A WORD TO Dr. VVomocke.

OR, A short Reply to his pretended Resolution of Mr. Croftons Position,
concerning Ministers Use of an Imposed Liturgy.

To which is annexed, A Blow at Jerubbaal Redivivus: Discovering his Weakness
and Errors in Defense of his Groundless Secession from Solemn Public Worship
Ministered by the English Liturgy.

By R. S.

The Publisher of Reformation not Separation.

London, Printed in the Year 1663.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Once more trouble thee, and the world, with a few Lines on this unpleasing
subject; I would entreat thy pains to read them. Though many slight this
controversy, it is of weight: Many minister not by the Liturgy; they must be
justified, or condemned; public Worship is confined to Liturgical
ministration; it must be attended, or avoided; and Conscience must direct which
is to be done. Mr. Crofton has (before, and since his imprisonment, in zeal
and faithfulness) pointed out the medium between sinful ministration, and
groundless non-communion; in both which, he is opposed by enemies, calumniated
by the wicked, and censured by the weak, yea, by Brethren in the Ministry, who
have never vouchsafed to read what he has written, nor have once reproved in
him any error. The advantage and increase of Separation is so visible, that I
may well stir up zeal to rebuke and repel it; I have therefore once and again
appeared its Antagonist: The Blow I now strike is indeed below me; the Assault
against my last is very weak. I have written, and pray thee to read, that thou
may not be deceived with great words, which signify nothing; and serve to
no end, save to fit the weak and simple to speak evil of the things they do not
understand. That thou might do in judgment and conscience, what thou art
like to be compelled to do by force and fear, has been, and yet is the
Endeavor and Prayer of

Thine, seeking purity of Worship, in union with the Church, whilst R. S.

A Word to Dr. WOMOCKE, By way of Reply to his pretended Resolve of Mr.
Crofton's Position concerning Liturgies: And a Blow at Jerubbaal Redivivus.
SInce my publication of Jerubbaal justified, there has appeared Lawrence
Womocke, Archdeacon of Suffolk. T. P. alias D. Author of Jerubbaal.
against it, and me, and Mr. Crofton concerned in it, a double assault, by two
different Antagonists, as directly contrary each to other, as the Right and
Left Wing; only combined in one Battalia under the Prince of Darkness, to
darken, and, if possible, destroy the truth; so that as Luther between Pope and
Anabaptist, stands Mr. Crofton between a Prelatical Clergy and Separatists:
yet vincet veritas.

Such is the unspeakable weakness of both these men's batteries, that I have
passed them with scorn, and stood still, in expectation of the onset of their
main Battalia, on the one side, or on the other; but none appearing, I thought
good to check their insultation (with which I hear they are puffed up) by these
few Lines. And first, to begin with the Learned Doctor, I would crave leave to
tell him, if he will give good assurance, that he will in the Schools of the
University give Mr. Crofton (viva voce) the Answer published in his name; I
will be bound Mr. Crofton shall meet him to receive it; and if the Boys do not
hiss the Doctor, he shall go out Victor. Shall I presume to take a turn with
this reverend Archdeacon? I must then tell him;

If he did not mistake, his Printer has wronged him at the entrance Antidote,
p 106. p. ibid.
of his undertaking, to make him read Nonconformist instead of Now-conformist.

That Pride, and over weening conceit of our own worth, makes men Non
conformists, I deny; for it is humility, and the fear of the Lord: they dare
not deviate from Divine Directions; and your instance is an evidence of the
same; whilst Mr. Crofton does humbly consult, whether his conformity may
consist with his Ministerial Office; and modestly offer his Notions to
Argumentation; the one shows his fear of Sin, whilst the other shows his
willingness to be convinced, and both his humility.

His Position you have truly transcribed, and observed the state thereof; but
if to affirm, It cannot be denied to be a most base and slavish servility to
prostitute the Office to which we are apted and ordained Page 107.
by the Lord Jesus Christ, unto the pleasure and prescriptions of men, though
the best for Quality and Authority, be to be proud, I will be proud, and glory
in my pride: And I doubt not, if you were calendered as a man who should deny
this Position, you, Sir, would be found proud enough to declare your
displeasure, as unjustly reproached: I therefore soberly require you, to deny
it, if you can, or dare; and if you cannot, what means this digressive
flourish?

Your flourish has indeed given you the start, so that you have lost your
question, and fall on a Magisterial Swada of Mr. Croftons conformity: Which of
Mr. Croftons Syllogisms do you hereby shake? *Is not this fair disputing? But
we will weigh your Reason. You say, Mr. Crofton may please to be so humble, as
to condescend to such an Imposition for peace and order sake.

How! condescend to such an Imposition which prostituteth the Office received
from Christ to the pleasure of men? Can you desire it? Were you in earnest when
you wrote this? Can you judge it an act of Humility, or not rather the greatest
Arrogance, for Mr. Crofton, instead of Minister of Jesus Christ, to write a
Minister of men? You need good Arguments; for you say you will prove it, and
that by this Argument.

What I may lawfully be determined to by my own private judgment, that I may
lawfully be determined to by the judgment of Superiors:

But, to stated Forms for the celebration of Gods public Worship, composed
(and for the very words, terms, and expressions) digested into method, I may be
lawfully determined by my own private judgment.

Ergo, To stated Forms for celebration of Gods solemn public Worship,
composed, and for the very words, terms, and expressions, digested into method,
I may lawfully be determined by the judgment of my Superiors.

But how now, Mr. Doctor? what is become of your Question? Do you not use to
bring that into your Conclusion? That Mr. Crofton ought to condescend to such
an imposition which prostituteth the Office received from Christ to the
pleasure of men, was that you pretended to prove; does not your Syllogism want
a foot more to make it reach? But to play with the Prevaricator, know, Sir, I
deny both the Propositions of your well-formed Syllogism.

The Major you expect to be denied, and therefore enforce; but I also deny your
Minor Proposition (viz) That to stated Forms for celebration of Gods solemn
public Worship, composed (and for the very words, terms, and expressions)
digested into method, I may lawfully be determined by mine own private
judgment. For, althoogh Mr. Crofton does not exclude his own judgment, when he
pleads for the liberty of his own invention, to compose and modifie his Forms
of public Worship; yet he denies his judgment a power to determine a stated
form, semper eadem, always the same, for words, terms, and expressions, what
ever be the variations of Gods providence, and the Churches condition. Nor does
this any way follow on the use of his judgment in managing his liberty: That a
man may judge a Crutch fit for his now condition, will not conclude, that he
may sana mente confine himself to a Crutch, one and the same Crutch, at all
times, in all conditions; this Argumentation is a manifest halting before a
Creeple: In the last, the judgment must needs be erroneous, to be corrected
before it be obeyed.

The Major you expecting to be denied, do thus enforce.

What I may lawfully be determined to by a weaker judgment, to that I may be
lawfully determined by a judgment that is stronger.

But, To stated Forms, etc. I may lawfully be determined by a weaker judgment,
(viz.) mine own;

Ergo, To stated Forms, etc. I may lawfully he determined by a judgment that
was stronger, (viz.) my Superiors.

Here, Sir, to make the Auditors laugh, I will again become ridiculous, in your
fancy, and deny both your Propositions.

I deny the Major in the sequel, I may be determined by the weaker judgment;
and it will not thence follow, that I must therefore be determined by the
stronger judgment: For Sir, the weaker judgment is mine own judgment; and mine
own eye is the best guide of mine own steps, though I see but darkly; mine own
understanding is my candle from the Lord; my dim light judicium rationale,
shines brighter in the closet of mine own breast, than 400. candles, or the
forense judicium of a Convocation. Sir, the Learned Davenant has taught me,
Men may guide us Judicio Ministeriali; but every one must judge (...), Judicio
private, and practicae discretionis: Yea, as if to your question, he has
concluded, Adnudam praescriptionem, aut determinationem alterius, sine lumine
privati judicii, nemo est qui credere potest, etiamsi cupiat maxim. And, Sir,
I am not bound to impossibilities; laugh while you list, I will move by mine
own eye, be it never so weak, and my Superiors never so strong; though my dim
light sees not more, it sees more truly and more directively then their
brighter.

But, Sir, that you may know a man of intolerable pride, in your account, I
deny your Minor; and tell you in general, That the private judgment of a single
person may be stronger then the judgment of a Convocation, or whole Council.
Have you never read of one Gamaliel in the Convocation of the Scribes and
Pharisees? Or of one Cranmer in the Six Articles Council of King Henry the
Eighth? Or of one Paphthnutius in the Council of Nice? If not, give us leave to
tell you, we hope you will not from Arhdeacon rise to be Archbishop; which if
you should, we should fear to be forced to pluck out our eyes, because you say
they are weaker then yours, now you are set above us. Let, Sir, Junior Sophs
judge, whether you have not disputed like the Master of much Reason. But, Sir,
your Magisterial Swada vanished, you appear as a Respondent, and say you lay
the Axe to the Root of the Tree; and I will give you your due; you do strike at
the Principle which is the Radix of Mr. Croftons Argumentation: But, Sir, you
seem no skillful Carpenter; you strike a blow which can never reach the Root,
or once shake the Tree.

Mr. Crofton argues, Ministerial modification of public Worship by personal
abilities, is the formal act of the Ministerial Office; and he puts his
Respondent to assign any other: You most profoundly answer by denial, and then
assign Ministration to be the formal act of the Page 109.
Ministerial Office. Mr. Crofton I know will admit your Notion in the Genus, an
inferior Minister of State, or Servant in a Family, must minister, as well as a
Minister of the Gospel: but that specifical act which shall difference the
special Ministrations of these special Relations, and several capacities, was
the thing enquired; and what is the formalis ratio of the Ministerial Office,
in the ministration of solemn public Worship, is the Question. To tell us,
Ministration is the formal act of ministration, is good Skepticism; Dolosus
versatur in generalibus; the formal act of the Ministerial Office is to
minister; but quomodo? is the question. To hold your Lord Bishops Stirrup, or
the Candle to an Archdeacon, will not sure fulfill the ministry of a Gospel
Minister; yet it is ministration. In your next tell us what is the formal act
of the Gospel Ministerial Office, which will specifically difference it from
ministration in the general; and then you will see little cause to cry out to
make modification of the act, the act it self, is to make apparel the man; for
modification of Ministration came not into the question; but that modification
of solemn Worship is the formal act of Ministration, was and is asserted: and,
Sir, the cutting and making of Cloth in such and such a shape, is the formal
ministration of a Tailor, who will easily see your Answer to be a man of
Clouts. But you pass to the Objection.

Imposition and prescription in Prayer and Sacraments, is applicable unto
Preaching. To this you give a fourfold Answer.

1. A Sermon is never the worse for being well digested. True; if it be the
Preachers own meditation, much the better.

2. If it be seen and allowed by Authority, I know no harm in it. Nor I
neither: but this is not necessary.

3. This course (if not endless) would more secure peace and solid edification
of the Church. I deny that, unless by the Popish guard, Ignorance is the Mother
of Devotion. But, Sir,

What are these to a Sermon not studied, much less digested by the Preacher?
not communicated to, but composed by pretenders to Authority? making Ministers
to have no work to do qua Ministers, but to read what they have written, which
is the nature and form of Homilies, and these exclusively imposed, which may as
well be admitted as the Liturgy!

4. When Presbyterians do preach other men's printed Sermons. Name any such, who
so do, let them bear their blame; I know no Presbyterians who so do: But if
you, Sir, please to enquire in the Parish of Christs-Church, or Martins
Ludgate, London, or Henly in Sussex, you may hear of Sons of the Church who
stuck not to preach Mr. Croftons own printed Sermons: But these are preparing
for Homily Ministrations.

You think there is a vast difference between Praying and Preaching: is there
not also a difference between these and Sacraments? Prove that Christ taught
that Prayer may be comprised in a short Office: He suggested matter, did he
determine the mode, terms, words, and expressions of Prayer? If not, what
avails this plea? There are not more various Texts in the Bible, then wants in
the Church, and both are the Scene for the variety of Gifts to exercise upon.
But Sir, your next makes work for the Terraefilius. Mr. Croftons instance of
the Parish Clerk and People, is not to our prejudice, or his purpose; for they
are a general part of the holy priesthood St. Peter speaks of, and it is their
duty to bear a part in Gods solemn worship.

Well levelled, Doctor; I hope we shall no more hear of Clergy distinct from
Laity: The Parish Clerk and People are part of the holy Priesthood; very true:
they ought to bear a part in Gods solemn worship; undoubtedly true: but must
that part be ministration, such ministration as is the formal act of Gospel
ministry? either so, or you have said nothing; and if so, farewell Holy Orders,
yea, solemn Ordination to the Ministry; a man may make himself a Priest: Enter
Indepency, the Archdeacon has opened the door: All the Lords people are holy,
the holy priesthood; Ergo, may minister in the Ministers Office.

Your next, concerning Schoolboys, does suggest some Boy read Mr. Croftons
Position to you; for otherwise, you might have observed, he does distinguish
the Ministerial Office, and Ministerial Act: and tells you, a boy may perform
the Act, and queries, Must he therefore be admitted to the Office? He never
allowed a Butcher a blow at an holy Ox or Lamb, because he can kill them; he
never allowed Qualification to conferr an Office.

Sir, upon what you have said, Mr. Crofton appears not self-condemned, nor
condemned by others; but if a Jury of Fresh-men condemn not your Logic, you
shall have my Vote to be Senior Lecturer. Ending your dispute, you pass to your
former Swada, and affirm.

Mr. Crofton, and his party are bound to submit to the use of a prescribed
Liturgy. Negatur. You undertake to prove it thus.

To do whatsoever is morally possible, for uniformity and peace sake, is your
duty: But to submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy is morally possible;
Ergo, to the submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy Page 3.
is your duty.

Though I could, in love to peace, I will not quarrel at the terms of your
Major Proposition, and deny it: but I deny your Minor Proposition, (viz.) To
submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy, is not morally pessible. You
proceed to prove this.

What is not sinful, and is within our natural power, is morally possible: But
to submit to a prescribed Liturgy is not sinful, and is within our natural
power; Ergo, To submit to the use of a prescibed Liturgy is morally possible.

The Major is allowed you; the Minor, as to the last Branch may be allowed you:
but sometimes our natural power may be under violent restraint, and then
possibility may fail.

As to the first branch, it is denied; and you proceed to prove it, (viz.) that
to submit to the use of a prescribed Liturgy is not sinful; and you thus
argue:

What is forbidden by no Law, is not sinful: But to submit to the use of a
prescribed Liturgy, is forbidden by no Law; Ergo, To submit to the use of a
prescribed Liturgy, is not sinful.

The Major is allowed you; the Minor I deny: For to submit to the use of a
prescribed Liturgy is forbidden in the first Command, which does require
faithfulness in the Office committed to us by the Lord himself; Ministers of
God cannot without sin become the Ministers of men.

2. In specialty; the Law of the Ministerial Office, in its special nature,
(which must give Rules to the Ministers acts qua Ministerial acts) does forbid
such submission, as inconsistent with, and destructive to the formal act of the
Ministerial Office, (viz.) modifying worship by personal abilities,
notwithstanding what our Opponent has urged to the contrary,

3. The edifying of the Church by variety of Ministerial Gifts, is a Law which
does forbid such submission, as destructive to that end.

The Apostle indeed bids us hold fast the form of wholesome words, but not to
hold to the same words; to speak the same things, but not in the same
syllables: for if so, the Liturgy must be catholic to all Christians, in all
places and ages of the World, and that in the Greek Language only. Had this
Doctor read Mr. Croftons Argument on this Question against D. G. he sure would
not have thus disputed, [Submission to Superiors is a duty; but our judicium
rationale must judge their Mandate to be licitum and honestum, which in this
case we cannot do; and then our Dilemma is manifest, Shall we obey God or man?
judge you.

Now, Sir, your holding your Conclusion is not in my power to hinder; but if
your Premises be not pushed down, let all men of reason judge.

You have, Sir, been at the pains to transcribe Mr. Crofton's Creed in point of
Church Communion; praeterea nihil; you deny no one Article, nor dispute not
against them: Herein then we are agreed; only, Sir, let me tell you, that
freedom from corruptions and disorders must be secured to the Church by the
ways God has directed, not by words which men have dictated, and by their
unwarranted power determined.

I having repelled the assaults, and dissipated the Forces of the Jerubbaal
Rediviv.
Right, must now encounter the Left Wing of this Armado: In address to which,
my courage is checked by observing the Antesignanus and Captain that appears
in the Front; not afraid of his force, but ashamed that any called a Presbyter,
should engage in such a Church-subverting design, and that with such weapons
which the most rigid Separatists will be ashamed to take up: but be he Son or
Brother, the Relation may restrain what the weight of the Warfare does
necessitate: With him therefore I must take a turn; the rather, for that many
have sounded in my ears his proud alarm, That Mr. Crofton himself cannot now
have any thing to say against him, his opinion and practice, unless he mind to
have the last word, and resolve he will not be convinced. That this man may not
abide wise in his own conceit, I must once more enforce the Rebuke given him,
and advise him, [to reflect the wilful affectation of a Title which can no way
appertain to him, (viz.) Jerubbaal; whereas Baal is not the object of his Plea,
nor is he the Gideon that threw down and pleaded against Baal. With what face
does this man conclude the Common Prayer Book is Baal, and not once consider or
resolve Mr. Croftons expostulations hereupon? My good friend, let it be
seriously resolved, is there no differbetween Israel and Judah? Rome, and a
Reformed Church? between Reformat. not Separat. p. 26, 36.
a calling on God, the only true God, in the Name of Christ, though in a
defective, rude, confused, and unfitting order, and praying unto Saints and
dumb Idols? Though our order of Divine Service be a Roman dreg of some
dangerous distastefull influence, yet it is not Popery: Shall we not bless God,
and rejoice in England, as brought out of Babylon, though some Babylonish
Vestures, Rites, and Orders, which ought to be abandoned, are retained, yea,
returned into her? When these things are well resolved, will not this Baal
appear a babe of his fancy, without any real existence? Knows not this
Pleader, that the mistake of the object does mis-guide the act, and make
reproof a groundless calumny?

But if the Liturgy must be accounted Baal, is this man the Jerubbaal? When?
by what Plea? in whose judgment, except his own? Let me say over again what I
said in my last; has not Mr. Crofton written and preached against it? Has not
Mr. Crofton suffered for his opposition to it? Does not Mr. Croftons (...)
Jerub. justified, p. 2.
against which this man appears, plead convincingly against it? The enemy
being Judge, is there any more open Jerubbaal in our Age then Mr. Crofton? This
man appears against Mr. Croftons limitation, and due bounds set unto men's
affection; inferring what the premises will not allow, and proudly affects to
be called Jerubbaal: Oh vanity! oh folly! But

Secondly, I would advise this Combatant to review what he has written; for
verily I cannot without grief and shame, observe the Nonsense, ignorance, and
error, with which this unanswerable Piece abounds: I shall, for his
humiliation, note it in each Paragraph of his Book; and the rather, because his
wild and confused method admits no regular Ratiocination. Note therefore,

His Preface enters with an outcry, That the Rebuke I last gave him (being
big-bellied with Satirical invectives, slanders, and revilings) Jerubb.
rediviv. p. 1.
would better become a Shimei, then a Levite: But he specifieth not one
revilingterm; how big-bellied soever the Rebuke appeared, it is manifest no one
was brought forth: I must therefore tell mine Antagonist, stubborn and
scornful Sons do conclude the Fathers just Rebukes are railing; let sober men
judge the sobriety of so just Rebukes, as his Jerubbaal provoked.

His next Paragraph complains, that he was charged with a mistake, a total
mistake, a gross mistake, which he says, is to him matter Page 2.
of wonder; and to whom can it be other, who is but in the least acquainted
with the occasion, end and scope of his writings. I cannot but note the
clearness of his Reason, or rather nonsense of his Argumentation: Mr. Crofton
blamed (he says censured) his non-communion at Lawrence Jewry Church-door, and
demanded (he says challenged) an answer to his Reformation not Separation:
this gave occasion to his writing; he aimed at truth and duty, that was the
scope and end of his writing. All this admitted, what follows? That it was
impossible he should mistake, totally mistake, grossly mistake? So that he must
hence wonder to be charged therewith; and all the world knowing this occasion,
and end, cannot but wonder with him. An exact Marks-man, that provoked to
shoot, and intending well, is thereby put under an impossibility of missing the
Mark! But could he think, all men will judge the occasion and end of his
undertaking would so clear his understanding, as to keep him from mistake? If
good intentions could destroy an erroneous judgment, there would not be so many
mistakes in the world as there is: Be the occasion and end of this man's
undertaking what it will, was he not mistaken in Mr. Crofton, when he called
him, printed him the Maecenas and Advocate for the English Liturgy? Is it not
out of mistake, that in this second piece he says, The Altar of Baal, by him
thrown down, is by me repaired, and my design is its resurrection? Result not
these terms of propriety; Your novum organum, your man-devised Liturgy, your
Divine Service, your blasted Liturgy, out the total and gross mistake of Mr.
Crofton, and his Plea; Will this man have Jerubb. Rediviv. p. 11, 13, 14, 17.
the impudence to justify the Calumny of the wicked, That Mr. Crofton is an
Apostate, revolted from what he witnessed? Let him draw it into an Indictment;
Mr. Crofton shall abide the trial, though his Jury be a pack of his worst
enemies, of superstitious Sons of the Church, and separating Sects. I could,
for the honor of Reformation, wish, that men had not more cause to wonder that
this man can do nothing but mistake, and persist with folly in a mistake, as it
is too manifest in this his second Tract; then to wonder, that notwithstanding
his good occasion and end, he was mistaken, totally mistaken, grossly mistaken;
for the last is incident to the best of men.

His third Paragraph tells us of five Quaeries, on Resolution of which
depends the decision of this controversy. But, Sir, my last drew the Page 3.
Controversy to a much narrower Crisis; one single Question, which well
resolved, would end this strife, (viz.) Whether the Liturgy, being an
unlawfully constituted mode of solemn public Worship, be so far unlawful, or
unlawful in that kind or quality of unlawfulness, which will constitute a
warrantable ground or reason for noncommunion in the worship of God ministered
by the same? Jerubbaal justif. p. 25. Near this question you do not, you dare
not come; your War would be too soon ended, and your wordy Army too soon
disbanded, if you should fight so close. Sir, have you studied nothing but
Sceptiscism, to avoid the Question by multiplying Quaeries of your own framing?
Are you a Sopbomore, so subtle to shun the Question stated, and dispute the
Quaeries of your own brain? You may, Sir, be your own Antagonist all your days,
with much ease and pleasure to your fancy, but with little profit to others.
Yet before you buckle to your work, you say you will enfeeble my Plea, which
you can more stoutly call cavils and exceptions, then convincingly gainsay or
contradict.

The fourth Paragraph does therefore observe the Crisis of Mr. Croftons Plea to
be communion in Gods worship ministered by the Liturgy, not communion in the
Ministerial mode: but this observed, is passed with a scornful note of Crambe
recocta, occurring 20. times; not once considering it was so frequently
inculcated on design to clear his dull capacity, who could, or would not
observe it in Mr. Crofton's Reform. not Separat. And, Sir, I yet see not but
this Crambe recocta may be disht up to you 200. times, before you will digest
the same: Solomon has indeed told us, though we bray a fool in a mortar, he
will not understand. I wish you had turned on the hinge of the controversy; I
should deny learned self to consider any strenuous argumentation, which would
demonstrate this forcible Plea to be what you please to call it. a plausible
evasion.

The fifth Paragraph fills time and paper to tell men, what he Ibid.
that runs may read, (viz.) Mr. Croftons dispute is about popular, not
Ministerial communion. Yet here I cannot but observe his mistake of the
Question; which he says is, Whether this communion be Duty? He should observe,
it is the Licet, not the Debet, of this communion, which Mr. Crofton does
affirm; he never disputed this Communion to be a duty binding semper, but
lawful, and made duty by inevitable necessity only: He always affirms
Communion with a non obstante, notwithstanding the Liturgy; and only, when we
cannot have solemn public worship without the same: the utmost of Mr. Croftons
affirmation is, The Liturgy makes not a warrantable ground for secession from
Gods Church and worship. But this man's good intention must make all men wonder
he should be charged to mistake.

Yet, Sir, you are well skilled in a (...), when you tell us, Page 4.
You had reason confidently to affirm, Mr. Crofton said, the Liturgy or
Common Prayer is an act of solemn public worship. This denied, you plead a
passage which only seems to suggest it; and in which it is not said: Is, Sir,
this the strife about words condemned by the Apostle, for a man to deny he
spoke what he is unjustly charged to have spoken? But of this enough, it being
personal. But, Sir, I cannot a little wonder at your strange confidence, in
again fathering the fancy of your own brain on Mr. Crofton, in what you call
his Dumb Argument, when you know it has in his name been disowned; and the
abominable sequel thereof, together with its inconsistency with his Question,
and the scope of his Plea been fully demonstrated in my Jerub. justif. p. 5. 6.
Can you outface me, and Mr. Crofton too, that he will not after recollection
say, that is a monstrous Argument, which makes the Liturgy essential to the
sanctification of the Lords day, so as that the Lords day cannot be sanctified
where the Service book is not attended, assented to, and acted in? and does not
this naturally flow from your fancied conclusion? Were you not rebuked for this
in my last? and was not Mr. Croftons Argument put into form, that you might see
its force; Man, be not obstinate.

The sixth Paragraph does assert a Notion, which admitted, makes set forms of
Prayer essential to Communion in all solemn public Prayer, (viz.) The
Adhibition of his Amen is as real communion in the Ministerial mode of worship,
as the personal acting by conclamation, popular responds, and groundless
variation of gesture, and the like. Sir, I agree with you, magis and minus non
variant speciem: Prove Mr. Crofton's Amen to be as real, though not so
extensive communion as the forementioned personal acts, and I will undertake
he shall retract his principle and practice too. But, Sir, you are the first
that ever made the external ministerial mode the adaequate object of the
peoples Amen; all others referr it to the matter, and the matter only: and
truly, Sir, if it be true, I must be excused, if I refuse to join with a
Scotch-man in Prayer; for they are, of all men, no little incident to disorder,
in their conceived, self-framed Prayers. Nor do I see how I can be secured
against the guilt of that confusion and disorder of expression to which all men
are subject, save only by seeing the Form of Prayer to which I must give mine
Amen, and being well assured from it the Minister shall not vary: This, Sir,
necessitateth a Liturgy, and was suggested to you in my last, had you pleased
to observe it. Sir, I judged Amen to be the act of my judicium discretionis, to
be adhibited as mine understanding apprehended the matter prayed for: I have
heard some Petitions put up to God, which I durst not enforce with my Amen. I
presume you will not deny to pray with me; and yet (as you and I stand
informed) you could not adhibit your Amen to all that I must ask of God. I
conceive, if my Amen be at the command of mine Understanding, in reference to
any matter, it is much more such in reference to every external Form, and
Ministerial mode of Prayer. And now, Sir, Mr. Crofton's Nuntio will tell you,
that admitting the Smectymnuan observation of the Letany (which holds not in
any part, save the Deprecations, and that also is disputable) to be true: Mr.
Crofton's judicium diseretionis commanding his Amen, can direct and dispose a
silent observation of such a popular interruptions to solemn public Worship.
Sir, if you will make Amen contract the Guilt of the mode of Prayer, you must
go to work again; for I will confidently affirm, in this opinion you stand
alone, and will stand alone.

The seventh Paragraph is the wild frolic of a foolish fancy; as if my noting
the Liturgy to be a political order and direction, did Page 6.
confound it with the Directory; this is a vanity so visible, that I will say
no more to it, save this, If you have no more wit then to play with your
shadow, enjoy your sport; what is this to the question in dispute?

The eighth Paragraph is like the seventh: In it you note, with Page 7.
seeming pity, Mr. Crofton's necessity of practice in prison; but, good Sir,
what necessity (more then that of conscience and duty) constrained Mr. Crofton
to state the Principle he now asserts, when he was at liberty, worshipping God
in purity and power, and contradicting the late Bishop of Worcesters advancing
the Liturgy? Deal you faithfully with God, his Cause, and People, when you
suggest Mr. Crofton's now principle and practice was extorted by a violent
necessity? The Lord judge these Censures. (2.) Your Notion of Civil presence
comes again to be observed. (3.) It is well the Plea of necessity grows
frivolous to you; it is not so to others; they miss some integrals of Worship.
(4.) I should be loath to conclude, set Forms of Preaching and Prayer (with
soundness of Doctrine in both) were England's Ichabod; these were imposed, and
all Preaching silenced, for some time, by the Proclamation of King Edw. 6. and
Gods Ark and Glory was then returning: I wish not to see so dark a cloud in
Gods Sanctuary; yet fear to conclude (if a lawful Ministry and substantial
Ordinances abide) that Gods presence is removed. I yet fear to eat your bread
of secrecy, and to drink your stolen waters, though sweet, lest the dead be
there, and such guests be in the depths of Hell. The house of an Obed-edom may
entertain an exiled Ark; but not have comfort, or give any guard to Corah's
company.

The ninth Paragraph is, in my judgment, an eminent piece of P. ibid.
Nonsense: To my Objection, The personal guilt of Hophni and Phineas could not
defile the Church; you answer, Personal corruptions are there contra-distinct
to real, not to public, as it seems you understand me. Good Sir, what
understand you by real corruptions? corruptions indeed? Is not all personal
corruptions real corruptions? Are personal faults only imaginary guilt? It is
then good sinning alone. Sir, I never understood real opposed to personal, but
it signified public. Consider well how Civilians and Casuists distinguish an
Oath into reale and personale; and tell me what you understand by real,
distinct from public, and opposed to personal, that I may understand you.

The tenth Paragraph does enforce the necessity of a groundless distinction of
participation by profession, and joint communion; but adds no new matter,
only refers to Jerubbaal: This then I turn back to Jerubbaal justified.

The eleventh Paragraph notes, that Mr. Crofton will deny that Page 8.
there are many, or indeed any members of the Church catholic, who never had
opportunity of associating themselves with, or of joint communion in the solemn
worship of God, in a particular Church: and answers the same with needless
distinctions, and manifest nonsense. As (1.) by universal is meant the
catholic militant Church, comprehending visible and invisible; yet note, his
Jerubbaal did determine it to be visible only, pa. 19. and the catholic
Church must be the subject of solemn public Worship, and Gods Ordinances,
capable of association and joint communion in them; of these the invisible part
of the Church are not capable. (2.) That a man may be a member of the
invisible, without opportunity of joint communion in outward Ordinances. I do
not only imply, but I speak out; but what is this to our purpose? Nor will I
deny, a professor may be a believer; but that makes him not a member of the
Church visible: Profession is the ground of visible Church Membership, but it
is not the formalis ratio thereof; no; that is Baptism, an act of personal
association, and joint communion; which must needs have its opportunity in all
that enjoy it. I say as his greater Sophies, (ignorantly quoted) A professor is
visible, a believer invisible; the believer may be a professor of the same
faith, and not partake in the same ordinances: Yet it will not hence follow,
there are any or many members of the Church visible, who never had an
opportunity of joint communion in solemn public worship; for all such must be
incorporated by Baptism; without which, the best professors and true believers
must be foro Ecclesiae judged without the Church.

The twelfth Paragraph, concerning Conventicles, tells us, A society of
persons, ten, twenty, thirty* or forty, amongst whom is a Minister celebrating
true Divine Worship, according to the will of Christ, by the assistance of his
Spirit, and in his Name; not causelessly and unjustly separating from a true
Church, is no Conventicle, or Schismatical Assembly. Who ever said such an
Assembly was a Conventicle? Jerubbaal justified told you of twenty, thirty, or
forty private members, assembled Page 22.
distinct from, and opposite to a Church, an holy Convocation: And I say again,
if the Congregations in England be true Churches, and secession from them (as
it yet seems to be) unwarrantable and groundless; though twenty, thirty, or
forty, with a Minister, constitute themselves a counter-Church, opposite to
these Assemblies, and therein administer Church-ordinances; I see not how to
acquit them from the repute and reality of a Conventicle, and Schismatical
Assembly: Nor will Christ's promise of his presence be any prop to their
Fabric, who are not met in his Name; for God is a God of Order.

We are at length arrived to his five Quaeries before mentioned; Page 9.
by himself stated, and so best resolved.

The first is this; What is that which may warrant and acquit from Quaer. 1.
Schism, a persons non-communion with the Church of England in the worship
alleged to be ministered by her Liturgy, or Common Prayer?

I must here note, that though he come not close to the Question in dispute,
yet he comes somewhat nearer; and can now mention the subject, Worship,
distinct from his adjunct, the Liturgy by which it is ministered: so that he
has learned to speak in an entire Proposition, worship ministered by the
Liturgy; I hope he has so clear reason as to discern the subject, Worship:
the Predicate ministered by the Liturgy, are the parts of this Proposition; and
the Worship ministered, not the Liturgical ministration, is the object of his
Communion, or non-Communion, controverted under this Quaerie; which he
resolves in certain Propositions, whereof the first is,

Communion with this part of the Church is a Duty, etc. This is square to Mr.
Croftons assertion; only I would advise him to revise 1 Proposit.
the wording of it, for it sounds nonsense in mine ears.

He notes an Objection, Reading the Word is a public Ordinance Page 10.
of God, and part of public Worship: He answers, True; who ever denied the
thing is appointed? but not the measure, or quantum; be enjoys it in Textual
occasional Reading in the Sermon preached. But, good Sir, is not solemn
Reading, distinct from, and opposite to textual and occasional Reading, a part
of solemn Worship? Cast your eye on Nehem. 8. 3. Luke 4. 16. Acts 13. 15, 27.
15. 21. Consult the practice of the Jews, and primitive Christians, the
determinations of Fathers, ancient and modern Divines Systems, and
Common-places in Divinity, especially Expositions on the fourth Commandment,
tell me which of them assert not solemn Reading, distinct from Preaching and
its accidents, to be a distinct part of solemn public worship? and which of
them will conclude textual and occasional Reading to be the performance of it?
Is not your fancy in this manifestly ridiculous?

The second Proposition resolving this Quaerie, is a most strange, 2 Proposit.
ranting, uncharitable (if I may not say impious) Notion, (viz.) The worship
administered, or administrable by the English Liturgy, or public set-Form,
considered as such, and in a complex state, appears (as yet) to be none of
that Worship of which God is the Author, the Gospel the Rule, the practice
Apostolic the pattern; but Cultus adulterinus, mere adulterate worship, a
piece of Superstition, arbitrary Devotion, Scripture-bitten will worship,
supererogatory service, Lawstruck Tradition and Ordinance of Man. Whither will
the man run? This proved, is enough to warrant, yea, to necessitate secession
from the English Church: but we must believe it on the Magisterial confident
say-so of this Grave Dictator; for no proof is so much as offered. But does the
man know what he says? or whereof he does affirm? that he thus ranteth, not
against the Liturgy, (that may be born) but against the worship in abstracto,
distinct from the Liturgy, is to me very strange. The Worship administered, or
administrable by the Liturgy, is cultus adulterinus, no worship of God, is his
Position; the most rigid Separatists will not say it. If this be so, well might
Doctor Owen acquit Independency from Schism, by pleading the Church lost its
being under Popery; gathering of Churches must needs be a duty; yet no gathered
Church has any worship of God, or any other the cultus adulterinus, etc. for
they have no other worship then what is administrable by the English Liturgy.
Good Sir, what is the worship administered or administrable by the English
Liturgy? Is it not solemn reading the Scriptures, invocation of God, Baptism
and the Lords Supper? Pray you, Sir, is not God the Author, Gospel the Rule,
and practice Apostolic the Pattern of these? If these be not the worship
administered, and administrable by the Liturgy, give us the name of it, that we
may enquire its nature: Protestants have had no other worship since King Edward
the sixth his days; true Christians have had no other since Jesus Christ his
days: have the one and other been left in approach to God without his worship?
yea, with adulterate worship, etc. How much will this fall short of Blasphemy,
not only against Protestants, but Christians, and the God of both? I profess,
I tremble that I hold you so close to the Crisis of our Controversy, that you
should break out with such a ranting notion, which does raze the foundation of
the Church. Your sensu composito in individuo, connexio and qua talis, will not
relieve you; for mean you what you will by these, the worship in abstracto is
the subject of these, and of your Proposition, predicated cultus adulterinus,
etc. And, Sir, lest we should mistake you, you have not only explained it by
the actual administration; worship administered would not serve your turn, but
you add the very posse thereof, and determine against the worship administrable
by the English Liturgy. You may, Sir, by this notion help the simple to
blasphemous words; but can never make a sober understanding Proselyte, or
obtain any rational second, that knows how to understand a Proposition: Yet
this fancy I find to be the Line which has led you into the Labyrinth in which
you are entangled. Be serious, and see whether it be not the snare of the
Devil; out of which the Lord redeem you.

On this Notion you proceed to resolve Objections: of which you note,

There is in the Common Prayer the substance of Divine worship, 1 Object.
though disorderly administered; the essential form of Prayer, a calling upon
God in the Name of Christ for things agreeable to his will, etc. To this you
answer, conceding the matter of the Petitions, as that you will not dispute;
and I suppose you will not question the matter of the Sacraments. The Form you
deny not; only follow your fancy, the Name of Christ; which, you say, Mr.
Crofton has with disdain disowned. That I, in Mr. Croftons name, disowned it,
is true; the disdain is your own fancy: What one word of disdain is expressed?
I will transcribe my sentence, that you and others may observe why and how I do
disown this sense of the Name of Christ. Sir, I will assure you, Mr. Crofton
did not understand by the Name of Christ, the Will of Christ; and yet I must
tell him, it Jerub. just. p. 27.
is but one Doctors opinion, that this is not a right description of Prayer: He
might have been pleased to observe, in the same page, Mr. Crofton determined
the matter must be according to the Will of God; and Will of Christ does
require some adjunct qualities which come not into the definition; but in the
Name of Christ; that is, for his sake, merits, and mediation, cannot be left
out. Note, Sir, The Name of Christ does not exclude the Will of Christ; both
have their places, and due respect: the will of Christ, in reference to the
matter, is essential; the name of Christ, in reference to the form, is made
essential; the will of Christ, in reference to the mode, in adjunct qualities,
gravity of expression, fervency of affection, and reverence in demeanor, is
made necessary, but not essential: And from what Divine does Mr. Crofton differ
in this distribution of the parts of Prayer? For herein (to use your own terms)
Prayer in genere, is worship; and in specie, such instituted worship. But you
proceed, and say;

I mutter; Sir, I speak it out, The will of Christ requires gravity Page 11.
in expession, reverence in demeanor, etc. which come not into the definition
of Prayer, as essential to its form. Nor, Sir, can you gainsay this: and, Sir,
it would seem, yea, it really is so, that if the essential form of Prayer
depend upon, or consist in a conformity to the will of Christ, that no Prayer
is such, but what has those qualifications: for, Sir, if so, a vain thought,
and word, or rude demeanor, does destroy the Prayer. But you say;

Two Commandments are confounded. But, Sir, by whom? is it not by your self in
your very present distinction? For you say, the modus, outward manner of
worship does belong to the second Commandment, Pa. 12, 13, 14, 15.
cujus contrarium verum est.

You enter a discourse of your Orthodoxie; in which if you be not Heterodox, I
have no skill in Divinity. I will not strictly scan each word, yout discourse
is wild; but these Notions are obvious.

That calling on God in the Name of Christ is required in the third Pa. 12, 13.
Command. And yet, Sir, this is the forma informans of Prayer as instituted
Worship; for Nature will teach men to call on God.

The external mode of Prayer does belong to the second Command. And yet it is
not essential to Prayer, as instituted Worship.

That Prayer which is not agreeable for necessary modes and qualifications, as
gravity of expression, reverence in demeanor, etc. to the third Commandment,
may be justly denied to have the complete essential form of instituted worship.
If this be true, Prayer it self is impossible to sinful men, and glorified
Saints need it not.

The ministerial mode in Prayer is medium cultus; Which you were told is but
cultus vehiculum: the medium is invocation, the ministerial mode is only the
vocal instrument between God and the people.

Praying by the Liturgy is as praying before an Image: And yet in the one the
Image, in the other, God, and God only, is the proximate immediate object of
the Prayer: Men praying by the Liturgy, pass to God himself, nullo medio
interveniente; but praying to an Image, sets God at a distance, and salutes his
Gentleman Usher.

Upon these and the like Notions you infer your principle, and justify what I
thought you would have retracted with grief and shame, That God is not
worshipped by the Liturgy. Hereupon, you frivolously, and to no purpose,
mention many Authors: I pray you study in what they have written on the third
Command, with this note; Many things are noted as sinful, to be avoided and
abandoned, which yet existing do not vitiate the subject, nullify Gods Worship
about which they do converse, and will not therefore warrant secession or
sepration.

You highly insult in my concession the Liturgy is evil, a positive evil. I
grant it you again: but, Sir, is there no evil, positive evil, but against the
second Commandment? Is all evil, positive evil, in other men's act, a warrant
for my separation? And now let us come again to the Question; Is the Liturgy,
though evil, a positive evil, such an evil, an evil of that kind and quality,
as to warrant separation? If not, what do you gain by what I grant? I tell you,
the Liturgy is not medium cultus within the second Command; but modus
ministerialis within the third Command. Be it superstitions, your self confess
it is not Idolatry.

To your Quaery concerning the Corinthian prayers in an unknown tongue; I say,
God was not the object; things according to his will Page 15.
was not the matter, nor was the Name of Christ the form thereof; for there was
no invocation, there being vox and praeterea nihil; men heard a voice, but for
what, to whom, or through whom it was uttered, they understood not: Now, Sir,
is this the Case of the Liturgy?

Sir, not to insist on your confused discourses of superstition; that there is
evil, positive evil, in the Liturgy, I deny not; that I, or Mr. Crofton are
Advocates for it, or the evils of it, I do deny: but being convinced all evil
will not warrant separation* here I stick, and here I hold you; Is the Liturgy
such an evil, of such kind and quality, as to constitute a warrantable ground
of secession or separation? I yet stand negative: Come to the Question, and
prove that; for affirmanti incidit probatio. Your wild discourse concerning the
Commandments and Superstition being past, you proceed to answer another
Objection by me made.

God (say you) is not worshipped by the Liturgy; the manner Page 17.
and form is humane. To which I objected, So is the form and mode of a studied
Sermon, and conceived Prayer; is not God worshipped by them? To this you first
answer by manifest mistake: the worship is called humane, of which man is not
only agent, but author. But my Objection is not of the Worship administered, or
administrable; but of the Liturgy, manner and dress administering: and hereof I
affirm, God has appointed men to be not only Agents, but Authors, according
to their wisdom and faithfulness, as Ministers; though that be appointed, yet
this is arbitrarily eligible by men apted and authorized thereto. Your second
Answer, telling us, you call it humane because it proceeds from man originally,
is insignificant; for as an external and ministerial mode, it is not within the
second Command, nor contrary to Christ's Crown Prerogative, but consonant
thereto; for Christ, as King of his Church, has committed his mind to his
Ambassadors, and charged them by their own wisdom and faithfulness to put his
Worwip into a due mode, suitable to his Majesty, and his peoples weakness; and
this you must know is bottomed on the nature of the Ministerial Office, that
Scripture Precept; and is justified by the president of the Apostles practice,
who were the Authors of that mode and dress by which they ministered: If then
you fancy man's wisdom of composition of Prayer and Sermon in general, and man's
will in imposition of his own composed mode, is contrary to the will and
wisdom of God, your self, and all Ministers in Gods Church are hereof Guilty;
yet they neither may, nor must avoid it. Your third Answer is, That the
essential form of worship administered by the Common Prayer is justly denied and
disproved. That, Sir, it is boldly denied, is very true; but not justly; nor
yet disproved, I confidently affirm: Yet, Sir, I must pull in my confidence, if
the worship administered and administrable by the Liturgy be not Gods worship:
When this is proved, I shall know in what sense God is not worshipped by the
Liturgy: but I hope you will find out other worship of God not administrable
by the Liturgy; for Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, you affirm, are cultus
adulterinus. Your fourth Answer cannot but make Liturgical men to laugh:
Studied Sermon, and conceived Prayer, you say, cannot be said to be humane;
(you must mean, in the Ministerial mode and dress, invented by man's judgment;)
for though Man is the Agent, he is Author of neither; yet the one and the other
is the act of his invention and judgment: Christ has directed Preaching and
Praying in an edifying manner and method, and therefore the Ministerial mode is
determined in the Word: Oh rare Logic! The Lord Major requires his meat be
carved in an handsome and honorable manner; therefore he determines the special
carving mode. Your next concession, concerning exegetical, or analytical, or
paraphrastical Preaching, and the wording of Prayer, is contradictory to this
inference; and yet, in the height of nonsense, you proceed to affirm, the
mode and dress is directed in specie, by the general rules of edification and
order: General Rules for the guidance of man's wisdom, have determined the
special mode for ministration. Why may not some Son of the Church report on
you, The Liturgy was enjoined in specie, 1 Cor. 14. 12, 26, 40. and endited in
individuo by the Spirit as dictator, Romans 8. 26. and be as soon believed, as
you affirming it of conceived Prayer? for these two are equally demonstrable in
the one, as in the other. And, Sir, let me tell you, nonsense, tautologie,
rude indigested expressions in conceived prayer, is an evil, a positive evil,
as well as the order and method of Common Prayer; and therefore are as cogent
to exclude the injunction and enditement of the Holy Ghost. Do what you can,
you most and will find, the Ministerial mode is and must be humane, subject to
humane weakness (which is a positive evil) in ministration; and Gods Worship
must therein and thereby exist betwixt God and his Church; yet this positive
evil is not fathered on the Holy Ghost.

Your next Paragraph offers an Answer to my Objection, Our first Reformers,
and Marian Martyrs, rejoiced and died under Page 20.
a mode of Worship by which God could not be worshipped. Your Answer is
five-fold.

Your first Answer, by way of concession, tells us, This was the dark side of
those pillars; they were fallible men; Peter might Judaize; therefore we must
measure truth by rule, and not by their practice. Sir, you might have observed,
their practice was not propounded as a pattern, but a proof; that though they
missed it in the Ministerial mode, yet God was worshipped by them, in and by
this mode. Sir, God did not leave them in approach to him with adulterate
worship, whilst they witnessed his truth. But, indeed, you observe not the
purpose, scope, and strength of any one Objection. The Martyrs abhorred the
notion of being saved only by true Doctrine* which they were charged to
believe. Would you have us believe they went to Heaven, who witnessed true
Doctrine, but worshipped God with false Worship, will worship, the worship
administered and administrable by the Liturgy?

Your second Answer does deny matter of fact, That these Martyrs rejoiced in,
and died for the Liturgy; as if Life and Liturgy came in competition, you
freely deny. You may, Sir, deny the Sun does shine. This man is sure well* read
in our Book of Martyrs. Did not Cranmer, Ridley, and others, joyfully compose
the Liturgy? Did not all that that then feared God in England, rejoice at the
establishment of the Liturgy by the Statute of King Edw. 6. Did not Philpot
appear in its defense at the Convocation? Did not old Latimer justify it in
his Disputation at Oxford? Did not Rogers our Proto-martyr approve it, in his
Speech digested to declare to the Commissioners who condemned him? Did not all
that then suffered minister their last public and dying devotions by the
Liturgy? Did not the Congregations (who then necessarily served God in
corners) worship by the Liturgy? Did not they wish and wait for the return of
the Liturgy, and rejoice in its revival by Elizabeth? Came not Life and
Liturgy in competition, when the Articles objected against, and on which
Thomas Watts, Thomas Osmond, Derrick Carver, John Launder, Mr. Rough the
Minister, and Cuthbert Sympson, Deacon of the congregation in Bow-
Churchyard, were condemned, was, that they used, attended, loved, labored to
restore the English Service, or Liturgy? Concluded not good Mr. Bradford, They
fell under Gods curse for calling good evil, and evil good, who condemned the
English Service of Heresy? How far short is he who concludes, and confidently
affirms the worship administered or administrable by the Liturgy, is not Gods
worship, but cultus adulterinus? God is not worshipped by the Liturgy. Sir,
turn over the Book of Martyrs, you may run and read these demonstrations of the
matter of fact; it cannot be denied: Yet I tell the Zealots for the Liturgy,
they infer more upon this practice, then these premises will allow; for
whilst I am forced to produce them against this most rigid Separatist, to prove
God worshipped by the Liturgy; I do deny their practice to be any way cogent,
to confine all, or any ministration of Gods worship to this mode and Liturgy.

Your third Answer, of the disparity between their case and ours, has been
fully answered by Mr. Crofton, and me; who has told you, the difference is
gradual, not real; the worship of God was, Reformat. not Separ. p. 44, 45.
is, and must be always one and the same, though the Ministerial mode do, and
ought to vary.

Your fourth Answer, ad hominem, is indeed most judicious; I affirm, Ministers
may not lawfully minister by the Liturgy; therefore all that did, or do hereby
minister, do minister by a sinful and unlawful Form of Worship, a formal
positive evil. I did, I do so affirm; what then? I did not affirm, The Worship
administered, or administrable by this finfull mode, was not Gods Worship, or
cultus adulterinus; or that God was not worshipped by the Liturgy. But I
affirm the contrary.

I did also affirm this evil, formal positive evil, to be a personal evil,
consistent with, whilst conversant about Gods true worship, and therefore no
ground of separation; I affirmed salvability under this evil, positive evil.
And herein your Censure is a manifest breach of Charity; you conclude the
Martyrs had not Gods worship, but adulterate false worship; which is
inconsistent with salvation; for otherwise, the very Devils may dance in hope
of Heaven; for they believe and tremble, yea, and profess true Doctrine: I
charge a defect in circumstantials; you in the subject and substance: I reprove
a sin of weakness, consistent with salvation; you the height of wickedness,
adulterate worship, which concludes its subjects, living and dying (as you
cannot deny the Martyrs to have done, if your Notion be true) under it, in
utter impossibility of salvation: Have you not cause to sing, jam sumus ergo
pares?

Your fifth Answer is, The Martyrs devotion was not confined to the Liturgy.
Nor is theirs who use it, and administer by it; or ours who attend the same.

Your third Proposition resolving this first Query concerning Page 21.
the expulsion of the Liturgy, I pass, as not concerned in it; consenting to
your Conclusion, though grieved to see you give so much advantage to Liturgical
Zealots, as by your weakness and wildness of Argumentation you have done: I
say, it ought not to be; but being, will not warrant a separation.

The Objections you take from me, I will observe your Answers to.

The first is Mr. Crofton's sense of scandal. Your Answer does witness, you
either did not read, or did not regard and consider Mr. Croftons Plea to the
Bar of Scandal; you would else have seen his care of, and compassion to the
weak; his concession of scandal in all acts of liberty, and sui juris; and his
neglect of scandal only when it does obviate his duty. But you insult here, as
every where, on manifest mistake, wonder at the charge whilst you will.

Your fifth Proposition is your Conclusion, built on the forenoted horrible and
erroneous premises, and must be consonant Pa. 26, 27.
thereunto; I will to it say no more: but I deny the Conclusion.

Your second Query, as a species of the first, is of the same nature, Quaer. 2.
and in it included, discussed, and resolved; yet you do particularly state it
thus: What is that which may warrant and acquit from Schism, a persons
non-communion with the Church of England, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
under the present mode, manner, and method of administration?

In this Query, I cannot but note, that the Lords Supper, as in the former
worship, abstracted from the Ministerial mode, is proposed as the Object of
non-communion.

Your Answer to this Query is general, and granted you in Thesi; That if one
cannot communicate in the Lords Supper without sin, he is warranted in his
non-communion: But your Hypothesis and Assumption is yet denied. Nor can your
horrid breach of Charity pass without observation, That the mode, manner, and
method of administration, makes the Lords Supper poison: whereby you must
conclude, that all who have, all who do communicate in this Ordinance, thus
ministered, have received poison: Yet you give us no proof for this
Martyr-blaspheming, Saint-damning Notion. But you pretend to answer some of
mine Objections.

1. What superstitions and corruptions attend the Ministration of the Lords
Supper, in which he must personally act, so as to become guilty of 1 Object.
page 98.
the same? You answer, Two, the Service, and the Gesture; Common Prayer and
kneeling. But, Sir, you have not proved the communicants personal acting in
Common Prayer; nor an impossibility of receiving the Lords Supper without this
gesture: Suppose these warrantable reasons, your secession cannot be warranted
by them, until you have essayed all means for public communion without them;
in which, I am sure, you might have found a possibility of enjoying this, with
at least connivance as to those Ceremonies which call for personal action.

Your Plea, that the gesture of kneeling is imposed, is merely frivolous; King
James his Proclamation was no Law; the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. extends not to
Successors; but if it do, his now Majesty's Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical affairs, has discharged the Canon challenging this Authority;
the Common Prayer Book does imply, and suppose, not impose this gesture: your
reason is as weak in matters of Law, as of Divinity. And, Sir, personal acting
in the Service and Ministration, being as it may be avoided, it will be an hard
dispute, whether the Gesture imposed will constitute a sufficient Bar to so
great Privilege, and so certain Duty: But that it makes the Lords Supper
poison, express poison, is out of dispute to men of modesty and charity, who
dare not conclude all in Hell, who have received, and do receive the Elements
kneeling. I am, Sir, no Advocate for this Gesture; but I abominate your
venomous Notion. Object. 2. page 30.


Your second Objection is ad hominem thus; Corruptions in point of gesture, are
to Mr. Crofton a warrantable ground of non-communion: But, corruptions in point
of gesture are corruptions extrinsecal and circumstantial; Ergo, Some
corruptions extrinsecal and circumstantial, at a warrantable ground for
non-communion. I pray you, Sir, when, and where did Mr. Crofton say,
Corruptions in point of gesture is a warrantable ground for non-communion? I
find it not in any of his writings: I say indeed, Mr. Crofton put by communion
because of the Gesture, which is his personal act, and he judges sinful, is
barred, by violence driven, he does not go: This, Sir, is not repugnant to what
I said, The worship attended with circumstantial corruptions, may with safety,
and must in duty be used; for, Sir, every sinful act, personally done,
becomes a substantial corruption; but done by others only, and about Gods
worship, it is circumstantial, and extrinsecal, and becomes not my Guilt.
Again, Sir, your Argument a fortiori, has the little force of your whole
Argumentation; If corruption in point of gesture be a warrantable ground for
noncommunion (which you falsely say is confessed) then much more the Liturgy:
Sir, here is a mere non sequitur; for the gesture (if sinful) is the personal
act of the Communicant, who is wholly mute, and passive, in the Liturgical
ministration, in which he needs not to act at all.

Your third Querie is in effect the same with the first and second, concerning
the Communion in the Service or Worship exhibited by the Liturgy. In the
resolution of which, you run round, like the Horse in his Mill; and whilst I
grant you the Liturgy is an evil constitution, as it is a Ministerial mode*
you fly upon the Worship ministered and ministrable by it; and tell us, The
worship ministered by the Liturgy is not performable by faith; the worship is
sinful; the worship is unlawful: to these I shall say nothing more then what I
have said before; If this Worship ministered (be the ministration what it will)
be cultus adulterinus, sinful worship, unlawful worship, God has no stated
public worship in the world; for Word, Prayer, and, Sacraments are the
worship. In your last, Liturgy was the object of your Communion; but in this,
worship, distinct from, and opposed to Liturgy, is the object of your
non-Communion; that we may know God is not worshipped by the Liturgy, you
speak out, the worship is sinful, not Gods worship, not performable in faith.

Having discoursed at Rovers concerning the subject, worship, Page 34.
you come to the Predicate, ministered by the Liturgy; and state my Objection;
The Liturgy is only a Ministerial mode, which the people are not to be Judges
in; and therefore all the guilt resulting from thence is personal, i. e.
peculiar to the Minister. To this you gravely answer, This twenty-year-old
Notion is become an Article of Mr. Croftons Creed; and in your Margin you
referr to Mr. John Ball. Is age any harm to the Notion? Is it the worse for
being stated by Learned, Judicious John Ball? No, Sir; these add force and
luster to it, and acquit Mr. Crofton from novelty and singularity in this
notion; your notions are not two years old, nor can they claim any other
Author, save acute T. P.

Secondly, You deny the Liturgy is any Ministrial mode, more then the Book of
Scripture is in the Ministers reading. If so much, Sir, Page 34.
is not that enough? That Gods Word be read in such a Translation, measure, and
order, is the ministration humane? And that Prayer be pronounced in such
method, order, and expressions, stated, or immediately conceived, is the humane
ministration thereof; edifying expressions, and reverential manner of delivery,
you grant, is the Ministerial mode; these may be both exhibited by a stinted
Liturgy: But, Sir, does the Liturgy (whatever be its order) do any thing more
then exhibit Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, in such an humane mode and dress
between God and his People? and is not this the formalis ratio of ministration
of Gods worship, to which edification and order are separable Adjuncts? Is yet
the Liturgy no Ministerial mode? Is Prayer read, no Prayer? and Sacraments
ministered by prescribed forms, no Sacraments? Is such ministration, no
ministration? Will you say it, and stand to it? I may commend (or rather
condemn) your confidence: You say, The Popish Missal may be termed a
Ministerial mode: It may so, it Page 35.
is so; yet it may not be attended by the people, because the matter ministered
by this Ministerial mode, is either no worship, or false worship: Your parallel
between the Popish Missal and Liturgy, is very square; they are both a
Ministerial mode; in the Popish Missal, the subject matter, the worship, is
vitiated; in the Liturgy, the subject matter, the worship, is right and good,
but the ministration and mode is bad; A full agreement! an excellent Harp and
Harrow! The Popish communicants contract guilt by communion in Idolatrous,
superstitious worship, ministered by their Priests and Missal; Ergo, Our people
contract guilt by communicating in Gods true and own worship ministered by the
Liturgy: Rare Reason! but I must remember, the worship is cultus adulterinus,
and the Liturgy is not a Ministerial mode. But

Who is this that cries out, that is a dangerous Principle, That people may
lawfully communicate by that form, mode, and order of worship, which a Minister
cannot lawfully administer by? D. G. redivivus? This quarrel is proper for a
Liturgical Considerator. But Page 35.
wherein lies the danger of this Principle? Such Opiniators fondly try an
experiment, how near they may approach to sin without sin. How, Sir? Is
distribution of different capacities of Minister and People, and determination
of the proper Duties of each, a fond experiment? Is an approach to sin, without
sin, so greatly dangerous, especially in the critical, necessarily casuistical
part of Divinity? Is a serious consideration of a Case of Conscience, the
wanton act of the wild Schoolmen? Will not an Act of Parliament, a penal Law,
clear this dangerous Principle, and make you, and many your Proselytes, make
this near approach to sin without sin? Does not the Law, public Peace, and
Order, with Self-preservation, conclude the man under sin, whose condescensions
came not near to sin, without sin? If we escape the sin, shall we not bless God,
and do any thing with comfort? But*

Your third Answer is; The people have Judicium discretionis, you grant, not of
Order and Method, to direct and determine that; Page 36.
this is proper to the Minister. We are, Sir, in this agreed; but your fancy
does confound the medium cultus with the modus ministerialis; the last you will
not allow, and the first you do not understand; there is the reason of the
strife: I pray you, Sir, study the propriety of these terms in reference to
Gods Worship; for want of this, you mis-apply Zanchy and all other Authors.

Another Objection: Under this Ministerial mode the people are purely passive.
You answer by way of Question, In what worship are the people active, if not in
the worship in question, who cannot deny their Amen to any petition in the
Common Prayer? Who, Sir, denies the peoples acting in the Worship? The
Ministerial mode (which I must and will retain) is the matter in question: You
must prove, That the Ministerial mode is the Object of the Peoples Amen. Your
supposition does not evade mine allusion to the Speaker or Recorder; unless you
make it certain, that the order and terms of their Speech is determined by the
King, and so their Office be destroyed, and reduced to the Act common to every
Boy. In the Case of Elies sons, you grant, the people who loathed did not leave
the offerings of the Lord: Nor do you urge any Reason cogent to them, which in
its general nature is not cogent to us; we have true worship, and a lawful,
though not Levitical Ministry: The force and pertinency of this instance, as
also that of the high places, Jerub. just. p. 29, 30.
is fully urged in my last; I shall only leave you to review it, and see what
you now object is fully answered.

Your Notion of civil presence, urged in your fourth Question, is so notorious
to guard your attendance on a Mass, Alchoran, or idolatrous Page 39, 40, 41.
worship; so repugnant to the principle and practice of Primitive Fathers, and
Martyrs, that all sober Christians will see it a fancy, and conclude you will
never make a Martyr. I shall not therefore stand to dilate upon it; only
desire you to tell us in your next, what it is shall predicate Civil presence?
in what lies the ratio formalis thereof? whereby we may difference it from
Religious presence? Do you predicate it, Civil presence ratione subjecti,
because the person present is a civil person? If so, Ecclesiastical persons
will be at a loss, and your self not defended. Do you predicate it Civil
presence ratione objecti, the business at which we are present is civil
business? that will not warrant a presence at Common Prayer, for that is
Religious (though in your fancy false Religion) business.

Do you, as you seem to do, predicate it Civil presence, from the reason which
does enforce it, the Law of a Civil Magistrate? then presence at Mass, at a
Turkish Alchoran, or Idolatrous service will be civil presence; for in all
these my body, the suppositum, is at the Magistrates command. Nor will your
self* contradicting notion, That the Common Prayer is not Heathenish, or Popish
Idolatry, any thing relieve you, whilst the worship administered and
administrable by the Liturgy is cultus adulterinus, and as prayer before an
Image, as is before observed. Then our primitive Martyrs were Felones de se,
who were destroyed for not yielding their presence at Idol sacrifices on the
Edicts of the Emperor. Until we know what is a civil presence, we must admire
the largeness of your fancy, under the great strictness of your Conscience: and
be sure you can foot it any way to free your self from danger; for your
necessitas officii does fail, when the Magistrate does Religiously (in zeal,
whether good or bad, I will not dispute) compel your personal attendance on a
Religious administration, by you judged cultus adulterinus: Nor will your
necessitas beneficii hold against that Rule, We must not do evil that good may
come thereby: It cannot please me, that any called a Presbyter, should own and
argue the Jesuitical partition of body and soul, in external communion with the
Church visible, in outward Ordinances; in which, the quale of my presence must
be judged by its appearance ad vulgus to the observing world, and not by mine
inward intention, and mental reservation: Pudeat nobis haec dici potuisse --
Know you not, that all Protestants have abandoned, abominated, and exploded
this distinction, as the odious covert of Church-Papists, in their Hypocritical
obedience to the Statutes*, which commanded their presence at Divine Service?

Your last Quaery, concerning the Solemn League and Covenant, is by your self
resolved, without any regard, or the least Answer to the three Considerations I
have laid before you in my last: I will not therefore strive to word it with
you to no purpose; consider, and rationally contradict what has been said;
otherwise, you multiply words in vain. In all you have now said on this
Question, you have said no new thing; therefore I will say nothing; but pray
that God may break the Snares with which you are entangled, and give you
unfeigned Repentance.

FINIS.

