I7 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
ACT Of His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland, for a solemn and public
Thanksgiving, upon the Birth of the most Serene, and High-Born-Prince, the
Prince and Stewart of Scotland, Prince of Wales. etc. Born at St. James's the
10of June 1688.
Present in Council.
The Earl of Perth, etc. Lord High Chancellor. The Lord Archbishop of St.
Andrews. The Lord Duke of Hamilton. The Lord Marquess of Douglass. The Earl of
Linlithgow. The Earl of Lauderdale. The Earl of Airlie. The Earl of Belcarras.
The Lord Viscount Tarbat. The Master of Balmerino. The Lord President of
Session. The Lord Advocat. The Lord Justice Clerk. The Lord Castlehill. Major
General Grahame of Claverhouse. The Lord of Nidry.

Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of June, 1688.
IT having pleased the Almighty GOD, by whom Kings Reign, to bless His Sacred
Majesty, our August and Glorious Monarch, and in Him us his dutiful and happy
Subjects, with the Birth of the most Serene and High-Born-Prince, the Prince
and Stewart of Scotland, etc. by His Royal Consort, Our G^^^^ous Queen Mary.
And these glad News being ^^^^^^at^d to by a most welcome Letter under His
Royal Hand, We in acknowledgement of this great Blessing, do in the first
place thank the great King of Heaven for so extraordinary a mercy, fitted to
unite all our Hearts, and prevent all our Jealousies: Not doubting but that all
His Majesty's Loyal Subjects will express their solemn and sincere Joy, upon so
signal an Occasion, and that they will put up their ardent Prayers to the
Almighty, to whom they owe this hopeful Prince, for prolonging His Life, in
which they ought to be concerned, as in their chief Earthly Blessing, next to
that of His Royal Parents, whom GOD preserve. And for this end, We the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council do by His Majesty's special VVarrant, Appoint
and Ordain, that a Solemn and Public Thanksgiving be kept and observed in all
the Churches of this His Majesty's Ancient Kingdom, on the respective Days
after-specified, viz. Those in the Diocese of Edinburgh, and the three
Lothians, on Thursday the 21. day of June instant; and in all the other
Paroch-Churches of the Kingdom on the Thursday thereafter, being the 28. of the
same Month. And We, by warrant foresaid, do accordingly Require and Command
the most Reverend, and the right Reverend, the Archbishops and Bishops, to
take care that Intimation be made hereof, by the Ministers Reading the same
from their Pulpits, the Lord's Day immediately preceding the said days of
Thanksgiving and Solemnity respective, and that in all the Paroch-Churches
within their Diocesses, the said Thanksgiving be accordingly Celebrated; and
We Require and Command the Magistrates of all Burghs-Royal, that they cause the
said Thanksgiving and Solemnity be observed with all suitable marks of Joy and
Congratulation within their respective Burghs. And Ordain the Lion King at
Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Council, and Pursevants, forthwith
to pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and make Publication of these
Presents. Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me

WILL PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.


