J2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
AN ACT OF PRIVY COUNCIL, Ordering Probation and Information to be sent in with
public Prisoners.
THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to prevent the great Prejudice that
may arise to His Majesty's Service, by the not sending in Probation with the
Prisoners, who are sent into His Majesty's Prisons, and particularly those of
Edinburgh and Cannogate whereby His Majesty's Advocate cannot know the ground
whereupon they are to be pursued, or how to find a Probation; as also the
extraordinary prejudices that daily arise to His Majesty's Subjects, by being
Imprisoned through Malice, Ignorance, or Misinformation; Do therefore hereby
ordain all Officers of the Army, Magistrates, or others, who send in Prisoners,
to send to His Majesty's Advocate, or the Clerks of the Council, as sufficient
Information of their Crimes, with a full account of the Depositions of such
Witnesses, or other Probation as can be had against them; Warranting the
Keepers of the Prisons, to receive none into their Prisons, unless. Information
or Probation be sent-in, as said is, to be verified to the said Keepers, by
the said Clerks, excepting allwise such as are sent in Prisoners by order from
a Privy Counselor; to whom it is hereby Recomended, to send also an account to
His Majesty's Advocate of their Crime, and Probation, with their first
convenience; and His Majesty's Advocate is hereby required to represent to the
Privy Council, the Grounds and Warrands of the said Imprisonment, the very next
Council day after the Prisoners are incarcerated, as said is, to the end they
may be either set at Liberty or Punished. And to the effect these Presents may
be Published and known; the said Lords ordain the Macers of Council to pass to
the Market-Cross of Edinburgh, and there by sound of Trumpet make Publication
of the same, that none pretend Ignorance.

Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me Mr. Colin Mckenie,
Clerk of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

COL. McKENIE, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1688. This may be Reprinted, by George Croom, at the
Blue-Ball in Thames Street, near Baynard's- Castle.


