A PROCLAMATION For calling together the Militia on this side of Tay, and the
Fencible Men in some Shires.
Edinburgh, the Thirtieth day of March, 1689.
THE Meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, taking to their Consideration,
that the Protestant Religion, and the Public Peace of the Kingdom, are at this
time in eminent danger; the Papists being in Arms in great numbers in the
Kingdom of Ireland, and that there is just ground to apprehend and fear, in
case they prevail, that they in Conjunction with other Enemies to our Religion
and Peace, may attempt to Invade this Kingdom; And it being indispensably
necessary, that in this time of common danger,, the Subjects of this Nation be
put in a Posture of Defense, for resisting any Foreign Invasion, and
suppressing any Intestine Commotion that may arise: THEREFORE the Estates do
Command and Require the Militia Horse and Foot in the several Shires
after-mentioned, according to the present Establishment by Law, to repair to
the places following, sufficiently Armed and Provided, and there to Rendezvous
under the Command of the respective Colonels of Foot, and Captains of Horse
after-named; viz. The Militia Regiment of the Town of Edinburgh, at the Links
of Leith, upon the Fifteenth day of April next. The Militia Regiment of the
Shire of Edinburgh, at Currie Moor; and the Militia Troop of Horse of the said
Shire* at the Links of Leith the said day. The Militia Regiment and Troop of
the Shire of Haddingtoun, at Beinstoun Moor the said day. The Militia Regiment
and Troop of the Shire of Berwick, at Creas Moor the said day. The two
Regiments and Troops of the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, at Lantoun-edge or
Moor the said day. The Regiment and Troop of the Shire of Dumfreis, at
Lockhar-bridge, near the Town of Dumfreis the said day. The Militia Troop of
the Shire of Wigtoun, at Glenluce; and the Troop of the Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright, at Carlinwork the said day. The three Militia Troops of the
Shire of Air, as follows, viz. The Troop for Carrick, at Mayboll, the Troop for
Kyle, at the Town of Air, and the Troop for Cunninghame, at Irwine the said
day. The three Militia Troops of the Shire of Lanerk, as follows, viz. The
Troop under the Command of the Duke of Hamilton, at the Town of Hamiltoun, the
Troop under the Command of the Marquess of Dowglass, at the Town of Lanerk, and
the Troop under the Command of the Lord Carmichael, at Glasgow the said day.
The Troop of the Shire of Renfrew, at Renfrew Moor the said day. The Militia
Regiment of the Shires of Argyle, Dumbarton and Bute, as follows, viz. These
Companies Out-reiked by the Shire of Argyle, at Innerrary, and the rest of the
Companies of that Regiment Out-reiked by the Shires of Dumbarton and Bute, at
the Town of Dumbarton, the said day. The Militia Regiment and Troop of the
Shires of Striviling and Clackmannan, at Brocks-brae, the said day. The Militia
Regiment and Troop of the Shires of Linlithgow and Peebles, as follows, viz.
The Troop of Horse, and these Companies of the Regiment Out-reiked by the Shire
of Linlithgow, at the Town of Linlithgow; and the Companies Out-reiked by the
Shire of Peebles, at the Town of Peebles, the said day. The Western Regiment of
the Shires of Fife and Kinross, and the Western Troop thereof, at Dumfermling;
and the Eastern Regiment and Eastern Troop, at Cowper Moor, the said day. The
two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Perth, at the
Town of Perth, the said fifteenth day of April next. And the Meeting of the
Estates do Nominat and Appoint the Persons after-named to be Officers of the
said Militia Regiments of Foot, and Troops of Horse, viz. Of the Militia
Regiment of the Town of Edinburgh, the Provost of Edinburgh for the time
Colonel, Baillie Thomas Hamilton Lieutenent-Collonel, (...) Lumsden of
Innergellie Major, Archibald Dumbar Merchant, James Heart Merchant, Robert
Wright, William Mitchell Baxter for the Cannongate, and the Baron-Baillie of
Leith for Leith, Captains. In the Shire of Edinburgh, Sir John Maitland
Colonel of the Militia Regiment, Sir John Clark of Pennicook
Lieutenent-Collonel, (...) Burnet of Carlops Major, Alexander Gilmor of
Craig-miller, Sir John Ramsay of White-hill, the Lord of Leny younger, the
Lord of Deuchar, the Lord of Long-sauchtoun, the Lord of Hermisheills, the
Lord of Murehouse younger, Captains. The Earl of Lothian Captain of the
Militia Troop, the Lord Forrester Lieutenent, and the Lord of Woolmet Cornet.
In the Shire of Haddingtoun Sir James Hay of Linplum Colonel of the Regiment,
Sir William Baird Lieutenent-Collonel, (...) Halliburton of Inchcairnie Major,
(...) Hepburn of Bearford, (...) Durham of Lufness, (...) Dowgall of Nunland,
(...) Brown of New-hall, the Lord of Gilmertoun younger, and (...) of
White-law Captains: Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun Captain of the Troop of Horse.
(...) In the Shire of Berwick, Sir Archbald Cockburn of Langien, Colonel of
the Militia Regiment; John Hume of Ninewalls Lieutenent-Collonel; the Lord of
Kimerghame, (...) Brown of Thorne-dicks, George Hume of St. Leonards; (...)
Belshes Younger of Tofts (...) Brown of Black-burn (...) Trotter of Ketle-sheil
younger; and (...) Hume of Hundwood Captains; Sir Patrick Hume of Polwart,
Captain of the Troop of Horse (...) Hume of West-reston Lieutenent, (...) Mowat
of Falside Cornet. In the Shire of Roxburgh, and Selkirk, Sir William Ker of
Green-Head, Colonel of the Eastern Regiment (...) Bennet younger of Grubit
Captain of the Eastern Troop; Charles Ker of Redding Lieutenent, and Andrew Ker
younger of Chatto Cornet; The Lord Newbotle Colonel of the Western Regiment;
Sir William Douglas of Cavers Lieutenent-Collonel; George Pringle younger of
Torwoodlie Major; John Scot of Gilmor-seleugh younger, Walter Riddel of
New-house; (...) Turnbul of Stamhall, James Murray of Sound*hope, (...) Veitch
(...) Ker of Abotrule, and the Lord of Torsonce Captains, Sir Francis Scot of
Thirlstone Captain of the Western Troop. In the Shyre of Dumfries, the Earl of
Annandale Colonel of the Militia Regiment, Sir Patrick Maxwel Lieutenent
Colonel, John Johnston younger of Wester-hall Major, the Lord of Howmains, the
Lord of Closburn younger, the Lord of Core-head elder, the Lord Brakinside,
the Lord of Capinoch, the Lord of Garnsalloch younger, and the Lord of
Crawfordston Captains. The Duke of Queensberry Captain of the Troup. In the
Shire of Wigton, the Lord of Logan Captain of the Troup, James Agnew younger
of Loch^aw Lieutenent (...) Gordon of Craich-law Cornet. In the Stewartrie of
Kirk^udburgh, the Viscount of K(...)mure Captain of the Troup, the Lord of
Rusco Lieutenant, and (...) Murray of Kellvens Cornet. In the Shire of Air, and
Bailliary of Curri(...) therein, the Lord Barganie Captain of the Troup, the
Lord of Dunduff Lie(...)tenant, and (...) Montgomery of Borland Cornet. In the
Bailliary (...) Kyle, the Earl of Dundonnald Captain of the Troup, the Master
of Cathca(...) Lieutenant, and (...) Cornet. In the Bailliary of Cunninghame,
t(...) Earl of Eglington Captain of the Troup, the Lord Montgomery
Lieutenan(...) and (...) of Col^field Cornet. In the Shire of Lanerk, the Duke
(...) Hamilton Captain of the Troup of the Midle-Ward, the Lord of Raplo(...)
younger Lieutenant, and (...) Stuart of Torrence younger Cornet, t(...) Marquis
of Douglas Captain of the Troup of the Upper-Ward (...) Menzies of Coulterraws
younger Lieutenant, and John Bannantyne of Crai(...)mure Cornet. The Lord
Carmichael Captain of the Troup of the Neithe(...) Ward, the Lord of Cleghorn
Lieutenant, and (...) Hay of Craignetha(...) younger Cornet. In the Shire of
Renfreu, the Earl of Glencairn Captain (...) the Troup, (...) Pollock of that
ilk Lieutenant, (...) of Glan(...)derston Cornet. In the Shires of Dumbarton,
Argyle, and Bute, the Earl o(...) Argyle, Colonel of the Militia Regiment,
(...) Colquhoun of Luss, Lieutenant Colonel, Black Alexander Campbel Major,
Archibald Campbe(...) younger of Barbrek, Duncan Campbel, Brother to
Mcconachie, Duncan Campbel, Brother to Kilberrie, (...) Buntin younger of
Airdoch, and (...) Bannantine younger of Kaymes Captains. In the Shires of
Stirling and Clackmannan; The Lord Elphingston Colonel of the Militia
Regiment, the Lord of Polmais Lieutenant Colonel, (...) of Boquhen younger,
Major, (...) of Harbert-Shire, (...) Rollo of Woodside, (...) Livingston of
Glentirran, and (...) Nicolson of Tilliecultry, Captains, and Baillie James
Brown, Captain of the Town of Stirlings Company; the Lord of Alva Captain of
the Troup, Sir Alexander Hope of Carss Lieutenent, and (...) Glass of Sauchie
Cornet. In the Shires of Linlithgow and Peebles, the Lord Cardross Colonel of
the Militia Regiment, the Lord of Riccarton-Drummond, Lieutenent Colonel, the
Lord of Livingston Major, Thomas Hamilton of Boghead, (...) Lawson of
Cairnmure, (...) Russel of Slipperfield, and (...) Veitch of Glen, Captains;
the Lord Torphichen Captain of the Troup, (...) Dickson of Heartree Lieutenent,
James Hamilton of Bangour Cornet. In the Shires of Fife and Kinross, the Earl
of Morton Colonel of the West-Regiment of Foot, (...) Douglas of Strahenry,
Lieutenent Colonel; Alexander Spittle of Lewchat Major, James Skeen of Grange,
(...) Aiton of Inch-darnie, (...) of Spenser-field, (...) of Lassoddie younger,
and (...) Orrack of Baltrain Captains. Sir Charles Halket Captain of the
Western Troup of Horse, (...) Monteith of Randifoord Lieutenent, (...) Cornet.
The Master of Burghlie Colonel of the Eastern Regiment, Sir David Arnot
Lieutenent Colonel, Robert Douglas of Kirkness Major (...) Watson of Athernie
Elder, (...) of Balbirnie younger, (...) Hay of Naughton younger, (...) of
Banikie younger, and (...) Aiton of Kinnadie Captains; the Master of Melvil
Captain of the Eastern Troup of Horse, (...) of Auchter-marnie Lieutenent,
(...) Cornet. In the Shire of Perth, the Marquis of Athol, Colonel of the
Eastern Regiment of Foot* formerly commanded by him* the Earl of Breadalbine,
Lieutenent Colonel, James Ramsay of Ba^ff Major, (...) The Lord Rollo Captain
of the Eastern Troop. The Lord Ruthven Colonel of the Western Regiment*
formerly commanded by the Earl of Perth, the Lord of Weyme younger Lieutenent
Colonel, Robert Stuart of Arvordlich Major, (...) Drummond of Comrie, (...)
Lindsay of Evelick, the Lord of Leys, (...) Oliphant of Condie, and (...) Ure
of Shirgartoun, Captains; The Lord of Glenegies, Captain of the Troop in the
Western part of the Shire, (...) Hume of Argitie Leiutenent, (...) Cornet. And
Ordains the said Colonels of Foot and Captains of Horse, to take upon them
the Command of the said Regiments and Troops respective; with Power to the
Colonels to name their own Majors where they are not named by this Act, or
being named shall not Accept: And that both Colonels, and Captains of Horse,
have the same Power of Nominating their inferior Officers, not named by this
Act, which was granted to them by Acts and Instructions of the Privy Council.
And it is hereby Declared, that all these Persons who are hereby Nominate
Officers of the Militia, albeit they should Decline to Accept, yet they shall
be holden to bring together to the foresaid places of Rendezvous these
appointed to be under their Command, and that they shall also be liable to the
Penalties appointed by Law for their refusing to Accept. And the Estates do
Ordain the Colonels of Foot and Captains of Horse respective, or in their
Absence the next Commanding Officers, to keep together the space of six Days
the said Regiments and Troops, when they shall Rendezvous at the foresaid
places, and during that time to Exercise them, and then to dismiss them, they
being always in readiness upon advertisement from the Colonel of Foot or
Captain of Horse, or the next Commanding Officer, to come together again to the
said respective places of Rendezvous with twenty days Provision, and either to
continue there for the space of twenty Days, or to March else where within the
Kingdom, as they shall receive Orders from the said Officers: And it is hereby
Declared, that the Absents from the Rendezvous in this Juncture, shall be
holden as Absents from the Host, and Proceeded against accordingly. And to the
end that the Militia may be made the more effectual, the Estates do Nominat and
Appoint the persons afternamed to be Commissioners, for Ordering the Militia in
the several Shires, with the Colonels, Leiutenant Colonels, Majors and
Captains of Foot, and the Captains, Leiutenants and Cornets of Horse, viz. For
the Shire of Edinburgh, The Viscount of Tarbet, Sir John Baird of Newbyth, Sir
James Foulis of Collingtoun, Sir James Richardson of Smeitoun, Sir William
Murray, Sir Mark Carss, Sir Robert Baird, the Lord of Arnistoun, the Lord of
Riccartoun Craig, the Lord of Pumpherstoun, Mr. David Dunmure of Curriehill,
and Mr. William Douglas of Baads, the Duchess of Buckcleughs Baillie of the
Regality of Dalkeith for the time, and the Duchess of Lauderdale her Baillie
for Dudingstoun for the time. For the Shire of Haddingtoun, The Lord Yester,
the Lord Belhaven, the Lord of Stevinstoun, the Lord of Ormistoun, the Lord
of Lamingtoun, the Lord of Prestongrange, (...) Hepburn of Beinstoun, Robert
Hamilton of Presmenan, David Hepburn of Humbie, Sir John Lawder of
Fountain-hall, (...) Hamilton of Nynwar, Sir John Hall of Dunglass, (...)
Hepburn of Smeiton, Sir Patrick Hepburn of Blackcastle, (...) Sydserf of that
Ilk, and the Duchess of Lauderdale her Baillie for Leidingtoun, Sir John Baird
of Newbyth, Sir John Sinclar of Lochend, the Lord of Gosford, the Lord of
Dirltoun, the Lord of Ruchlaw, (...) Murray of Spot. For the Shire of Berwick,
The Lord Harcars, the Lord Mersingtoun, Sir James Don of Newtoun, Sir Robert
Stuart of Allanbank, Sir Patrick Hume of Lumsden, the Lord of Lambertoun, the
Lord of Moristoun, the Lord of Idingtoun, the Lord of Tosts, Patrick Wardlaw
of Berriehaugh, James Hume of Flass, William Hume of Greenlaw-castle, John
Watson of Jardenfield, Sir John Hall of Auldcambus, Pringle of Greenknow, Mr.
James Daes of Coldingknows, George Hume of Bassindene, and John Hume younger of
Newtoun. For the Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk, The Lord Jedburgh, Sir William
Elliot of Stobbs, Sir John Scot of Ancrum, Sir William Scot younger of Harden,
George Pringle of Torwoodlie, Sir Patrick Scot younger of Ancrum, Sir William
Bennet of Grubet, the Lord of Chatto, the Lord of Cliftoun, the Lord of
Raeburn, the Lord of Smelholm, (...) Ker of Littledean, Alexander Don of
Rutherford, the Lord of Hadden, the Lord of Gallowsheils, the Lord of
Midlested, (...) Elliot of Midlamiln, the Lairds of Mckerstoun elder and
younger, the Lairds of Stitchhill elder and younger (...) of Frogden, (...) of
Horsliehill, (...) of Blackhill, the Duchess of Buckcleugh her Chamberlain,
and the Earl of Roxburgh his Chamberlain for the time. For the Shire of
Dumfreis, The Lord Drumlanrig, the Lord of Craigdarroch, Sir Robert Lawrie of
Maxweltoun, Sir James Johnston of Westerhall, the Lord of Carnselloch elder,
the Lord of Eccles, (...) Johnstoun younger of Lockerbie, (...) Murray of
Drumcreiff younger, William Johnston of Grantoun, Andrew Johnston of Newtoun,
the Lord of Ramerskails, the Lord of Dormount, William Douglas of Dornock.
For the Shire of Wigtoun, Sir Andrew Agnew of Lochnaw, Sir John Dalrymple,
William Mcdowgal of Garthland, Sir William Maxwell of Monreith, John Vaus of
Barnbaroth, the Lord of Mochrum, the Lord of Castle-Stewart, Sir Charles Hay,
the Lord of Seuchan, the Lord of Dunsky, James Dalrymple of Dunragat. For the
Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, Alexander Gordon of Earlstoun, Roger Gordon of
Troquhen, Patrick Murdoch of Cumlodan, Edward Maxwell of Hills, David Mcculloch
of Ardwell, Robert Brown of Corslouth, Andrew Herron of Kinauchtree, William
Gordon of Craig, John Ewart of Mullock, Samuel Maxwell of Newlay, John Mackie
of Palgown, John Neilson of Corsack, Alexander Brown of Kempletoun. For the
Shire of Air, In the Bailliarie of Carrict, The Lord of Cairltoun, John
Mack-Alexander younger of Drummochrie, Quintine Kennedy elder of Drumellan,
(...) Boyd of Trochrig, Fergus Mackgibbon of Knockdollian, Thomas Kennedy of
Grange, Alexander Ferguson of Kilkerran, John Whiteford of Blairquhan, James
Crawford of New-wark, Quintine Macilvain of Grimnet, Mr. John Ferguson of
Barclauchanan* For the Bailliarie of Kyle, The Lord Crichton, the Lord of
Cesnock, William Cochran of Ochiltrie, (...) Fairlie of Burntfield, (...)
Fullerton of Corsbie, (...) of Adamtoun elder and younger, (...) McAlexander of
Boghall, (...) Farquhar of Gilmerscroft, (...) Logan of Logan, (...) Chalmers
of Polquharn, Mungo Campbel younger of Nether-place, David Crawford of
Drumsowie, David Crawford of Barquharrie, Charles Cunninghame of Drongan, (...)
Cathcart of Drumton, Mr. David Cunninghame of Milcraig, John Reid younger of
Ballach-myle, David Crawford of Carss, David Boswell of Auchinleck, Mr. John
Boswell, William Cunninghame of Brown-hill, and William Campbel of Skelden. For
the Bailliarie of Cunninghame, The Lord of Blair, Sir James Montgomery of
Skelmorlie, (...) Crawford of Kilbirnie, (...) Mure of Rowallan, (...)
Cunninghame of Cunninghame-head, (...) Hamilton of Grange, Mr. Francis
Montgomery, Major Hugh Buntine, (...) Crawford of Ferguson, Sir Alexander
Cunninghame of Corshill, (...) Cunningham of Aiket, (...) Crawford of
Crawford-land, and Hugh Stevinson of Mont-greenan. For the Shire of Lanerk, The
Earl of Forfar, the Lord of Lamingtoun, Sir Daniel Carmichael, the Lord of*
Westshiel, (...) Lockhart of Kirktoun (...) Baillie of Jerviswood, (...)
Hamilton of Aikenhead, Sir William Maxwell of Calderwood, (...) Muirhead of
Bradisholm, (...) Stuart of Allantoun, Hamilton of Barncluith, Stuart of
Cultness, Sir William Lockhart of Carstairs, Sir John Carmichael of
Bonningtoun, Sir William Fleming of Fairme, Mr. John Kincaid of Crossbasket,
(...) Hamilton of Westburn, the Lord of Dalziel, Alexander Cleland of
Clelandtoun, George Muirhead of Stevinstoun, Sir John Harper of Cambusnethan,
the Lord of Lee, (...) Stuart of Hartwood, (...) Cochran of Rochsolls, (...)
Hamilton of Airdrie, (...) Hamilton of Halcraig younger, William Baillie of
Hardingtoun, James Lockhart of Annistoun, (...) Stark of Anchinvoll, William
Cleland of Hairshaw, William Hamilton of Wishaw, James Young of Netherfield,
the Lord of Walstoun younger, and William Lawrie of Blakwood. For the Shire of
Renfrew, The Lord Ross, the Lord Blantyre, (...) Shaw younger of Greenock, Sir
Archibald Stuart of Blackhall, Sir Patrick Houstoun of that Ilk, (...)
Cunninghame younger of Craigens, (...) Maxwell of Pollock, (...) Fleeming of
Borochen, (...) of Fulwood. For the Shire of Dumbartoun, (...) Cochran of
Kilmaronock, Archibald (...) of Ardincaple, Alexander Gartshore of that Ilk,
(...) Hamilton of Barns, William Colquhoun of Craigtoun, Andrew Colquhoun of
Garscadden, John Carmichael Chamberlain to the Earl of Wigtoun, James Hamilton
of Hutchestoun, Nicol Buntine of Airdoch, and William Stirling of Law. For the
Shire of Bute, (...) Bannatine of Kaymes elder, Master John Stuart of Escog.
For Arran, the Baillie of Arran. For the Shire of Argyle, Sir Duncan Campbel of
Auchinbreck, (...) Campbel of Barbreck, (...) of Craigneish, Lord Neil Campbel,
(...) Campbel of Lochnell, (...) Campbel of Mcconachie, Sir Colin Campbell of
Ardkinless, (...) of Strahur, the Lord of Lamond, (...) Campbel elder of
Allangreg, (...) Campbel Captain of Carrick, (...) Campbel of Skipnage, (...)
Campbel of Glencarradel, Dougal Campbel of Glensaddel, Colin Campbel of
Blythswood. For the Shires of Striviling and Clackmannan, The Earl of Mar, the
Viscount of Tarbet, the Lord Cardross, the Lord of Houstoun, the Lord of
Wood-head, the Lord of Bardowie, the Lord of Culcreuch, the Lord of
Ballendalloch, the Lord of Touch, Alexander Monro of Bear-crofts, the Lord of
Powes, the Lord of Quarrel, the Lord of Gargunnock, the Lord of Clackmannan,
John Keirie of Gogar, the Lord of West-quarter, the the Lord of Tillibody,
Francis Mastertoun of Park-miln. For the Shire of Linlithgow, the Lord of
Dundass, (...) Dundass of Manner, (...) Dundass of Dudingstoun, Mr. William
Dundass of Kincavle, John Hamilton of Dechmont, Walter Cornwall of Bonhard,
(...) Sharp of Houstoun, (...) Monteeth of Aldcathie, Sir William Hope, (...)
Hamilton of Binnie, (...) Cochran of Barbachlaw, (...) of Balbairdie, (...) of
Polkennet, the Lord of Craigiehall, Robert Anstruther of Wrae, Alexander
Hamilton Baillie of Strabrock. For the Shire of Peebles, James Earl of Mortoun,
Lieutenent-General Dowglass of Skirling, William Hay of Drumelzier, Sir
Archibald Murray of Blackbarrony, Sir William Murray of Stenhope, David Murray
younger of Stenhope, Richard Murray of Spitlehaugh, James Geddes of Kirkurd,
William Morison of Prestoun-grange, John Hay of Hay stoun, (...) Burnet of
Barns, James Williamson of Cardrono, Jo. Brown of Scotstoun, Jo. Dickson of
Whitslaid, (...) Hunter of Polmude, David Plenderleith of Blyth, William Burnet
of Kailzie, Alex* Horsburgh younger of that Ilk, James Nasmith of Posso,
Alexander Murray of Hall-myre, John Murray of Cringltie, John Balfour of
Kailzie, Sheriff-Depute, Robert Burnet of Little-Ormistoun, Alexander Baillie
of Callens, Alexander Hamilton of Cold-coat, James Chisholm of Hayhope, (...)
Pennicook of Romanno, William Younger elder, Portioner of Lintoun. For the
Shires of Fife and Kinross, The Earl of Crawford, the Earl of Levin, the Lord
Melvil, Sir Philip Anstruther, (...) Hay of Nauchtoun, Mr. Archibald Hope of
Rankeillor, (...) of Reddie elder, (...) Auchmoutie of Lawhill, William
Anstruther of that Ilk, John Dempster of Pitliver, (...) of Lathallan, James
Robertson of Newbigging, James Crawford of Monwhannie. For the Shire of Perth,
The Lord Cardross, Mr. Francis Montgomery, Sir Patrick Murray-Patrick Smith of
Methven, Patrick Stuart of Ballachan, (...) Stuart of Stentoun, (...) of
Collonbellie, (...) Home of Argattie, Collin Campbel of Formage, Thomas Hay of
Balhousie, Walter Stuart of Kincarachie, (...) Blair of Inshyra, (...) Grahame
of Balgoun, (...) Linton of Pandrich, Colin Campbel of Monzie, (...) Drummond
of Meggins, William Lindsay of Kilspindie, John Drummond of Blair, Colonel
Meinzies, Patrick Hay of Leys elder, Mungo Campbel of Burnbank, (...) Stuart of
Annat, Mr. William Erskine, John Erskine of Balgoun, Lawrence Craigie of
Kilgristoun, Mr. James Craigie younger of Dumbarnie, (...) Fleming of Moness,
Sir Colin Campbel of Aberurquhall, (...) of Rind, (...) Naper of Balwhaple;
Together with one of the Magistrates for the time of each Royal Burgh, and Burgh
of Regality, who contribute to the Out-reik of the Militia, in each respective
Shire. And the Estates do Authorize and Empower the said Commissioners, to
Nominat the Captains of Foot, and the Lieutenents and Cornets of Horse, with
consent of the Colonels and Captains of Horse respective, where they are not
named by this Act, or being named, do not accept. With power to the said
Commissioners, to determine all differences and controversies which may arise*
in relation to the Militia, and to do all other things requisite and necessary
for ordering thereof, which the former Commissioners had power to do by the
Acts of Parliament, and Acts of Privy Council. And it is hereby Declared, that
two of the Commissioners, with one of these Officers, viZ. The Colonel,
Lieutenant-Collonel, Major, and Captain of Foot, or the Captain, Lieutenent, or
Cornet of Horse, shall be a Quorum: And if a greater number meet, that the
Major part be Commissioners. And in respect of the present Exigence, The
Estates do Ordain all the Heretors, and other Persons in each Shire, and
Jurisdiction within the same, to come out with their best Horses and Arms, to
the foresaid places of Rendezvous of the Horse, the second day of the
Rendezvous, under the pain of Confiscation of their Horses, for the Public
use, and where there are different places of Rendezvouzes appointed for Troops
of Horse in one Shire, that the Heretors repair to the respective places of
Rendezvous appointed for the several Divisions of the Shires wherein they
Reside; And in case the Commissioners of Militia, with one of the
Field-Officers of the Foot, or the Captain, Lieutenent, or Cornet of Horse,
shall find any Militia Horse to be insufficient, that they cause the Leader
furnish another sufficient Horse, and if neither he, nor these of the Fraction,
who Contribute to him, have one, that they cause the Leader buy a Horse, and
that any of the rest of the Heretors, or others having sufficient Horses, at
the Rate contained in the Act of Parliament, or thereby shall be holden to Sell
one to him at a reasonable Price, to be appointed by the said Commissioners,
or their Quorum aforesaid, not exceeding the foresaid Rate, or thereby; And it
is hereby Ordained, that these Persons, who are liable in Fractions of
Militia-Horses, shall at this time Contribute their Proportions to the Leader,
for a new Out-reick of Horse, and Furniture, where the Leader has Served the
full space of seven years, since the last time that these of the Fraction did
Contribute to him: But where the Leader has not not Served fully the seven
years, that he shall continue to serve until the expiring thereof, without any
new Contribution, by these of the Fraction: And the Officers and Commissioners
of the Militia, are hereby Empowered to call for the Standarts, Colors,
Trumpets, and Drums, which belong to each Shire, from these who had the trust
thereof, or their Representatives, who are hereby required to deliver the same
to the said Officers; And where they are not extant, that new ones be
provided, at the Charge of the Shire. And the Meeting of the Estates
considering, that there is no Militia Foot in the Shires of Lanerk, Air,
Renfrew, Wigton, and Stuartry of Kirkeudburgh; They grant Power and Warrant to
the Commissioners of Militia, in the said Shires, and Stuartrie, to bring
together all the fencible Men, in these respective Shires, and Stuartrie, who
are hereby required upon Intimation from the said Commissioners, to come out
sufficiently Armed, and provided according to their Qualities, and Conditions,
with Power to the Commissioners, with Advice of the rest of the Gentlemen, when
the Fensible Men are met, to moddel them, or so many of them* as they shall
think fit, into Companies, and to appoint Captains, and other Officers to the
said companies, which captains shall Randezvouz them weekly, within their
respective Paroches, to be in readiness thereafter, to come out as they shall
be advertised by their Officers. And further, the Estates commands and Requires
the respective Sheriffs, and their Deputs, to cause prepare Beacons upon the
most Eminent and conspicuous Places in the Shires of Wigton, Air, and Bute, and
to cause kindle these Beacons when they shall have Notice, or appearance of an
Invasion, upon the Westcoast of this Kingdom: And in that case, the Leidges,
who have their Horses, or cattle near the said coast, are Required to Remove
them Ten miles from the coast, that no Invaders from the Irish coast may have
any Supply, Assistance, or Advantage thereby; And Ordains the Fensible men in
the said Shires, and Stewartrie, upon their having Notice of the firing of
these Beacons, to repair to the respective Places to be appointed for the
Randezvouzes, by their Officers. And Ordains their Presents to be Published, by
Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, or Sheriff Officers, at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all the Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the
whole Shires above*exprest, and other Royal Burghs, and Burghs of Regality
within the same. Extracted out of the Records of the Meeting of Estates, By me

Al. Gibson Cls.

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year, 1689.


