ARTICLES AND ORDINANCES OF WAR: For the present Expedition of the Army of
the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

By the Committee of Estates, and his Excellence, the Lord General of the
Army.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1643.

ARTICLES AND ORDINANCES OF WAR, etc.
The publishing of the Articles and Ordinances of War.
THat no man pretend ignorance, and that every one may know the duty of his
place, that he may do it; The Articles and Ordinances following, are to be
published at the general Rendezvous in every Regiment apart, by the Marshals
of the several Regiments, and in the presence of all the Officers. The same
shall afterward be openly read to every Company of Horse and Foot, and at such
times as shall be thought most convenient by the Lord General: and in like
manner shall be made known to so many as join themselves to be professed
Soldiers in the Army. For this end, every Colonel and Captain shall provide
one of those Books, that he may have it in readiness at all occasions, and
every Soldier shall solemnly swear this following Oath:

^he Soldiers Oath
I N. N. Promise and swear to be true and faithful in this Service, according
to the heads sworn by me in the Solemn League and Covenant of the three
Kingdoms: To honor and obey my Lord General, and all my Superior Officers
and Commanders, and by all means to hinder their dishonor and hurt: To
observe carefully all the Articles of War and Camp-Discipline: never to leave
the defense of this Cause, nor flee from my Colors so long as I can follow
them: To be ready to watching, warding, and working, so far as I have
strength: To endure and suffer all distresses, and to fight manfully to the
uttermost, as I shall answer to GOD, and as GOD shall help me.

I. ^irk Dis^^pline.
Kirk Discipline shall be exercised, and the sick cared for in every Regiment,
by the particular Eldership, or Kirk-Session to be appointed, even as uses to
be done in every Parish in the time of Peace: And that there may be an
uniformitie throughout the whole Army in all matters Ecclesiastical, there
shall be a general Eldership, or common Ecclesiastic Judicatory, made up of
all the Ministers of the Camp, and of one Elder direct from every particular
Regiment, who shall also judge of Appellations made unto them from the
particular Sessions or Elderships.

II. Councels of War.
For deciding of all questions, debates and quarrellings that shall arise
betwixt Captains and their Soldiers, or any others of the Army, and for the
better observing of Camp-Discipline, two Courts of Justice, the one higher, and
the other lower, are appointed, wherein all Judges are sworn to do justice
equally: The higher also to judge of Appellations to be made from the lower
Court. And if any man shall by word or gesture show his contempt or mis-regard,
or shall fall out in boasting or braving, while Courts are sitting, he shall be
punished by death. And both these Judicatories, as well of the Kirk matters, as
of War, shall be subject to the General Assembly, and Committee of Estates
respective.

III. Duties to God.
Whosoever shall wilfully or carelesty absent himself from morning and evening
Prayers, or from preaching before and afternoon on the Lords Day, or other
extraordinary times appointed for the worship of GOD, when the sign is given
by sound of Trumpet or Drum, he shall be censured and punished for his
neglect or contempt, by penalty, imprisonment, or other punishment, as his
fault deserves.

After the warning given, there shall be no Market, nor selling of Commodities
whatsoever, till the Prayers or Preaching be ended, upon the pain of
forfeiting the things so sold, and of the imprisoning of the offenders.

IIII. Common and ordinary swearing and cursing, open profaning of the Lords
Day, wronging of his Ministers, and other Acts of that kind, shall not only
be punished with loss of pay and imprisonment, but the transgressors shall
make their public repentance in the midst of the Congregation, and if they
will not be reclaimed, they shall with disgrace be openly casseered and
discharged, as unworthy of the meanest place in the Army.

V. Duties to ^he King, Country, and Gene^all.
If any shall speak irreverently against the Kings Majesty and his Authority,
or shall presume to offer violence to his Majesty's Person, he shall be
punished as a Traitor. He that shall speak evil of the Cause which we defend,
or of the Kingdoms, the Parliaments, Convention of Estates, or their
Committees in the defense thereof, or shall use any words to the dishonor of
the Lord General, he shall be punished with death.

No man shall at his own hand, without warrant of the Committee, or of my Lord
General, have, or keep intelligence with the enemy, by speech, letters,
signs, or any other way, under the pain to be punished as a Traitor. No man
shall give over any Strength, Magazin, Victual, etc. Or make any such motion,
but upon extremity, under the same pain. No man shall give supply, or furnish
Money, Victual, or any Commodities to the enemy, upon pain of death.

Whosoever shall be found to do violence against the Lord General, his
Safeguard, or Safe Conduct, shall die for it.

Whosoever shall be found guilty of carelessness and negligence in his service,
although he be free of treachery and double-dealing, shall bear his own
punishment.

VI. Duties of Superiou^^
All Commanders and Officers shall be careful, both by their authority and
example, that all under their charge, live in godliness, soberness, and
righteousness: and if they themselves shall be common swearers, cursers,
drunkards, or any of them at any time shall come drunk to his Guard, or by
quarrelling, or any other way shall commit any notable disorder in his quarter,
loss of place shall be his punishment; And further, according to the sentence
of the Court of War.

The Captains that shall be negligent in training their Companies, or that
shall be found to withold from their Soldiers any part of their pay, shall
be discharged of their place, and further censured by the Court of War.

No Commander or Officer shall conceal dangerous and discontented humors,
inclined to mutinies, or grudging at the orders given them, but shall make them
known to the prime Leaders of the Army, upon the pain to be accounted guilty
of mutiny.

No Commander or Officer shall authorize, or wittingly permit any Soldier to
go forth to a singular Combat, under pain of death; But on the contrary, all
Officers shall be careful by all means to part quarrellings amongst
Soldiers, although they be of other Regiments or Companies, and shall have
power to command them to prison, which if the Soldiers shall dis-obey or
resist by using any Weapon, they shall die for it.

No Captain shall presume at his own hand, without warrant of the Lord
General, to casseer or give a Pass to any enroled Soldier or Officer, who
has appeared at the place of the General Rendezvous; nor shall any Commander,
Officer, or Soldier depart without a Pass, or stay behind the time appointed
him in his Pass; and whosoever transgresses the one way or the other, shall
be punished at the discretion of the Court of War.

VII. Duties of Soldiers.
All Soldiers shall remember that it is their part to honor and obey their
Commanders, and therefore shall receive their commands with reverence, and
shall make no noise, but be silent, when the Officers are commanding or giving
their directions, that they may be heard by all, and the better obeyed: he that
fails against this, shall be imprisoned.

No Soldier shall leave his Captain, nor servant forsake his Master, whether
he abide in the Army or not, but upon license granted, and in an orderly way.

Whosoever shall presume to discredit any of the great Officers of the Army, by
writ, word, or any other way, and be not able no make it good, and whosoever
shall lift his Weapon against any of them, shall be punished by death; and
whosoever shall lift his hand against any of them, shall lose his hand.

No Soldier, nor inferior Officer, shall quarrel with, or offer any injury
to his Superior, nor refuse any duty commanded him, upon pain of casseering,
and to be further censured by the Court of War. And if any shall presume to
strike his Superior, he shall be punished with death. But if it shall happen,
that any Officer shall command any thing to the evident and known prejudice of
the public, then shall he who is commanded, modestly refuse to obey, and
presently give notice thereof to the Lord General.

If any man shall use any words or ways, tending to mutiny or sedition,
whether for demanding his pay, or upon any other cause, or if any man shall be
privy to such mutinous speeches or ways, and shall conceal them, both shall
be punished with death.

All must show their valor against the Enemy, and not by revenging their
private injuries, which upon their complaints to their superior Officers,
shall be repaired to the full. And if any man presume to take his own
satisfaction, or challenge Combat, he shall be imprisoned, and have his
punishment decerned by the Marshall Court.

The Provost Marshal must not be resisted or hindered, in apprehending or
putting Delinquents in prison, and all Officers must assist him to this end,
and if any man shall resist or break prison, he shall be censured by the Court
of War.

VIII. Duties to others.
Murder is no less unlawful and intolerable in the time of War, then in
the time of Peace, and is to be punished with death.

Whosoever shall be found to have forced any woman, whether he be Commander or
Soldier, shall die for it without mercy. And whosoever shall be found guilty
of adultery or fornication, shall be no less severely censured and punished
then in the time of Peace.

If any common whores shall be found following the Army, if they be married
women, and run away from their husbands, they shall be put to death without
mercy, and if they be un-married, they shall be first marked by the hangman,
and thereafter by him scourged out of the Army.

Thieves and Robbers shall be punished with the like severity. If any shall
spoil, or take any part of their goods that die in the Army, or are killed in
service, he shall restore the double, and be further punished at discretion. It
is provided, that all their goods be forthcoming, and be disposed of according
to their Testament and Will, declared by word or writ before witnesses, or if
they have made no Testament, to their Wives, Children, or nearest Kindred,
according to the Laws of the Kingdom.

All shall live together as friends and brethren, abstaining from words of
disgrace, contempt, reproach, giving of lies, and all provocation by word or
gesture: He that fails, shall be imprisoned for the first fault, and if he be
incorrigible, he shall be with shame punished and put out of the Army.

IX. Concern^^^ Arms.
All Soldiers shall come to their Colors, to watch, to be exercised, or to
muster, with their own Arms, and if any Soldier shall come with another man's
Arms, he shall be punished with rigor, and the lender shall lose his Arms.
All shall come also with complete and tight Arms in a decent manner, otherwise
to be severely punished.

If any man shall sell or give in pawn his horse, his Arms, or any part of
the Ammunition committed to him, or any Instruments, as Spades, Shovels,
Pickes, used in the Field, he shall for the first and second time be beaten
through the quarter, and for the third time be punished as for other theft: And
he that buyeth them, or takes them to pawn, be he Soldier or Victualler,
shall pay the double of the Money, beside the want of the things bought or
im-pawned, and be further punished at discretion.

Whosoever in a debauched and lewd manner by Cards or Dice, or by sloth and
unexcusable neglect, shall lose his horse and Arms, in whole, or in part, to
the hinderance of the service; And whosoever shall wilfully spoil, or break his
Arms, or any Instrument of War committed to him, by cutting down of Trees, or
any other way, he shall serve as a Pioner, till the loss be made up, and he
furnished upon his own charges.

X. Concerni^^ marching
No man on his march, or at his lodging, within or without the Country upon
whatsoever pretext, shall take by violence either horse, cattle, goods, money,
or any other thing less or more, but shall pay the usual prices for his meat
and drink, or be furnished in an orderly way upon count, at the sight of the
Commissar, according to the order given by the Committee upon pain of death,
without mercy.

If any man shall presume to pull down, or set on fire any dwelling house,
though a Cottage, or hew down any fruit trees, or to waste or deface any part
of the beauty of the Country, he shall be punished most sevearly, according to
the importance of the fault.

In marching, no man shall stay behind without leave: No man shall straggle
from his Troup or Company: No man shall march out of his rank, and put others
out of order, under all highest pain.

XI. Of musters.
If any Colonel of horse or foot shall keep back his Soldiers from the
appointed musters, or shall lend his Soldiers to make a false muster, upon
trial in the Court Marshall, he shall be punished as a deceiver. And if any
Muster master shall use any false Rols, shall have any hand in false Musters,
or by connivence, or any other way be tried to be accessory to them, he shall
suffer the like punishment.

XII. Victuallers.
No man shall presume to do the smallest injury to any that bring necessaries
to the Leager, whether by stealing from them, or deceiving them, or by violence
in taking their horse or goods, under the pain to be accounted and punished as
enemies. No victuallers shall sell rotten victuals, upon pain of imprisonment
and confiscation, and further as they shall be judged to deserve.

No Soldier shall provide and sell Victuals, unless he be authorized, nor
shall any that sells Victuals, keep in his Tent or Hutte any Soldier at
unseasonable hours, and forbidden times, under pain at discretion: Like-as,
all the prices thereof shall be set down by the general Commisser, and be
given to the Quartermaster of the several Regiments.

XIII. Duties i^ the Cam^^^^
No man enrolled professing himself or pretending to be a Soldier, shall
abide in the Army, unless he enter in some Company, nor shall he that has
entered depart without license, upon pain of death. No man having license
shall stay beyond the time appointed him, upon pain of loss of his pay during
the time of his absence, and further punishment at discretion. If any man in a
mutinous way, show himself discontent with the quarter assigned him, he shall
be punished as a mutiner. And if any man shall stay out of his quarter, or go
without shot of Cannon being entrenched, but one night, without leave of his
superior Officer, he shall be casseerd.

All that shall be absent from the watch after the sign is given for the
setting thereof shall be severely punished. He that reveals or falsifieth
the watchword given by the Officer, within the Trenches, or before the Colors:
He that is taken sleeping or drunk upon his watch: He that comes off the watch
before the time, every one of those shall be punished with death.

Whosoever shall assemble themselves together for taking mutinous counsel upon
whatsoever pretext; they all, whether Officers or Soldiers, shall suffer death.

XIV. Duties in Battle.
Every man when the Alarm is given, shall repair speedily to his Colors; no
man shall forsake or flee from his Colors.

No man in the Country shall reset them that flee.

No man in the battle shall throw away his Musket, Pike, or Bandileir, all
under the pain of death.

Whatsoever Regiment of horse or foot, having charged the enemy, shall draw
back or flee before they come to stroke of sword, shall answer for it before a
Council of war; and whosoever Officer or Soldier shall be found to be in
the default, they shall be punished by death, or some shameful punishment, as
the Council of war shall find their cowardice to deserve.

XV. Duties after Battle.
If it shall come to pass, that the enemy shall force us to battle, and the
Lord shall give us victory, none shall kill a yielding enemy, nor save him that
still pursues, upon pain of death. Neither shall there be any ransoming of
persons, spoiling, pillaging, parting of the prey, or wasting and burning by
fire, or disbanding from their charges, or Officers, but as the Lord General
shall give order upon the same pain of death.

XVI. Rewards for the well desering.
Every man's carriage shall be diligently observed, and he according to his
merit rewarded or punished: And whatsoever Officer or Soldier shall take
Commanders, or the Colors of the enemy, or in the siege of Towns shall first
enter a breach, or scale the walls, and shall carry himself dutifully in his
station, and does his part valiantly, in skirmish or battle, shall after the
laudable example of the wisest, and worthiest Kingdoms and Estates, have his
honor and reward according to his worth and deserving, whether hereafter we
have peace or war.

Matters that are clear by the light and law of nature are presupposed: Things
unnecessary, are past over in silence: and other things may be judged by the
common customs and constitutions of war, or may upon new emergents, be
expressed afterward.

FINIS.

