Jerubbaal Justified: Or, A Plain REBUKE OF THE High (pretended humble)
Remonstrance and Plea against Mr. Crofton HIS Reformation not Separation: OR, A
Plea for Communion with the Church under those Corruptions, and by that
disorderly Ministration, to which he cannot Conform, nor by it Administer.

DEMONSTRATING, T. P. (alias D.) his gross mistakes of Mr. Crofton his
Principle and Argument: as also the fallacy and vanity of his pleaded
necessity for his (confessed) separation from public Assemblies, which is
found insufficient to acquit him of Schism.

To which is added A Position, disputing the lawfulness of Ministers receiving
an imposed Liturgy.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

TO THE PIOUS AFFECTIONATE READER.
Christian Reader.
SHake off prejudice, abate affection, give place to judgment; let not the
Christian destroy the man, nor grace (captivating Reasons dictates) dethrone
the rational power; understand the object before you embrace or refuse it; know
well the nature of the Act before you do, or decline it; prove, hold fast, or
reject: Censures are easy and common, but when groundless, they become
Calumnies, and retort with sadness on the Censurers head; leaving him under the
guilt of false judging, calling good evil, and evil good; condemning the just,
and clouding the testimony to the truth; robbing God of the honor, and truth
of the strength of his Servants Martyrdom.

Reformation, The perfection of reformation is the work, the contest of our
land and age: I must bear many witness, they have a zeal, but not according to
knowledge; their affections fly after that which for want of knowledge, they
do not, will not regularly follow; we easily hear what they would have, and
what is taken from them; but cannot make them hear how they must have it, and
how they must wait in their places until they can have it; and recover what is
removed.

Reformation has ever failed between Sylla and Charibdis, and in these last
days been most sadly battered, and is almost split on the Rocks of superstition
and separation: these Rocks are visible, but the course to pass between them
without dashing on either, is dark and difficult, and the Devil labors to
dash us sometimes on the one, sometimes on the other; in one he acts like
himself, in the other like an Angel of light; and those lights which should in
this straight direct us, are taken down, and in this case did, and do give so
dim and uncertain light, that it is a mirror of mercy that any escape
Shipwreck, what cause have we to prise any who herein advance themselves, and
shine brightly though thereby they expose themselves to the tempestuous
assaults and boistrous blasts of men devoted to either extreme.

Mr. Crofton, as Luther contesting against the Pope, and at the same time the
Anabaptists, for first degrees of Reformation; and as Cartwright and others
against Prelates and Separating Brownists for further degrees of Reformation;
has exposed himself to, and been afflicted by men of both extremes; and not a
little wounded in the house of his friends, who are become his Enemies because
he told them the truth; many have censured, calumniated him, who cannot resist
the wisdom and Spirit by which he has spoken.

Yet rather then truth shall want contradiction, or error scribe by silence,
Satan will find and stir up instruments among Gods Servants, who shall sharpen
the old weapons of most bitter enemies, whereby to assault the assertors of
truth, and say something; that simple souls may be deluded, ( with a Mr.
Crofton is answered) though not one word is said to purpose; nor one Argument
urged by Mr. Crofton is at all answered.

If he be (as I dare affirm he is) a Son in Presbytery who has lifted up the
heel against his Father, let me assure thee Mr. Crofton instead of adjudging
him to Chams curse, will pray he may dwell in the Tents of Shem, he having
discovered his own, not any thing of his Fathers nakedness, only when its said
a Presbyter, and Scotch Presbyter has answered Mr. Croftons Plea against
Separation; and that by only urging the old uncharitable Plea of the most
rigid Separatists (viz.) God is not worshipped by the Liturgy, the Ministration
by the Liturgy is poison, express poison; and to attend Gods Worship ministered
by the Liturgy, is to go back into Egypt, we cannot but say, tell it not in
Gath, publish it not in Askelon; but if it must be heard abroad, let it be
known it is a young Presbyter; not overladen with seriousness in consideration,
clearness of apprehension, or stayedness of resolution, and in this case of
great concernment (...), and in his general nature a Scotch Remonstrator; the
men of which name made (by a breach of order in Discipline only) such a Schism
in the Scotch Kirkes, which was not cemented until confusion brake in upon them.

Reader, read with freedom what this Remonstrator has written; only with it
compare Mr. Croftons Plea; thou will see his mistake of the Question, Mr.
Crofton and his Argument is so manifest, that in all he has said, he has said
nothing to what he pretends to have spoken; nor will thou need the fescue of
a learned pen, to point thee in the reading thereof.

I have taken the opportunity of saying something by way of reply to his
pretended Answer; more for the sake of truth and thee, then of the Author,
(whose conviction I cannot but desire) that I might something more fully and
distinctly explain the case in controversy now among us; and those principles
on which Mr. Crofton does determine it and direct himself and others; I have so
fully known this good man, his principles and practice, that I can with
confidence, and could not but in duty to Truth speak out the same.

Had Mr. Crofton been in health, thou might have had these things more
acute, exact and polite, but their plainness may be thine advantage; and it is
verity not victory, is by me pursued; I beg of thee to read without prejudice,
and judge without passion; I doubt not but thou will then give glory to God,
and see the way in which thou must walk; for if thou can but once convince
thy self that modification of Gods worship is the personal act of the Minister;
and so all defects and disorder therein is his personal sin; and that
attendance on Gods Worship is thy direct act and positive duty; this or that
Ministerial mode is to thee an accident put upon thee by the Minister who
ministers thereby; and that to stumble at this or that because humane, which
God has determined, and the nature of the thing does direct to be humane, is a
very great vanity, thou will see cause to dismiss thy scruples, and to do in
Conscience, what carnal policy and self interest (poor reasons below a
Christian) ( viz.) fear of a Penal Law, or desire to hear a good Sermon will
allow thee in, but can never make lawful to thee.

Farewell.
Least the Remonstrator and his over-affectionate Adherents should say I have
in the ensuing Tract stated the Question in coutroversie otherwise then it is
stated in Mr. Croftons Reformation not Separation, (the false-hood of which is
manifest from the whole scope of that Book) I have thought it convenient to
transcribe such sentences in that Book which contain the Hinge, and Crysis of
this Ca^e of Conscience, which thou may take as follows.
Title Page MR. Croftons Plea for Communion with the Church, under those
corruptions, and by that disorderly Ministration, to which he cannot conform,
nor by it administer. Epistle to the Reader. We must either withdraw from the
Prayers and public worship of God in this Church, or attend it by this
disguised Ministeral mode and order. In the Book. pa. 2 In the use hereof I
must of necessity attend that order of administration, against which I have
publicly witnessed. Page. 3. My resolution to attend those corrupt
Administrations, and that disorderly Service of God, until God please to bring
me forth, and make me drink the water of the Sanctuary in purer Vessels. Page.
6. At present I have no choice, if I will attend Gods solemn public worship I
must do it in this place and Order, or not at all. Page. 16. Will any object
the profaneness of the Ministers, the rudeness and disorder of Ministration; we
yield it is too visible, but more vile administrators, and irregular
administrations cannot be, then were the Sons of Eli in their service.
Specifying extrinsecal corruptions, which do not vitiate the Subject; Mr.
Crofton in our Caese mentions these. Pa. 21, 22.Rude unsuitabe Ministerial
Method and Order ( which is the Vessel and only instrument of conveyance) of
Administration. Our imposed Method, disorderly Method of Prayer, under all
which Gods Ordinances abide a subject complete, truly and formerly Existent,
and distinct from these superadded corruptions, operative unto Salvation, and
therefore must not be declined or disowned. Page 24. The Administrations of
Gods Worship among us, is indeed nauceous, but not void and venomous, our
waters are bitter and pudled but not poisonous, to be plain under all our
corruptions, we must not, we cannot, we dare not deny the matter and essential
form of Gods Ordinances, and worship is continued to us. Page 25. I confess
their Common Prayer is my burden, by reason of its defects and disorder, and
the rudeness of the Ministerial Method etc. yet I find in it no matter to which
a sober serious Christian may not say, Amen. and though I distaste the
ministerial Method, I cannot disown the Essential form of Prayer. Page 26. My
good friend, is their no difference between a calling on the only true God in
the name of Christ, though in a defective, rude, confused, unfitting order, and
praying unto Saints and dumb Idols between the disorderly Administration of the
worship for matter and form, Gods own appointment, and the Ordinance nullifying
administration in an unknown tongue; so long as we enjoy in her the matter and
essential form of Gods Worship and Ordinances, though in an Humane, Unfit,
Corrupt, Ministerial Method, and Order, with some vain and needless appendents
of humane invention, we are not without confidence of Gods presence, and a
possibility of salvation; we therefore are without a sufficient ground for
separation or non-communion. Page 35. With all peaceable submission embrace
such degrees of Reformation, of the extrinsecal Order and Ministerial Method of
Gods Worship, enjoying the substance in the essential form thereof. Page 36.
Shall we not acknowledge Gods mercy in affording us, and humbly use the
substance of his own worship, celebrated in a disorderly way and Method? Page
37. I must profess to all that fear God, I see no sufficient cause to satisfy
my conscience, or to plead before my God, on which to refuse communion with
her, (the Church) and attendance on Gods solemn public Worship, under her
rude ministerial method, for that duty is not warrantably superseded by another
man's iniquity. Page 40. I confess the ministerial order, and method of public
worship, and prayer is purely humane, within the power of the Ministers
thereof, and so indifferent it ought not to be prescribed and imposed. Page 41.
This is not my Case and Question, but whether solemn, public worship, my
positive duty, etc. which cannot by reason of my confinement be enjoyed,
without my attendance on that irregular, unsuitable method and confused order,
may be warrantably superseded, etc. Page 42. The ministerial method of Gods
Ordinances, is charged on the Ministers, not on the members of the Churches.
Page 49. I fear to be charged with the omission of Gods public worship
celebrated in Christ's Church, though with extrinsecal corruption, and in a rude
ministerial Order which ought to be reformed. Page 69. The ministerial mode
imposed, and sinfully received (by such who subjugate their Ministry) not
vitiating the subject, nor nullifying the Ordinances of God, will not warrant
my non-attendance on them. Christian Reader.

Impartially judge upon these passages, whether Mr. Crofton does not clearly
distinguish between Gods Worship substantially existing in matter and essential
form, and the humane ministerial mode by which it is exhibited in and to the
Church, and so he has fixed the Hinge and Crysis of this controversy on this
Notion; ( viz.) The defect and disorder of the Ministerial Mode, is not to the
Members of the Church a sufficient ground for non communion in Gods Worship,
fully, formally, existing by it; whilst the Remonstrator has not discerned
this, he has fought with his own Fancy, in his pretended Answer to Mr. Crofton.

Jerubbaall Justified: OR, A Plain rebuke to the High (pretended) humble
Remonstrance and Plea against Mr. Croftons Reformation not Separation.
Worthy Sir,
YOurs the 12. instant I received, and with it a Book entitled Jerubbaal, or
the Pleader impleaded, which pretends to answer Mr. Crofton's Reformation not
Separation: in good time sir, has Mr. Crofton's papers past nine Months in
private from hand to hand, and four Months in public in the world and now
answered: if it be to purpose, and truth be beaten out it is well, I will say
better late then never.

I have not sir Communicated the Book to Mr. Crofton as you do desire, his late
sickness (not yet recovered) h^th discapacitated him for such work: but I have
read this humble Remonstrance, and find in it a Spirit sufficiently high: I
shall adventure to give you, (and if you please the world) my thoughts
concerning this impleading Plea, against Mr. Crofton's Plea for communion with
the Church under those corruptions, and by that disorderly Ministration to
which he cannot conform, nor by it Administer: And truly Sir, This Book makes
a great cry, but yields little wool, it may serve the simple (whose good
affections to purity lead their judgment not only from, but against duty) to
make a noise Mr. Crofton is answered: but the* Judicious Reader will soon see
there is in it vox preterea nihill, and that Mr. Crofton is as far from being
answered, as he was before.

This Author having passed his Mindus like part built on his own Judgment of
the expediency of it: (it is reason he enjoy Page 15.
his fancy in his own fabric) he abruptly assaults Mr. Crofton on the most
gross and manifest mistake of the man, the nature of his Book, and the form and
force of his Argument, which could possibly befall and misguide any Antagonist
whatsoever.

Sir, This Gentleman mistaketh Mr. Crofton, and the general nature of his
book: he accounts (and that with more then ordinary heat and confidence) Mr.
Crofton the Mecaenas and Advocate of the Liturgy and Common prayer book, and an
accuser of the brethren: he apprehends Mr. Crofton's Reformation, Pa. 14. 30.
not separation to be a Plea for the Liturgy, and an Indictment, or accusation
of the Saints, cujus contrarium verum est, how just, sober, or warrantable
those his apprehensions are, let all impartial, unprejudiced men judge.

Mr. Crofton an Advocate for the English Liturgy, who can have the face to say
it? How will that appear? has he not preached and written against it? did he
ever retract? does he conform to it? or consent to read it? was not his known
opposition to it apprehended to be the cause of his vexations, and bonds he met
with in Staffordshire in his late Travells? can envy it self oppose Mr. Crofton
to Mr. Crofton: his enemies being Judges, never was any man more square and
stable to himsell then is Mr. Crofton: these things do indeed give cause to
call him Jerubbaal and make it suspicious he is the Gideon who threw down the
Altar (if the Liturgy must be so accounted) of Baall: on what ground could this
pretender, to reason and religion, cry Mr. Crofton is the Mecaenas and Advocate
for the Liturgy: has not Mr. Crofton's Contests, actings and sufferings,
manifested him a Monument of Gods Grace and Truth; and Sectarian rage and
falsehood: will men needs reproach him with that, which none has as he
resisted? Oh Sir, Mr. Crofton has pleaded for Communion in the Liturgy.

It is false sir, he has pleaded no such thing, his Plea is for Communion with
Gods Church, in Gods Ordinances and worship, though Administered by the Liturgy,
and that only in case of necessity, when we cannot otherwise enjoy solemn
public worship: it is one thing to commnnicate in the Liturgy simply and
abstractedly considered, this supposes an assent unto it, and a personal
acting in and by it as a Liturgy: for this Mr. Crofton has never yet spoken
one word: It is another thing to communicate in, and Religiously attend Gods
Worship Administered by the Liturgy, in which the Liturgy is no more but the
vehiculum instrument of conveyance and humane Ministration: the formality of
Mr. Crofton's Plea is this: the Liturgy is a rude and disorderly Ministration,
an evil which ought to be abolished, by which he cannot Administer, but it is
not an evil of that nature, to visiate the Subject, nullify and destroy Gods
worship, and so warrant the peoples withdrawing from that because of this.

Vulgus non distinguit, that the over zealous vulgar should account this a Plea
for Communion in the Liturgy is no wonder: whilst a man of learning does it
with all confidence, is a withstanding of an inserence which the premises will
not allow, a justification of the premises, as true and good, cannot a man
plead: men must in case of need drink water in unclean vessels, or affirm
Citizens must not loose all for want of asking by the rude dialect of their
Recorder: but he must be concluded the Mecaenas of Barbarisime and nonsense,
and Advocate for the Queen of Sluts! may not Mr. Crofton deny such disorder to
be a sufficient ground for Secession from Gods worship, but he must needs be
the defender of that disorder? According to this sober Logic is Mr. Crofton
tauntingly represented the accuser of the brethren: and his Book branded as an
Indictment against the Saints, what cause is there for this high charge, whom,
when, where, and whereof has Mr. Crofton accused? This Author calls him his
accuser, he shall do well to put him to shame by telling the world whereof Mr.
Crofton accused him, Mr. Crofton does in his book suggest groundless,
unwarantable, Secossion Page 29.
from, voluntary non-communion in Gods worship, is a private or negative
Separation; the first act toward a positive and total Sepeparation, but is
this to accuse the brethren? cannot a Minister suggest the sinful nature of an
act, but he must be arraigned as an Accuser of the brethren, oh Charity! oh
Sobriety!

Sir, Who reads Mr. Croftons book; and sees not that it is so far from an
Indictment or Accusation of others, that it is a sober, serious, and necessary
Apology for himself, and his own practice most groundlesly, unchristianly and
incharitably accused by others; and those, some of the brethren; who never
administered, or attempted to reprove the things whereof they did accuse him; in
his whole Conflicts for Reformation, he had protested he could communicate in
Gods worship under that order, by which he could not adminester; coming to
practice his principles, what Calumnies what Censures did accuse him of
defection and Apostasy? and constrain these Letters by way of Apology for
himself, And this, thus extorted by false accusations, is most falsely accused
to be an accusation of the brethren; Oh! Charity! Oh Sobriety!

Sir, We cannot expect he should rightly take up Mr. Crofton's Argument, who
has so grossly mistaken himself, and the general nature of his work, let me
observe to you his mistake in the very form, and so in the force of what he is
pleased humbly to term Mr. Croftons Doom Argument. Page 15.


Having passed his many needless distinctions, he professes himself a negative
and partial Sepatist; he is best, see to his Warrant, least being loosed from
the Harbor he be driven he knows not whither, I am glad he disavoweth Positive
Separation, gathering a select Company into a Corner, some who shreudly guess
who this Author is, think they durst presume to charge him as peccant in this
respect; but sure I am Mr. Crofton, and other good men, are no little grieved
to observe some Presbyters, not only absent from public assemblies, but also
celebrate the Lords day by preaching and Ministration of the Lords supper, to a
select Company in private, as if they were designed to verefie that Independent
Calumny; ( Presbiterated Churches are gathered Churches.)

His Separation stated, this Antagonist assaults Mr. Crofton's Considerations;
that he might fence with better success, he forces the chief of them into
this syllogism according to his own fancy, not Mr. Croftons Argument.

Communion with the Church, visible in all acts of solemn Public worship; is
an essential part of the Sanctification of the Sabbath or Lords day, and
indispensable Duty of every particular Pa. 15. 16.
Christian to be only superseded by an inevitable necessity etc.

This is indeed Mr. Crofton's proposition; on which this man does assume, as
that which he says, must be the assumption, and accordingly stateth the
Conclusion.

But Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy, or Common Prayer
(called Divine Service) is Communion with the Church visible in solemn public
Worship. ERGO. Communion with the Church of England in her Liturgy or
Common Prayer is an essential part of the Sanctification of the Sabbath or
Lords day, and indispensable duty, etc.


Sir, this Argument thus framed is a monstrous Argnment; especially to come
from Mr. Crofton; they that ever heard him preach, read his writings, know his
person, principles or practice can believe him, such a Mecaenas and Advocate
for the English Liturgy and Common Prayer Book, as to assent and conclude
Communion in it, to be an Essential part of the Sanctification of the Sabbath;
So as that the Sabbath or Lords day cannot be sanctified where the Service Book
is not attended, assented to, and acted in.

But Sir: What ground or reason in Mr. Crofton's Plea has this Antagonist,
which necessitateth this Assumption and Conclusion as that which he tells us
mnst be.

Mr. Crofton's Book is an Epistle to a Friend, his Argument is not (therefore)
logically formed, but very legible in the Connection and scope of his discourse;
but this Author does not in his book, or Margin, cite, or refer his Reader to
one single sentence, or word on which he bottometh this assumption and
conclusion as that which must be, he indeed has Page 22.
confidence enough to affirm. Mr. Crofton says, the Liturgy or Common Prayer
is an act of solemn public worship: but does not tell us where he says it;
and I am sure I have read all that he has written, and I never found that he
said it; I must say, Sir, they say so of this humble Remonstrator, though
spoken with so high considence, is not a sufficient ground for credit: the
rather, because the question Mr. Crofton did discuss, and was to bring into
conclusion was not; whether Communion in the Liturgy or Common Prayer Book was
an essential part of the sanctification of the Sabbath: Truly sir, Mr. Crofton
has disputed fairly, if only this Antagonist can find his sillogysme
conclude, what never came into his question: his logic has lately failed him
very much: Sir, sure I am? whosoever shall read and regard the scope of what
Mr. Crofton has written on this Argument shall find another assumption and
conclusion, then what the zeal and prejudice of this Remonstrator has assumed
and concluded: the true state and form of Mr. Crofton's Sillogisme is manifest
to be this.

Communion with the Church visible in Gods solemn public worship is an
essential part of the sanctification of the Sabbath and indispensable duty. But
Communion with the English Church in the worship by her celebrated, is
Communion with the Church visible in Gods solemn public worship. ERGO.
Communion with the English Church (having no opportunity with any other) in the
worship of her Celebrated is to me an essential part of the sanctification of
the Sabbath, and indispensable duty.


This Argument Sir, is far from assuming and concluding the Communion in the
Liturgy, is, an essential part of the sanctification of the Sabbath, and
indispensable duty, and that the worship celebrated in the English Church, must
be the Subject predicated in the assumption of Mr. Crofton's Argument: is
manifest to every one who observes these passages in his amplifying the
consideration which contains this Argument

1 Communion with the English Church in the worship by her celebrated;
notwithstanding the defects and disorders in Ministration thereof; was the
question Mr. Crofton did dispute, and must bring into his conclusion.

2. He says to his friend, you yet enjoy a liberty of worshipping God in due
and right order, and may drink the waters of the sanctuary in clean vessels i.
e. Without the Liturgy its Rites and order (it is manifest this he intended)
long may you enjoy Reformation not Separation
it, and if God take pleasure in me he will in due time restore me to it, Sr.
is it likely Mr. Crofton would assume and conclude the Liturgy is that solemn
public worship which is an essential Page 6.
part of the sanctification of the Sabbath, and indispensable duty; whilst he
professes he had sanctified the Sabbath, and worshipped God without it, and
hoped for a restored liberty so to do again as a token of divine favor to him;
he acknowledges it to be his friends privilege, prays the continuance,
fears the loss of it; that he did enjoy a liberty to worship God in due and
right order without the Liturgy, he complains of of it as his affliction that
he had no choice, but was under a necessity of attending Gods worship in this
order Ministered, or he must enjoy no solemn public worship of God. Sr. all men
must confess those things will not square with an argument that shall conclude
Communion in the Liturgy is an essential part of the sanctification of the
Sabbath etc. but they are exactly square with an Argument for Communion with
the Church in Gods woship there celebrated, though Ministered with rudness and
disorder.

3. Mr. Crofton as a conscientious Christian, and serious Casuist, having
concluded Communion in Gods worship was his indispensable duty, in the general;
enquireth what specialty might become a moral bar, and warrantable supersedeas
to the Reformation not Separation.
same, hereupon he considers what is pleaded by the Separatists who abound
among us; and among other things the Liturgy by which Gods worship was
ministered in and to the Church, admitting the defects, disorders, and
corruption Page 25.
charged on the same, he concludes they are great, and evil, but not an evil
of that nature and quality, as to constitute a sufficient bar to Communion in
Gods worship ministered by the same. Sr. it is manifest the worship concluded by
Mr. Croftons argument. (and the scope of his whole discourse on this
consideration,) is distinct from, though ministered by the Liturgy, and that
this is considered as a moral bar, or warrantable supersedeas to that, but is
found insufficient.

Sr. our Antagonist having thus mistaken and misformed Mr. Croftons argument,
must needs be concluded to fight with the fancies of his own prejudice; and so
I might dismiss him, but Sr. I seek verity, not victory, and would if possible
he may see his mistake more plainly upon the whole case of this Controvercy, in
which Mr. Croftons conflict is the more uncomfortable because single, and failed
by those whose place and duty oblige them to his succor: but the Conquest is
most certain to him fighting for the truth against all extremes for vincit
veritas: I would therefore direct a word to this Remonstrator, and tell him in
his ear, if instead of those many needless and some groundless distinctions he
has multiplied, he had well weighed and closely pursued the Criticismes in
this case stated by Mr. Crofton, he had saved this labor, or written with
better success, and more satisfaction to his Reader, if he will not be offended
I will note unto him a distiction or two, according to which Mr. Crofton does
move, and on which this controversy does depend.

Sr. This Remonstrator makes much ado, in distinguishing Page 22.
solemn public worship, by persons, place, and reallity, in which he fights
with his shadow, for Mr. Crofton would not differ with him, about them; though
I believe he will dislike his expressions concerning them, instead hereof he
should have observed Mr. Crofton has distinguished between.

1. The substance of solemn public worship, which cosisteth in the matter, and
essential form of every ordinance, both which must be determined by the Lord
and directed in his word. 2. The Ministerial mode of worship, or that humane
dress, in and by which its celebrated in and to the Church, which is not
determined by the Lord, nor directed otherwise then as to its general nature,
as that it be serious, reverend, grave, and the like, in the word, but is wholly
left to the wisdom and faithfulness of such to whom the Ministration of solemn
public worship is committed.
Unto this distinction our Remonstrator should have added this second viz.

Communion in Gods worship, thus or thus administered, which consists in an
humble, reverend, attendance on, and acting in the worship of God, as
hearkening to the petitions pronounced, and sighing or speaking an Amen to
them, and the like. Communion in this or that mode of ministration: so as to
assent unto it, and act decently in it: as the Ministers administration by it,
or the peoples personal actings in popular Responds, contamations or corporal
gestures, required by it without any relation to, or direction from the worship
of God.
Sr. These distinctions are manifest in themselves and manifestly necessary to
all understanding Christians the worship of God in its substance consisting of
matter, and essential form, is clearly distinct from the humane dress, and
ministerial mode by which it is celebrated in and to the Church; preaching the
word is Gods worship, by him determined: for matter, his word, will and mind,
for form preached, solemnly spoken, discoursed in and to his Church: but that
the preaching be an analytical explication, or metaphrastical amplification of
any portion of Scripture, whether it be by Doctrine, Reason, and Use, or only
a discourse argumentative to confirm an Article of faith, or confute an error
is ind^fferent, undetermined by the Lord, left to the wisdom and faithfulness
of the Preacher; and this or that mode is clearly distinct from Gods Ordinance
of preaching, which is fully, formally existent in and to the Church by any, by
every mode which the edification of the Church shall dictate, and the ability,
wisdom and faithfulness of the Preacher shall determine.

The Methods and Phrases of administration of the Sacraments by previous or
subsequent exhortation to duty, discourses of their nature, use, and end; and
prayers so modified and phrased, are apparently distict from the Sacraments,
those parts of Gods worship, which substantially exist, when water, bread and
wine, the right matter, are ministerially applied in the name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, as significant sealing memorials of Christ's death, body and
blood; the assential form of Gods ordinance and instituted worship. The same
Sr. is considerable in prayer, the substance of which ordinance does consist in
a calling upon God in the name of Christ for things agreeable to his will, so
that where things agreeable to his will is the matter; and calling upon God in
the name of Christ is the form; by whatsoever humane mode, order of speech,
phrase, words, sentences, the same is performed in, and for the Church it does
substantially exist, is distinct and to be abstracted from the same.

Sr. on this first, the second distiniction does manifestly arise, viz. it is
one thing to Communicate in Gods worship, preaching prayer, or Sacraments,
substantially existing in any, in every ministerial mode, and dress by which it
does exist in and to the Church; although these cannot be divided when Gods
worship does exist in to the Church (for God cannot be worshipped by men,
without the humane ministration of his ordinances in some* suitable mode) yet
they may be easily and plainly distinguished so as that the Church and
particular members may know their distinct interest in Communion; the people in
the general nature of the worship, substantially existing Gods, in matter and
form, in and by any humane mode whatsoever, as that which concerns and so
charged on them, all in common, and the Minister the specifical and ministerial
mode of administration of Gods worship between God and his people; which is
personally incumbent, and charged on him by virtue of that office for
modification of Gods ordinances, which he has received from the Lord.

Sr. These distinctions are not more manifest in themselves, then that they are
Mr. Croftons, in this very case and controversy; I would not that this
Remonstrator should think I come to relieve Mr. Crofton, with any distinctions,
which are not his, and plainly legible in the plea he does implead, be pleased
therefore to observe Mr. Croftons own words. Under all our corruptions, we must
not, we cannot, we dare not deny the matter, and essential form of Gods
ordinances and worship is continued to us.

Again Sr. in this very and special case of the Litugy Mr. Crofton Reformation
not Separation.
thus writes; I confess the Common Prayer is my burden, by reason of its
defects and disorder, and the rudeness of the Ministerial method; I stand
convinced it ought to be altered, ye abolished, etc. Yet I must confess I
find no matter in it, to which on a charitable interpretation, a sober serious
Christian may not say or can deny his Amen: and though I distaste the
Ministerial method, Page 25.
I cannot but observe in it the essential form of prayer viz. a calling (...)
the name (...).

Sr. Can any terms make these distinctions more plain, and yet Sr. these
occasion in Mr. Croftons plea for his Communion two more, which do arise from,
and depend on these.

The first concerning corruptions, which he considers to Pa. 20. 21 22, 23.
be intrinsecal vitiating the subject, nullifying Gods ordinance, destroying
Gods worship, and so necessitating separation.

Extrinsecal superadded to, concomitant with, and conversant about Gods
Ordinances, which notwithstanding does exist for matter and essential form
perfect and entire, capable of due opperation, as stinking fish does nourish,
or water pudled, or taken in an unclean vessel does quench the thirst, and
preserve life.
This distinction, this humble Remonstrator, does with some scorn observe, and
pass by as of little or no weight, though the case of conscience now
controverted, does depend upon it, and directs the next distinction viz.

Reformation which supposes the subject to continue substantially the same,
but attended with some circumstantial corruptions, the removal of which must be
endeavored, but these notwithstanding the subject may with safety, and it must
in duty be used. Separation supposing the subject so viciated, that it cannot
be used with safety, without sin, and must therefore be shunned.
These distinctions most humbly slighted, I wonder at, that this Remonstrator
should fly out so high, as to cry out Mr. Page 24.
Croftons instances of stinking fish, pudled water and unclean vessels yield
not the least satisfaction to me; for it is evident to any impartial Reader his
prejudice never suffered him, to find the form, and therefore he could not
feel the force of the argument; for if the Liturgy be but a vessel though
unclean, this argument extrinsecal corruptions, being consistent with Gods true
worship, will not warrant a secession, or negative separation, appears very
cogent, and is well amplified by the instance of pudled water or an unclean
vessel.

Sr. These distinctions being not more manifest in themselves, and to be used
by Mr. Crofton, in the plea which this Antagonist does implead; then to be
Crisis of this Controversy; the the hinge on which this great case of
conscience does turn. I will presume on my friend so far, as to present you
with some short and plain Aphorisms concerning Gods worship, and his peoples
communion; you may (if you please) call them Mr. Croftons Creed concerning
communion with Gods Church, I cannot but commend them to the observation of
Gods people and consideration of Gods Ministers, as those which few sober men
will deny to be true, and being well understood would readily direct a godly
man's course in the hour of temptation which is come upon us.

1. The Church Catholic visible distributed (through necessity, and good
order) to particular Assemblies must sanctify the Lords day by an holy
Convocation.

2. The Congregation of particular Christians convened in full and open joint
Assembles, to celebrate Gods solemn worship, is the formality of an holy
Convocation: in which every particular Christian must make conscience to be
present, and continue from the beginning to the end of the ministration of Gods
worship, they must assemble on the sound of the silver trumpets, and not depart
without the Priests blessing.

3. The worship celebrated in the holy Convocation for the matter and essential
form by which it substantially existeth, must he determined by the Lord, and by
him alone: all other matter though in a form by God directed; or the matter
without the form by him appointed, is supperstition to be avoided; a dogshead
or Swines blood offered by a lawful Priest, and with Levitical Rights, and
Incense in the hands of Chora Dathan, and Abiram, or a Lamb and Bullock offered
by the lawest of the people at Dan and Bethel, are eqully abominable to the
Lord, Baptism by fire in the name of Father Son and holy Ghost or by water in
the name of God the Father, and time the Mother of all things is equally void
and vile, no worship of God.

4. All worship of men's invention superadded to Gods apointment must be
avoided, abandoned by every of Gods people, but Gods worship substantially
existing with the same must not be disowned or declined: the mountains of
Israel, the Temple must be frequented, devoutly resorted unto, though the high
places be on the one, and the Image of jealousy be in the other; these
superadded evils provoke God, but the Simbolls of his presence continued, bind
his people to due and constant attendance: the Cross in Baptism is to be (if
possible) avoided but Baptism formally existing must not be disowned,
declined, because the other is superadded.

5 Gods worship celebrated by and among men, must be ministered, and exist in an
and by an humane mode and dress suitable to, and so fit to edefie such a
Creature and society. Gods word and Sacraments, his peoples prayers, must be
ministered in, and by modes, methods, words and actions, invented by the mind,
expressed by the tongue, and performed by the hands of men.

6. The humane mode and dress, words and phrases, by which Gods worship must
exist, and be ministered in and to the Church is not determined by the Lord, but
wholly left to the wisdom and faithfulness of them who minister the same,
hence it comes to pass, that the substance of Gods worship continues the same,
in respect of matter and essential form by and under various ministerial humane
modes; Gods word is preached, though some times one way, and sometimes another;
the Sacraments are formally administered, prayers are truly made, and the one
and the other is Gods Ordinance, the same unto all subjected to it, though the
ministration thereof does vary according to the various Gifts of the
administrator.

7. The humane Ministerial modification of Gods Ordinances in and to the Church
is the formal act of the Ministerial Office to be fulfilled, and performed by
the Ministerial gifts, the personal abilities, of every individual Minister,
who is guifted of God, and ordained by the Church for that purpose. Gospel
Ministry is an office in Gods Church authorizing enabling, its subjects not to
institute any new worship for matter or form, but to Minister the worship
appointed by the Lord in an humane mode, and order, such as may edefie the
Church: the matter is the determination of God, the Ministerial mode is the
digestion of the man, invested with an office to that purpose the word and the
preaching of it is appointed by God, the mode, and terms in which it is
preached, to reproof instruction, or correction is the work of the officer,
ordained to preach; he is guifted, and authorized to dicotomize, divide the
word aright; the case is the same* in Sacraments, Prayer, Censures, all which
must exist in, and too the Church by the Ministerial mode and order, words, and
expressions, in which the Minister entrusted with them, does exhibit the same
to them: herein each Minister must employ his Cinisterial gifts, his personal
abilities; this is the service he must do to God, and his Church; he is a
steward of the Mysteries of God, to distribute his masters Goods with the
utmost of his skill and faithfulness: dicotomization of Gods word,
modification of Gods worship, is the work in, and by which he must approve
himself a werkman which needs not to be ashamed: in this he cannot without
sloth and porfidie assume, another man's mode, or suffer himself to be imposed
upon; so as to vail his own received gifts and to administer by the modes, and
forms digested and composed by others.

8. The ministerial mode, and order of Gods worship being wholly humane,
determined by men's Wisdom and faithfulness, it is and cannot but be subject to
much and great corruption in defect, and disorder rudeness, and irreverence in
expressions; some Ministers are rash and inconsiderate, unaffected with the
Majesty of God to whom they approach, in whose stead they stand, in and to his
Church unacquainted with the nature of the ordinance to be administered by him:
and the quality of the Church in and to which he does minister (which things
are the only dictators of that mode by which they minister) there are many
times rude, preposterous, rash, irreverent full it may be of nonsense, and
cautologies, in the modes by which he does minister; some are proud and
curious, and in their carnal policy compel an uniformity, in ministerial mode,
not necessary, yea sinful; (restraining ministerial gifts, and the Churches
profit by their variety) these pretend to correct some men's. rudeness, and
irreverence, by imposing their own prescribed composed forms and modes of
ministration (to the open violence, and almost subvertion of the office of the
Ministry) these again met, with men of sloathfull, or slavish spirits, who are
idle and neglect their own ministerial gifts; whilst others (on pretense to
peace and obedience to superiors) do admit them the forms composed by others;
betraying the office they have received from the Lord, no wonder to find
defects and disorders in the ministerial mode of Gods worship, whilst the same
is wholly dependent on men of weakness, subject to folly and infidelity: the
best of men and Ministers need a Priest to make attonen ent for their holy
things.

6. The guilt of all defect and disorder in the humane ministerial mode of Gods
worship is immediately, properly, and directly personal, charged on the
Minister, and on him alone: not on the Church, or any the members thereof. The
guilt is proportioned to the duty, modification is a personal duty, charged on
the officer appointed to that office: this guilt may indeed (as other sins) by
accident be derived to the Governors of the Church, who should, but do not set
up, and ordain men to the Ministry, and suspend, and put down such who want
ability, well and rightly to modifie and minister Gods worship and Ordinances:
and to the peo, ple and individual members, when they observing defects and
disorders in the Ministerial mode of worship, donot grieve for the sin of
others, and complain of it as burdensome to themselves; and in liberty of
choice, if they do not choose better, but sit contentedly under the same. Eli
by the first, brought on himself the sin of his sons, profane ministration,
and the God-fearing Israelites delivered themselves by the last* but there is
no common reason which can derive the sin of rude Ministration on the people.

10. All defects, disorders, rude and impertinent expressions, in the hnmane,
ministerial mode of Gods worship: are corruptions, circumstantiall, and
extrinseal in, and by which Gods worship may substantially exist in matter, and
essential form, capable of operation to its appointed end. The Scriptures are
read, though in parts and parcels, and in a corrupt, imperfect translation: all
which are evil: and abate the efficacy to edification: but are not such evil,
on which we may conclude the Seriptures are not read, or cannot edify the
hearers: the word is preached, and may profit the hearer, though the Sermon be
raw, rude, indigested, immethodical, and in wild and unfit expressions. Prayer
is presented to God, though defective in some matter, to be desired, disorderly
in the manner of expressions, uttered with abruptions, abreviations, pauses,
and postings one again: None of these evils do vitiate the subject, or alter
the matter or essential form of Gods Ordinance, so as to destroy the substance:
these make Gods worship not so serious, grave, and reverend as it should be:
but these, notwithstanding it does truly, fully, formally exist Gods worship:
the third, not second Commandment is hereby broken. God's name is truly but
not rightly used: he is truly worshipped, but th^se adjunct qualities which
should attend his worship are wanting: the want of reverence and right order in
the ministration of his Ordinance does provoke* God, but will not conclude he
is not at all worshipped.

11. Defects disorders and corruptions in the ministerial mode of Gods
Ordinances fixed, continued and reiterated, are more sinful and offensive to
God, and his people then those which are present and transient, but both these
are sins of one and the same nature and quality, and of equal influence on Gods
worship ministered by the same. Corruptions fixed and reiterated, are more
wicked because more deliberately, and wilfully used: more offensive to Gods
people because foreknown: like the rude ministrations of Elies sons, they make
the Lords people loath the offerings of the Lord, but yet they enter not into
Gods Ordinance, so as to vitiate the same, and make it cease to be his prayer,
is no less prayer when pronounced by the defective, disordered forms which are
fixed and reiterated; then when expressed by the raw, rude, irreverent modes,
presently conceived by the Minister: the last may be more excusable in the
Minister, and more comfortable to the people: but prayer is as truly formally,
existent Gods worship under the first: the fixed reiteration of a defective,
disordered ministerial mode of worship adds to the degree: but alters not
the nature and quality of the sin.

12. No defects, or disorders in the humane ministerial mode, (whether fixed
and reiterated in, and by imposed, and prescribed forms, or expressed in, and
by present, transient conceived forms, in and by which Gods worship does
substantially exist, for matter and form his, in and to his Church) will
warrant any Christians secession, voluntary withdrawing from the holy
Convocation, or non-communion in Gods worship so ministered: for these,
notwithstanding Gods worship does truly, fully, formally exist, capable of
operation to its appointed end: 2. This sin is purely personal, chargeable on
the Minister, who stands charged with the office of ministerial modification
of Gods worship, in, and to the Church: the people or particular members of the
Church, may and must pass on this (as other personal acts) a judgment of
charity, which does direct them to grieve for the sin existent; to complain of
it, and as they have opportunity to admonish the sinner: (though the sons of
Eli) of it, and seek the correction and removal of the same; but they have not
of it any judicium publicum, judgment of Office, charged on them, by the
specialty of duty: and armed with a just moral power of correction, so as that
the same should be the neglect of this public duty become their sin, and
leave its guilt on their souls: that Gods worship formally exist in every mode
of ministration: every Christian and member of the Church must judge and see:
for by this corruption, the holy Convocation cease, and they worship not God:
but the mode it self is personally charged on the Minister: the defect and
disorder is an accident resulting from the sloth, negligence, ignorance,
weakness and unfaithfulness of the Minister, and an adjunct separable from
Gods worship existent by the same.

Sir* I pray you take good notice of this, that the private Christian, and
particular members of the Church have no public judgment of office,
concerning the Ministerial mode of Gods worship: for Sir, it is a notion of
much weight, and use in this Case, and it appears plainly true, if the
modifying of Gods worship, be, as it cannot be denied to be the personal act of
an Officer appointed to that end: moreover Sir, if the people have a public
judgment of the ministerial mode of Gods worship, we are under a necessity of
having what we so much complain against, and cast off, ( viz*) a fixed Liturgy
for the mode of Prayer, Preaching, Ministration of Sacraments: must then be
kown to the people, and judged by them free from all defect and disorder,
before the people can attend Gods worship in that Ministration: it must be
confessed impossible, for a single Minister constantly to communicate to every
particular member of his Congregation: the mode into which he has (by his
personal abilities and ministerial Gifts) cast the word Prayer and Sacraments:
no serious, sober Christian can think the people to be guilty of those rude
methods, indigested, raw, expressions tautologies, solecismes, and disorders,
which a Minister may utter in his preaching, and praying, yet this is
inevitable if the people have a public judgment by special office, of the
ministerial mode of Gods worship: it is indeed true, the defective, disordered
mode of worship which is fixed, stated, and so from time reiterated is more
obvious and offensive, then what is transient, and so by the judgment of
charity more burdensome to the people, the grief of it being continued and
renewed: but it is the judgment of office, armed with power to correct,
deriveth the guilt of the one, or of the other.

I hope Sir, our Remonstrator will by this time see, that he has most grossly
mistaken Mr. Crofton, and the whole scope and nature of his Plea, and the very
Crissis of our present Controversy, he will sure now see Mr. Crofton pleads
not for Communion in the Liturgy, he is positive in it: a Minister cannot
without sin minister Gods worship by this (or a much better) mode (if generally
and exclusively imposed) of worship, he never yet advised, justified, or
defended the peoples personal acting, by conclamations, popular responds, and
groundless variation of Gestures, the part allotted to the people in, and by
it; and this is Sir, properly Communion in the Liturgit. Sir, Mr. Crafton* does
consider the Liturgy in its general nature, a Ministerial mode, conveighing
some part of Gods shorship, in, and to the Church, the which he confesses is
defective and disorderly, and therefore the grief and burden of the Lords
people; but it does not vitiate, destroy, or nullify the worship ministered by
the same; but that it substantially existeth for matter and form Gods worship,
capable of operation to its end, by reason whereof the people having no choice
of a better, and more orderly ministerial m^de, must, (though with grief, and a
burdened spirit) attend the same; blssing God they have his ordinances, though
in a^ unclean, unhandsome vessel, or rudely mangled, or ill favouredly carved;
so that Communion in Gods worship thus ministered; not Communion in this
ministerial mode is Mr. Croftons Question.

S^. I havering corrected this Remonstrators most gross mistakes, shall now
take a veiw of the strength of his argumentation, in Page 16. 17.
what he supposes to be an answer to Mr. Crofton's plea.

To his falsely formed argument, or Syllogism he says, his answer shall be by

Concession. Distinction. Retortion.
In the first part of his answer, viz. his Concession he yields to Mr.
Crofton; the truth of the Church of England; about this we dispute no longer,
only some who will clap him on the back, for appearing an Antagonist against
Mr. Crofton will think by* this Concession he has given away his cause.

S^. One thing I cannot pass without observation; and that Page 19.
is, an expression wildly let fall, to which I cannot consent to him viz.
personal corruptions in scandalous professors, or other Church members,
(Minister (as well as others) the Hophni, and Phineas of our age) defils the
Church: this I understand not, nor does he tell us whether it defile the Church
immediately, and of it self, or consequently and by accident, the defect of the
Church, in some duty incumbent upon her, intervening* to derive the sin unless
by this last way; personal sin, and Church guilt, are a contradiction: the
profaneness of Elies sons was indeed charged on their Father Eli, and that by
accident only: but I never read, nor can find it was charged on the Church of
Israel; the God fearing Israelites did deliver themselves, by their robukes of
their disorder, without forbearing to bring their offerings to the Lord, though
they were rudely Ministered by profane hands.

By way of Distinction.

Here he distinguishes between Communion by Page 19. 20.
Profession, Participation.

How warrantable, and well grounded this distinction is, I shall not now
consider; I do not find Mr. Crofton to be concerned in it; only I must tell
this Remonsttator, I understand not the necessity, and prrviledges he
appropriateth to Communion by profession, (if that profession be abstracted,
from, and opposed to participation) calling upon God, worshipping, God, and the
visio salvit^ca are not had* or done by a ba^e profession of the true religion,
but do require personal participation, pation, to make man enjoy, the
priveledges to them belonging.

Again I must tell this Remonstrator, Mr. Crofton will deny Page 21.
there are many, or indeed any members of the universal Church; (he sure means
visible and militant, or it squareth not with his discourse) who never had
opportunity of assonating themselves with, or joint communion in the solemn
worship of God; for if they be actual, formal members of the Church visible,
they had an opportunity to be made such; men as we are not members of the
Church; saving faith may give relation to the Church Catholic invisible, but
membership with the Church Catholic visible, could not be had without an
opportunity of joint Communion in Gods worship in some particular Assembly.

The Whole improvement of this distinction by this Antagonist is only to infer
what Mr. Crofton had yielded, yea interminis stated, viz. Communion in Gods
worship, with Gods Church is an indispensable duty of every soul called by the
name of God; to be only superseded by the real inevitable necessity of some
natural (such as is humane violence) or moral (such as is the certainty of sin
by such Communion) ba^e. About this therefore we are agreed.

The Remonstrator makes another distinction of public solemn worship in
respect of

Persons worshipping. Place of worship.
Reality of matter, and Constitution of the worship.

On what ground he multiplieth these distinctions I see not, unless on a mere
fancy that Mr. Crofton determined the worship of God to be solemn public in,
and because of those places appointed, and used to that end in this nation;
unto this Page 26.
conjecture I am lead by his hot assertion, locallity under the Gospel is mere
matter of indifferency; God having only stamped sanctity on places among the
Jews. Mr. Crofton bearing me witness: for which in his Margin he quoteth Mr.
Crofton his Altar worship. page 77. but good Sir, what needs this heat? Mr.
Crofton did witness this assertion in his Altar worship: has he unsaid it in
his Reformation not Separation? he pleads for communion with the Church: but
did he ever confine the Church to any place? he says private particular
members may not withdraw themselves, or deny communion, with the holy
Convocation or Church assembly, wheresoever it is held; but he never denied the
Church or holy corrvocation was convened, and (if necessitated) may be again
convened in woods, caves, dens, or poor cottages. Mr. Crofton does grant the
Church is an holy convocation in any place assembled, but he does deny that 10.
20, 30, or 40. private particular Members, (among whom may be a Minister by his
office a Public officer) assembled in a place distinct from: it may be
opposite to the Public Assembly, is a Church or holy Convocation: and truly
should he grant this, he must be at a loss how to know a Conventicle or
determine a Schismatical Assembly, and throw down the Banks of all Church
order.

That the Church of Englands Liturgy, or Common Prayer P^. 28. 29.
(the great Apple of strife) is a part of this Real solemn worship of God, and
Communion with her therein is an indispensable duty I must (says this
Antagonist) take leave to deny: and Mr. Crofton will reply to him, do so and
welcome; for greater zealots for the Liturgy, then ever Mr. Crofton is like to
make, will not once affirm that the Liturgy is a part of real solemn worship
of God: it is not properly any worship at all; it cannot then be real solemn
worship of God: the Liturgy in the strict form, and general nature of it is
not worship but a Political (though Ecclesi stique) order and direction, unto
praying, reading the Scriptures, and Ministration of Sacraments; methinks this
learned man should not confound; real solemn worship, and a Political order
relating to solemn worship; they are in themselves manifestedly distinct.
wherein the Liturgy does prescribe, and impose set forms; and certain words
by, and in which Prayer, or other parts of worship must exist in, and to the
Church it is only a Ministerial mode, exhibiting worship; it is not worship it
self: I hope this acute disputant, will not affirm the form or mode into which
he casts, and by which he expresses Prayer, is real solemn worship: I hope
calling upon God in the name of Christ, for things according to his will, is
the formality of solemn worship, and that his, or other men's forms expressing
the same, is only the ministerial mode, by which it is exhibited in, and to the
Church.

Sr, How vain, and frivolous, are these high-flown Epethites, which this
humble, Remonstrator does give the Liturgy humane ordinance, super-erogatorie
worship, arbitrary service, Scripturebitten worship: whilst it is not at all
worship: but almost a Politic Order; and Ministerial mode of Worship: but I
must take up: least by correcting a mistake, I also be branded to be the
Mecaenas and Advocate of the Liturgy: We shall hear more of this in the next
part of his answer, which he says is by way of

Retortion.

And what is it that he recorted on Mr. Crofton?

Communion with the Church of England, may be superseded by real inevetable
necessity, exeoncessis: by Mr. Crofton's own Doctrine, and assertion; but mine
(that I may put in for a supersedeas, Page 31.
is a real inevetable necessity says the Remonstrator: If so sir, is this a
Retortion? I should have thought it to have been more properly accounted
ajoyning Issues, according to Mr. Crofton's Rule: which he could not, does not,
deny to be a Rule of truth, not to be avoided: but binding all non-communicants
in Gods worship to assign and plead the inevetable necessity which must be
their warrant for secossion, so as to acquit them from Schism, or sinful
separation: Let us hear sir his inevetable necessity pleaded, and herein he
tells us.

He cannot communicate in two things:
1. In the Liturgy 2. In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
He cannot communicate in the Liturgy, nor did Mr. Crofton ever advise he
should: But I hope he will assign a good reason why he cannot communicate in
Gods worship Ministered by the Liturgy: he says he joyneth with the Church in*
Prayer, praises, and hearing the word: he sure will not deny the reading of the
word to be a Public Ordinance of God, and part of public solemn worship: he
will I hope manifest an inevitable necessity for his own non-communion in that:
and for his absence from any, those Prayers which are by the Church put up unto
God.

The necessity of my noncommunion in the Liturgy (says this Remonstrator) is
grounded on invincible doubts, about the Lawfulness of such a constitution:

Sir, I cannot but pity the man, doubts are a Rack to the Pa. 32.
mind: and being invincible he is like to live in constant bondage: Sure I am,
Mr. Crofton will consent, he follows his conscience though erroneous being duly
careful, and humbly studious to certify, rightly inform the same: But sir,
methinks he vexes his soul, entangleth himself and seeks to ensnare others
with a needless scruple, viz. Whether he may communicate, where the
constitution of a thing is unlawful: Mr. Crofton is at no distance with this
Remonstrator as to the lawfulness of the censtitution of the Liturgy he will
not stand to admit his 3. Maxims in reference to Gods worship

What is unusefull is unlawful What is unnecessary is unlawful What is in his
general nature not commanded is unlawful.
But they come not into his Question: nor has these things any thing of
answer, to any thing pleaded by Mr. Crofton, for Communion in worship ministered
by the Liturgy.

But Sir, the constitution of the Liturgy being granted to be unlawful, and
what ought not to be; the Question yet abides, Whether the Liturgy, being an
unlawfully constituted mode of solemn public worship, be so far unlawful, or
unlawful in that kind and quality of unlawfulness, which will constitute a
warrantable reason for non-communion in that worship of God, which is ministered
by the same: Sir, all things unlawful, and relating to Gods worship, will not
warrant non-communion in Gods worship; he must therefore specify an
unlawfulness in the Liturgy, which will be of the kind and quality which
rises thus high, or he does nothing; and I confess, were it not for some
fallacy in his terms, more then (I apprehend) is in his mind, he does this
Pa. 29. 35
to purpose, it is this, The Liturgy is no worship of God, but will worship,
etc. no reason then he should communicate in it as such: But Sir, how shall we
understand his words? they are capable of a good and true sense, for the
Liturgy is no worship of God; nor is it any will worship; for, as I have before
noted, it is not any worship at all, but a political order, at the most an
bumane ministerial mode relating to Gods worship: But Sir, the whole scope of
his Book, and bent of his spirit, makes me assured, this sense came not into
his mind; but rather this, The Liturgy is not Gods worship, i. e. it is an
Page 30.
unlawful constitution, and God is not at all worshipped by it, or in the use
of it; he therefore concludes, his crime is in not joining in prayer in such a
dress or form.

And Sir, this sense makes his words an assertion so horrid, and uncharitable,
that he professing himself an Antisectarian, I would (if I had once ground to
support my Charity) hope he did not intend it; for Sir, this is the old notion
urged by the brainsick Brownists, and others repelled and reproved by the old
non-Conformists.

Sir, the truth is, in this sense he must be understood, or in none to this
purpose; and then be pleased to observe the height, rather then strength of his
Argument.

If the Liturgy be not Gods worship, (i. e.) Gods worship be not celebrated by
the modes and forms directed in the Liturgy: it then follows, our first
Reformers and Marian Martyrs, rejoiced in, and dyed under a mode of divine
worship, by which God could not be worshipped: all our pious painful preachers
ministered by, and all the Christians in the time of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and most of the Reign of King CHARLES the First, attended on a mode,
dress, or form, by which God was not worshipped: all the Ministers who now
minister in public, and all the people in England who now attend the same, do
minister by, and attend a mode, form, and dress, by which God is not
worshipped: and all who have been baptized, or received the Lords Supper in and
by the modes, and forms directed in and by the Liturgy, have been mocked and
deceived, and enjoyed no Sacraments; and then Sir, judge you whether England be
not Paganized, and the Independents have not reason to gather Churches in
England.

Sir, this man says, his charity must be only judged by God; sure I am, he
gives men (by such an assertion as this is), little cause to think he has
much; for a more notorious breach of charity, cannot befall the most rigid
Separatist, the Church of England ever knew.

But Sir, what reason does this Remonstrator render, why God is not worshipped
by the Liturgy? it is this, the manner (for the matter he yields; and essential
form he cannot deny, of the worship) the form and dress is humane: we grant it
Sir, so is the mode and form of his studied Sermon, and conceived Prayer; will
he be willing we should conclude God is not worshipped by them? will he stand
by it that the ministerial mode of worship is determined by the Lord in his
Word? if so a reading ministry may serve Gods Church, for there is no need of
other ministerial gifts; I would advise him to recollect his thoughts, and see
whether he can deny, that it is Gods will, in condescension to men's weakness,
that the ministerial mode of his worship, be determined, digested, by the
wisdom and faithfulness of his Ministers gifted and appointed to that purpose.

Sir, though the Liturgy is a mode of worship obnoxious to exception, and
unlawful; yet it is only a ministerial mode, whereby in reference to Prayer,
right matter is requested from the Lord, in the Name of Christ, and so Gods
worship does substantially exist for matter* and essential form, and he is
worshipped by the same; nor does it at all vitiate Gods worship, because it is
in it self an humane mode and form; for Gods worship cannot exist in, and to
the Church, but by a ministerial mode and form humane, invented, digested, by
men: And now Sir, where is our Remonstrators inevitable necessity for
non-communion in Gods worship ministered by the Liturgy.

Sir, the imposing of this Liturgy may be in it self an evil, but it does not
alter the nature of it; but that God is as truly worshipped by it when imposed,
as when left at liberty, and his worship is as fully, formally, though not so
orderly ministered, and existent in, and to the Church by this, as any other
humane mode, form, and dress whatsoever.

One thing more I must not pass without observation, and that is; this
Antagonist says, I know Mr. Crofton does attribute the essential form of
Prayer to it, (page 25.) which he describes to be a Page 39.
calling upon God in the Name of Christ, but if he understand not by the Name
of Christ the will of Christ, then I say it is not a right description of
Prayer.

Sir, I will assure him, Mr. Crofton did not understand by the Name of Christ,
the will of Christ, and yet I must tell him, it is but one Doctors opinion that
this is not a right description of Prayer; he might have been pleased to
observe in the same page, Mr. Crofton determined the matter must be according
to the will of God; and the will of Christ does require some adjunct qualities,
as gravity of expression, fervency of affection, and reverence in demeanor,
which come not into the definition of Prayer, as essential to its form; but in
the Name of Christ, that is, for his sake, merits, and mediation, cannot be
left out*

Sir, I now leave our Remonstrator on his Rack of doubting, praying God may
show him mercy; not doubting, but whatever they be to him, you see his doubts
are not invincible to others* for Mr. Crofton's argument stands yet firm, viz.
The worship of God existing for matter and essential form, his own in
substance, though by the Liturgy, (a defective, disordered, unlawful mode) may
not be refused or declined, this mode only by this reason because it is humane,
makes not an inevitable necessity of communion or secession.

2. Our Remonstrator cannot communicate in the Lords Supper, under the present
modes and methods of ministration in the Church of England: and his ground is
the imposed gesture of kneeling, the superstition and corruption which attends
it.

Sir, What superstition and corruptions* attend the ministration of the Lords
Supper? in which he must personally act, so as to become guilty of the same, I
see not; nor does he specify any, the gesture of kneeling excepted: that the
ministerial mode of this Ordinance is disordered, I can allow him, but this, as
in other parts of public worship, is personal to the Minister, and him only,
there is a possibility of his composed, reverend attendance on the Ordinance,
without any personal acting in those popular Responds, and Conclamations, which
are directed to the people in and by the Liturgy.

As to the gesture of kneeling, I do not find that Mr. Crofton does speak one
word for it, or that he ever advised any to it; I well know he does not yield
it, nor approve it: I have heard him say, that If he be put by the Communion in
the Lords Supper, because he will not receive the Elements in that gesture, he
is barred from his duty, and privilege, by an act of violence he is driven, he
does not go from Gods Ordinance. It is Sir, worth the enquiry, whether this
professed Separatist negative, have tendered himself to Communion in the Lords
Supper, and tried whether there were not a possibility of enjoying it without
the gesture of kneeling: for Sir, secession without all endeavors, and under
any possibility of Communion without what we conceive to be sinful, cannot be
acquitted of Schism or sinful Separation.

Sir, I cannot but conceive this Remonstrator to have in himself a fair
latitude concerning the Gesture of kneeling; he says, I could go near to
approve of the Gesture of kneeling, being left arbitrarie, and Page 41.
commended or practiced only as an outward badge of more then ordinary thank
fulness, under the reception of an extraordinary blessing, and not as an act
of piety, necessity and worship. Sir, the now Zealots for the English
Ceremonies? will join issues with our Antagonist, and tell him kneeling at
Sacrament is not act of worship, but only a reverend and pious badg* of more
then ordinary thankfulness, in reception of an extraordinary blessing; and
will refer him for proof to the Rubric in their new book, which does
declare kneeling is a signification, of our humble and grateful acknowledgment
of the benefits of Christ therein given to every Receiver? and the imposition
is justly capable of a dispute; the Rubric seems to do littte more than
commend this Gesture, only directing the Minister to deliver the Elements to
the people all meekly kneeling; and the legality of the Canon, by him quoted is
justly questioned; so that his reasons on which he could go near to approve
the Gesture, seems to be so clear, that we may wonder he should not
communicate in the Lords Supper, much more that he should fly so high as to
conclude Poison positive poison; his Charity is large; who can judge all that
ever did; all who do now communicate in the Lords Supper, celebrated by the
Service Book, and by the Gesture of kneeling are poisoned, expressly killed by
poison, this Charity will better become a total and positive Separatist.

Our Remonstrator having (as he conceived assigned) a sufficient warrant for
his confessed separation; in what he seems to answer to Mr. Croftons 2d* and
chief Consideration; proceeds to consider some others, his next assault is on
Mr. Croftons argument from the high places in Israel, the high places were not
taken away, but the people went thither to worship; yet I find not that any
Godfearing Israelite, who loathed those relics of Idolatry, ever barred
themselves, Page 43.
because thereof, from Gods Altar and worship.

Sir, I cannot but observe what a fair leap our Antagonist makes; passing many
considerable Arguments, urged as most proper, pertinent, and regent in our
Case, amongst others the instance in the sons of Eli, who failed in the
Ministration of Gods worship, taking their own part, before they had burnt the
fatt, according to Gods own appointment; and not contented with the portion God
had allotted to them, they took by violence what came next hand; insomuch that
the people of the Lord loathed, yet never durst leave the offerings of the
Lord; this disorder in the Ministerial mode of worship; runs higher then that
of the English Liturgy? yet the sin is not charged on the people; but this, and
arguments of the like nature, are not worth the observation of our humble
Remonstrator? but be it so, let us consider his batteries against Mr. Croftons
plead from the high places in Israel. Page 44*


1. He tells us the retention of Jewish Ceremonies in the Christian Church, is
(God knows) a just cause of complaint, did Mr Crofton ever deny it?

2. Reduction of them after sacred and solemn expulsion is more grievous, who
denies it? what reason does Mr Crofton give for his and shall we not complain?
whose complaints for retrogradation of Reformation, have been more audible and
affectionate then Mr Croftons? who has more pressed or provoked the Complaints
of Gods Israel? and shall we cry to him; what and shall we not complain?

3. M^ Croftons alleged Case of the Israelites high places, (he says) is
infinitely wide of ours, Sir, it must be ours according to his wide mistakes?
for according to Mr. Croftons close argumentation, it is very near, and
pertinent; the objection M. Crofton does obviate by the Israelites high places,
he has indeed transcribed; but not once regarded, or considered? ( viz) do men
complain of some Roman Rites retained? let them consider the high places in
Israel: what is the form, and force of this analogicall argument? Roman Rites
retained, is unlawful matter super-added to Gods worship? which substantially
existeth with the same; the high places were unlawful matter super* added to
Gods Temple and Altar, which subsisted with the same, the Israelites left not
Gods Altar, because of the super* added matter of the high places; nor may
Christians leave Gods true worship, because of the superadded matter of Roman
Rites: Sir, are not these cases now infinitely wide? but we will weigh the
distance he observes.

1. He says the high places were retained; our Roman Rites restored: what then
restoration may aggravate the evil, but does it change the nature of the
corruption; high places and Roman Rites whether retained or restored, are only
evils superadded to Gods Altar and worship, with which these do truly formally
exist, may and must be attended; the relapse of a Church reformed does add to
its guilt, but not abstract its being; return of expelled evils do much more
provoke God but not vitiate the subject his ordinance to which it is
superadded; restoration of corruption makes sin sink deeper in the Church, or
subject of such restoration, but it is the qulle of the Corruption must sink
into and subvert the worship of God to which it is affixed, so as to vitiate
and destroy the same.

2. He says the Israelites were confined to Gods Altar in a certain place;
Page 45.
and Mr. Crofton says Christians are confined to Gods worship in certain
assemblies; true constituted Churches, such as our Antagonist yields Englands
Congregations to be; Mr. Crofton denies not local liberty, or the place of
worship to be the matter of indifferency; the man is mistaken, locallity never
became a Topic of any force to Mr. Crofton he says to a true Church, a
lawfully constituted Christian assembly, meet, assemble where you will and can,
that which he says against the loose affections of some Christians, apt to
wander, is, forsake not the Assembling of your selves together, as the manner
of some is: let Christ's flock lie where it will or can, all particular members
must keep Company with them; and have good reason before they refuse it;
Christ's true assemblies are to Christians, what the fixed place, and altar was
to the Jews.

3. The high places were at most but Idolatrous places, but our worship is
superstitions worship: and into this runs his fourth note of distance, and
disparity in this Analogy, the Israelites worship was good, and place bad, but
our place is only good and our worship is bad: No marvel Sir, if Master
Croftons inference be to him a Non-sequitur: but Sir, This Charity is again
the fruit of his separation, and will carry him beyond the negative part of
it; how? our worship superstitious? our worship bad? this cannot be admitted;
who is the object of it, is it not God in Christ? what is the matter of it, it
is not things instituted, appointed by the Lord himself, Word, Prayer,
Sacraments? what is the form which gives the esse to it? is it not what God
determined, that his Word be read, preached, that he be called upon in the Name
of Christ for things according to his will; that the symballs by him
determined, be given and received as significant, sealing memorials, of the
death, body, and blood of Christ? is not this the substance of the worship
ministered in the English Church, and much of it by the English Liturgy? is this
superstitious worship? bad worship?

Had our Remonstrator said, the Ministerial mode of Gods worship by the Liturgy
had been bad, disordered, and not without some mixtures of superstition; he had
not had Mr, Crofton for his Antagonist; but this vitiateth not its subject;
enters not into the worship; so as to make it superstitious worship, bad
worship, the worship hereby existeth truly, fully, formally, Gods worship
though not so comfortable, not so profitable to Gods people, as a better and
more orderly mode for Ministration; but this will not do his work, his
inevitable necessity fails; his separation appears sinful, a schism
unless he confound the worship and Ministerial mode, so as to make the worship
bad, superstitious, and not Gods worship.

Sir, before we pass this part of our Remonstrators Answer, I cannot but
observe he is at a loss for what he pleads against: he cries, What does Mr.
Crofton plead for? Page 46


Alas man, that should have been known before now, and at the beginning of your
Debate; it might have saved you this labor and time; What says he, Is it my
presence in the Church at the time of Divine Service? yes it is: but not as his
large Conscience, can yield it, in an Idol Temple, at the Mass, or Turkish
Alchoran; which I am sure Mr. Crofton, or any good understanding Christian
could not yield: nor will his necessity to avoid poenal Laws, or to bear a
good Sermon justify his so doing: no matter what Religion is publicly
professed, this man is secured from suffering, for he ( to save his Estate) can
foot it with a Church-Papist, to a Popish Mass, or Protestant Service; and if
presence in the Idol Temple in the time of Idol Worship may be made the
Character by a poenal Law, you shall never know him for a Christian; if this
necessity would have been sufficient, we should have had a much shorter
Catalogue of Martyrs, both under Pagan, and under Papal power, then by Gods
grace we have for our encouragement.

But Sir, that he and others may certainly know what Mr Crofton pleads for; I
will tell him, It is for this Christian, careful carriage on Gods Sabbath. It
is a presence in the solemn public Assembly from the first to the last of
their approach to God, out of Conscience to begin and end the holy Convocation.

A presence with a mind informed, a judgment convinced, that this Assembly is
Gods Church, in which Gods true Worship is truly celebrated.

A presence with an heart affected with, and afflicted for the superadded
Rites, which are affixed to Gods Worship, and the sinful defective, disordered
mode, by which Gods Worship is ministered.

A presence with a Conscience convinced these Corruptions are evil, but not so
evil as to destroy Gods Worship; but that the same does (even by this sinful
mode) exist truly, formally Gods Worship; so as to use Gods Ordinance with
delight, though grieved, burdened by the disorder of the ministration.

A presence with a mind persuaded the modifying of Gods Worship is the personal
duty of the Minister, and so the defects and disorders therefore his personal
sin; so as that these may be the good man's burden, (being bound to mourn for
other men's sin, especially in what so much concerns his own profit, and
edification) but cannot be his sin, who has thereof no public judgment by
speciallity of Office.

A presence with a mind soberly vigilant over its own personal actings, so as
to decline all popular responds, conclamations, and variation of Gestures, and
the like actions, which are unduly required, from him; so as to contain himself
under such disorder in a composed silence.

A presence with a serious apprehension of God to whom the service is di^ected;
and the nature of the Worship ministered; so as with reverence to attend the
Word read, and Prayers pronounced, though in parts, parcels, with unfit
intermixtures, abruptions, abreviations, and pauses; so as to sigh and speak
out an affectionate Amen, the whole, the only vocal part of the people in
public Worship.

Sir, this is the presence which Mr. Crofton pleads for, as that which true
Religion, and good order does require, and direct, whilst Christians cannot
enjoy Gods Worship in communion with his Church, by a ministerial mode* more
regular, perfect, and profitable, digested by the personal abilities of each
Ministrator.

Sir, our Remonstrator proceeds to another of Mr. Crofton's Considerations,
and that he accounted his second, but in the order of Mr. Crofton's Book it is
the third, viz.

Communion with the Church under* many and great corruptions, is not
inconsistent with zeal, care and contest for Reformation. Page 46, 47, 48. What
he says to this is partly true, That endeavors of Reformation are a duty;
that Connivance is an argument of Affection* Communion an argument of
Connivance; the negative part of Reformation, binds ad semper, and the like;
all which Mr. Crofton has asserted, and amplyfied in his Plea: nor does he
detract or deny them; but these are generals, in the application of which our
Remonstrator follows the mistake of the Question, which has misguided him
throughout his whole Remonstrance.

Herein, like an acute Disputant, he corrects Mr. Crofton's state of the
Question, and profoundly tells us; Mr. Crofton Page 47.
had done well to have stated the Question aright, de ecclesia reformanda, and
de ecclesia reformata: Good Mr. Remonstrator may not ecclesia eadem, be eodem
tempora reformata, and reformanda, what if a reformed Church relapse into some
of tee same Corruptions, which were solemnly expelled, is she not ecclesia
reformanda? is there no cure for her but ruin? and no carriage toward her,
but to relinquish and run from her? does the Crisis of the Question lie in her
relapse, and retrogradation in Reformation, and into the same corruptions which
had been solemnly expelled; or in the quality and nature of the corruptions
which are returned into her? if her relapse be into extrinsecal, circumstantial
corruptions, which notwiths^^nding the substance of Gods Worship, and
salvability of Gods people is continued, and secured, is not the Question then
plain, Whether communion with her relapsed into such corruptions be not
consistent with zeal, care and contest for* Reformation? and who will deny
that? but if the relapse into intrinsecal, and substantial corruptions which
vitiate the subject, and destroy Gods Worship, and the salvability of Gods
people; then indeed separation, not only negative, but positive is a duty.

But Sir, I wish the Remonstrator may review Mr. Crofton's Plea, and see that
he does consider the English Church reformed, relapsed, and to be reformed, and
pray he will consider relapse, and retr^gradation is the aggravation of the
Church's sin, and provocation of Reformers zeal; but, the quale of the
corruptions, whether first introduced, or after solemn expulsion returned into
it, is that which must direct, and determine Communion or Separation.

But Sir, no state of the Question does, nor indeed can be expected to suite
his mis-guided zeal, but what is square to his mistaken judgment; he therefore
here again c^ieth out of Communion in Corruption; Communion in the Liturgy; and
according to the uncharitable fancy of the old brainsick Brownists, and most
rigid Separatists, his Dialect is, It is no Worship; God is not Worshipped; it
is a going back into Egypt; it is poison; I. will dye of famine rather then of
poison; and the like, which is every where scattered up and down his
Remonstrance.

To all this I know, Mr. Crofton will grant to him Communion in the
Corruptions, Communion in the Liturgy is not consistent with endeavors for
reformation: But Sir, herein lies the difference between Mr. Crofton and this
Antagonist, the one makes corruptions the direct immediate object of
Communion; the other does make Gods worship substantially for matter and form,
only Ministered by such a corrupt mode, and with such and such corrupt
appendants conversant about it, which enter not into it, the object of
Communion; Mr. Crofton says, we must communicate in Gods worship hereby
Ministered; and the Remonstrator says, we do communicate in the coru^ptions, in
the Liturgy; Mr Crofton is so far from pleading for Communion in the Liturgy,
that he says Ministers cannot without sin use it, for they are Judges? and
stand charged with the Ministerial mode of worship; and non-ministration by it
is the least Art of reformation; nor does he plead for, or justify the
personal actings of the people, in those popular Responds, Read h^s Reformation
not Separation.
Conclamations, and groundless change of Gesture, which is their part of
Communion in it as a Liturgy; nay, so far is Mr. Crofton from pressing
Communion in the Liturgy, that he makes attendance on Gods worship ministered
by the form of the result necessity; and blames the same in a case of choice,
or liberty, to enjoy Gods worship in a more orderly and regular mode.

If Sir, the Remonstrator will not take the question as it is stated, the case
of Conscience as it stands, and came close to the crisis of the Controversy,
if he will not distinguish between his food, and the unclean vessel, and
ill-favored carving which does transmit it to him, if he will not differ
between a necessity of feeding in such vessels on good wholesome food,
ill-favouredly carved* and mangled, or starving, and a liberty and choice of a
better and more orderly ministration; he may be afraid of and all his days
fight with his shadow; for he fights not with Mr Crofton whose question is
manifest in, and through his whole book, to be about necessitated Communion in
Gods worship in such an unfitting Ministerial mode.

Sir, Mr Crofton would not have any reforming Christian go back, or retreat
from the degree of Reformation they have attained: but this is the case, and
private Christians duty; the forum of the Church visible (at least the
particular to which they relate) is changeable, and changed, yet confisteth of
such who are true and lawful though it may be not pious) Ministers of the
Gospel, these are Judges; and do assume, and by their office impose on the
Church a Ministerial mode of Gods worship, which is rude, disorderly, and was
solemnly expelled; the people and particular members do nauseate, are burdened
at this mode, yet cannot deny Gods worship does truly, formally and salvably
exist in and by it, they have no public Judgment of, nor moral power to
correct this mode, may passively attend, and personally act their part in Gods
public worship, without any personal acting in the Ministerial mode; must
they in this case not keep their places? but recede from Communion, and
resolve to live without solemn public worship, not knowing how or where to
have it better Ministered? Sir I would entreat our Remonstrator to let his
future discourse turn on the binge of the controversy; or his answer will be
rejected as a groundless and forced creaking, not more unpleasant then
unprofitable.

Our Remonstrator does suggest something from the Oath, called the Solemn League
and Covenant, (of which he speaks in such terms, as speak little of wit, or
honesty, and less Scotch zeal) as making for his fancy argumentum ad hominem
at least.

Sir, we all know that Oath is become a Noli me^tangere, I must not plead for
it, but this I will tell you, Mr. Crofton who has reason, (having studied and
disputed it, and deeply suffered for it) to understand that Oath will undertake
to plead his principle, as that to which that Oath does oblige; I will in his
behalf note these three things considerable in this Case, to which that Oath
does bind: they are these.

1. It obliges to Reformation in Worship, which supposes worship does fully
and formally exist, defiled with some extrinsecal corruptions which must be
removed, expelled; but still the subject must be owned and secured; not
declined or refused whilst we conscientiously attend Worship, we must carefully
endeavor it may be as pure, as it is true.

2* This Reformation must be endeavored in our places and Calling by lawful
means, but the private capacity of particular members of the Church, dispose
them to endeavors by no means but what result from the Judgment of Charity,
viz. observing other men's sin, they must grieve for it; admonish even Elies
sons to forbear it; Complain to God and superiors, humbly petitioning a
Reformation by their public authority; and in case of choice, and liberty,
attending Gods worship ministered in a better Ministerial mode; but in case of
necessity, rather then not attend Gods worship truly, salvably existing, their
place does bind them to attendance on it in this mode? but with a greived,
burdened, complaining, supplicating spirit; that this evil may be reformed,
bringing their offerings to the Lord, whilst they loath and rebuke, are greived
for, and complain against the Profane Ministration of the sons of Elie.

3. This Reformation must consist with real sincere endeavors to extirpate
schism, as well as superstition; Mr Crofton has well cautioned us, that the
Devil does labor to reform the one, by running as upon the other sin; but
the grace of God keeps Reformation not (...).
us in an equal opposition to both: Now* unwarrantable secession from Gods
worship, this very Remonstrator grants is a separation, and a sin, and although
it be but negative and P^ge 46.
partial, yet it has in it the formality of Schism: our Remonstrators
inevitable necessity we have found before does varlish; on his mistake he must
assign another, and that from the nature and quality of corruption, or
impossibility of communion in Gods true worship, without communion in the
ministerial mode, which is evident may be abstracted from the worship; and Mr.
Crofton does affirm is a personal act, though of a public Officer to a
public end

Sir, the whole of what the Remonstrator says in this point of Reformation is
this: Mr. Crofton says, the matter, (and he should have added the essential
form, for so Mr. Crofton says) Page 48*
is good, but the outward mode is bad, and to be reformed; this our
Remonstrator very often and with great humility calls Mr. Crofton's recocta
Crambe; and yet as often as it is boiled by Mr. Crofton, it has no good
connection in this man's stomach; all the nurture he draws from it, is but like
Scotch Keal, which turns into wind and vapor.

Sir, our Remonstrator must yet have this crambe recocta, it is the Crisis of
this Controversy, till it be digested, this Case of Conscience cannot be
resolved; Mr. Crofton grants, that the whole frame and constitution of the
Liturgy is to be reformed, removed; but he deemeth it to be adulterate worship
and affirms it to be only a desective, disorderly ministerial mode of Gods
true worship, of which the people has not public judgment, and by which they
may enjoy Gods Ordinances, capable of operation to their end, without any
communion in this mode, which is personal in a public Officer to a public
end, and must therefore be reformed by the endeavors of all in their places,
and without unwarrantable secession, negative separation, formal Schism, and so
a sin.

They who have made a Schism between Pastors and People by an act of violence,
and exaction of what must not be yielded, must be pittyed and prayed for, but
not paid in their own Coin by us, or repelled by our personal sin and Schism: I
desire to serve God, but God keep me from serving him by my sin; where sin is
Gods instrument, judgment (his strange work) is his business, and the fire is
usually prepared for such Instruments, when their work is done.

Our Remonstrator stumble^h on another Sentence of Mr. Crofton's Plea, for
indeed he no where takes the scote, or understands the form and force of any
Argument; he Page. 5.
faith Mr. Crofton says, I cannot without trembling consider the circumcised
Sects in the Church of Corinth, ( Colosse he meant) are charged to have left
the head, by leaving the body: This our Antagonist says is a strange Argument,
unless his non-Communicants be proved to be circumcised Sects, and guilty of
such corruptions as will amount to a not holding the head.

Here Sir, our Remonstrator (who takes no Argument right) is run out into
another mistake; as if Mr Crofton did allude to the circumcised Sects for their
corruption, who alludeth to them for their separation, not holding in the body,
and so not holding the head; be the corruptions of any Church or People what
they will; a separation, and unwarrantable separation from Gods true Church is
a leaving the body, and so not holding the head; the estate of which is so
dreadful, that every good man cannot but tremble to see any in the least
appearance thereof, motion, or tendency thereunto.

Sir, What our Remonstrator does urge in case of scandal is no contradiction in
these to Mr. Crofton, in what he has asserted: but in hypothesi he has run on
his old mistake, Is communion in the Liturgy a positive duty? is Page. 53.
his Quaerie: Mr. Crofton says, No; but communion in Gods worship ministered by
the Liturgy, is a positive duty to such who have no choice, and cannot enjoy
Gods worship in communion with Gods Church Catholic visible, in a better
ministerial mode and order.

2. Says he, is not the Liturgy indifferent? Mr. Crofton faith, No; it is not:
not as the Bishop told him, because imposed, but because a formal positive
evil, but yet it is not an evil of that nature and quality, as to intercept the
indispensible duty of communion in Gods true worship ministered by it, when we
have no choice.

3. Says he, Will not scandal accrue by Mr. Crofton' s communion, as well as
conformity in the Liturgy; Mr Crofton says, It will; but he denies all
communion in the Liturgy; and his nonconformity is the act of non communion in
his capacity, as a Minister; his non-personal acting in any the popular
Responds, Conclamations, and groundless variation of Gestures, is the evidence
of his non-communion, as a Member of the Church.

Mr. Crofton is sensible, men, and good men, are, and will be scandalized by
his communion in Gods worship, ministered by this mode; but this is by accident,
not from the nature of his act, but from the ignorance and weakness of those
who take it, and therefore are no bar to his duty; indeed weak, though good men
may well stumble, when this man of Learning has no more brains, then to
confound communion in Gods worship ministered by the Liturgy, with communion in
the Liturgy, and so conclude Mr. Crofton a Mecaenas and Advocate for the
Liturgy.

Sir, That which is the great stick, and stumble with many, though this acute
Disputant does not urge any thing against it, is this principle which some men
(whose judgment should be better) is pleased to call proprium Degma to himself,
( viz.) I can communicate in Gods worship ministered in that humane ministerial
mode and order, by which I cannot administer.

Sir, The general reason of this his resolution, is the modification of Gods
worship in, and to the Church, is the personal act of the Minister: If Sir,
this act be personal, the Minister may not be imposed on, all sins in the
ministerial mode, are his, who ministers; and they extend not to the Church,
unless by accident through some defect of their own: Sir, this general might
be amplyfied by these particulars.

1. A Minister by his Office stands charged to modifie Gods worship by his
ministerial gifts, and personal abilities; he may not therefore be imposed on,
be the modes imposed never so good; he may as well admit composed Sermons, as
composed Prayers, and forms for Administration of Sacraments.

2. Every Minister has a public judgment of the ministerial mode by which he
ministers the worship of God, and does qua Minister, as a public Officer,
receive this, and reject that; so that if he receive a mode defective and
disorderly, the sin becomes his.

3. Every Minister is personally active in the ministerial mode by which he
ministers, so that he mangleth Scripture, and does personally act all that
disorder which is in it.

These things are well illustrated by Mr. Croftons allusion to the Recorder of
the City, or Speaker in Parliament, and show good reason why he cannot
conform to, Minister by such and such a ministerial mode.

But his ministry (as to exercise) being superseded, and he resolved into the
state and capacity of a private member of the Church, considers,

1. This ministerial mode is evil, but not such an evil as vitiateth the
subject; Gods worship does truly, formally, salvably, (though not comfortably
or so prositably as by another) exist in, and to the Church by it, and I cannot
have Gods Ordinances in communion with Gods Church without it.

2. In this ministerial mode, the members of the Church are purely passive,
they according to their duty, assemble to worship God; the Minister charged
with the bumane mode, does assume a Minister by this, the which the members of
the Church do not advise or choose, nor any way act in, but composedly attend
the worship of God hereby ministered unto them, and exhibited for their Amen: so
that the sin is personal, not public and common, no way derived to me,
unless by my neglect to mourn for this, as any other sin in another.

3. Though this mode of worship do direct some acts to be done by the people,
yet I am Master and Judge of my own action, and can withold, and refuse it, so
that in the whole ministration I act not, but in my Amen to the prayer thus
modified, and my attention to the worship thus ministered, and the sinful mode
is by, and to the Minister, and him alone.

Sir, Let not any infer, that on these grounds we may attend a Mass and be
innocent: For Sir, the corruptions in a Mass are such as vitiate the Subject,
and destroy the worship of God.

1. It is celebrated in an unknown tongue, and so does not exhibit any worship;
it is to the people, vox and preterea nihil, it is a frivolus objection, I
understand Latin, when the Church, who understands it not, is the subject of
the worship to be done to God, the Question is of public communion, not my
private and personal adoration.

2. The Mass does pray to the Saints, a wrong object; in the name of the
Saints, a wrong ground, for some unlawful things; wrong matter of prayer, Gods
worship is not herein existent, but destroyed.

3. The Mass makes the Sacraments Sacrifices for the quick and dead;
transubstantiateth the Elements, and so changes the nature of the Ordinance in
the very nature and esse thereof.

We are Sir, at last, arrived at the last quarrel our Remonstrator picketh at
Mr. Croftons Plea, in which he is exactly square to his mistaken self.

Mr. Crofton says, I am not without the caution and conduct of sober, godly,
learned promoters, and pursuers of a perfect and complete Reformation.

To this the Remonstrator says, It is strange Mr. Crofton Page 54.
should argue from communion amongst distinct Churches, against the
non-communion of present members of one and the same Church, since that is a
communion not by participitati^^ and joint fellowship.

How Sir, not by participitation and joint fellowship? that is strange; though
not by constant participitation personal, by their individual members, yet by
joint fellowship in the same substantial worship, and occasional perticipation
reciprocally, each with other, by their particular members cast into this or
that Country: Sir, can other Reformed Churches hold communion with England, if
her worship be no worship of God? will worship, Scripture-bitten, will worship?
Moreover, Mr. Crofton observed Reformation not Separation.
the Reformed Churches disowned not, on occasion declined not, never advised
their traveling members to decline communion with England, her Liturgy
notwithstanding, they sure concluded Page 43.
Gods worship was thereby ministered.

Again, this Remonstrator tells us, Mr. Croftons instance in the primitive
Non-conformists, is wide of that of the modern; it is true, and Mr. Crofton
tells us in his Plea, He was sensible of it, they administered by this
ministerial mode, which Mr. Crofton says, He can better excuse than justify;
yet the distance is not Page 44.
so great, as this man's wild fancy does dream; they were under the same
corruptions for kind, which are returned upon us; yet Hildersham, Ball,
Nichols, Hind, and others maintained the duty of communion in Gods worship,
under, in, and by them, against Brown, Barrow, and other Rigid Separatists, who
urged this man's grand Argument, it was not Gods worship, and it was
will worship: I know our Remonstrator disowns relation to these men, and their
Sects, yet sheltereth himself under their shield, and fights with no weapon,
but what was forged on their Anvil, and in their Shop, only he adds ours is
an estate of relapse; that is indeed true, and aggravateth our sin, but
alters not the nature and quale of the corruptions; if these corruptions
returned do vitiate the subject, and destroy Gods worship, they did so when
first inovated, or continued in the first Reformation; for as I have before
urged it is only the quality, not the degree of the evil must vitiate Gods
worship, to make it poison, express poison.

Sir, I have done with this Remonstrator, when I have told him Mr. Crofton is a
Peter, who can receive the rebukes of a brother Paul; but the rebukes of a
Zeal, mistaking matter of fact, does only retort on the Censurer, with a what
does your arguing reprove?

I am Sir, Your Obliged Friend, R. S.
Febr. 13. 1662.
POSTSCRIPT.
Worthy Sir,
YOu cannot but have heard, that Mr. Crofton in his late travels, had a Paper
taken out of his pocket, it was a rough Draught of his highway thoughts which
he committed to paper, to communicate to a now Conformist, a good friend of
his; himself had not another Copy, for whilst it was in his hand, it was never
transcribed by himself, or any other; I having, with some difficulty, procured
a Copy thereof (from one relating to the Gentleman who took it from Mr.
Crofton) have presumed to send it you, that if you think good, you may make it
public, and thereby capacitate our conforming Clergy, to resolve (if they
can) one of the great Scruples which barreth Mr. Croftons Conformity and
Ministration by a Liturgy; however, the world will see what a Mecaenas and
Advocate he is for Liturgies; This Paper being since his Plea for Communion.

Vale.
FINIS.

