THE LAWS and ACTS Made in the FIRST PARLIAMENT Of Our Most High and Dread
SOVEREIGN JAMES VII.

By the Grace of GOD, King of SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND. Defender
of the Faith.

Holden at EDINBURGH the 23. of April 1685.

By His Grace WILLIAM Duke of Queensberry, Marquess of Dumfreis-Shire, Earl of
Drumlanrig, and Sanqhuar, Viscount of Nith, Torthorwald, and Ross, Lord Douglas
of Kinmount, Midlebie, and Dornock, etc. Lord High Thesaurer of Scotland.

His Majesty's High Commissioner for holding this Parliament, by virtue of a
Commission under His Majesty's Great Seal of this Kingdom.

With the special Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament.

Collected and Extracted from the Registers and Records of Parliament, by
GEORGE Viscount of Tarbet, Lord Mc Leod, and Castle-haven, etc. Clerk to His
Majesty's Council, Registers, and Rolls, etc.



EDINBURGH*

Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty,
Anno DOM. 1685. Cum Privilegio.

GOD SAVE KING JAMES THE SEVENTH.
LAWS and ACTS Made in the FIRST PARLIAMENT Of Our most High and Dread
SOVEREIGN JAMES VII. By the Grace of GOD, King of SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, FRANCE and
IRELAND. Defender of the Faith. Holden at EDINBURGH the 23. of April 1685.
I. ACT For Security of the Protestant Religion.
April 28. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Consent of the Estates of Parliament Conv^ned,
Ratifies and Confirms, all the Acts and Statutes formerly past, for the
Security, Liberty, and Freedom of the true Church of GOD, and the Protestant
Religion, presently professed within this Kingdom, in their whole Strength and
Tenor* as if they were here particularly set down and expressed.

II. A Declaration and Offer of Duty by the Kingdom of Scotland, with an
Annexation of the Excise to the Crown.
April 28. 1685.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT now Conveened by His Majesty's Sovereign Authority,
Taking into their Consideration, how this Nation has continued now upwards of
Two Thousand Years in the unaltered Form of Our Monarchical Government, under
the un-interrupted Line of One Hundred and Eleven Kings, whose Sacred Authority
and Power has been upon all signal Occasions, so owned and assisted by
Almighty GOD, that Our Kingdom has been protected from Conquest, Our
Possessions defended from Strangers, Our Civil Commotions brought into wished
Events, Our Laws vigorously Executed, Our Properties legally Fixed, and Our
Lives securely Preserved; so that We and Our Ancestors have enjoyed those
Securities and Tranquillities, which the greater and more flourishing Kingdoms
have frequently wanted. Those great Blessings we owe in the first place to
Divine Mercy; and in dependence on that, to the Sacred Race of Our Glorious
Kings, and to the solid, absolute Authority wherewith they were Invested by the
first and fundamental Law of Our Monarchy; nor can either Our Records, or Our
Experience instance* Our being deprived of those happy Effects, but when a
Rebellious Party did by Commotions and Seditions Invade the Kings Sovereign
Authority, which was the cause of Our Prosperity, yet so far has Our primitive
constitution, and fundamental Laws prevailed against the Innovations and
Seditions of turbulent Men, as that these Interruptions never terminated, but
either in the Ruin, or at least the Suppression of these who at any time did
Rebel or Rise in Opposition to Our Government. And since so many Ages has
assured to Us the great advantages, which flow down to all Ranks of People from
the happy Constitution of Our Monarchy, and that all Our Calamities have ever
arisen from seditious Invasions upon these Sacred Rights; THEREFORE, The
Estates of Parliament for themselves, and in name of the whole Kingdom* judge
themselves obliged to Declare; And they Do Declare to the World, that they
abhor an detest, not only the Authors and Actors of all preceding Rebellions
against the Sovereign, but likewise all Principles and Positions which are
contrary, or derogatory to the Kings Sacred, Supreme, Absolute Power, and
Authority, which none, whether Persons, or Collective Bodies can participat of,
any manner of way, or upon any Pretext* but in Dependence on him, and
Commission from him. And as their Duty formerly did bind them to own and
assert the just and legal Succession of the Sacred Line as unalterable by any
Humane Jurisdiction; So now, They hold themselves on this occasion obliged for
themselves, and the whole Nation Represented by them, in most humble and
dutiful manner, to (...) the hearry and sincere Offer of their Lives and
Fortunes, to Assist, Support, Defend, and (...) King James the Seventh, their
present Glorious Monarch, and His Heirs, and lawful Successors, in the
possession of their Crowns* Sovereignty, Prerogatives, Authority, Dignity,
Rights, and Possessions, against all Mortals: And withal, to assure all His
Enemies, who shall a^venture on the Disloyalty of disobeying his Laws, or on
the Impiety of Invading his Rights, that such shall sooner weary of their
Wickedness, then they of their Duty* and that they firmly Resolve to give their
entire Obedience to His Majesty without Reserve, and to concur against all His
Enemies, Foreign or Intestine. And They solemnly Declare, That as They are
bound by Law, so they are voluntarly and firmly Resolved, that all of this
Nation, betwixt Sixty and Sixteen, Armed, and Provided according to their
Abilities, shall be in readiness for His Majesty's Service, where, and as o^t
as it shall be His Royal Pleasure to Require them.

And since the Excise of Inland and Foreign Commodities granted to King
Charles the Second, of ever Blessed Memory, by the 14. Act of the Parliament
1661, during all the days of his Lifetime, and Prorogate by the 8. Act of the
Parliament 1681. for Five Years thereafter, will shortly Terminat. And the
Estates of Parliament Considering the usefulness of this Grant, to Support the
Interest of the Crown; Do as the first Evidence of their Sincerity in the
foresaid Tender of their Duty, Humbly and Unanimously Offer to His most Sacred
Majesty King James the Seventh, their present Monarch, and to His Lawful Heirs,
and Successors, in the Imperial Crown of Scotland, the said Excise of Inland
and Foreign Commodities, expressed in the said 14. Act of Parliament 1661 to be
Collected in the manner prescribed by the said 8. Act of the Parliament 1681.
for ever. And His Majesty, and Estates of Parliament, by the force of this Act,
have United, Annexed, and Incorporated; and Unites, Annexes, and Incorporats
the same to the Crown of this Realm, to Remain therewith in annexed Property in
all Time coming: And in respect that the alteration in the method of Collecting
the Inland Excise from what it was by the Act 1661, to that prescribed by the
8. Act, Parliament 1681. will require some time to Establish it in Collection.
THEREFORE, His Majesty, with Consent of the Estates, Continues the Collection
prescribed by the 14. Act, Parliament 1661, for the said Inland Excise for Six
Months, from the first of May next allanerly.

III. ACT Concerning Citations in Processes for Treason.
May 1. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Do
hereby Ratify and Approve, the former Custom used by His Majesty's
Commissioners of Justiciary, in proceeding against Pannals already in Prison,
and Indicted for Treason, upon Twenty Four Hours; but for the future, His
Majesty allows such Pannals to be Cited on Forty Eight Hours; And if the
Pannals Represent such Defenses to the Commissioners of Justiciarie within that
time, as may need an Exculpation. His Majesty with Advice foresaid, allows
the said Commissioners to delay the Trial till the days elapse, to which the
Exculpation is to be raised.

IV. ACT Concerning Witnesses in Processes for Treason.
May 1. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Do Statute and Ordain, That
such as being Cited to be Witnesses in the Cases of Treason, Field, or House
Conventicles, or Church Irregularities, do refuse to Depone, they shall be
Liable to be Punished as Guilty of these Crimes respectively, in which they
refuse to be Witnesses: It being always hereby Declared, that these
Depositions so emitted, shall not militate against the Deponent himself any
manner of way.

V. ACT Declaring it Treason to Take or Own the Covenants.
May 6. 1685
OUR SOVERAION LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Do hereby Declare, that the
Gi^ing, or Taking, of the National Covenant, as Explained in the Year 1638. Or
of the League and Covenant, (so commonly called) or Writing in Defense thereof,
or Owning of them as lawful, or Obligatory on themselves or others, shall infer
the Crime and Pains of Treason.

VI. ACT Obliging Husbands to be liable for their Wives Fynes.
May 6. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering, that the Lords of His Privy Council, and
other^ Commissionated by His Majesty and them, have Fined Husbands for their
Wives withdrawing from the Ordinances, Does with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Declare the said Procedure to have been Legal, and
Ordains the same to be Observed in all time coming* And Ratifies all Decreets
and Sentences granted against Husbands for such Fynes: Reserving always Power
to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to Absolve, or Mitigat the Fynes
of such Husbands as are known to be of Loyal Principles.

VII. ACT Anent Porterfield of Duchall, And Concealing of Supply given to
Rebels.
May 6. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Do Ratify, Approve, and
Confirm the Sentence of Forfaulture pronounced by the Commissioners of
Justiciary against John Porterfield, sometime of Duchall, and the
Interlocutors, and whole Procedure of the said Commissioners in that Process.
And Declares that the same was conform to the Laws of this Kingdom. And in
general, Statutes and Declares, that the Concealing, and not Revealing of
Supplys Given to, or Demanded for Traitors Forfaulted for Treason against the
Kings Person or Government, is Treason, and to be Judged accordingly.

VIII. ACT Against Preachers at Conventicles, and Hearers at Field-Conventicles.
May 8. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering the Obstinacy of the Fanatical Party, who
notwithstanding all the Laws formerly made against them, Persevere to keep
their House and Field-Conventicles, which are the Nurseries and Rendezvouzes of
Rebellion. THEREFORE, His Majesty, with Consent of His Estates in Parliament,
Does Statute and Ordain, That all such as shall hereafter Preach at such
Fanatical, House, or Field-Conventicles, As also, such as shall be present as
Hearers at Field-Conventicles, shall be Punished by Death, and Confiscation of
their Goods.

IX. ACT For the more effectual Payment, and Inbringing of His Majesty's Rents
and Revenues.
May 8. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and the Estates of Parliament, Considering the great
Neglect and Remissness of the Sheriff, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries, and
Regalities, and their Deputs, in their Discovering, Collecting, and Inbringing
of His Majesty's Rents and Revenues Constant and Casual; And of the Feuars and
other Vassals, who are liable for the Rents and Duties of His Majesty's
Property, and the Chamberlains thereof, whereby the Payment of the same is
fallen very much in arrear; And the Compting yearly in the month of July,
according to former Acts of Parliament, is greatly neglected. THEREFORE, the
better to prevent the same for the future, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent
of the Estates of Parliament, not only Ratifies and Approves all former Laws
and Acts of Parliament made for In-bringing His Majesty's Rents, and
particularly the 15th Act, 3d Session of the first Parliament K. Charles the
2d, Ordaining the same to be put in full Execution, Conform to the Tenor
thereof; But likewise, further Statutes and Declares, That in all time coming,
whatsoever Sheriff, Stewart, Baillie of Bailliarie, or Regality, or their
Deputs, or Chamberlains of His Majesty's Proper Rents respective, shall delay,
or neglect to Compear and Count yearly in Exchequer, in the Month of July, and
accordingly receive their Aeques, and Exoneration of all that can be Charged on
them, as due and payable by them to His Majesty; That immediately after they
shall be Charged and Denunced for the same, at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
Conform to the former Laws and Practice; And the Horning and Denunciation shall
be duly Registrat, that Persons so Denunced and Registrat, shall ipso sacto,
amit, loss and tyne (during their lifetime) their Offices of Sheriff-ship,
Stewartry, Bailliary, or Chamberlanry, whether the same be Heretable, or during
Life, or Pleasure; And it shall not be lawful for them by themselves, or their
Deputs, to Exerce, or Officiat therein at any time thereafter; but the same
shall vaik and fall in His Majesty's hands, without any Declarator, or Process
of Law: As also that all Feuars, and other Vassals of His Majesty's Property,
who shall neglect, or delay to compear yearly in the said Month of July, in
Exchequer, and make Count and Payment of the Feu, Blench, or Taxt-ward-duties
and others, due and payable by them, and receive their Aequies and Exonerations
thereof accordingly; So as two years thereof shall run together unpayed, and
that they shall be therefore Charged, Denunced, and Registrat, as is
abovementioned, that immediately after the said Denunciation, and Registration,
they shall be liable for the double of the whole ^eu, Blench, Taxt-ward, or
other Duties, then due and payable by them, and all Execution shall pass
against them therefore, Sicklike as if the same were mentioned, and contained
in the Reddendoes of their Infeftments; And that by and attour, and but
prejudice of the penalties formerly Imposed, and payable by the said
Non-accomptants, conform to former Laws. And it is further Statute and
Ordained, That all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries and Regalities,
their Clerks, and Clerk-deputs shall be holden and obliged, to send Lists from
time to time to the Lord High Thesaurer, Thesaurer Deput, or Clerks of
Exchequer, of all Wairds and Marriages, as well Simple as Taxt, that shall
happen to fall and vaik in time coming, or that are already fallen within their
respective Jurisdictions, bearing the time of the Decease of the Person by whom
the same vaiks, and of the Successor, and their Age, and whether Married or
not; Certifying all such Clerks, as shall not, before the first day of November
next to come, report in Exchequer the Lists under their hands, of all such
bygone Casualities fallen, preceding the date hereof, and thereafter from time
to time, within six months after the same shall happen to fall and vaik, if
the persons die within the Kingdom; That they shall amit, lose and tyne their
Office of Clerk-ship, to be immediately disposed on, by these who shall have
right thereto, without any Declarator, or other Process whatsoever; And to the
effect, they may the better know the tenor of the holding of all Lands within
their respective Jurisdictions, His Majesty, with Advice forsaid, Ordains the
said Sheriffs, Stewarts, Baillies of Bailliaries, and Regalities, and their
Deputs, at the next Michaelmass Head-Court, and at such other Dyets, as they
shall think convenient, to cause all the Vassals within their respective
Jurisdictions produce before them their Charters, to the effect the Clerks may
record the Reddendoes thereof in their Books, who are ordered immediately
thereafter to return them to the Parties, without payment of any money for the
same. And Ordains Letters of Horning to be directed against those who shall
fail to produce their Charters, as said is* And it is hereby declared, that in
all time coming, when poynding is used for the Kings proper Rents, the
Apprising of the Goods poynded may be als Legally done upon the Ground of the
Lands allenarly, as if the samine were Apprised at the Market Cross of the head
Burgh of the Jurisdiction, notwithstanding of any Law, or Practice in the
contrary.

X. ACT Concerning Judicial Confessions before the Commissioners of Iusticiary.
May 8. 1685.
THE KINGS MAJESTY, and Estates of Parliament, Do hereby Statute and Declare,
all Confessions of Parties, after they have received an Indictment in the Case
of Treason against the Kings Person or Government allenarly, Emitted before the
Commissioners of Justiciary, Sitting in Judgment, and Subscribed by the Pannal,
or by the said Judges, in the Case where the Pannal owns the Confession, as it
is Reduced in Writ, and yet either cannot, or refuses to Subscribe, shall be
Considered as a Judicial Confession, and shall be as Probative to Assizes, as
if the same had been Emitted in presence of the Assize, notwithstanding of the
90. Act of the 11 Parliament of King James the Sixth, and that if Assizers
Assoilzie, notwithstanding of such Confessions, they shall be liable to a
Process of Error; and this Law to be of force only to the next Session of
Parliament; and the 90. Act of the 11. Parliament of King James the Sixth, is
to continue in its full force as to all the rest of its Tenor and Contents.

XI. ACT Obliging Persons to Accept Offices.
May 8. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Do
hereby Statute and Declare, That if any of His Majesty's Subjects within this
His Ancient Kingdom, shall Refuse to Accept the Office of Magistrates, Justices
of Peace, Constables, Officers in the Militia, or any other Employment laid on
them by the King or Council, They shall be Fyneable for their said Contempt,
unless they can propone such reasonable Excuses as may satisfy the Lords of
His Majesty's Privy Council, to whom the Execution of this Act is Remitted; And
this without Prejudice of any former Right or Privilege given to the Royal
Burrows for Obliging Burgesses to Accept of Offices and Employments within
Burgh.

XII. ACT of Supply.
May 8. 1685.
THE ESTATES OF PARLIAMENT, Calling to mind the many great Blessings they have,
and do enjoy, under the Protection of the Royal Government, and especially by
the many Deliverances from the Rebellious Insurrections and Designs of
Fanatical Traitors, from whom they could expect no less then Confusion in
Religion, Oppression in their Estates, and Cruelty against their Persons and
Families: And that the terror of His Majesty's Forces has been very
Instrumental for procuring our present Security; But considering, that not only
these Enemies continues their inveterat hatred against King and People, but
that their frequent Disappointments have heightened their Melice to Despair; and
that the present Forces may be too few to undergo all the Fatigue which His
Majesty's Service, or the Protection of the Country does Require. And to
demonstrat to all Seditious Men, that this Nation is resolved to bestow all
they have in the Kings Service, rather than to be exposed to the least of their
Insults. Do therefore, for themselves, and the Nation represented by them, Make
a hearty and dutiful Offer to His Majesty of Two Hundred and Sixteen Thousand
Pounds yearly, payable at two Terms, viz. Whitsunday and Martinmass, each year,
beginning at Whitsunday next 1685, and so forth Termly, and that over and
beside the Five Months Cess already Imposed on this Kingdom by the 3. Act of
the Parliament 1681, whereby there will be Four Months Cess payable at each
Term hereafter, beginning at Whitsunday next 1685. And as a further evidence of
their entire Affection to the Sacred Person of His present Majesty, they humbly
and heartily offer a Continuation and Prorogation of the said Four Months Cess
termly, from the said Term of Whitsunday 1685 inclusive, during all the Terms
of His Majesty's Lifetime (which God Almighty long preserve,) that being the
greatest of our Earthly Wishes, as it is the chief of our Temporal Felicity and
Glory. And for the better and more speedy inbringing of Payment of the said
Eighth Months Cess, the Kings Majesty, with Advice and Consent of the Estates
of Parliament, Nominats, Appoints, and Ordains the Persons underwritten to be
Commissioners within the respective Shires, for Ordering and Uplifting of the
said Eighth Months Cess, viz.

For the Shire of Edinburgh.
The Earl of Lawderdale, the Earl of Lothian, the Viscount of Oxfuird, the
Viscount of Tarbet, the Lord Torphichen, the Master of Balmerinoch, the Lord
Advocat, the Lord Justice Clerk, the Lord Reidfuird, the Lord Edmingstoun, the
Lord Newbyth, Sir John Maitland of Ravelrig, Sir John Dalmahoy of that ilk, Sir
William Nicolson of that ilk, Sir John Fowlis of Ravelstoun, Sir Alexander
Gibson of Pentland, Sir John Clerk of Pennycook, Sir William Drummond of
Hathorndean, Sir Patrick Nisbet of Dean, Sir John Young of Leny, Sir William
Murray of Newtoun, Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun, Sir John Ramsey of Whitehill,
Sir Robert Baird of Sauchtounhall, Sir William Sharp of Stonyhill, Sir William
Binning of Wallyford, Sir James Dick of Priestfield, Henry Trotte^ of
Mortounhall Thomas Craig of Riccartoun, Alexander Nisbet of Craigintinny,
Robert Miln of Barntoun, Patrick Hamilton of Falla, John Cunninghame of
Woodhall, Mr. Walter Pringle of Graycruik, Mr. James Deans of Woodhouslie, Mr.
Rodorick Mackenzie of Prestounhall, Mr. David Watson of Sauchtoun, John Fowlis
of Ratho, James Baird younger of Sauchtounhall, James Murray younger of
Deuchar, Charles Murray of Hadden, Sir William Hope of Grantoun, Mr. James
Hunter of Murrayes, the eldest Baillie of Musselburgh for the time, the eldest
Baillie of Dalkeith for the time; The Earl of Perth, Sheriff-Principal,
Conveener, and in his absence the Lord Collingtoun.

For the Shire of Haddingtoun.
The Earl of Wintoun, the Earl of Tweddale, Lord Yester, Lord Elibank, Lord
Belhaven, Sir John Sinclair of Lochead, Archibald Murray of Spott, Mr. Robert
Lawder Portioner of Belhaven, Archibald Sydeserf of Roughlaw, Sir Andrew Ramsey
of Waughtoun, Francis Kinloch of Gilmertoun elder, Sir William Baird of
Newbyth, Patrick Brown of Colstoun, James Dowgall of Nunland, Robert Hepburn of
Beer^oord, John Seaton of Barns, Sir Robert Sinclair of Stevinson, Sir James
Stansfield of Newmilns, Richard Cockburn of Clerkingtoun, Sir James Hay of
Linplum, George Swintoun of Chesters, Mr. George Halyburton of Egglescairney,
Sir John Lawder of Fountainhall, George Brown younger of Colstoun, Adam
Cockburn of Ormstoun, Adam Hepburn of Humbie, David Hepburn of Randerstoun,
John Wedderburn of Gosford, Sir John Nisbet of Dirltoun, William Congleton of
that Ilk, Sir George Sutie of Balgone, Sir John Ramsey of Westerfalside, John
Seton of St. Germans, Sir William Hamilton of Prestoun, George Morison of
Prestongrange, John Sleich Provost of Haddingtoun, William Mccall Baillie
there, James Forest Baillie in Dumbar, Charles Maitland Baillie in
North-Berwick, the Earl of Wintoun Conveener, and in his absence George Brown
younger of Colstoun.

For the Shire of Berwick.
James Earl of Hume, the Lord Harcars, Mr. Charles Home of Aytoun, Sir William
Nicolson of Cockburnes-path, Sir John Sinclar of Lonformagus, Sir Alexander Don
of Newtoun, Sir John Hume of Blackader, Sir James Cockburn of that Ilk,
Archibald Cockburn of Borthwick, Sir Patrick Hume of Burns-bank, John Rentoun
of Lambertoun, Sir James Cockburn of Riselaw, John Ker of West-Nisbit, William
Cockburn of West-Winsheil, Mr. Alexander Brown of Thorny-Dykes, William Ramsay
younger of Edingtoun, John Edgar of Wedderly, Henry Troiter of Mortounhall,
Andrew Ker of Moristoun, Andrew Ker of Little-Dean, James Nicolson of Trabroun,
John Dunce of Growel-Dykes; John Hall of Old-Cambuss, James Cockburn of
Whin-rigg, William Cockburn of Caldra, Mr. Henry Hume of Keams, Joseph Douglas
of Edringtoun, Henry Sinclar of Wouldforland, George Hume of Saint Leonards,
Mr. Patrick Craw of Heugh-head, Charles Swintoun younger of Mersingtoun, James
Brown younger of Blackburn, James Pringle of Ruthchester, Thomas Rochead of
Whitsumhill, James Peter of Chapel, Thomas Falconer of Kincorth, Mr. James
Douglas of Earnslaw, Mr. John Cockburn of Easter-Winsheil, Mr. Duncan Forbes of
Uxstoun, John Sleich of Greengelt; Sir Archibald Cockburn elder of Lantoun, or
in his absence his eldest Son, Conveener.

For the Shire of Roxburgh.
The Earl of Lothian, the Lord Cranstoun, the Lord Iedburgh, the Lo. Newbottle,
Sir William Ker of Greenhead, Sir Francis Scot of Thirlestane, Sir William
Elliot of Stobs, Sir William Bennet of Grubit, Henry Mcdougal of Mckerstoun,
Sir John Scot of Ancrum, Sir Robert Pringle of Stitchel, Sir Patrick Scot of
Lang-newtoun, William Ker of Chatto, Francis Scot of Gorron-berry, John Ker of
Frogtoun, William Scot of Raeburn, Andrew Ker of Little-Dean, Charles Murray of
Hadden, Mr. Patrick Don of Advocat, Robert Scot of Horslihill, Thomas Mcdowgal
younger of Mckerstoun, John Scot of Rennel-bourn, George Rutherford of
Fairnintoun, James Don of Smelholm, John Halyourtoun younger of Murehouselaw,
Thomas Rutherfoord of Knowsouth, Gledstoun of that Ilk, Andrew Ainsley of
Black-hill, the Provest of Iedburgh, Robert Fae Bailie of Melross, Robert Eliot
of Midlem^ln, Robert Eliot of Lairistoun, Thomas Scot of Quislet, William
Murray younger of Hadden, Mr. Francis Pringle Sheriff-deput, William Eliot of
Grange, Langladge of that Ilk; Sir William Douglas of Cavers, Conveener.

For the Shire of Selkirk.
The Earl of Traquair, the Lord Elibank, Mr. William Hay of Drumelzier, Sir
Francis Scot of Thirlstain, James Murray of Philip-hauch, Sir Patrick Murray of
Deuchar, Thomas Scot of Whitslad, John Riddel of Hayning, Hugh Scot of
Gallosheils, Alexander Pringle of Yair, James Murray of Deuchar younger, James
Scot of Bowhill, Thomas Scot of Todrig younger, William Scot of Braidindows,
Ker of Sunderlandhall, Gideon Murray of Sundhope, Francis Scot of
Gilmanscleuch, Andrew Plumber of Midlesteid, John Currer of Howden, William
Mithilhill, late Baillie in Selkirk; The Lord of Drumelzier Conveener.

For the Shire of Peebles.
James Earl of Mortoun, James Lord Aberdour, Charles Earl of Traquair, John
Earl of Tweddale, John Lord Yester, Colonel James Douglas of Skirling, William
Hay of Drumelzier, Sir Archibald Murray of Black-barony, Sir William Murray of
Stainhope, John Veitch of Davick, Richard Murray of Spittle-hauch, James Geddes
of Kirkoord, John Hay of Haystoun, William Burnet of Barns, James Williamson of
Cordrono, John Brown of Scotstoun, John Dycks of Whitslad, George Hunter of
Pollwood, David Plenderleith of Blyth, William Burnet of Keilzie, Alexander
Horsburgh younger of that Ilk, James Nasmith of Posso* Alexander Murray of
Hall-myre, John Murray of Cringilty, John Balfour of Kilzia, Robert Burnet of
Little-Orinstoun, William Horsburgh of that Ilk, Lawson younger of Cairmuire,
the Provost of Peebles for the time, Alexander Baillie younger of Callands,
James Russel of Slipperfield, Alexander Hamilton of Coldwall, James Chisholm of
Hayrhope, Pennicook of Romano, William Morison of Prestoungrange; Colonel
James Douglas of Skirling Conveener.

For the Shire of Lanerk.
William Duke of Hamiltoun, James Marquess of Dowglass, James Earl of Arran,
Alexander Lord Blantyre, John Hamiltoun of Eldershaw, John Hamilton of
Kilkerscleuch, William Baillie of Littlegil, John Carmichael of Boningtoun,
Alexander Menzies of Culteralloes, Mr. Andrew Brown of Dolphingtoun, James
Moorhead of Persielands, Christopher Baillie of Walstoun, James Somervel of
Gladstanes, Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath, John Somervel of Spittel, James
Lockhart of Cleghorn, the Lord of Lee, Menzies of Castlehil, Gavin Hamilton of
Raploch, John Hamilton of Broomhill, William Hamilton younger of Raploch, Sir
Robert Hamilton of Silvertoun-hill, John Robertoun of Ernock, James Oswald of
Fingaltoun, John Hamilton of Barncluith, the Bailies of Hamiltoun for the time,
John Hamilton of Blantyre-ferm, Sir William Maxwel of Calderwood, Alexander
Steuart of Torrens, Robert Cunninghame younger of Gilbert-field, Sir William
Fleming of Fairholm, The Baillie of the Regality of Glasgow for the time, Mr.
Hugh Corbet of Hardgray, Corbet of Tollcorse, Mr. Archibald Roberton of Bedlay,
James Dunlop of Gardenkirk, James Muirhead of Bradiesholme, William Cleiland of
Faskine, Cochran of Ruch-soals, Alexander Cleiland of that Ilk, John Hamilton
of Wood-hall, George Muirehead of Stevinstoun, Sir John Harper of
Cambushnethem, William Hamilton of Wishaw, Patrick Hamilton of Green, Alexander
Hamilton of Dalzell, William Inglis of Murdochstoun, William Cleiland younger
of Hairshaw, The Duke of Hamiltoun Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Nithsdail and Dumfreis.
William Duke of Queensberry, James Earl of Drumlanrig, John Earl of Carnwath,
William Earl of Annandale, Lord William Douglas, Sir Robert Dalzel of Glenae,
Sir James Douglas of Kelhead, Sir Robert Greirson of Lagg, Sir Thomas Kirk
Patrick of Closburn, Sir Robert Lourie of Maxweltoun, Sir James Iohnstoun of
Wasteraw, Sir Patrick Maxwel of Springkell, Thomas Charters of Ammifield; John
Carruthers of Holl-mayns; William Douglas of Dornock; John Dalzell younger of
Glenae; John Ferguson of Craigdorroch; James Iohnston of Corre-head; Dowgal
Maxwell of Cowhill; Robert Maxwell of Carnsalloch; George Maitland of Eccles;
John Greirson of Cappinoch; William Crichton of Crawfoord-toun; Matthew
Hairstains of Craigs; John Craik of Stewartoun; James Menzies of Enoch; James
Carruthers, Chamberlain to the Earl of Annandail; The Sheriff deput of Dumfreis
for the time; The Provost of Dumfreis for the time; The Duke of Queensberry
Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun:
The Earl of Galloway, Robert Steuart of Reavingstoun, Sir Andrew Agnew of
Lochnaw, William Steuart of Castle-stewart, Sir Charles Hay of Park, Sir
Godfrey Mcculloch of Myrtoun, Sir William Maxwel of Murreth, Sir David Dumbar
of Baldoun* James Dumbar of Mochrum, Patrick Mcdougal of Logan, William
Mcdougal of Garfeland, John Steuart of Phisgil, James Agnew of Lochnaw, Sir
John Dalrymple of Stair, John Blair of Dunskey, Andrew Agnew of Sheuchan*
George Steuart of Tonderghie, John Vauce of Barnbarroch, John Ferguson of
Doweltoun, James Gordon of Craiglaw, William Coultran, Provost of Wigtoun,
Gilbert Neilson of Craigcastle; the Earl of Galloway Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Air.
The Earl of Dumfreis, the Lord Boyd, the Lord Cochran, the Lord of Craigie,
the Lord of Blair, John Chalmers younger of Gaitgirth, Major Thomas Kennedy of
Baltersane, William Wallace of Sewaltoun, Mr. Rorie Mckenzie of Dalvenan
Baillie of Carrick, James Whitefoord of Dunduff, John Hamilton of Inchgoterick,
John Wallace of Cames-skan, William Steuart of Showood, Hugh Wallace of
Galrigs, Hugh Kennedy of Donan, Robert Fullartoun of Craighal, the Lord
Montgomery, the Lord Creichtoun, the Lord Bargany, the Lord of Culzean, Sir
David Cunninghame of Robertland, Alexander Kennedie of Kilhenize, Cathcart of
Carletoun, Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun, the Lord of Penustoun, John Boil of
Kelburn, Andrew Brown of Boghead, Robert Wallace of Underwood, Robert Crawfoord
of Crawfoordstoun, the Provost and Bailzies of Air for the time, the Provost of
Irwing for the time; the Earl of Dumfreis Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Dumbartoun.
The Lord of Luss, the Lord of Ardingaple, the Lord of Kilmahew, the Lord
of Ardoch younger, the Lord of Colgrean, Mr. James Smollet of Stainflet,
Robert Grahame of Callingade, Alexander Mcaulay of Dureling, Glaud Hamilton of
Cochnay, William Bonteir of Mildiving, Walter Mcaulay of Stuck, John
Kirkmichael, Chamberlain to the Earl of Wigtoun, the Magistrates of Dumbartoun
for the time; the Lord of Orbistoun Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Bute.
The Duke of Hamiltoun His Grace, the Bailie in Arran for the time, the Earl of
Eglingtoun, Ninian Bannatyne of Kames, Charles Steuart of Killcatton, John Boil
of Kellburn, Mr. John Steuart of Ascog, Mr. Robert Steuart Advocat, Archibald
Steuart of Kinwhinlick, Ninian Steuart of Largiezian, Robert Steuart of
Macknack, John Steuart of Linchael, Culbert Steuart of Ardinho, Archibald
Glass, Sheriff-deput of Bute, Robert Ballantine of Lewbas, the Magistrates of
Rothesay for the time, Sir James Steuart, Sheriff of Bute, Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Renfrew.
The Earl of Glencairn, the Earl of Dundonald, the Lord Montgomery, the Lord
Cochran, the Lord Ross, the Lord Blantyre, the Lairds of Houstoun elder and
younger, the Lord of Blackhall, the Lord of Orbistoun, the Lord of
Johnstoun, the Lord of Bishoptoun younger, the Lairds of Greenock elder and
younger, the Lord of Hellie, the Lord of Barrochan, Thomas Crawfoord of
Carsburn elder, Thomas Crawfoord of Carsburn younger, the Lord of New-wark,
the Lord of Over-pollock, the Lord of Scotstoun, the Lord of Jordon-hill
younger, James Oswald of Fingaltoun, Colin Campbell of Blythswood, the Lairds
of Bargarran elder and younger, Robert Hall of Fullbar, William Hamilton of
Fergusly, John Hamilton of Bar, Robert Lawder of Auld-house, the Lord of
Cathcart younger, the Lord of Glanderstoun, the Lord of Dargwell younger, the
Provost and Baillies of Renfrew for the time, the Bailies of Paisley for the
time, John Pollock of Falside; the Lord Montgomery, Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Striveling.
The Duke of Hamiltoun, the Earl of Callender, the Lord Elphingstoun, Mr.
William Livingston of Kilsyth, James Seton of Touch, John Murrays of Polmais
elder and younger, Michael Elphingston of Quarrel, James Bruce of Pow-fowlis,
Alexander Bruce of Kinnaird, James Livingston of Westquarter, Archibald
Stirling of Carden, Hugh Patersons elder and younger of Bannockburn, John
Stirling of Craigbonet, James Forsyth of Taylcortoun, Robert Bruce of
Achenbowie, David Moir of Leckie, James Edmonstoun of Broich, William Buchannan
of Drumakeil, George Stirling of Herbert-shire, Mr. Adam Campbel of Gargannock,
Sir Hope of Carse, Alexander Napier of Culcreuch, Sir Charles Areskin of Alva;
the Earl of Mar Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Linlithgow.
William Duke of Hamiltoun; James Earl of Arran; George Lord Livingstoun;
Walter Lord Torphichen; General Dalzel; Walter Dundas of that Ilk, Thomas
Drummond of Riccartoun; James Cornwall of Bonhard elder; Walter Cornwall of
Bonhard younger; James Hamilton of Bancrief; Alexander Hamilton of Grange;
Patrick Murray of Livingston; Alexander Cochran of Babachlaw; William sharp of
Houstoun elder; Thomas Sharp of Houstoun younger; James Dundass of Philipston
elder; James Dundass of Philipston younger; Sir Alexander Livingston of
Craigingal elder; Alexander Livingstoun of Craigingal younger; Sir John
Dalrymple of Newlistoun; Sir William Hope of Grantoun; Mr. William Dundass of
Kincavil; Captain Dalzell of Binns; James Monteith of Old-Cathie; John Hamilton
of Dachmont; Mr. John Fairholm of Craigiehall, Mr. John Hay of Woodcockdale;
George Drummond of Carlourie; Alexander Miln of Carriden; Robert Miln of
Barntoun; John Dundass of Manner; Baillie of Pollkennet; the Earl of
Linlithgow, Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Perth.
James Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, John Marquess of Athol
Lord Privy Seal, Patrick Earl of Strathmore, John Earl of Broad-Albion, David
Viscount of Stormount, Andrew Lord Rollo, George Lord Kinnaird, Patrick Master
of Kinnaird, Leiutenant General Drummond of Cromlix, James Grahame of Orcholl,
John Drummond of Deanstone, John Hadden of Glenagies, Sir John Drummond of
Machinnie, John Drummond of Pitkellonie, Sir Robert Murray of Abercairny, Sir
Patrick Murray of Auchtertyre, Gavin Drummond of Belliclon, Sir George Drummond
of Milnab, Thomas Grahame of Balgown, Thomas Hay of Balhoussie, John Stewart
younger of Gairntully, George Drummond of Blair, David Drummond younger of
Invermay* Thomas Moncrief of that Ilk, Mr. Robert Ross of Invernethy, Mr.
Patrick Ker of Kilmount, Mr. Alexander Carnagie younger of Kinfauns, Sir
Patrick Threepland of Fingask, Patrick Hay of Kirkland, Sir Alexander Lindsay
of Evelick, Thomas Blair of Balthaick, Mr. John Blair of Balmyle, Andrew Blair
of Inchshiral, Sir John Hay of Mury, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Inchlesly, David
Kinloch of Bardoch, James Ramsey of Bamff, James Ogilvie of Clunie, William
Stuart of Balid, Thomas Stuart of Stentone, Patrick Stuart of Bellechen, Sir
James Campbel of Lawers, Sir John Murray of Drumcairn, Sir Colin Cambpel of
Aberuchill, Colin Camphel of Monzie, Thomas Stuart of Ladywell, Menzies younger
of Weem, David Haliburioun of Pitcur, John Gray of Crichie, Haliburtoun of
Fothrens, James Blair of Ardblair, John Mitchel of Byres, James Grahame of
Garvoch, Patrick Smith of Methven, Walter Stuart of Kincarathie, John Murray of
Pitculan, Mr. James Elphingstoun of Comrie, John Buchannan of Arnpryer,
Alexander Stuart of Annat, Mr. David Grahame Tutor of Gorthie, John Murray of
Stravan, William Paton of Pannols, John Williamson of Barnhill, John Murray of
Arthurstoun, Mr. Patrick Morray of Dollary, Charles Stewart of Rotmell,
Alexander Robertson of Struan, Sir William Stirling of Ardoch, Adam Drummond of
Meginch, John Stuart of Fass, Kinloch of Gourdie, Patrick Murray of Keiler,
Donald Robertson of Kilachangie, James Stuart younger of Orart, Henry Murray of
Lochlan; The Marquess of Athol Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Kincardin.
The Earl of Marischal, the Earl of Southesk, the Earl of Midletoun, the
Viscount of Arbuthnet, the Lord Halcartoun, the Lord President of the Session,
Sir Charles Ramsey of Balmain, Sir Alexander Falconer of Gl^nfarquhar, Sir
David Carnagie of Pittarow, the Lord of Laurenstoun, the Lord of Lies, the
Lord of Balbegno, the Lord of Halgreen, the Lord of Elsick* the Lord of
Pitgarvie, George Keith Sheriff Deput* Mr James Falconer of Phesdo, John
Douglas of Tilliwhillie, William Barcla^ of Balmaqueen, William Ramsey of
Woodstoun, John Barclay of Johnstoun; the Earl of Marischal Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Aberdeen.
George Duke of Gordon, John Earl of Errol, George Earl Marischal, William Lord
Keith, Charles Earl of Mar, James Earl of Dumfermling, George Earl of Panmure,
John Earl of Kintore, William Lord Inverury, George Earl of Aberdeen, William
Lord Forbes or the Master his Son, Alexander Lord Salton, or the Master of
Salton, Alexander Lord Pitsligo, or the Master his Son, the Lord Frazer,
Alexander Irving of Drum, Sir Alexander Seton of Pitmedden, Sir George Nicolson
of Kemnay, Sir John Forbes of Craigyvar, Sir James Baird of Auchmedden, Sir
George Gordon of Edinglassie, John Gordon of Rothemay, John Gordon younger of
Fechill, Alexander Gordon Tutor of Pitlurg, John Gordon of Knockespack, Sir
James Gordon of Lessmoir, the Lord of Udney younger, Robert Udney of
Auchterellon, Sir George Skeen of Fintray, Patrick Dun of Taartie, Mr.
Alexander Cuming of B^ness, Mr. Alexander Forbes of Foverane, Samuel Forbes
younger of Foverane, John Ross of Rosehill, Alexander Frazer of Streichen, Sir
Henry Guthrie of Kinnedward, William Mowat of Balquholly, James Keith of
Tilligonie, Sir William Keith of Ludwhairn, John Forbes of Lesly, Sir John
Forbes of Monymusk elder, William Forbes of Monymusk younger, Patrick Lesly of
Buchquhain, Leith of Whitehaugh, Alexander Cuming of Coulter, Elphingstoun of
Glack younger, the Lord of Dyce younger, Mr. James Gray of Balgony, Alexander
Skein of that Ilk, Sir Thomas Burnet of Lies, Sir George Gordon of Geight, Sir
Alexander Burnet of Craigmyle, Robert Gordon elder of Clunie, Robert Gordon
younger thereof, James Urquhart of Knockleith, Menzies of Pitfodels, James
Innes of Drumgask, Adam Gordon of Achainachie, Francis Ross of Achlossin,
Gordon of Kochlarachie, Sir Robert Innes of Kinnermonie, John Gordon of
Braichley, Mr. Thomas Gordon of Buthley, Francis Dugit of Auchinhoove, Forbes
younger of Echt, David Edie of New-wark, Mr. Thomas Gordon of Crimomnagate,
Gordon of Badaiscoth, William Gray of Creichie, Robert Ross younger of
Achlossin, William Thoires younger of Muresk, John Gordon of Nethermoor, Thomas
Forbes of Watertoun, Charles Gordon of Brelack, Adam Gordon of Glenbuckit,
Gordon of Tarpersie, Mr. Alexander Irving of Lernie, John Gordon of Hallhead,
Mr. Robert Irving of Cults, Forbes of Tulloch, Bisset of Lessindrum younger,
James Gordon of Bodome, Frazer of Streichen, Caddel of Asswanly, John Gordon of
Cairnborrow, Francis Gordon younger of Craig, Sir Charles Maitland of
Pittrichie, Thomas Forbes elder of Echt, George Morison of Pitfure, Arthur
Forbes of Brux, George Garioch younger of Kinstaret, James More of Stonywood,
Mr. James Elphingstoun of Logidurno, Patrick L^sly of Kincraigie, Alexander
Ross of Tilliesnaught, William Forbes of Camphel, Mr. James Keith of Anquhorsk,
Andrew Watson Baillie in Peterhead, William Gordon of Newtyle, Alexander
Donaldson of Little Drumwhindle, Mr. Richard Irving of Kirktoun, James Gordon
of Daach, Robert Burnet of Elrick, James Forbes of Savock, the Lord of
Fetterneir, John Logie of Boddom, Leith of Newlands, Lesly of Little Warthell,
the Lord of Craigyvar younger, Robert Simp^ son of Thornstoun, James Chalmers
of Balbirthno, the Lord of Bal^lig younger, George Paton of Grandom, Thomas
Menzies of Kinmundie, Mr. George Richard of Aldnigh, Henry Forbes of Boynday,
John Udney of Cultercullen, Mr. Robert Innes of Blairtoun; The Earl of Errol
Conveener.

For the Shire of Innerness.
The Duke of Gordon, the Earl of Morray, the Lord Down, the Lord Lovat, the
Lord of Mcintosh, the Lord of Mcleod, the Lord of Grant, the Lord of
Glengerrie, Sir Donald Mcdonald, the Lord of Kilravock, the Lord of Clava,
Hugh Frazer of Belladrum, Alexander Frazer of Kinnaries, John Grant of
Corrimoney, Donald Mcintosh of Kellochy, William Frazer of Daltulich, Donald
Mcqueen of Corribroch, James Frazer of Rilik, Alexander Mcintosh of Far, Angus
Mcintosh of Kellochie younger, John Mcintosh of Dalmegotter, Farquhar Mcilvray
of Dunmackglass* Mcdonald of Benbonula, Mcdonald of Castletoun; The Lord Lovat
Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Nairn.
The Lord of Calder, or in his absence his eldest Son, the Lord of Kilravock,
or in his absence his eldest Son, Alexander Rose of Clava, Duncan Forbes of
Cullodin, Alexander Brodie of Leathine James Dunbar of Boath, David Sutherland
of Kinsterie; The Lord of Calder Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Cromarty.
George Viscount of Tarbat, John Master of Tarbat, the Chamberlain of Cromarty
for the time, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh His Majesty's Advocat, his
Chamberlain for the time, Alexander Urquhart of Newhall, and John Urquhart Fiar
thereof his Son, George Dallas of St. Martins, and Mr. James Dallas younger
thereof his Son, William Urquhart of Braelangwell, Alexander Clunes of
Dunskeith, Andrew Frazer of Bannance; The Viscount of Tarbet Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Argyle.
The Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor, John Marquess of Athol, the Earl of
Broad Albion, Campbel of Lochneil, the Lord of Mclean, Lachlan Mclean of
Brolos, Lachlan Mclean of Torlus^, Mclean of Argour, Mclean of Lochbuy,
Mcalaster of Tarbet, Mcdonald of Largie, the Lord of Lamont, the Lord of
Mcnaughtain, the Lord of Calder elder and younger, John Mcnaughtain Sheriff
Deput of Argyle Shire, Stuart of Apin, or his Tutor, Archibald Lamount of
Silvercraig, John Campbel of Carrick, John Campbel of Duneen, John Campbel of
Glendarnel, Archibald Mclachlan of Craiginterrie, Archibald Campbel of Invera,
Donald Campbel of Graignish, Alexander Campbel of Dunstafnish; The Lord of
Brolos Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Fife.
Colin Earl of Belcarras, John Lord Lindores, David Lord New-wark, the Lord
Dunkell, Sir David Balfour of Forret, Sir Thomas Stuart of Balcaskie, Sir
Andrew Ramsay of Abbotshall, Sir Charles Halket of Pitfirrin, Sir William Bruce
of Kinross, Sir Henry Wardlaw of Pittrevie, George Durie of Pitluskar,
Alexander Spittel of Leuchat, Robert Moutray of Roscobie, Sir Alexander Bruce
of Broomhall, Mr. James Robertson of Newbigging, Mr. James Alexander of
Kinglassie, John Skeen of Halyards younger, Mr. Alexander Malcolm of Lochor,
David Beatoun of Balfour, James Beason of Curden, Sir John Malcolm of
Innertick, Robert Bailie of Balmeddieside, George Moncreif of Reidie, James
Prestoun of Dumbrea, Sir John Aitoun of that Ilk, Michael Malcolm of Neth-hill,
James Carmichael of Bamblea, the Master of Burley, James Crawford of Monquhey,
Scot of Pitlochy, John Skeen of Halyards, Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, John
Balfour of Ferm, Sir Philip Anstruther of Ilk, Arthur Forbes of Rires, Lindsey
of Wormounstoun elder, Robert Smith of Giblistoun, Sir Alexander Areskin of
Cambo, David Scot of Scots-Tarbet, John Cuninghame of Barns, Hamilton of
Kilbrakmont, Andrew Bruce of Earlshaugh, Sir William Sharp of Scotscraig,
Robert Trotter of Lawhill, Didinstoun of Samfoord, William Anstruther Fiar of
that Ilk, Mr. James Balfour of Randerstoun, Alexander Monipenny of Pitmills,
Forbes younger of Rires, David Balcanquell of that Ilk, David Balfour of
Grange, Sir Michael Balfour of Denmiln, Stuart of Rosyth, Sir David Arnot of
that Ilk, James Ar^ot of Woodmiln, Mr. Archibald Hope of Rankilor; The Earl of
Belcarras Conveener.

For the Shire of Kinross.
John Lord Burghlie, Sir David Arnot of that Ilk, Robert Douglas of Kirkness,
Sir John Malcolm of Innerteil, John Halyday of Tilliboll, Mr. Alexander
Crawford of Claslochie, James Banken of Colden, George Berill Portioner of
Kinneswood, Patrick Robertson of Smiddiehill, the Baillie of Kinross for the
time, Sir William Bruce of Kinross Sheriff Principal, or his Deputs Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Forfar.
The Earl of Strathmore, and Lord Glames, the Earl of Southesk, and Lord
Carnagie, the Earl of Airly, and Lord Ogilvy, the Earl of Panmure, the Earl of
Northesk, the Earl of Midleton, the Viscount of Arbuthnet, the Lord Lindores,
Sir David Falconer President of the Session, Sir George M^kenzie of Rosehaugh,
His Majesty's Advocat, Sir Patrick Lion of Carss, Mr. James Maule of Balumby,
Mr. Henry Maule of Kelly, Mr. James Carnagie of Phinheaven, David Lindsay of
Edzell, James Carnagy of Balnamoon, David Haliburtoun of Pitcur, Colonel John
Grahame of Claverhouse, James Scot of Logie, David Fotheringhame of Powrie, Sir
John Wood of Bonytoun, William Durhame, sometime of Ardown, now of Grange,
James Crichtoun of Ruthven, Gilbert Auchinleck of that Ilk, John Guthrie of
that Ilk, Alexander Carnagie Sheriff Deput of Forfar, John Ouchterlauny of
Guynd, Mr. John Wishart of Balgavie, one of the Commissars of Edinburgh, Robert
Young of Auldbar, John Ogilvie of Pitmeves, David Grahame of Fintrie, Gray of
Crichie; The Earl of Southesk Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Bamff.
The Duke of Gordon, the Earl of Airly, the Earl of Finlater, the Lord
Oliphant, the Lord Bamff, Sir Patrick Ogilvie of ^oyn, Sir James Baird of
Ach^eddine, Sir George Gordon of Edinglassie, the Lord of Troup, George Keith
of Northfield, Sir Henry Guthrie of Kinnedward, Grant of Denlugus, Walter
Stuart of Bog, James Ogilvie of Poldavie, Thomas Ogilvie in Bogtoun, Alexander
Hay of A^bath, Mr. John and Alexander Abercrombies elder and younger of
Glassach, George Gordon of (...), Patrick Gordon of Claistirum, Alexander
Gordon of Glengerrack, John Ogilvie of Kimpcairn, Ogilvie younger of Kimpcairn,
Innes of Edinkeith, of Kilmach, Anderson younger of Westertoun, John Grant of
Balindalloch, the Lord of Park*Gordon, Provost Stuart, Baillie Fi^e, Baillie
John Gordon, the Lord of Grant, Patrick Grant of Elchies, Alexander Duff of
Kethmore, John Gordon younger of Edinglassie, Alexander Duff of Braco, James
Gordon of Camdell, Patr^ck Stuart of Tanachie, Hay of Raneies, John Gordon of
Baldornie, Francis Gordon of Achintoul, Ogilvie of Cantly, John Gordon of
Auchynachie, John Gordon of Rothemay, John Gordon of Dallouchy; The Duke of
Gordon Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Kircudbright.
The Viscount of Kenmore Sir David Dunbar of Baldoon, Sir Robert Grierson of
Lagg, Sir Robert Lowrie of Maxweltoun, Sir Godfrey (...) of Myrtoun, Sir Robert
Maxwel of Orchartoun, Rodger Gordon of Torquhen, Grierson of Bargatton, Muir of
Carsincarrie, M^guffock of Rusco, Thomas Lidderdale of Isle, Richard Murray of
Brochtoun, Andrew Herron of Kerucht^e, David Dunbar of Machnemore, Maxwel of
Newlaw, Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun, John Mcgie of Balmagie, William Stuart of
Levinstoun, Gordons elder and younger of Shirmeirs; The Lord of Lag Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Sutherland.
John Lord Strathnaver, the Lord Rea, James Lord Duffus, the Lord of
Balnagown, Sir Robert Gordon younger of Gordinstoun, Sir George Monro of
Culrain, Sir John Gordon of Doll, Sir Robert Gordon of Embo, Robert Gordon of
Rogart, Rodorick Mcleod of Cambuscurrie, Adam Gordon of Dalpholly, the Lord of
Bighouse, Aeneas Mcleod of Leadmore, Robert Gordon of Carrel, Robert Gray of
Sk^bo, Patrick Dumbar of Sudderay, Mr. Alexander Gordon of Rovie, John Dumbar
of Torrobel, Hugh Monro of Eriboll, John Monro of Inveran, John Gray of Arboll,
Mr. John Gordon younger of Carrel, Sheriff Deput, M^key of Skeray, William
M^key of Borrey, Hugh Mckey younger thereof; The Lord Strathnaver Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Caithness.
The Earl of Broad-Albion, John Lord Glenurchy, Sir James Sinclair of May, Sir
George Sinclair of Clyth, John Sinclair of Murkle, William Sinclair of
Dumbeath, Sinclair of Brimes, David Murray of Clerden, Mr. James Innes of
Sandside, Mr. Alexander Calder of A^gingail, Robert Campbel of Breanegle^s,
John Sinclair of Freswick, Laurence Calder of Lyneger, George Sutherland of
Fo^s, John Sinclair of Ulbster, Robert Sinclair of Durren, Robert Campbel of
(...), the Sheriff Deput of Caithness for the time, Alexander Smart of Wester,
the Baillies of Thursso for the time, the Earl of Broad-Albion^ Chamberlain in
Caithness for the time, William Dumbar of Hemprigs, John Sinclar of Stircog,
James Sutherland of Ausada^l, Mr. Robert Dumbar of Orkingail, Alexander Sinclar
younger of D^nbaith, Patrick Sinclar of Southd^n, Sinclar as Brabster, Sinclar
of Hemster, James Sinclar of Lybster, James Sinclar of Hoy; The Earl of
Broad-Albion, or the Sheriff Deput of Caithness for the time Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Murray.
The Duke of Gordon, the Earl of Murray, the Earl of Dumfermling, the Lord
Duffus, the Lairds of Innes, the Lord of Coxtoun, the Lord of Cubin elder,
the Lord of Muirtoun, the Lord of Gordinstoun younger, the Lord of Brodie,
Sir Robert Dumbar of Grangehil, the Lord of Grant, the Lord of Easterelchis,
the Lord of Dunfail elder, the Lord of Grange, Charles Mckenzie of Earnside,
Thomas Tulloch of Tanochie, David Steuart of Newton, Alexander Douglas of
Spyny, the Lord of Bellandolloch, John Innes of Quadrain, Walter Innes of
Black-hills, Alexander Innes of Dunkintie, John Cuming of Logie, John Dumbar of
Boges, William Brody of Coutfi^ld, the Lord Down Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Orkney and Zetland.
The Stewart for the time and his Deputs, Archibald Steuart of Burrow, William
Douglas of Egleshay, William Craigy of Cairsay, James Grahame of Grams-hall,
William Ballenden of Stenhouse, Henry Grahame of Breckness, Robert Steuart of
New-wark, George Balfour of Pharay, Steuart of Burgh, James Steuart of
Grahamsay younger, William Mudy of Melsetter, David Craigy of Oversandy, the
Commissar of Orkney for the time, James Baikie of Tankerness, John Buchannan of
Sandyside, George Grahame of Grahametoun, George Trayl of Holland, Andrew Bruce
Tutor of Munis, Laurence Stuart of Bigtoun, Laurence Sinclar of Quandel, George
Seen of Essilmonth, Arthur Sinclar of House, Robert Hunter of Luna, Patrick
Umphra of Sand; the Stewart-Principal, or his Deput, Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Clackmannan.
The Earl of Mar, George Viscount of Tarbat, the Lord of Ava, John Ki^ie of
Gogour, Robert Miln of Tiliallan, George Abercrombie of Bruce of Kenet, The
Lord of Tillicoutry, the Lord of Tillibody, Mr. Francis Mastertoun of
Parkmiln, George Stirling, the Baillie of Alloway for the time, the Lord of
Ava Conveener.

For the Sheriffdom of Ross.
The Earl of Seaforth, the Viscount of Tarbat, the Master of Tarbat Sir George
Monro of Culrain, Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehauch, the Lord of Belnagoun, the
Lord of Foulis younger, Sir Alexander Mckenzie of Cull, Murdoch Mckenzie of
Fai^burn, Mr. Rodorick Mckenzie of Kinchulidrum, Sir Rory M^kenzie of Findon,
Alexander Mckenzie of Kilcovy; Kenneth Mckenzie of Suddy; Sir Donald Bain of
Tulloch, Alexander Mckenzie of Belmaduffie; ^odorik Mcleod of Cambiscutrie;
Alexander Mckenzie of Bellon; John Munro of Fyres, Lachlan Mcintosh of Kinrara;
Alexander Mckenzie of (...)* Mr. John Bain of Delnies; Colin Mckenzie younger
of Kincraigie; Hugh Munro of New^ore; Kenneth Mckenzie of Scatwall; William
Ross of Invercharron; Alexander Mckenzie of Aplecorss, William Ross of Kindies,
Mr. George Paterson of Seafield, George Ross of Moringy, Rory Mckenzie younger
of Redcastle, Donald Mckenzie of Meddat, Alexander Mckenzie of Ardloch, Mr.
James Mcculoch of Baliquith, Alexander Ross of Little tar^el, Matthew Robertson
of Dochcarty, Alexander Sutherland of Inchfuir, Murdoch Mckenzie of Ardross,
Kenneth Mckenzie of Dochmaloag, Robert Barbar of Mulderg, Alexander Ross of
Easterf^rn, ^ugh Monro of Teaninik* David Fer^e of Tarlogie, James Ross of
Mount-eye; the Earl of Seaforth Conveener, or in his absence the Ma^er of
Tarbat.

AND Ordains the first Meeting of the said Commissioners, for the several
Shires, to be at the Head-burghs thereof, upon the day of next, and appoints
the major part of the said Commissioners, named for the respective Shires, to
be a Quorum at their first meeting, who are to appoint the next Diet of
meeting, and the Major part of such as shall meet at the second Diet, or upon
advertisement from the Conveener, at any other Diet, to be a Quorum: With power
to the said Conveeners, for the said Shires respectiv^, to call the
Commissioners foresaids, at such Dyets thereafter as they shall think
necessary, for the effectual execution of this Act; And Remits to His Majesty's
Privy Council, to nominat such other persons to be Commissioners upon the death
of any of the forenamed persons.

And for the Bu^ghs, His Majesty with Advice foresaid, Nominats and Appoints
the Magistrates of the same, for the time being, with power to them to choice
Stent-masters within their respective bounds; which Commissioners of Shires and
Bu^ghs, are hereby Ordained to Accept, and Discharge their Trust, as they shall
be answerable; and that at their Acceptance thereof, to take their Oaths of
Alleadgeance, Supremacy, Declaration and Test, and Oath de sideli
administratione. And His Majesty, with Advice foresaid, Does hereby Empower the
said^ Commissioners to prescrive and set down such Rules and Orders within the
respective Shires and Burghs, as may be most effectual for the speedy and easy
Raising, Levying, and bringing in of the said Supply; and Ordaining, and doing
every other thing that may concern the same: And particularly, With power to
them to choice their own Collectors, for In-gathering of the said Supply, for
whom they are to be answerable, and other Officers (except the Clerks who are
to be named by the Clerk of Register;) And Ordains that no Clerk shall Officiat
in the said Office, either in Shire or Burgh, without a new Deputation from the
said Clerk of Register: And that the said Commissioners shall at the first
meeting, choice their Collectors, for In-gathering of the said Supply. And the
said Commissioners are hereby Ordained to receive the said Collectors and
Clerks accordingly, and to allow them such Fees to be paid by the Shires and
Burghs, as they shall think fit; And which Fees are hereby Declared to be over
and above the foresaid Supply, and no part of the same: And which Collectors
and Clerks are to take the Oaths appointed by Law.

AND the Kings Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His Estates, Ordains all
Execution, real and personal, to pass at the Instance of the Collector General,
and the Collectors of the respective Shires and Burghs, against all persons
deficient in payment of their proportions as formerly. And also, Impowers the
Commissioners by their Officers, to Arrest, Poynd and Distrenzie the Goods; and
Imprison the persons of the Deficients, ay and while they make payment of their
just proportions, and necessary expenses. And for the more ready and effectual
payment, Does also Empower the Commissioners, and Collector-General, to Quarter
upon Deficients, with this express Proviso, That every Horseman that shall be
upon the place, shall have only free single Quarter alloted to him upon the
persons Deficient, or by quartering in Burghs and Villages, as the
Commissioners shall appoint to be satisfied, and paid, by the Deficients, and
not by these on whom they are quartered, except where they themselves are
Deficient, and in that case to have fifteen shilling Scots a day, from the time
of presenting the Order to the Collector upon whom they are to quarter, until
he give them a List of the Deficients, and the sums wherein they are Deficient,
and thereafter to quarter upon the Deficients; and each Dragooner, to have ten
shilling Scots a day, and each Footman to have four shilling Scots, or his
Diet, as the Commissioners shall Order; And the Commanders of the Party of
Horse, Dragooners, or Foot, to have only Double-quarter, or pay of an
Horseman, Dragooner, or Footman, as he serves. And Declares, That in Order to
the Quarters, and matters relating to the* Inbringing of this Supply, any three
of the Commissioners shall be a Quorum, and who are Empowered to proportion
upon, and raise from the Deficients, the Expense and Charge of their
Deficiency, and to see payment made to these on whom the Soldiers are
Quartered, who were not Deficient. And further, His Majesty, for satisfaction
of His good Subjects, is graciously pleased to Declare, That all Officers and
Soldiers, Horse, Dragooners and Foot, shall make due and punctual payment of
their Quarters, local, and transient, as the same shall be appointed by the
foresaids Commissioners, according to the Rates of the Country; and in case
the Soldiers do not pay their Quarters, that the Quarters be stated betwixt
the Quarter Masters, or other Officers, and any two of the Commissioners; And
the Accounts being stated and sitted, that they be paid, or allowed by the
respective Collectors, in the first end of what is due by the Shire, or Burgh,
where the said Quarters are owing: Providing the said Quarters exceed not two
parts of their Pay; And which stated Accounts are to be allowed to the
respective Collectors, by the Collector-general, and to be by him retained off,
the first end of the Troops, or Companies Pay. And in case the Officers remove
before their Accounts can be stated; In that case, the Collectors of the Shires
and Burghs, are to retain, what after trial, the said three Commissioners
shall find resting, till the Accounts be stated in manner foresaid.

And His Majesty, with Advice of His Estates, Does Declare, That no persons
liable in any part of this Supply, shall be holden to produce their Discharges,
or Recepts of the same, after ilk fifth year, Commencing from the Date of this
Act, unless where Diligence has been done by Denunciation, before elapsing of
the said fifth year.

XIII. ACT For Taking the Test.
May 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Ordains, That all Protestant Heritors, Liferenters, and Others having Right to
Liferents, I^re Mariti, Wodsetters, Tacksmen, having Tacks for longer time than
for Eighteen Years: All Masters of Ships, and such other Burgesses, and
Inhabitants of Burgh^, whether of Royalty, Regality, or Barrony, as are not
Heretors, and who shall be Appointed by the Privy Council, shall take the Test
Prescrived by the sixth Act of the Parliament 1681. Before the First Day of
November, for all such as Live be-south the River of Tay; and before the first
day of January next, for all be-north Tay. And for that end, that all Noblemen,
and their Eldest Sons above the Age of Eighteen Years, shall Compear before His
Majesty's Privy Council: All Masters of Ships, and Burgesses aforesaid, shall
Compear before the Provost or Bailliffs of the Burgh to which they belong, and
all others foresaid, before the Sheriff of the Shire where they live, at some
time before the said Days; And there shall Swear and Subscrive the said Test
before the Judge and Clerk of the Court, with Certification, that such as fail
in Swearing and Subscribing the Test as said is, shall be Punished in such
Pecunial Sums as the Secret Council shall Determine; To be Disposed of by His
Majesty, at His Royal Pleasure. It is always Declared, that this Act Extends
not to Women. And all Clerks are hereby Ordained, to send in Lists of such as
have taken the Test, within their Respective Jurisdictions, to the Clerks of
His Majesty's Privy Council, before the First Day of February next to come,
under the pain of losing their Office, and to be Punished otherwise as the
Privy Council shall Determine: But such as have already Sworn and Subscribed,
shall not be Obliged to Renew it on this Occasion. And further, His Majesty
with consent foresaid, Does Ratify and Approve what is already done, in
offering the Test by His Majesty's Privy Council, Justice Court, or any
Commissionate from any of them, or by Sheriffs, and other Magistrates, Declaring
the same to have been good Service to the King and Country.

XIV. ACT Explaining the Ninth Act of the Parliament 1669, Concerning
Prescriptions.
May 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering, That at making of the Ninth Act of the 1.
Session of the 2. Parliament of King Charles the 2. Concerning Prescriptions,
in that part of it relating to Actions proceeding upon Warnings, Spulzies,
Ejections, Arreistments, or for Ministers Stipends, and others foresaid; the
Cases that existed before that Act were not taken into Consideration:
Therefore, His Majesty with Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Ordains, That all such Actions proceeding upon any Diligence mentioned in that
Act, already intended either before the said Act 1669. or since, shall
prescribe within five Years after the Date of this Act, if they be not Wakened
within that time: And all Actions to be raised hereafter upon the foresaids
grounds shall prescribe in five Years, if they be not Wakened within that time.
And His Majesty Wills and Declares, the foresaid 9th Act to stand in full
force as to the rest of the tenor thereof.

XV. ACT Explaining the Tenth Act of the Parliament 1669, Anent Interruptions.
May 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering, that the Clause concerning Citations used for
Interruption, mentioned in the 10. Act of the 1. Session of the 2. Parliament
of King Charles the 2. Has left the Case of such Citations before the said Act
undetermined. His Majesty therefore, with Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, that all Citations used for Interruptions preceding that
Act, shall prescribe within seven Years after the Date of this Act, if they be
not Renewed within that time. And further Statutes and Ordains, that in
Citations for Interruption as to Rights of Lands and Wakenings thereof, Copies
of the Citation shall be affixed on the most patent Door of the Paroch Church,
and that over and beside what is required by the said Act anent these
Executions.

XVI. ACT Anent Justices of Peace.
May 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering the many Advantages which His Leiges might
have had, if the Justices of Peace had exerced their Function, with that
diligence which the Law required, and the many Evils, especially in
Ecclesiastic Disorders and Irregularities, which might have been prevented by
their care. For Remeid whereof in time to come, His Majesty, with the Consent
of His Estates in Parliament, Does hereby Ratify, Approve, and Confirm the 8.
Act of the Parliament 1617, Entitled, Act anent the Justices for keeping of
the Kings Peace and Constables. The 25. Act of the Parliament 1633. And the 38
Act of the Parliament 166^, Entitled, Commissions and Instructions to the
Justices of Peace and Constables, in the whole Heads, Articles and Clauses
contained in them. And further, His Majesty Gives full Power, Authority and
Commission to the said Justices, to put the Laws in Execution against all who
shall be Guilty of Conventicles, Irregular Baptisms and Marriages, withdrawing
from Church Ordinances, and other such Disorders, in so far as they are not
Capital, Conform to the Laws made thereanent; And where the Crime is Capital,
they are to secure the persons, and acquaint the Sheriff, or other Judge
ordinary thereof: And it is Declared, That in their proceedings against Church
Irregularities, Baptisms, Marriages and Conventicles* The Justices may proceed
immediately without waiting any time after the Crimes are committed, and their
Clerk is appointed to send Information of their proceedings once in the
Quarter, to the Clerks of the Council, as they will be answerable. And for
their further Encouragement, His Majesty allows unto the said Justices of
Peace, the Fynes of all, except Heritors, which shall arise from these
Delinquencies judged by them, to be employed for Explicating of their
Jurisdiction as they shall think fit, and for Discovering of what the Fynes of
Heritors shall amount to. The Clerks of these Courts are hereby appointed to
send a subscribed List of them to the Clerks of Exchequer, in the first week of
November yearly, under the pain of Deprivation: And His Majesty with Advice
foresaid, allows the Justices to Nominat their own Clerks at their first
meeting. Attour, His Majesty and Estates foresaid, Give full Power, Authority
and Commission, to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, upon the Deceass
of any of the Justices of Peace, to nominat others in their place, and to ^et
down and Impose Penalties upon such of the Justices as shall not keep and
observe the Dyets prefixed for their several and particular Meetings, according
to former Acts, and an Act made in this Parliament; And with power likewise to
the said Lords of Privy Council to Enlarge and Amplify the Power and Authority
of the said Justices of Peace, if they shall find it necessary and expedient:
And what the Council shall Decree and Determine there-an^nt, Find and Declare,
that the same shall have the Force, Strength and Power of an Act of Parliament.
It is always Declared, That Sheriffs, Stewarts, and Baillies of Bailliaries,
Regalities, and Barronies, are to Remain in the Possession and Exercise of
their former Rights, according to the Laws of the Kingdom: Any thing in this
Act notwithstanding.

XVII. ACT For Taking the Oath of Allegiance.
May 22. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Does Ratify,
Confirm, and Approve what has been done by His Majesty's Privy Council,
Justice Court, and these Commissionat by them, In Banishing, Imprisoning, or
Fyning such as Refused to Take and Swear the Oath of Allegiance, And to Assert
the Royal Prerogatives mentioned in the 11. Act, Parliament 1. of King Charles
the Second. And further Ordains all the Subjects of this Kingdom to Take and
Swear the Oath of Allegiance, and to Assert the said Prerogatives, whenever
they shall be Required, either by the Privy Council, Justice Court, or any
Commissionat by them, and that under the pain of Banishment, Imprisonment, or
such other Pains and Punishments as shall be Determined by the Privy Council,
Justice Court, or Commissioners foresaid, not reaching to Life or Limb.

XVIII. ACT Concerning Vacant Stipends.
May 22. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Declares, That the Vacant Stipends of all Churches in time coming, shall be
Employed on pious Uses within the respective Paroches by the Patron, and more
particularly for the Building and Repairing of Bridges, Repairing of Churches,
or Entertainment of the Poor, as the Patron shall determine Yearly; and if he
fail therein, he shall lose his right of Presentation for the next Vice. It is
always Provided, that the Vacant Stipends in the Diocesses of St. Andrews,
Edinburgh, Dunkel, Dumblain, and Breichen, for Five Years, shall be Employed
for Repairing of the Gair-bridge, Crawmond-bridge, and New-Liston-bridge, and
for the use of the University of St. Andrews; The Vacant Stipends of the
Diocesses of Glasgow, and Galloway, for the same number of Years, to the use of
the College of Glasgow; And these Vacant Stipends within the Diocese of
Aberdene, and Diocesses be-north the same, for the use of the Old and New
Colleges of Aberdene, and Repairing of the Bridges within these Diocesses;
Excepting the Vacancies of the Diocese of Orknay (which are hereby Ordained to
be Applied for Reparation of the Cathedral Church of Kirkwall, during the the
said Five Years;) And that at the Determination and Appointment of such Persons
as shall be Nominat by the Privy Council, for Overseeing thereof: Which Five
Years aforesaid, shall Commence from this present Year 1685, and so Continue
consequutively, during the said Space. And His Majesty, With Consent foresaid,
Declares, that after Expiring of these Five Years, the Vacant Stipends do
belong to the Patrons, to be Employed by them for pious Uses within the
respective Paroches aforesaid; But prejudice always of the Maintenance of the
Ministers Manse, during the time of the Vacancy, out of the first and readiest
of the Vacant Stipends, Conform to former Acts of Parliament; and that not only
during the said Five Years, but in all time coming. It is always hereby
Declared, That this Act is not to be extended to the Vacancies of these
Churches whereof the Kings Majesty is Patron, nor to Mensal and Patrimonial
Churches belonging to Bishops.

XIX. ACT Ratifying the Privileges of the Senators of the College of Justice.
May 22. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Does
Ratify, Approve and Confirm, all Privileges, Liberties, Freedoms and
Immunities, Given and Granted by His Majesty's Royal Predecessors, to, and in
Favors of, the Ordinary Senators of the College of Justice, and whereof they
are in Possession; and all Acts of Parliament Made and Conceived in their
Favors, and specially but prejudice of the Generality foresaid, does Ratify
the 8. Act of the 2. Session of the 2. Parliament of King Charles the second,
Concerning the Immunity of the Ordinary Lords of Session, from all Burdens
Imposed, or to be Imposed by the Parliament: And Declares, that this
Ratification shall be as sufficient and effectual, as if all these Privileges
and Immunities, and Acts of Parliament concerning the same, were specially
expressed, and at length insert herein.

XX. ACT For Preserving Game.
May 27. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, And Estates of Parliament, now presently Conveened, Taking
to their Consideration, the great Decay of Game in this His Ancient Kingdom,
especially in the Low Countries, notwithstanding of all the Laws and Acts of
Parliament, and Acts of Privy Council made thereanent by His Royal
Predecessors, which does principally proceed through the not vigorous Execution
of the said Laws and Acts, and not Exacting of the Fines and Penalties
therein-contained. THEREFORE, Our Sovereign Lord, With Advice and Consent of
the Estates of Parliament now presently Conveened, Does Revive, Renew, Ratify,
and Approve all the former Laws and Acts of Parliament made for preserving of
the Game, and the Act of His Majesty's Royal Brother (of blessed Memory) King
Charles the Second, with the Advice of His Privy Council, of the date the 9.
day of June, 1682 years, with the whole Laws and Acts of Parliament
therein-narrated, of which Act the Tenor follows, A Proclamation, Reviving the
Laws anent Hunting, Hawking, Fishing: and appointing Masters of the Game*
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms,
Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute,
Greeting; We taking to Our Consideration the great prejudice the Kingdom does
sustain in the Decay of Deer, Roes, and Wild-fowl, and that there is not only
danger of an utter decay of so useful Creatures, but the Manly exercises of
Hunting and Hawking, is like to be altogether neglected; And albeit Our Royal
Progenitors have made many good Laws to prevent and repair this great evil and
mischief, and against the destroying of Smolts and Trouts with Creels, and
other Engines, anent Cruives and Zairs, steeping of Lint in Rivers, Lochs and
Burns, where Fishes are; which good Laws, although they be yet in force
unrepealled, yet by the distraction of the late Times, they have been less
regarded these many Years by gone, to the enorm lesion of Our People, and
contempt of Our Authority: Have therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council,
thought fit to Revive all the Laws that stand yet unrepealled or innovate, for
preserving of Do, Roe, Hares, and Wild-Fowl, and especially the 31 Act of the
23 Parliament of K. James the sixth, whereby all Persons who are not Heretors,
are prohibited to Hunt or Hawk, and that neither Heretor or other shoot Deer or
Roe in time of Snow: As also, the 11 Act of the 4 Parliament of K. James the
fifth, and 210 Act of the 14 Parliament of K. James the sixth, by which,
Letters are ordained to be direct, charging all Keepers of His Majesty's
Forests, to permit no Pasturage within the Marches of the Forests, but that
they seize and escheat them, under the pain of loss of their Office; and that
Forresters of Forests belonging to private Men, shall apprehend such as travel
with Guns or Dogs in Forests, and carry them to the nearest Sheriff, Stewarts
of Stewartries, Baillies of Bailliaries and Regalities, or Justices of Peace,
to be secured, to answer as accords of the Law; and that all such of the
Leidges who shall be required to concur to apprehend such Persons, give ready
Obedience, as is ordained by the Forest Laws, cap. 15. and cap. 22. and these
who conceal them, be fined as Art and Part of the said fault. And further, We
do hereby forbid all shooting of Hares, or Herron at any time, under the pains
contained in the Acts of Parliament made thereanent. Item, That all Persons
forbear to slay any Muir-fowl, Heath-fowl, Partridge, Quail, Duck, or Mallard,
Tale or Atale, or Tormichan, from and after the first day of Lent, to the first
of July yearly, according to the 108. Act, Parliament 7. K. James 1. excepting
Waterfowl with Hawks in Dredging-time. Item, The 23 Act, Parl. 16. K. James 6.
Forbidding the killing of Muir-fowl-pouts before the first of July, Heath-pouts
before the first of August, or Partridge or Quail before the first of September
yearly. Item, We Revive the 48 Act, Parl. 4. K. James 4. Forbidding Muirburn
after the last of March, and the Masters to be liable for all upon their Land.
And further, We considering that Setting-Dogs, and other Engines for killing of
Fowl, is a great cause of the scarcity of Game; We do hereby prohibit and
discharge all Persons, to have or use Setting-Dogs, unless he be an Heretor of
one Thousand Pound of valued Rent, and have express License of the Masters of
Our Game within their several Bounds, under the pain of Five Hundred Merks.
toties quoties, in case of sailzie. And We do hereby discharge all common
Fowlers, and Shooters of Fowl, or any persons, except they be
Domestick-Servants to Noblemen or Gentlemen, who are Heretors of One Thousand
pounds Scots of valued Rent, to have or make use of Setting-Dogs, or
Fowling-pieces, under the pain of escheat of such Dogs or Guns, and
imprisonment of their persons for the space of six Weeks, toties quoties. Item,
We Revive the 210 Act, Parl. 14. K. James 6. Whereby Shooting, Hunting, or
Hawking within six Miles of Our Palace are Prohibited, under the pains therein
contained, without express License of the Masters of the Game: And seeing the
Fowls, Hares and Roes are already so far destroyed, that there is ground to
fear a total decay thereof, We therefore with Advice foresaid, Do Revive the 23
Act, Parl. 16. K. James 6. Forbidding all selling or buying of Deer, Roe,
Hares, Muir-fowl, Tormichan, Heath-fowls, Partridge, or Quail, for the space of
seven Years next ensuing the 20 day of June instant Year 1682, under the pains
contained in the said Act; And for the better discovery of the Contraveeners,
We do hereby give Warrant to the Masters of Our Game, their Deputs, or others
empowered by either of them in their respective Bounds, to make search for any
of the said Deer, Roe, Hates, Muir-fowl, Tormichan, Heath-Fowl, Partridge, or
Quail so killed in any suspect place, within or without Burgh, as well the
Buyers, as Sellers in Market, or outwith the samine, or Fowlers, and to seize,
search, secure and confiscate the same for their own use. Item, We do hereby
Revive the 51 Act, Parl. 6. Q. Mary, Forbidding Hunting on other Men's Ground
without leave of the Owner. And whereas by the 11 Act, Parl. 1. K. James 1.
Cruives and Zairs set on fresh Water without express Infeftments of
Salmond-fishing, are ordained to be destroyed and put away for ever, and that
where Cruives are allowed by Infeftments, that ilk Heck be three Inch wide,
which is ratified by the 73 Act, Parl. 10. K. James 3. And by the 87 Act, Parl.
14. K. James 2. It is statute that no Man set Vessels, Creels, Weirs, Nets, or
any other Engine to hinder Smolts from going to the Sea, and that Coups,
Masses, Nets. Prins set on Waters that has course to the Sea be destroyed, and
who holds them up, to be liable as destroyers of red Fishes. Item, That all
Millers that slays Smolts or Trouts with Creels, or any other Engine; or any
who Dams or Laves, shall be punishable as Slayers of Red-Fish, conform to the
73 Act, Parl. 5. K. James 3. and where the Transgressors has no Means, they
are appointed to be put in Prison, Irons, or Stocks, for the space of one
Month upon their own Expenses; and if they have it not of their own, to be fed
on Bread and Water, conform to the 89 Act, Parl. 6. K. James 6. And by the 13
Act, Parl. 18. K. James 6. The steeping of Lint in Rivers, Lochs, or Burns
where Fishes are, is discharged, and that under the pain of forty Shilling
Scots, toties quoties, and confiscation of the Lint: Which good and ancient
Laws yet standing unrepealled or innovate, We have thought fit hereby to Revive
and Ordain to be put in Execution; Ordaining hereby the Masters of Our Game to
require all Heretors and others, to throw down all Cruives and Zaires set on
fresh Waters, without express Infestment of Salmond-fishing, betwixt and the
first day of July next, under the pain of an hundred pounds Scots, to be
uplifted off these who refuse, and the Sheriffs and their Deputs to give speedy
Justice therefore, when desired by the Masters of the Game, or their Deputs.
And We appoint the several Sheriffs and their Deputs, Stewarts of Stewartries,
Bailiffs of Regalities and their Deputs, and Magistrates of the next adjacent
Burrows to concur with the Masters of Game, for throwing down of the said
Cruives, Creels, Nets, and Engines, when they shall be required; and if the
said Judges be found negligent, that the foresaid Penalty be uplifted off
themselves, according to the 68 Act, Parl. 9. of Q. Mary. And to the effect the
said Laws may receive the more vigorous Execution, We do hereby Commissionate
the Persons following to be Masters of Game, within the respective Bounds
after-specified, viz. Our Chancellor for the time being, for the three
Lothians, and Town of Edinburgh, and Shire of Bathgate; The Earl of Mar, for
Stirling Shire; Sir George Mackenzie of Tarbet, Lord Clerk Register, for
Clakmannan Shire; The Earl of Belcarras, for Fife; and Sir William Bruce of
Balcaskie, for Kinross; the Marquess of Athol, Lord Privy Seal, for Perth
Shire; the Earl of Perth, for the Stewartries of Strathern, Monteith, and
Balquhidder; the Earl of Southesk, for Forfar Shire; the Earl of Marischal, for
the Shire of Kincardin, and for all below Mormouth Hill, and the Water of Eugie
in Bamff Shir^; and the Earl of Airly, for all the rest of Bamff Shire; the
Earl of Dumfermling, for all betwixt Crathus, Bannachie, and the Sea in
Aberdeen Shire; the Earl of Kintore, in all above that in the said Shire; the
Earl of Murray, for all from Spey to Ness, high and low, comprehending Elgin,
Nairn, and Innerness Shire, to Lochness; The Earl of Seaforth, from Ness to
Conan, high an^ low, comprehending Cromarty Shire; Sir George Mackenzie of
Tarbet, Lord Clerk Register, from Conan to Portnaculter, and Okel-Water, and on
the West from Lochew to Cuiliscuack; the Lord Duffus, for Sutherland, excepting
Assint, which is in the last Division; the Earl of Caithness, for Caithness;
the Stewart of Orkney, for Orkney; for Argile and Bute, the Sheriff for the
time being; the Earl of Home, for the Shire of Berwick; the Sheriff o^
Roxburgh, for the Shire of Teviotdale; the Lord Duke of Hamilton, for Lanerk
Shire; the Earl of Kilmarnock, for the Shire of Air; the Lord of Yester, for
Peebles Shire; the Earl of Glencairn, for the Shire of Renfrew; the Marquess of
Montross, for the Shire of Dumbartoun; the Lord of Burghtoun, for the Shire of
Wigtoun; the Earl of Galloway, for the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright; and the
Marquess of Queensberry, Lord High Thesaurer, for the Shire of Dumfreis. Hereby
Impowering and Warranting them to put the standing Laws in Execution, in so far
as concerns the preserving of Forests, Wild-fowl, and Fishing, especially the
Laws and Ordinances above-specified. And We Require all Our Judges ordinar, in
their respective Bounds and Jurisdictions, to give speedy Justice thereupon, in
favors of the said Masters of Our Game, or their Deputs, when they delate or
pursue Delinquents before them, as they will be answerable upon their Duties
and Offices. And all Sheriffs, Mayors, other Officers, and Fiscals of their
respective Courts, are Ordained to cite Delinquents before these Courts, as
they shall be informed thereof, and Witnesses to prove the samine, and to
prosecute them until final Sentence be pronounced against them, and thereafter
see these Sentences put to due and lawful Execution, the Expenses whereof is to
be paid out of the first and readiest of the Fines of the Delinquents so
uplifted, at the sight of the respective Masters of Game, under the pain of
Deprivation, and further Censure in case of neglect, as Our Council shall find
cause. And for further enabling Our said Masters of Game, We Empower them to
appoint Deputs, one or more, for whom they are to be answerable, as well for
their Diligence as Fidelity. And that their said Deputs themselves, no^ none
by their connivance, take upon them to contraveen this Proclamation, and
destroy the Game; And to encourage them in so good Service to Us, and Our
People, We hereby allow Our parts of all Fines and Unlaws due to Us by Our
Laws, for the Crimes relating to Forests, Game, and Fishing, in favors of the
said Masters of Our Game, within their respective Bounds, and during the time
We shall think fit to employ them in the said Service; Withal certifying them,
that if they be remiss or negligent in their Duty, they are to be discharged of
their Offices, and fined by Our Privy Council, as they shall find cause. And We
declare Our said Commission is to continue and endure for the space of seven
years after the date hereof, and until We, or Our Privy Council think fit to
recall the same. And that We have recalled Our former Proclamation anent Game
of the Fourth of March, 1680. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly,
and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the
several Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the Premises, that none pretend Ignorance.
Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the 9. day of June, 1682 years. And of Our
Reign the thirtieth and fourth Year. And Does strictly Require and Command all
Our Masters of Game, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates, and their Deputs, and all
Heretors, and Liferenters, and proper Wodsetters, within their respective
Bounds, to be diligent and vigilant in Time coming, in putting the said Acts
and Laws therein contained to full and due Execution. And Does hereby Require
all Our Judges, before whom Our Masters of Game, or others, shall Pursue the
Contraveeners, to give them full and speedy Justice, as they shall be
answerable. And for the Preservation and Increase of Partridge, Muir-fowl,
Heath-fowl, and Quails (which are so much decayed of late.) Our Sovereign Lord,
with Consent foresaid, Does Statute and Ordain, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever shall make use of Setting-Dogs with Nets, for taking or killing of
Partridges, Muir-fowls, Heath-fowls, or Quails, within any part of this Our
Ancient Kingdom, for the space of Seven Years, immediately after the Publication
hereof, under the Penalty of Forty Merks Scots for each Fowl that shall be so
killed, or taken, to be paid by the Killers or Takers to Our Masters of Game,
and their Deputs, or others who pursues the same: And whoever shall Shoot
Hares, shall pay Forty Merks Scots for each Hare that he shall shoot.

XXI. ACT Against Stealing of Dogs and Hawks.
May 27. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of this present Parliament, Taking to their
Consideration, the great Prejudice and Inconveniences that has, and does daily
fall out through the Stealing and Keeping of Hawks and Dogs that has strayed
and got away from their rightful Owners, by Persons that has no right or
interest to do the same, Does Statute and Ordain, That whosever hereafter shall
Steal a Hawk out of the Nest, or Air, or take a Collar from a Dogs Neck, or
Vervel from a Hawk with the Masters Name or Style thereon, shall be Pined in
the Sum of Five Hundred Merks Scots; And whosoever shall give away, or sell any
Hawk, or Dog, which is not his own, shall be Fined in the Sum of One Hundred
Pound Scots; As also, that whosoever does get a Dog straying, having the Collar
abovenamed, or Hawk with Bells or Vervels that has got away from her or his
Master, and does take the said Hawk or Dog into his Possession, shall be
obliged within Forty Eight Hours after the said Dog or Hawk shall be so taken
by him, to send and Book the same in the Sheriff-Clerk his Books, (where the
Waith-Goods are booked,) the Dog by the Kind, Collar, and Marks, and the Hawk
by the Kind, and Vervels, if it have any, for which there shall be paid to the
Sheriff-Clerk Six Shillings Eight Pennies Scots, which the Owner of the Hawk or
Dog shall be obliged to repay, together with Two Shillings Scots for each Mile
that the Bearer shall be sent to the Sheriff-Clerk, or Booking of the said Dog
or Hawk; And in case the Dog or Hawk shall not be Claimed by Letter, or
otherways, by the just Owner, within Six Months after it shall be so booked in
the Sheriff-Clerk of the Shire, where the Dog or Hawk shall be taken, his
Books; Then and in that case, the Dog or Hawk shall belong and appertain in
Property to the Possessor, and the Owners shall not be heard thereafter to
Claim the same; And if the Taker and Keeper of any Hawk or Dog, shall failzie
to cause Book the same in manner above-specified, he shall pay the Sum of
Forty Pounds Scots of Penalty to the Owners, if they shall pursue the same
before any Judge competent.

XXII. ACT Concerning Tailzies.
May 27. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Declares, That it shall be lawful to His Majesty's Subjects to
Tailzie their Lands and Estates, and to Substitute Heirs in their Tailzies,
with such Provisions and Conditions as they shall think fit, and to Affect the
said Tailzies with Irritant and Resolutive Clauses, whereby it shall not be
lawful to the Heirs of Tailzie, to Sell, Annailzie, or Dispone the said Lands,
or any part thereof, or Contract Debt, or do any other Deed whereby the samine
may be Apprised, Adjudged, or Evicted from the others Substitute in the
Tailzie, or the Succession frustrate or interrupted, Declaring all such Deeds
to be in themselves null and void; and that the next Heir of Tailzie may
immediately upon Contravention, Pursue Declarators thereof, and Serve himself
Heir to him who died last Infeft in the Fee, and did not Contraveen, without
necessity any ways to represent the Contraveener; It is always Declared, that
such Tailzies shall only be allowed in which the foresaid Irritant and
Resolutive Clausesare insert in the Procuratories of Resignation, Charters,
Precepts, and Instruments of Seasing: And the original Tailzie once produced
before the Lords of Session Judicially, who are hereby Ordained to Interpose
their Authority thereto, And that a Record be made in a particular
Register-Book, to be kept for that effect, wherein shall be Recorded the Names
of the Maker of the Tailzie, and of the Heirs of Tailzie, and the general
Designations of the Lordships and Barronies, and the Provisions and Conditions
contained in the Tailzie, with the foresaid Irritant and Resolutive Clauses
subjoyned thereto, to Remain in the said Register ad Perpetuam rei Memoriam,
And for which Record, there shall be paid to the Clerk of Register and his
Deputs, the same Dews as is paid for the Registration of Seasings, and which
Provisions and Irritant Clauses shall be Repeated in all the subsequent
Conveyances of the said Tailzied Estate to any of the Heirs of Tailzie; And
being so Insert, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent foresaid, Declares the
samine to be real and effectual, not only against the Contraveeners and their
Heirs, but also against their Creditors, Comprysers, Adjudgers, and other
Singular Successors whatsoever, whether by Legal or Conventional Titles. It is
always hereby Declared, that if the said Provisions and Irritant Clauses shall
not be Repeated in the Rights and Conveyances, whereby any of the Heirs of
Tailzie shall brook or enjoy the Tailzied Estate, the said Ommission shall
Import a Contravention of the Irritant and Resolutive Clauses against the
Person and his Heirs who shall omit to insert the same, whereby the said Estate
shall ipso facto fall, accresce, and be devolved to the next Heir of Tailzie,
but shall not militat against Creditors, and other Singular Successors who
shall happen to have Contracted bona fide with the Person who stood Infeft in
the said Estate, without the said Irritant and Resolutive Clauses in the body
of his Right. And it is further Declared, That nothing in this Act shall
Prejudge His Majesty, as to Confiscations or other Fines, as the Punishment of
Crimes, or His Majesty or any other lawful Superior of the Casualities of
Superiority which may arise to them out of the Tailzied Estate, but which Fines
and Casualities shall Import no Contravention of the Irritant Clause.

XXIII. ACT Ratifying the opinion of the Lords of Session, anent these who
refuse to Depone anent the late Treasonable Proclamation, 1684.
June 2. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Ratify, Approve and Confirm an Opinion given by the Lords of Council and
Session, upon the day of November 1684. Whereby they find, that if any of His
Majesty's Subjects, being questioned by His Majesty's Judges, or Commissioners,
if they own a late Traitorous Proclamation, in so far as it Declares a War
against His Sacred Majesty, and asserts, That it is lawful to Kill all such as
Serve His Majesty, or who shall not dissown the same; are thereby guilty of
High Treason, and are Art and Part of the said Treasonable Declaration: And
also Ratifies, Approves and Confirms all Processes of Treason, Led, or to be
Led thereupon in time coming.

XXIV. ACT Ordaining that Tennents be obliged by their Tacks to live Regularly*
June 2. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates Conveened in
Parliament, Do Statute and Ordain, That all Masters, whether Heretors,
Liferenters, proper Wodsetters, Tutors, Tacks-men, Donators of Wards, or
Liferents, shall in all time-coming, insert in all Tacks to be set by them to
their Tennents, as well in Burgh as Landward, an express Clause, whereby the
Tennent shall oblige himself, That he, his Family, Cottars and Servants, shall
live Peaceably and Regularly, free of all Fanatical Disorders, under the pain
of the Tennent, Cottar, or Servant Contraveening, their losing the half of
their Movables respective, each for their own fault; And where there is no
written Tacks, that all the Tennents shall enact themselves in the Masters
Court Book, or in the Town Court Books within Burgh, or give Bond, to that
effect, and in the Tenor foresaid. Which Enrolment of Court is to be subscribed
by the Tennent, or if he cannot write, by the Clerk of the Court in his name;
and if the Master, or any of the persons foresaid shall fail herein, they shall
pay an years Rent of the Lands, set otherwise; a third part whereof to the
Discoverer, if he prove the same, and two parts to the Kings Majesty: And all
Masters and others foresaids, who have Lands already set in Tack, without the
said Clauses, are hereby Ordained to renew the same, and insert the said
Clauses in them, betwixt and Whitsonday one thousand six hundred eighty and
six, or to take an obligement apart from the Tennent, bearing these Clauses,
otherwise to remove summarly; such Tennents as refuse to accept them on the
said conditions, notwithstanding of any former Tacks, which in this case are
hereby Declared void and null. And in case the Tennents will not immediately
Remove, that the Master may commit them to Prison. And it is hereby Statute and
Ordained, That if any Tennent shall refuse to renew his Tack, enact himself, or
give Bond in the Terms foresaid, he shall be liable to pay to his Master an
years Rent of the Lands set to him. And this but prejudice or derogation to all
former Acts of Parliament, whereby Masters are obliged for their Tennents, in
the manner therein-specified.

XXV. ACT Ratifying two Acts of Parliament and a Proclamation of Council, anent
apprehending of Rebels.
June 2. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Ratifies and Approves the 124 Act Par. 12 of King James the sixth, Entitled,
Act Anent the Duty of Sheriffs and Judges ordinary, their Deputs and Clerks: As
also, the 144 Act of that same Parliament, Entitled, Act for punishing the
Resetters of Traitors and Rebels, in the whole Heads, Clauses and Contents of
them; Together with a Proclamation by His Majesty's Privy Council, Dated the
eight of July 1682. Entitled, Anent the Discovery of persons in Arms, and
Apprehending of Rebels, in the whole Contents thereof: of which Proclamation
the Tenor follows. A Proclamation, anent the discovery of persons in Arms, and
apprehending Rebels and Fugitives. Charles, by the grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lion King at
Arms, and his brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council, Pursevants, and
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute Greeting: Albeit by the blessing of Almighty God, upon Our
Royal Endeavors, the many Attempts of His and our Enemies (made most impiously
under pretense of Religion and Zeal, against the Laws of God, of Nature, of
Nations, and of this Our Kingdom, designing the overthrow of Religion,
Government, Liberty and Property) have been frequently Disappointed and
Defeated, and their malice turned upon their own heads, and that the many Acts,
both of Mercy and Justice, exerc'd by Us, conform to the Laws of God and the
Kingdom; and the great Prudence, Vigilance, Moderation and Justice, of Our
dearest and only Brother, during his abode in, and Government under Us, of this
Our ancient Kingdom, have had such happy success, as to bring Our good Subjects
to further abhorrence of Fanatics and their Impieties, and most of these who
were misled by the lying Spirit of some of their pretended Ministers, are
shrunk from these ways, whereof they are justly ashamed, so that Our people
are brought nearer to that Dutiful and Peaceable Deportment which becomes
Christians and Subjects: Yet some are so indefatigable in malice, as to
continue and stir up others to Disturb that Peace and Tranquillity, which Our
people may enjoy under Our Reign: In so much as of late, some Traitors,
Runnagates, and Fugitives, have Convocat toward the number of eighty, with
forbidden Weapons, and in unlawful manner, near to Tala-lin, in the Shire of
Peebles; And the people in that Country, have been so Defective in the Duties
of Loyal Subjects, or good Contrymen, as to neglect giving timeous notice of
such Meetings or Actings, either to Our Council, the Sheriff of the Shire, or
the Commanders of Our Forces, who were nearest to them; and this neglect of
theirs being not only a breach of Duty in them, but of very bad example, and
dangerous consequence, if practiced by others on such Emergments; We therefore
by Our Royal Authority* and also in conformity to the whole course of Our Laws*
particularly to the 144 Act of the 12 Parliament King James the 6. And 7 Act,
Parliament 1 King James 1. Do hereby strictly Require and Command, all the
Subjects and Inhabitants within this Our Kingdom, whether in Burgh or Land,
upon Knowledge or Information, that any number of men do Convocat unlawfully in
Arms, or appear in company in any place, or where any one or two of such, as
are Declared Traitors or Fugitives from Our Laws, on Treasonable accounts,
shall repair, that they shall with all Diligence give Intimation thereof to Our
Chancellor, and such others of Our Secret Council, as shall be at Edinburgh:
As also, without del^y, that they give Information to any Commander of Our
Forces, who shall be nearest to the place where the said unlawful Convocation,
or such Traitors and Fugitives are, and to the Sheriff of the Shire, Stewart of
the Stewartry, Bailie of the Regality, or Magistrates of Burrows, where the
said Meeting, or persons appear, or are informed to be, and that within the
space of one hour at most, for every three miles distance they are at the time
from Edinburgh, or from the nearest Commander of the Forces, Sheriffs, and
other Magistrates foresaid. And farther, We do hereby Require and Command Our
said Sheriffs, Bailies, and Magistrates, upon any such Information given to
them, that they call together competent numbers of Our good Subjects, and with
these, do exact Diligence, at the utmost of their power, to Search, seek, and
Apprehend these who are so met, and to present them to Justice, and to follow
them until they be apprehended, or expelled out of their Jurisdiction, and on
their flight, they are immediately to acquaint the Magistrates of the next
Shire, whither they are fled; who are hereby required to do the like Diligence;
and so from Shire to Shire, until they be apprehended, or expelled forth of
this Realm: And in case any hurt or skaith fall out in the Pursuit, or in
apprehending of these so unlawfully convocat, the Actors thereof are to be
free, and unpunished in any manner of way; With Certification, that these
whoever fails in their said respective Duties, whether it be the Magistrates, in
not pursuance, or Our other Subjects, in not giving timeous Information within
the space foresaid, or in not rising with, and assisting the Magistrates in
their forementioned Duties, they shall be held and repute as Disaffected to Our
Government and Service, and as Art and Part, and connivers with them in their
said unlawful Designs and Convocations, and undergo the punishment due to these
who were of the said unlawful Convocation, by the Laws of this Our Kingdom. And
We hereby of new, Intimat to all Our Subjects, that whoever shall Intercommune
with, Reset, supply, shelter, or give any comfort to any declared Traitors or
Fugitives; or who shall conceal, reset, or shelter any who do Convocat in
manner foresaid; that such Resetters or Assisters, shall be proceeded against,
as if they were guilty of the Crimes whereof these Traitors and Fugitives are
guilty, according to the just rigor of Our Laws. Our Will is herefore, and We
Charge you strictly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye
pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the whole Market Crosses of the Head
Burghs, and whole Paroch Kirks of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and
there, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of Our
Royal Will and Pleasure in the Premises, that none may pretend ignorance, but
give cheerful and punctual obedience thereto; The which to do, We commit to you
conjunctly and severally, Our full power, by these Our Letters, Delivering them
by you duly execute, and indorsed again to the bearer. Given under Our Signet
at Edinburgh, the eighth day of July, One thousand six hundred eighty two
years, and of Our Reign, the thirtieth and fourth year. And Declares the same
shall have the effect of an Act of Parliament. And ordains the said Acts and
Proclamation to be put vigorously in execution.

XXVI. ACT Concerning Adjudications for Fines.
June 2. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That all Adjudications and Apprysings, Led, or to be Led
for Fines Imposed, or to be Imposed by His Majesty's Privy Council,
Commissioners of Justiciary, or any other His Majesty's Judges, for the Crimes
of Reset, Intercommuning, Concealing of Treason, Conventicles,
Irregular-Baptisms, Marriages, or other Church Disorders, or Irregularities,
where the Adjudication or Comprysing does not exceed, or shall be restricted to
Lands, not exceeding the value of the Fines Imposed, the Legal shall expire
within year and day after Deducing of the Adjudication or Comprysing. And it is
hereby Declared, that in case of Competition and Concourse of several
Diligences, within year and day, betwixt the King or His Donator, and a
Creditor, which by the Law comes in pari passu: The King or His Donator shall
be preferred, and have His Election of His proportion of the Lands, of which
the Legal shall expire within year and day, in manner foresaid; That proportion
not exceeding the sum contained in the Adjudication. And it is hereby Declared,
That this Act is only to be extended to Adjudications for Fines already
Imposed, or to be Imposed betwixt and the next Session of Parliament.

XXVII. ACT For Securing Sea-Passengers.
June 2. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statutes and Ordains, That all Masters of Ships who bring Home any Passenger
who is not a Seaman and of his Ship-Company, shall at his Arrival, and before
he suffer the said Passengers to depart, bring them before the nearest
Magistrate, that the said Passengers may give account of themselves, so as to
free them of all suspicion to the said Judge, who is to secure them until they
give such an account: And also, Forbids an Prohibites any Master of any Ship,
to export any Passenger who is not a Seaman, and of their Ship-Company, until
he bring the said Passenger before the next Magistrate, to whom they shall give
account of themselves in manner foresaid, and the Master of the Ship shall have
a Testificate of his so doing, under the said Magistrates Hand and Seal before
whom he compears, (for which he shall pay only half a Merk,) under the pain of
such Fines, and Personal Punishment as His Majesty's Privy Council shall think
fit to inflict on the Master of any Ship, who contraveens this Law. And this to
continue during His Majesty's Pleasure.

XXVIII. ACT and COMMISSION For Plantation of Kirks, and Valuation of Teinds.
June 2. 1685.
FORASMUCH, As His Majesty's Father of ever blessed Memory, out of His Royal
Care and Zeal for the Reformed Religion within this Kingdom, and the
Maintenance and Provision of the Ministry and Churches thereof, and the Peace
of the Kingdom, and for preventing and settling all Differences that did or
might arise betwixt Titulars, and others having Right to Teinds, and Heretors,
concerning the Leading and Drawing of their Teinds; And immediately after His
Attaining and Succeeding to the Crown, Gave forth and emitted His Royal
Declaration anent the Premises, and the other Particulars therein-specified*
And in pursuance of the ends foresaids, diverse Laws and Acts of Parliament were
made in the Year of Our Lord 1633, His said Majesty being then present in His
Royal Person; and since, diverse Acts of Parliament, and Commissions have been
made, given, and renewed to that purpose, and particularly by the 15 Act of the
3d Session of the 2d Parliament of K. Charles the Second* His Majesty's
Umqu^ile Royal Brother, of ever blessed Memory* And His Majesty being resolved,
and desirous to prosecute so good a Work, for the universal good of His
Subjects, and especially for the encouragement of the Ministers of the Gospel.
THEREFORE, His Majesty, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Gives full Power and Commission to His Majesty's Officers of Estate for the
time being, and to the Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Archbishop of Glasgow,
the Bishop of Edinburgh, the Bishop of Dunkell, the Bishop of Galloway, the
Bishop of Isles, the Bishop of Breichen, the Bishop of Dumblane, the Bishop of
Aberdeen; the Duke of Hamiltoun, the Marquess of Douglas* the Earl of ^ol, the
Earl of Marischal, the Earl of Mar, the Earl of Strathmore, the Earl of
Linlithgow, the Earl of Southesk, the Earl of Tweddale, the Earl of Belcarras;
the Lord President of the Session* the Lord Pitm^dden, the Lord Forr^, the Lord
R^dfoord, the Lord Boyne, the Lord D^irn, the Lord Balcaskie, Sir William Bruce
of Kinross, Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath, Sir Archibald Cockburn younger of
Lantoun, Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun; Sir George Drummond of Miln-nab* Charles
Murray of Hadden, Alexander Mill of Carri^, Sir Alexander Bruce of Broomhall,
Sir Patrick Murray, James Iohnstoun Provost of Glasgow, Mr. Robers Innes Writer
to the Signet, Sir George Skeen Provost of (...)* James Fl^her Burgess of
Aberdeen, John Dempster of (...)* or any Eleven of them, to be a Quorum*
whereof Two of every Estate, to M^et and Conveen at Edinburgh, the day of
year^, and such other Place or Places, Times or Die^s, as they shall appoint,
to value and cause be valued whatsoever Teinds, great or small, Parsonage, or
Vicarage within this Kingdom, which are yet unvalued* Declaring, that where the
Vicarage of any Paroch is a several Benefice and Title from the Personage* the
same shall be severally valued, to the effect the Titulars or Ministers serving
the ^re, having right to the said Vicarage, be not frustrated of the true worth
thereof, with Power to the said Commissioners* or Quorum foresaid, to appoint
Committees, or Sub*Committees of their own number, and to grant Sub
Commissions, and to receive Reports from them, an^ to approve or disapprove the
same as they shall find just, and to Rectify whatsoever Valuations led, or to
be led to the enorm prejudice of the Titulars, or the hurt and detriment of the
Church, and prejudice of the Ministers Maintenance and Provisions. Providing
always, Likeas it is hereby expressly Provided and Declared, That where
Valuations are lawfully led against all Persons having Interest, and allowed by
former Commissions, the same shall not be drawn in Question, nor Rectified upon
pretense of enorm lesion at the instance of the Minister (not being Titular,)
or at the instance of His Majesty's Advocat, in respect of His Majesty's
Annuity, except it can be proven that Collusion was used betwixt the Titulars
and Heretors, or betwixt the Procurator-Fiscal and the Heretors and Titulars,
which Collusion is declared to be, when the Valuations are led with the
diminution of the third part of the just Rent, which diminution shall be proven
by the Parties Oath; and with Power to the said Commissioners or Quorum
foresaid, where Ministers are not already sufficiently Provided, or have not
Localities already assigned to them for their Stipends out of the Teinds,
within the Paroch, where they serve the Cure, in so far as the same will amount
to, according to the Quantities, Proportions, and Rules contained in the 19 Act
of the Parliament 1633, to Modifie, Settle, and Appoint constant Local Stipends
to each Minister, out of the Teinds of the Paroch where they serve the Cure;
With Power also to the said Commissioners, to grant recompense by prorogation
of Tacks to Parties for all Augmentations of Stipends which are granted since
the Year 1630, or shall be granted, and that effeiring to the Augmentations
already granted, or to be granted, as the said Commissioners shall think sit.
And sicklike, To disjoyn too large and spacious Paroches, to cause erect and
build new Churches, to annex and dismember Churches as they shall think
convenient, and to take order that every Heretor and Liferenter shall have the
leading and buying of their own Teinds, if they be willing, according to the
Rules prescribed by the 19 Act and Commission granted by His Majesty, with
Consent of His Estates of Parliament in anno 1633, and the Acts of Parliament
therein-mentioned, with Power to Determine all Questions concerning the prices
of Teinds betwixt Titulars and others having Right thereto, and the Heretors,
and to appoint such Securities in favors of Titulars and others having Right
to Teinds for their prices, to be granted to the Heretors and others liable in
payment of valued Duties, or Buyers of the said Teinds, and in favors of the
Ministers as to their Maintenance, as the said Commissioners shall think
fitting, according to the Rules set down in the said Act 1633; And each Heretor
whose Teinds belongs to Titulars of Erection, to have power and liberty to buy
the Teinds of his own Lands, whether valued or not, within the space of three
years after the date of this Act: With this Declaration always, that in case
the impediment during the time foresaid flow from the Titular by reason of his
Minority, or other inability, in that case, the Heretor who offered to buy his
own Teinds within the space foresaid, shall have place so soon as the
impediment is removed to buy his Teinds, notwithstanding of the expiring of the
years and space after-exprest; And it is Declared, That if the Heretor be
Minor, and his Tutor neglect the buying of his Teinds within the foresaid
space, the Minor shall have Action for two years after his Minority, to compel
the Titular to sell his said Teinds. And generally, with Power to the said
Commissioners to Decide, and Determine in all other points which may concern
the Drawing or Leading of Teinds, the Selling or Buying of the same, or payment
of the Rates thereof, contained in the former Acts of Parliament, or set down
in the general Determination given out by His Majesty's Royal Father, of
blessed Memory. And if any Person or Persons shall find themselves grieved, and
complain of the injustice or exorbitancy of any Decreets or Sentences given in
any of the Commissions during the time of the late Troubles, With Power to the
said Commissioners to take the same to their Consideration, and Alter, Annul,
or Allow the said Decreets and Sentences, as they shall find just. And it is
always Provided and Declared, That the Archbishops and Bishops, and other
Beneficed Persons, being Ministers, and their Successors, shall not be
prejudged of the Rents whereof their Predecessors were in actual and real
Possession, and which by the Laws of the Kingdom were due to them in anno 1637,
or whereof they are presently in Possession; And that they shall be no further
bound, but according to the Provisions and Conditions expressed in the
Submissions made by the Bishops to His Majesty's Royal Father, of blessed
Memory, of the Date the day of 1628 years, and Registrat in the Books of
Commission for Surrenders and Teinds, upon the Fifteenth day of July 1631. And
whereas it may fall out, that some of the said Commissioners may be unable to
attend the Service, through Death, Sickness, or other known Impediment,
THEREFORE, His Majesty Declares, That He shall be careful to fill their places
with other Persons qualified, whose Oaths (for faithful discharging of the
same) shall be taken by the Lord Chancellor, or in his absence, by the Lord
President of the Commission for the time. And Ordains this present Commission
to endure ay and while the same be discharged by His Majesty, and the Acts,
Decreets, and Sentences thereof, to have the force, strength, and effect of a
Decree or Sentence of Parliament, and the Lords of Session to grant Letters of
Horning, Poynding, and other necessars to be direct upon the said Decreets and
Sentences in manner contained in the foresaids Commissions. And His Majesty,
with Consent foresaid, hereby Discharges all former Commissions, Declaring the
same to be expired.

XXIX. ACT Concerning Citations before Circuit Courts.
June 2. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Do
hereby Ratify and Approve the practice of the Circuit Courts, in citing
persons even for Treason, upon Porteous Rolls by Messengers, or
Sheriff-officers, without employing Heralds or Pursevants, which because of
the Circumstances of the time, place and number of the Pannals cannot be done
in Circuit Courts: And Declare that for the future, it shall be lawful to cite
before Circuit Courts after that manner. It is always hereby Provided, that in
cases of Treason, the Messenger or Sheriff-officer, and Witnesses to the
Citation shall be Sworn upon the verity thereof.

XXX. ACT Approving the Narrative of the Plot.
June 4. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Having Read, Seen and Considered a Narrative of the late horrid inhumane
Conspiracy by that Execrable Traitor, Archibald Campbel, sometime Earl of
^rgile, and others, and the Papers, Ciphers, and Instructions whereon the same
is founded; They Do Find and Declare, that there has been a pernicious and
treacherous Conspiracy, carried on by him and others; And they THEREFORE
Approve the Discovery of the said Plot, by the extraordinary Pains, Exactness
and Industry of the Lords of the Secret Committee; Together with the Narrative
Drawn and Printed by Authority of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, as
good and acceptable Service done by them for the Security of His Sacred
Majesty, and this His ancient Kingdom.

XXXI. ACT for Security of the Officers of State and others:
June 4. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering the great and acceptable Services done to His
Majesty by the Secret Committee, His Majesty's Privy Council, and His other
Judges and Officers; And being desireous to Secure them for their Actings and
Omissions in His Majesty's Service, in most ample Form; Does therefore, with
Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Indemnifie and Secure all and
every one of His Majesty's present Officers of State, the Members of the Secret
Committee, Lords of the Privy Council, and all His Majesty's Judges, both Civil
and Criminal, the Officers of the Army, and all others who have Acted by His
Majesty's Commissions, or by Commission from His Privy Council, against all
Pursuits or Complaints that can be raised against them any manner of way, for
their Actings in His Majesty's Service: As likewise for their Omissions, and
wherein they have fallen short of their Duty, and that as fully as if every
particular Crime or Misdemeanour were particularly specified in a Remission
under His Majesty's Great Seal, or contained in an Act of Indemnity; Requiring
all His Majesty's Judges to Interpret this Indemnity in the most ample and
favorable Sense, as they will be answerable.

XXXII. ACT Concerning the Militia.
June 4. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Considering
that it may contribute for the ease of the people, to have the ordinary
Rendezvouzes of Militia Discharged, unless extraordinary occasions should
otherwise require: THEREFORE they Discharge all Rendezvouzes of the Militia in
time coming, during His Majesty's Royal Pleasure; and until His Pleasure be so
Declared, that no Leaders, nor Assisters shall be liable for furnishing, and
contributing to buy or maintain Horse or Foot on that account; And they
Recommend to the Secret Council to take such courses for disposing of the
Militia Arms in the respective Shires, as shall seem most expedient for His
Majesty's Service; But prejudice always of the continuance of the former, and
present Constitution of the Militia, during the present Rebellion.

XXXIII. ACT for Security of the Records.
June 4. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Considering of how great
Importance it is to the Leidges, That the Records and Registers be securely
Kept; Do therefore Ordain, That all Clerks within the Kingdom, who keep such
Registers as are, or have been in use to be delivered in to the Clerk Register,
to be preserved in His Majesty's General-Register-house, shall give in all
their Registers and Books preceding the first of August 1675* before the first
of November 1685. To be kept by the Clerk of Register; And that hereafter
they shall keep only ten years Records in their own hands, for the use of the
Leidges; With Certification, that these who failzies, shall incur such pains
and penalties as the Lords of Session shall think fit. And it is hereby
Declared, That no private Grant made by any Clerk Register, shall excuse them
from obedience to this Act, which tends so much to the security of the people,
and preservation of the Records.

XXXIV. ACT for Poll-Money.
June 4. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and
Ordains, that for relief of Heretors, and others liable in the Supply, Granted
to His Majesty by this present Parliament, that their Vassals who pay no part
of the Cess; and also their own, and their Vassals Tennents, Sub-tennents, and
others living upon their Land, shall be Taxed, and pay in to the said Heretors
yearly, during the said Supply, the sums of Money following: viz. Each
Gentleman, above the quality of a Tennent, a proportion to be appointed by the
Heretor, not exceeding six pounds Scots yearly for himself, his Wife and
Children; Each Tennent, and other Inhabitant, above the quality of a Tradesman
or Cottar, a proportion not exceeding four pounds for themselves, their Wives
and Children: And each Tradesman, Cottar or Servant, a proportion not
exceeding twenty shilling Scots yearly for themselves, their Wives and
Children; And it is Ordained that the Heretors shall have the same execution
for raising of the said sums, as for their Mails and Duties.

XXXV. ACT anent Messengers Fees.
June 4. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Statute and Ordain, That it shall be in the power of the Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Bailies of Regalities, Justices of Peace, and Magistrates of Burghs Royal
respective, within whose bounds any Legal Diligences shall be used, to modifie
the Prices and Charges craved by Messengers, for execution of their Offices
from any of His Majesty's Leidges upon the Complaint of the Parties, either
for, or against whom the Messengers were Employed.

XXXVI. ACT anent the Address of the Estates of Parliament of His Majesty's
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, to His Sacred Majesty, against the arch-Traitor
Archibald Campbel, sometime Earl of Argile.
June 11. 1685.
THE ESTATES of PARLIAMENT, Taking to their Consideration the great happiness
conferred on this Nation by Almighty GOD, in having been for so many Ages
Governed and Protected by a long and continud Succession of Glorious and Just
Monarchs, and when they had very just reason to expect a further continuance
and increass in this happiness, from the auspicious Entry of Your Sacred
Majesty to the Possession of Your undoubted Right, and from your extraordinary
Justice, Prudence, Courage and Conduct, They cannot but with horror reflect on
the unparalelled Treachery of that Hereditary and Arch-Traitor, Archibald
Campbel, late Earl of Argile, who after that Our late Merciful King had
restored His Family, notwithstanding it had been guilty of a dreadful tract of
Rebellion, Bloodshed, and Oppression, and had raised it to a greater Luster and
Estate than ever it had formerly arrived at; Yet he did employ that Power the
King had invested him with, to support that Traitorous and Fanatical party, and
to oppress all who had served the King against His Father in the late
Rebellion; And being more led by the inveterat Treachery, in which he had been
educated, then remembering the great favors so undeservedly bestowed upon him,
he committed these Crimes for which he was justly forefaulted; And in
prosecution of them, he has at last absolutely plucked off the mask, by Invading
this Your Majesty's ancient Kingdom, and his own Native Country* and by
endeavoring to defame in a public Proclamation, the late King and Your Sacred
Majesty, Robbing and spoiling such Innocent and Loyal men as would not join
with him, and associating to him these barbarous Miscreants, who did undertake
to assassinat Your Majesty, and Your Royal Brother, as Rumbold the Maltster,
now passing by the Name of Bowls, who at the Ry was to have committed the said
horrid Assassination; These also who actually murdered James late Archbishop
of St. Andrews, as John Balfour of Kinloch, George Fleming in Balbuthy, and
these other Assassins who have rendered almost every man's life unsecure: From
all which just Resentments, We judged it our Duty in all humility, to Address
to Your most Sacred Majesty, and with all earnestness to Implore, that the said
Archibald Campbel, late Earl of Argile, that execrable Traitor, should be for
ever secluded from Your Majesty's favor, and that Your Majesty would be
pleased to Declare, that he, his Family, and the Heretors, Ringleaders and
Preachers who have joined with him in this Rebellion, should be for ever
Declared incapable of Mercy, and bearing any Honors, or enjoying any Estate
within this Kingdom, and to Discharge under all highest pains, all Your
Majesty's good Subjects to interceed for him or them, any manner of way; And
that all such as shall interpose for their Restoration, shall incur the pain
of Treason; and that Your Majesty would be pleased in Your Royal Prudence, to
Inquire who have been the Assisters and Abaters, either at home or abroad, of
this Treasonable Invasion, by which Your Majesty's Government has been so
highly injured, and maliciously arraigned, and this your Kingdom, so Disturbed
and Harrassed; to the end Your Majesty may Declare Your high Displeasure
against them, and every one of them, to the Terror and Example of others; In
Return of all which, We the Estates of this Your Majesty's ancient Kingdom, Do
hereby most Cordially and Sincerely, Offer with ou^ Lives and Fortunes, to
assist Your Majesty against this, and all other Traitors, their Adherents and
Associats.

XXXVII. ACT for the Clergy.
June 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Considering how just and necessary it is, and how much it
imports the honor of His Government, That the persons of the Archbishops and
Bishops, and all others the Orthodox and Loyal Clergy, be protected from the
Sacrilegious Assaults, Violence, Outrages and Assassinations of Fanatical,
Impious and Bloody-men, who to the scandal of Religion and Humanity, do
maintain the pernicious and horrid Principles of Rebellion, Violence, Murder
and Assassination, and to practice accordingly; Does with Advice and Consent of
His Estates in Parliament, Not only Ratify and Confirm all former Laws and
Acts of Parliament, made for the Security of the persons of the Clergy,
particularly the fifth Act, first Session, second Parliament, Charles the
Second; Fourth Act, second Session, second Parliament, Charles the Second; And
fifteenth Act, third Parliament, Charles the Second. But further, His Sacred
Majesty from His just abhorrence of, and Indignation against all such horrid
and inhumane Principles and Practices, Does with Advice and Consent foresaid,
of new, Statute and Ordain, That whatsoever person or persons shall be found
guilty of Assaulting the Lives of Bishops, or other Ministers, or of Invading
or Robbing their Houses, or actually attempting the same, shall be punished
with Death, and the Confiscation of all their Goods; And if any regular
Minister shall happen to be Assassinated or Murdered, the Parochioners of that
Paroch wherein he is Assassinated, shall pay such sums as the Privy Council
shall determine; which sum shall be bestowed to the use and behove of the Wife
and Children of the said Minister, at the sight of the Privy Council; and if he
has neither Wife nor Children, It is hereby Declared to belong to the nearest
of the said Ministers Kindred; and the Legal and Conform Parochioners are to
have relief, and to be Re-imbursed by the Noneconform Parochioners, or others,
who shall be proven to have had accession thereunto, at the sight of the Privy
Council. And the Estates of Parliament make their humble Address to His
Majesty* for conferring a competent encouragement and Reward to such persons as
shall make effectual Discoveries, or shall apprehend any who commit any of the
violences foresaid, either upon Bishops, or Ministers in their persons or goods
respectively; and if there shall shappen any Slaughter, or Mutilation to be
committed in apprehending such persons; His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Does
hereby Indemnifie the persons Employed, and all such as shall assist in
apprehending of them; and Declares them free of all question or trouble for
the same, in all time thereafter.

And His Sacred Majesty being firmly Resolved to Conserve and Maintain the
Church in the present State and Government thereof, by Archbishops and
Bishops, and not to endure, nor Connive at any D^rogation from, or Violation of
it; Does therefore, with Advice and Consent of His Estates Assembled in this
Parliament, Ratify, Approve and Confirm all former Laws and Acts of Parliament
made and passed in the Reigns of His Royal Grandfather, King James the Sixth,
His Royal Father King Charles the First, and Royal Brother King Charles the
Second of Glorious, Memories: Restoring the Church to its ancient and right
Government by Archbishops and Bishops, and Redintegrating the Estate of
Bishops to the Exercise of their Episcopal Function; and to all the
Privileges, Immunities, Dignities, Jurisdictions and Possessions which was
enjoyed by, or by the Laws of the Kingdom was due to their Predecessors, in the
year 1637. And Ordains them to stand in full force, as public Laws of the
Kingdom, and to be put in execution in all points, conform to the Tenor
thereof, as if they were herein all specially repeated and expressed: And in
pursuance of His Majesty's Royal Resolution therein, His Majesty with Advice
foresaid, Does recommend to all His Ministers of State, Lords of His Privy
Council, and all other Judges and Magistrates, to take the Persons and Interests
of the Loyal and Orthodox Clergy, under their special Care and Protection; That
all Laws, Acts and Statutes, made in their favors, may receive due and ready
obedience from all His Majesty's Subjects.

XXXVIII. ACT Concerning the Registration of Writs in the Books of Session.
June 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Considering, That there have been in all Time bypast, only three Offices of
the Ordinary Clerks of Session, and that the Erection of any more of these
Offices is unnecessary, and may be prejudicial to the Leidges, THEREFORE,
Statutes and Ordains, That there be only three Offices of Ordinary Clerks of
Session in time coming, and that there be no more then two Persons conjoined in
each of these Offices, which shall remain entire in the full extent thereof,
without Alteration, Division, or Dismemberation of any part of the same. And
Statutes and Declares, That they as Clerks to the Session, and their Successors
have the only Right to be Clerks as Deputs to the Lord Register, to all
Processes which are competent before the Lords of Session, and to the
Registrating and Extracting of all Writs Registrat in the Books of Council and
Session, and have right to all Privileges, Profits and Emoluments, whereof
the said Clerks are in Possession: And for the better securing of the Leidges,
both as to the Registration and Preservation of Principal Writs, Statutes and
Ordains, That the Clerks of the Session keep an exact Register a part in every
one of their Offices for Registration of all Writs, and that they appoint one
or two fit, diligent, and faithful Persons in every Office, to receive in the
Writs given in to be Registrat, from whom they are to take Caution for their
Registrating, Recording, and safe Preserving of these Writs. And Appoints, That
there shall be two Minut-Books kept in every Office, in the One whereof there
shall be set down the Title of Writs given in to be Registrat, the Name of the
Giver in, and the Date of the ingiving; which is to be subscribed by the Clerk,
or his Substituts foresaids, and all Writs so given in, shall be booked within
the space of one year after the ingiving; and if any Party, or one employed by
him, shall desire up a Writ given in, within the space of Six Months after its
ingiving, then the Title of the Writ, the name of the Party, and the Date of
both ingiving and outgiving of the said Writ shall be insert in the other
Minut-Book, and be subscribed by the Receiver thereof, that as the one
Minut-Book does Charge, so the other Minut-Book may Discharge the Clerk of
such Writs, And that no Writ given in, shall be taken out after the same is
Booked; And the Clerks are to begin the foresaid Method of the said two
Minut-Books, from the first day of August next ensuing; And when the time come^
that these Registers are to be given in to the General Register House, the two
Minut-Books are likewise to be given in with them subscribed by the Clerk; And
the Deput appointed by the Lord Register for keeping of the said Registers,
shall subscribe other Doubles of the said Minut-Books, which are to kept by
the Clerks for Information of the Leidges in their Offices. And the Clerk of
Register, or his Deput, are hereby Ordained to keep all Principal Writs in a
secure Room, distinct from the Room where the Registers are kept: As also,
Further Ordains the Clerk of Register once in the year to visit the Registers
in every Chamber, as he shall be answerable. And because many Writs are
Registrat incompetently outwi^h the Jurisdiction, to the great prejudice of the
Leidges, (such Registrations being void and null, and consequently all
Execution following thereupon.) THEREFORE, Statutes and Ordains, That no Clerk
of Inferior Court for the future, presume to Registrat any Writs in his Books,
either for Conservation, or where Execution is to pass against any Party that
dwells without the Jurisdiction, under the pain of Deprivation, and of Five
Hundred Merks of Penalty, the one half to His Majesty, and the other half to
the Party Pursuer. Likeas, His Majesty, with Consent foresaid, Ratifies and
Approves the Gifts granted by the Clerk Register to the present Ordinary Clerks
of Session, of their respective Offices, in the whole Heads, Tenors, and
Contents of the same; Declaring these Presents to be as effectual, as if the
said Gifts were verbatim here insert. And in respect that by this Act, there
is a great addition to the Clerk Register his Care and Trouble, as well as to
the Peoples Security, THEREFORE, It is Ordained, That there shall be Twenty
Shilling Scots paid to the Clerk Register in place of the Merk formerly paid
to him and his Predecessors for each Subscription*

XXXIX. ACT In Favors of Planters, and Inclosers of Ground.
June 13. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of the Estates of this present
Parliament, for the Encouragement of Enclosing of Ground and Planting of Trees,
Does Ratify and Approve all former Laws and Acts of Parliament made in favors
of Inclosers of Ground and Planters of Trees, and particularly the 41 Act,
Parl. 1. Charles 2. Entitled, Act for Planting and Enclosing of Ground. And
because the time Prescribed in the said Act is now elapsed, They Statute and
Ordain, That the whole Heads contained in the said Act be observed for the
space of Nineteen Years next to come, Commencing from the Date hereof. And
Likewise, Ratifies and Approves the 17 Act, Parl. 2. Charles 2. Entitled, Act
for Enclosing of Ground. And Ordains the same to be observed in all time
coming. And further, Statutes and Ordains, That hereafter no Person shall Cut,
Break, or Pull up any Tree, or piel the Bark of any Tree, under the pain of Ten
Pounds Scots for each Tree within Ten Years old, and Twenty Pounds Scots for
each Tree that is above the said Age of Ten Years, and that the Havers or Users
of the Timber of any Tree that shall be so Cut, Broken, or Pulled up, shall be
liable to the same Penalty, except he can produce the Person from whom he got
it, and if the Person that shall be so convicted be not able to pay the Fine,
then he shall be decerned to work a Day for each half Me^k contained in the
said Fine to the Here^or whose Planting shall be so Cut or Broken: As likewise,
Statutes and Ordains, That no Person shall break down or fill up any Ditch,
Hedge, or Dike, whereby Ground is Enclosed, and shall not leap or suffer their
Horse, Nolt, or Sheep to go over any Ditch, Hedge, or Dike, under the pain of
Ten Pounds Scots, toties quoties, the half whereof to be applied to the
Heretor, and the other half for the Mending and Repairing of Bridges and
Highways within the Paroch at the sight of the Sheriff, Stewart, or Justices of
Peace before whom the Contraveeners shall be pursued.

XL. ACT Of Annexation of the Offices belonging to the late Earl of Argile.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Advice and Consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Considering how dangerous it has always been to the Peace and Quiet of this
Kingdom, to bestow too many Heretable Jurisdictions, Office^, and Superiorities
upon any of His Majesty's Subjects, living in the remot High-lands, and that by
such helps as these, the Family of Argile did in the last Age, as well as this,
commit, and maintain their Execrable Treasons, and oppress and enslave His
Majesty's faithful and Loyal Subjects, and that the Jurisdictions, Offices,
Superiorities, and Constabulaties after-specified are now fallen in His
Majesty's hands, by the Sentence and Doom of Forfaulture given and pronounced
against Archibald Campbel late Earl of Argile, by the Commissioners of
Justiciary upon the day of. THEREFORE, His Majesty, with Consent foresaid, Do
Unite, Annex, and Incorporat to His Crown of this His Ancient Kingdom, to
remain inseparably with the same in all time coming, the Offices of Justice
General of all the Isles of Scotland, except Orkney and Zetland, of the Shires
of Argile and Tarbet, and of all the remanent Lands and Estate belonging to the
said late Earl in Scotland, the Heretable Lievetenand^y of Argile and Tarbet
Shires, the Heretable Chamberlainry of both these Shires, the Office of
Admirality of all the Lands belonging to him the said Archibald Campbel, the
Right of the Commissariot in so far as it belonged to the late Earl, the Office
of the Kings Master-Houshold within Scotland, the Heretable Sheriff-ship of
Argile and Tarbet Shires, the Heretable Crownership, and Toshdorich, or
Mayorship in these Shires; as also that half of the Casualities belonging to
the King and Prince formerly dispon'd by His Majesty and His Predecessors to
the Earl of Argile and his Predecessors, viz. The half of the Wairds, Reliefs,
Marriages, Non-Entries, Escheats, Amerciaments, and of all Casualities
whatsoever belonging to the King and Prince within the said Shires; And sick
like, the Patronage of all Kirks and Prebandries which any manner of way did
belong to the said late Earl and his Predecessors; And in like manner, the
Constabularies, of the Castles of Craignish, Tarb^t, Carrick, Duni^e, Swine;
and Dunstaffnige, with the Profits, Rents, and Emoluments belonging thereto; As
also, the Superiorities of all and whatsoever Lands belonging to the Earl of
^road-Albion, Lord Lovat, John Mcleod of Herreis, the Heirs of the late Lord
Mcdonald, of Donald M^donald of Moydart, of the Lord of M^lean, Mclean of
Lochbuy, Mclean of Torlosk, and of the other Heretors holding of the late Earl
of Argile in the Isles of Mull, Iura, Tir^e, of the Lands belonging to the
Lairds of Calder, Locheall, Achinbreck, Mcnaughtan, Arkinless, M^alaster of
Tarbat, Arbruchell, Duncan of Lundy, Campbel of (...), the Lairds of Orms^y and
Lochnell, together with the Superiority of the Burgh of Inverary, and the
Property of the House, Castle, and parks of Inverary; Declaring that the
generality hereof, shall be as sufficient, as if each part of the said Lands,
and every Patronage, were particularly herein expressed. And that this present
Annexation is affected with all the Conditions and Provisions as to the way and
manner of Alienation and Dissolution mentioned and expressed in the former Act of
Parliament, Annexing to the Crown the Lands of the Earl of Tarras, Lord
Melvill, and others.

XLI. ACT Declaring the Greenland-Fishing to be a Manufactory.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, With Consent of His Estates of Parliament, Considering the
great Advantage which may accrue to this Kingdom by encouraging the
Greenland-Fishing, whereby vast Sums of Money will be kept within the Kingdom,
and by the export of Oil and Whale-bone considerable Sums of Money brought into
the Kingdom. Do therefore Declare the Greenland-Fishing an Manufactory, and to
have all the Privileges and Immunities made in favors of any other
Manufactory, or Fishing-Company; And that all A^l or Drinking-Beer made use by
the Ships to be sent to Greenland, and an Butt of Brandy for each Ship yearly
shall be free from Excise, Imposition, Custom, or any Dues whatsoever. And the
Greenland-Fishing being much prejudged by the importing of Foreign Soap, or
Whalebone, the Customers quitting the one half of the Duty imposed by Act of
Parliament upon Imported Soap. Do therefore, expressly Prohibit and Discharge
the Fermorers of His Majesty's Custom, or others, from quitting or abating any
of the said Duty due by Law upon Imported Whale-bone or Soap; and if it be
discovered, that they shall quite or abait any of the said Duty, that the said
Soap or Whale-bone shall be Confiscate, the one half to His Majesty, and the
other half to the Discoverer, and the Tacksmen or Collector who shall be found
so guilty, to be Censured by His Majesty's Privy Council or Exchequer, as they
judge fit.

XLII. ACT of Annexation of several Lands to the Crown.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Considering that the Traitors
after-mentioned, have of late been Forefaulted upon Processes of Treason,
Intented at the Instance of Sir George Mckenzie, His Majesty's Advocat, against
them, both before the high Court of Parliament, and the Commissioners of
Justiciary ( viz) Sir John Cochran of Ochiltry, Sir Patrick H^me of Polwart,
Thomas Steuart of Cultness, Pringle of Torwoodlie, George late Lord Melvil,
David Montgomery of Lainshaw, Sir Hugh Campbel of Cesnock, Sir George Campbel
younger of Cesnock, Mr. Robert Martin, sometime Clerk to the Justice-Court,
Walter late Earl of Tarras, Mr. Robert Bailie of Ierriswood, Thomas Kenedy of
Grange, Porterfield of Duchal, Mr. William and Alexander Gordons, late of
Earlstoun elder and younger, James Gordon younger of Cra^en: And His Majesty
and Estates of Parliament, being desirous to Annex the whole Lands, Barronies,
Teinds, Annualrents, Roums, Possessions, Milns, Woods, Fishings and others,
which pertained to the forenamed persons, any manner of way, to the Crown, for
the better Supporting the Dignity of His Royal Estate, and the expenses of His
Government: His Majesty Does therefore, with Advice and Consent foresaid*
Ratify and Confirm the said Decreets of Forefaulture; And Ordains the same to
be of full force, strength, and effect in all time coming, holding and willing
this their Ratification to be as sufficient and effectual, as if the said
Decreets, and whole Tenors thereof were insert herein. And further, His Majesty
with Consent foresaid, Does Unite, Annex and Incorporat to His Crown, of this
His ancient Kingdom, to remain inseparably therewith in all time coming, all
and whatsoever Lands, Lordships, Baronies, Heretages, Roums, Possessions,
Milns, Woods, Fishings, Tacks, Steedings, Teinds, Annualrents, Patronages,
Wodsets, expired Apprysings and Adjudications, Castles, Towers, Fortalices,
Houses, Biggings, Yairds, Orchyairds; Annexis, Connexis, Tennents, Goods and
Aikers, and all other Heretages, Lands and Estates whatsomever, pertaining and
belonging to the forenamed persons, Rebels and Traitors abovementioned, or
any of them, by whatsomever manner of way, Right or Title, and wherein they, or
any of them, have been, or might have been in Possession, or to which they, or
any of them have succeeded, or may succeed, as Representing any person, and
where the same ly within this Realm, of whatsomever Name, Title, Bounding, or
Designation the same be of, Dispensing with the foresaid generality; And
Declaring the same to be as sufficient, as if every particular, Roum, Land or
Barony pertaining to the forenamed, forefaulted Rebels and Traitors, or any of
them, and which can any manner of way fall under their Forefaultries, were
herein particularly condescended on and expressed; And particularly, but
prejudice of the foresaid Generality, the Lands, Baronies, and others
after-mentioned, which formerly pertained to these of the said Traitors
after-named; viz. The Lands and Barony of Ochiltry, the Lands and Barony of
Trabeanch, the Lands of Chalmerstoun, the Lands of Kinowdouns, and Flownstoun,
the Lands of Craigman, The Lands of Brownstoun, Beaches, the Lands of
Green-hill, and the Superiorities and Feu-duties of the twenty pound Land of
Carbel, all lying within the Sheriffdom of Air, with the whole Pertinents
thereof, which pertained to the said Sir John Cochran, sometime of Ochiltrie;
The Lands and Barony of Polwart, the Lands and Barony of Greenlaw, Red-path,
with the Rights of Patronages, and whole Pertinents thereof, and Lands of
pertaining to the said Sir Patrick Hume, sometime of Polwart, lying within the
Sheriffdom of Berwick; The Lands and Barony of Cultness, lying within the
Sheriffdom of Lanerk; And the Lands of North-Berwick, lying within the
Constabulary of Haddingtoun, which pertained to the said Thomas Steuart,
sometime of Cultness; The Lands and Barony of Torwoodlie, with the Pertinents
thereof, lying within the Lordship of Ettrick-Forrest, and Sheriffdom of
Selkirk, sometime pertaining to the said Pringle of Torwoodlie; The Lands,
Lordship and Barony of Mony-mail, comprehending the Lands, Patronages, and
Baronies mentioned in the Infeftments thereof, lying within the Sheriffdom of
Fife, and particularly, comprehending the Lands and Baronies of Raith, and
Balweirie, sometime pertaining to the said George Lord Melvil; The ten merk
Land of Lainshaw, and Teinds thereof, the ten merk Land of Kirkbryd, with the
Miln and Pertinents, the five pound Land of Milnstoun-fleet, the five merk Land
of Over and Nether* Peacock Lands, with the Miln and Pertinents, with the Tower
and Fortalice, called Castlesturt, and Lands of Brockholmer, all lying within
the Bailiary of Cunningham, and Sheriffdom of Air, the Lands of
Over-Cassilioun, extending to a three merk Land, with the Teinds and
Pertinents, lying within the said Bailiary and Sheriffdom, all formerly
pertaining to the said David Montgomery, sometime of Lainshaw; The Lands and
Barony of Riccartoun, the Lands and Barony of Cesnock and Galstoun, with the
Tower of Cesnock, and Pertinents, the Lands and Barony of Bair, the Lands and
Barony of Castlemains, the Lands and Barony of Hayningress, all lying within
the Sheriffdom of Air, and the Lands of Newhal, lying within the Sheriffdom of
Fife, formerly pertaining to the said Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels,
sometime of Cesnocks; The Lands and Barony of Hughchester, the Mains of
Borthwickshiels, lying within the Shire of Roxburgh, the Lands of Robertoun and
Howeleuch-miln, and Pertinents thereof, lying in the Sheriffdom of Selkirk, the
Lands and Steedings of Alemuir,, lying in the said Shire, the Lands of Cassock,
Tameucher, and Glenderig, lying in Eskaldemuire, the Lands of Harden, Mabenlan,
Hichchester, and Borthwick-walls, lying in the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh, formerly
pertaining to the said Walter, sometime Earl of Tarras; The Lands and Barony of
Ierviswood, lying within the Sheriffdom of Lanerk, the Lands and Barony of
Mellerstains, lying within the Sheriffdom of Roxburgh, formerly pertaining to
the said Mr. Robert Bailie, sometime of Ierviswood, The Lands of Grange, and
Heretable Office of Bailiary of Monkland, lying within the Bailiary of Carrick,
and Sheriffdom of Air, formerly pertaining to Thomas Kennedy, sometime of
Grange, the Lands and Barony of Duchal, and pertaining to Porterfield, sometime
of Duchal; the Lands and Barony of Earlestoun, the Lands and Barony of Kenmuir
and others, formerly pertaining to the said William and Alexander Gordons, late
of Earlestoun, lying within the Sheriffdom of Wigtoun, and Stewartry of
Kirkcudbright respective; The Lands and Barony of Craiglaw and others, formerly
pertaining to the said James Gordon younger of Craiglaw, together with all
other Lands, Teinds and Rights whatsomever, belonging to the Remanent of the
said Traitors, or to all or any of them, or whereof they were in Possession,
or to which they might have succeeded any manner of way, with all Lands, Teinds
and others, Castles, Towers, Fortalices, Milns, Multures, Fishings,
Annualrents, Reversions, Patronages of Kirks and Teinds, Personages and
Viccarages, and all and whatsomever Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper and other
Minerals within the foresaid bounds, and belonging to the said Forefaulted
Traitors, with all other Parts, Pendicles and Pertinents, Casualities,
Privileges, Jurisdictions, Offices, and others whatsomever, pertaining to the
same: All which, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Does Unite and Annex to His
Crown, Declaring the Generality foresaid to be as sufficient to the intent and
effect foresaid, as if each Part, Parcel and Pertinents of the said Lands,
Offices, Patronages, Privileges and others belonging to the said Traitors, or
any of them, and whereof they were in Possession, were herein expressed. And it
is Statute and Declared, That the said Lordships, Lands, Baronies, Teinds and
others respective abovementioned, Annexed to the Crown in manner-foresaid,
shall remain therewith in all time-coming; And that the same, or any part
thereof, shall not, nor may not be given away in Fee and Heretage, nor in
Frank, Tenement, Liferent, Pension, or Tack, except for the full Duty, which
may be gotten from, and paid by the Tennents, or by any other manner of
Alienation, Right or Disposition whatsomever, to any person or persons, of
whatsomever Estate, Degree, or Quality they be, without Advice, Decree, and
Deliberation of the whole Parliament, and for Great Weighty and Reasonable
Causes, concerning the good, welfare and public Interest of the whole Kingdom;
First to be proposed, and to be Advised and maturely pondered and considered by
the Estates re integra, before any previous Grant, Right or Deed be given, made
or done by His Majesty, or His Successors, concerning the Disposition of the
said Lordships, Baronies and others, or any part thereof, which may any ways
predetermine them, or the Estates of Parliament, and prejudge the freedom of
their Deliberation and Consent. And if at any time hereafter it shall be
thought fit to Dispone, or Grant any Right of any part of the said Lands,
Superiorities, Offices, Teinds and others; It is Declared, That the general
Narrative of good Services, weighty Causes and Considerations, shall not be
sufficient; But the particular Causes and Considerations, whereupon His Majesty
and His Successors may be Induced to grant, and the Estates to Consent to such
Rights, are to be expressed, that it may appear that the same is not Granted
through Importunity, or upon private suggestions or pretenses, but for True,
Just, and Reasonable Causes and Considerations of public Concernment. And
further, It is Declared, That if any general Act of Dissolution, of His
Majesty's Property, shall be made at any time hereafter, the said Lands and
others abovementioned, and Annexed, shall not be understood to fall, or be
comprehended under the same: And if the said Lands, and others foresaid, or
any part thereof, shall be Annalzied or Disponed; or any Right of the same
shall be Granted otherwise then is Appointed, and Ordained in manner
abovementioned, His Majesty with Consent foresaid, Does Statute and Declare,
That all Dispositions, Infeftments, and other Rights of the said Lands, and
others foresaid, or any part thereof, which shall be Granted contrary to this
present Act, with all Acts of Dissolution and Ratification, and other Acts of
Parliament concerning the same, shall be from the beginning, and in all
time-coming, void and null, and of no effect; and notwithstanding thereof, It
shall be lawful to Our Sovereign Lord, and His Successors for the time, to take
back and receive at their Pleasure, for their own use, without any Process of
Law, the Lands and others above Annexed, or any part thereof, which shall be
Annalzied, or Disponed, and these in whose favors any such Rights, or
Alienations shall be made, shall be accomptable for, and liable to refound and
pay all Profits, Intromission, or Benefit taken, uplifted, or enjoyed by them,
in the mean time. And it is Declared, That all other Clauses, Articles and
Provisions, contained in any former Act, or Acts of Annexation, to the
advantage of His Majesty and His Crown, are, and shall be holden, as repeated,
and insert herein: But it is hereby always Declared, that if any of the said
Lands hold of a Sub-altern Vassal, That it shall be Lawful to His Majesty to
present a Vassal to the Intermediat Superior. To the end His Majesty may
thereby apply the Mails and Duties of these Lands so holden, to His Majesty's
own use. It is always hereby Declared, That the Annexation of the Lands of
North-berwick, as belonging to the said Thomas Stuart, sometime of Cultness,
shall not prejudge the Senators of the College of Justice, as to their Right
and Interest in these Lands, who are hereby Declared preferable for the same;
Reserving also Lieutennant Colonel, Theophulus Ogilthrop, and Major Mayn, and
Captain Cornwall his Authors, the Rights and Grants made to them respective by
His late Majesty, in so far as concerns the Lands Gifted to them, to be bruiked
and enjoyed by them, ay and until they be satisfied by His Majesty, or by their
own Intromissions.

XLIII. ACT in favors of the Inhabitants of Orkney and Zetland.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Considering the great distance of the Islands of Orkney and
Zetland from the Town of Edinburgh, the ordinary place of Justice, and the
uncertainty of Passage by Sea, and the many fresh Waters and other Ferries in
the way by Land; Does with Advice and Consent of His Estates of Parliament,
Statute and Ordain, That all Summons to be intented against the Inhabitants of
Orkney and Zetland, before the Lords of Privy Council, the Lords of Session,
and before the Commissioners of Justiciary, and Letters of Horning and
Law-borrows upon their Decreets, or by their Warrant, shall be execute in time
coming upon forty days; but prejudice always of Letters to be raised upon
Writs Registrated of consent of parties, where, by the Clause of Registration,
the party consents that execution should pass on a shorter time.

XLIV. ACT for a Standart of Miles.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, Thinking it fit, that there should be a fixed Standart for
Measuring and Computation of Miles, and that the whole Isle of Britain should
be under on certain kind of Commensuration, Does therefore with Consent of the
Estates of Parliament, Statute and Ordain, That three Barley Corns set
lengthways, shall make an Inch, as it is already used; That twelve Inches shall
make a Foot of Measure, which is to be the only Foot by which all Workmen,
especially Masons, Wrights, Glasiers and others are ordained to measure their
Work in all time coming, under the pain of an hundredth pounds, toties quoties;
Three of these Foots are to make a Yard, as three Foot and one Inch makes a
Scots Eln, And a thousand seven hundredth and sixty Yards are to make a Mile,
which is to be made the Standart of Computation from place to place in all time
coming.

XLV. ACT in favors of Sir William Bruce, for enlarging the Shire of Kinross.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, and Estates of Parliament, Considering the smalness and
extent of the Sheriffdom of Kinross, and Jurisdiction thereof, to support and
maintain the State and Rank of a distinct Shire, as it is, and anciently has
been, and that it will be of great advantage and ease to His Majesty's Lieges,
the several Heretors, Residenters and Inhabitants within the Parochs of
Portmock, Cleish and Tilliboal (excepting always, and reserving the
Jurisdiction of the Lands of Carnboe, Bridge-lands, Cruick, and Cruick-miln,
lying in the said Paroch of Tilliboal, and Stewartry of Strathern, whereof
James Earl of Perth, Lord high Chancellor is Heretable Stewart, out of this
present Act, which is hereby Declared to be without prejudice thereunto,
Infringement thereof, or Incroachment thereupon, or to the detriment of the
said Heretable Stewartry in any manner of way whatsomever) and to the Heretors
of these several parts and portions of Land, lying in the Paroch of Kinross,
and in the Shires of Fife and Perth; and of the Barony of Cuthilgourdy, lying
in the Shire of Perth, and belonging to Sir William Bruce of Kinross Baronet,
Heretable Sheriff of the said Shire of Kinross, be Disjoined from the said
Shires of Fife and Perth; and Jurisdictions thereof, and Joined, Annexed, and
United to the Shire of Kinross, and Jurisdiction thereof, unto which the said
Parochs and Lands ly contigue, and most conveniently: And that John Marquess of
Athol, Sheriff principal of the Sheriffdom of Perth; and Margaret Countess of
Rothes, and the Deceast Charles, Earl of Hadingtoun her Husband, Heretable
Sheriff of the Shire of Fife, have for their respective Interests, consented to
the Disjunction of the said Lands, and Parochs abovementioned, from the said
Shires of Fife and Perth, and to the Uniting them to the said Shire of Kinross,
and Heretable Jurisdiction thereof, in favors of the said Sir William Bruce,
Heretable Sheriff of the same, with the burden of the Valuation, and all other
public burdens laid on, or to be laid on the same: THEREFORE His Majesty and
Estates of Parliament, upon the Considerations foresaid, hereby Dismember and
Disjoyn the said several Parochs of Portmock, Cleish and Tilliboal, and whole
Lands contained therein (Reserving the Jurisdiction of the said Lands, as is
above reserved) and the said parts and portions of Land, in the Paroch of
Kinross, lying within the said Shires of Fife and Perth, and the said Lands
and Barony of Cuthilgourdy, from the said Shires of Fife and Perth, and
Jurisdictions thereof, for now and ever; And Adjoyn, Unite, Annex, and
Incorporat the same to the said Sheriffdom, and Heretable Sheriff-ship of
Kinross; And Statute, Ordain and Declare them in all time coming, to be a part
of the Shire of Kinross, in and to all effects and purposes, and in particular
in point of Jurisdiction, Judicatures, Civil and Criminal, and in all matters
private and public whatsoever; and in the ordering, casting and collecting of
Cess, Excyse, Militia, Out-reeks of Levies, and mending of Highways, as amply
and freely as any other Shires do, or may do within this Kingdom; Discharging
hereby all other Sheriffs and their Deputs, and Justices of Peace within the
said Shires of Fife and Perth from exercing any Power of Jurisdiction over any
of the said Lands and Parochs foresaids, Heretors and Inhabitants thereof, in
any time coming, as being now only answerable to the Sheriff-Court of Kinross,
and Justices of Peace within the same (Reserving alwise to the said James Earl
of Perth, and his Heirs, the Jurisdiction of the said Lands of Cruik,
Cruik-miln, Carnboe and Bridg-lands, as Heretable Stewart of the said Stewartry
of Strathern) And in respect that formerly the public Burdens, Cess, Excise,
Militia, and mending of Highways, and other public Concerns, were (because
of the smalness of the Shire of Kinross, and that for many years, the Right and
Interest thereof was broken, and divided in the hands of many Creditors) casten
in, and managed with the public Concerns of Fife; And the Shire of Kinross
being now enlarged, and that Interest brought in, and made entire again in the
person of the said Sir William Bruce; THEREFORE His Majesty, with Consent
foresaid, separates the said Shire of Kinross from Fife, as to all these
public Concerns and Actings, as well the Lands contained therein formerly, as
these Annexed thereto by this present Act; and from the Shires of Fife and
Perth respective, in all matters whatsoever that relate to, pertain, and fall
within the precinct, and Jurisdiction of the said Shire of Kinross, as it is
now Established and Comprehended by this present Act, and to consist of the
Parochs of Kinross, Urwell, Portmock, Cleish, and Tilliboal, and whole Lands
lying within the said Parochs, and of the said Lands and Baronies of
Cuthilgourdie, with the burden of the Valuation of the said Parochs and
Lands; and liberating and freeing the said respective Shires of Fife and
Perth, proportionally of the Burden thereof; and particularly (without
prejudice of the generality foresaid) of all Cesses, Excise, Militia, Out-reeks
of Horse and Foot, Highways, and all other public Burdens, and Impositions
laid, or to be laid upon these Lands, Disjoined from the said Shires of Fife
and Perth, and Annexed to Kinross in manner foresaid; and particularly,
liberats the Shire of Fife of the Valuation of the Lands formerly contained in
the Shire of Kinross, and of the Valuation of the Lands that are now Disjoined
from the Shire of Fife, and Adjoined to the Shire of Kinross, amounting both to
the sum of Eighteen Thousand five hundredth and sixteen pounds scots Money. And
also, particularly Liberats and Frees the Shire of Perth of the Valuation of
the said Lands, hereby Disjoined from the Shire of Perth, and now Annexed to
the Shire of Kinross, extending to the sum of One Thousand, seven hundredth and
eighteen pounds, six shilling eight pennies, Scots Money, making up the said
two Valuations, in the whole, the sum of Twenty Thousand, two hundredth and
thirty four pounds, six shilling, eight pennies, Scots Money, Which is Declared
to be the full and complete Valuation of the Shire of Kinross hereafter, and
the Rule of proportioning the public Burdens laid on, or to be laid on the
said Shire of Kinross. Willing and Appointing the Heretors, Inhabitants and
Possessors of the said Lands, in all time coming, to answer to the Courts of
the said Sheriffdom of Kinross, and to be liable to the Jurisdiction of the
Sheriffs thereof, in all Causes, Civil and Criminal, competent to an Sheriffs
Cognition, and to be holden, reputed and esteemed in all time hereafter, a part
of the said Shire of Kinross, to all effects, and particularly (without
prejudice of the generality foresaid) with the burden of all Cess, Excise, and
other Impositions whatsoever, Militia and other Out-reeks, Collecting and
Ordering thereof: And that in all Retours, Rights, Dispositions, Charters and
Infeftments of the said Lands, they be Designed in all time-coming, to ly
within the said Sheriffdom of Kinross: And that all Denunciations, and
Executions of Hornings, Apprysings, Inhibitions, Adjudications, Publications of
Interdictions* and other Legal Diligences against the Heretors, Possessors and
Inhabitants of the said Lands, with all Brieves, Proclamations and others, be
used and Execute at the said Market Cross of Kinross, head-Burgh of the said
Shire, in like manner, and to the same effect, as these Executions are used at
the head-Burgh of any other Shire; And in case there be any mistake in the
casting of, and inserting in this Act the sums of the Valuation
abovementioned, to the prejudice of any of the said other Shires. His Majesty
with Consent foresaid, Ordains the Commissioners of Cess and Excise of the
said other Shires, to Meet, Adjust, and settle the said Proportions; and
being so Adjusted, to signify the same to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, under their hands, that the same may be Recorded in the Books of Privy
Council, for a Rule hereafter. As also, His Majesty, with Consent of the said
Estates of Parliament, Considering that by the sixteenth Act of the twenty
second Parliament of His Majesty's Dearest Grandfather, King James sixth, in
anno 1617. (Entitled Act anent Registration of Seasins, Reversions and other
Writs) That for the great ease of the Lieges, the said Registers were
Established in the Burgh of Couper in Fife, for the whole Lands lying in the
bounds of the said Sheriffdoms of Fife and Kinross, or were to be Established
in any other place or places more convenient: And that now for the greater ease
and accommodation of the Leiges, it is thought more fit and convenient, That the
said Register be kept at Kinross, head-Burgh of the Shire thereof, for the
whole Lands, as well formerly lying within, as now Annexed to the same Shire:
THEREFORE His Majesty, and Estates of Parliament foresaids, Statute and Ordain,
That in all time coming, there be a public, particular Register, for
Registrating Seasins, Renunciations, Reversions, Discharges of Reversions,
Grants of Redemption, and other Writs, enjoined to be Registrated by the said
former Act of Parliament* kept by the Clerk of Registers, and his Deputs, at
the said Burgh of Kinross, for the whole Lands, as-well formerly lying within
the said Shire of Kinross, as now annexed thereto, within the space, to the
same effect, and with the like conditions mentioned and contained in the
foresaid Act, in anno 1617. For Registration of Seasins, Reversions, etc. And
Lastly, His Majesty and Estates of Parliament foresaids, Hereby Ratify and
Approve, in favors of the said Sir William Bruce, and his Heirs-male, Tailzie,
and others contained in his Infeftments of the Estate of Kinross, the twenty
ninth Act of the first Parliament of His Majesty's Dearest Father, King Charles
the first of ever blessed memory (Entitled, Act in Favors of the Earl of
Morton and the Lord Dalkeith his Son, anent the Loch of Loch-Levin, and
preservation of the Fishes thereof) And Ordains the said Act to be put to
Execution by the said Sir William Bruce, and his foresaids, and his and their
Deputs and Bailies, after the Form and Tenor thereof. It is alwise hereby
Declared, That this Act, and every part thereof, is but prejudice to the said
Sir William Bruce* and his Heirs of any other Jurisdiction of Regality or
Bailiary, formerly belonging to him of any of the said Lands, either formerly
belonging, or now Annexed to the said Shire of Kinross.

XLVI. ACT Salv^ jure Cujuslibet.
June 16. 1685.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD Taking to Consideration, that there are several Acts of
Ratification, and others past, and made in this Session of Parliament, in
favors of particular persons, without calling or hearing of such as may be
thereby concerned, or prejudged; THEREFORE His Majesty, with Advice and Consent
of the Estates of Parliament, Statutes and Ordains, that all such particular
Acts, and Acts of Ratification past in manner foresaid, shall not prejudge any
third party of their lawful Rights, nor of their Actions and Defenses competent
thereupon, before the making of the said particular Acts, and Acts of
Ratification; And that the Lords of Session, and all other Judges of this
Kingdom, shall be obliged to judge betwixt parties, according to their several
Rights standing in their persons, before the making of the said Acts: All
which are hereby Exponed, and Declared to have been made, Salvo jure Cujuslibet.

XLVI. ACT of Adjournment to the last Tuesday of October.
June 16. 1685.
THE Kings Majesty Declares this Parliament Current* and Adjourns the same to
the last Tuesday of October next, 1685. And Ordains all Members of Parliament
to attend that Day: And that there be no new Elections of Commissioners from
Shires or Burghs, except upon the Death of some of the present Commissioners.

Collected and Extracted from the Registers and Records of Parliament, by
TARBAT, Cls. Reg.

A TABLE Of the Printed ACTS.
1 ACT For Security of the Protestant Religion. Page 1 2 A Declaration and
Offer of Duty by the Kingdom of Scotland, with an Annexation of the Excise to
the Crown. Page 2 3 Act concerning Citations in Processes for Treason. Page 3 4
Act concerning Witnesses in Processes for Treason. Page Ibid. 5 Act Declaring
it Treason to Take, or Own the Covenants. Page Ibid. 6 Act Obliging Husbands
to be liable for their Wives Fines. Page Ibid. 7 Act anent Porterfield of
Duchal, and Concealing of Supply given to Rebels. Page 4 8 Act against
Preachers at Conventicles, and Hearers at Field-Conventicles. Page Ibid. 9 Act
for the more effectual Payment, and Inbringing of His Majesty's Rents and
Revenues. Page Ibid: 10 Act concerning Judicial Confessions before the
Commissioners of Iusticiary. Page 5 11 Act Obliging Persons to accept Offices.
Page Ibid. 12 Act of Supply Page 6 13 Act for Taking the Test. Page 15 14 Act
Explaining the 9th Act of the Parliament 1669. concerning Prescriptions. Page
Ibid. 15 Act Explaining the 10th Act of the Parliament 1669, anent
Interruptions. Page 16 16 Act anent Justices of Peace. Page Ibid. 17 Act for
Taking the Oath of Allegiance. Page 17 18 Act concerning Vacant Stipends. Page
Ibid. 19 Act Ratifying the Privileges of the Senators of the College of
Justice. Page 18 20 Act for preserving Game. Page Ibid. 21 Act against stealing
of Dogs and Hawks. Page 21 22 Act concerning ^ailzies. Page Ibid. 23 Act
Ratifying the Opinion of the Lords of Session, anent these who refuse to Depone
anent the late Treasonable Proclamation, 1684. Page 22 24 Act Ordaining that
Tennents be obliged by their Tacks to live Regularly. Page Ibid. 25 Act
Ratifying two Acts of Parliament, and a Proclamation of Council, anent
apprehending of Rebels. Page 23 26 Act concerning Adjudications for Fines. Page
24 27 Act for securing Sea passengers. Page 25 28 Act and Commission for
Plantation of Kirks, and Valuation of Teinds. Page Ibid. 29 Act concerning
Citations before Circuit Courts Page 27 30 Act approving the Narrative of the
Plot. Page Ibid. 31 Act for security of the Officers of State and others. Page
Ibid. 32 Act concerning the Militia. Page 28 33 Act for security of the
Records. Page Ibid. 34 Act for Poll-mony. Page Ibid. 35 Act anent Messengers
Fees. Page 29 36 Act anent the Address of the Estates of Parliament of His
Majesty's ancient Kingdom of Scotland, to His Sacred Majesty, against the
Arch-Traitor, Archibald Campbel, sometime Earl of Argile. Page Ibid. 37 Act for
the Clergy. Page 30 38 Act concerning the Registration of Writs in the Books of
Session. Page 31 39 Act in Favors of Planters, and Inclosers of Ground. Page
32 40 Act of Annexation of the Offices belonging to the late Earl of Argile.
Page Ibid. 41 Act Declaring the Green-land-fishing to be a Manufactory. Page 33
42 Act of Annexation of several Lands to the Crown. Page Ibid. 43 Act in
Favors of the Inhabitants of Orkney and Zetland. Page 36 44 Act For a Standart
of Miles. Page Ibid. 45 Act in Favors of Sir William Bruce, for enlarging the
Shire of Kinross. Page Ibid. 46 Act Salvo Iure Cujuslibet. Page 38 47 Act of
Adjournment. Page 39
A TABLE Of the Acts, and Ratifications, past in the First Session, of His
Majesty's First Parliament, and which are not here Printed.
PRotestation by some Noblemen, and Others, Commissioners from Shires, and
Burghs, concerning their Precedence in the Rolls of Parliament. His Majesty's
Letter to the Parliament, With the Parliaments Answer. Record of the Production
of the Patent of Honor granted by His Majesty to the Viscount of Tarbat and
his Admission. Act for several Yearly Fairs, and Weekly Mercats, to some
Noblemen, and Others. Act in favors of the Viscount of Tarbat. Act in favors
of the Lord Advocat. Act Ratifying and Approving the late Earl of Argiles
Forfaulture. Act Ratifying and Approving the Sentence of Forfaulture against
the late Mr. Robert Baillie of Ierviswood. Act Ratifying and Approving the
Sentence of Forfaulture against Hamilton of Monckland. Act for a Commission
anent the Estate of the late Earl of Argile. Act in favors of the Viscount of
Tarbat, for changing an Highway. Remit from the Parliament to the Kings
Majesty concerning the Earls of Roxburgh and Lothian. Act Concerning Trade and
Manufactories. Act for a Commission of Trade. Commission for Regulation of
Inferior Judicatories. Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against Sir John
Cochran. Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against Sir Patrick Home of
Polwart. Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against Pringle of Torwoodlie.
Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against Mr. Robert Martine, sometime Clerk
to the Justice Court. Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against Thomas Stuart
of Cultness. Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against Mr. Robert Ferguson.
Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against the late Lord Melvill. Decree and
Sentence of Forfaulture against the Lairds of Cessnock elder and younger.
Decree and Sentence of Forfaulture against David Montgomery of Langshaw. Act
in favors of the Children of Sir William Primrose. Act Remitting the Processes
of Treason Depending before the Parliament, to the Justice Court. Act Reducing
the Conversion of the ancient Few-Duties of the Estate of Argile. Act for
Sowing Pease and Beans, and Inhibiting the Casting up of Ground within the
Shi^e of Aberdeen* Act in favors of the Burgh of Innerness. Act in favors of
the Burgh of Aberdeen. Act in favors of David Areskine of Dun. Act in favors
of the Town of Dalkeith. Act in favors of Sir Patrick Frazer of Doors. Act in
favors of the Town of Linlithgow. Act for Exacting a Petty Custom at several
Bridges. Ratification in favors of the Duke of Gordon. Protestation the Earl
of Marischal against the same. Protestation the Bishop of Aberdeen against the
same. Protestation the Earl of Finlater against the same. Protestation the
Lord of Drum against the same. Protestation Sir John Gordon in behalf of the
Duke of Gordon, against the foresaids Protestations. Ratification in favors of
the Earl of Mar. Ratification in favors of the Earl of Monteith. Three
Ratifications in favors of George Viscount of Tarbat. Ratification in favors
of the Royal College of Physicians. Protestation the Town of Edinburgh against
the same. Ratification in favors of Mr. Roderick Mackenzie of Prestounhall.
Ratification in favors of the Earl of Southesk. Ratification in favors of
Hugh Wallace of Inglistoun. Ratification in favors of Mr. John Richardson, and
John Drummond. Protestation Sir James Rocheid, and James Hamilton against the
same. Ratification in favors of Aeneas Mcleod. Ratification in favors of Sir
Robert Lowrie of Maxweltoun. Ratification in favors of Duncan Toshich of
Monyvaird. Ratification in favors of Colonel James Douglas, and Robert
Bartoun. Ratification in favors of the Apothecaries in Edinburgh. Protestation
the Chirurgian-Apothecaries against the same. Ratification in favors of
Christopher Irving. Ratification in favors of Colonel Barclay of Ury, and his
Son. Ratification in favors of the Trades of Edinburgh. Protestation the
Trades of the Cannongate against the same. Ratification in favors of the
Bonet-Makers and Litsters of Edinburgh. Protestation the Weavers of the
Cannongate against the same. Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Innerness.
Ratification in favors of John Scot of Comistoun. Ratification in favors of
James Miln. Ratification in favors of Mr. David Dewar Advocat. Ratification in
favors of Donald Mcdonald of Moydart. Ratification in favors of Sir William
Bruce of Kinross. Ratification in favors of Sir John Murray of Drumcairn.
Ratification in favors of the Lord of Drum. Ratification in favors of Sir
George Mackenzie, His Majesty's Advocat. Ratification in favors of James
Caddel of Muirtoun, with an Erection of the Lands of Blackstoh in an Burgh of
Barony. Ratification in favors of the Baxters of Edinburgh. Protestation the
Baxters of the Cannongate against the same. Ratification in favors of Mr.
David Grahame Tutor of Gorvy. Ratification of an Act of Convention of the
Burrows in favors of the Burgh of Barony of Cromarty. Ratification in favors
of Mr. Roderick Mackenzie of Dalvenan. Ratification in favors of John Lawder
of Fountainhall, and Sir John Lawder his Son. Ratification in favors of Sir
John Gordon of Rothemay. Protestation the Town of Forest, against James Caddel
of Muirtouns Ratification. Act in favors of the Bishop of the Isles. Decree
of Precedence in favors of the Earl of Strathmore.
FINIS.

