A PROCLAMATION ORDERED By His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland, Upon the
Horrid Murder of JAMES late Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate and
Metropolitan of all Scotland, and one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy
Council of that Kingdom. At Edinburgh, Sunday the Fourth of May, 1679.
CHARLES By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, or Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute,
Greeting:
We being fully and by legal Proofs assured of the late Horrid and Bloody
Murder committed upon Saturday last, being the Third Day of May instant, by
Ten or Eleven Fanatic and Execrable Assassinates, upon the Person of the most
Reverend Father in GOD, JAMES late Archbishop of St. Andrews, Primate of all
Scotland; which Barbarous and Inhumane Assassination will (we doubt not) spread
Horror and Amazement in the Hearts of such as believe that there is a GOD, or
a Christian Religion; A Cruelty exceeding the Barbarity of Pagans and Heathens,
amongst whom the Officers and Ministers of Religion are reputed to be Sacred,
and are by the respect born to a Deity whom they Adore, secured against all
such Bloody and Execrable Attempts; A Cruelty exceeding the belief of all true
Protestants, whose Churches have justly Stigmatized with the Marks of Impiety
all such as defile with Blood those Hands which they ought to hold up to
Heaven; and a Cruelty equal to any with which we can reproach the Enemies of
this True and Reformed Church! By which also not only the Principles of Humane
Society, but our Authority and Government (the Archbishop of St. Andrews being
one of Our Privy Council) is highly violated, and Example and Encouragement
given for Murdering all such as serve Us faithfully according to the Prescript
of Our Laws and Royal Commands: Daily Instances whereof We are to expect whilst
Field-Conventicles, those Rendezvouses of Rebellion, and Forgers of all Bloody
and Jesuitical Principles, are so frequented and followed, to the scandal of
all Government, and the Contempt of Our Laws; and which Murder is as far as is
possible rendered yet more detestable by the unmasked Boldness of such as durst
openly with bare Faces in the midst of Our Kingdom, at Midday assemble
themselves together, to Kill in Our Highway the Primate of Our Kingdom, and
one of Our Privy Council, by so many Strokes and Shots, as left his Body as it
were but one Wound, and many of which being given after they knew he was Dead,
were remarkable Proofs they were acted by a Spirit of Hellish and Insatiable
Cruelty:

Have therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, thought sit hereby to
Command and Charge all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailiffs of Regalities and
Bayliaries, and their Deputies, Magistrates of Burghs, and Officers of Our
Standing Forces, to Search, Seek, Take, and Apprehend the Persons Guilty of the
said Horrid Murder, or any Suspected by them, until they be brought to Justice;
and all our good and faithful Subjects to concur in the Taking and Securing (as
far as is in their power) those Assassinates. And in respect there is a Company
of vagrant and skulking Ruffians, who, to the great Contempt of all Government,
do Ride through this Our Kingdom, Killing Our Soldiers, Deforcing such as put
Our Laws in Execution, and Committing such Horrible Murders, who might be
easily Discovered, if all such, amongst whom they Converse, did, according to
their Duty, endeavor to Apprehend them, or give Notice of their Residence. We
have therefore thought fit, Conform to the 144 Act of Parliament 12, King James
6. to Command and Charge all Our Subjects, that whenever any unknown Men or
Vagabonds happen to repair amongst them, That they with all possible speed
Certify any of Our Privy Council, Officers of Our Forces, or any having Trust
under Us thereof; With Certification to them, That if they omit the same, they
shall be punished with all Rigor, Conform to the said Act. And since several of
the said Assassinates are known to have been Tenants in the Shire of Fiffe,
whose Faces will be known to such of the Witnesses as were present. We hereby
Require and Command all the Heretors and Masters of the said Shire of Fiffe and
Kinrosse, to bring their Tenants, Cottars and Servants, living in the
respective Presbyteries, upon the several days, and to the places following,
viz. To St. Andrews, etc. There to be seen by the said Witnesses, and to
continue there until they be Examined; With Certification to such of the said
Tenants, Cottars and Servants as shall be absent, they shall be reputed as
accessory to the said Crime; And the Masters, if they produce them not, or if
hereafter they harbor any that shall not Compeer, they shall be reputed as
Favorers of the said Assassination; And whereas there are several Persons under
Caption and Intercommuning in the said Shire for several Causes, and left
Persons, who are innocent, may be thereby debarred from appearing, We have
thought fit hereby to sist and supersede all Execution upon any Letters of
Caption or Intercommuning, or any other Warrant, for securing of Persons for
the space of Forty eight hours, after the said Diets of appearance. And to the
end the said cruel Murder may be the more easily discovered, We do hereby offer
and give full assurance of our Indemnity to any one of the said Assassinates,
who shall discover his Accomplices, and such as hounded them out, and present
payment of the Sum of Ten Thousand Merks to any who shall inform who were the
said Assassinates, if upon his Information they, or any of them can be
apprehended, that they may be brought to condign Punishment. And We Ordain
these Presents to be Printed and Published at the Market-Cross of Edinburgh,
and other Places needful.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Fourth Day of May 1679 and of Our
Reign the One and Thirtieth Year.
GOD save the KING.
Reprinted at LONDON by THO. NEWCOMB. 1679.


