A PROCLAMATION FOR Adjourning the Parliament from the First day of March next,
to the Eighteenth day of the said Month.
Edinburgh, the Eighteenth day of February, 1690.
Whereas his Majesty, by his Royal Letter of the Date at Holland-house, the
Thirtieth of November last bybast, Authorized and Required the Lords of his
Privy Council, to issue forth a Proclamation in his Name, Continuing the
Adjournment of this Current Parliament till the First day of March next: And
that the Council have in obedience to His Majesty's Commands, and in His Name,
and by virtue of His Royal Authority, Declared the same Parliament Current, and
Continued the Adjournment thereof until the said First day of March next: And
His Majesty having signified by his Letter, to the Lords of tne Privy Council,
of the Date at Kensingtoun, the Thirteenth day of February, One thousand six
hundred and ninety years, that many great and urgent Matters, which concerned
the good of the Protestant Interest, and the well of these Kingdoms, did
necessitate his Majesty to continue the Adjournment of the, parliament in this
Kingdom for some longer time, and has thereby Authorized and Required the
said Lords, to issue forth a Proclamation in his Name, continuing the
Adjournment until the Eighteenth day of the said Month of March next. Therefore
the Lords of the Privy Council, Do in his Majesty's Name, and by his special
Command and Authority, Declare the said Parliament Current, and continues the
Adjournment thereof until the said Eighteenth of March next: And Require and
Command the Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of
Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, that incontinent these Presents seen, they pass to
the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of
this Kingdom, and there in his Majesty's Name and Authority foresaid, by open
Proclamation, make Intimation of the Continuation of the said Adjournment, from
the First day of March next, to the Eighteenth day of the said Month; Requiring
hereby all the Members of Parliament to attend that Day, at Ten a clock in the
Forenoon, in the usual way, and at the ordinary place, and upon the accustomed
Certifications, For doing of all which, the said Lords commit to them
conjunctly and severally his Majesty's full Power by these Presents, delivering
the famine by them duly Execute and Indorsed again to the Bearer. Extracted by
me,

GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concili.
WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of Privy Council.

Reprinted at London by G. Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, 1690.


