royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
A PROCLAMATION For discovery of the horrid and sacrilegious murder of the
late Arch Bishop of Saint Andrews.
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To (...) our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, or
Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting;
We being fully and by legal proofs assured of the late horrid and bloody
murder committed upon Saturnday last, being the third of May instant, by Tenor
eleven Fanatic assasinats, upon the Person of the most reverend Father in God,
James late Archbishop of Saint Andrews, Primat of all Scotland, which
barbarous and inhumane assasination, and parracide will (we doubt not) spread
horror and amazement in all the hearts of such as believe that there is a God,
or a Christian Religion; A cruelty exceeding the barbarity of Pagans, and
Heathens, amongst whom the Officers and Ministers of Religion are reputed to be
sacred, and are by the respect born to the deity, which they adore, secured
against allsuch bloody and execrable attempts, A cruelty exceeding the belief
of all true Protestants, whose Churches have justly stigmatized with the marks
of impiety, all such as defile with blood those hands which they ought to hold
up toHeaven; And a cruelty equal to any with which we can reproach the Enemies
of this true and Reformed Church: By which also not only the principles of
humane Society, but our Authority and Government (the said Archbishop, being
one of our Privy Council) is highly violated, and example and encouragement
given for murdering all such as serve us faithfully according to the prescript
of our Laws and Royal Commands, daily instances whereof we are to expect,
whilst Field-Conventicles, those rendevouzes of Rebellion, and forges of all
bloody and Jesuitical principles, are so frequented and followed: to the
scandal of all Government, and the contempt of our Laws; And which murder is
as far as is possible, rendered yet more detestable, by the untasked boldness
of such, as durst openly with bare faces, in the midst of our Kingdom, at
midday assemble themselves together, to Kill in our Highway the Primate of
our Kingdom, and one of our Privy Council, by so many strokes and shots as
left his body, as if (...) but one wound, and many of which being given after
they knew he was dead, were remarkable proofs they were acted by (...) of
hellish and insatiable cruelty: We have therefore, with advice of onr Privy
Council thought fit hereby to command and charge (...) Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Baylies of Regalities and Bayliaries and their Deputes, Magistrates of Burghes,
and Officers of Our standing Forces, to search, seek, take and apprehend the
persons guilty of the said horrid Murder, or any suspect by them, and to
imprison them until they be brought to Justice, and all Our good and faithful
Subjects to concur in the taking and securing as far as is in their power these
Assassinates; And in respect there is a company of vagrant and sculking
Russians, who to the great contempt of all Government do ride through this Our
Kingdom, killing Our Soldiers, deforcing such as put Our Laws in execution,
and committing such horrible Murders, who might be easily discovered if all
such amongst whom they converse did according to their duty endeavor to
apprehend them, or give notice where they haunt or resort: We have therefore
thought fit conform to the 144. Act, Par: 12, K. Ja. 6. To command and charge
all Our Subjects That whenever any unknown men or vagabounds shall repair
amongst them, that they with all possible speed certify any of Our Privy
Council, Officers of Our Forces, or any having Trust under Us Thereof; with
certification to them, that if they omit the same, they shall be punished with
all rigor conform to the said Act. And since several of the said Assassinates
are known to have been Tennents in the Shire of Fife, whose faces will be known
to such of the Witnesses as were present; We hereby require and command all the
Heretors and Masters of the said Shire of Fife and Kinross to bring their
Tennents, Cottars and Servants, and others dwelling on their Lands, to the
respective Towns at the Dyets after mentioned, viz. those within the Presbytrie
of St. Andrews, to the Town of St. Andrews, upon the thirteenth day of May
instant; those within the Presbytrie of Couper, to the Town of Couper upon the
sixteenth day of the said Month; those within the Presbytrie of Kirkady, to
the Town of Kirkady upon the twenty day of the said Month, and those within
the Presbytrie of Dumfermline, to the Town of Dumfermline upon the twenty third
day of the said Month, at ten a Clock in the forenoon, upon each one of the
said Days, there to continue and abide till they be examined by the
Sheriff-Deputs of the said Shire, who are hereby Commissionate to that effect,
and to be seen by the said Witnesses, With certification to such of the said
Tennents, Cottars, Servants, and others foresaid as shall be absent, they shall
be reputed as accessory to the said Crime; And the Masters if they produce them
not, or if hereafter they harbor any that shall not compear, they shall be
reputed favorers of the said Assassination. And whereas there are some persons
under Caption or Intercommuning in the said Shire for several causes, and lest
persons who are innocent of that horrid Crime, may be thereby debarred from
appearing, and vindicating themselves; We have thought fit hereby to sist and
supersede all execution upon any Letters of Caption or Intercommuning, or any
other warrant for securing of any persons for any cause for the space of forty
eight hours before and after the said dyets of appearance, that they may
safely come and go without any trouble or impediment whatsoever. And to the end
the said cruel Murder may be the more easily discovered, We do hereby offer
and give full assurance of Our Indemnity to any one of the said Assassinats
who shall discover his accomplices and such as hounded them out, and of present
payment of the sum of ten thousand merks to any who shall inform who were the
said Assassinats, if upon his information, they or either of them can be
apprehended, that they may be brought to condign punishment. And ordains these
Presents to be Printed, and Published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and at
the Market Crosses of all the Royal Burghs in the Shires of Fife and Kinross,
and to be read at the Paroch Kirks of the said Shires, and Jurisdictions within
the same upon Sunday next, being the eleventh of this instant, immediately after
the ordinary time of Divine Service in the forenoon that the same may come to
the knowledge of all Persons concerned. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the
fourth day of May, 1679. and of Our Reign the thretty (...) year.

Alexr. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the King.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1675.


