C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament from the tenth of July, to the sixth
of December, 1683.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute Greeting;
Whereas We by Our Royal Proclamation, Dated the eight day of February last,
Adjourned the Parliament of this Our Ancient Kingdom, to the tenth day of July
Instant; And there being no urgent Occasion for their meeting then, (else We
had sent down Our Dearest Royal Brother, Our High Commissioner, in due time,)
Nor yet does the present state of Our Affairs require their Meeting for some
time longer. We therefore with Advice of Our Privy Council, have thought fit by
this Our Royal Proclamation, to continue the Adjournment of Our said
Parliament, from the said tenth day of July, to the sixth day of December next
ensuing the Date of these Presents: We being always resolved to continue Our
said Dearest Royal Brother, to be Our High Commissioner in all the Sessions,
and until the end of that Our Parliament: And to the end all the Members
thereof may attend that day, in the usual way, and upon the accustomed
Certifications, and that Our Pleasure may be known in the Premises. Our Will
is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our
Letters seen, Ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and the Remanent Market
Crosses of the head Burghs of this Kingdom, and there in Our Name and
Authority, by open Proclamation, make public Intimation of the said
Adjournment of Our Parliament, from the said tenth day of July, to the said
sixth day of December next ensueing; Requiring all the Members of that Our
Parliament, to attend that day in the usual way, and upon the accustomed
Certifications. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally, Our
full Power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you, duly Execute and
Indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of August, One thousand
six hundred eighty and three. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and fifth Year
Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. PAT. MENIES. Cls. Sti. Concilij.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, 1683.

Reprinted at London, by George Croom, in Thames Street, over against
Baynard's Castle,


