A NEW DISCOVERY OF SEVERAL PASSAGES performed by the Malignant Party, who is
resident in the North, and here laid open and made manifest to the public view
of the world.

Describing who he is, what be his qualities, conditions aims and intents,
and what he has already done;

Endeavoring the desolution of the Parliament, and the disturbance of the
peace of the Kingdom, now producing Civil War.

Showing who are the chief Noble Men that appear in these distractions and
wicked designs.

By W. S.

Printed in the year M.DC.XLII.

A new Discovery of several passages, performed by the Malignant Party, etc.
When the Parliament endeavored to work a reformation of the great
disorders, both in the Ecclesiastical and Civil State, this their pious
proceedings drew a more particular envy and odium upon it; than was usual to
the generality of Parliaments, and was the first cause that those, who had
swallowed up in their thoughts our Religion and Liberties, and now saw
themselves defeated by this means, bended all their endeavors, and raised all
their forces to destroy it, whereupon they carried the King from the Parliament
to York, and possessed him with such a hatred of the Parliament, so that under
the pretense of a defensive guard, he has by the advice of this Malignant
party raised a great Army.

This malignant party if the word be taken in the largest sense, are all those
who upon different bad respects and to advance their own wicked purposes, have
alienated the Kings affections from the Parliament, set this Kingdom into the
combustion of a Civil War, and either fearing reformation, or seeking
preferment by betraying their Country, to serve the Court have combined to
bury the happiness of this Kingdom in the ruin of the Parliament, and
afterward to effect that which was first in their intention, that is, the
introducing of an arbitrary government, and the changing of Religion into
Popery and Superstition.

The name and title of malignant party (now so commonly used) may be derived
from male agens or from doing and contriving that which is wicked and evil, as
being a company of Royalists gathered about the King, who for their own safety
being most of them delinquents and other ill affected persons, do endeavor
like so many Phaethons to set the whole Kingdom of England on fire, that so
they may see it ruinated in the flames of a Civil war.

They pretend that they are the Kings friends, and to give a fair color to
their malignant purposes they are fu^ly resolved to defend the Kingdom even to
the utmost hazard of their lives and estates, and as they formerly endeavored
and also have prevayled in settting the King against the Parliament, so now
they have persuaded his Majesty to set up his Standard, to raise a great Army,
and to give them power and authority under the name of Cavaleers to commit
diverse outrageous insolences in the Country, while they go about by violence
to put in execution the illegal Commission of Array.

The people that do make up this Malignant party, may be distinguished into
several sorts and kinds, though all aiming at the subversion of the Kingdom,
and the conversion of the Protestant Religion into superstitious Popery, they
being gather Papists or people popishly inclined, rash unadvised noble men,
newtrall Protestants, decayed Gentlemen, Delinquents fearing punishment,
cutting Cavaleers indebted persons, loose idle livers, inconsiderate giddy
Gentlemen, ambitious discontented Clergy men, and factious troublesome Lawyers,
all which have conspired together to make a Malignant Army upon several wicked
grounds and reasons; The Papists ill affected to the peace and welfare of this
Kingdom, fearing that their religion shall be utterly rooted out of this
land, do all ^oyne their forces together to oppose the Parliament; in regard
they have so violently endeavored to work a general reformation, and to
extirpate their idolatrous superstition. The unadvised Noble men to gratify
and please the King though against their own Country, have by their purses and
presence encouraged the Kings Majesty to a Civil War The Gentlemen well
descended, but of weak and decayed estates, conceive Civil War to be the
best way suddenly to raise their fortunes. The Cavaleers loving to fish in
troubled waters, do imagine that the dissension of a Civil War will be
their time of harvest. Others caring not what the cause of the war be being
indebted and rather than they will take pains in their calling, have recourse
unto the wars only for security and present maintenance Giddy brained
Gentlemen follow these, missed by scandalous reports, and false surmises of the
Parliaments proceedings. The discontented Clergymen and ambitious Lawyers,
although they are no soldiers yet being armed with malicious tongues, the
Divine by his preaching and doctrine does endeavor to stir up dissension and
procure Civil War, and the Lawyer against conscience and equity does
possess the King with quirkes of Law, encouraging him to prosecute illegal
courses according to their evil counsels

It was not therefore without good ground has stood so much to have the
disposing of the Militia in their own power, that so the Magazine of Arms in
several Counties, might not be employed against the Kingdom but be put into
such hands as the Parliament might conf^de in, ^o suppress commotions within
our selves. For were these per^ici^^^ m^lignant persons about the King masters
of them, ^^w ^e would it be for them to master the Parliament (...) ^^^gdom?
And what could we expect but mire and destruction from them who make the King
revile and detest his P^^^i^m^nt, from them who have emberqued the King in so
many designs to overthrow this Parliament, and have so long thirsted to see
Religion and liberty confounded together?

These and the like are the intentions of the malignant party, who are now
gathered into a mighty Army, and amongst the rest the Cavaleers being the
Champions of the malignants do commit diverse outrageous insolences in several
countries, killing, robbing and slaying wheresoever they come, setting houses
on fire, and keeping the Country in such subjection that they dare not hardly
look out of doors, riding along as assistants unto those that have commission
to compel his Majesty's Subjects to submit to the illegal Commission of
Array, thereby to strengthen themselves by leauying forces against the
Parliament.

And what is the end, in persuance whereof they have thus traitorously combined
against this Parliament? Is it not to ruin this Parliament that has set a
stop to the violence so long by them intended? Is it not to induce an
alteration of Religion, and the subversion of the Laws and liberties of the
Kingdom? Is it not plainly to bring in popery and Idolatry together with an
arbitrary form of government, that so tyranny accompanied with merciless
taxes (leavied according to the fancy of a favorite) should not leave the
common people anything which they may call their own, all being at the will and
disposing of the Prince and some few evil counselors. And that the Malignant
party compounded of several ill affected persons, who for many reasons above
mentioned do all wickedly conspite against the Parliament, may the better go
through with their work and accomplish their own pernicious designs, many
Lords and other member of the Parliament instead of discharging their duty in
the service of the Parliament, are as they pretend by his Majesty's command,
but indeed drawn away by their own malevolent and malignant affections gone to
York, there to contribute their advise and assistance to the destruction of the
Parliament, endeavoring to possess the people that the Parliament will take
away the Law, and introduce an arbitrary government, and that it had been much
better if this ^arliament ha^ never been called, having after three years
s^t^^^ng in consultation done nothing for the benefit of the subject, but by
provoking the Kings Majesty, engaged the whole Land into the misery of a civil
war. With these and the like false aspersions diverse Lords and great personages
being Papists or popishly inclined, do in their several Countries endeavor
to compel the Subjects and the trained Bands to obey the Kings illegal
Commission of Array, raising to that end both horse and foot in several
Countie^ to oppose the Parliament and beget a civil war within the Kingdom.
The chief Noble men that appear in this rebellious design are the Earl of
Northampton, the L. Dunsmore, L. Willoughy of Er by son to the E. of Lindsey,
Henry Hastings Esquire, and diverse other unknown persons in the Counties of
Lincoln, Nottingham, Leicester, Warwick, Oxfordshire, and other places, the
Marquess of Hertford, the L. Paulet, L. Seymer, Sir John Stawell, Sir Ralph
Hopton, John Digby Esquire, together with their accomplices, who have gotten
together great forces in the County of Sommerset, and do both there and in
other parts of the Kingdom, raise forces to the disturbance of the peace of the
Kingdom. The Lords and Commons therefore in Parliament seeing that the Malignant
pity does thus oppose their proceedings have ordained the E. of Essex L.
General, of their forces, to prevent the furious outrages which are daily
committed by the malignants. Therefore let all true heatred Subjects come to
help the Parliament against this malignant party consisting of Papists, ill
affected persons to the Commonwealth, and a multitude of malcontents, that the
Devil may not by these evil and malignant agents work the dissolution of
this happy Parliament, and the destruction of the Kingdom.

Finis

