C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION,
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, and to all and sundry Our good and loving
Subjects, Greeting.
Forasmuch as Archibald Earl of Argyl, being (for a treasonable Paper, wherein
he had defamed Our Parliament and Laws) found guilty, by the Verdict of an
unanimous Jury, of leising-making betwixt Us, Our Parliament and People, of
reproaching Our Laws, mis-representing Our Government, and of the crime of
High Treason in usurping Our Authority; he was notwithstanding kept at large,
without any such restraints as are usual to persons so found guilty: And now he
having, upon the twentieth day of December instant escaped, adding the breach
of prison to his other crimes, and without waiting for that clemency which he
might have relied more upon, if he had not been conscious to himself of
guiltiness that required such an escape, We have by Our Royal Letter, ordained
all execution to be sisted, until We understood the nature of his crime; And
our Privy Council having, after the Verdict, interposed with Us, that
notwithstanding he was found guilty, and that it was usual for completing the
Process, that sentence should be once pronounced, that yet We might in Our
Clemency, ordain execution to be stopped during Our Royal pleasure. OUR will is
herefore, and We charge you straightly and command, that incontinent, these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-crosses of Edinburgh, Strivling, Perth,
Dumbartoun, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority,
by open Proclamation, command and charge all Our Sheriffs, Stewarts,
Magistrates of Our Burghs of Regality and Royalty, and all others in
Jurisdiction, to pass, pursue, take, apprehend, imprison and present to
Justice, the person of the said Archibald Earl of Argyl, where ever he can be
found within the bounds of their Jurisdictions: And if he happen to flee out of
one Jurisdiction into another, that they pursue him within the same: And We
hereby Require and Command all Our good and loving Subjects, to concur with,
aid, fortify, and assist our said Magistrates in the prosecution of this Our
service. And if the said Earl of Argyl shall happen to flee to Strengths, or
Houses for Refuge, that Our said Magistrates and others assisting them,
assiege and take the same in by force of Arms: And if it shall happen, that the
said Earl of Argyl, or any of his Accomplices (resisting to be taken) be killed,
mutilate, or slain by Our said Officers, or any assisting them, We declare
they are hereby indemnified, and shall never be brought in question therefore,
Civilly nor Criminally, in all time coming. And farther, that ye, in Our Name
and Authority foresaid, Prohibit and Discharge all Our Subjects of this Our
Kingdom, to resset supply, or intercommune with the said Earl, or his
Accomplices, or to furnish him Meat, Drink, House, Harboury, or any other thing
necessar or comfortable to him, or to transport him to, or from Ferries, under
the pain of Treason.

Given under Our Signet at Halyrudehouse, the twenty one day of December, One
thousand six hundred and eighty one. And of Our Reign the thirty three Year.
Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1681.


