C R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Against the Resetting of Tenants, or Servants without
Testificats.
CHA^LES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, his Brethret Heralds, Macers of Council,
Pursevants, or Messengers of Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and
severally, specially const^^ute, Greeting;
Forasmuch, as We have for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, as it
is now established by the Laws of thi^ Our ancient Kingdom, taken care that all
unlawful Meetings, upon pretense of Religion, may be restrained, by which many
of the Commons of that Our Kingdom, have been for several years withdrawn from
their Paroch Churches, and been thereby deprived of the appointed means for
their establishment in the true Fear of God, and the Duty they ow to Us, and
Our Government, and have b^^n seduced to keep seditious Field Conventicles in a
tumultuous way, and other Disorderly Meetings, where they may and do actually
hear, declared Tr^^^ours, Intercommuned and Vagrant Preachers, and any who
without license or authority, do impiously assume the holy Orders of the
Church, and ^ake it their business to diffuse amongst the unwarry and credulous
multitude seditious and false doctrines, and pernicious principles, which are
destructiv^ ^o all Order and Constitution of Societies, by which these who
frequent those Meetings, are observed to be corrupted and poisoned with an open
and o^stinate contempt of all authority Civil or Ecclesiastic, and to be led
into most irregular practices, which are inconsistent with all Order and
Government, ^^d are not to be allowed in any Protestant or Christian Church:
For remeding of which growing evils, and vindicating Our Authority and Laws
fr^^ such gross violations and affronts, We have commanded a Band to be
subscribed, whereby Heretors, Liferenters, and Masters are obliged for their
^enents, Servants, and others living upon their Lands, and they for themselves,
for obeying such Laws as may secure against schism and separation; and ^ast
the same be eluded, and the Heretors, Liferenters; and Masters prejudged by the
Tenants, Servants, and others foresaids, deserting such as the the said Band,
^or least the said Tenants Servants or others, may be encouraged not to take
the same upon expectation that after they are removed by their Masters, or run
away from their Masters, for not taking the Band or for going to Conventicles,
(...) withdrawing from public Ordinances, or upon any other account provided
against by the Masters Band, they may or will be sheltered brothers: We
therefore, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do hereby Require and
Command, That no Tenants, Servants, or others ^^oresaids whatsomever within
this Kingdom, be resett upon another man's ground or in his service, without a
Testificate from the Heretor, Master, or fr^^ the Minister of the Paroch where
they live, that they have lived orderly, in manner foresaid, Declaring hereby,
That whatsoever Heretors, Lif^^enters, or Master^, shall receive any such
Tenants, or Servants, or others foresaids, without such a Testificate, they
shall be liable to such Fines as Our Privy Council shall think fit to inflict
suitable to their Guilt, both for repairing the Damage done to the Heretor,
Liferenter, or Master, and for ^unishing their Contempt of this Our
Proclamation: And to the effect, Our pleasure in the premises may be made
known to all persons concerned: OUR WILL i^ herefore, and we charge you
strictly and command, That incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the
Market Cross of Edinbur^^, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name
and Authority, by open Proclamation, with all Solemnities requisite, make
Publication of the Premises, that none of Our Leiges may pretend ignorance
thereof. And Ordains these presents, and the Band, and Act of Council
underwritten, to be printed, and subjoyned hereunto: The which to do, We
committ to you conjunctly and severally, Our full power by these Our Letters,
delivering them by you duly execute and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of February, 1678. and
of Our Reign, the thirtieth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al.
Gibsone, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Follows the Tenor of the Band mentioned in the foresaid Proclamation.
I (...) under subscribing, do faithfully bind and oblige me, that I, my Wife,
Bairns, and Servants, respectively, shall no ways be present at any
Conventicles, and disorderly Meetings in time coming, but shall live orderly in
obedience to the Law, under the Penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament
made thereanent, As also, I bind and oblige me, that my whole Tenants and
Cottars respectively their Wives, Bairs, and Servants, shall likewise refrain
and abstain from the said Conventicles and other illegal Meetings, not
authorized by the Law, and that they shall live orderly in obedience to the
Law; And further, tha^ I nor they shall not resett, supply, or commune with
forfeited persons, intercommuned Ministers, or vagrant Preachers, but shall do
our outmost endeavor to apprehend their persons: And in case my said Tenants,
Cottars, and their foresaids shall contraveen, I shall take and apprehend any
person or persons guilty thereof, and present them to the Judge ordinar, that
they may be fined or imprisoned therefore, as is provided in the Acts of
Parliament made thereanent; otherwise I ^h^l remove them and their families
from off my ground, and if I shall failie herein, I shall be liable to such
penalties as the said Delinquents have incurred by the law: Consenting to the
Registration hereof in the Books of His Majesty's Privy Council, or Books of
any other Judges competent, That Letters and executorials may be direct
hereupon in form as effeirs, And constitutes my Procurators.

Edinburgh, the eleventh day of February, 1678.
THE Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council do declare, that the Heretors,
Liferenters and Masters, Who have subscribed, or shall hereafter subscribe the
Band above written: Obliging them for their Tenants, and others therein
specified, shall be only liable for the penalties by the delinquencies of
their Tenants, and others foresaids, in case the Ten^nts, and others for whom
they are bound shall be pursued and convict within year and day after the
committing of the Delinquencies witho^t prejudice to pursue the Tenants, or
others foresaids, themselves at any time thereafter as accords: Extracted by me,

Al. Gibsone, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printed to the King's most
Sacred Majesty. 1678.


