AN ABSTRACT (With REMARKS) OF Dr. Scot's Sermon, PREACHED At Chelmsford
Assizes, Aug. 31. 1685. WHEREIN The Doctor prophetically gives his Opinion of
the Consequences of the late Revolution, concluding with an excellent Character
of King JAMES the Second.

(...). St. Luke 19. 22. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first Works, or else, etc. Rev. 2. 5. London, Printed in the
Year 1693*

To the Gentlemen of the Vestry of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in
the County of Middlesex.
Gentlemen,
THis little Piece is dedicated to you by a true Lover of your Souls, being an
Abstract with Remarks, of an excellent Sermon formerly preached by your now
Reverend Doctor, as a Test of whose Veracity this is presented to you. And as
it is hoped you will be careful to examine the Doctrines of your Preachers by
the Word of God, the holy Scriptures, which is the prime and chief Rule to try
the Doctrines of Men by (like the noble Bereans, who searched the Scriptures
whether those things were so; i. e. Whether the Doctrines of the Apostles did
agree with that Rule and Standard,) so likewise that you will consult as a
subordinate Rule, the Books and Writings of your said Reverend Doctor (to whose
Conduct you have resigned your Souls) which he made and wrote before these
Backsliding and Apostate Times; wherein Men have learned to prevaricate, and
prefer their Interest to their Duty, (your Spiritual Guides themselves having
stumbled and fallen,) that you may be the better able to judge whether he gives
you the true Interpretation of the holy Text, according to the Analogy of
Gospel Faith and Manners, or preaches (...), another Gospel, which will
Anathematize an Apostle or an Angel, it being your Duty to hold fast the Form
of sound Words, and to be Followers of Men as far as they are of Christ.

You Will pardon this Address, coming from one who seeks not yours but you; and
who is,

Gentlemen, Your humble Servant, and sincere and faithful Monitor, Philalethes.
Nov. 6. 1693.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SOme Envious Man designing totally to suppress and rob the World of the
Benefit of it, having bought up all the Copies that he could meet with, of Dr.
Scot's excellent and famous Sermon preached at Chelmsford Assizes, I have
thought fit, and that out of an honest and charitable Design for the public
Good, to make this Abstract of the most remarkable Passages in it. And I pray
God (to use the Author's Words in his Epistle Dedicatory with a little
Alteration) it may answer my honest Intention, which is to do Good to the World
by it, to open the Eyes of those miserable misled Souls that in numerous Droves
have been seduced into Faction and Disloyalty and to direct their wandering
Steps into the Paths of Righteousness, Peace, and Obedience.

An Abstract (with Remarks) of Dr. Scot's Sermon, preached at Chelmford
Assizes, on Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, etc.
HEre is the Extent of this Duty, Page 1.
it is to every Soul; that is, to every Man, of what Order, or Degree, or
Quality soever; whether he be High or Low, Rich or Poor, Spiritual or Secular,
none are exempted, Let every Soul be subject; without any exception either of
St. Peter and his Successors, or of the Body of the Qu. Whether the People then
have Power to depose their Lawful Sovereign, and elect a new King? and whether
to do so, is not Popery?
People; for the Reason extends equally to both, because the Powers that are are
ordained of God; they are by God's Commission, and rule by his Authority; and
therefore neither the Bishop of Rome, nor the Majority of the People, can claim
exemption from this Duty of Subjection, Qu. Whether the Convention then did not
set themselves above God?
without arrogating to themselves an Authority superior to Gods.

You have here the Matter of this Duty, and that is to be subject; in which
comprehensive Phrase is included the whole Duty of Subjects to their Princes
and Governors, honoring their Persons, reverencing their Authority, assisting
them against their Enemies, defending the Rights of their Government, and
conscientiously rendering to them their Customs and Tribute, but more
especially and particularly it includes our free and ready Submission to them
in yielding a cheerful Obedience to their Commands, so far as we can innocently
and consistently with our Duty to God; and where we cannot, in patiently
undergoing all those Pains and Penalties they shall think meet to inflict on us
for our Disobedience, in suffering their unjust Persecutions without murmuring
or clamor, without disturbing their Government, or resisting their Authority,
or endeavoring to repel their Force with Force, but meekly submitting our Cause
to God, who is the Patron and Protestor of oppressed Innocence.

This Duty of Subjection to our Superiors, Page 8.
implies our meek and patient Submission to the Penalties of their Laws, when
upon a full Persuasion of the unlawfulness of them we cannot actually comply
with them; for when the Commands of our Prince do interfere with the Commands
of God, it is an undoubted Rule, That we must obey God rather than Man: But
then at the same time that our Allegiance to the Throne of Heaven obliges us to
refuse Active Obedience to our temporal Prince, it indispensably obliges us to
render Passive, and not to use any Violence against him, Qu. How faithfully Dr.
Scot, and his Swearing Brethren, have observed this Doctrine?
though it be in the Defense of our Estates, or Liberties, or Lives, or which
ought to be dearer than all, our Religion; for the just use of Violence is
founded in a just Authority over the Person upon whom it is exercised, and
supposes a Right in him that uses it to call the Person to account against whom
he uses it, and punish him according to his demerit, without which Right the
use of Violence is an injurious Outrage and Oppression; but Sovereign Princes
are in their several Dominions next to and immediate under God, the most high
Sovereign of the World, and therefore having no Authority but his above them,
are accountable only at his Tribunal; so that for Subjects, in any Case
whatsoever, to offer Violence to their Prince, is to usurp the Throne, and
invade his Sovereign Tribunal; for in offering Violence to them we claim a
Superiority over them, and in so doing impiously trespass upon the Peculiar of
the Almighty, and arrogate his Divine Prerogative of being King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords: For since God alone is placed above them, as being the sole King
of Sovereign Kings, how can we assume Superiority over them, without setting
our selves in the Place of God? Unless therefore we will render our selves
guilty of the highest Affront to, and Profanation of, the Divine Majesty, we
have no other Remedy, when ever we are reduced to that Extremity, as that we
cannot obey our Prince without disobeying God, but to discharge our Duty
courageously, and faithfully, and meekly, and quietly to submit to the unjust
Persecutions of our Prince, referring our Cause to that Sovereign Tribunal
before which Princes and Peasants must one day give Account together, for every
unjust and unrighteous Action. And though this may seem a hard Chapter to those
who consider only one side of the Case, yet there is nothing more apparent than
that the Liberty of resisting Princes would prove a far greater Mischief to the
World than all the Cruelties and Oppressions of the most barbarous Tyrants; for
what though there was never any Governor so wise and good as not to be
chargable with some Faults and Miscarriages, we ought to consider that our
World must be governed by Men, and not by Angels, and that perhaps there never
was any Lawful Prince so bad, the Benefits of whose Government did not far
outweigh the Mischiefs of his Tyranny; and therefore it is wisely eligible for
us rather to suffer a less Evil than to deprive our selves of a greater Good.

The third and last Consideration in this Duty, Page 12.
viz. the Object of it, the Higher Powers; by which its evident we are to
understand the Persons of Sovereign Princes and Governors, and not the Laws and
Constitutions, as some of Of which Number the Bishop of St. Asaph, even Dr.
Scot. being Judge, is to be reckoned; who, in his Discourse of God's Ways of
disposing of Kingdoms, Page 7. expounds Romans 13. 1. after a new Fashion,
putting Kingdoms for Kings, and resisting their Laws for resisting their
Persons; whereas the latter is a Crime, whilst the former may be a Virtue; or
else the Three Children in Daniel sinned, and were, according to that Author,
damned. His Words are these, Page 7. The Powers that be are of God; that is,
The several Kingdoms and States, even all that are in the World, all have their
Authority from God. And whosoever disobeys or resists the public Order and
Government of the Kingdom, or State where he lives, he disobeys or resists the
Ordinance of God; and (...), he shall be called to Account for it, or as it is
in our English Bible, shall receive to himself damnation.
our Republican Doctors pretend; for this Epistle was writ either under Claudius
or Nero, whose Wills were the only Laws they governed by, and yet these were
the Higher Powers to whom the Apostle requires our Subjection; and those whom
he here calls the Higher Powers, in the third Verse he calls the Rulers, and in
the fourth Verse he tells us that this Higher Power is the Minister of God, a
Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil, which must necessarily be
meant of the Governors, and not of the Laws; and accordingly St. Peter thus
explains it, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the King, (...), as Supreme, which is the very Word that
is used here for the Higher Powers; so that by the Higher Powers here, must be
meant the Person or Persons that are rested with the Supreme and Sovereign
Power.

Now the Supreme Power to which we in this Nation owe subjection is the King,
Page 13.
whom our Laws do declare and recognize to be our Supreme and Sovereign Lord;
for so, for instance, the Statute of Praemunire declares, That the Crown of
England is in no earthly subjection, but immediately subject to God in all
things touching the Regality of the same. -- And in other Laws it is declared
to be High Treason to Levy Arms against the King, either within or without the
Realm, and that it is unlawful for both or either Houses of Parliament to raise
or levy War offensive or defensive against his Majesty, Qu. Then whether the
Convention did act honestly and consistently with their Duty, to raise such
immense Sums, to levy War against the King in Ireland?
or his Heirs and Lawful Successors; and that it is not Lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King, Qu. Whether to take Arms
against the King is not now thought and pronounced lawful, the Law being
abrogated that made it unlawful?
and that we are to abhor that traitorous Position of taking Arms by his
Authority against his Person, or against those who are commissioned by him.

I could never have imagined we could be so abandoned of our (...), Page 20.
as in the same Age to act over the same (...) again; but if, as a just
Punishment of our Sins, God should permit us to be so far infatuated, as to
sell our Liberties again for fear of being enslaved, to fight against the
Principles of our Religion in the defense of it, to rip up the Bowels of our
native Country to preserve it; and in a word, to go to cross a pile with a
Company of beggarly Malcontents for our own Estates and Fortunes, and run our
selves into present and certain Mischiefs to prevent future and contingent
ones; if these things, I say, should happen again, which God forbid, a very
small Prophet may easily foretell the woeful Consequences of it; and when we
shall see our Fields strewed over again with the Carcasses of our Friends and
Relations, Qu. Whether this is not fulfilled amongst our Fellow Subjects in
Scotland and Ireland?
our Cities, Towns and Countries, laid waste by an unnatural War, and shall
come to cast up our Accounts, Qu. Whether it is not time to cast up our
Accounts, after so great Expense of Blood and Tresury?
and to reckon all the Blood and Treasure we have spent only to purchase
Confusion or Slavery, then we shall remember perhaps with Tears in our Eyes,
Quis talia fundo temperet a lacrymis.
That it was nothing but a Surfeit of Happiness that caused our Misery.

Consider, Page 22.
That upon our dutiful Subjection to our Prince, the Honor of our Religion
depends, --

If once it should appear that our Religion is mischievous to Government,
Mankind would soon conspire to proclaim War with it, and to decry and exploid
it as a public NUISANCE to the World.

And I verily believe should Men consult the Devil himself, Page 23.
what course they were best to take to blast the Honor of Religion, Qu.
Whether the Devil has not been consulted by the Patrons and Abettors of this
Revolution, who act quite contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus Chrict, and his
Apostles, and yet cry up Religion, Religion, like the Jews of old, The Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord?
he could not direct them to a more effectual one than under sanctified
Pretenses to turn Rebels to the Government; and accordingly heretofore the
Adversaries of Christianity could find no such effectual Calumny to blast and
expose it as this, that it was an Enemy to the Civil Government; as wisely
enough considering That could they infuse into Mankind a Belief of this
Scandal, there was nothing could be more conducive to antidote Men's Minds
against it, and to render it Base and Infamous in the Opinion of the World;
whilst therefore we conduct any Seditious Design under the holy Banners of
Christianity, we join hands with our open and professed Adversaries, and
endeavor so far as in us lies to defend their most malicious Calumnies against
it. Whilst therefore we make our Religion a color for our Faction and
Disloyalty, That this Prophetic Speculation is reduced to practice, Tell it
not in Gath, publish it not in the Streets of Askelon, least the Philistians
rejoice, least the Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
we confess it to be guilty of the most infamous thing that it was ever charged
with by the worst of its Enemies; viz. That it lays Trains of Factious
Principles in Men's Hearts and Consciences, on purpose to blow up Thrones and
Governments, and throw the World into Ruins and Confusions.

Consider, Page 25.
That upon our faithful Subjection to our Prince, the Safety of our Religion
depends; for there is nothing iu the World can more endanger our Religion than
our making it a pretense for Rebellion; for hereby we inevitably expose it to
the hatred of Princes, and do what in us lies to arm their Power against it;
for by our Actions we do in effect make this open Declaration to them. Sirs, To
tell you plainly you may thank our Religion for our Disobedience; we would be
Loyal, but it will not suffer us; and therefore ye were best have a care of it,
it will undermine your Thrones, and will one time or other arm the hands of
your People against your Persons and Dignities: When therefore we set up our
Religion against our Governors, we force them in their own Defense to set
themselves against it, and to endeavor as far as in them lies to root it out
of the World; and if being provoked by our Sedition they should ever draw their
Swords against it, it may thank us for it, who first began the Quarrel, and
gave the Challenge, and did in effect declare by our Actions, that unless they
forced us to lay down our Religion, our Religion would force them to lay down
their Crowns; yea, and though we should succeed in our Rebellion, and prove too
hard for our Governors, yet first or last our Tho I hope, and I heartily with,
that Dr. Scot may prove a false Prophet as to what he predicts in this
Paragraph of the direful Effects of a Religious Rebellion, yet should it happen
(which God avert) that our Religion should at last smart for it, that it should
be rooted out of the World, and have its dismal Funeral Exit (which some holy
learned Men, who perhaps by the Spirit of Prophecy did foresee this wretched
Rebellion, have predicted, as Dr. Plume observes in his Preface to Dr. Hacket's
Sermon, Page 15. last Paragr.) whom may we thank for it, but these Members of
the Church of England who have succeeded in their Rebellion, which the Doctor,
and his prevaricuting Brethren, by false Oaths, wicked Prayers, and Setitious
Anti-Gospel Preachings have promoted and abetted. But though the Argument which
the Doctor suggests to a highly provoked Prince be so genuine and natural, as
to put him upon the most tremondous Instances of Indignation and Revenge; yet
it is not to be doubted, but that the Innocent, yea, and the Penitent too (if
they are not too late so, like the hardened Sinner who spurns at the Bowels of
Mercy, and defies a Pardon, until the time of Justice, the hour of Vengeance
surprise and overtake him) will find a kinder Usage from the Justice and
Clemency of a Prince, who has signalized himself to be a true Englishman, a
Father of his Country, and of the forgiving Race.
Religion will be sure to smart for it.

Lastly, Page 28.
Consider that if we of this Nation had no other Motive, yet in mere gratitude
we stand obliged to render our faithful Subjection to our Prince; for
considering with what an easy and indulgent Government, and with what a
Succession of excellent Princes God Almighty has blessed us, I know no Nation
under the cope of Heaven that may be so happy as our selves, if we please; for
as our Government is, in the Frame and Constitution of it, a most easy Yoke,
and gentle Burden, so, for sundry Ages, we have had Princes as gentle and
gracious as our Governments; Princes that have studied our Ease and our
Happiness, and that have in nothing so much exceeded as in their Mercy and
Indulgence toward us.

Not to mention that pious and every way incomparable Prince Charles I. Page 29.
whose sacred Blood is such a Monumental Shame to Treason and Rebellion, Qu.
Whether the Patrons and Abetters of this Revolution have not then cause to
blush, who by their Arms and their Prayers attempted and encouraged the same
against the Son, which the Rebels and Traitors acted against the Father; viz.
the Shedding of Sacred Blood, which in the Doctor's Opinion is such a
Monumental Shame to Treason and Rebellion.
as must make Rebels and Traitors, if they have any modesty in them, blush and
be confounded for ever.

And then that Reverend Author proceeds to give an admirable Character of King
James the Second. -- And now to him (that is, King Charles the Second) in
despite of all the Hellish Machinations of a restless Faction, our present If
King James is our Rightful Lord, how can Dr. Scot, and his Brethren, justify
renouncing of Allegiance to him, and transferring it to a new Master, who;
ipsis Iudicibus, is not Rightful King?
Rightful Lord peaceably succeeds; a Prince whom God seems to have reserved on
purpose to make us amends for the unestimable Loss we sustained in Charles the
Wise and Good: And indeed considering the Great and Princely Virtues which
adorn his Mind, and shine through the whole Sphere of his Activity, we have all
the Encouragement in the World to promise our selves a Continuance of those
Halcion days, under his happy Influence, if by our intestine Seditions we do
not cloud and disturb them, that we have se long enjoyed under the Auspicious
Reign of his Brother. For if from an undaunted Courage and Firmness of Mind; if
from an immense Greatness and Generosity of Soul; if from an inflexible
Sincerity and Which, though blasted with the virulent Tongue of Infamy and
Detraction, and loaded with the foulest and blackest Aspersions and
Imputations, yet, like the Sun, being clouded shines the brighter; for none of
those black Crimes, of which he was accused, ( viz. the Murder of the Earl of
Essex, the Poisoning of his Brother, the League with France to cut all his
Protestant Subjects Throats, and to crown all (as Dr. Burnet Words it) the
Supposititiousness of the Prince of Wales) being proved against him, though
there has been uncontrollable Liberty of Speaking, and Petitioning, nay
Challenging the Accusers to do it if they can; it amounts to a Demonstration of
his Innocence, and that according to the usual Methods in Courts of Judicature,
where, if the Fact against the Person is not proved, the Jury pronounce him
Innocent by their Verdict of Not Guilty.
Integrity of Manners; if from an impartial Justice, sweetened with an endearing
Which he sufficiently signalized in Ireland, notwithstanding what Dr. King of
Dublin, like a cursing Shimei, and railing Rabsheca, says in his celebrated
Book; which, for the many Falsehoods in it, may be styled a Legend of Lies,
rather than a true History; who points only to to the dark side of the Cloud,
but hides its brighter and beautiful Glory; insists only on those things,
which, either out of unavoidable Necessity, the King was forced to comply with,
or those which were acted at a distance by the rude Irish, or by Soldiers, for
the which he was not accountable; but conceals all the Instances of his
Goodness, which will embalm his Memory in that Kingdom throughout all Ages; of
which the Protection he gave his Protestant Subjects (to whom he was a Screen
from the furious and enraged Irish) his surprising and unexpected Kindness and
Charity (inconsistent with the Politics of War) to the vast Numbers of Women
and Children in Londonderry; his wonderful Compassion to the Sick English
Soldiers at Dundalk, when he was advised and importuned by his Generals to
break into the Camp, which had defeated Schomberg, and discouraged any other
Attempt; and finally his leaving Dublin after his Defeat at the Boyne, without
Suffering his Soldiers to burn or plunder it, are glorious and perpetual
Monuments.

And though the Bishop, who has learned to speak evil of Dignities, talks now
at an insolent Rate, yet the Preacher of St. Warburghs had another Language;
every Sunday almost presenting his Auditors with a Panegyric upon King James's
Virtues, and especially those God-like ones of Clemency and Mercy. In which the
Doctor was either then a fulsom, hypocritical Flatterer, or is now a
disingenuous and false Historian.


Benignity of Temper; if from the fair Conjunction of all these Royal Virtues
in a Prince a People may presage their own Happiness, we have all these to
build our hope on in our present Sovereign.

FINIS.

