A REVIEW Of that which RICHARD HUBBER THORN Did affirm to the KING AS The
chief Principle of the QVAKERS.

Whereby it does appear that HUBBERTHORN did not declare fully the Quakers
Principle.

WRITTEN In a friendly way to undeceive the QUAKERS if possible, and to prevent
others from falling into their errors.

LONDON Printed, by I. C. 1661.

My Friend:
YOu and I having had some speech about that place, John. 1.9. That Christ is
the light that lighteneth every one that comes into the world: Which in the
conference betwixt the King and Hubberthorne is termed your principle; viz.
that every man in the world has within himself a sufficient light, (and that
without Scriptures) to instruct and guide him in all things appertaining unto
God for his salvation, if the fault be not in himself. And this you conclude
from that saying, He is the light that lighteneth every one that comes into the
world. John. 1.9. Although that Hubberthorne declared not that principle in
these very words to the King; yet others of your way do affirm, that the light
which is in every man, is of it self, without Scriptures, Churches, Fatheres,
Teachers, or Tutors, from Christian parents, or others, a sufficient guide to
salvation. This assertion you would not deny. After thoughts upon this our
Conference made me write these lines; which I Pray you seriously consider.

This I affirm, that Jesus Christ, the second person in the blessed Trinity,
consists of two natures; that of the Deity, and that of the Humanity. The Deity
is from Eternity; but so is not the Humanity. This place in St. John speaks of
Christ's Deity; as he was God from all eternity, he inlighteneth every one that
comes into the world. But this faith James Nayler denies, crying out that in
so saying, thou dividest Christ, thereby plunging himself into a condemned
heresy, viz. that our Lord consisted not of two natures; but for some help to
our understanding, you may be pleased to consider that Eusebius in his third
book of his Ecclesiastical History, Chapter 21. speaking there upon what
occasion the Four Gospels were written, says that John preached, but writ
nothing, till by entreaty he was moved. Now other Authors write more plainly
who moved him, and upon what occasion; namely for that Ebion and Cerinthus, two
Arch-heriticks did then deny and oppose the Deity of Jesus Christ, the Bishops
in Asia desired St. John to write his Gospel in opposition of them Heretics:
which he then did, and began his Gospel as you see; In the beginning was the
word, and the word was God etc. This in Eusebius is very remarkable; for says
he, He wrote nothing till he was moved; and then omitted the Genealogy of
Christ, amply laid down by Matthew and Luke, and begins his Gospel with the
Divinity of Christ, which is thus; In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and the word was God; and all things were made by him, and
without him nothing was made, that was made. Mark, I pray you, how manifestly
plain this is spoke of the Deity of Jesus. Moreover St. John goes on upon the
same Subject, ver. 4, In him was life, and the life was the light of men. Now
that was the true light, St. John says, that lighteneth every one that comes
into the world, ver. 9. A like speech St. Paul has, Heb. 1.2. By him, says
the Apostle, he made the worlds, speaking there of more then one, namely
worlds, visible and invisible. The meaning there is explained in another place,
Coloss. 1.17.18. By him all things were created, that are in Heaven, or that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were created by him, and for him, and
that he was before all things, and by him all things consist. This must be
meant of the deity only; for the humanity was not then in being, till many
hundreds, yea some thousands of years after the Creation. Moreover Christ is
called the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and so he is to be with God from
everlasting, before ever the earth was laid; and when the earth was laid, then
was I, says that Text. I; what I? Christ Jesus, termed Prove. 8. and 1 Cor 1.
called the wisdom of the Father. I was with him, as one brought up with him;
and I was daily his delight. Yea he was with him in the Creation, and by him
man was made; for there was nothing made without him. He inspired into man the
breath of life, and man been me a living soul, Gen 2.17. This spirit, or breath
of God, made the soul immortal; and in this is a Candle, or Lamp, planted,
which is called the candle of the Lord, which gives light to all our actions,
and thoughts, searching even to the inmost parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. And
this is no other but the conscience, in which is written the natural, or moral
Law, Romans 2. which inlighteneth the conscience; which accordingly does now
either accuse, or excuse, and in the Judgment day shall with God acquit, or
condemn. And this is the light or candle of the Lord, in Scripture so called,
that lighteneth every one that comes into the world. But this light alone,
without Moses and the Prophets, declared not, nor instructed men in the
Ordinances, Statutes, and Judgments of Moses Law; neither does it, without the
Scriptures of the new Testament, the Apostles and Successors, teach the
doctrine of Christianity. This light alone instructs not men in the doctrine,
either in the Old or New Testament, any further then they are the same with the
Law of nature. For the Statutes and Judgments, which by Moses were made known
to Israel, were not showed to any other Nation, but to them alone, Psalm. 147.
ver. 20. And as for the doctrine of Christ, no natural light informs men of it.
For who can by nature without Scriptures, Church, Fathers, Teachers, or Tutors,
by Christian parents, or others, come to believe in him that was Crucified at
Jerusalem, as in the true eternal Almighty God, and Savior of the world? yea
or to believe any particular point of Christian doctrine, that is not radicated
and rooted in the Law of nature? The boldness of this assertion is a wonderment
to men. O Lord, how does Heresy bewitch, and brazen men's foreheads! Does not
common experience state them in their faces, and tell them, that let their
pretense be what it will, there is not one Quaker, that could talk, conferr, or
dispute so as they do, but that they have been first tutored among Christians,
Scriptures, or books? yea and Christians have been the Sampsons Heifers to help
these Philistines. For, alas! without the help of Scriptures they could no more
speak of the mysteries of Moses law, and Christ's Gospel, then the Philistians
could of Sampsons Riddle, without the help of his wife.

And therefore my friends, blush with a holy shame for this bold assertion and
repent. If the doctrine, and mysteries of Christian Religion could have been
known without help of Scriptures, or Christian Churches, or teachers, what need
the Apostles to have been sent forth into all the world, and that with so great
effusion of blood, to publish that which was known before, or might have been
known without their help? That were to make our Lord needlessly profuse of his
servants blood. And what need was there, that they must stay in Jerusalem,
till they were endowed with power of working miracles? For without doing some
miraculous works, the people were not bound to believe the Apostles: for so our
Lord said, If I had not done the works amongst them, which no other man did,
they had not sinned: but now their sin remains, John 15.22.24. Moreover St.
Paul says How shall we escape, if we neglect the doctrine of so great
salvation? confirmed by so many miracles, signs and wonders, Heb. 2.3.4. And
therefore doubtless the mystery of Christian Religion is not instamped in the
Law of nature. For then it might have been known without such a conflux of
miracles, to have witnessed it to us. How can they believe without a Preacher?
says St. Paul, Romans 10.14. that is, they cannot. The natural man cannot
understand the things that be of God. The Wise men of the East, notwithstanding
their great talents of natural wisdom and knowledge, must come to Christ; the
Eunuch must hear Philip; Cornelius must send for Peter, without which no light
was able to inform them in all things, needful to Salvation. And therefore for
any to pretend to know by the light that is in every man, (and that by it
alone, without any Scriptures, or books, churches, teachers, or tutors) to know
every thing needful for his salvation, doubtless its a great error, and such
an one as upon which many others do depend: as namely, it forces them off from
Christianity, yea and to leave off all the ordinances of Christ's Church, both
Sacraments, Lords days, yea all days dedicated by the Church to the service
of our Lord, the which Quakers now do; and indeed to center in very Gentilisme,
not observing in Christianity any more but what the law of nature teaches
only. I do not say, that Christ cannot teach without Scriptures, Churches,
Preachers, etc. For he who is God blessed for ever, can do all things, and with
him nothing is impossible. He can make bread of Stones, and Fish of Serpents,
for his children. He could cure Naaman without washing seven times in Jordan;
and save also people without Scriptures, Churches, Teachers, or Sacraments; but
for us to trust, and that contrary to his revealed divine wisdom directing, is
a most unpardonable presumption. And yet to these streits do the principles of
Quakers drive them upon. But this is a sad condition, that poor deluded souls
are in: and therefore O my friends, stand, pause, and consider your danger.
Scripture says, that Heresy proceeds from worse to worse. 2. Tim. 3.13.
Heresy is a dart, that strikes through the liver; whereby the soul, like the
poor bird, hastes to the Snare, and knows not that it is for her life. But
her house, says that Text, is the way to hell, going down to the Chambers of
death. Prove. 7.23.27. Such deluded Souls forsake the Church, the guide of their
youth, and forget the Covenant of their God. Their house inclines unto death,
and their paths unto the dead. None that go unto her, return again, neither
take they hold of the paths of life. Prove. 2. These passages the Ancient
Fathers (as Vincentius Lyrinensis, in his Golden rule says) are principally
meant of Heretics, deluding poor souls: but your boldness says, the Fathers
have erred; and James Naylour, even to me, said, that the spirit which
searches all things, even the deep things of God, has revealed unto him, and
many more, that which Teachers and their Churches, Parents and Tutours were all
Ignorant of, though they had the Scriptures, said he, often talked over. This
is according to their principle, that the Spirit instructed them, and that
without Scriptures, Churches, Teachers, or Christian Tutours.

I answer, This assertion is so audaciously bold, that it cannot be paralleld
by any Heretics. But this I pray these men to think upon, that their boasting
of the Spirit is the very way of the worst of Heretics; and if they can
demonstratively make it appear, that their spirit, upon which for
infallibility they so much boast of, is any better then the very worst spirit
of all Heretics that ever was in the world, both I and many others will be of
their Religion. But alas my Friends, I know you cannot do this; you can do
nothing but condemn the Church, and Fathers, and boast of your particular
spirit; and so did all Heretics. Consider moreover our Lord did not make
promise of sending the Holy Ghost to any particular men which were averse from
the Church, but to the Church in general, for them to decree, to bind and
loose, when they were gathered together. He said, he would be with them, and
that to the end of the world: and what they did on earth, the same he would
confirm in heaven. Particular men, Sons of the Church, had his spirit for
particular ends, profitable for people in their condition, namely to hear and
obey their guides and superiors. Obey those whom God has set over you,
(says the Scriptures) and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give account thereof. Hebr. 13: 17. It is true, that in the
Apostles days, several members had several gifts, but ever by one and the same
spirit; and that for the good of the Church. And in this kind the spirits of
the Prophets were subject to the Prophets, that so there might be no Schism in
the Body, or Church. 1. Cor. 12. To this end, though St. Paul were taught his
Gospel of God, and not of man, and had an extraordinary calling from Christ
himself, yet as he says, he was sent to Jerusalem by revelation, to conferr
the same Gospel, which he had preached, with the Elders, which were the
Apostles before him; least (sad he) I had run or should run in vain.
Galat. 2.1.2. Behold the Humility of St. Paul! But you will say in Elihu's
words, that Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding; and great men are
not always wise men, neither do the aged always understand Judgment. Job.
32. I answer, Jobs Friends, as confident as they were of a right spirit, were
deceived. For God Almighty says, that they had not spoken right, as his
servant Job had done. And therefore said God, Take a Sacrifice, and go to my
servant Job, and let him pray for you: for him will I accept, least I deal
with you after your folly. Job. 42. This is a good sample for Sectaries, that
without they be reconciled to the Church, and the Church pray for them,
notwithstanding their Confidence in the spirit, God will deal with them after
their folly, ver. 8. And therefore my Friends, be wise. Good men have been
deceived, and why may not you? Be serious in your thoughts, for your Souls lie
at the Stake. Be advised by the Prophet Jeremy, who says, Thus says the Lord,
Stand in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way,
and walk therein; and ye shall find rest to your Souls. Jerem. 6.16. This is
the language of holy Scriptures. God bids Israel to ask of the Ancient days,
that were before them. Deuteronomy. 4. and appoints the Fathers to declare unto the
Children, the use of Ancient monuments. Jos. 4. and of Ceremonies, Exodus 12.
And Gideon professes his belief of the Miracles which his Fathers had told
him. Judges. 6. and the Psalmist says, we have heard with our ears, O God;
our Fathers have told us, Psalm. 44. and again, I have considred the days of
old, and the years of Ancient times. Psalm. 77. and Moses bids us remember the
days of old, and the years of many Generations. Ask the Fathers, says he,
and they shall show thee; the Elders, and they will teach thee. Deuteronomy. 33. O my
Friends, this was the way of Gods people, both in the old and new Testament.
See an example of this in the Song of Solomon, Tell me, O thou fairest among
women, whom my soul loves, where thou feedest. If thou know not, says the
Spouse, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flocks, and feed thy kids by
the Shepherds Tents. Canticles. 1.7.8. Ayasworth cites the Rabbis exposition
of this place, who say, The Congregation, which is like to a fair Virgin, and
whom my soul loves, says God, let her walk in the ways of just men, and
order her ways by the mouth of her Governors (not by her private conception)
and let her lead her posterity, and learn her Children, which are like unto
kids of the Goats, to go unto the Synagogues and the Schools. Thus speak the
Scriptures, and Ancient Interpreters, far differing from your way. The
Apostle bids us, keep the customs of the Church. 1. Cor. 11.16. Also, that we
hold fast the Traditions, which we have learned, whether by word, or by
Epistle. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Also our Lord bids us hear the Church, and obey the
Church; and he that will not, is to be accounted as a Heathen, and a Publican.
Matthew. 18.17. Answerable is that in 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. If any man obey not our
word, says the Apostle, note that man, and have no company with him. Again,
Obey those, that have the rule over you: for they watch for your souls, and
must give an account for them, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Hebr. 13.17. Mark that; for the
greiving your Pastors now will be grevious to you in the judgment day. But by
your doctrine you acknowledge not for your souls neither rulers, teachers, nor
guids, but only the light within you, for which you allege Jsa. 30.20. Thy
teachers shall not be removed into a corner any more, but thy eyes shall see
thy Teachers. But according to your doctrine, this light, viz. your teacher in
every man, less or more, was never in any other corner, then where he is now.
Besides all this, the old Testament shows that if any controversies did
arise, for resolution the Jews were to go to the Priests of the Levitical
tribe, Deuteronomy. 17. but according to your doctrine neither they nor you ought to
go either to ruler, Priest, or teacher; for that's within you; a light that
lighteneth every man borne of a woman: which light was never in any other
corner, then in that which it is in now.

O my Friends, we count many of you honest men and rational men, and wonder at
your Stupid senselesness. O Lord, what has bewitched you? Some foregoing sins
certainly has provoked the Almighty, so that he has permitted an evil spirit
to delude you. Consider your bypast lives with trembling, Many of your
leaders, before they were Quakers, were in Arms against the King and the
Church, thereby to get a liberty to serve God without trouble in the Flesh; and
by consequence to make void the Cross of Christ. O this was a deadly Sin; you
fought against your Sovereign to gain a liberty to the flesh. Also many of you
have renounced the Baptism, that you had received in the name of the Blessed
Trinity into the says of Christ's Church. O, this was a deadly Sin; by which in
a manner you did put your selves out of Gods Protection, and so became active
Instruments to the Devil, for rebellion, or heresy. I do not say all have thus
done, but I saysome; and perhaps others by a loose and evil life, made some
gradual Stepts into, or toward this way.

But you will object, and I have heard it objected, that you are now become
what you now be, of better lives then ever you were before. O my Friends, let
not a good life in Schism or heresy delude you; for by the seeming good lives
of Heretics the Devil has ever promoted his Kingdom. So Corah and his
accomplices were of seeming good lives, and notable Orators; for which they
compared themselves with Moses and Aaron, Numbers the 16. The Israelites
thought so also, crying out against Moses; ye have slain the Lords people, said
they, verse 14. And truly, as it was then, so it ever was, that the
Schismatics that pretend to reform their Mother Church, generally they seem
to be of better lives, then the Church was of: for if this were not so, they
could have deluded very few. But so it ever happens; Ministers of Satan
transform themselves into the habits of Angels of light, to deceive. 2. Cor.
11.13.14.15. And therefore let not this gloss keep you in snares, but deliver
thy soul as a Roe from the hand of the Hunter, and as a bird from the hand of
the Fowler, Prove. 6.5. you that are opposers of Gods Church, if possible,
recover your selves out of the Snare of the Devil, who as yet by him are led
Captive at his will. 2. Tim. 2.26. Which that you may, shall be the earnest
prayer of your faithful Friend,

T. S.

POSTSCRIPT.
Q. What esteem do you bear to the Scriptures of the old and new Testament?

A. We account of them the very best of all writings, and as they issue forth
from their Original Authors, they then were the pure wine of God; but as they
have passed through the hands of many Copies, and since them again of many
Translators and Printers, these Scriptures have in length of time passing
through the Antichristian chanel, contracted some Rust, and are now helped by
the Spirit in the saints, which is no other but the same spirit, by which at
first those Scriptures were declared to the world.

Q. But for that they were declared to several people, and that upon several
ocasions, of what use are they now of to another people, and that also in
another generation?

A Of great use, if applied by the same spirit to others to the same end for
which at first they were given forth, then are they profitable for doctrine,
reproof, correction and Instruction. 2 Timothy 3.16.

Q. But are they not also profitable to himself that has the spirit?

A. Not for these ends; for he needs them not, be having the unction that
teaches him all things. 1 John 2.20. Yea the deep things of God, 1. Cor 2.10.
And needs not that any man teach him; for he has the Anointing faith, that
text that teaches him all things, 1. Joh. 2.27. so that for a particular man's
salvation that has the Anointing, the written Scriptures profit him nothing.

Q. Why then do they preach by Scriptures or in Scriptures phrases? this
argues that ye need the help of Scriptures to preach by.

A. It is for the sake of others who so highly esteem of Scriptures we are
forced to use that they so highly esteem, to convince them by; and moreover in
this we seem weak with the weak that we might save some, 1. Cor. 9. and in this
kind did Humphry Woulridg as he said condesend to rebaptise a woman, not that
he regarded baptism, but that the woman had a mind to be dipped, he
condescended to her weakness, that thereby he might bring her out of the water
unto the Rock; this be mentions in his book which he Intitleth, The unlimited
God.

Reply.
This is the very answer that Josiah Carbrane the pretended prophet to John
Roberts who made himself God; he that writes heard him speak it, that they used
not Scriptures for their own sakes, but for the sakes of others, and moreover
that they would deal with any men even with their own weapons, viz.
Scriptures; so he spoke there were six or seven that fell down before Justice
Hubberts. Face and worshipped this Roberts for a God, as the woman worshipped
Naylor for a Christ; but as Naylor was worshipped and Pillered for his
blasphemy; so was Roberts and his worshippers sent by Justice Hubbert to the
prison in Sr. Joane's. But why was it said the woman worshipped James Naylor
for a Christ, and Roberts by his followers was worshipped for a God? why not
the Christ and the God, but a Christ and a God?

Ans. James Naylors answer was that in whomsoever the light viz. Christ is
eminent. the same is a Christ or Savior; Obadiah ver. 21. Saviors shall come
on mount Sion to judge the mount of Esau, and in the same sense would Roberts
prove himself a God. Thus we see how horribly the Scriptures are abused.

FINIS.

