A PROCLAMATION, Indicting a Solemn and Public Thanksgiving throughout the
Kingdom of Scotland, to be kept upon the ninth of September next, for his
Majesty's safe Delivery from the late Phanatical Conspiracy against his
majesty, his Royal Highness and Government.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
speically constitute, Greeting; To all and sundry Our good Subjects Greeting;
Forasmuch as Almighty God in his great Mercy, and by His wonderful Providence,
has brought to Light, Defeated and Confounded a most Un-natural, Traitorous
and Diabolical Conspiracy, contrived and carried on by Persons of Phanatical,
Atheistal and Republican Principles, for taking away of Our Sacred Life, and
the Life of Our Dearest Brother James Duke of Albany, Subverting of Our
Government, and Involving these Kingdoms in blood, Confusion and Miseries;
Concerning which Treasonable Conspiracy, We have Emitted Our Royal Declaration
to all Our loving Subjects, at Our Court at Whitehall, the 28th. of July last,
in this 35th. Year of Our Reign, which We have Ordered to be Reprinted here.
And We being deeply sensible of the humble and grateful Praises and Adoration,
We owe to the Divine Majesty, for this great and signal Instance of His
watchful Care over Us, whom He has so long Preserved, and so often Dilivered
by Miracles Have out of Our Religious Disposition, readily approven of an
humble Motion made to Us for commanding an Solemn and General Thanksgiving, to
be religiously Observed throughout this whole Kingdom, to Offer up devout
Praises and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for this eminent and miraculous
Deliverance granted to Us, and in Us to all Our Loyal and dutiful Subjects; as
also, fervently to pray that God may continue His gracious Care over Us, and
His Mercies to these Kingdoms, and more and more bring to Light, Defeat and
Confound all Traitorous Conspiracies. Associations and Machinations against Us,
Our Dearest Brother and Government; We with Advice of Our Privy Council, have
therefore thought sit by this Our Royal Proclamation, to Indict a General and
Solemn Thanksgiving, to be Observed throughout this Kingdom, that all Our
loving Subjects may offer their devout Praises and Gratulations, and their
fervent Prayers and Supplications to Almighty God for the Purposes foresaid;
And We strictly Command and Charge, that the said Solemn Thanksgiving be
religiously and devoutly Performed by all Our Subjects and People within this
Our Kingdom, upon the Ninth of September next And to the end this part of
Divine Worship so pious and necessary, may be uniformly and at the same time
offered by all Our loving and Loyal Subjects; We thereby Require the Reverend
Archbishops and Bishops to give notice hereof to the Ministers in their
respective Diocesses, that upon the Lords Day immediately preceding the said
9th. day of September next as also upon the said 9th. of September they cause
Read and Intimate this Our Royal Proclamation from the Pulpit in every Paroch
Church, together with Our foresaid Declaration, Dated at Our Court at Whitehall
as said is, and that they exhort all Our Subjects to a serious and devout
Performance of the said Prayers, Praises and Thanksgiving, as they tender the
Favor of Almighty God; and the Safety and Preservation of Our Sacred Life and
Government; Certifying all such as shall contemn or neglect this so religious
a^^ important a Duty, they shall be proceeded against, and punished as
Contemners of Our Authority, and as Persons highly Disaffected to Our Person
and Government. And ordains these Persents to be Printed

Given under Our Signet at Haly-rud-house, the seventh day of August, One
thousand six hundred eighty and three. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and
fifth Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON. Cls. Sti.
Concilij.

On Wednesday the 8th Instant the above mentioned Proclamation was Proclaimed
in manner following at Edinburgh.
1. THe Ordnarie City Officers Two and Two, With Halberts bareheaded. 2. Two
City Trumpets in Liveris, founding barheaded. 3. Two Persons bearing the Sword
and Mace barheaded. 4. The Lord Provost. 5. The City Baliffs (or Sheriffs) and
whole Council Two and Two in their Robes Gowns and other formalities. 6. The 4
Macers of the Session with their Gowns and Maces. 7. Two Macers of his
Majesty's Privy Council. 8. Four Trumpets in his Majesty's Liverie sounding. 9.
The Pursuviants and Heralds with the Lion Depute in their Coats dissplayed.
10. The Clarks of the Council walking Two and Two In which Order they Proceeded
from the Town Council-house, to the Market Cross, where a Stage was erected for
them and Guarded by the Town Company all in yellow Coats lined with Black.
The Lion Depute Heralds Pursivants, Macers Clerks and Trumpets assended the
Cross, which was Richly coverd with Tapistrie, where the Proclamation was Read
by Sir William Paterson, one of the Clarks of the Council and by the Lion
Depute Proclaimed, all Persons whatever being uncovered, and when Ended the Guns
from the Castle were discharged and the Auditors with Repeated Shouts Cried out.

GOD save the CING
EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno. DOM. P683-Reprinted at London, by George Croom in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's Castle, 1683.


