Detma asilike: A SERMON Preached at the Kings Prison the Fleet, On the 30th.
of JANUARY, 1681. Being the ANNIVERSARY of the MARTYRDOM OF King Charles I. Of
Ever Blessed Memory.

Judges 19.30. And it was so, that all that saw it said there was no such Deed
done, nor seen, from the day that the Children of Israel came up out of the
Land of Egypt.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Davies. 1682.

To the Right Noble HENRY, Lord Marquess, and Earl of Worcester, etc.
My LORD,
THey that say they make Dedications to show their Gratitude to their Patrons:
do, in my opinion, at the same time secretly insinuate the worth and value of
their own Works. Not to acknowledge my Obligations to your Lordship, were great
want of Breeding; But, to say I present you this Sermon out of Gratitude, were
a greater want of modesty; And I hope I know my self better, than to have any
such presumption.

I profess ingeniously, that the chief reason that induced me to prefix your
Lordships Name to this Discourse, was (according to the old use of Dedication)
to do the thing all the credit it was capable of; and if, at the same time,
though contrary to my intentions, I have displeased Your Lordship, in desiring,
or rather violently arrogating your Protection; yet I have this inward
consolation, that my good meaning, (especially with so good a man) may, in some
measure, apologize for my Error.

Again, my Lord, every body knows, what both your self and your Noble Family
have suffered for his late Majesty of happy Memory; so that, what you can
possibly suffer in a discourse of him, will be so inconsiderable, that it will
scarce deserve the mentioning.

God Almighty make us truly sensible, and ever mindful of what is past, and
keep us from ever seeing the like again, is the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, T. S.

A SERMON Preached at the King's Prison, THE FLEET.
PSALM. 149 8. To bind their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of
Iron.


THere was once a wicked Harangue (for Sermon I dare not call it) delivered
from the Pulpit upon these words, whereby both the Holy Text, and that sacred
Stool, were desecrated and profaned.

A scriptum est, a holy Text, and a damnable Doctrine, has been one of the
Devils Practices, ever since he carried our Savior into the Wilderness to
tempt him.

Nor are these days of ours the first, wherein the Precepts of the God of Love,
and the Gospel of Peace, have been made use of for a Trumpet of Tumult and
Rebellion.

I shall not need to tell you how properly, or with what success, the
Holder-forth brought the Text, and his occasion of it together. I wish with all
my heart, it were in the power of this discourse in some measure to expiate his
fault, and raise as much hatred and detestation in the minds of my Hearers, as
he did encouragement in those of his toward that never to be mentioned fact,
(were it not to deter Posterity from the like) which gave the sad occasion of
this days solemnity.

Wherein we commemorate the unnatural Murder and Martyrdom of our late lawful
Sovereign, and the Lords Anointed, Charles the First, of ever blessed memory.

And indeed, besides, that I shall right and vindicate this Text, which has
been so much abused, when I consider how little there is between the Prison and
the Grave, the Confinement and the Death of Kings; and how sensible his Sacred
Majesty was of those wounds, which he received through the sides of his Loyal
Nobility, I know none I could have chosen, that might more fully, and fitly,
put us in mind of his suffering, s and the Duty of this day.

Which is to humble and afflict our Souls under the sense of those manifold
crying Sins and Iniquities, for which God Almighty suffered Rebellion thus to
exalt her self, and justify her Villainies and Murders by the success, neither
sparing Innocent, nor Royal Blood; but, To bind our Kings in Chains, and our
Nobles in Fetters of Iron.

I will not be over-careful (nor do I think it necessary) to reconcile my Text
to the present occasion, any further than it may serve for a sad Remembrancer
of this black and fatal day: I will only (in passing) mind you of the
disproportion.

Whereas the Kings spoken of here by the Psalmist, were Heathens that knew not
God; The King, whose hard fate we remember this day, was a Christian, and so
truly the Defender of the Faith, that, even in the literal sense, he resisted
unto Blood.

And whereas, the binders in the Text, were Saints, and Men of Honor; ours
were execrable Villains, and the dregs of the People; Though I cannot but
observe by the way, that there was a kind of fatality in their calling
themselves Saints, and the People of the Lord.

The main Thesis then, or Pillar of my discourse at this time will be, the
Sufferings of our Royal Martyr: But because it is impossible to mention them,
without some reflections on His Virtue, and His Enemies Malice, these two will
make our Topics, or Common-places, three; to wit,

His Majesty's Sufferings,

His Virtues, and

His Enemies malicious wickedness.

His Sufferings were passing great, and (for ought I know, or have ever read,
if you will except our Saviors) unparallel^d.

His Patience and Virtue, as I shall show you anon, were such too; And lest any
proportion should be wanting in the story, such also was the implacable Malice
and Wickedness of his Enemies

A Malice, which, I had almost said, was immortal, and notwithstanding any Act
of Grace and Indemnity, seems to have outlived both Pardon and Punishments,
and the very Actors themselves.

And, according to the notion of the Philosopher, to have transmigrated and
removed it self into new Bodies.

I do very well know, that this part of my discourse (and it may be some other
besides) will not please every body; but I am confident I am guiltless, and
they have themselves to thank for it, who, in this late conjuncture, have
endeavored (as far as in them lay) to involve us in the same miseries and
calamities again.

So that, to speak freely and boldly at this time, (whatever they would make us
believe,) is so far from doing any violence to that his present Majesty's most
Gracious Act of Oblivion, that I do verily believe it were a sin to be silent;
and I hope the seasonable liberty of all the Pulpits in the Kingdom at this
present, may be one means to keep us from being twice Shipwrackt upon the same
Rocks; from being undone again, and perishing a second time by the same unhappy
method of binding our Kings in Chains, and our Nobles in Fetters of Iron.

I cannot promise you that in this ensuing discourse, I shall so strictly as it
may be you may expect, and so distinctly and severally speak to each of those
three Heads or Arguments I have proposed.

For, besides that grief (especially such as this) is not easily confined in
Rules and Methods; the nature of my Subject, and the circumstances of the
Story, will oblige me to speak of them mixtly and confusedly, and as they shall
present and show themselves upon several occasions and emergencies.

However, that I may observe as much of form and order, as the nature of the
thing will bear, I will part the following Tragedy, according to the custom of
those bloody entertainments, into these five Sections.

The first will contain His Majesty's Sufferings and Troubles before, and to
the very time of, the late open Rebellion.

The second will show us His Misfortunes and ill success, during the time of
that Civil War, till he was delivered up by the Scotch Army, and confined. The
third will consist of the story of His Confinement it self.

The fourth, of His Sufferings in the Persons of His Loyal Nobility, and such
good Subjects as followed His Fortunes in that general calamity.

And the fifth and last Act, which is the Catastrophe, or winding up of the
Tragedy, will tell us the sad story of His Death and Martyrdom.

For which this polluted Land, which drank His Royal Blood, mourns to this day
under the Judgments of a righteous Avenger; and for which, and for our sins,
which were the remote cause of it, every good man cannot choose but have his
eyes full of tears, and his mouth full of such lamentations.

How are the Mighty fallen? The Crown is fallen from our Head, and woe unto us
that we have sinned, woe unto us that we have sinned, and done so wickedly, as
to bind our Kings in Chains, and our Nobles in links of Iron.

Before I enter upon this ungrateful Province, instead of a Preface, I will
first of all show you His late Majesty, of blessed memory, in all his,
(sometime,) Pomp and Greatness, incircled with all those blessings that may
make a Monarch happy, and the care of Governing tolerable.

That so, from those mighty heights and advantages, you may have the fairer
light, and take a better view of the humble valley of His Tears and Misery.

It is but too well known, that men in adversity, measure their misfortunes and
present evils, by all the steps and degrees of Honor or Riches, that ever they
were possessed of.

-- Fuimus Troes. Is but a miserable comfort, to have been happy, to have been
rich or honorable, is one of the bitterest circumstances and aggravations,
that Affliction is capable of.

Celsae graviore casu decidunt turres.
High Buildings fall heavy.
And for this reason, says the Son of Sirach, O Death! how bitter is thy
remembrance to a man, that lives at ease in his possessions.

Now I must put you in mind, that His Majesty (who furnishes us the Subject of
this discourse) was once, it may be, one of the happiest Princes of the World.

He was Royally Born and Related: There was scarce a Crown in Europe, of any
great consideration, but he had some alliance to it.

His Person and Presence were pleasing and Majestic, and every way becoming
His Birth and Quality.

And then for His Soul, it was fair and Princely too, like the Mansion it dwelt
in.

He was a Person of a most undaunted Resolution and Constancy, of a present and
ready Wit, a profound and discerning Judgment, and, in a word, a most universal
Knowledge and Learning, witness those excellent, those incomparable Writings of
His, the best Legacy (except His great and holy Example) which he could have
left to Posterity.

Writings, that are thoroughly informed, not only with the Majesty of a King,
but als^ the Reverence of a Divine. Alas, that so much Worth, and Learning, and
Goodness, should be murdered in one man.

To complete his happiness, he married a Wife Great and Virtuous like himself,
by whom God gave him a numerous Issue, in some of whom we are (and may we be
long so) blessed and happy to this very day.

In short; a time there was (and pity it was so good a time had wings) when
this mighty Monarch wanted nothing, that (...) or Industry could think ^^f, to
(...) Crow^^^^ (...); nothing that might render him considerable, and esteemed
abroad, or honored and obeyed at home.

Yea Rebellion her self, like the sin of Witchcraft, sought the shadow of the
Night, and dwelt in the dark.

She crouch'd and crept into corners. She was both afraid and ashamed of the
Light, and as yet durst work no worse effects in the Kingdom, than what she
could do with thinking and Imagination.

Till at length, when the number of our sins were fulfilled, and when their Cry
had justly provoked God Almighty to anger, he suffered his own, and his
anointed^s Enemies, like Jesurun, to wax fat, and kick; and from thinking and
wishing evil, to fall to murmuring, and running into privare Cabals and
Tre^sonable Meetings: From murmuring and private Meetings, to advance as far as
undutiful and disloyal discourses upon the Streets, and running together into
insolent and unwarrantable Tumults, from Tumults to open Rebellion and
Slaughter; thence to the Confinement and Imprisonment of his Majesty's Sacred
Person; so to the Plundering, Sequestration, and Murdering of His True, and
Loyal Subjects; and last of all, to that bloody Murder and Martyrdom of the
best of Kings, under the notion of a Traitor and Malefactor, by a pretended
course of Law and Justice.

By the imperfect touches I have given you of his former prosperity, and
comparing them with the subsequent story of his afflictions, you may take some
kind of measures, and give some sort of guess at his sufferings and sorrows.

And when we have traced him through all the Tumults, Wars, Imprisonments, and
Sufferings that befell him in his Life, and added to them the horrid manner and
circumstances of his Death, you will believe with me, that next our Savior, He
may pretend the second best Title to the words of the Holy Ghost, Behold now,
and see all ye that pass by, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow!
Behold, and see a King (once indeed a mighty King) bound in Chains, and his
Nobles in Links of Iron

But to begin with his story, according to the order I have proposed.

When His late Majesty, of Blessed Memory, first received the Crown, the too
happy Kingdom had so long enjoyed an uninterrupted Peace, that it was even
grown sick of its own Prosperity, and lost and swallowed up in its own
happiness.

We had surfeited of our own plenty, and (like those that had eaten too much
Honey) could not relish our own enjoyments.

And, as this is ordinarily the time that men grow wanton and wicked, and
forget God; so is it very often a forerunner of Rebellion against his Anointed.
And hence is that common observation, both in History and Policy, that the best
and most indulgent Princes, that have the most carefully consulted the Peace
and Happiness of their Subjects, have for the most part been worst obeyed

Such was the hard fate of this Good King, whose Fatherly Piety and Tenderness
toward his People, made them (as is common in ill Natures) to forget their
duty and Allegiance toward him.

The first appearance of this Storm was in that fatal unquiet Quarter, the
North.

The Cloud arose in Scotland, and was, at first, no bigger than a man's hand,
but at last it grew so great, that it covered three Kingdoms, and drenched
almost every corner of them with showers of blood.

The pretense indeed of this disorder was Religion, but it appeared by the sad
consequences, that the thing designed and intended (at least by the
Ringleaders and first movers of it) was Violence, and Rapine, and Sacrilege.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum?
Who would think Religion should make men so wicked?
They begin first of all with Paper Arms, mutinous and Treasonable Pamphlets,
and insolent and senceless Petitions.

Then the evil Spirit grew so unruly and disorderly, that it assaulted the
Bishops upon the Streets, nay the very Churches and Pulpits could not secure
them from violence.

And at length this heat and insolence broke forth into an open flame of
Hostility and Rebellion.

But that which made every good man's apprehensions of this mischief the
stronger, was, that the Rebels were connived at, if not favored, and
encouraged under hand by a party of their Brethren in England.

For at the same time there were many Seditious Pamphlets scattered about here
likewise, which did most impiously reflect both upon the Church and Government,
yea which was yet infinitely more intolerable, several of the Authors, who had
been taken into custody and confined for them, were afterward by the House of
Commons delivered, and vindicated, and commenced the date of their Fame and
Popularity (as Herostratu^ from the burning of Diana's Temple) from those a
bominable beginnings, and upon those dangerous Foundations erected the
structure of their rising Fortunes.

This I say to put you in mind, that sometimes men arrive at strange degrees of
honor and esteem, only by the merit of their Crimes: And I am of opinion, we
have seen but too many examples of the like kind very lately, who to please the
people and make a fortune, neither cared what they said, or swore, or did.

But let me tell you by the way, that such attempts and practices as these, are
for the most part very unfortunate in the end, and when the Peoples eyes are
opened, they that before cried Hail Master, will then cry Crucify him,
Crucify him; and they that to day cry Hosanna, will to morrow cry Away with
him to Golgotha.

But I came not here to Prophecy.

The Malcontents in England, after the example of their rebellious
Neighbors, begin to cry out aloud for Liberty, and Religion, and a through
Reformation.

Hereupon his Majesty, thinking it the most proper remedy for these Agonies and
Convulsions of State, calls a Parliament.

And this, as it happened afterward, proved a remedy worse than the Disease it
self: For instead of healing and composing differences and grievances, they
made it their business to aggravate, and make them worse.

They themselves immediately begin to complain of Bishops and the whole
Hierarchy of Ecclesiastical Officers in the Church; and of evil Counselors in
the State, and about his Majesty's Person.

Nay they begin to descend to particulars. His Grace the Lord Archbishop is
Impeached, and afterward Executed for High Treason; nor can the Reverence of
his Office, nor the Integrity of his Manners, secure him. About the same time,
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, of whose Innocence his Majesty, and all the
World (not excepting his very Enemies, who took care that his case should be no
president for Posterity) were very well satisfied, was also Committed to the
Tower, Condemned, and Executed upon the like accusation.

All this while his Majesty was but a helpless looker on, for the Common People
upon his occasion, ran together in such Multitudes and clamorous Tumults, as
endangered not only the Servant, but the Master.

A hard case and a pitiful, that a King whose the Laws are, could not deliver
an innocent Person from being Condemned, and suffering Death contrary to Law,
and a sad presage of his own misfortunes.

In the mean time, the Parliament is plied with Petitions from all sorts of men
and women too (except the good) and Grievances, and Fears, and Jealousies of I
know not how many kinds.

But the main common places were Religion and Liberty.

Alas! what Religion do they dream of, that strike at the very roots and
foundations of it? Or what Liberty can the Subjects expect, when the King
himself is not free.

However they and the Parliament mutually encourage one another, and strengthen
one another hands in wickedness. The clamours of the People make the
Parliament bold, and the boldness of the Parliament makes the People clamorous.

All this while his Majesty, to show how much he tendered the peace and quiet
of his Subjects, and to satisfy them all, if it were possible, at their
importunity, recedes in some things from his Right and Prerogative.

He passes a Bill for the Triennial Parliaments, and afterward settled this
during the pleasure of the two Houses.

A wonderful condescension and goodness in a King, the like of which we have
never met with in all our English Chronicles.

And now let us see how they requite him.

About this time, his Majesty charged some of the Members of the House of
Commons, and not without just cause, with High Treason, and demanded them in
the House himself in Person.

But this they exclaim of as a high breach of Privilege, and the accused
Members, who were for the present fain to abscond, were in a little time
afterward brought again to sit in the House, and vindicated without Trial.

Thus finding the ground they had got of his Majesty, their demands grow every
day louder and more unreasonable: They do not blush to demand the power of the
Militia, the Command of the Navy, the Government of all the Strengths and
Garrisons in the Kingdom.

So that Royalty was now to be strips of all her Ornaments, and Sovereignty to
be -- Vox and praeterea nihil.
An empty Name, and nothing else.


And now what is become of our old English Loyalty and Honesty, when our King
shall, by his own Parliament, be divested of all the Ensigns of his Honor and
Majesty, and the Father of his Country become a Slave to his Subjects?

About this time did the Natives of the Kingdom of Ireland, encouraged by the
example of the Scots, and the attempts of this Parliament upon the Crown, cast
off the Yoke of their Allegiance, and run into open Rebellion, and made such a
Massacre of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, as never was heard of before in
the three Kingdoms.

And here notwithstanding his Majesty's continual soliciting and importuning
the Parliament, for the reducing and settling that Kingdom; it is very
observable, that they still declined it: And some men were so barbarously
scandalous and so unreasonably malicious, as to object the cause of that
Rebellion to his Majesty himself, and intimate to the World that it was
secretly begun and favored by his Authority and Commission.

Thus did the three Kingdoms, as if they had made a secret League and Agreement
among themselves, almost at one time fall into Rebellion against their Natural
Prince: A Prince who was so ready to grant them any reasonable request, that we
may say of him as it was once said of the good Roman Emperor, Neminem unquam a
se tristem demisit. He never let any man depart out of his presence sorrowful
or dejected, if his Petition could be granted with honor.

But the Parliaments Addresses are not such, they spend whole Reams in
Petitions, Remonstrances, Declarations, and a great many such like Paper
fireworks, all very strange and unreasonable.

And still the more his Majesty grants, the more they still demand; for they
are resolved that nothing shall satisfy them but all.

They will have the very Fundamentals of Government altered, both in Church and
State, and because his Majesty cannot agree to this, the Rabble associate
themselves in tumults and dangerous uproars, insomuch that he is forced to send
away his Queen into Holland, for fear of violence from his own Subjects, in the
head City of his Kingdom, and in his own Palace.

Nay at last he was fain himself to retreat from his own House, and take an
unwilling leave of the City, for fear his People, in their mutinies and
tumults, (than which there can be no greater omens or presages of approaching
misery to a State) should have stretched forth their hands to destroy the Lords
Anointed.

And because he is now out of their reach, the Parliament do actually seize
upon the Militia, the Tower, and all other Garrisons of the Kingdom, they put
the command of the Navy into hands of their own choosing, and their own
Creatures into all Offices of Trust in the Kingdom.

In short, having made all the preparations that the time would admit, they put
themselves into a posture of War, and to let the world see that they were in
good earnest; his Majesty is absolutely denied entrance into one of his own
Towns, and the Parliament avow the Deed.

And this, I think; was one of the first acts of open Hostility and Defiance.

I am sorry I have been forced to be so particular in this first part of his
late Majesty's Sufferings, but I have done it not only to put you in mind of
those steps and advances, whereby the late Civil Wa^ ^^gan, but also to let you
see how near we were, in this late conjuncture of affairs, to tread the ^^me
paths, and make our selves miserable once more by the same means.

And here I desire that no body may take that for Reproach and Affront, which I
intend only for Reproof and Instruction

We began now just ^^we did then; after a long Fit of Ease, and Plenty, to be
weary of our Rest, and sick of our Happiness.

And, to secure the Success, the Design is begun with the very (...) method,
whereby (...) had once prevailed.

Secret Murmurings, Private Cabals, Treasonable Pamphlets, Lewd Petitions,
Complaints against the Church, and Her Discipline, Indignities to Her Bishops,
Crying out against Evil Counselors, lessening His Majesty in the esteem of
His People, and filling their Heads with frantic Fears, and Jealousies where
no Fear was.

This I (...), though I could wish it were not. And, had (...) His Majesty, and
His Council, seen the (...) Consequences of these things once before, and all
probability we had been min'd, and un^one by When ^ow, and the whole Nation
(...) in a Bloody Civil War

Brother might been fighting against Brother, the Father against the Son, and
the Son against the Father; and a Man's Enemies might have been those of his
own House.

And this puts me in mind of the second Section in my method; wherein I
promised to speak of His Majesty's Sufferings and Misfortunes, during the time
of the late Civil War, till he was deliver d up by the Scots into the hands of
His Enemies, and Imprisoned.

And now, you may imagine the War already begun; Englishmen marching, and
fighting against Englishmen; the Air filled with the noise of Drums and
Trumpets, and darkened with the smoke of Cannons and Muskets; the Fields
covered with the Carcasses of the Dead; and the Rivers colored with the Blood
of the Slain.

In the midst of this Confusion, and clattering of Arms, the Laws are utterly
silent, and each man's Possession is his only Title.

With what eyes, and with what heart, do you think so good a King could behold
the various Successes and Events of the War^ wherein, whoever were the
Conquerours, He was still sure to lose His Subjects, and always to bear a
sorrowful part, both in Doing and Suffering.

How contrary this War was to His Majesty's Intentions, (that I may use his own
words, in his incomparable (...)) will appear in his total unpreparedness for
it. His sonner Concessions show how willingly he would have prevented it; and
his frequent Messages for Peace sufficiently testify that he delighted not in
War.

Whereas, all the Overtures of Peace that his Enemies ever made, were still
accompanied with such Articles and Clauses, as they knew beforehand could never
be condescended to; either by a King, or a Good Man.

Witness the Nineteen Propositions with the Addition; The Treaty at Uxbridge;
and all other their Mediations, wherein it is evident, even to ordinary
Capacities, that they designed nothing but War, well understanding, and wisely
considering, that a^^om of Machiav^^^, He that draws his Sword against his
Prince must throw away the Scabb^rd.

This indeed they kept to themselves.

But there were other (...) of their own Policy, I could tell you of, which
they ob^^led upon the People, to the eternal shame of o^^ English Nation be it
spoken.

As, the distinction between His Majesty^s Private and (...) against Himself,
by H^^ Authority; Killing his Subjects, to Defend (...) ^^belling our (...)

I know (...) they worthy upon (...) they imposed these notions but I am
certain the Impartial (...) Swords and Bullets could never be taugh^ (...)

(...) in (...) Confusion and Calamity, it should go well with the Church, when
it was so ill with her Sons.

The Reverend Bishops are some of (...) from their Se^^.

An Ordinance is made against the Book Common Prayer; (...) the very Creed and
Lord's prayer (...) and some of the (...) form (...) of (...) ha^^ (...)

(...)

Th^^ Pulpits (...) Stools of Sedition, and Treason; and because there were not
enough of them, the Shop-bulks, Tables, Chairs, Tubs, Trees, and almost every
co^^er of the Streets, are pressed to supply the defect.

The Learned and Orthodox Divines are slighted, and persecuted; and the bold,
and ignorant, Guifted-men, (as they called them) are favored and advanced.

No wonder then if all manner of Sects, Errors, and Heresies (like Leprous and
Infectious Diseases) spread themselves almost into all places of the Kingdom.

And now the Scots are called in, as Auxiliaries, to their Brethren; but they
are men not to be hired upon any easy, or ordinary terms.

They bring a Solemn League and Covenant along with them; and unless their
Brethren in England will take it, they are resolved not to strike a stroke in
their Quarrel. How this Covenant obtained amongst us, and how it was received
in this Kingdom, I shall not need to tell you.

Let me only say this, (and the truth of it) That it was only made use of here
as a trick of State, for the R^^ner of the Church, and the Extirpation of her
Discipline.

I had like to have added, the Damming of men's Souls; for it was directly
contrary to the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; so that he that took both
Them, and the Covenant, must of necessity be Perjured; and whereas they called
it, A Solemn League and Covenant with God: I dare boldly say, in the Prophets
Phrase, Isa. 28.15. It was a Covenant with Death, and an agreement with Hell.

But to return to the War.

This War was managed on His Majesty's side with the greatest disadvantages
imaginable; for the Parliament had seized upon His own Revenues, sequestered
His Friends, and to keep His Subjects from serving him out of Love, and
Loyalty, they maliciously spread abroad false and scandalous Reports of His
Person.

Thus, by the permission of God Almighty, (who sometimes in Judgment lets the
Wicked prosper) His Majesty's Army, by several considerable Losses, being
extremely reduced and weakened; and Money (which is the strength and sinews of
War) being wanting to recruit them, He resolves to give over the War, and
betake Himself to the Scotch Army, which lay then before Newark, and did so,
having this only comfort in the world, (besides that of a good Conscience) that
the Event never states the Justice of a Cause.

With what killing thoughts, and terrible apprehension^^ do we think His
Majesty threw Himself into the power of these perfideous Men, of whom he
himself said, after they had sold him, That they were just in this, that they
had not deceived him?

How lamentable was his condition, when, upon mature deliberation, he thought
it his greatest safety to trust those, in whom he knew there was no Trust?

Immediately after his arrival there, he issues out his Warrants to all the
Governors of Towns, and other Officers in his Army, to capitulate with his
Enemies, make such Conditions as their circumstances would admit, and surrender.

And certainly, it could not choose but be a very great affliction to so large
and noble a Soul as that of his, to think that at last so many Brave and Loyal
men must leave his Service, without any Reward, but that of Heaven, and be
exposed to the Fury of those wicked men, whose very tender Mercies, he knew,
were Cruel.

The News of His Majesty's putting himself into the protection of the Scots
(you may think) quickly arrived at the Parliament, who immediately agree with
them about his Price, (I must not say Ransom) and so he is bought and sold, and
delivered into the hands of his Implacable ^nemies, conducted to Holm^y, and
confined.

And this brings to the third Section of His Majesty's Sufferings; to wit,
During His Imprisonment; which part of his affliction comes nearest the literal
sense of the Text, To bind your Kings in Chains.

I shall need to say little (especially in this Audience) of the pressures and
difficulties of a Prison to the very meanest, and most vulgar of men. But, that
a King should be bound in Chains; the Assert or of the Peoples Liberties
confined; a Sovereign Prince, so Great, so Good, so Just, Imprisoned by his own
Subjects, in his own Kingdom, may challenge the wonder and amazement of this
age, and perhaps exceed the belief of some of those that are to come.

The boldness and malice of his Enemies was a wonder; so also was His Majesty's
Virtue and Patience: And certainly, had not his Spirit been buoyed up, and
wonderfully confirmed, by the sweet and comfortable Influences of God
Almighty's, his restraint would have deluded their last Revenge, and put an end
to his miserable Life before the day.

Immediately after, his Enemies, that their malice and bitterness might want no
aggravation, command his Guardians to retrench both the Expenses of his
entertainment, and his Retinue; The Countrey-people that flocked thither to be
cured of that Disease which we commonly call the King's Evil, are not admitted
to his Presence, but repelled with Scorn and Reproaches. But that which was the
most Prodigious and Inhumane of all their Cruelties, and hard usage, was, that
(as if, like the Devil, they had envied the welfare of his Soul)
notwithstanding all his Solicitations in this Extremity, they refus d him the
attendance of his Chaplains; a greater Rigor and Barbarity than is ever used
amongst Christians to the meanest Prisoners, and greatest Malefactors.

By the first, they might think to lessen the Quality of his Person; By the
second, to diminish his Credit and Esteem among the People; But, by the last, I
know not what they could intend; unless it were to hedge up his way to Heaven,
and, if it were possible, murder his Immortal Soul.

I will not adventure to tell you how his Majesty resented this passage, I
refer you to his own Book.

A while afterward, some misunderstanding arising between the Parliament and
the Army, the General sends a Party of Horse, seizes his Majesty's Person, and
carries him from one place to another, till at last he is committed Prisoner to
the Isle of Wight.

And here the Parliament send their Commissioners to Treat with him again;
where they find his Concessions such, that they tell him they doubt not but
that the Peace will suddenly be concluded, and all differences between Him and
his People adjusted and determined.

Upon their return to London, the Army (wherein, it is probable, there were
many Cains and Judass's, who thought their sins too great for Pardon) puts
for^h a Remonstrance, wherein they demand, That Justice may be done upon all
the Actors and Contrivers of the late Civil War; and particularly upon his
Majesty, as the Author and Beginner of that Calamity.

Hereupon his Majesty is committed close Prisoner, his Servants dismissed, and
he himself a while after brought to Windsor, and so to London, with a strong
Guard; where the usual Respect, and ceremony of the Knee, is quite waved, and
omitted by most of those that are about his Person; nay there were some that
would scarce vouchsafe him the Hat.

And now, to add the last complement to their Iniquity, which is, to Establish
it by Law: the House of Commons declare, That, by the Fundamental Laws of the
Realm, it is Treason in the King of England, to levy War against the
Parliament, and Kingdom. That the Legislative Power is in the People. That the
Commons assembled in Parliament are the Supreme Authority of the Nation That
all the People of the Nation are included in the Parliament, although the King
and House of Peers do not consent thereunto. That the King himself took Arms
against the Parliament, and therefore is Guilty of all the Bloodshed in the
late Civil War; and that he ought to expiate the Crime with his own Blood.

Notwithstanding this, the Ordinance for his Majesty's Trial is refused by the
Lords; whereupon the House of Commons pass it alone, and by themselves cause a
Charge of High Treason to be drawn up against him, in order to his Trial, in
the Name of the Commons of England, and immediately make Proclamation, That
they that could Accuse the King, should present themselves before the
Commissioners appointed for his Trial, and they should be heard.

I will not trouble you with Remarques upon these several passages; the bare
Relation does manifestly show us both the Rebels Malice, his Majesty's
Sufferings, and admirable Patience and Resignation; whereof himself has given
us the best draught, in his own incomparable Book.

We will therefore leave him a while to his Devout Prayers, and Holy
Meditations; and before we bring him to act his last Part upon this Bloody
Stage, according to the order of our method, speak a word upon His Sufferings
in the Persons of his Loyal Nobility, and such good Subjects as stood and fell
with his Majesty, in that Good Cause.

We commonly say, The King is the Fountain of Honor; and when the Fountain is
troubled, you know the Rivulets, and little Streams, must needs run muddy.

The King is like the great Luminary of the world, the Sun; from which (as some
Natural Philosophers conceive) both the Moon, and many of the lesser Lights of
Heaven, borrow their shine and splendor.

Now, when the Sun it self is Eclipsed, the Moon, and all those other Planets,
must needs fade, and lose their brightness.

When the King (...) we th^^^ (...) Loyal ^^bles should enjoy their reflected
Honors and Liberties.

Thi^ was the state of (...) time.

(...), was D^^^^^'^ (...) the measures of his Suffering this Fai^^ (...) were
likewise Plundered, (...), and many of (...)

So exactly were those (...) applicable to this sad occasion, The Servant is
not greater then his Masters, And (...) things in the Green Tree, what will
they do to the D^^?

I will not pretend to give you a just Bill of the Mortality of those da^s; But
since I am so far engaged, I will (...) to say something, and be sure to keep
(...) bounds of truth and modesty.

There were on his Majesty's part above Twenty Earls and Lords slain and (...)
a pretended Court of Just^^^; (...) and Knights; above an Hundred (...)
Lieut^^^^^ (...), and Sergeant (...) Four hundred (...), and other inferior
Commission Officers; and then, for the meaner Subjects, and (...) you to guess;
I will say nothing of (...) ^^^hers, but pray to God, th^^ their Blood (...)
ever ^tise up in Judgment against (...)

(...), or Ten^^^^^, overture would (...) Oak, and goodly ^^^ars, but destroy
d^^^^ crushed the very Sh^^ (...)

There was fear scarce (...) were only thought, (...) to be so) though his Qu^l
joy were never so mean, but felt the Insolence and Violences of th^^^ (...)
^^ful Conquerours.

Yea, some^^^^ (...) a Crime only to live in a Loyal Neighborhood, and to
relieve or show mercy to such as were persecuted for (...) Loyalty, was the
^^ady way to follow the^^ (...), and share in the (...)

Nay more, their malice often times (...) ^scended all bounds, that they did
mischief where they were not (...) to themselves; only (...) they took in doing
it: Burning (...) Goods, destroying Books; E^^^^^^s, and Public Records, to
the prejudice of Posterity, the disturbance of Possessions, the obstruction of
Justice, the impairing of Learning, only to make themselves sport.

Nay, I believe there is scarce a Cathedral in the Kingdom, which does not bea^
the Livery of their madness, and some marks of their rage, unto this very day.

Nor do I wonder, that the Houses of God were profaned and defaced, when I
consider that the Priests themselves, who served at his Altar, were either
sacrificed to the fury of his Enemies, or at least deprived of their Benefices,
and exposed to the wide world; which was one of their tender Mercies.

But what do I speak of their persecuting of the living, who envied the very
rest and quiet of the dead; breaking in pieces their Monuments, and violating
the Ashes of those Bodies, whose Souls are in ^eaven, out of their reach, long
ago?

How monstrous and disproportionable is it in these men, to pretend themselves.
Servants of the Living God, who in their practices (...) ^^ich a mortal ha^^ed
to the places where his (...) dwells? Or how can we think that they have any
Religion, who have even divested themselves of all Humanity.

I will pass from this unpleasant Argument, with praying for those of them that
are yet alive, in the words wherewith St. Stephen (the blessed Proto Martyr
prayed for those that stoned him, Lord lay not this S^^ to the^ Charge.

I will only put you in mind, that when you have added the Sufferings of the
Nobility, to those of his late Majesty, you have the complete figure, and
substance of the Text; A King in Chai^e^, and his Nobles in Feet^^ of Iron.

But there is yet no end of this sorrowful story.

What I have hitherto said, are all but flourishes and preliminaries; The great
slaughter of the fifth Act, the last and bloudiest section of my method, is yet
to come; and that is, the Murder and Martyrdom of the best of Kings, by the
hands of his own Rebellious Subjects.

An action, that (all circumstances considered) can find no parallel in time
past, and God forbid it should in time to come; to which Posterity shall for
eve^ ^ay an annual Tribute of Tears, and the solemnity (...) Penetential
Commemoration.

An action, that surpasses all the savage and inhumane Barbarities of those
Countries, whose Cruelty is gone into a Proverb, and which, among other
Nations, has branded, and stigmatized this of ours, with an eternal Infamy.

The Rebels bring their Lawful Sovereign to a formal Trial, in a Court of their
own erecting: In vindication of whose Authority, when questioned by his
Majesty, as they had nothing to answer, so could they not produce the least
color of Law, or pretense of Reason for trying him, who was unaccountable to
^^^y. (...) upon Earth, and according to that ancient man (...) the Law, can do
no wrong.

But their Po^^^ ^^^st pass for Justice, and their Wills are a Law: And he
might as well demand an account of their Proceedings, as an Innocent Traveller
might of violence offered him by a desperate knot of Banditti, or Highway-men.

All this while (as the Jews did at the Trial of our Savior) the insolent
Soldiers, according to their Instructions, (not to mention their more than
Barbarous and Inhumane affronts and uncivilities) cry out aloud for Justice
against the Prisoner at the Bar.

The President of that High Court of Justice (as they called it) in the mean
while, with a torrent of imperious and insolent words, urges him to plead,
while he only persists (as well be might) to deny the Authority of the Court.

There are several days spent in the same manner; after which, as Judges use to
treat Malefactors, that have not the fear of God before their Eyes, the
President begins a grave Harrangne, (nor will he be interrupted by a King)
wherein he asserts the Authority of Parliaments, aggrevates his Majesty's
contumacy, and the horror of his Crimes wilfull^ mistaking light for darkness,
and darkness for (...); Innocence for Guilt, and Guilt for Innocenc^ (...) so
proceeds to Sentence of Death, by seve^^^g his Head from his Body.

This (says he, after the Sentence read) is the Act, Sentence, Judgment and
Resolution of the whole Court; whereupon they that sat as Judges (being in
number Seventy eight persons) stood up, and showed their assent, by holding up
their hands; never considering, with what heavy hearts, and dejected eyes, they
should one day bold up their hands again for the same. Fact, before the
dreadful Tribunal of the Righteous Judge of all the world.

The Execution was not long respited. There were but two days between that of
his Sentence, and that of his Death; which he spent in such Devout and Pious
Exercises, as become a dying Christian.

He received the Holy Sacrament, Blessed and Instructed those his Children that
were with him; prayed for the Peace of the Nation, for the Happiness of his
Friends, and the Repentance of his Enemies.

The black and dismal day of his Execution being come, he is brought to the
Place, which (as if it were designed to add to his affliction, if possible)
was, a Scaffold erected just before his own Palace.

The spectators were amazed to see him enter upon that Bloody Stage with so
much meekness and leuity, so much serenity and cheerfulness in his looks.

Nothing daunted, or surpised with the sad spectacle of the Instruments, and
Circumstances of his Death; In a short Speech, he first declares his Innocence;
laments the public Calamity of the Kingdom; heartily pardons, and prays for
his Enemies; Then, making an open Profession, that He died in the Christian
Faith, according to the Profession of the Church of England, and kneeling down,
his last breath dissolves in a meek, and holy Prayer.

And, in assurance of God Almighty's Mercy, and his own Innocence, I go (says
he) from a Corruptible, to an Incorruptible Crown, where no disturbance can be,
but Peace, and Joy for evermore.

Then, lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, mildly praying to himself, he
stooped down to the Block, and humbly bowed down his Royal Head to God, to be
cut off by the Vizarded Executioner, which was suddenly done, and one blow.

Thus fell that Mighty Monarch, and Miracle of Goodness, CHARLES I. of ever
blessed memory, a Martyr for his God, and a Sacrifice for his Subjects; the
Grief, and Glory of the English Nation; lamented not only by his Friends, but
even by those very men (though too late) that had assisted in bringing him to
the Block.

Thus fell the Beauty of our Israel, in the High Places. How are the Mighty
fallen?

Tell it not in Gath; publish it not in Askalon; lest the Daughters of the
Philistines rejoice; lest the Daughters of the Uncircumcised triumph.

Tell it not among our Neighbors abroad, publish it not in Foreign Kingdoms,
lest our Enemies rejoice, lest we become a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn
and decision to them that are round about us.

Ye Mountains of Gilboah, let there be no Dew, neither let there be Rain upon
you, nor Fields of Offerings; for there the Shield of the Mighty is vilely cast
away, the Shield of Saul, as though he had not be anointed with Oil.

Let the fatal Time and Circumstances never be forgotten, wherein the Shield of
our Defense was vilely cast away, wherein the Scepter fell from his Hand, and
the Crown from his Head, as if he had not been anointed with Oil.

Ye Daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet, with other
Delights; who put on Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel.

Weep, O ye Loyal Subjects, over your Murdered Prince, under whose shadow ye
once enjoyed all the Blessings of a happy Peace.

How are the Mighty fallen, and the Weapons of War perished?

Nor did the malice of his Enemies expire with his Life; they pursue and follow
the Royal Martyr into the very shades of Death, like the Philistines that
fastened the dead body of Saul to the Walls of Bethshan.

They raise false and scandalous Reports of his Religion; they erect him a
Statue, with that contumelious Inscription, Exit Tyrannus; and, in despite of
his Name and Posterity, pass an Act for the utter abolishing of Monarchy it
self. And thus I have given you a brief account of his late Majesty's grievous
Sufferings, both in his Life, and Death.

I come now, for Conclusion, to tell you what Use or Improvement we ought to
make of the story.

And that will either respect the time past, or time to come.

As to the time past, we should with sorrow, and bitterness of Spirit,
remember, and repent of those crying Sins, and Offenses, which provoked God
Almighty to suffer his Anointed, our late Sovereign, (of happy memory) to drink
so deep of the Cup of his Wrath, and humbly deprecate those Judgments, which we
have reason to fear that Innocent Blood may yet bring upon us. And this is the
duty of this day.

As to the time to come, we must use our utmost care and diligence to prevent
the like, by yielding all due Homage and Fealty to our Kings, and Respect and
Obedience to all that are in Authority under them, both in Church and State.
And this is the duty of our whole lives.

And, that we may herein acquit our selves, like good Christians, and Loyal
Subjects, we must first of all most industriously avoid those things which have
the very least tendency to Disloyalty, and the very first steps that lead to
Rebellion.

Of this sort are, Murmuring, and repining against the Government; and so are
Tumults, and Unlawful Conventions; and therefore equally to be shunned and
avoided.

I say, we must beware of Murmuring, and repining against the Government.

This is become so common, and ordinary at this day, that I dare say there are
many men scarce believe it to be a Sin.

Unhandsom Reflections upon His Majesty, the Church, the State, the Court, the
Council, and the Laws too, are the ordinary entertainments of some men's
Conversation.

Every Mechanic now adays pretends to give you an exact account of all the
distempers and mistakes in the Government, and their proper helps, and remedies
besides; so that to hear him talk, you would think he had served his Time to a
Privy-Counsellour.

Nor is this a practice but of yesterday; it has been so in all ages, and
amongst all people.

Omni populo inest aliquod malignum and querulum in Imperantes, says Plutarch,
in one of his Tracts.

Men are generally malignant and querulous against their Governors.

And though a Prince do nothing that may deserve it, yet he is sure to have the
hatred of some. The most exalted Piety and Goodness, could never yet boast of
every man's Love; nor the most unspotted Innocence, secure it self against the
poison of Tongues.

And here I might add that Tetter, or Scab of the Commonwealth, the Publishing
of Scurrilous, and Seditious Pamphlets; which, in my mind, is a kind of
undermining the Government; But let the Authors take heed it do not at last
fall upon their heads, and oppress them; For though the heels of Justice be of
Lead, yet her hands are of Iron.

Therefore, Curse not the King, no, not in thy thought; for a Bird of the Air
shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.

It is the wisest of Kings, and the best of Preachers Counsel. Eccles. 10.20.

2dly. The second step or advance toward Rebellion, are Tumults, and Unlawful
Conventions; and from these we should abstain, as we would from the Infection
of a Pesthouse; for there is Nothing (to use his late Majesty's own words)
portends more the displeasure of God toward a Nation, than when he suffers the
confluence and clamours of the vulgar to pass all boundaries of Laws, and
reverence to Authority.

And that which should the more oblige us in this case to stand upon our Guard,
is the fatal prevalence, and insinuation of example.

For there is nothing more common, than for men to follow a multitude to do
Evil; and like Beasts march on with the Herd, without ever enquiring whither
they go.

And besides, in such intemperate Heats, and Mutinies, men are apt to do those
things all together, which singly the very worst of them would be ashamed of;
for every man fancies himself sheltered in the Crowd, and a great fault divided
into many pieces, they think will be but every one a little.

To Tumults I added all other Unlawful Meetings and Conventicles whatsoever,
yea, though they be under pretense of Religion it self.

For besides that those are for the most part Schools of Sedition, and
Nurseries of Schism, the very act of Meeting, and Convening it self, is a
violation, and breach of the Law, and therefore by all means to be avoided.

Of both these, to wit, Mutinying against their Prince, and Invading the
Priests Office, Korah and his Company stand a sad (but fatally pertinent)
Example unto all Posterity.

Their story is Numb. 16. In verse 3. you have their Sin. And they gathered
themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye
take too much upon you.

Their Punishment you have in the 31, 32, 33. And it came to pass, as Moses had
made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that was
under them,

And the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their Houses, and
all the men that appertained unto Korah; and all their Goods.

They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the Pit; and the
Earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the Congregation.

And I know not what better Counsel I can give you, either in regard of
Tumults, or Unlawful Conventions, than that which Moses gave the Children of
Israel, upon that occasion of the Rebellion of Korah, in the 26. verse of the
same Chapter: Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked men, and touch
nothing of theirs, lest you be consumed in all their Sins.

And, as we must avoid those Things, so must we also avoid those Persons, which
lead toward Rebellion.

I mean, we must have a care of the Designs and Insinuations of those covetous
and ambitious men, who are always making a Party against the Goverrnment; and
that for no other reason, but only to gratify their own infatiable and
boundless desires of Riches and Honor.

The Tools which these State-wrights commonly work with; the Baits which cover
their Hooks, are for the most part, the Preservation of Religion, and the
Vindication of Liberty.

With these two specious pretenses they draw in not only the wicked and
profligate Desperado's of their own Principles; but also the simple,
short-sighted, well-meaning Multitude, who, ten to one, never know where they
are, till there is no room left them them to retreat; Nor understand rightly
what they are doing, till it is too late to retract.

And this was the very case of a great part of the Kingdom, in the late Civil
Wars.

They cried so long upon Religion, that at last they conjured her up in so many
shapes, and there appeared so many New Lights, that the undiscerning multitude
could not tell easily which was the Old.

They were afraid of the Re-establishing of Superstition, and Popery; and
looked upon our Churches decent and useful Ceremonies, as Dangerous
Innovations, and Introductions to Idolatry.

And in the State, the fancied endeavors of an Arbitrary Government, and
advancing a Boundless Prerogative, even to the despoyling the Subject, and
robbing him of his Birthright, the benefit of the Laws.

And, to free themselves of these Fears and Jealousies, they ran out into an
open Rebellion; whereby, instead of settling and confirming, they ruin and
overthrow the very Foundations of both Religion and Liberty.

Alas! their Ignorance in both.

One would think that the Excellency of our Religion, and the great Prudence
and Sincerity used in the Reformation, might have satisfied any considering
man, that there was no danger of our returning to the Communion of the Church
of Rome; Or, if nothing else would, yet (methinks) the inconsistence of the
Interest of our Kings with subjection to that See, might have persuaded any man
in his wits, that they would never submit themselves again to that Yoke, which
neither we, nor our Forefathers, have been able to bear.

And again, for Liberty, it can never be for the Public Good, to assert it by
Subjects taking up Arms against their Prince, because some ambitious designning
men are always sure in such cases to make the abused People their own Slaves.

This truth was well known to some at the beginning of our Troubles, though
their endeavors to infuse it into the distempered peoples minds, had the fate
of Cassandra's Predictions, To hit the Truth, but want Belief, till a costly,
and too late experience, had vouched it.

So that, upon the upshot, it appeared, that all the fair pretenses of their
Leading-men, were but a miserable masque and cover of a Damnable Rebellion; and
their towering, high-flown Religion, nothing but downright Hypocrisy, and
deep Dissimulation.

This was but too plain to every body, upon their refusal of His Majesty's
large Concessions, in the last Treaty he had with them.

Every man's eyes were then opened, and they saw manifestly, that the great
designers and managers of that Rebllion, aimed at nothing but his Crown and
Dignity; and that the People had all this while been deluded with appearances,
and cheated with Golden Dreams. So true is that of the Prophet, even in this
sense, 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.

God deliver us from her Enchantments, and accept the Blood of his dear Son
Jesus Christ, as a perfect atonement for that Royal Innocent Blood, wherewith
our Land was, as this day, stained and polluted; Bless the Kings Majesty with a
long and prosperous Reign; Grant us Peace and Truth in these our days, both in
Church and State; Give us all one Loyal and Obedient heart; Compose all our
Unnatural Heats and Divisions; Deliver us out of the hands of all our Enemies;
and grant, that those Evils which the craft and subtilty of the Devil or Man
works against us, be brought to naught; and by the providence of his Goodness
they may be dispersed, that we his Servants, being hurt by no Persecutions, may
ever more give thanks unto him in his Holy Church, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, be all Honor
and Glory, now and evermore,

Amen.
FINIS.

