C R

(...)QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Anent Pedagogues, Chaplains and others.
CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To (...) Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as in the whole course of Our Government, We have manifested Our
Pious and Princely Care, and Zeal to maintain and promote the Sacred Interests
of the Established Religion, together with the Order and Unity of the Church:
And considering the danger arising to the Church, to Religion, and to Our
Government, by the undutiful practices of some of Our Subjects, in intertaining
disaffected, and irregular Persons in the Offices of Chaplains, Pedagogues, and
Schoolmasters, who are apt to corrupt and poison the Families wherein they
Serve, and the Children whom they Teach and Instruct, with the Principles of
Schism, Sedition and Rebellion, Instilling into the Minds of Our People (under
the specious color of Piety) sinful prejudices against the settled Religion,
and begetting in them a Disloyal aversion from Our Authority and Government:
Not withstanding that by the 4th. Act. of the second Session of Our first
Parliament, It is Statuted, That none he allowed to Teach any Schools, or to
be Pedagoghes to Children, or Chaplains in any Family, without a license from
the respective Ordinaries: And that by the 6th. Act. of Our third and current
Parliament, All such Pedagogues, Schoolmasters and Chaplains, are appointed to
Swear and Sign the Test, under the certification therein contained; As also, by
Our Royal Proclamation, of the date at Edinburgh, the first of March 1676. We
did Require and Command, That none thereafter should intertain any
Schoolmaster, Pedagogue or Chaplain, or Person for performing Family Worship,
who have not a License for that effect, under the hand of the Bishop of the
respective Diocese under the penalties therein expressed. And now being
informed, that some to elude the Laws, and Proclamations foresaids, do
intertain disaffected and irregular Persons, for Teaching their Children, and
overseeing of their Learning, Manners and Education, or exercising
Family Worship in their Houses, under other N^d Designations, as of Physicians,
Factors, Chamberl^^ns, Attendants, or ordinary Servants, whose influence in
corrupting the youth, and debauching of Families from their Duty to GOD, (...)
to Us, is most apparent, and of very pernicious consequence; We do therefore,
with advice of Our Privy Council, strictly Prohibi^t and Discharge all Our
Subjects, of what quality soever, to intertain any Person or Persons, to be
Chaplains in their Families, or to be Governors, Teachers or Instructers of
their Children, or Pupils, or Minors, under their Tutory or Curatory, or to be
Schoolmasters within their Lands or Jurisdictions; or who shall perform the
Duties and Offices of Teaching, and Instructing their Children, or Pupils, or
minors, under their Tutory or Curatory, by Overseeing them in their Learning,
Manners and Education; or who shall exercise Religious-worship in their
Families, or shall perform the Duties belonging to the Places or Offices of
Pedagogues or Chaplains, under the Names and Designations foresaid, or under
whatsoever other, Color, Name, Title, or Designation, except such only as
shall Swear and Subscribe the Test for said, before their respective
Ordinaries; and who shall be allowed by Licenses, under the hands of their
respective Bishops, for performing and exercing of these Offices, certifying
all these who shall contemn, or contraveen this Our Royal Will and
Proclamation; That every Nobleman so offending, shall be fined in three
thousand Merks: Every Gentleman in twelve hundredth Merks: And each Burgess or
other Subject in six hundredth Merks, toties quoties, as they shall be found
guilty, conform to the Certification contained in Our said Proclamation dated
the said first of March 1676. and shall also be esteemed Persons disaffected to
the Bstablished Religion, and to Our Royal Government; and the Magistrates of
all Burghs of Royalty and Regality, are discharged to permit any Schoolmasters
to Teach Scholars in their Burghs, except they be qualified as aforesaid,
under the penal^^ of being pursued and punished before the Council, as their
contempt and neglect shall deserve. And to the effect, Our Royal Will and
Pleasure in the Premisles may be publicly known; Our Will is, and We Charge
you straightly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises,
that ^one pretend Ignorance. The which to do We commit to you, conjunctly and
severally, Our full Power, by the^e Our Letters, delivering ^^^m by you, duly
Execute, and indorsed again to (...)

Given under Our Signs, at Hallyrudhouse, the fourth day of (...) ^^ousand and
six hundred eighty and three: And of Our Reign, the thirtieth fifth year. Per
actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON, Cli. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderso^ ^^^^ to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno, DOM. 1683.


