CVPIDS SCHOOL: Wherein Young men and Mayds may learn diverse sorts of new,
witty, Amorous Complements.

Newly written, and never any written before in the same kind.

Complain unto thy Love with flattering Art,
For gentle words do move the hardest heart.
cupid seated before a stand with an open book in front of three standing
couples

Printed at London by Rich. Cotes, and are to be sold by Francis Grove,
dwelling on Snow-hill, near the Sarasins-head, 1642.

The Character and Description of a Complement.
IN the old time their Garments were plain, and so were their words and
meaning. But afterward, some more witty than the rest (finding what power
perswa^ion has over the mind of man) invented a new art of words called
Complements: which ^s indeed nothing but an effable and courteous manner of
speech, and yet is now grown so necessary, that nothing can be done without
them. For men now a-dayes regard not virtuous qualities, but only a
pleasingnesse of nature and condition, so that he that speaks best, ^eeds
best, and shall be sure to be preferred before the plain meaning man. So that
the ne^essity of these times does enforce us to learn ^he Art of Complements,
which I will prove unto you by particulars; and first in love, he that ^hinkes
to win affection by telling a Maid in plain terms that he loves her, is
much deceived, for when she hears you begin so plainly, she will start back
from you, and think you to be some ignorant Coridon, that know not Cupids
language: when on the contrary, he that can deliver his mind in amorous
words, does seem to keep the keys of their Maydenheads, of which he can take
possession when he list, for their hearts are at his devotion; while the other
poor Lover that cannot express his mind in a Complement, may pine away with
sorrow unregarded, for he that loves most is many times neglected, and he that
loves least is oftentimes most respected. Therefore it behooves a Lover now
adays to use some Complement and insinuation to procure affection, for a man
can prevail in nothing without Complements: your friend will not think you
his friend, without you salute him with a Complement: you cannot invite one
home, nor entertain him afterward, without Complements neither can you keep
company, or be sociable without the mutual enterchanging of Complements. To
conclude therefore, a Complemen^ is the language of Callants, the Conquer our
o^ Mayden-heads, the quintessence of wit, the res^ner of speech, and necessary
both in City an^ Country. For though the Countryman be plain, yet fair and
courteous words will prevail much with the goodness of his nature: and this
may be seen by the fable of Mercury and Jupiter, who wandering one night upon
the plains, not knowing where to get a lodging, at last they came to the house
of old Baucis and Philemon, an old married couple, who had long lived together
in a poor cottage: here Jupiter beginning to make his case known, the old wife
Bauci^ began to scold, and told him plainly she had no lodging for him, till
at last Mercury so far prevailed with his complementall eloquence, that the
good wife being ravished with his sweet words, straight opened the door,
lighted a candle, and entertained them with all kindness and courtesy*
whereby you may see that such is the power of Complements, that it breaks
locks, opens doors at midnight, and will give you access to the mistress
of your heart, if you can but handsomely complement with the Maid, and come
over her with melting language; only you must remember to mingle some kisses,
and line her Apron with gold, and then you may be sure to obtain your own
desires. Besides, as Complements are necessary in wooing, so you cannot
counsel your friend to refrain from any vicious course, unless you use the
ins^nuation of a Complement, fortruth is so sharp, that it is displeasing to
all men, and seems to grate their ears, if it be not sweetened by some
pleasant discourse; and therefore when you are to do the tenderest office of a
friend, which is to lay his shame and vice before him, there is nothing can
give a more ready entrance to your words, or make him more willingly endure the
sharpness of good counsel, than to begin in a loving and complementall
manner. Seeing therefore that a Co^plement is so graceful to the speaker, so
delightful to the hearer, and so powerful to win affection, I hope young
men will embrace and love this Book, which teaches them how to obtain their
love. And I hope young Mayds will lay it under their pillow, and read it when
they go to bed, since, it will instruct them how to give an Answer to their
amorous Suitors. And so wishing to all young men and Maids the accomplishment
of their desires, I leave these complements to their perusal.

A Complement to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
IT is some persuasion to read a Book, when we dare say that the matter is
new, and that there was never any thing written in the same kind. This we may
affirm of these Complements: and therefore having had no pattern of imitation
to direct me, I hope (kind Reader) thou will so much the rather vouchsafe out
of thy wonted kindness to grace them with thy favorable acceptance. Let their
newness persuade thee to rerd, and then I doubt not but thou shall find some
amongst them so pleasant and delightful, as will induce thee to crown my
labors with thy free commendations. For as I am studious to benefit thee in in
any thing I may so all the aim of my desire is, to be thought worthy of thy
liking and good opinion: which if thou grant me, it shall oblige the service
of my Pen to pleasure th^^ in this or any other kind. So I rest,

Thine as mine, W. S.

The Author to the Reader.
When thou do chance to fall in love by power of Cupids bow,
If thou these Complements do prove, their virtue thou shall know.
Suppose thy Sweetheart fled from thee, as Daphne fram Apollo,
Yet she at last changed will be, if thou the c^ace do follow.
And if these Complements thou use, in fitting place and time:
The Maid that did thy love refuse, shall unto love incline.
For though my self did never try, yet I have heard it said,
Fair words and opportunity, will win the coyest Maid.
The Contents.
1 TO woo a Maid. 2 The Mayds answer. 3 To urge a suit the second time. 4 The
Mayds answer. 5 The Lovers reply. 6 Master Brainelesse his wooing of Barbara 7
To excuse some inconsiderate speeches to ^ Gentlewoman. 8 To welcome one home.
9 To persuade by way of counsel. 10 To entreat a courtesy. 11 The Answer. 12
To bid a Bride goodmorrow. 13 To bid a Bridegroom goodmorrow. 14 At the first
meeting of a friend. 15 The other friends answer. 16 To present a gift to a
Maid. 17 To bid a friend farewell. 18 To entreat a courtesy of a stranger. 19
To ask a Fathers good will to marry his Daughter. 20 To begin a health. 21 To
promise to pledge it. 22 To desire to be excused. 23 To acquaint one wiih a
journey. 24 To thank one for a courtesy. 25 To excuse a friend in his absence.
26 The wooers complement. 27 The Mayes answer. 28 The Wooers answer. 29 To
invite one home. 30 To excuse with thanks. 31 To deliver a letter to a Lady.
32 The Ladies answer to her Waiting-Mayd. 33 The Waiting-Mayds answer. 34 The
Serving-mans wooing of Susan a Chamber-mayd, 35 Susans answer. 36 To desire the
Maid to speak to the Mistres. 37 To entreat lodging at a Gentleman's house. 38
The Gentleman's answer. 39 A bold Complement to a Widow. 40 The Widows
answer. 41 To woo a Country-Mayd. 42 The Country-Mayds answer.
A BOOK OF COMPLEMENTS.
As there are diverse occasions of speech, so to have variety of words and
phrases to express ones self, must needs be an ornament to the speaker, and
delightful to the hearer: I have therefore in this little Book set down some
forms of speaking and answering, as follows.

1. To woo a Maid.
Fair Maid, the opportunity of time and place (none being by to over-heare us)
does invite me to discover my affection. For since nothing can be determined
in loves affairs without consent of both parties, I mean now so acquaint you
with my desire: Which is, that since my heart has made choice of you in the
way of marriage, you would be pleased to receive my love with like affection:
I know I might have delivered my mind in more choice and eloquent words, but
believe me, that love is truest, which speaks plainest. Now the reasons that
induce me to seek your lovs, are the virtuous qualities which adorn your
mind; whose amiable and lovely beauty makes my heart burn with a chaste
affection: Think not therefore that any foul desires move me to become a
Suitor to y^u, nor am I hasty for marriage; for if you please to grant me your
love, I will stay your leisure to appoint the day to consummate our happiness.
I am a young pleader at the Bar of affection, and therefore hope you will not
discourage me in my first suit, but rather since my cause is full of love, will
at last give me a happy answer. Fearful distrust I know does plead against
me, and tells you how Maids have been deceived by flattering men, who have
only made a Complement of love to obtain their own desires But alas (fair
Maid) condemn not all because some have been false hearted: for I dare
promise for my self, that the stream of my affection slowing from your
virtues shall ever keep a constant course. For the seal of your love is so
deeply imprinted in my heart, that no time can wear it out: and therefore be
assured, that till you cease to be virtuous (which I know is impossible) I can
never cease to love you. And thus (sweet Maid) I have unclasped the volumne of
my secret thoughts, wherein you may read by fair intents, which are only to
obtain your love. and join your heart nearer to mine by the inviolable Bond
of marriage. Let me desire you therefore to unfold your lips, and give a
favoring. answer to my languishing hopes.

2. The Maids answer
SIr, your language is so full of chaste affection, and delivered with so much
mooving passion, that had my fancy hitherto entertained a thought of love, you
had certainly prevailed over the weakness of a Mayds resistance. But alas,
your love is a stranger to my heart; and therefore blame me not if I dare not
receive it as a plain guest, till I have consulted with my own thoughts.
Sudden consent is always held dangerous, and is still followed by repentance.
And therefore give me leave to consider your late motion, and I will study your
satisfectio^ in my answer: which if it prove not to your content, yet it shall
express my thankfulness for that love you bear me. In the mean time I must
dismiss my self from your company, for I fear my mother has took notice of
our conference, and so for my abrupt departure (if it be any breach of manners)
I must rely on your parton.

3. To urge a suite the secondtime.
THe next day, repairing to the former place, I spyed these two Lovers lying on
a bank of Flowers, so that using the friendship of some bushes to hide me, I
lay down, and so u^seene overheard the former Suitor renewing his suit in
these words: Fair Maid, now is the time that your promise has engaged you to
give an answer to my doubtful fears: and now I am to receive my sentence from
you, which I hope shall be full of comfort, since the greatest offense
wherewith you can charge my heart, is only this, that I love you: and
therefore I came to this place full of hope to be made happy by your answer, so
let me return full of joy by your free consenting to my former motion* But
what need I doubt, or afflict my self with vain fears? since I do reads
some comfort in your cheerful countinance, which caynot, like a cruel Judge,
smile and condemn at once M^ heart does presage, that during my absence, Cupid
has wrought in your heart a good opinion of me, which if you are unwilling to
let your tongue confess, lest a bush should spread it self upon your cheek: I
am content to take you^ silence for my answer, so you will suffer me,
ac^cording to the rules of love, to interpret that silence for consent, But
say, I see your lips are ready to prepare my doom, and therefore with patience
I will expect my sentence either of life or death, since it is in your power to
raise me up, or cast me down.

4. The Mayds answer.
SIr, I perceive the love that you profess unto me can receive no alteration
by time: for I was in good hope, that your two days absence would have
informed your judgment, to place your love on some more worthy choice. But now
since you are bent still to prosecute your former suite, and will not believe
me when I ^ell you how much I want of those v^^tues which you attribute to me,
I hope you will not ^lame me if I consent to your former motion: for I believe
you love me in the way of mar^^ge, and in that assuran^ I grant you my love
^^aine.

5. The Lovers reply.
IT is a grant that makes me happy, and now let me seal my patent with this
kiss, for you have given me your love, and with it a little world of
happiness: So that there remains nothing, but that we appoint our wedding
day, which I will not hasten through any forward desire of mine own: For since
I have obtained your promise for marriage, I do believe that our hearts are
already married in heaven, before a Congregation of Angels, which the Church
shall but only publish and make known to the world. And so bidding adieu to
vain Complements, which only became me as a Suitor, I hope I may now say you
are mine, as I am yours.

6. Master Brainlesse his wooing of Mistrisse Barbara.
Sweet Mistress Barbara, I beseech you not to be barbarous unto me. For our
Father^ have made the match already, and I am now come to w^^e you: for I feel
the mouth o^ my affection begin to water at thee, so th^^ there must be some
speedy remedy found out t^ allay my burning heat; for if I look, but ^^ your
pretty foot, I feel my heart begin to ris^ beneath my girdle, that sure I
think thou have some spirit about thee, which does bewitch me, but I hope ere
long, you shall find that I have a spirit too, which if it take after my
Mother, it may be a devilish spirit for any thing I know, for I am sure she
was an arrant shrew. But I love no long discourse, and therefore I would
entreat you,

That you would look upon my wounded heart*
And with your favor help to ease my smart.
7. To excuse some inconfiderate speeches to a Gentlewoman.
IF formerly (sweet Mistress) I have thrown out any words inconsiderately,
which might move your anger, I beseech you pardon them, or if my tongue have
wronged my heart by hasty speaking, attribute it to my rashness, not want of
love: for I recant those words that have moved your just disdain, and since
they cannot be recalled, let your wisdom and sweetness of nature be showed
in pardoning, as my folly was in offending: Let these words excuse my
trespass, for I know you are full of mercy, and cannot long deny a pardon to
him that sues for it with tears, though in a greater matter. But I see you
turn away from me as if my words seeking to excuse my former words did still
offend you, and therefore I will beg some favor from you in these few verses
which I made upon this occasion.

If that my tongue (fair Nymph) has said amiss,
The same for pardon now a Suitor is,
Or for it self if it too weakly plead,
My lips on its beh^lfe thus intercede:
Thus sue, thus beg, and begging will not leave,
Till they a pardon s^al'd from yours receive,
And while my kisses beg, O happy me,
If I might ever such a beggar be.
8. To welcome one home.
SIr, we have often wished your compony at home, and now you have made us happy
in our desires, by your safe ret^rne, to bid you welcome is but the common rode
way of friendship, and therefore I would f^ine speak something that might set
forth my love more fully, but indeed I find that all words are too mean to
express the joy tha^ my heart conceives at your happy return, We were
fearful and solicitons, least some misfortune might befall you in the way But
now we must confess we owe a sacrifice of thanks to Heaven for protecting you
in your journey, and bringing you back again unto us, to whom I dare pr^sume
you are as welcome as health to the ficke man, or a calm to the Weather-beaten
Mar^iner. To conclude, I could bid you welcome a thousand times, and yet think
those welcomes too few for since my love to you is infinite, I must needs say
you are infinitely welcome.

9. To persuade by way of Council.
SIr, were I worthy to counsel you of whom I am more fit to learn than to
advise, I would persuade you, to leave off that ill company, to which I find
you are too much addicted For I profess unto you, my counsel is directed to
no other aim, but your own good, and to entreat you to be kind unto your
self, and not to disgrace your parentage and birth, by frequenting such base
and ignoble company, who only desire to infect you with their vices, and who
like shadows only depend upon the Sun of your fortune: which if once it be
darkened by the aclipse of adversity, you shall find that you who before could
number so many friends, shall then be left alone to deplore your own folly, in
thinking that those could be friends unto you, who are not friends unto
themselves: for having by their own lavish profusion spent their own estates,
all their purpose now is to wind you into the some Labyrinth of misery, if
there thou have already entered into the intricate ways of vice, let my
counsel serve like Adriadne's clew of thread to guide your steps, back again
into the way of virtue, from which you have too far already wandered. But
perhaps I shall obtain your hatred, and by seeking to reclaim your errors,
shall there by lose your favor, yet however, I shall express the duty and
office of a friend: for while I see you run these wild, and ruinous courses,
though I am your friend, I will not be your flatterer.

10. To entreat a courtesy
SIr, you shall oblige me to you, by adding one new favor to your former
courtesies, for so it is, that my business will miscarry, unless I obtain
your assistance, which if you please to grant me, you shall not only bind me
unto you by the res^e^s of duty and observance, but shall also express your
self the miracle of true friendship, I confess I am unwilling to be
troublesome unto ^ou, but yet such is the commanding necessity of my affairs,
that I must assume an unwonted boldness to petition your favor and assistance
in my behalf.

11. The answer.
SIr, you may command me; for I am so wholly devoted to your service, that you
may assure your self, I can deny you no request which lies within the circle
or compass of my power. For my heart is yours, and therefore what good I am
able to do you (either in this or any other kind) you may promise your self)
being indeed glad to be employed in any service that concerns you, so that (to
the ability of a poor friend) I shall be ev^r ready to second your desires
with my best endeavors. Command me therefore when you please, and you shall
find me your ready servant, for I languish with a desire to do you some
courtesy that may express that friendship and love I owe you, which has
hitherto lain dead in me, for want of opportunity to demonstrate and make it
evident to the eyes of the World, by some friendly office.

12. To bid a Bride good morrow.
Mistress Bride, I wish the joys of love may be still multiplied upon you. Nay
blush not, for it is no shame to do the Common wealth service, by bringing a
race of Soldiers into the World. I know this night you have endeavored for it,
but we must see the fruit hereafter: All this I wish is, that your Husband and
you may live together like a contented pair, happy in each other. What now?
Weeping? I hope you will not give such an example to the Mayds, or so disable
your Bridegroom, as to show any sigues of grief or sorrow on the following
morning to your Wedding day. If you have parted with a long preserved joy to
night, yet comfort your self in your losses, for there are many Mayds would
have been glad of your place, and thank you too, But I have no art in
Complements, and therefore in a word, I wish you all joy.

13. To bid a Bridegroom good morrow.
MAster Bridegroom, I must congratulate the joys of Marriage, and wish they
may increase daily to both your comforts: you have enjoyed to night a
happiness which my knowledge did never yet arive at* and therefore it is
unpossible for me to guess it; however I do not envy, but wish you al
happiness with your fair choice. And though by your heavy eye, I discern you
have not took your due of rest to night, yet you may take it out the next, for
I could wish my Bed were troubled with such fleas, on that condition I slept
not these two nights. All that I can wish is this, that no fatal time day, or
hour, may produce a change or alteration in your affections: But that you may
live like Turtle Doves you ioying in her and she with mutual delight making
you the object of all her happiness, that so your marriage may prove a
merri-age.

14. At the first meeting of a friend.
SIr, you are well met and most happily returned; for fame has given out a
sinister report, that you were miscarried in your journey, but I am glad the
old proverb is true, that fame is often a liar. I pray let a pint of Wine be
the Scrivener to renew the bonds of our friendship, for I am even full of joy
to behold you, and my heart would bid you welcome in better phrase, but that I
want words to express the integrity and truth of my affection. I have forgot
all this while to enquire of our friends health, my thoughts were so wholly
busied to bid you welcome. But I hope, Sir, they are well.

15. The other friends answer
SIr, your friends are all well, and are m^ndful of you in the remembrance of
their love. Neither am I less joyful at our fortunate meeting, which is a
happiness I have long wished for; and though my tongue cannot interpret the
inward joy of my heart, yet I would not have you think that love is least;
which has least expression of it self. For a full vessel yields no sound,
and a heart full of affection cannot so easily express it self in a smooth way
of Complements: in a word I am heartily glad to see you and to say more, were
but to speak the same in more words.

16. To present a gift to a Maid.
Fair Maid, I would desire you to accept this small Ring, as an emblem of my
affection, which like a circle shall be ever endless. I know it is unworthy
your acceptance, yet vain out of the graciousnesse of your humility, to
receive this unworthy pledge of that love and service which I shall ever owe
you, till time shall enable me to express my love in some more worthy gift.
And if at any time this toy do chance to draw down your eye unto your finger,
if you please to remember me thereby and think on me who has de voted my
self to your service, I shall think my self the less unhappy in my absence;
though indeed till I return again, I shall be able to relish no taste of
comfort, since all my joy is to enjoy your company: but my business does
enforce me away, so that leaving this with you as a memento of my affection, I
take my leave with as sad a heart as ever lover parted with his Mistress.

17. To bid a friend farewell.
SIr, I am so unwilling to be deprived of your sweet society, and so sorty to
loose the fruition of your good company, that my heart will hardly permit me
to take my leave of you, yet since the necessity of your occasions does enforce
us to part, I can but wish you a prosperous journey, and with my prayers daily
solicit heaven for your safe return. I will not bu^then your memory with
several commendations, but only desire you to remember my love and service in
general, to all our friends in the Country. This is all I require of you, and
since, though unwilling, we must endure your absence from us, I will promise
in the mean time, to be your Beades-man to pray for your happy journey and
will only keep so much of my heart as may keep me alive, the other half shall
go with you. Now I see why death is called departing, for departing of friends
is a short death; give me your hand, the ancient emblem of affection, and I
pray be careful of your self, since in your welfare consists the welfare of
all your friends. And so farewell.

18. To entreat a courtesy of a stranger
SIr, though I am unknown unto you, yet the report of your known courtes^
makes me bold to prefer a suit to your favorable consideration. Which if I
might obtain, I should think virtue has not quite forsaken the World, but
that there lives such sparks of goodness in your breast, as may be able to
inflame posterity with an emulation of your goodness: I beseech you therefore
be not afraid to do me a courtesy, because I am a Stranger. For by how much
you have less inducements to show me any favor, you shall thereby make your
virtue shine with more illustrious glory. I must confess I have no great man's
Letter to prdcure your liking and good opinion of me, yet since my desires are
modest, and such as you may grant with ease, I hope you will grant my request,
in requital whereof I will proclaim your nobleness and courtesy wheresoever
I come, and will be sure to mention you always in my prayers, who have with
the eyes of pity looked down upon the necessities of a stranger But I will not
urge you with any further importunity, but leave my suit to your consideration.
Verbum ^at bono, few words prevail with good men in a good cause.

19. To ask a Fathers good will for marrying his Daughter.
SIr, it has pleased your Daughter to bestow her affection upon me, and now I
must become a suitor to you for your good will and liking: For so far she has
granted me her love, if it be seconded by your good allowance. I would entreat
you therefore be pleased to ratify and establish by your free consent what the
Heavens have already decreed. For our hearts are already married in heaven, and
we lack nothing now but your consent, which I hope I shall obtain and since
we have both been obedient in making you acquainted with our desires, I
beseech you seek not to cross our loves, but give us both your blessing.

20. To begin a health.
GEntlemen, since we are now unable to commemorate our friends any other way
than by remembering them in a health, I am bolo, out of the overflowing of my
love, to dedicate this health to the memory of our absent friends, I will fill
it so full that a fly may drink of it at the top, and will drink it so
clearly off, that a fly shall not be able to drink at the bottom. And thus
Gentlemen I begin it, hoping that no man that honors his friend will refuse
it, for I would have the health in a circular orb move round about the table,
till every man has had it: And so (as I said before) I begin this health Ad
salutem Amicorum. To the health of all our friends, wishing them as full a
measure of all happiness, as this cup is full of Wine. I hope you will pledge me
Gentlemen.

21. To promise to pledge it.
SIr, heeres no man will refuse it, for my part I will continue the health for
I am bound to second it, since it is in memory to our friends, and therefore I
will pledge it, though the glass were so big, that the Moon might make a
c^ver to it.

22. To desire to be excused.
GEntlemen, I must entreat your pardon, for I dare not drink such health,
since I know I should loose mine own health by it. Besides, I hold it a
heathenish custom, and not becoming a Christian. I shall therefore esteem it
a courtesy in you to dispense with my pledging it; for to show love to our
friends by wronging our selves, were a part of folly rather then friendship. To
which purpose I have written these verses.

It Is an ^ld rule now amonst Bac^ius train,
That from our own healthes drinking we refrain:
Yet now they do begin healths to their friends,
Which with the loss of their own health still ends:
And thus while of our friends, too much we make,
We love our friends but our own selves we hate.
23. To acquaint one with a journey.
I Am to ride this morning toward London, and if you please to command me any
service, I shall be careful in the performance of it: or if you have any thing
to buy, pray let me be your steward, I Will buy it as cheap as I can for it is a
happiness to me to have any employ, meant from you. If therefore you have any
business or cause to solicit, trust me with it and I will use the best
diligence I can to effectuate your desires, or if you please to command me any
other service, you shall find me your ready servant.

24. To thank one for a courtesy.
SIr, I must acknowledge my self indebted to you for your last courtesy, the
remembrance makes me your debtor till I can find some opportunity of
requital; neither will I be ungrateful for your last favor, but will
return it with interest when Fortune shall enable me: in the mean time I would
desire you to reckon me in the number of those that are beholding to you, and
for your former crurtesies to take the payment of a friend, in a current
English shankes.

25. To excuse a friend in his absence.
SIr, it is the part of one friend to excuse another in his absence, and
therefore I entreat you not to be offended with him till you know the truth,
but to interpret all things to the best. For I know it would much grieve him
to gain your displeasure, and therefore let not your wisdom censure him in
his absence for I know he will clear himself at his return. Be pleased
therefore to suspend your anger a while, and let not your passion pronounce him
guilty, before you know the truth: for if you will uniustly condemn him, I
must rise up in my friends defense, for howsoever his enemies have incensed you
against him, I dare engage my self he is not guilty of those calumnious
slanders which are heaped on him. Let me entreat you therefore not to give
credit to the reports of malicious informers, who can with ease defame and cast
aspersions upon the best men, but I would rather have you think the best of
him, till you know the worst, and then determine of as you find cause. If he
deserve it. let him continue still your friend if not, let him be wiped out of
the number of your friends.

26. The Wooers Complement.
SWeet Maid, the Sun has almost gone his yearly journey about the World
since first I beheld the Sun of your beauty, which has so dazzled mine eyes,
that I behold all other things as trifles in respect of those glorious beams
which do shoot themselves from thence. If therefore c^ntinuance of time may be
any assurance of fidelity in love, you must needs confess that I have long
been a devoted servant to your perfections. Be pleased therefore now to
accept that love of mine, which my fond heart cannot conceal, you are the
darling of my thoughts, the treasure of my heart, the ^appinesse of my life:
neither would I live ^ndeed, but that I hope in time by my true ser^ice and
obedience to obtain your favor, Neither would I have you think that I
slat^er you, for my tongue does but interpret ^o my heart, and the heavens know
with what a due reverence I honor you. If therefore my love be grounded upon
virtuous desires, you ought to cherrish it, but if I seek your wrong by
satisfaction of my own desires, let me perish in your favor, which is to me
above all punishments. You are the Lodestone of my affection, your lips are
the moist Adamants that do attract me, one touch from your hand has power to
revive the dead faculties of age. There is music in your voice, and a
lovelines in all your actions. Blame me not then for loving you, but blame your
self for being so worthy of love, and since your beauties have wonnded me, let
your gracious answer cure me by consenting to tie that holy knot of Marriage,
which I have often urged. Make me happy in your answer.

27. The Mayds answer.
SIr, as you are a friend to virtue, I cherish your Love and am persuaded you
love me: but alas, we Maids have no power to give away our selves without
consent of Parents, neither can we dispose o^ our selves, or be liverall of our
affections, til^ our Parents be acqutinted with it. And therefore you must now
become a Suitor to my Father; his liking obtained, mine shall follow, and if you
get his good will: my hand shall give you my heart in the Church before the
whole Congregation: in the mean time rest assured, you shall find me constant
in affection, and therefore you need solicit me no further, I am yours.

28. The Wooers answer.
I Desire no more happiness: for by your answer you have revived my drooping
heart; neither would I change my estate with rich Croesus, since I value the
obtaining of your love above the Empire and Dominion of the whole world. I
doubt not but we shall live and love together. And as for your Father, I hope
he will grant us the privilege due to al hearts, to love and to enjoy: and I
will shortly take some fit opportunity to solicit his consent: in the interim
I must force my heart to take my leave of you, not daring to salute you for
fear one kis should tempt me back again, but it is no matter, what we spare
now, we will take out upon our Wedding day, Farewell.

29. To invite one home.
SIr, I have often desired your company at home, but yet could never be so
happy to obtain it. But now you shall not deny to grace my poor house with
your presence, since we are hard by it, and to honor me so much as to let the
star of your virtue shine within the sphere of my house: for I dare promise
though entertainment be not worthy your invitation, yet you shall be as
welcome as a friend can be to a friend.

30. To excuse with thanks.
SIr, I desire your pardon, for my business will not permit me, otherwise you
should not entreat me twice if I could grant it without much hinderance to my
self. I am sorry to refuse your kind invitation, but I will promise to visit
you shortly, and since it is your desire, I will be bold to call upon you. At
this time I am enforced to withstand my own happiness by denying your free
invitation, but I hope you will excuse me, and attribute it to my business,
not want of love.

31. To deliver a Letter to a Lady.
MAdam, here is a Letter waits your perusal; and desires to be presented to
your Ladyships hand, the messenger told me that it was sent from your humblest
servant Sir T. C.

32. The Ladies answer to her waiting-Gentlewoman.
Who bid you forsooth receive these amorous papers? I know it is lighter than a
Complement and it may be 'twas written in a Tavern, I will not open it till I
mean to laugh, for I mean to make it my recreation after meals. But I pray
be careful hereafter to receive no more, you know my mind, and now you cannot
excuse your self by ignorance

33. The Waiting-mayds answer.
I Shall obey your Ladyships command, for I will not gain your Ladyships
displea^ure by receiving their Letters, though they should tempt me with a
shower of Gold, I will not offend wilfully, but will study in all things to
preserve your favor: for it has be hitherto the aim of my desires to
continue my self in your Ladyships good liking, and I hope I shall never
deserve the contrary.

34. The Servingmans wooing of Susan a Chamber-Mayd.
SVsan, it is now three years since we have been fellow servants together.
During which time I have received many courtesies from you, and been invited
to many a Sack Posset, which kindnesses of yours, though tending to no other
end than to express your own natural good^esse, have since invited me to
love you. And now having both ^ate out the fi^e, and our candl^ burning dimly,
I thought this twilight, would best become a Love-suit. For I profess unto
you Susan, I love you with as much affection as my heart can obtain: and
albeit ^e have often fallen out upon trifles, yet I did it but to try thy
nature, which I found to be hasty (as the best natures are) but not able to
retain anger long, and therefore I hope you will forgive what is past, and
consider my motion which tends, to both our good. For is it not better to live
freely in the married state of life, than to depend on service, where every
frown is ready to cast us off the hinges? for my part Susan, though the
unthriftines of my friends did first compel me to undertake a servile life,
yet I could never bring my heart to affect it, and I know you are of the same
mind, for I have heard you say, your Father was a wealthy Farmer, who coming
behindhand with the world you were put forth to service, which kind of life I
know must needs seem tedious, and therefore I have propounded a way, whereby
we may both live a free and happy life. I know you will object the want of
means to mainetaine a charge or family. It Is true, but yet let us not despair
of Gods blessings, for have we not seen many Couples, whose whole stock could
hardly purchase a Wedding Ring, and a License, who yet afterward by their own
endeavors have lived more contentedly than these great money-matches, which
seldom prosper? for where there is love, there all things thrive, but where
there is debate, there all things go to wrack. Love will supply the defects of
want, so that if you please to entertain my suite with your kind a^cep^ance*
you shall not only free your self from the subjection of a servant but live i^
the ssweet yoke of marriage. And now Susan I entreat you to consider these
reasons which I could enlarge but that I fear our Candle will go out, and
therefore having thus rudely with little art, but much affection, delivered my
mind, I hope you will make me happy by your answer.

35. Susans answer.
ROger, you are much mistake^ to interpret any courtesy of mine to proceed from
love, though indeed I have always loved you as one servant may love another.
But for other matters (as they say) I never so much as dreamed of them, and
therefore do not urge so vain a suite, for I have something else to do, than
to think of marriage. It is a sign Roger you live easily, for ease is the
nurse of love; but if you sat up night by night, starching as I do, and then
arose again as early in the morning you would have little mind to entertain a
thought of love, And therefore hereafter busy your self in some good
employment, and you shall see these idle fancies will vanish of themselves. But
if by this means your desires be not abated, I will consider better of your
motion, and this is all I can say at this time, in answer of your suit. And so
farewell, for I hear my Mistress knock above, and therefore I must be gone.

36. To desire a Maid to speak to the Mistress
SWeete-heart, I know your long and faithful service has indear'd you into
your Mistresses opinion, so that she rep^ses some trust and confidence in your
words, and I know you are not ignorant of those strange times and seasons when
women's fancies are most apt to receive Loves impression If therefore you would
please to take some hour of advantage to remember my suite to your Mistress,
and would but cast forth some words that may stir affection in my behalf, I
would not prove unthankful, For though others have solicited you in the same
way, yet if you will promi^ me your good word and assistance to prefer my
suit to your Mistress, I will requite it in your own desire, in earnest
whereof I would entreat you to wear this Ring; and to be mindful of me in my
absence, that so at my next visitatio^ of your Mistress, I may find her more
i^c^^^able to my su^e. Farewell.

37. To entreat lodging at a Gentleman's house.
SIr, being a stranger benighted and strayed out of my may and finding that the
Village Town affords no Inn or house of receipt, I wouldgladly be beholding
to you for this nights lodging till in the morning I may receive some better
directions to proceed on my journey.

38. The Gentleman's answer.
SIr, it is a courtesy that the laws of hospitality bind me to perform. I
must confess our Town is but ill provided for the entertainment of strangers,
and therefore if you please to accept of such a mean lodging as my house can
afford, you shall be welcome.

39. A bold Complement to a Widow.
SWeet Widow, I come not with a tedious Complement to win affection: but I
come with love and youth, which are more graceful qualities in a Widows
eyes. I am indeed a younger brother, and have no land to indeere me into your
liking, yet if you please (as they say) to cast away yourselfe upon a man, I
hope I shall be able to delight you with the sweet contents of love. Think it
not therefore the worst charity to make a man, and to raise the fortunes of a
younger Brother, who only wants some of that white and red earth, which lies by
you so uncomfortably Come, I will not be put back or daunted, nor will I take
your no, for a denial: for I know, however you Widows seem to dislike our
boldness* yet in your own thoughts you do commend us; when like good
Soldiers coming up bravely, we make an assault upon your lips and scorn to
retire, although your eyes shoot frowns against us. Thus far (sweet Widow) I
have bin bold with you, and I hope not more bold than welcome: yet lest I
should p^esume too far, know therefore in plain terms that albeit I am the
last that has solicited you for affection, yet do I not least affect you,
but should be glad of such a comforter as yourselfe, who by your good counsel
may reclaim me from the wild unstayed errors of my youth, for being once
married, I will fast from all loose affection, striving night and day to make
myself worthy of the title of your husband, which I hope you will grant me,
that so our wooing may conclude in a wedding.

40. The Widows answer.
ALas Sir, the remembrance of my late Husband, whose memory does ever draw
tears from mine eyes, his memory (I say) had so far once prevailed, and was
so deeply implanted in me, that I resolved never to make a second choice. But
yet I know not how, moved rather out of pity to your self, than any desire
of my own, I am willing to second your desires in any lawful affection. For I
see you can speak moovingly, and I must confess you have wrought more upon me
than many others whom I could put back at any time by telling them with a
serious countenance, that I never meant to marry. But I see you will have no
answer but in the right kind, and therefore (as I said before) in pity of your
youth, hoping you will be a comfort to my age, and prove a good Husband, I am
content to make you Master of my self and mine. But still I say in pity of
your youth, for it is your youth and young blood that I love.

41. To woo a Country Maid
Fair Maid the opportunity of occasion, and the strong bent of my affection
(which will either break out in words, or break my heart) compel me to take
this short time to discover my desires unto you. The first time that I beheld
you, was, when you were reaping your fathers corn, and then it seemed to me
that the golden ears did even bend unto your hands, and your straw hat became
you better than if you had wo^e a coronet of stars. But indeed what need you
wear a starry crown, whose eyes are stars and have so powerful an influence
upon the beholders, that ever since that day, my heart has never been mine
own, but yours, and my thoughts have been wholly given over to think of
nothing but the obtaining your love, for which I am come now to entreat,
b^gge, and sue, knowing that you cannot be unmercifull: for if you will save
your Fathers Lambs out of danger when they fall into a pit. if such trifling
things can moove your compassion. I hope you will a little commiserate the
dolou^s, and extreme passions of a Lover. For I per^wade you to nothing but
that which is the end of your coming into this world* and that is marriage,
for how soon would the world decay and come to nothing, if it were not
preserved by marriage? since therefore nature has given you so large
perfections, she looks that you should requite her again, and not to let your
beauties wither on your cheek, but to bestow your youth and beauty on him who
will honor you both in age and sickness. For know this that beauty is a
fading flower, which cannot long continue, and as Friar Bacons headspake, Time
is, Time was, Time is past: so Mayds have their sev^rall times and seasons; for
at 15. they are in their prime, and then Time is, at 30. Time was, and at 40.
Time it past. But I need not, I hope, use so many circumstances in words, to
come to the sull point af Marriage, since you yourselfe cannot be ignorant of
my affection For when you went to milk, I have like a faint shadow followed
you, a^nd when you went to fold your fathers sheep, I have helped you all which
were services of that love and duty which my heart does owe you. Be pleased
therefore now out of the goodness of your nature, and by that soft compassion
which should dwell in a Ma^dens heart* to grant me your love, and then I shall
esteem myself more happy than the greatest Monarch in the world. I beseech
you do not deny me, but let one chaste kiss strike a bargain between us, that
so we may tie the true Lovers knot of marriage.

42. The Country Maids answer.
SIr, I had thought you would not have mocked me by laying beauty to my charge,
for I have often beheld my face in the running stream, but I wish I could
never behold such a dicker of beauty as you will ascribe unto me. You compare
my eyes unto stars, and I know not what. Alas, Sir, do you think we
CountreyMayds are such harmless innocent fools that we are taken with fine
fai^e words, which you Courtiers call Complements? Alas no, you may go use
them to Ladies: yet I know not how, me thinks your words come from you with
such fervency of affection, that I could find in my heart to answer you in your
own phrase, for you must know we Country Mayds can Complement as well as you:
know therefore that if your former words do proceed out of chaste desire to
marry me, and if your heart has been so long a servant of mine I will not
detain your wages, but will pay you love for love again, and that I know is
the payment that you expect. But I pray boast not that you overcame me with a
Compleme^t though indeed I like your Complements very well, which being set
forth with a languishing behavior, did become you so well, that I am content to
yield my self to your disposing, and to make my self an example to show what
great power a Complement delivered in due time and place may have over a mayds
affection: and so without further ceremony, pray let our Ba^^es be bidden, let
the fiddlers be hired to play upon our wedding day, and let the Mayds strew the
way to Church woth flowers, for your Complement has overcome me, and so I
leave you.

FINIS.

