C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Allowing a further Diet to the Commons for taking the Test,
and Indemnifying the Heretors Guilty of Harboring, or Resetting of Rebels who
have taken the Test at the late Justice-Aires, as to their Lives.
CHARLES R. Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants or
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute Greeting:
forasmuch as it being represented to Us, that some of Our Commons have,
through ignorance, or want of frequent Meetings of these appointed by Our late
Proclamation for Administrating the Test, lost the benefit of Our Indemnity,
and considering that the time formerly allowed unto them was very short, We
have thought fit, as a further evidence of Our Clemency, with advice of Our
Privy Council, to continue the Diet for their taking the Test, to the first of
March next ensuing, for Indemnifying them for ever, as to their Resetting, and
Intercomuning with such as were engaged in the Rebellion, in the year 1679.
Excepting such as have Reffetted, or Intercomuned with the Assassines of the
late Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews, or Seditious Field-preachers: As also,
such as have Ressetted, or Intercomuned with any who is Guilty of, or any manner
of way accessory to the late horrid Conspiracy against Our Royal Person and
Government; Requiring hereby all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Magistrates and others in
Office strictly to search for, (after the said day,) and to punish with all
rigor that Our Law will allow, all such as will refuse this last Offer of Our
Mercy: But if any are, or shall be apprehended before their making application
for obtaining this Our Favor, We Declare that they shall have no benefit
thereof. And further, We declare, that the Heretors who have already taken the
Test in the last Iustice-Aires, thereby are secured as to their Lives, if they
have been only Guilty of Resetting, and Intercomuning; but that nevertheless,
they shall after the first day of November next be liable to be Conveened
before Our Privy Council, and to such Arbitrary Punishments as they shall think
fit to appoint, according to the Specialities of their respective Cases and
Guilt; Declaring hereby, that their Sentences being fulfilled by them, shall
Indemnifie them as effectually, as if they had a special Pardon and Remission
from Us, under Our great Seal; and We do allow those entrusted by Our Privy
Council, to take the Declarations of Witnesses against those who have been
suspected of being in the late Rebellion, or Guilty of Ressetting and
Intercomuning, providing always that there be no Processes intented upon these;
or any other Declarations, or Depositions, until Our Advocat shall find
sufficient matter of Dittay therein. And to the effect Our Pleasure may be
known in the Premises, Our Will is, and We Charge you straightly and Command,
that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other places needful, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by
open Proclamation, make publication of the Premises: The which to do, We
commit to you, conjunctly and severally, Our full Power, by these Our Letters,
delivering them by you duly execute, and indorsed again to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Haly rud-house, the twenty day of September, One
thousand six hundred eighty and three. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and
fifth Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON. Cls. Sti.
Concilij

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, 1683. Reprinted at London, by George Croom, in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle,


