THE POEMS OF Ben. Johnson JVNIOR.

Being A Miscelanie of Seriousness, Wit, Mirth, and Mystery.

In VULPONE. The DREAM. ITER BEVORIALE. SONGS. etc.


Composed by W. S. Gent.

Parce -- vatem sceleris damnare -- London Printed for Tho. Passenger at the
three Bibles about the middle of London Bridge. 1672.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of Rutland, and his Honorable Son the Lord
Ross.
LEt Virgil and wise Homer crowned with Bays
Instruct my Pen to sing great Rutland's praise;
Skie-mounting Belvoir my Pernassus be,
Wh^re Bounty, Plenty, noble Charity
Erect their throne, where the fair Heavens adjoin
A Manor, and a Mountegue divine.
To the Right Honorable Walter Lord Aston.
ASton a Stone cut from the marble Quar,
Framed to outlive the flames of civil war;
With all the bounties of the heavens befriended
Nineteen brave Knights, two princely Lords descended.
From this great Stem laden with Honors spoil,
That now o'respreads Great Britains fruitful Isle.
Tixal the Fountain, whence these Heroes flow,
Where Hospitality and Bounty grow.
Here Corydon does act a pleasant Scean,
While his swift grinders sweep the Table clean.
Here I my noble Ancestors of old,
Tracing the steps of Charity behold,
By Loves fair hand to mine own Cradle led,
Aston and Lucy joined in one Bed.
To all the ancient Family of the Lucyes, and to all their Honorable
Extractions
Luci quasi Luxi.
LUcy bright morning star, pure light divine,
Drawn from the Roman and the Norman line,
In every Revolution still the same,
Their Countries Honor and transcendent flame.
From this clear Spring I am a little Stream,
From this Apollo a derived beam.
Ingratitude unto that Root and Ground,
That noble Being, I my Being found;
Lamp of their Country, to their endless praise,
I dedicate these soft and humble Lays.
THE CONTENTS.
In Vulpone.
A Fri^r. Vulpone's Schoolmaster. His Pedigree. Mahomet Vulpone's Coat of
Arms. His Friends. Usurers. Vulpone's Apology, etc.
In the Dream.
Dreams. The Court of Spain. The Inquisition. London. Lawyers. Opinionists. The
Rich. The Poor. The University.
Miscellanies.
Iter Bevoriale. False and true Love. Egypt and the Brick-makers there. The
Wilderness. Death.
On the Royal Sovereign. A Poetical Strain. Two Poetical Epistles. A cold
Journey. Upon my Return hence. A Dialogue, The Drainers are up. ^uch a Rogue's
a Roundhead. A Catholic Hymn. A Hymn of Love. An Epitaph Hymn. The Angels
Entertainment. Hymnus in eandem. A Song of Hospitality. Self. A Littany. A
Sovereign Receipt. Dysticks.
THE POEMS OF BEN. JOHNSON Junior.
VULPONE.
AQuarius eb'd, and Pisces caught in the wile,
The Ram skips in, when Thalia deignes to smile,
Sol courts his Mistress, gives her a green gown,
I Am crowned with joy, and tripping ore the Down
I chanced to pass by a fair crystal flood,
Whose nearest neighbor, was an o'regrown wood,
The little bubbling purling Fountains springing,
The Nightingale on every bow sat singing,
The Fields, the Flowers, the Fruit so freely budding,
Without all care I stumbled on a sudden
Upon the Foxes hole; Reynard, quoth I,
Why art thou banished from society?
This solitary, melancholy Cave,
Looks like some desperate dungeon, or a grave;
Thy sentence is severe; what! no reprieve?
Must thou lie buried and entombed alive?
The goodwives call thee treacherous, and sullen,
A greedy dog, for killing all their pullen.
The Shepherds too such loud complaints do bring,
Make every corner of the Downs to ring
The bloody slaughter of the harmless Sheep,
Like a sly curr, when Shepherds are asleep.
The cruel murder of the pretty Lambs,
Slain on a heap together with their damms.
Reynard to me his gentle paw did reach,
And in smooth language thus began to preach;
Many blind souls who cannot read their Psalter,
Are too too bold and busy with the Altar.
Let no man put his finger in the fire,
I by profession am a reverend Friar,
Our order 'bove all earthly power was ranged
Equal with Angels, but those times are changed,
A dismal cloud has shaded all our mirth,
We now are called the Locusts of the earth
By Schismatics, who having lost the way,
In a wild labyrinth of error stray
It was a golden age, when we did handle,
The affrighted world, with our Bell, Book, and Candle.
Lords of the World, Men's Consciences to boot,
We made great Kings humbly to kiss our foot;
We then were Emperors of all men's treasures,
My brother Wolf, and I, did fare like Coesars,
Our bellies strutting, nothing could we lack,
The full crammed dishes made the Table crack,
Gammons of Bacon, Brawn, and what was chief,
King in all feasts, a tall Sir Loyne of Beef.
Fat Venison Pasties smoking, it is no fable,
Swans in their broth came swimming to the Table,
Partridges, Pigeon, Plover, and the Hen,
With all her broods, would it were there again.
My sides were wondrous plump, and in good plight,
I had no cause to range abroad by night,
Feasted with delicates beyond all measure;
Our golden path was Paved with ease, and pleasure.
The highway Huckster he delights in pillage,
The Gypsy swaggers in a Country Village,
The beggar under every bush does feast,
But of all lives the Monk's life is the best;
The world in pure devotion was so holy,
While we fed fat and laughed at their folly.
The pretty Nuns and we agree so well,
Whom we did pardon whatsoever befell.
We put the fair side outward; what was foul
Was closely hidden underneath our Cowl.
None in the Pulpet could become a lie,
With face more bold and confident than I.
Such melting words, that made the women weep.
Into the closet of their souls I creep.
The men from home, and dreaming of no harm,
I kiss their wives, and keep their places warm;
I led the fools in such a stupid blindness,
At their return they thank me for my kindness.
The world was fast asleep, and did not mind me,
Where e're I came I left my spawn behind me.
Like Bulls reserved for breed, from our fair Abbyes,
We fill all countries with our lusty Babyes.
Hence in their mouths this Proverb all men gather,
It Is a wise child that knows his own Father.
But I must now in deep contrition mourn,
Fasting and praying for the swift return,
I lay my bones upon this rocky hill,
Besides the Lents I keep against my will;
Since Abby's were dissolved, which I condole,
I hid mine head ever since in this dark hole,
In this poor Hermitage my vows to pay,
In deep devotion I consume the day,
Shunning all company by Heavens direction,
I keep my self untainted from infection.
In meditation on my own thoughts feeding,
Least they should spoil my manners and my breeding:
I contemplate and study in my mind,
Where I at night some pleasant bit may find.
Self preservation is a general rule,
I sucked this lesson from dame nature's School.
My Occupation, which some thiev'ry call,
I learnt of man the greatest thief of all,
By him I was instructed to indite;
Man is my copy, what he writes I write;
Look on my Book I Am sure I do not miss,
Compare them well, my letters are like his.
It Is true with Ducks and Geese I am at war,
But he in cruelty exceeds me far;
For one offense of mine number his ten,
I prey on Lambs, but he does prey on men.
Upon a Pigg sometimes, I place my mind,
Whole Nations he devours of his own kind.
To satisfy fierce hunger, it is most just;
Man plays the wanton Cannibal for lust.
A Coney, or a Hare, small things we prize them;
These Alexanders Worlds will not suffice them,
He calls for more worlds, and he cries Aloon Sir,
As if one were too little for one Mounsieur.
Such petty thieves as I are still dispraised;
Your mighty Tories unto honor raised.
We make the woods our dreadful habitations,
They stear the healm of Kingdoms and of Nations.
These Caesar's placed on fair Fortunes brow,
But we are taught to swim on every bow.
The world is caught with toys, things prized we see,
Not as they are, but as they seem to be.
Of our deserved honor she would bar us,
Because our chamber is not hung with Arras.
Truth stands on the rock, it is no false Latin,
A foole's a fool although he ride in Satin.
Do not debase our royal pedigree,
Our famous Line shines with the greatest He,
Though I am forced to live in humble cote,
Mine Ancestors were Beasts of princely note,
And tho* I am by no man now befriended,
I am from Kings and Emperors descended.
With Hannibal I was in great request,
I always lodged in this brave Generals breast;
'Twas not his Sword that drove the Romans home
Totally routed, to besieged Rome;
It was my counsel gave the fatal blow,
When Italy with blood did overflow,
And had my policy found approbation,
Rome had not been the Empress of each Nation.
When wary Fabius drew his Bilbo blade,
He circumvented him in his own trade;
My Grandsire Herod, whose grave steps I follow,
Taught how the great Thieves do the little swallow.
From his example all men will confess,
The tall ones are supplanters of the less:
All wrestlers from the Matock to the Crown,
The strongest arm tumbles the weakest down.
Though in the art of fencing none could beat him
A mighty Monarch! yet the Lice did eat him.
From Cain my lineal pedigree I draw,
Who first proclaimed the statute of clubb Law;
'Twas when the early world was newly blown,
When Pistols, Sword, and Canons were not known,
Nor that Italian trick, that lays men dead,
Lulled fast asleep, before they go to bed.
So soon did fratricide man's mind invade,
But parricide is now a common trade.
My Cousin Nimrod learnt his skill from me,
The first that hunted after sovereignty;
He kept about him a flete pack of Beagles,
Who had the Tallons and the Wings of Eagles.
But when his deep mouthed Hounds did roar and thunder,
They did amaze poor Coridon with wonder.
Beside he had his Bloodhounds and Setters,
Whereby freemen were frighted into Fetters.
To build a Tower, he long time was brewing,
That he might see what all the Gods were doing,
Peeping into (although it were forbidden)
Their wise decrees, and counsels that were hidden.
And that which made it Luciferian treason,
He thought to overlook them with blind reason.
Here Is the foundation of that City laid,
Which into ruin all mankind betrayed.
When this ridiculous plot it would not be,
He then unkennels all his Hounds on me.
His Huntsman fury blew the Bugle Horn,
Forewarned forearm'd in the top of all the morn,
I fled (as I had cause) through thick and thin,
Through woods and dangerous floods to save my skin:
Fear gave me wings, it was no time to dally,
I scale the Mountains which o'relook the Valley;
Until I found this home, this homely bower,
A castle stronger than his lofty Tower.
Necessity my nimble pate refining,
I taught the world the art of undermining,
Which they have practiced since in all their wars,
To blow up Towns, and fix them all new stars.
A figg for his Granado and redout,
Although I am besieged round about,
Within this Palisado safe am I,
His Culvering and Canon to defy.
My brother Mahomet did hold me dear,
I taught the Dove to whisper in his ear,
By this fine cheat the vulgar minds beguiling,
His Alchoran was all of my compiling;
With strong delusion, and devout pretenses,
I framed a pamphlet, pleasing to the senses.
To charm man's appetite, was my sole aim,
Some small additions; which I now disclaim,
Foisted by fools, for that was none of mine,
When he forbad mankind the use of wine.
That such brave liquor should be in disgrace,
For this the Poets curse him to his face.
They call him Sot, and Fool, and senseless wigeon,
No Poet ever was of his Religion.
And had Anacreon been alive again,
He would have whipped their Armies with his Pen.
Till he had banged them to the Scythian Roc^s,
From whence these Nomades first drove their Flocks.
Sack gave Don John that Spanish brave Galanto,
A glorious day in the battle of Lepanto.
Had the Dutch there been armed with furious Brandy,
The State of Venice had not lost their Candy.
Wise Privy Counselors, whose pates are running,
In all their deep designs practice my running.
Their greatest safety in my counsel lying
To keep their Necks whole, and their Heads from flying.
Statesmen attend my Chamber every minute,
Their counsel fails, if Reynard be not in it.
Popes, Cardinals, their Engines and Decoyes,
Instructed to amuze the world with toys.
A world of subtle snares I hourly set,
To bring blind Idiots headlong to my Net,
To swallow down my charms, which I do season
With bowls of wine that robs them of their reason,
And that they may not smell my bitter potion,
I color all their liquour with devotion.
I lend my hand to low ones that are down,
Without my help none wear the tripple crown.
Unto my painted lure all mortals bend,
Old Simon Magus is a trusty friend;
Achitophel whose policy was rare
I grieved to see him sailing in the Air.
To Machiavel I nearly am allyde,
Both my great Uncles by the surer side.
I were ungrateful should I not commend her,
My good old Grannam the grave Witch of Endor.
She taught me Magic to foretell good hap,
When a fat Kid should fall into my lap.
By Astrology instructed to discover,
When I should plant my lips upon some plover.
The Sun in Capricorn, the moon decreasing,
I told each calf his minute of deceasing.
My skill in Palmestry would much delight ye,
From Venus mountain to the linea vitae,
By secret lines the fortune I display
Of every goose that came into my way.
In all Arithmetic I was well read,
I could divide the shoulder from the head;
A capon, or a cock, If I could win him,
I quickly did reduce into a minnim.
The feathered fowl that fly I did Trappan 'um
All this and more I learnt of my good Grannum.
Fair Cleopatra, though the Roman kissed her,
Antonius minion, was my mothers Sister:
She was his mate, he was her Turtle Dove,
Shrin'd in one tomb, fond fools to die for love.
Queen Jezabel, she was my mother dear,
Whom cruel Dogs did all in pieces tear:
I sucked her milk, a tender mother she,
For which the dogs still lick their lips at me.
There is but two names in the world bear rule,
Two mighty families, the Knave and Fool:
Of these, the major part, in power, and place;
The crafty knaves spring from the fox's race.
Your Mountebanks, they daily do invoke us,
The Juglers learn their tricks of hocus pocus,
The crafty Lawyers, nimblest of the three,
Lay by their Littleton to study me,
Their Clients purses they do plow and harrow,
Who gnaw the bone, when they have sucked the marrow.
When I was young, and did an infant write,
In books of Heraldry I took delight.
Our predecessors fame, from Adams prime,
I could reduce unto the present time.
I and the serpent, joined in commission,
Gave Eve that apple caused man's perdition.
Our coat of Arms is rich and wondrous good,
Three lambs new slain in a fair field of blood.
Some of our Ancestors wanting their fleeces
Did bear a ragged coat all torn in pieces;
An honorable badge, worn as a Jem,
Won in the wars, between the hounds and them.
Upon our Crest, a Duck, struggling and striving,
Caught on a sudden, as she was a diving.
These things are laid aside, and out of date,
The leaf is changed in the book of fate.
It Was all mine own, that came within mine eying,
I could have taken the swiftest swallow flying.
Nothing to clamber up the tallest cliff;
But now my joints and sinews are grown stiff;
My grinders not so sharp to gnaw a bone,
And all my vaulting, tumbling tricks are gone.
This is my greatest grief, my friends abuse me;
Thieves of my own profession, they accuse me:
And by no people am I more besmeared,
Than those whose fired fingers have been seared.
The Gypsy, and the cutpurse in the stocks,
Tailors, and Millers, all do curse the Fox.
Envy swells like a toad ready to burst,
But the poor fox fares best when he is cursed.
Two handed Lawyers rob both rich and poor;
Wiping their mouths, they lay it at my door.
The Justice and his Clark, who for a Fee
Turn justice topsy turvy, rail at me;
The Usurer, whose Soul is hell-fed bacon,
Roares out of hell for stealing his fat capon;
Widows, and children, his wide throat does swallow,
Yet calls me thief as if I had no fellow;
His own he sees not, but my pranks he will tell ye
Who has whole Towns and Cities in his belly;
When he has chewed a parish, and her people,
At the next morsel he devours the steeple:
Their thundering acclamations all let fly,
As if there were none other thief but I.
When if you put all creatures to the test,
Among the thieves I shall be found the lest.
The little crystal springs do rob their Donor
The envious rob their neighbor of his honor,
The Sun does rob the Sea, in Showrs of rain,
The thirsty earth does rob the Sun again,
The Rivers rob the Brooks, which gently fall
In silent streams, the Sea does rob them all.
When Cupid he does throw his poisoned dart
The lover steals away his Mistress heart:
Not Lions only that for prey do ly,
Nor whales, that swallow mighty shoals of fry;
The little Wren, the Dove, the silly sheep,
The Fowls, the Fishes of the watery deep,
They live by rapine, brother robs his brother,
And all subsist by plundring one another.
Theft, the worlds prop, Dame natures chiefest friend,
Banish all thieves the world will quickly end.
I loved all my brethren wondrous well
Who did in active feats of hand excel.
^ thought those thieves who in the open Sun,
Bid travelers stand, who have more mind to run,
To be the greatest fools; I shun the light,
My stratagems have safety in the night.
The dogs are all asleep, and not one Mouse,
That licks the cream, did move in all the house.
The Trumpeter his trumpet sometime blowing,
^ charm the busy tell-tale-cock from crowing,
His trumpet shrill was heard through all the village,
Disturbing my designed plot for pillage,
Forewarning man of future things to come,
Of that black, blessed, dismal day of doom,
When that loud trump shall sound, to raise up men
To their last judgment, though they know not when*
Who sounding in your ears with his shrill horn,
Tells you, that it may be er'e the next morn.
Whose crowing was to Peter a good morrow,
When his repentance melts in tears of sorrow.
It was not so with me, I was afraid,
Least he should wake the Mistress and her Maid:
Whose thundering tongues, would gather in a cluster
The neighborhood, all to a general muster,
Raising great tumults, high and mighty sturs,
Pistolls, and Guns, and all the bawling curs.
Who would not spare me, if they once did wind me,
Compelling me to leave my skin behind me.
The pleasant game stood fair before mine eyes,
To make the cock sure was my master prize;
At his vain babbling I was sore offended,
Griping his throat, his tale was quickly ended.
My work done suddenly, without debating,
I stop his whistle, and his tongue for prating,
Upon the earth poor Chanticleer lies springing,
His melody was marred for ever singing,
And to accompany his dismal fall,
Some cackling hen attends his funeral.
To weigh these things, it makes me melancholy,
I would redeem with tears my wanton folly,
That all is out of frame, all will confess,
Another error makes not mine the less;
I Am weary of the course which I have run,
And do repent the mischiefs I have done.
Let man begin, whom we poor Animals call,
The Microcosme, the quintessence of all,
Framed out of all worlds, copy of the three,
A perfect figure of the Trinity,
The lowest Angel, and the tallest beast,
A goodly thing in all his titles dressed;
Let this great thing who does in honor swim,
Begin the dance, and we will follow him,
I Will leave my thieving trade, and be his debtor,
If his example teach me to be better.
The crafty Fox does solemnly protest
Man unredeem'd is worse than any beast,
Than Wolf, Dog, Lion, Tiger, more uncivil,
Without a Jesus an Apostate Devil.
THE DREAM.
For foreign Lands I had a traveling mind,
My main design a trusty friend to find,
If in the miriads of souls that are
One real lover would fall to my share,
Where soul to soul tune up one harmony,
I made no scruple were it he, or she:
Jewel of jewels, which does rarely grow,
Richer then all the Gems in Mexico.
He that is crowned with this part, is blessed,
Holds in his arms the Indies east and west.
Musing upon the state of humane things,
The slipperie fate of kingdoms, and of kings,
Oppressed with weighty grief, which made me weep,
Clouding my sense, I fell into a sleep.
Here swift Ideas made my brain their column,
I saw the universe bound in one volumn;
Me thought the whole was small, yet all did pant
To win this thing, no bigger then an ant.
Each would have all, they shoulder, and they sweat,
The little world was fighting for the great:
A Sea appeared, king Neptune seemed to flout me,
Millions of dreams like boats sailing about me:
These roving run-agates my fancy smother,
Dream after dream, and one succeeds another.
Some say that dreams within the brain are toss't
Of things which in the day we think of most.
Some dreams are pleasant, some are troublesome,
Some of things past, and some of things to come,
Prophetic dreams that please, and sometime fear us,
Conveyed by Angels when some mischief's near us;
Some told of things they never knew before;
Some dream of gold, and yet are always poor;
Some dream of rivers, mountains, Shores, and Seas;
Some of a new world: mine was all of these.
My wandering fancy did for Spain incline
Famous for Sack, that Emperor of wine;
Other, small princes of inferior rank:
This liquor Virgil and wise Homer drank
When they did muster on the Ilian sands
The Trojan armies and the Grecian bands.
Over rockie hills and lofty mountains high,
Whose tall aspiring heads do kiss the sky
I search each corner of that crabbed coast,
The cities which antiquity does boast;
Tracing those mountains many a tedious mile
I stumble on the brave court of Castile.
Here Hercules did all his labors end:
But mine began, to find a faithful friend.
Monsters and Mino-taur's tamed by his hand,
For which he did encompass Sea, and Land:
My labor did to greater things aspire,
To find a Phoenix melted in the fire,
Out of whose ashes should spring up to birth
A friend, the quintessence of Heaven and earth.
The gentle Donna's in mine eye no less
Than sparkling angels in a female dress:
Their courtesy was rare, so wondrous free,
With kind embraces they half ravished me:
At the first flourish they appear like posies
Composed with July flowers and fragrant roses:
But flowers will fade; they bid me pick and prune*
You may as well find constancy in the moon,
Sweet melting manna from our northern dews,
Knowledge in Lapland, chastity in the stews.
Would thou reap diamonds where they are not sow^
The pearl called friendship never here was known.
Go gather grapes in Greenland, that dark hole,
Pepper, and ginger, at the Artick pole.
Can thou bring all Religions into one,
Whose quintessence is love: thy work is done,
Thy mind at rest, thy travel at an end,
The whole creation is become thy friend,
Not only man, appointed to command,
But every thing that moves by sea or land:
Both heaven and earth with all their wealth shall st^ the
Lions and Tygres shall fall down before thee.
In country cottages friendship was rife,
Leases of love they took for term of life;
Love there is dead, Amyntas does not mind it;
And do thou think in palaces to find it?
Perfection dwells not in frail, mortal dust;
Show me the man that to himself is just.
Damon, and Pitheas, are exiled from hence:
Virtue her self has here no influence.
The Pages tell her in their wanton play
She is some country Lady of the May
That knows no courtesy, or how to speak,
Only trained up to run at barley-break,
Some canting Gypsy with a conjuring wand,
Or petty Princess of the Fairie land;
She is too judged by her brown olive hue
A Lady errant of Don Gusmans crew.
In this place thou will prosper, can thou paint
With all the colors of a seeming Saint;
Thou may perhaps ascend bright honors hill
If thou can court where thou intend'st to kill;
We call it policy, just in our sight,
To cut those trees down that eclipse our light.
The upright, simple, innocent, we slay:
It Is crime enough that they stand in our way.
We study not the morals of wise Plato;
Nor that old fool whom they entitle Cato:
To imitate their follies we want leisure;
All our divinity is ease and pleasure.
Slaves chained to conscience no, no, we are freemen*
And know no friend, no God, but wine and women.
Have thou the stone that turns all to gold,
Or teeming bags of Silver? then be bold.
Melt all Peru into one mass of treasure,
Then Call the Infanta Cousin at your pleasure:
Gentlemen kneel, and at their distance are,
Esquires your footmen, let the knight stand bare;
From the grand Seignior you may take the Wall,
Great Dons and Dukes, you Tom and Dick may call.
Fortune's a Whore, my temples that were crowned
Must feel her lashes when the wheel turns round.
Love wins love, disdain begets disdain,
Who scorn the world, the world scorns them again.
Those that will live magnificent and feel
His favor, must to mighty Mammon kneel:
These were his minions, in his bosom lay.
True loyal Subjects, they his Laws obey;
These were rewarded with all earthly blisses,
Swimm in his favor, crowned with his kisses:
But I that could not bow to this Apollo,
Must nolens, volens, all disgraces swallow.
My simple Outside did these Lapwings fright,
Winters at hand, come let us take our flight,
Beside the courtesy of friendly blows,
They took their last adieu with their kind toes.
The tall groom-porter spyde mine empty purse,
Then whipped me from the presence with a curse.
My tongue was mute, my wrongs I durst not tell,
But with my heels I bid this Court farewell;
And had not patience armed me in have,
To ward their blows, that day had been my last.
The Inquisition made me wondrous sick,
^east they should take me for some Heretic,
Whence no redemption till the grand assize,
When the graves open, and the dead arise:
Criminal faults they might have found good store,
What greater Blasphemy than to be poor;
And in their flames I might a Martyr fry,
Where simple honest is grand Heresy;
What courtesy, what Civil entertainment,
When poor and honest came to their arraignment.
That some allege there is a Purgatory,
Experience proves it is no fabulous story.
It Is easy to believe when we have seen it,
^ can assure you I my self was in it,
^ prayed to all the Saints on my bare knee,
From limbus patrum now deliver me.
Remembering Lot's wife I durst make no halt,
Least I should be dissolved into Salt;
Fear would not let me stay, nor look behind,
But hoysing sail, with a brisk merry wind,
With all my wings for England I am gone,
To London, Empress of fair Albion;
unto this royal City then I pack Sir,
^ met this common greeting, what de'e lack Sir?
Methought the word was sweeter far then honey,
Will these kind Souls supply me without money?
This gentle salutation it did sound
As if that Paradise were newly found
Where the fair beams, of the bright heavens do smile*
All things provided without care and toil.
Perhaps old Saturn, with his golden age,
Is here arrived from his long Pilgrimage.
Where cursed mine and thine was never known,
And no man durst call any thing his own.
Men's minds were not enclosed, that crying sin,
For all the world was then one common Inn,
Landlord and Tennant names unknown, all share
The whole creation common as the air,
The hospitable earth man's friendly host,
Nature his hostess, at whose proper cost
Her guests were feasted with a liberal hand,
To furnish them she plunders Sea and Land.
At their departure hence, for their long stay
The reckoning was brought in nothing to pay.
'Twas Saturns absence caused the City's mourning,
And Bonfires now were made for his returning.
To make his welcome equal their desire,
The bells for joy were melted in the fire.
I secretly within my self thus praid,
Blessed heavens, O noble City, be thine aid.
May every Mayor be a Duke or Earl,
Thy Ships return laden with gold and Pearl.
Buying and selling banished, all things given
With a full hand, as they descend from heaven.
Let there be no Apprentice, but all Freemen,
And every thing as common as some women;
That fire which many thousands did undo,
O let it burn up their Opinions too;
Let every Soul be ruled by the Dove,
And no Religion in the world but Love,
That all men's hearts may shout with joy and mirth,
That heaven is now come down to dwell on earth.
Credulity it has deceived many,
I would not be ungrateful unto any,
Nor at his civil courtesy to spurn,
This Answer to his Question I return.
I want a Friend Sir. He in scorn did mutter,
It is a ware we never use to utter,
It Is not within the walls I dare be bold,
Nor any where in the large Suburbs sold;
It Is a commodity quite out of fashion,
And rarely to be found in the whole Nation,
Moore's brave Vtopia, with a deluge drowned,
Covered with water, no where to be found;
This world affords it not, it is a Gem
Was never seen but in Jerusalem;
It has no stain, nor intermitting foil;
But grows there as in his native soil;
Their very walls are built with such rich stone,
Millions of Pearls cemented into one.
The breath of love his friendly blast does blow;
It Is natural there, as enmity below:
Disposed to good, so readily inclined,
They know not what it is to be unkind.
Some of our modern travelers do say,
'Twas lately found in terra incognita.
Sir we expect some Ships, but O I fear,
The voyage long, they will not return this year.
A friend! it is the thing we most desire,
'Twould save our shop from thieves, our house from fire.
Pride's our best friend, on lust we make our dinner,
At every meal we swallow up some sinner.
But these thy friends scourge thee with many lashes;
Melting thy stately buildings into Ashes;
A dearth of friendship did invade this place,
Where plenty did put on a smiling face;
The thing called love, it was not to be found,
Pride and ambition did besiege it round;
Miracles cease, I had no cause to mourn,
If Thames to wine, and stones to bread would turn;
For aged Paul's was falling every day,
The famine great I could no longer stay,
My sides grew lean, my bowels out of Tune,
Even in the height and heat of parching June;
With frozen entertainment here benumbed,
I march, where the Knights templers lie intombed;
These warriers, as I walk about the Isle,
Did seem to court me with a Soldiers smile,
The marbles were less stony then the men,
Who have exchanged their swords into a pen,
The cruel murdering pen that in a word
Kills and cuts deeper than the keenest sword.
Four fleeces from their clients they do shear,
Four golden crops, four harvests in one year:
Were Ceres to the Plowman half so kind,
He Would skip and caper like the bouncing Hind;
His horses too, taking their masters mow,
Without their bells would dance before the Plow;
Their Ship can sail with all winds that do blow,
They reap the land which they did never sow:
The fat of all they put into their purses,
Together with the widows tears and curses;
Their long demurs their bawling in mine ears,
Their Pedlers french drove me from hence with tears:
My cause nonsuited, no man could befriend me,
Wanting my Guardian-Angel to defend me;
My forma pauperis was thrown over the Bar,
^uch men are mad that enter into war;
The gowned battle is not for the poor,
The remedy they find worse then the sore.
My Dream continued; in my sleep I saw,
A multitude in several bodies draw;
^n antique shapes they move with various paces,
And yet methought there was more minds then faces:
All would have all men amble in their way,
And each did think his neighbor went astray;
Yet none did know upon what ground they stand,
Mistake the right, and turn to the left hand.
In the morning this side, which they change e're noon,
Like the Chamelion, or the pale-faced moon.
All strive to be aloft, their brains they beat
Who shall be placed in the highest seat;
In an uncertain slippery orb they reel,
Moved by that great power that guides the wheel;
Those heads who now are crowned with a wreath,
At the next revolution fall beneath;
From their exalted Empire down they tumble,
Blessed says wisdom are the meek and humble;
Who standing on the lowest step of all,
Are sure to rise, but can no lower fall,
Who swim in the smooth stream without a bladder;
By slow sure steps they climb up Jacobs ladder.
But these benighted wander from the road,
Loosing the narrow way they take the broad.
They are ignorant that great does little grow,
And to be less than nothing, less do know:
Nothing no favor has in mortal eyes,
But to be something is their Master-prize.
The battle is begun, see how they ruffle,
And every man does with his neighbor scuffle;
Fury, grand captain of this cursed brawl,
Opinion is Dictator of them all:
Opinion with opinion is at odds,
And humane reason she prepares the rods,
To whip the backs of struggling Souls that wander
From the blind steps of this notorious Pander;
Whose beauty now has lost his virgin luster,
Like swarms of Bees or armies when they muster.
Her bastards multiply all like the mother,
And one opinion still begets another.
Of this in estuous Strumpet old and rotten,
That bloody fratricide Cain was begotten;
Who when the world a little infant stood,
Taught men to sacrifice with humane blood:
Who e're does play Religion wins the game,
For now opinion she assumes that name;
Thus by opinion and his brother fancy,
The world is overgrown with Negromancy;
True love, religion pure and undefiled,
A wandering Pilgrim from all hearts exiled;
With bloody noses and with broken bones,
Like wanton boys they fight for cherry-stones;
Their ordnances play, their fury swells,
For a poor handful of old rotten shells:
The Nut is good, who would not strive to win it?
It has a pearl when the sweet kernell's in it:
Fond Strife has cracked the Nut, the kernell's gone,
And now they quarrel for the shells alone.
It is not colored duties faced with lies,
Regeneration only wins the prize;
Although Heaven-gates stand open all the year,
None but a little child can enter there.
By their own works heavens palace is not gained;
Man's righteousness will not be entertained;
The word, the living word, a thundering dart,
Through bones and marrow wounds the panting heart:
It made the world e're time and world began,
And for man's sake this word became God-man.
But they, O grand mistake! knowing no better,
Confine the unconfined to the letter;
A noval-paper deity compounding,
The spirit with the written word confounding;
Their Sun is set, thick darkness does invade,
In stead of light they dally in the shade:
Aesops devouring dog, a greedy glutton,
Diving to catch the shadow lost the mutton.
Some Dina or Diana is the cause
Of all our woes, the breach of natures laws;
With an Acheldema of crimson blood,
For trifling toys not rightly understood;
True knowledge clouded with Egyptian blindness,
All amity confounded with unkindness;
The law of love, the livery and token
Of Christ's disciples, by division broken:
This is great Babel, mother of delusion,
Strumpet of Strumpets, city of confusion.
No peace no truth where Jezabel does reign,
My hopes were dead, my heart was almost slain,
Sighing to see how all things did deceive me;
Is this great world too narrow to receive me?
What hideous deluge does o'rewhelm thy face,
That the poor Dove can find no resting place?
A friend! an Unicorn! not to be found,
When instantly turning my body round,
A man, more then a man, a God did meet me,
With kind embraces thus began to greet me:
Through bogs and briers wading in distress,
Why do thou wander in this wilderness?
When thou thy part have acted on the stage,
Poor Pilgrim thou must quit thy pilgrimage;
Time with his Sickle these false joys will sever,
And when you parted are, you part for ever;
Wean thy bewitched Soul whilst thou have breath,
Know this, there is no returning after death.
These short-lived transitory joys ride double,
Delight with sorrow mixed, pleasure and trouble:
Repentant tears of mourning after gladness,
A shower of comfort interlin'd with madness.
Look up to him whose love is still descending,
Whose greatness no beginning has nor ending:
Enter sweet Paradise with Angels singing,
Swim in the Fountain that is always springing:
The glories of the world perish in tasting,
Embrace those pleasures that are everlasting.
Follow my counsel, if thou would have rest,
I Will lead thee where the Doves do build their Nest;
Where thou shall feast in fullness all the day,
A lamb among the lambs frolic and play.
Thou sow'st in fears and tears, hoping to find;
All that thou reapest here is froth and wind;
Had thou the whole world, It Is a little spot;
Fond fool, thy native country this is not.
This Fabric is a cottage of small price,
My heart's thy palace and thy paradise.
His breath was sweet, it sounded in mine ears
More pleasant then the music of the Spheres;
Which gently blowing like a whisper came,
To kindle up loves fire into a flame:
Excellent consort, by whose charming tone
Our nature with his nature is made one.
Silencing man makes him for ever mute,
Jesus the Lutanist, Christus the Lute;
Christus the Lute the instrument of Jesus,
On whom he plays what melody he pleases.
Jesus Jehovah is the grand Creator,
Jesus in Christo the Regenerator;
Healer of Nations, good Samaritan,
The Son of God is now the son of man:
The mystery of mysteries indeed,
The blessed Sower is himself the seed;
The spirit by his overshadowing powers,
Does breath his flaming heart of love in ours:
Duality confounded in this union,
Where heaven and earth do meet in full communion.
Ravished with wonder, I did kiss his feet
In whom all that is excellent does meet;
The luster of his beauty all-divine,
Speeds through my veins, and made my face to shine:
I fixed mine eye upon his face, that shone;
But O! upon a sudden he was gone;
I turned me round about if I could see
The footsteps of my love, where he should be;
My Love, my Dove, my Joy, my sole delight,
What Cherubin has snatched him from my sight?
O where is my beloved? is he fled?
Dwells he among the living or the dead?
I Will search the graves, perhaps death has inrol'd him;
The marble Sepulcher could not hold him:
I Will climb the clifts for him that is my crown;
His power that made can pull the mountains down:
I Will scale the walls of heaven but I will gain him;
Fond fool! the heaven of heavens cannot contain him*
I mount the rocks against which the North Wind rages*
They answer me, he is the rock of ages:
I travail to the Woods, is my Love here?
Echo did answer, he lives every where:
To the starry region then I take my flight;
He is the luminous center of all light,
Whose glorious beams continually do pierce
Through all the body of the Universe.
Man's soul's a sparkle of this light divine,
Enlightened Souls do all the stars outshine:
Whose radiance here has not his full disclosing,
Eclipsed by the bodies interposing.
Thence to the springs that Issue from the mountains,
Thy lover is the Fountain of all Fountains;
His bosom is a hill, whiter then Snow,
Whence water of eternal life does flow;
Conveyed by power, through secret unknown allies,
Descends down to bless the humble vallyes.
It is not drained by drawing, but runs quicker;
The thirsty Soul tasting this heavenly liquor,
Drinks liberal draughts, greedily pouring in,
Accounts sobriety the greatest sin.
I sound the rivers, but they answer all,
He is the Sea wherein all rivers fall;
That bounteous, boundless, bottomless abyss,
Where little streams are swallowed up in bliss:
From this Apollo man's a sparkling beam,
From this great Ocean a derived stream,
Springs, Rivers, Brooks, by heavens distilling rain,
United into one great Sea again.
True love is not a quainted with pale sear:
Armed with courage, to embrace my Dear,
Unto the Lions den I boldly came,
The Lion rampant was an humble Lamb*
Here in this Wilderness I am a King;
When I do roar I make the Forest ring.
The Elephant his fear cannot dissemble,
I make the Leopard and the Tiger tremble;
But I my self am couchant and do fall
Before his presence who is King of all.
Among the homely Shepherds then I stear,
Such as King David and the Patriarchs were;
Saw you my royal Prince? fond Soul, quoth they,
Who trust in man are sure to loose the way:
We are lambs as thou art, Sheep of his dear fold,
In the number of his little ones inrol'd;
Close by the river in fair flowery Meadows,
And Mountains always green, he gently leads us:
It Is true, we spring from his immortal line,
But he that is our Pastor now is thine;
In his great power and glory we do swim,
Our harps and hearts are tuned all by him:
We are his instruments, his choice delights,
We are the Song which he himself indites;
With his own hand he touches all the strings;
It Is one that plays, it is one alone that sings:
We are his written word, he the Inditer,
Look not upon the writing, but the Writer;
Enquire of him alone, on yonder rock
He sweetly pipeth to his fleecy flock;
Go to him boldly man, thou needst not doubt him,
His pretty lambs are dancing round about him,
Dancing for joy, there is nothing now can fear them,
The greedy Wolf and Fox cannot come near them;
The bearded Goats apart from him do stand,
The little Lambs he feeds with his own hand:
In his warm tender bosom they are nursed,
With his heart-blood he satisfies their thirst.
To pay their debts, upon the Cross he hung;
Good Pelican that bleeds to feed his young.
TRANSPORT.
My soul mad drunk with love, that still did mi^ him
Among the Doves I cannot choose but find him
Dressed in the flames of love; saw you my Dear?
One milk-white Dove did whisper in mine ear,
Behold in yonder flourishing Grove of Mirtles
Thy Lover sits, the King of all the Turtles;
His mate so constant, that he does not doubt her,
His love so great he cannot live without her;
He courts, and to be courted she is willing;
Music of hearts whose melody is billing.
In an eternal knot espoused they be,
He full of love, a modest Virgin she;
His love eternal is, and has no date,
He is thy Turtle, and thou art his Mate:
Father of Spirits, Angels, and the rest,
Bright flame of love within Jehovahs breast,
Upon the day of Penticost he came,
With cloven tongues, and in a fiery flame,
This spreading fire from East to West was hurled,
Whose holy sparks did kindle all the world;
Till Antichrist did poison this pure life,
And quench this heavenly fire with floods of strife:
But now he is come the second time, whose breath
Will plague the Beast, and whip the Whore to death.
Unto the sturdy Plowman then I pass,
Such as of old the Prophet Amos was;
Rid my Love this way on his milk white Steed?
Amos replied, thy Lover is the Seed;
He sows himself into thy fruitful mind,
That at the Harvest he himself may find;
There Is nothing but himself that he does save,
All but himself lies rotting in the Grave;
The perfect new man which from heaven descended
Returns, when this frail mortal life is ended;
Thy Soul's the Land where he himself does sow,
The Spirits holy breath makes it to grow;
Refreshed by the heavens distilling rain,
It multiplies into a field of grain;
All flowers of Paradise grow to delight 'um,
Grace after grace springs up ad infinitum.
Inquiring of the Shrubs, who weep and mourn,
Hanging their heads, this answer they return;
By resignation and humility,
A little Plant becomes a stately Tree;
All look on Trees that on the Mountains grow,
But those are safest that are placed below;
Jehovah's thunder does not overtake them,
The wildest Hurricano cannot shake them:
They flourish like the Lillies, without care;
He is their life, and they his being are.
I march among the Rich hoping to find him,
Voluptuous pomp gave them no time to mind him;
Rattling of Coaches in their brain did rout them,
A train of Sycophants placed round about them,
Whose soothing language lavishly did measure
Their Summum bonum to consist in pleasure.
The world's a Hogstye, (O that word hereafter!)
Where men like Swine are fatted for the slaughter.
I row my Boat unto the ragged shore,
To the despised, rich, contented poor,
Who in the heavens have laid up all their treasure,
Where they have riches without end or measure.
Where rests my love, when Sol at noon is riding
Upon his flaming Steeds? where is his abiding?
He dwells in the low and humble mind,
That prostrate lies before his feet resigned.
Such simple innocence without all skill,
Like newborn babes that know no good nor ill,
Poor naked nothings, numbered with the dead,
Have sold their ornaments for heavenly bread;
Whose souls are purifyed from filthy mire,
By passing through the Purgatorian fire:
A noble battle against themselves proclaimed,
Their passions and affections wholly tamed;
Great Alexander with his noble crew,
Conquering the world, the world could not subdue;
Another Empire large he had to win,
To tame that little world that was within:
We that are crowned with double victory,
In these poor Coats are greater Kings than he.
To the University I set my face,
Among the Rabbis of that reverend place:
I hunted out the chief for fame reputed,
And unexpectedly I was saluted
By one whose beard was snow, whose face was frost,
Trained in the noble School of Penticost,
In Christ-church College a resplendent light,
And by degree a learned Jesuit;
Chief of that Order, with all knowledge blessed,
Skilled in the heavenly Magic of the east;
'Twas one of those brave Magi, that from far
Did visit Jesus, guided by a Star,
Offering rich presents, Frankincense and Spice;
To offer me his council was not nice;
And that he might my lawful audience win,
He kissed me thrice, and thus he did begin.
What vanity, on childish arts to look!
And leave unstudied thine own learned book;
Thy book has but three leaves, leaves that are few,
The wisdom great, all that all worlds can show:
Thy Soul's that noble book, wherein does lie
Heaven, hell, and earth, time, and Eternity;
He that can read this book, he must inherit
The wisdom of the Father, Son, and Spirit:
This book has long been claps'd and closed within,
Sealed and shut up by the angry Cherubin:
In heaven and earth none worthy, none was fit,
But the dear Lamb, God's heart, to open it;
To keep it locked the anger did decree,
Love did unseal the book and set it free;
A Library of books in this book find
Printed* and fairly written in thy mind,
Whose lines are gold indicted by the Dove,
Whose letters are the sparkling flames of love:
Teipsum nosce, leave their tittle tattle,
And then thou know more then Aristotle;
Study thy self, if thou would knowledge win,
Faith will unlock the golden gate within:
Let wisdom bridle passions in the Soul,
Good Servants, but ill Lords, if they control:
Hell lies in wait to crucify thy lover,
Heaven with it is Angels at thy door does hover,
Seraphick Angels with immortal power,
Thy Guardian strength, attend thee every hour:
Vain roving thoughts, Moss troopers do way lay thee,
With their hail Master, kiss thee to betray thee;
Thought follows thought as wave on waves do roll,
And all to steal away the wandering Soul;
Like thieving Pickaroons, in Neptunes hall,
They sail about thy brain to plunder all;
If they once bring thine heart unto their shore,
Poor Gally-slave they will chain thee to the Oar;
O keep thine heart entire for him alone
Who rules the heavens, and makes thy heart his throne.
This lower world is a deceitful cage,
Where mortals act their part as on a stage:
Some march into the field, and some retreat,
Disguised like Maskers, all is but a cheat:
Play how you please, when you have thrown your cast
Death comes and sweeps away the stake at last;
Look not so big, thy life is but a span,
It Is a wise part to act the honest man;
For toys thy future bliss do not destroy,
Prepare thy mind for that sweet land of joy.
Where all things do in equal temper grow,
Nor hot nor cold, with you it is not so:
The torrid Zone burns up the fruitful grass,
The frigid turns it all to icy glass;
There love and anger both together dwell,
A country seated between heaven and hell;
With you love friezes, and grows wondrous cold,
Our constant amities are never old.
That friendship which some thousand years has run,
Is now as fresh as when it first begun.
Things always present, nothing past and gone,
One heart, one mind, we number all by one.
Arithmetic with us allows not two,
To sing and love is all we have to do.
In every soul love throws his flaming darts;
The flame's so great, no frost can frieze our hearts:
Incompast with the glories of the Dove,
Whose gentle breath does melt us into love.
Nothing so kind as he who is our brother,
Nothing so dear as we to one another.
Love without wrath, whose garment has no spot,
Ties all our hearts in one eternal knot.
No striving to be high or to be best,
For he is the greatest Prince that is the least.
He stands upon the mount and is most tall,
Who is the humblest and the low'st of all;
Titles of honor, bubbles in the air,
Why should they soar? who noble princes are;
Ambitious Nimrods, who to heaven would climb,
The tower of honor, long before their time.
All aim at greatness, all men would be Kings:
They take their flight with raw unplumed wings;
Those that in sweet humility lie low,
Are lifted up whether they will or no.
To purchase Dukedoms we take no delight,
The meanest Subject in this land's a Knight;
The name of Earl, what honor does it bring
To him that is enthroned a crowned King?
We wear the crown which you now strive to win.
Look not on things below, but turn thou in
With all the strength of faith, and thou shall see
The Star that guided us will tutor thee:
He Will lay thy soul in such a slumbring trance,
Thou will admire thy former ignorance,
When he shall freely to thy Soul impart
The open cabinet of his rich heart;
^n the clear beams of loves eternal light,
The Prophets and Apostles, they did write:
Their book stood open, where was drawn in pages
The History of all succeeding ages;
Things present, past, to come, as they did pass,
Were represented in a perfect glass;
And if their book of life were once unsealed,
All things to all mankind would be revealed.
My time is spent appointed by the powers,
The Angels call me to their cristal bowers;
Since thou must dwell among the Sons of men,
In this vain world a forlorn Citizen,
^ollow my Council, and all Idols quit,
The rock Self-love, where millions have been split:
It Is self that seeks to mount into the Saddle,
That he may murder Jesus in the cradle;
^t swept like a dire plague, where e're it ran,
And has infected all this world called man,
^n an insulting domineering high rant,
Stalks in the steps of the Sicilian Tyrant
This word called Love, which makes the world run mad,
Has now more faces than e're Janus had;
Many false loves there are, for in the trial,
The Touchstone proves there is but one that is loyal;
The Puritan will sing an amorous Sonnet,
To sensual love the Zelot vails his Bonnet,
All light their Torches at Don Cupid's lamp;
This bastard love has not the royal stamp.
For some fair face madmen and fools will dye,
Because it is delightful to the eye.
For gold men sail over Seas of flaming fire,
Because it gives them all they can desire;
Flowers, whose pleasing odors do excel,
We love not for themselves, but for their smell;
Whatsoever pleases, all men strive to win it,
And at the bottom self is still within it:
This coin it will not pass, it is counterfeit,
Self love is grown to be a general cheat;
It Is chaff that is blown away with every fan,
All creatures have this love as much as man;
Unfixed meteors like the wandering light,
Which does deceive the Passenger by night;
Friendship's dissolved, and love grows wondrous lean,
When greater interests do intervene;
Love from the fountain, which is rarely found,
Loves 'cause it loves, and has none other ground.
Can thou love loveliness when clouds do shade it,
Not for thy interest, but his that made it?
Can thou with love and pity then bemoan it,
Because it has his superscription on it?
Can thou draw Fountain Water from a puddle,
And swim in joy in the height and top of trouble?
Can thou make crosses thy delight and pleasure,
And from the depths of hell drag heaps of treasure?
A Virgin undefiled in the mire?
Eat Thunderbolts and swallow flaming fire?
Can thou with Jonathan a David take,
When Scepter, Crown and Kingdom, lie at stake?
Can thou embrace what all men discommend?
Call naked poverty thy bosom friend?
What mortals fear, can thou shake hands with, death,
When he does come to blow away thy breath?
Could thou a sacrificed Victim be
For him that lies in wait to murder thee?
Can thou write self in the number of the Martyrs?
And lay poor Lazarus where thy Strumpet quarters?
Thy dear and only Isaac, can thou leave him
In his fair hands from whom thou did receive him?
Have thou this love, though it be never so little?
Then thou have something that deserves the title!
The mysteries this good man did unfold
I wished they had been written all in gold;
Transported with high wonder and delight,
Ending his speech, he vanished out of sight.
To Pharaoh's plenteous land I next did row,
Which famous fruitful Nile did overflow:
The land was good but for a cursed law,
That I my self must gather all my straw:
To make my tale of bricks, if I grew dull,
My shoulders paid the reckoning to the full;
And what was worse, my mind does yet abhor it,
My work being done I had no wages for it;
Some that did sing and caroll all the day,
Carouse and tipple, they had all the pay;
These spent their time in merriment and laughing,
Rewarded richly with a crown for quaffing.
We feed and intercommon with the swine,
They at their great Lords table daily dine.
To swallow bran and husks we are not nice,
They banquet on the fruit of Paradise:
Imprisoned like a blackbird in a Cage,
Poor puddle-water is our beverage;
Rich Nectar cannot their quick palate escape,
Nor the heart-blood of the most noble grape;
With golden ornaments and silk arraid,
On beds of down with diamonds o'relaid
They rest, and feast in jollity and mirth:
Our bones in rags on the despised earth.
What e're they do, is paid with smiles and graces,
Our crimes are all unboweld to our faces,
For which, beside the sorrow and the cost,
Our backs are feasted at some Whipping-post:
These have no other leader but the Dove,
Their meat, their drink, their rich attire is love.
They Kings and Princes are; no cruel law,
Conscience to fright, or keep their minds in awe;
They dance, they sing, they frollick, sport and play,
For all the year is but one holyday;
The father does the work, the children play,
And yet the father does the children pay;
These children dear he kindly does embrace;
We are Abortives and of Bastard race;
With full deep draughts they drink all sorrow down,
The deepest drinker wears the greatest crown.
With oaths they tear the stars out of the sky,
And make the trembling fearful Devils fly,
Frighting the Hypocrite out of his wits,
Yet no dark cloud upon their conscience sits;
Moses is dead long since, who did command,
Jehovah takes the Scepter in his hand:
Jesus the God of love, his love imparts,
VVriting his Law of love in all their hearts;
O what is Moses, what are all his laws,
VVanting the witness to maintain the cause;
The Holy Spirit he can only cure ye,
He is the Judge, the witness, and the Jury:
In Pharaohs land the laws they were not good,
Written in Characters of humane blood;
Those that dwelt here did labor to be poor,
Had this reward, to wash the Blackamoor,
With menaces and blows, because they went
On their own errant, when they were not sent.
An unsure path, this was their overthrow,
They wait not till their Leader bid them go.
Instead of Peter's palace headlong tumbling
Into the pit, where Cerberus sits grumbling.
What though heaven-gate stand open all the year,
None but the new man has admittance there:
This little Infant is that lovely boy,
That leads the Soul to everlasting joy.
I fled from hence when no body did mind me,
Leaving this Country with a curse behind me:
Now for the Wilderness with all my sails,
To gather Manna, but I met with Quails.
A merry Crew with feasting and good cheer,
About a foolish Calf were dancing here;
Moses was in the mount, where he did draw
Tables of Stone; but who regards his Law?
They Are not amazed, nor startle at the wonder,
Though it received it is birth in horrid thunder,
Unlike the Gospel, that with gentle voice
Did make their hearts in melting tears rejoice;
Bewailing these this in my mind did come,
How many Calves are there in Christendom?
And those that see old Israel go astray,
Perhaps do worship Calves as well as they.
What quarrels every where, what fruitless odds?
About their wafer, water, paper-gods;
We style them heathens who the Stars did hallow,
Falling in zeal before their great Apollo;
When those that see their error (that is known)
With open eye cannot behold their own;
All men are Archers roving in the dark,
Their arrow flies to some mistaken mark.
Our aim should be at heaven alone, but O!
The earth is still between, we shoot too low;
Some Dallila, some creature, we are wide all,
And every man's his own beloved Idol:
The griping Usurer can take no rest,
For dreaming of his Idol in the Chest;
The ambitious man with new invented Oaths,
Swears by his honor, and his painted clothes:
The Lover's fettered in Don Cupids cord,
The Soldier boldly swears by his good sword;
The Scholar on his Concubine does look,
Vows he will have no Mistress but his Book;
He call's it bigamy to sport and kiss,
Or marry any other Wife but this;
Out of his little senses he does run,
To find the earth dancing about the Sun;
Man, man, too little, or too much does prize,
It Is safe to love, but not to Idolize,
Wife, children, lands, descent from noble birth,
Titles of honor, Demy-gods on earth.
Rather then fail abroad, at home we find,
Millions of Images within the mind,
Neat Images carved out with curious art,
And all those flattering Idols of the heart;
As Cannon-bullets with impetuous force
Cut through the air, taking their violent course,
Not resting, though they fly with eager wing,
Til they return to earth whence they did spring.
So man, whose Soul's a sparkle of that flame,
Breathed by the Holy spirit, whence it came,
Like Noah's dove can find no steady footing,
Till it reenter where he had his rooting:
In the true balance it is most just and fit,
To give the Soul to him that framed it.
'Twill stand in no place but where it first grew,
It Is general peace when Caesar has his due.
This makes the IV to quarrel in great pain,
Struggling and striving to return again:
Into the only one pure element,
Their first dear mother where they have content:
This is the root of all their disagreeing,
Because they are not in their pristine being;
For which the universal frame does mourn,
Groaning with sighs, and panting to return:
Israel for forty years was tried and tossed.
But I could stay no longer in this coast,
This country could not win my approbation,
It looked so like the land of desolation;
Where parching Southern winds do always blow
Where Corn and grass was never known to grow;
For Canaan now winged with the rosy morn.
That holy land where my dear Prince was born;
I found those sweet and blessed habitations
Were Joshua dwelt, possessed by barbarous nations;
King David's greatness like a Dream was gone,
And all the gloryes of King Solomon:
Old Jacob said with grave and reverent brow,
The land thou see, it is not Canaan now;
Canaan a garden, which the heavens did dress,
Is now become a barren wilderness;
Here in this land a Sun arose most bright,
Whose luster to the lower world gave light;
The Son of God, the glory of each nation,
In flesh and blood took up his habitation:
To bless the world he from my loins did spring;
But he that was my Son, is now my King.
Transplendent light sealed with Jehovahs stamp,
My bastard children quenched this glorious lamp;
This land, which Prophets and Apostles nursed,
Is for their crying murdering crime accursed,
For which they are dispersed in every part.
Would thou see Canaan, it is within thy heart;
This is King David's Scepter, and his throne,
This is the temple of King Solomon.
Vrim and Thummim seek, and thou shall find,
Holy of holies is within thy mind,
Wrestle with God as I did, boldly wrestle,
Like some brave Soldier when he storms a Castle,
Or's mounting up to some strong Cittadell,
Victorious faith does conquer heaven and hell.
The fearful coward meets with many a cross,
Returning from the battle still with loss:
Laodicea was reproved of old,
For her Lukewarmness, neither hot nor cold;
In mine encounter I did boldly say,
I am resolved to die, or win the day:
It Is known through all the world, I do not boast,
I did encounter with the Lord of host,
Who holds in his hand lightning and fire,
Till he had granted all I could desire.
I would not let him go, but held him fast
In my strong arm of confidence embraced;
In this power Labans craft I overcame,
Changed Esau's Lion to a gentle lamb;
And in the vision which was clearly given,
Faith is the ladder which does reach to heaven;
Earth linked to heavenboth kingdoms comprehending,
Throne- Angels swift ascending and descending.
'Twas not a mess of pottage rarely dressed,
Cookt out with art, to furnish Esau's feast;
All conquering faith begat that princely boy,
Give me the blessing which you now enjoy,
Promised to Abraham for's resignation,
In Isaac's line, a crown to every nation;
The blessing fixed in every revolution,
Though Solomon's Temple had its dissolution.
All outward glories are eclipsed and gone,
The King of Kings call's for the heart alone.
He is, he was before the world begun;
All things do praise his name, why should not man?
Uncomprehended, all things comprehending,
His glory no beginning has, nor ending.
The Angels sing inspired with heavenly flame,
All glory, glory, glory, to his name;
Spirits of just men in a holy dance,
Lift up their hands for their deliverance;
Rejoicing that the tree which knowledge bore,
Blasted in their fair garden, grows no more,
Torn by the root with all its bastard race,
The tree of Life replanted in the place.
The Nightingal in warbling roundelaies,
Does make the Valleys echo forth his praise.
The little Lark mounts up with soaring wing,
As he would teach the Cherubins to sing.
About Religion they are not at odds,
But sing as merrily as the old Gods:
The little worms which on the earth do crawl,
Boldly entitle him, their all in all.
All disagreeing forms in this agreeing,
He is, he was, the being of all beings.
And thou with cheerful heart, chant forth his praise,
Although thy pen cannot deserve the bays;
Keep on that humble pace thou have begun,
Until thy glass it is utmost Sand has run.
Enough was said to satisfy my mind,
I could not see, for Love had made me blind;
Love has no ears nor eyes, I call, I cry,
Give me my Love again for whom I die;
Let Cupids army all their forces join,
Angels to boot, no Love was e're like mine:
Bring Damons Love to Pithias on the stage,
Who feared not death, nor Dyonisiu's rage:
Set David's love to his dear Jonathan,
Bring all the love of all men into one,
Bring woman's too, whose quick mild sparkling beams
Makes them most excellent in both extremes;
Yet mine excells, exceeds them all as far
As great Apollo does the meanest star.
The Usurer, Italian-like, in's breast
Locks his dear Dallila, in his dark chest.
The love to woman does with beauty die,
If Virtues chain be not the sacred tie:
But mine that cannot perish in the tasting,
Is like the noble object everlasting;
A love unmeasurable, and unbounded,
Where firm Foundation cannot be confounded:
Why then mine only joy do thou remove,
From him that has no life but in thy love?
The very earth where thou thy foot do set,
Does smell more sweet than Rose or Violet.
My happiness, my dear delight is lost,
He Is gone to heaven, and thither will I post;
If any Spirit in my way shall stand,
Angels, Archangels, are at my command;
Faith joined with love controuleth the abyss,
And forces entrance where no entrance is;
It batters walls, and breaks down every fence,
For heaven it self is won by violence;
It charms the Lions heart with sacred Spell,
They have no power to touch a Daniel;
Subdueth Tyrants, and their armed band,
Walks on the Sea as if it were dry land;
It cuts a passage through the watery Stream,
And raises Laz'rus from his drouzy dream:
The walls of Jericho it does deflowr,
It stormeth hell, and conquers heaven with power,
Commands trembling Devils to retreat,
Removes lofty mountains from their Seat;
It bids one Sea divide it self in two;
What thing so difficult Faith cannot do?
Our Souls are tinder, burning in desire,
Faith is the flint that strikes up the fire;
Which being kindled by the gentle Lamb,
The Spirit blows, and turns it all to flame.
My dear and only jewel do not fly me,
Armed with this faith, thy power cannot deny me;
It is decreed, though thousand deaths I die,
Nothing shall separate my Love and I;
Through Daniels furnace, and the flames of hell,
I Will pass to find where my dear Love does dwell.
Let hell heap all her fire, fuel on fuel,
Nor heaven nor hell shall rob me of my jewel;
Though all created things should strive to thwart us,
Devils, nor men, nor Angels shall not part us:
With him for ever I Am resolved to dwell,
Without whose presence heaven it self were hell.
O what were Paradise, if we could win it,
Heaven is not heaven, and my sweet Lord not in it:
That heaven is heaven, where all delights do grow;
It is the smiling eye that makes it so;
His frown's the house of torment, and of night;
It Is paradise to be his Favorite;
My Soul's a prisoner, none but love can bail her,
Give me that Prison, where love is the Jailer.
Hearing my cries, and into pity breaking,
He was within me while I was thus speaking;
Words that did love and pity, both provoke them,
Though I was ignorant, 'twas he that spoke them;
He touched mine heart, but I had lost my feeling,
He like the rock did stand, but I was reeling:
With amorous wine mad drunk, my heart lay panting,
Something I wanted, knew not what was wanting;
I sought in foreign countries every way,
For that rich pearl which in my bosom lay;
Through Asia, Europe, Africa I roam,
Hunting abroad, my Jewel was at home.
He present was, his presence unrevealed,
He stood before me, but mine eyes were sealed.
His seeming distance was a piercing dart,
Though he was never absent from my heart;
He always lodged in mine heart I see,
'Twas my beloved was that faith in me;
I knock at heavens bright gate, my way was blocedk,
It was not I, but he in me, that knocked;
Who like a wanton lamb, or skipping Hind,
In jollity was sporting in my mind;
With holy violence the door flew open,
The brazen locks, all bolts and bars were broken.
Enter the Royal Fort which thou have gained,
Fountain of wisdom, holy love unstained;
Take up thy lodging in my smiling eye,
Wherein unknown, unmeasured treasures lie;
With keenest arrow draw thy bended bow,
But when thou aim'st, aim not at things below:
Thou shoot'st at such a mark, that will deceive thee,
When storms arise, these treacherous friends will leave thee;
They fleet and flutter like the air that is ranging,
All Sublunaries subject are to changing:
The Stars and Plannets, like the giddy Ocean,
Wander uncertainly with wanton motion
This day, as their aspects would never fade,
Before the next morn they run retrograde.
If Jupiter the knot of love does tie,
Saturn and Mars dissolve the harmony;
Has Venus a fine web of friendship spun,
Mercury ravells all that she has done;
Though Sol be hot, Luna is wondrous cold,
Fresh youthful amities on earth grow old;
Art thou infected with some strong disease,
Why do thou run unto the Stars for ease?
How can thy Soul be cured with poisonous plasters?
These are thy Servants, make them not thy Masters.
Their whirling wheel is always running round,
Build not thy hope on such uncertain ground;
Though by thy fall thou art of low degree,
I Will mount thee to a throne, and marry thee;
That I am Lord all creatures they shall know,
I made thee King Vicegerent here below:
By disobedience thou did forfeit all,
I Will make thee greater, stronger by thy fall;
I Will land thee on the sweet delightful Shore,
The land of Peace whence thou can fall no more.
Thou art my Virgin-bride, I will assure thee,
With endless joys my heart shall be thy Dowry:
Treasures and pleasures of the greatest price,
With all the gloryes of sweet Paradise;
In mine infolded arms I^le gently take thee;
When all the world of slippery friends forsake thee.
The world does love it self, it is own is dearest,
When it is furthest off, then am I nearest.
When friendly death shall cut thy fatal clue,
Thine extreme unction, shall be Hallelue;
Death shall no Cobling nor no Bugbear be,
But a safe passage to felicity.
A friendly Ferry-man to waft thee over,
Safe from all danger to the Elysian shore.
What if he take this garment off that is worn,
Withered with age, with winters fury torn?
From mine own Wardrobe I will cloth my Dear,
With garment rich, such as the Angels wear;
I Will give thee Adams garment without spot,
When he was naked, and yet knew it not;
Rivers of heavenly wine full to the brim,
Wherein the Prophets and Apostles swim;
Anthems of joy, thy Soul for ever singing,
The Tree of life in thine own bosom springing;
With all the favors of my love I Will grace thee,
With Doves and towering Eagles I will place thee,
With all the little lambs that know no guile,
With constant Martyrs that in death did smile;
With Cherubins and Seraphims inrol'd,
And all the princely Patriarchs of old,
With Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Quire
That chant my praises on King David's lyre.
And thou that do delight in humble verse,
Poor homely strains, my glory to rehearse,
Chanting my praise and Babels overthrow,
Shall sing a new Song which thou do not know;
Thy Ship has sailed on Seas where billows roar,
On thy right hand behold the pleasant shore;
Now having run thy rude tempestuous race,
Thy travells end, cast Anchor in this place.
This is the place of pleasure and delight,
Upon this Rock thy ne plus ultra write;
Set up thy Pillar here, it is holy ground,
This is the Rock which hell cannot confound;
My sleep unto its period now was come,
I wished 'thad lasted till the day of doom.
The miracles I saw in this short Dream,
For some brave (...) were a noble Theme,
Sweet flowing pens, tears from all eyes compelling,
But mine perhaps has spoiled the Tale in telling;
The Sight, strange wonder and amazement drew,
For when I waked, I found it to be true.
ITER Bevoriale.
I sing no civil war, nor what did fall
To Palmerine or Am^dis de gaul:
Prince Arthurs story shall no paper blot,
Nor the conceited pranks of Don Quixot;
If mad Orlando wild and furious be,
What Is his divine Angellica to me?
Rouse they that list the Lion in his den,
A brisk and Bonny-Tale flows from my pen;
Like the idle dreams fanta^ue Poets faign,
Or those fond Fables Midwives entertain
Over a smiling cup of simpering Ale
Of tall Tom Thumb, and doughty Jack of the Vale.
Now lend your ear, as we from Belvoir came,
Owned by a noble Lord, and princely Dame,
All our discourse, our welcome, and our (...)
Our merry hearts light, as our Purses were:
We had no ships at Sea, to make us sad,
Lost in a tempest when the winds are mad;
We never did abuse the Commonweal,
By virtue of our place, and the Broad Seal,
As some Land Pirates, nor all down the hate
And heavy curse of an incensed State;
We broach no projects, no inventions brew,
Nor damn old Doctrine by inventing new:
Plunder the public for our private gain,
Nor are we Spies or Pentioners to Spain:
I hope it is no Treason then to sing,
And say, God bless our Sovereign Lord the KING.
With such clear Souls like sober Snails we creep
To our desired Harbor where we sleep
Sounder than Swallows, or industrious Bees,
Who rest all winter in old hollow trees.
Sol now is climbing up the Eastern hill,
Our mornings-draught good boy, and then a Bill.
(...) imis Sawee, what Reckoning have we here?
^^m for Fire, Tobacco, wine and Beer:
Summa totalis: Well the to'ther pot,
And then thy Mistress lip shall clear the shot.
So taking leave of every Chamberlain,
Lo at the door, the Ghost of Tamberlain,
Of bulk as burly as an Oak, stood forth
A sturdy Gallant sailing from the North:
Fair Sirs, said he, will you be pleased to own
A wandering Traveller that is unknown;
The ways are foul, and we have far to ride,
He that is alone does measure every stride:
That in the tented field I have been bred,
Where winking Stars have lighted me to bed,
Circled with pale-faced Death on every side,
^s such a truth that cannot be denied;
^eap you the pleasure of my passed broils,
^eed on my language, and forget the miles.
To this in courtesy we did consent,
^o up we got, and on our Journey went.
To pay my love, which he accounts a charge,
^e draws the Picture of his life at large:
^y Jove said he, I more degrees have run,
Than Drake or Candish, or the trav'ling Sun;
^he proudest Kingdoms in the world have kissed
^y wandering foot, I have them in a list,
^uina, Madagascar, and Japan;
^ook in the Map, the world is but a span,
^e Globe a Football kicked from pole to pole;
^e that has Gold is sure to win the Goal.
^y self first found the passage to Cathay,
^^rra del Fogo, and incognita;
^hot the Gulf, leapt over the Line at noon,
^hence passed to the new world in the moon;
^he horrid battails, O the dismal wars
that I have seen, witness these speaking skars,
Which like so many gaping mouths appear,
and I as bracelets on my limbs do wear.
^s language was all Thunder, when he spoke,
^e thought the center of the earth did shake.
^y Sanco panco, much dejected Reeve,
^^ke a pale Image pulls me by the sleeve;
^^en whispers in mine ear, good Sir be wise,
Do you not see those pistols in his eyes
That shoot me dead? are all thy spirits fled?
Where Is that grave Oracle? that subtle head
VVrapt in a Turbant Mahomet put on,
When he did frame his foolish Alchoran.
Thy body too, in more warm woollen clad
Than thy great Grandsire; courage then my Lad;
Entrenched in thine own Pallisado ly,
And all the Instruments of death defy.
Gun, Dagger, Sword, Grannado, and Petar,
What other engines by the Sons of war,
At hand devised for slaughter, or aloof,
A wastcoteer so lined is Cannon-proof.
Words are but wind, the silly Swain was sick,
By nature and complexion Phlegmatic.
A trembling Palsy on his heart did sit,
Like one arrested with an Ague-fit,
At last kind Soul he weeps, shaking his head,
With broken hollow voice, Sir we are dead,
We are beset, besieged, by Sea and land;
And his companions in each corner stand
Like forlorn Scouts, see see y'on yonder hill?
I nothing see, but Bushes and a Mill.
O they are men, it is in vain to fly,
And I alas am not prepared to die.
I have that golden bait, that dainty dish,
For which these greedy Cormorants do fish;
False Traitor to betray me in distress,
Accursed gold I never loved thee less;
With all my heart, would I were rid of thee,
A hand to boot, so my dear life were free.
How will my wife and children entertain
The heavy news, to hear that I am slain?
My sides grew fat with laughter at the man,
Methought they were enlarged more than a span;
Yet putting on a seeming face of fear,
When lo, my Servant who did over-bear
All our discourse, and understood my mind,
Spurs up his Palfry swifter than the wind;
Breathless a while he pauses, then in have
Tells the bold Cavaleer all that had past:
And that he may be suited for the Scean,
Lays open all John's gold, his heart I mean.
The morn was close, fit for the work in hand,
A misty darkness covers all the Land;
His liquid fear did much increase by this,
And Fear the mother of devotion is;
His Soul extracted from immortal birth
Had till this hour been buried in the earth,
But now was fairly traveling to heaven,
Large his accounts, and how to make them even
His time was little, but his voyage long,
His faith was weak, his sins were wondrous strong,
Yet now he sends his hovering thoughts before,
Like nimble spies to scale the narrow door.
Up comes my Gallant, on whom John did look
As does the prisoner that is denied his book.
But he grim Sir, pitching his subtle hay,
Least over acting should undo the play:
Inquires how rotten sheep did stand that year,
What prices cattle, corn, and wool did bear;
Seasons and times, for selling and for seeding,
As if his whole time had been spent in reading
Old Almanacks nine Summers out of date;
On whom he leans, more than the book of Fate.
Then Bookers Prophecies he does unfold,
Valued with those Scybilla sang of old.
O happy men said he, who never roame
In foreign countries from your native home;
Your days with plenty crowned, ending your lives
In the chaste arms of your beloved wives:
But we torn from our cradles to be hurled
By cruel fate into the rugged world,
Like Bastards of the earth at our return,
Encounter nothing but contempt and scorn:
Where you in pity of our wants allow,
VVretched reward, a halter and a bough.
But by this steel, this steel that I unsheath,
E're I will end my days so dry a death.
A grinning wry-mouthed death, I Will kill pell mell
Five hundred churls, and send them all to hell:
And this by Mars, and all the Gods I swear.
The amazed Swain seeing the storm so near,
For shelter sought his fearful head to hide,
His rusty Sword hung loosely by his side.
But he thereon dare not his safety build,
His Rippon Spurs are now both sword and shield.
His foaming Steed companion of his fright,
Did like a Whirlwind, snatch him from our sight:
We follow after like the greedy Hound,
And when he cannot to our eye be found,
We haunt him by the nose; for in the wind,
The Fox had left a filthy scent behind:
In this sweet pickle, melancholy sick,
Bathed all in Sweat, and something that did stick
Like yellow Birdlime, to his limber thighs,
The stingless Be to his own cottage flies;
It Is true, he brought no Honey to his Hive;
But Wax good store: 'twas well he escaped alive.
His Wife salutes him, in whose welcome arms,
In brief he tells part of his passed harms;
The rest he apprehends; for out of doubt
The witty Girl soon smelt the matter out.
On the Royal Sovereign.
PRoteus grand Shepherd of the foaming deep,
That feed'st thy scaley herds like flocks of sheep,
Hold up thy shaggie head; lo here does come
A greater miracle than Thetis womb
Did ever bear; a royal frame composed
May vie with Noah's Vessel, that enclosed
All natures store; who else had found her grave,
A floating Island dancing on the wave.
So Delos wandering Isle, or Poets feign,
Till mighty Jove did fix her in the main.
In ages that succeed why may not she
Pulled from the Sea, part of the firm land be?
Part did I say; how vainly do I dote?
Thou art a little world; the world a boat
Compared to thee: the passenger no more
Salutes thee for a Ship, but for a shore:
Who scorched with heat, then nipt with northern blast
With storm and tempest tossed, when he at last
His long desired harbor sees at hand,
Shall spring for joy, and throw himself on land.
The nice Philosopher with curious eye,
Finds in the horned Moon a Collonie:
As they to us, why may not this afar
Appear to them to be a blazing Star?
But whether thou a Star or Comet be,
That wandering world stands gazing now on thee,
On thee their Sun: blessed nations of the night
Who from thy beams receive their borrowed light,
Neptune no more a god, for thou shall reign
Star of the Sea and shine in Charles his VVain.
A Poetical Strain.
To Dr. Hiam Theolog. Medicum.
I were uncharitable should I desire
Consumption, pestilence, fierce raging fire
Of scorching Fever, Surfeit, and the Wench,
That borrows English coin, but pays in French;
Cold poisonous air, hot meteors that inflame,
With thousand others which I fear to name,
Should blast the widdowed world and make her wear^
A mourning weed: thy fame and art to indear.
My Love shall be more modest, I will pray
Thy charms may conjure all these Fiends away.
May thou by quintessence of thy great skill
Restore more lives then Mountebanks do kill;
While they employed to cure the leprous Itch,
The worms in children, or some Female stitch
Got by a wanton slip, from Pispots win
Brown-bread, and thread-bare-cloaths; or in the sin^
Share with the Devil, and converse with Smocks,
Til they themselves be peppered with the Pox.
May thou things high and excellent acquire;
That all thy Tribe may envy and admire;
The Gout, the Stone, which ope' the Usurers eye
To see the torture, rack, and cruelty,
Which he has laid on others; for his health,
Would now (though unwilling) part with all his wealth,
Be fully cured by thee; but not before
His bags be safely landed on thy shore;
And thou with this rich prize so justly won,
Build Hospitals for those he has undone.
May the young fry fall sick, grow lean and wan,
And long for thee more than they do for man.
May every female-patient be a lover,
By feeling of their pulse let them recover
Green Sickness: Were their fame and honor fled
^et them redeem both that and Maidenhead,
^et them from all diseases be set free
Not by thy Drugs, but confidence in thee.
^et aged Madams on whose furrowed brow
^ald time has worn deep wrinkles with his plow,
Their hourglass turn as full of juicie sap
^s when they danced in their mothers lap:
^ick nature by thy help as healthful grow,
^s when our father Adam held the plow:
^ay all thy Patients live the perfect date
Of old Methusalem, and in a state
^s strong. And thou for making others sound
With glorious immortality be crowned.
Two Poetical Epistles to two Friends.
Epist. 1.
When all things out of frame grow wondro^^^ scurvy,
And nature from her course turns tops^ turvy;
When horses ride on men with Spur and Switch,
And Scholars do put down their masters britch;
When Princes to their people do stand bare,
When Dogs do fly before the fearful Hare,
When Maids command their Mistresses by patten,
When beggars ruffle in their Silk and Satin,
When Ostlers teach their horses Greek and Lattin*
When Gallants walk on foot, and footmen ride,
When Noblemen run lacquies by their side:
When the elements from natures course do turn,
When fire shall drown the earth, and water burn;
When lofty mountains congee to the vale,
When Pigs sing sweeter then the Nightingale,
When Pearls and Oisters grow on Oaken trees,
When in the midst of Summer it shall freeze,
When all this comes to pass, which cannot be,
Yet shall I then prove faithful unto thee.
Epist. 2.
GIve me a Sidney's Pen, which dipped in wine
Made his Philoclea more then half divine:
Summon the Poets, none shall march before us,
Thou my Pancela, I thy Musidorus.
Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, framed in story
To mint a female, made of Masc'line glory;
Muster to these all the brave old Commanders,
The Scipio's, Caesar's, and the Alexanders,
With bills and swords they made all nations fly:
But Livia with the Magic of her eye,
Does lead the world in chains of love divine,
Conquering all hearts; I Am sure sh' has conquered mine.
Since I am grown to be thy Gally-slave,
Give me the privilege which prisn'ers have,
My liberty being lost, by Cupids charms,
To live and die a prisoner in thine arms.
Nectar, Ambrosia, purely here I sip;
The Muses nine they all dwell on thy lip.
Swimming in love, no pleasure now shall pass us,
Thou art my Hellicon and my Parnassus.
On a Gentleman who lost his Mistress called Nancy, (at the same time) also his
Hawk of the same Name.
VVilt thou forsake me thus my dearest Nancy,
To wander over the world in a wild fancy,
To couple with an Owl wantonly ranging
Til thou have cloyed thy self with often changing?
An Eagle was my Dove,
True, as the Turtle-Dove
If she a faller prove,
Farewell my Nancy.
Come my bird of Paradise thus I conjure thee,
Illo, ho, ho, my love, when I did lure thee
Thou would come stooping down like clap of Thunder,
And like a falling star cleave the air asunder.
Then hovering over my head,
Whoo, hoop, the game is dead;
Yet thou art from me fled,
Farewell etc.
Thy feathers were more soft then maiden tresses,
I gave thee bells to wear,
Varvels and jesses,
Casting to keep thee clean
Made of white Flannel,
When thy limbs bathing were,
I was thy Spani'l,
I gave the stones good store,
Yet thou did play the whore,
And wilt return no more.
Farewell etc
Sweet Plover was thy food,
Patridge and Pigeon,
Thrush, Feldifare and Snipe
Woodcock and Widgeon,
Quail, Pheasant, Duck and Teal,
the pretty Bunting,
And she that sweetly sings
whilst she is mounting.
Yet thou art gone astray,
On worms and mice to prey,
Beetles that shun the day.
Farewell etc.
Now since thou art so coy
If e're I catch thee,
False Kite, to keep thee tame
I Will sit and watch thee;
I Will hood those rouling eyes
that shoot at rovers,
And mew thee in a cage from thy fond lovers.
Cupid's a wanton child,
True lovers are beguiled,
Ware Hawk and Wenches wild.
Farewell etc.
A cold Journey, and cold Entertainment.
UNto a country farm I lately came,
Where I hung like a picture in a frame,
'Twas in the wintrie cold month of December,
Her frosty frowns forget, her smiles remember.
Fare would content Apicius to his mind,
Then who dare say my Landlord was unkind.
His broth was wondrous good, but with the ladle
He banged my noddle, till my brains grew addle.
A trembling Schoolboy I demurely stand
My master with a ferrula in his hand
If I but blow my nose, or wink, or nod,
Or smile, or look awry, fetch me my rod:
Poor men are fools, wisdom attends the rich;
Which made me readily put down my brich.
He that at great men's tables takes a seat,
Has freedom to do nothing else but eat;
If he have wit he must not spread his banners,
For that were blasphemy against good manners;
This learned Lesson my Praeceptor knew,
His what, his when, and why, even to a cue.
Quick-ey'd he was to see and understand,
And always carried in his reverend hand
A multiplying glass, wherein was shown
The errors of mankind, all but his own.
The good and evil mixed, made me believe
This was the garden where our mother Eve
Upon that cursed fruit did freely feed,
Which poisoned her self, and all her seed.
Words steeped in vinegar, and spending money;
Hemlock and ^itter wormwood, mixed with honey:
Such as poor beggars purchase to their cost,
A gentle aims, and then a whipping-post.
I came invited to this double banquet,
Laid in a bed of down, tossed in a blanket;
The Gospel here, there, Moses bloody banners,
A lincic-woolsie Medly of all manners:
Kindness, unkindness, should I sum up all,
Sugar two ounces with one ounce of Gall.
Which being tempered with the oil of Saunders,
Would make an excellent medicine for the Glaunders;
Hallo my fancy whither will thou fly?
Has my kind host some faults, and have not I?
God pardon all; O be not too sharp sighted,
If he be in the dark, thou art benighted.
He Is in the oven, and I am in the fire,
He Is in the dirt, and I wade in the mire.
He has some pimples on his face that shine:
And have not I, poor I! a mole on mine?
Now that I may not crow, or hang the wing,
In equal balance let me weigh the thing:
The good I have received I will inroll,
Fairly ingraved in a marble scroll;
All stains and blemishes I Will blot with Ink,
And not to see I Will shut mine eyes and wink.
Upon my return hence, with little wit, and less money, being alone; I took a
dangerous fall from my Horse.
REnowned Drake from Pole to Pole was hurled,
In his long voyage round about the world:
Such strange, miraculous wonders, could not see,
As I, who shot a greater gulf than he;
When I fell from my horse in deadly swoon,
Where I saw stars, to Ticho Brache unknown;
Fire from mine eyes did flame, the skies flew open,
My back quoth I, and all my ribs are broken.
Here I beheld as I lay on the ground,
In pain and grief, that the Universe went round:
Upon my back, which made me much dismayed,
The burden of the world was wholly laid.
A fancy took me which did little please,
That I was sailing to the Antipodes;
Had not some mountains interposed my way,
I had discovered them that fatal day.
False friends, and dirty ways, henceforth forbear;
Dull jades and winter journeys, I forswear:
With pity to poor carriers, forced to go
Over rocks of ice and monstrous hills of snow;
Let others travel countries strange, to see
Surely I thought 'twas the worlds end with me.
A DIALOGUE. A conference between two plain countrymen, Tom, and Will, about
deep matters of Religion.
CANTO.
Tune -- The Drainers are up
Tom. Good Neighbor Will, I prithee be plain,
With what religion shall we close,
Since every Sect does stiffly maintain
That the tree of life in their garden grows?
Will. Ic'h tell thee Tom, 'chave found the best,
Whatever men do write or say,
If thy vessel be bound for the city of rest,
True neighbourly love is the only way.
Let us fly away from the land of strife,
The Lamb has bought us with a price,
And post to the holy river of life
Which glideth through our Paradise.
See how those heavenly streams do set
To fill our Souls with a living flood,
The tree of knowledge we will forget,
But the tree of life shall be our food.
The way to this river so pure and so clear,
Which through the valley of love does glide,
By resignation we must steer,
Humility is our faithful guide.
By faith we travel to a princely town
Which wise men do call the fathers will,
Here we in the Sabbath of rest will sit down,
And set up our tents on Mount Sion's hill.
In the Ocean of love let us freely swim:
To thee, my Joy, I drink this cup,
Come fill up the bowl unto the brim,
It Is liquor divine, then drink it all up;
Drink merrily Tom, the Fountain it flows,
We have no enmity nor gall;
This cup to our friends, and this to our foes,
A hearty carouze we tipple to all.

Tom. Let us take the to 'ther pull,
This liquor will make all darkness fly,
Why should we spare? the Fountain is full,
And never can be drained dry.
Let greedy Misers wade in the mire,
Let squint-eyed envy murder his brother,
Let hatred and malice remain in the fire,
Pure Nectar we drink and love one another.
Let Pharisees pray till their knees grow bare,
Let Gamesters cog the subtle dye
Let Huntsmen pursue the silly Hare
Let sober Citizens cozen and lie;
Let Courtiers dissemble, let Scholars read
The quirks and quibbles of old Aristotle,
Let Soldiers fight, let Littleton plead,
We Will cheerfully tame the to'ther bottle.
From North to South, from East to West
Inventions through the world do range,
Opinions in fine garments dressed
Like blazing Comets of the brain,
About religion they make foul work,
And into bloody wars they fall,
The Heathen, the Jew, the Christian, the Turk,
This liquor will reconcile them all.
The flowers drink the pearly dew,
Like merry drunkards all in a row,
What though they are of various hue
In neighbourly love together grow;
They merrily tipple and sweetly agree,
No quarrel about their cups they move,
They drink to each other, then why should not we
Drink liberal cups of innocent love?

A SONG.
TUNE. Such a Rogue's a Roundhead.
What Is he who breaks the thunder crack,
And bids the raging Sea go back,
Unto his voice inclined;
Who does the angry Ocean still,
And makes the winds obey his will?
Jehovah unconfined.
What Is he who gives the Sparrows meat,
And moves the rocks out of their seat,
Where first they were designed;
Who does the crystal Springs invite,
And clothes the lillies all in white?
Jehovah unconfined.
What Is he who does the stars advance,
Whilst round about the Globe they dance,
With earthquake and with thunder;
Destroys great Cities of renown,
And makes the hills come tumbling down?
It is the Lord of wonder.
The Tiger I do keep in awe
And to the Lion am a law
By my sole power confined;
It Is I that bound the Sea and land,
Yet I above all bounds do stand,
Jehovah unconfined.
With Eagles wings survey all lands
Number the innumerable sands,
And write them in a story;
View every thing that is gone and past,
Though time it self must end at last
There Is no end of my glory.
The clouds I suck out of the Seas,
And make them fall where I do please
To fill the earth with treasure;
The Sea, the Sands, the stars survey,
The mountains in a balance weigh,
My power thou can not measure.
All things do in and to me flow,
The things above and those below
Are Servants to my pleasure;
The heighths, the depths, are in my hand,
The bredths and lengths at my command,
My power thou can not measure.
The Rant is dead, the Quake must die,
All forms before my presence fly,
By my sole power designed,
The Names they are the stumbling stone,
Eternal life in all is one.
Jehovah unconfined.
Thy wisdom, will, and holy show,
Must perish like the early dew;
And when thou art resigned,
I Will take thee in mine arms again,
For I in thee alone will reign
Jehovah unconfined.
If sweetness be thy souls delight,
Carnation, Pink, and Lillies white,
All flowers bound up in posies,
Arabian Gums and Indian spice,
My bosom is the Paradise
The Paradise of Roses.
The secret Cabinets below,
Where yellow gold and silver grow
Do all obey my pleasure,
Pearls, Diamonds, that sparkling be,
All these am I, come dwell with me,
And I will be thy treasure.
A Catholic Hymn.
TUNE. If there be a Phoenix in the world, it is she.
OPinion rules the humane state,
And domineers in every land,
Shall Seas and Mountains separate
Whom God has joined in natures band?
Dwell they far off or dwell they near,
They are all my Fathers children dear.
Features and colors of the hair,
Why meet they not in harmony?
The yellow, black, the brown, the fair,
All tinctures of variety;
In single simple love alone,
Millions of colors are but one.
The Nightingale does never say,
Though he be King of harmony,
Unto the Cuckoo, and the Jay,
Why sing you not so sweet as I?
Each sing their own in loves fair eye,
Their tongues complete one melody.
Lend me the bright wings of the morn,
That I about the world may run,
From Cancer unto Capricorn,
Far swifter than the flaming Sun.
Where e're my winged Soul does fly;
All Is fair and lovely in mine eye.
In the phlegmatic I sweetness find,
The melancholy grave and wise,
The sanguine merry to my mind,
From choler flames of love arise:
In single simple love alone,
All these complexions are but one.
Behold the painful laboring hand,
And those that keep their harmless sheep,
The country Swain that ploughs the land,
The Merchant that does plough the deep;
Each do their work in love alone,
One works for all, and all for one.
With open arms let me embrace
The Heathen, Christian, Turk and Jew,
The lovely and deformed face,
The sober and the Jovial Crew;
For this I see, in love alone
All forms and features are but one.
I love with all mine heart and soul,
The French, the Dutch, the Englishman,
The Dane, the Swede, the Turk the Pole,
The Spaniard and the African;
For this I see, in love alone
All nations reconciled are one.
Thence sail I with my love as far
As China, to the Indian shore,
The Artick and Antartick Star,
The Tawny and the Blackamoor,
From thence I travel round about
To countries never yet found out.
My heart, my heart, is very sick,
All nations of the earth I woo,
My Soul is turning Catholic,
And so is my religion too;
The Deity in all does move,
So universal is my love.
An Hymn of Love,
TUNE. True blew etc.
Gentle love has no dissension
In our holy Christendom,
He will end all wild contention,
Hell and death he will overcome.
Love that is of no price accounted
Tossed like a Tennis-ball,
On his white horse bravely mounted,
He will ride to conquer all.
Heaven and Hell with wealth shall store him,
The fatness of the holy land,
Victory does march before him,
The Lamb and Dove at his right hand.
To the battle he advances;
His colour's oriental blew,
Not with guns and ordinances,
Adversaries to subdue.
In his eye there are such blisses,
Enemies it overthrows;
With embraces smiles and kisses,
He will conquer all his foes.
Low humility befriends him,
Meekness patience and the rest,
Noble charity attends him
To provide for every guest.
Here Is no begging or entreating,
None do labor plow or sow,
^od provided without sweating,
The tree of life does freely grow.
In his house there dwells no danger,
Steward Hospitality
Kindly welcomes every stranger
Pressed with friendless poverty.
Bounty crowns all their wishes,
Entertains with cheerful breast,
Plenty ushers in the dishes,
Grand purveyor of the feast.
Dishes rich innumerable:
But of all this princely fare,
Quoth love mine heart is on the table,
Feed, my Joy, and do not spare.
Noble Angels sweetly singing
Tunes of heavenly melody,
In the midst a fountain springing,
They that drink can never dye.
Measured dances nimbly tracing,
Fires of love that always flame,
Hugging, kissing, and embracing,
Singing praises to the Lamb.
Love within, and love without them,
Love does all his treasure lend,
Peace and joy dwells round about them,
Peace and joy that has no end.
Immanuel is all our story,
He is our royal diadem,
To him be glory, glory, glory,
We are his new Jerusalem.
An Epitaph Hymn, etc.
On the death of the Lady Maria Manors, daughter to the noble Earl and Heroic
Countess of Rutland, and Sister to the Lord Ross.
Maiden of honor born of princely stem,
A virgin in the new Jerusalem,
Rose in sweet Paradise, plucked in the morn,
In her dear Virgin bridegrooms bosom worn;
Angels about this angel dance and sing,
Music when love does move on every string;
Among the Martyrs and the heavenly Quire,
Numbered with those who chant to David's lyre.
New triumphs now exchanged for transitory,
On her fair temples a rich crown of glory;
Rivers of pleasure full unto the brink,
Such as the Prophets and Apostles drink.
The Angels entertainment in eandem.
VVElcome sweet Angel to our crystal bowers,
A star thou art among the immortal powers;
To be a Lamb in the grand shepherds flock
Is more than to be born of princely stock.
Thou now have escaped those doubts, those cares, and fears,
Which would have waited on thy riper years;
Thy lover till December would not stay,
But hugged thee hence in thy fresh blooming May.
A Dove among the Doves thou here may play,
Cutting thy passage through the milkie way:
Till thy dear Bridegroom with his favor grace thee,
Whose arms are always open to embrace thee.
Hymnus in eandem. The Bridegrooms Salutation.
TUNE. When the stormy winds do blow.
I Took thee on a sudden
In all thy glories dressed,
I cropped thee in the budding
To wear thee in my breast:
My rosy blooming blossom,
My lovely flower thou art,
I Will hug thee in my bosom
A jewel in mine heart.
Thou have given me thy virgin power
Mine honor to advance,
And all the joys that heaven can shower
Are thine inheritance;
I Will tincture thee with blisses
My flames of love to pay
With sweet unnumbered kisses
We dally out the day.
The Angels are invited,
The Supper ready dressed,
The holy lamps are lighted
For our eternal feast:
Banquets to thy desiring
On tables rich appear,
I Will give thee such attiring
The noble Angels wear.
The sacred knot which I have knit
No power can untie,
Duallity I Will not admit,
Our We is turned to I;
One heavenly flesh, one blood and bone,
One life not transitory,
The Male, and Female both in one,
One undivided glory.
I Will gather thee sweet posies,
Sweet posies of rich price,
Of July-flowers and Roses
That grow in Paradise.
Let shepherds call on Phillis
As fair as fair may be,
More beautiful than Lillies
My Jewel is to me.
The Cherubims advancing
In all their beams of light,
The little Angels dancing
About this Angel bright.
Sweet harmony rebounded
In all the heavenly Spheres,
Such melody never sounded
In any mortal ears.
A Song of Hospitality.
TUNE. The Drainers are up, They threaten to drain the Kingdom dry*
GIve me the golden age again
When wine did welcome every guest,
When that good Knight Sr. Loyn did reign,
Plover and Patridge did fly to the feast,
Since bold Copernicus has found
New nations never known before;
The tottering world by turning round
Has turned poor Charity out of door.
Where Is the bouncing Buck we so much boast,
Whereon good fellows did heartily feed,
When Shoulder of mutton did rule the roast;
O then 'twas a merry world indeed!
What Is become of our Capon, our Chicken and Veal,
The Miser ingrosseth them all in his Hutch,
Long-winded prayer, and left handed zeal
Makes lame hospitality lean on a crutch.
A Gammon of Bacon is very good meat
With a piping Pig new drawn from the spit,
With plowing on both sides the Plowman does sweat;
That worlds at an end, now the Devil a bitt;
March beer in black Jacks as big as ones waste,
But locks and keys have robbed the Hall,
When our friendly wine of Catholic Love.
liquor they freely do taste.
The Butterie and Pantrie will fly open to all.
SELF.
O Self! that art the cause of all our sadness,
The whole world is involved in thy madness;
And I that write this, would that I could see,
Accursed Self, that I were rid of thee.
Had Self been hanged on Judas tree,
Had he been drowned in Pharaoh's fall,
But O! he lives in thee and me,
To plague and to torment us all:
Self-reason does all mischief breed.
The Tyrant proud that would be King,
The Serpent and the Serpents seed,
The Dragon with envenomed sting,
Herod that did the children slay,
False Judas that did Christ betray,
True love does conquer hell and sin
Were not for love that cures all evils,
Disarms the angry Cherubin,
This world were a mere den of Devils;
Th'arraign, condemn, at their own bar,
Thieves punish thieves, all Judges are.
A Littany.
FRom drinking up the laborers sweat,
From making war without a Warrant,
From climbing to the Judgment Seat,
From running on a sleeveless errant,
From all my fetters set me free
And from my Self deliver me.
From the dissemblers yea and nay,
From Pharaoh's kindness, Kedars Tent,
From daubing with untempered clay,
From stoning of the innocent,
Good Lord deliver me.
From unbelief, fond cares, and fears,
From a long Bill of a Tailor,
From the Hiena's murdering tears;
From the deep dungeon of a Jailer,
Good Lord etc.
From close dissemblers with two faces,
From a false, lying, double tongue,
From Catch-poles and their kind embraces,
From lingering Lawsuits nine lives long
Good Lord etc.
From all stubborn disobedience,
From Wolves that would devour the flock,
From Peter's foolish confidence,
But give me Peter's watchful Cock,
Good Lord I pray thee.
From the inventions of man's brain,
From the foul curse of being rich,
From Gog and Magogs cursed train,
And from the Apple that did Eve bewitch,
Good Lord deliver me.
From Sina's thunder, Babels Tower,
From those that fly with borrowed wing,
From Caterpillars that devour
The noble Lilly that does spring,
Good Lord etc.
From Herod and the man of sin,
From Jonah's Whale and perishing Gourd,
From the fierce angry Cherubin
And from the fiery flaming sword,
Good Lord etc.
From north-east winds when they do blow,
From winter journeys without coin
From traveling to Jericho,
Where Thieves my jewel did purloin,
Good Lord etc.
Let me escape thy raging ire,
Thy Thunderbolts O do not dart!
And from thine angry flaming fire,
O hide me in thy tender heart;
In thy dear heart I shall be free
Enthroned in perfect liberty.
Good Lord hear me.
Drain up those weeping springs of tears,
Thy Hurricano's let them cease,
Thy frowns awaken horrid fears,
But in thy smiles are joy and peace.
Good Lord hear me.
Give me a constant faithful mind,
To meet thy mercy at the last,
That I may full forgiveness find:
Let me forgive all that is past.
Good Lord hear me.
A Sovereign Receipt for the Eyes, and Hearing, etc.
LOok not asquint, or neighbors failing mind,
The faults thine own, which thou in him do find;
To all his errors lend thy deaf'ned ear,
Speak well of him, and then thou well shall hear.
Probatum est.
Dysticks.
BLess me from Guns, they kill the lame, the blind:
The Ordinance of love saves all Mankind.
Seek not to man, a mere created thing
For what thou want, go boldly to the King.
The Soul with life continually is fed
When Love and Charity lie in one bed.
The water of eternal life we gather,
When we receive the meek love of the Father.
My dark dry Soul was Aarons withered rod,
By Jesus springs 'it'h Paradise of God.
God breathed life into this little span,
Himself the Breather breathed into man.
Carry my thirsty Soul, O holy Dove!
Into my Fathers flaming heart of love.
Christ and the Father's one, and we in him,
Crowned with joy, in all his glory swim.
They needs must live a sweet and pleasant life,
Where Love's the Husband, Charity the Wife.
FINIS.
A Newfound Medicine for maladies, not hazardous, desperate, or violent; but
safe, and sure, pleasant, pallatable, and comfortable; not putting nature to
any stress, but greatly strenthening, relieving, and enabling her to encounter
with her malignant enemies, etc. Found out (this instant -- 1671) By the great
care and study of ABC. H.

Item There may be had pleasant cordialities, for the prevention of Diseases,
procuration of cheerfulness, improvement of Diet, and supply of Spirits.

From Mr. Waddis his House in Barns September 24. 1671.

Enquire at Mr. Horners at the Kings head in Whites Alley in Chancerie lane for
Capt. Sambach, betimes any morning, and from eleven till one, and you may have
farther Information and directions, etc.

Books sold by Thomas Passenger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
A Mirror or Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners, showing the justice of God
on the one, and his mercy toward the other. Set forth in some thousand of
examples by Sam. Clark late Minister of Bennet-Finck London, in 2 Volumns in
folio. Royal and Practical Chemistry, by Oswaldus Crollius, and John Hartman,
faithfully rendered into English, folio, price 10 s. Gods revenge against
murder, by John Reynolds, containing thirty Tragical stories, digested into
six Books, newly reprinted, folio, price 10 s. Lord Bacons Natural history,
folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels, containing a description of the Turkish
Empire, of Egypt and the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and Islands
adjoining, folio, price 8 s. Markham's Masterpiece. Roman Antiquitiess by Tho.
Godwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d. The famous History of the destruction of Troy,
in three books, quarto, price 3 s. Valentine and Orson, price 18 d.
Etimologicum parvum, by Francis Gregory, octavo, prite 3 s. Chemical essays, by
John Begumis, price 1 s. 8 d. Spiritual Antidotes against sinful contagion, by
Tho. Doolittle, price 18 d. Pools Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a Protestant,
twelves, price bound 1 s. Monasticon Favershamiense; or a description of the
Abbey of Faversham, octavo, price bound 18 d. The Christians Crown of glory; or
Holiness the way to happiness, octavo, price bound 18 d. The path way to
health, price bound 18 d. The complete Academy, or Nursery of complements,
bound 1 s. The book of knowledge in three parts, price 10 d. The book of
Palmistry in octavo, price bound 18 d. The Wise Virgin, being a narrative of
Gods dealing with Martha Hatfield, price bound 18 d. The Pilgrim's port, or the
weary man's rest in the grave, in twelves, price bound 1 s. The famous History
of the five wise Philosophers, containing the Life of Jehosaphat, Son of
Avenerio, Emperor of Carma, and his wonderful conversion to the Christian
faith. The great Assize by Sam. Smith. The delectable History of Amadis de
Gaul. The pleasant History of Paladine of England. The Bear-baiting of Women.
The History of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungy. New conceited Letters. The Jovial
Garland containing all the newest songs that are now used. The penitent
Prodigal, or a gracious Reproof for pharisaical Saints, by J. H. The Christians
best exercise in the worst of times, by J. H. Scarborough Spaw, being a
description of the nature and virtues of the Spaw of Scarborough in Yorkshire,
by Doctor Witty. The French Schoolmaster. Farnabies Epigrams. Newtons Art of
Logic. Newtons Art of Rhetoric. The famous History of Don Bellianis of
Greece, in three parts being now complete. The famous History of Montelion,
Knight of the Oracle.

