THE SAINTS PRIVILEGE, OR GAIN by DYING.

O Gaudium, super omne gaudium, vincens omne gaudium, extra quod non est
gaudium, quando intrabo in te, ut videam Deum meum qui habitat in te?

Aust. de desiderio and siti animae ad Deum. O mora, Christ veni,

Mors pijs, malorum ademptio, bonorum adeptio, Disce mori, sursum quisquis
sapis erige vultum in patriam, terras despice, disce mori.

2 Cor. 5.2. We groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house
which is from Heaven.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1673.

To my much Honored, and Worthy Friend, Captain Robert Fisher.
Dear Sir,
I Would be loath to be the first that welcomes You into England, with the sad
News of the breach that God has (since your departure) made upon your
comforts, I mean, in taking to himself your dear Wife. I suppose the tidings of
that, will reach your ears to your hearts grief before my Papers, for bad
news flies apace. I send you not these Lines for that end, but for a
contrary, namely, rather to quiet and bare up your disconsolate Spirit under
so smarting a Providence: As a means to which, I commend to you a serious
consideration of her great Gain, to be opposed to your great loss: what great
gainers Christ's Saints are by Dying, you may, if you please, read in the
following Lines.

Sir, I remember one says that the work of Navigation, is a very great Work;
and requires much Understanding and Wisdom, for men to build moveable Houses,
and go thorough the great Deep, or dry Land, and every way so fitted as would
amuse an ordinary and unskilful beholder to view. Its a very graet work, Now
God that has brought you lately from doing one great work, has upon your
return provided another for you to do. Which is to submit and resolve your will
into his, and if I mistake not to do this aright, will ask you no less
Understanding and Wisdom, I am sure more Grace and Holiness, then the former;
but that God that has given you understanding for the one, can by his Almighty
Power and Goodness, enable you to the other.

You have often seen in the Seas, the resemblance of the misery of man's life,
as that ebbeth and flows, and is seldom quiet, but after a little calm a
storm succeeds, why such is the whole life on Land too, naught else but a Sea
of Tempests while on this side our great Haven or Port of Glory.

Its the saying of a Learned and good Man; what pity is it but Soldiers and
Mariners should be holy Persons, who are so subject to dangers, and have such
experiences of Gods Goodness and Mercy in their preservation: He that carries
his life in his hand, should always carry grace in his heart, and yet the
Author complains, who worse men then those that behold Gods wonders in the
Deep. Seldom good but in a Storm, and when over as bad or worse then ever: of
Soldiers it was long since an harsh affirmation, Nulla fides pietasque viris
qui castra sequuntur, I wish the most of them did not too much verify it, that
there is little Religion or Piety in such as follow Camps; and of Mariners
Nautarum vota, a Mariners Vow, has been long since a Proverb, and yet some
very good men amongst both sorts: for Soldiers, we read of Cornelius, of whom
it is said he was a devout Man, one that feared God with all his House, gave much
Alms and prayed to God always, and he was a just man, one that feared God,
and of good Report, Acts. 10.2.22, and v. 7. of the same Chapter, You read of a
devout Soldier that belonged to that devout Captain.

And for Seamen and Mariners; I question not but God has a large and precious
number among them, of which I hope your self to be one, and that you seriously
desire so to be: and truly Sir, if so, as I question it not, here is a trial
for you, to make proof of, and make use of that Faith, that Patience, that
Humility and self Denial, yea of that whole stock of divine Grace, wherewith
God has endowed and enriched your Soul.

I have read of Alexander, when he was in a great Peril in India, being to
fight with Men and Beasts, huge Elephants; he solaced and cheered himself,
saying Tandem par animo meo periculum video, at length I see a danger
answerable to my mind, as great Dangers require great Stomaches; so great
Trials will exercise great Graces, I hope you have learned not to despise the
chastning of the Lord, nor faint when rebuked of him, as knowing that whom the
Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every son whom he receives, Heb. 12.5,
6. I must needs yield your loss very great, for I think in my heart, no man
ever enjoyed a more tender, kind, loving, and every way endearing, and
desirable yoke fellow; For her Piety toward God, her love to your self, and
all excellent endowments, you had wives in a Wife, truly Sir, did I not really
believe it I would not dare to speak it, I know not how to give f^attering
Titles, in so doing my Maker might soon take me away, Hugo Card.
Job 32.22. I remember a Learned writer, upon those words of David, Ps. 39.1.
That I sin not with my tongue, I will keep my mouth with a Briddle etc, makes
eleven several ways, wherein a man may be guilty, and offend in speech; as
lying, detracting, swearing, idle speaking, etc. amongst the rest of tongue
vices, he reckons up that of flattery, thereby intimating, that Christians
ought as well to be careful of this, as of any of the other: and says one,
Amarae sunt obloquentium linguae, and non semper veratia sunt ora laudantium;
the tongues of Detractours are bitter, and the tongues of Flatterers oftentimes
not true, but that God that ponders hearts as well as words; knows that I
really think all true, that I speak or have spoken of her.

And therefore your loss the grater, but Sir, quarrel not that you enjoyed her
no longer, but bless God you enjoyed her so long, and be content that he has
her, who has more interest in her then your self ever had, to whom she was but
lent for a little while,

And now learn by her loss, how slippery the best of earthly comforts are, and
therefore to look at, to look after, and make sure of; these comforts that when
enjoyed are never to be parted with; look up to that place where she in her
better part dwells, where there is life without death, day without night, joys
without sorrows, holiness without impurity, comforts without crosses, rest
without labor, health without sickness, youth without age, beauty without
deformity, strength without weakness; where are such good things as Eye never
saw; 1 Cor. 2.9.
Ear never heard, or Heart never comprehended; and to complete all, eternity of
all, without change or fear of loss.

When once we are got safe thither, we shall be safe indeed; yea sit down and
be quiet, which this troublesome (yet bewitched world) will not afford us:
thither I hope you aspire, whither she is but gone before.

I have no more, but to end with my well wishes, beseeching God to bless,
guide, and keep you; to fill you with himself, to stay your mind upon himself,
to enable you to make a wise and holy improvement of this stroke, and to say,
what shall I receive good at the hand of the Lord, and not evil.

The Lord continue you a comfort to yours, and make them comforts to you, and
make your little Daughter the Relict of your deceased Yoke Fellow, the
inheritrix of her Mothers Virtues; that all her excellent endowments, may so
live and flourish in that little child of hers; that we may say of her gone, as
Cicero of his Sulpitius, Null^m monumentum clarius Sulpitius relinquere potuit
quam effigiem morum suorum, virtutis, constantiae, pictatis, ingenij filium.
he could not have left a better monument, than so lively a Portraiture of his
goodness in his Son.

I hope Sir, you will pardon me the giving you this trouble, and let the
singular respect I bear to your self, and the honor I owe to the memory of
your pious Consort, now with God, plead my excuse I have no more but to assure
you of my being and remaining

Your Cordial Friend and Servant in CHRIST JESUS Chr. Scott.
From my Study in Milton Hamlet, this 3. Ian. 1672.
To my Worthy and much Honored Friends. Captain John Bradman, and Mrs. Sarah
Bradman his Wife. Friends and Relations to Captain Richard Haddock Mr. Isaac
Heath. Mr. Richard Fisher
Brothers in Law to Mrs. Elizabeth Fisher. Daughter in Law to Mrs. Marjory
Fisher, late Wife to Captain Robert Fisher, together with the rest of her
Pious Relations and Friends, whether to Me Known or Unknown.
My Christian and Worthy Friends,
UNderstanding it was the great desire of your dear Kinswoman and my loving
friend Mrs. Fisher, that (if it might have been) I should have preached Her
Funeral Sermon; and hearing by some after your coming down, that your design
was, that rather then her desire should not be answered, to have had it done in
private, Though for my own part, I thought it not convenient by reason of the
multitude of people, which could not have received benefit, and the offense
that might have been taken; yet had it not been otherwise resolved, but her
request had been insisted upon, I must have submitted to any inconveniences,
rather then not have answered her and your desires. In order to which, after I
heard of it, I applied my self that little time I had to the work: but very
glad that it was at last performed by another in public, where no offense
could be given, or danger incurred.

And now because I could not serve her and your desires in that last office,
yet in the Testification of my great respects I owe to her memory and your
selves her dear relations; I have thought good to copy out my then prepared
Meditations; and in these few sheets of Paper to present you with them, as to
serve, for an acknowledgement of my thankfulness to you all, for your respects
showed to me, a Stranger to you, and undeserving from you, so to testify my
great esteem of that precious Saint of Christ, and to let all that shall read
them see, that such losses are deeply to be lamented. I cannot say they are
word for word the same, but as near as possible the same, they should have been
if I had then preached them, perhaps although not for any worth in them, yet
for her respect, whose death has occasioned them, you may at some spare hours,
cast an eye upon them, and if they may be matter of advantage to your selves,
or any other, I should be glad, being joyful I might serve or do good to any
that belonged to her, though unknown to me. I believe you all affectionately
loved her and delighted in her, truly the best and now the only way left to
testify your respect of her, is to set before your eyes, and keep in your
memoryes the Pious example of her holy life, and to be followers of her so far
as she was of Christ Jesus, a Copy with fewer blots, a rule less crooked, I
know not where you will find on this side heaven.

The work that she has done, I know you expect to do, leave her, and prepare
for your own; that when Christ comes he may find you no worse prepared, then I
hope he found her; to this end let matters of soul-concernment, which are the
only business of life, have more, and matters of the world have less of your
hours then ever they have had. Its strange to see how this vain world, where we
can be but a very little time at longest, should so eat up our Affections,
Thoughts, Desires, Days, and Years; that for the one thing needful, we can
find no leisure, as if our God, our Christ, our Souls, our Heaven, were nothing
worth.

It was an excellent speech of Charles the fifth to the Duke of Venice, who
when he had showed him the glory of his Princely Palace, and earthly Paradise,
instead of admiring it, or him for it, he only returned him this grave and
serious Answer haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori; these are the things that
make us unwilling to Dye; so truly this is the great cause, why Christians play
loath to depart, when their times come, and make death such a Bug-bare, they
have been, with Martha, combred with much serving, always so busied about
laying up Treasures that they must now leave behind them; that they are
unprovided of that which should serve them for their great Journey; Oh my
friends when you are Bees for Earth, but Drones for Heaven, what low thoughts
have you of it?

Methinks is an Incongruous sight, if we could see in^o it, that a man who is
animal brevis aevi, should be infinitae Sol icitudinis, a creature but of a
days continuance in the world, yet of infinite cares about the world; and what
is this world we pursue? as one says, Vita quid est hominum? vasti quid gloria
mundi? Dulla est and somnus fumus and umbra fugax.
what is this life? what is the glory of this vast world? a Bubble, a Dream, a
little Smoke, a flying Shadow.

And yet what Folly and Madness possesses the hearts of men, Eccles. 9.3. to
do^e on this windy Bubble, to please themselves with this foolish Dream, to
embrace this blacking Smoke, and ever to be catching at this flying Shadow,
till with Esops Dog the substance be lost and past recovery.

But I hope better things of you whom I write, you are not to Learn in point of
knowledge, how to distinguish of things that differ; and I hope it need not be
pressed in point of practice, to look not at things seen but at things not
seen; All I shall say to you, shall be but this, as you would not have your Sun
set in a Cloud, I mean Dye uncheerfully, for your selves; as you would not
sadden the hearts of your surviving Godly friends; as you would not bring up an
evil report upon the Protestant Faith, which you profess, which teaches
Christians that assurance of Salvation may be had; as you would not open the
mouths of the wicked to cast dirt upon holiness, when they see the professors
of it go to death with Reluctancies; as you would prevent all this, make
Religion your great business, that so when your dying hours come, your Souls
may be full of sweet peace and comfort; live as strangers in this world, and
persons belonging to another, that you may be willing and ready to remove and
go home, when God shall send for you, which that you may be, shall be the
earnest Desire and Prayer of him who is,

Your Soul Friend and Servant in CHRIST, Chr. Scott.
From My Study in Milton Hamlet, this 3d January, 1672.
Philippians 1.21. Latter part of the Verse, And to dye, gain.
The whole verse runs thus, For me to live is Christ, and to dye, gain.
THe Particle causal, (for) which stands in the front of the verse, bids us to
look back to something that went before to make the sense perfect; and some
Expositors lead us a good way back for the cohaerence of the words: But I shall
not go any farther then the words immediately preceding, wherein the Apostle
had declared his willingness either for life or death, so Christ might in
either be glorified by him. And now as a reason of that profession or
resolution, he comes in with these words; For me to live is Christ, and to dye,
gain.

In the whole Verse observe these two parts.

1. The Christians duty in these words, To me to live is Christ. 2. The
Christians priveledge in the last words, and to dye gain.
Or thus.

1. Here is the believers aim and scope while he lives, and that is Christ,
either 1. The glory of Christ. or, 2. The enjoyment of Christ.


2. It is blessedness when he dies, he that lives with Christ or unto Christ
while he lived, he cannot be a loser when he dies; many have lost for Christ,
but never any lost by Christ; no, sooner or later, living or dying, Christ will
make up all his losses, to such a one, to dye, is gain.

Or yet again, if you please I shall resolve the words into three general parts
thus, and there rest:

1. You have a great and gracious priveledge, and that is gain by dying, it is
not the lot of all to have death an advantage, and therefore I call it a
priveledge, and a great one. 2, You have the Apostles confidence of it in
particular to himself, in this particle me, to me to dye is gain, as he says 2 Timothy 4.8. there is laid up for me a Crown, so to me to dye is gain, it would be
little advantage to know that others shall gain by dying, except I can affirm
it of my self, to me to dye is gain. 3. You have this probation, (as I may so
call it) of his right to this priveledge, that it was not a threadbare hope,
as the confidence of most is, in these words, to me to live is Christ, and if
to me to live be Christ, then to me to dye must be gain, to me to live is
Christ, and to dye gain.
There is nothing of difficulty in the words, only I confess I meet with
various readings of them amongst Expositers, though no very great or material
difference; as for example.

Beza reads the words thus, Mihi enim est Christus and in vita and in morte
lucrum, Christ is to me gain, both in life and in death, and says, that as in
the former words, v. 20. so in these which are a reason of them, Christ is the
Christus est utriusque membri subjectum.
subject of each part, and gain the praedicate thus, Christ is my gain in life,
and Christ is my gain in death, Gualt. to the same purpose, to me in life and
death, Christ is gain; that is says he Haec est vita mea si Christum videam
glorificari, etc.
this is my life, If I may but see Christ glorified whether I live or whether I
dye.

Tremellius reads the words thus Vita mea Christus, and si moriar lucrum est
mihi.
Christ is my life, and if I dye, my gain.

Piscator reads it wholly according to the vulgar Translation; the words says
he are ratio distributionis propositae, a reason of the distribution foregoing,
and that is plain, by the particle causal (for) and says, it is as if the
Apostle had said, Christ shall be glorified in my body if I live, for to me to
live is Christ, that is, all the actions of my life and sufferings of it too,
do and shall tend to his glory; but if otherwise that I dye and be killed for
his sake, even my death also shall not only redound to his glory, but to my own
gain and advantage.

Zanch. his gloss the same with this in effect, which reading soever you
follow, the doctrine that I shall lay down, will naturally flow from the Text.

I intend only to speak to the latter part of the verse; namely, to these
words, (and to dye gain) and there are two points that I might commend unto you
from the same, the first more general, which is this.

Adams; the Statutum est is gone forth, they cannot be exempted, it is appointed
to man once to dye; Man, that is every man, indefinite propositions are
aequivolent to universal: it is true in respect of deaths consequences, the
Saints have advantage of the wicked, as I hope to your comfort, and their
awakening to make good; but in respect of deaths passage they are equally
sharers, Eccles. 2.16. how dies the wise man? even as the fool. But that is
not the point intended; again 2dly. the Doctrine I intend is this.





Believers, gain by dying, that is the point I have to make good.

How full are the Scriptures of pertinent testimonies for the asserting of this
comfortable truth, Isa. 57.1. The righteous perishes. How perishes? God
forbid, their is terror in that expression; the words following are a
correction, a sweetning of that seemingly bitter expression, it is a good
perishing, they are taken away from the evil to come, enter into peace, rest in
their beds, etc. so 2. Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle be dissolved, if it be? does the Apostle make a Scruple of that? no,
for down it must, nothing more certain; but if it be, that is, when it shall
be, dissolved; what then? we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands eternal in the Heavens; these mud-wall houses, whose foundation is in the
dust, which we keep such a do to patch up, and all our patching will not long
serve neither, they must, they will down; well, and let them down; we shall get
by it, our dwelling will be well mended, we shall have a beter house, etc.
Hence Eccles. 7.1. the day of death is better then the day of birth. The one
the outlet from, the other the inlet to, a world of little ease, less comfort.
St. Paul knew there was good by dying, else so wise a man would never have
desired it; I desire to be dissolved. And says one upon the place, A good man
Vitam in patientia mortem in desiderio.
has life in patience, but death in desire: well pleased to live, but better
pleased to dye. Surely were there not some advantage to be made by dying it
would not be matter of choice and option.

But for the prosecuting this point, I shall do but these two things.

1. Show in what respects beleivers gain by the change of death. And 2. Apply
it for our own advantage, present and future.
For the first thing, and that is to show in what respects beleivers gain by
this change of death; and this I shall hold out unto you but in these three
particulars.

1. In the change of their place. 2. In the change of their estate. 3. In the
change of their company.
Look upon them in any, or all these respects, and death makes the Saints of
Christ great gainers.

First they gain in the change of their place, and this I shall hold out unto
you in these four things.

John 17.26. Father I will that they whom thou have given me, may be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory. You know where Christ is, he is in
Heaven, Acts 3.21. why then dying, they must be there too, for they must be
where he is, he told his Disciples when he left them, he went but to prepare a
place for them in those mansions in his Fathers house, and when he had done,
that he would come again, and receive them to himself, that where he was they
might be also, John. 14.2.3. Now what a change is here, is not this gain
beloved? only here is the mischief, we know what Earth is, we don't yet know
what Heaven is, as St. John says, it does not yet appear what we shall be, 1
John 3.2.
otherwise I am persuaded we would not care how soon death did us that happy
and good turn, but so long as we live here on earth, look as it fared with
Christ's Disciples, when they stood looking upon their Lords ascending, Acts
1.9. While they beheld he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
sight; there was a cloud that parted him above, and them below, so there are
clouds between our heaven and us, we cannot see into it, and therefore know not
how good it is being in it; all we can get sight of it, but a few glimpses and
sparklings, and that but now and then, of that Royal City; if the Celestial
excellencies, and surpassing joys, of that glorious bliss and blissful glory,
Matt. 7.14.
were but apparent, we should quickly cry as Peter in the transfiguration, oh
good being there, come death, if thy gain be such, even when thou will; that is
the first thing, they change Earth for Heaven, place well amended.

life, but a continual combat? this world but a place of blood? wars and
rumors of wars, are the daily tidings of the poor christian; scarrs and wounds
the frequent badges of christianity; look into the Scriptures and you
frequently read of warring, fighting, striving, christians resembled to
soldiers, and bid always to go harnest; will you see a few expressions to
this purpose, 1 Timothy 1.18. I charge thee Son Timothy that thou war a good
warfare, 2 Timothy 2.3. Endure hardness, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of Faith, yea, as if they were never to be out
of the field so long as here they are bidden, Ephesians. 6.12.13, 14. To put on the
whole armor of God, and with their loins girt, etc. It Is true, wicked men, they
know not what a conflict means; what a conflict with the world means, they are
of the world, Joh. 15.19. and therefore the world loves its own; what a conflict
with Satan means, they are his, John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil; and
though I cannot say he loves them, yet he is quiet with them so long as he
keeps the house, rules the roast, all is peace, Luke 11.21. what a conflict
with their lusts means; their lusts and they are agreed, what a war between
flesh and spirit means, they consist but of a single principle, yea but God's
people cannot be thus quiet, no, the world is to them a right warfar: but now
comes death, and that puts an end to all these bloody battles, takes them away
from this bloody field, and whither but to a place of triumph, see 2 Timothy
4.7.8. I have fought my fight, I have finished my course, and henceforth is laid
up for me a crown, no more fights now, etc. And that is a second piece of their
gain in reference to the place, this is a good change, a field of blood for a
place of triumph.

I am a sojourner and stranger before thee, as all my fathers were, says the
Prophet speaking of this life; it is true, Psalm. 39.12.
they have a country of their own, where they have a rich and glorious
inheritance; there is a kingdom they belong to, but its above, no sight of it
but what the eye of faith gives them; 2 Cor. 5.7
we walk by faith and not by sight; in my fathers house are many Mansions, yea,
but they are held from them, hid from them, for the present; the saints here
are far from home, from their country, their friends, kindred and alliance,
they are above; but now comes death, and that carries them home into their
country, to their fathers house, that inheritance of the Saints in light.
Coll. 1.12. while we are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord; but
now they shall go home to their Father from a strange country, where they have
met with nothing but injuries and oppressions; where they have been neither
known nor valued according to their worth, but the precious sons of Sion yet
esteemed as earthen pitchers, where they have been hated and hooted at; Behold
I and the children whom thou have given me are for signs and wonders, Esa.
8.18. they shall go now where they are known, honored, prized shining forth in
the glory of their Father. As a Kings Son and Heir to a Crown, traveling in a
strange country under a disguise, no more set by then an ordinary man; but
coming home to his Fathers Court, there he is honored: why thus will it fare
with the Saints if once death be sent for them, and in that respect gain by
dying, in reference to the place they change for.

Marah, for a place that knows not what a tear means: how often is it the
voice of a Saint, while be lives here, my tears have been my meat day and
night, you know what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears,
etc. and he that goes forth weeping, intimating that our seed time is very
watery; what is this world but a Bochim? a place of weeping; to have a gracious
heart and not wet cheeks, are almost inconsistent; so many occasions of weeping
meet the Saints withal, that they cannot long keep dry eyes; tears for
offending God, tears for present and frequent losses of their beloved, tears
for the sins of others, whereby God is dishonored; Rivers of tears gush out of
mine eyes because they keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136. tears for the
sufferings and oppressions of the Church, and people of God; By the waters of
Babylon we sat down, and wept when we remembered Sion, Psalm. 137.1. Some
occasion or other still furnishing them with matter of new and fresh sorrows;
yea but now comes death, and that carries them from this weeping country, and
sets them in a place where tears and sorrows are not known, Rev. 21.4. God
shall wipe away all tears, there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor
crying, nor pain; Oh what a change is here: And thus you see that in all these
particulars, believers gain by dying in the change of their place.

respect also Death makes them great gainers; and this I shall hold out unto
you in these five particulars.

All things are full of labor, Eccles. 1.8. God sent no man hither to be idle;
this life is for working, if he will have his hands full though but of earth,
it shall be with travel and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 4.6. Yea, sore travel
has God given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith. Eccles. 1.13.
would thou have blessings temporal, or would thou have blessings spiritual;
neither will come with sitting still: the man in pursuit of the former, he is
up early, a bed late, and eats the bread of carefulness; and the Christian that
pursues the latter, he carries them not with a few yawning wishing, no he must
digg and delve for these too; if thou cryest after knowledge, If thou seek
her as silver, and searchest for her as for hidden treasures, Prove. 2.3, 4.
Would he have salvation? Phil. 2.12. Luke 13.24. 2 Pet. 1.10. Luke 12.19.
Matthew. 8.11.
he must work for it, work out your salvation, strive to enter in at the strait
gate, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: what blessings
soever you look at, it is the diligent hand that makes rich; and while life
lasts, man's labor and travel will not end; to be sure, not the Saints,
whoever take their ease, they must not, their work is too great to sit down and
sing the fools requiem, Soul, take thine ease: Yea but now death finishes all
their labor and travel, and puts them to rest, though they could not have a
sitting time on earth, yet now they shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of God.

Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, they rest from their
labors, and Heb. 4.4. there remains a rest for the people of God, though they
have it not here, they shall have it, it remains for them; what ever travel or
trouble awaites their life, their end is peace, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the upright
man, behold the just, the end of that man is peace; if once death comes then
they rest; bodies rest, and souls rest, bodies rest, Isa. 57.2. They enter into
peace, and rest in their beds; yea and souls rest too, if Abraham's bosom be a
resting place. Well that is the first thing, I think you will call this a gain by
dying, their condition is much bettered, from labor and travel to rest and
peace; but then

Heb. 2.15.
1 Cor. 15.53. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must
put on immortality; while here they are always in fear of death, which is a
bondage as the Apostle calls it, at least in expectation of it; yea but then
mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and no more dying fears, 1 Cor. 15.54.
When this corruption shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass that saying which is written,
death is swallowed up in victory: while here, what crazy bodies do we carry
about us? always a dying and drawing on; yea but when we come above, they
shall have impotentiam moriendi, be under an impossibility of dying, though as
the learned observe, not absolutam and naturalem; for so God only immortal, he
only has an absolute and natural impossibility of dying; but ex gratia doni,
by the free gift and good pleasure of God, our bodies put under an
impossibility of dying any more; and in this respect better with us, then it
should have been had we stood with Adam in his innocence, for then our bodies
had had only Pot^ntiam non moriendi er Hypoth si.
a conditional power of not dying, but now a certain impossibility of dying any
more. Now, will not our estate be much bettered till we have once got this
dying work over; we have cause every moment and in every corner where we come,
to look for him, bed and board, at home and abroad, nescis quo loco, etc.
N^scis quo loco mors te expectat 90: omni locuto mortem expectes.
thou know not where death will look for thee, therefore every where look
thou for it; sometimes its approach is so sudden, that the same day, yea hour,
finds thee in the ruff, and leaves a cold and breathless carcass, Quem dies
vidit veniens superbum hunc dies vidit fugien^ jatentem.
this same death watching us every where it is our trouble, but when once he is
come and we have done the work, he shall never trouble us more, though the
gripe that he gives us, with his cold hand, may make us winch and tremble; yet
this may support us, having laid his hand upon us, he will lead us to the
gates of that Kingdom, into which himself shall never be admitted to assault
us more; and will not our condition then be much bettered, yes surely; that is a
second.

Paul's dolorous cry, Romans 7.24. as a man pained and crying for ease and help,
wretched man that I am (...) from (...) sensu miseriae tangor, the word
signifies a man heavily oppressed and burdened Qui calamitatum luctuoserum
oneribus permitur assidue Mr. Leigh Crit. Sac.
with mournful calamities; or as the same Author, like one who having striven
a long time, is at last like to be overcome with his adversaryes unless he be
helped; thus he cries out for help and deliverance, Wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me; now comes Death and he does it, he sets this same poor
struggling, and almost worn out Captive free; it is true, grace destroys the
power, rule, and dominion of sin, but it must be death that destroys the being
and dwelling of it: oh what would not a gracious heart give that it might not
offend God, what a gain the gracious heart accounts it, to have power but
against some one corruption, appears by his many tears, fervent prayers and
strong cries for a victory; well, death comes, and that brings him a complete
conquest, as Moses told the Israelites at the red Sea, concerning those cruel
and oppressing enemies of theirs, the Egyptians that had so wasted and harrased
them with their burdens, and concerning whom they were now in such a great
fright, they being at their heels with all Pharaohs Chariots and horsemen and
Army, an huge host; if Josephus speaks right, for he says besides all his
Chariots he had 50000 horsemen, and 200000 footmen; but what says Moses to
them Exodus 14.13. Your enemies which ye have seen to day, ye shall see them no
more for ever, so may I say to the dying Saint, of all his corruptions and
lusts, these enemies of thine that have cost thee so much, they that have
bedewed thy cheeks with tears so often, that have brought thee upon thy knees
so often, that have foiled thee so often; be of good cheer, thou shall now see
them no more for ever; never more troubled with a temptation to sin, never old
man dwelling in thy bosom more to afflict and disquiet thee; Oh! oh! what a
gain is this to the heart truly gracious: And this advantage does the Saint of
Christ make by dying, that is a third thing.

autdeserunt aut deseruntur, they either go from us, or we from them, what one
said of fortune Vitrea est cum splendet frangitur.
its glassy, when it shines it breaks, may be said of the world with all its
best things, how many have these times presented us with, that were once stored
with them to good sufficiency, but now stripped and can call little their own, so
for comfortable friends, relations, these are comforts, but alas but loosable;
thou had a dear wife, dear husband, dear sisters, brothers; but death has
made a breach, they are gone, and has left thee mourning for them, like Rachel
weeping for her children and refusing comfort because they are not; but what
stand I mentioning these, go to the best of their comforts, internal and
spiritual comforts, their apprehensions of Gods love, their evidences of a
Christ-interest, the comforts of Christ's spirit, in comparison of which, the
gracious soul counts all the world as a little dung, and which he had rather
keep than his very life; why even these, while we are on this side the Holy
Land, while we live here, they are ebbing and flowing; sometimes present and
the soul is lifted up, it is in heaven while on earth, by and by all lost, and
soul all amort, crying perhaps after its beloved, but cannot come at him, I
opened to my beloved but my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone, Cant.
5.6. How common this with precious Saints, this was that which holy Aust.
experienced, and did fortify his soul against, Ne timeas osponsamea, Ne timeas
osponsa mea si pautisper a te retrabat faciem suam, tibi venit and recedit,
venit ad consolationem, recedit ad cautelam.
do not fear O my soul if he withdraw himself from thee, he is coming and
going, he comes unto thee for thy consolation, and goes away for thy warning,
and which of all the Saints have been so happily guarded with divine graces, as
to preserve his comforts at all times green and flourishing; no, no, the best
of our comforts, though they cannot be lost quoad dei benevolentiam, in respect
of Gods good will, yet they may be quoad sensum and (...) in respect of our
sense and apprehension; though Gods loving kindness cannot, yet our sense of it
may be lost and taken from us, which makes it very dark and gloomy with the
poor soul, and turns his songs into Lamentations; yea but now comes death, and
that puts us into possession of such comforts, or puts us so into possession of
our comforts, as that they are out of fear of losing any more; when once we
take possession of our comforts above, our tenure of them shall run parallel,
with the long line of Gods eternity; there we shall see his face, and always
shining, it shall never be more eclipst, there we shall enjoy our beloved and
we shall be parted no more; will not here be a happy gain? why thus shall we be
gainers in respect of our estate by dying, and that is the fourth thing.

man that the world has espoused for its choicest favorite, or take me the
child of God, that he has most enriched, let me see the face that will say he
wants nothing; as for the wicked man that has most, I warrant thee yet he
wants somewhat, has he wealth? he wants health wealth and health? wants
honors, good name children, has he all these, and thinks he wants nothing? ah
poor heart, he don't know his wants, he wants God, without whom all his
enjoyments nothing worth, quid prodest diviti quod habet si Deum qui omnia
dedit non habet, what will a wicked man's All do him good, whiles without God
the giver of all good, he wants grace, more precious than Gold, he wants pardon
of sin, peace of conscience, set him by, set him by, he is a poor wanting
creature; but give me the Saint of God, it is he we would speak to, come friend,
thou have other manner of riches than the other, but do thou want nothing? oh
God help me Sir, want yes; I have an hard heart and would have it softened, I
have strong corruptions and would have them subdued, I have weak graces at
best, and would have them strengthened, I believe and scarce believe, hope and
scarce hope, sometimes have comforts, sometimes none, my wants are great; lo
here a wanting world, nothing but wants while in this world; but now comes
death, and he goes where he shall want nothing, for temporals, no need of them,
nothing for spirituals, all perfect: it is the saying of one Eacilius exponi
potest quid non sit in caelo, quam quid sit in caelo.
it is easier to tell what is not in heaven, than what is in heaven, I cannot
tell you what the riches of it are, but to be sure there be no wants there,
Rev. 7.16, 17. they shall hunger no more, thirst no more, and chap. 21.23. That
City has no need of the Sun or Moon, the glory of God lightens it, and the
Lamb is the light thereof. No no, the Saints needy days are gone now, their
wanting time is over, here is nothing but what is desirable, and here is every
thing that is desirable, yea fullness of all desirableness, and eternity to
complete all; when once death has wasted them over upon that shore, they shall
find nothing wanting to complete their everlasting blisfulness; as I remember
one speaking of hell says, n="*" Non mihi si centum linguae sint oraque
centum, Ferrea vox omnes scelerum comprendere formas, Omnia paenarum percurrere
nomina possem.
Non mihi si centum etc. which is Englished briefly thus,

No heart of man can think, no tongue can tell,
The direful pains ordained and felt in Hell.
So may I say of Heaven,

Had I a thousand tongues, I might not express its full happiness, will
glorious Robes please? will princely Attendance please? will delicious Feasting
please? I could fetch Scriptures to attest all these (...) dark resemblances of
that glory; but what spend I words when the Apostle, who was a little eye
witness and ear witness, when he was caught up into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.4. yet
concludes its fullness of happiness thus, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things that God has
prepared for them that love him.

Now whether to change a barren country, which is always in want, for such
fullness of estate, and unutterable plenty, be not a gainful change judge you,
but this change do Christ's Saints make by dying; And thus I have showed you in
these five particulars, that Saints gain by dying, in part of estate and
condition, one step farther and we shall come to the use.



Ps. 6.8. and Psalm. 119.115 Ps. 120.5. Psalm. 16.3.
does not the Psalmist banish such his society, away from me ye wicked, does
not he complain, Woe is me that I dwell in Mesech? does he not profess, all my
delight is in the Saints that dwell on earth? I answer, it is true he does so,
and the like do all Saints desire; as man is a sociable creature, so by his
society you may judge of the man, wicked men are for company like themselves,
and Saints for Saints society; the righteous are abomination to the wicked, and
the wicked are abomination to the righteous; Canaanites are thorns in the
Israelites sides, and pricks in their eyes; I would as soon guess at a man
bound for heaven or hell by his companions, as by most marks I know; it was the
speech of a good woman lying upon her bed of sickness, and under some trouble
of spirit, her comforts eclipsed; Lord (says she) I hope thou will not send me
to hell, for there be the wicked, and thou know I never loved their company
upon earth; Gods Saints had rather be in a desert, then with debauched
companions; Psalm. 55.6. O that I had wings like a dove; then would I flee away,
yea wander far off, and remain in the wilderness, but though these be not the
Saints companions by way of choice or option, yet so long as their converse and
walk lies here in the world, they must have to to do with ungodly ones; it is
true their fellow Saints are their dear associates, the company* they delight
in, but they cannot sometime avoid sinners company too, for then as St. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 5.10. they must go out of the world; yea but now comes death and
that sets them among company pure and perfect, now they are for Mount Sion, the
city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable company of
Angels, the general assembly, the Church of the first born, and with God the
judge of all, with the spirits of just men made perfect, with Jesus the
mediator, etc. Heb. 12.22.23. Now they are in the kingdom which no unclean
thing enters, where are shut out all dogs, and sorceres, and whoremongers,
murderers, Idolaters, liars, with the rest of that cursed rabble; this is Gods
holy place, where must come none but holy persons, called the Inheritance of
the Saints in light, Coll. 1.12. the inheritance undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4. where
they shall have no wicked Belialite, to vex, persecute, trouble, mock,
reproach, or bark against holiness and holy persons, no, they are gone by
themselves, to a place of their own, and shall never more disquiet thee, in thy
eternal and uninterrupted enjoyment, of thy long wished for rest and peace: Oh
what a gainful change is this to hearts truly gracious, company well amended;
that is the first thing.

Rev. 1.6. He has made us Kings and Priests to God, such they were here though
their glory was obscured, but now they go to have their Crowns put on, shall be
clothed with their Robes, have their palms in their hands, and be set upon
their Thrones and seats Royal, Matthew. 19.28.
Christ told them before, Ye that have walked with me in regeneration, shall
sit upon Thrones; and now will make good his word to them, therefore there
inheritance is called a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Yea a glorious kingdom, a
kingdom incorruptible that fades not away; now it is come, it was long since
prepared for them, and now they being prepared for it shall have it, Matthew.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my father receive the Kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world; oh little thought the world when time was, what
honor awaited this poor despised handful, yea but now to the grief of their
hearts, and gnashing their teeth, they shall see to what honor God designed
them; their life was hid before, though Kings children, yet they were in their
nonage; oh with what a scornful eye did the worldly gallant look upon a poor
Saint, too low companions for his worship; yea but now death comes, and the
Saint has the better of him, he is for higher company than ever he was, the
King of Kings admits him to himself, and to a participation of that glory, in
comparison of which, the highest earthly honor was but a Glowworms shine,
where Angels and crowned persons are his everlasting associates, himself
crowned with the same glory; and that is a second piece of their gain by death,
in respect of their company, but then,

2 Samuel 18.33.
O Absalom, Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, my son, my son Absalom, and
how much more piercing, the loss of children gracious, were it not for the
hopes of the one above the other; these are huge and sore losses: Job stood
under the reports of a lost estate pretty courageously, but when this messenger
of death came, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking in their
elder brothers house, and the house is fallen upon them, and the young men are
dead, them Job arose and rent his mantle, cap. 1.10. Yea but yet even here the
Saint by death becomes a gainer, for it carries them to friends far better and
dearer, to God their best friend and father, to Jesus Christ, like whom is no
beloved, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. We shall be ever with the Lord, comfort one another
with these words; it was the saying of one Carpenter a Martyr; My wife and
children are so dear to me, that all the riches of the greatest Duke could not
buy them from me, but for the love of my Lord I willingly forsake them all. and
holy Bernard was wont to say, Lord Jesus I love thee, plus quam mea, plus quam
meos, plusquam me, more than all my goods and possessions, more than all my
friends and relations, more than my self; to this love, loving and beloved
friend death carries them, I hope you will not think they leave any so
desirable behind them.

It was a most brave speech of Socrates, when his friend Crito persuaded him,
Vt si vitam suam, etc. Ut si vitam suam ipso negligeret liberis tamen parvulis
and amicis ab ipso pendentibus servaret incolumem. Liberi illi qui mihi eos
dedit curae sunt, amicos hic discedens inveniam aut vobis similes aut meliores,
nec vestra societate diu cariturus.
that if he did not regard his life for his own sake, yet for his childrens
sake, and the sake of his friends that depended on him, he should do what he
could to preserve it; to whom he made this worthy answer, As for my children,
he takes care of them who gave them me, and as for my friends, when I am gone
hence, I shall find friends, either such as you are, or better, and however I
do look not to be long without your company too, you will shortly follow me; he
was an Heathen, but I am sure his speech sounds most Christian; does the dying
Saint lose dear friends, it is their loss, but not his, he is going to dearer:
and that is the third thing wherein (in point of the company) he is a gainer by
dying. And thus I hope I have cleared my Doctrine, and made it good that Gods
people gain by dying.

They gain by the change of their place.

They gain by the change of their estate and condition.

They gain by the change of their company.

We come now to see what improvement we can make of this comfortable truth, to
our own benefit and advantage, and the uses shall be these.

non sic impiis, not so to the wicked, to them? no let them try if death will
advantage them, you make a gain by dying? yes, dye and try, death to the
Saints, it is a rest and refreshing; but to these, as one says well, it is like
the distracted slumber of a condemned person, who anticipates his next mornings
execution in a frightful dream. The Saints may say to death, as David to
Ahimaaz, come in thou bring good tidings, but the wicked may say to him as
Ahab to Elijah, Have thou found me O mine enemy; beloved, by the rule of
contraryes, if there be gain in the death of the righteous, then there is loss
in the death of the wicked; and poor hearts there is indeed: Shall I show you
in a few particulars, what loss there is in the death of the wicked man; why
thus then.

I shall have peace, God is merciful, and I do not fear but to fare as well as
the precisest of them all, and this hope may be so fine a spun thread that it
may be drawn out to the very dying hour, yea but then it breaks; Prove. 11.7.
When a wicked man dies his expectation perishes, and the hope of unjust men is
cut off, as one says on that place, perhaps he might even dye in strong hopes
of heaven, but his hope and breath failed him together, it is the righteous has
hope in his death, Prove. 14.32. the other might have it to his death, but not
in his death, then farewell that, as one says, the wicked hopes breathing, but
the godly hopes expiring, Job. 27.8. What is the hope of the Hypocrite,
improbidum (...) justus etiam cum expirat sperat.
though he has gained, when God takes away his soul, what is it? why it is a
vain nothing, he would not let it go while he lived, but now he dies it must
go; many times the poor wretch if a little awakened, shows you that his hope
is departed before himself departs, by his dolourous outcries, sick bed
shrikes and despairing speeches, but however beyond death no wicked man's hope
can hold it, no his hopes are all lost.

There is no peace to the wicked, Esa. 48.22. I mean that quiet that they had
in their breasts, by their tame submission to Satan as their Sovereign, and
from their sleepiness or deadness of their consciences, that they stirred not
to their trouble and disquieting; this is now gone and changed for horrors,
stings of conscience, and teeth meeting bites of the never dying worm, they
have hitherto been men very quiet all at peace, devil at peace never troubled
them, consciences at peace seldom had an angry word from them, as fine
consciences for the wicked man's tooth as were in the world, for they might do
what they would, lie, swear, be drunk, they would seldom braul or say, why do
you so; this was brave indeed; yes if it would hold, but it will not sure: Now
that a dying hour is come, How is it now, what all quiet still? no, no, now the
dog is awakened and it will bark, now the Lion is roused and will roar, every
flash is fire, and every word a Scorpions sting; oh conscience, conscience, it
was long before thou spakest, but now thou do, it is death to hear thee, oh
could you speak with the poor heart an hour after death, and ask now, what
peace man? put that question to him, is it peace Jehu, is it peace, is all
quiet still? you will find the case much altered, lo here the man's peace and
quiet, it is all gone, all lost; Then

Luke 16.25.
Son remember thou in thy life time had thy good things, had them, but gone
now; as it is said of Babylon, Rev. 18.14. The fruits that thy soul lusted after
they are departed from thee, all things which were dainty and goodly they are
departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all. the man had
riches, but they are gone, gay clothes, full tables, cups running over, but all
lost; Laban and his bags, Nabal and ^is flocks, they are parted, Belshazzar and
his Boules, Herod and his Harlots they are now asunder; all lost. A great Lord
showing to a friend his great House, and pleasant Gardens, his friend said to
him, Sir, you had need make sure of Heaven, or else when you dye you will be a
very great loser, all these comforts they are all lost.

Go from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, there be their companions now, as the Devil said to Saul, this day
shall thou he with me, time was when they would not be for Saints society, I
warrant ye they now would if they might, but now they shall not; no, there is a
left hand company for them, these roaring boys shall have roaring companions.

pessima mors peccatoris, the death of a wicked man is a most dreadful thing,
as one says, Mala in mundi amissione, pejor in carnis separatione, pessima in
vermis ignisque contritione (...)
it is bad in the loss of all their worldly good things, it is worse in Soul and
body parting; and worst of all in the worm and fire that follows it; all you
profane wretches, what happiness ye look for, take it before your death; as
indeed you do, crying, Let us eat and drink, to morrow we dye, come fetch Wine,
we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day
and much more abundant, Esa. 56.12. or as they are notably deciphered, Wisdom
2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Our time is a shadow that passes away, and after our end
there is no returning; come on therefore let us enjoy the good things that are
present, let us speedily use the creatures, let us fill our selves with costly
wine, and ointments, let no flower of the spring pass by us, let us crown our
selves with rose buds before they be withered, let none of us go without his
part of voluptuousness, for this is our portion: what gallant fellows if this
would hold? but as our Savior sald to Judas, what thou do, do quickly, so
say I to you, make have, make have, for if death comes, all is gone, oh sad is
the death of wicked and profane wretches; they are losers, great losers; And
that is the first Use: Again.

Modestus Lieftenant to Julian that Apostate and persecuting Emperor, told
Basil of grievous things (as he thought) confiscation of goods, and banishment,
and death; the good man answered presently, all these are nothing; for
confiscation of goods, I have nothing but a few old books and tattered clothes;
and for banishment, I count the whole earth mine; and for death, that will but
hasten me to God to whom I live, and with whom I would fain be; he could not
daunt him with dying tidings; yea, but now tell the other of death, and you
trouble him, you put him into Belshazzars fits, when he saw the hand writing
upon the wall, Dan. 5.6. His countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled
him; Luke 2.29. Phi. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8.
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another;
the Saints of God are brought in, in Scripture, as men rather desirous of, then
dreading a dissolution, Lord now let thy servant depart, said good Simeon, I
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, said the Apostle Paul, We are
willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord, Looking
for, and hastening to the coming of Christ, not dreading it, 2 Pet. 3.12. Rev.
22.20. 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Cor. 1.7.
fearing and flying it, and the whole troop of Saints are brought in, crying
come Lord Jesus, yea they are said to love the appearing of Christ, and to wait
for him from Heaven; yea but now are wicked men thus affected toward death?
no, and can ye blame them, they should be mad if they were, death has too
ghastly a countenance for them to look at with such an eye, there is nothing to
them so dreadful in all the world as death; Now if you would know the reason of
this, the Doctrine contains it, the Saints know they shall gain by it, but not
so the wicked man.

Obj. But I have here an objection to answer, methinks I hear some say, but
are the Saints thus affected to death, and do wicked men dye thus trembling, we
often see the contrary as to both, the Saint fearful, and the wicked daring in
point of death; for answer to this, as to both thus, and first for the gracious
heart.

Sol. It Is possible a precious Saint of God to meet death with some reluctance,
and that from a double cause.

1. First they consist of two principles, flesh and spirit, imperfectly
sanctified, now the flesh may prevail, and so far a natural fear of death
surprise for the present, but let the spiritual and sanctified part prevail,
and so far death's fear abated; there is a mixture of unbelif with faith, so
much unbelief, so much unwillingness, but so much faith, so much desire, and
the more faith the less fear; or

2. There may be a certain unpreparedness at present in a souls apprehension
for death, and that may cause some unwillingness apprehending some unfitness,
evidences not so clear, assurance clouded; O spare me a little that I may
reco^er my strength before I go hence and be no more seen, as a Spouse that is
to marry an Husband, she would be prepared for his coming, and though she may
exceedingly desire his coming, yet because things not so ready as she would
have them, perhaps she may not so desire his coming at that present; so the
gracious heart, not but that he looks at death as gain, not because he would
not be with Christ, with whom he accounts it best being, but perhaps would be
more fitted for his presence, which he hopes to be if God spare him, but still
with a sweet and holy submission to the Lords good will and pleasure.

Obj. Yea but then for wicked men, do not we often see them go to death without
any such, car and affrightment, no such terrors upon their spirits as you
speak of, Now, to this I Answer.

First it is possible they may be ignorant of death and its consequences, dye
like fools and beasts without regard to what follows, thinking when dead,
there is an end of them, say not such are scarce to be found among Christians,
for I Will tell you the ignorance of thousands is most lamentable and dreadful.
Or,

O quam multi cum hac spe ad aeternos labores, and bella desendunt. Ephesians. 4.
as one says, many go down to Hell with a vain hope of Heaven. Or,

3. Perhaps they are dead before they dye, the Apostle speaks of some that are
past feeling, feared; they are senseless and not awakened, Nabal like, their
hearts dead as a stone; as one says, Many go down to Hell, waking not till
they feel those flames about their ears, could you speak with any or all these
but an hour after death, they would sing another song.

Now you must know, 19. 1 Samuel 25.38.
when we speak of death being so terrible to sinners, we speak of sinners with
their eyes opened, their consciences a little enlightened and awakened, and to
these the tidings of death are killing, I warrant you they cannot look it in
the face, with their own faces smiling, and truly you cannot blame them; for
what should make a wicked man willing to dyer first at the best, they are
uncertain what shall become of them, as Aristotle when ready to die cried out, I
dye doubtfully, and whither I shall go I know not, Dubious morior quo vadam
nescio.
and Adrian the Emperor, animula vagula, etc. quos nunc abibis in locos, oh my
poor soul what places art thou now going into, why what then can make them
willing, is it to be rid of some pain they feel, nay then they are well helped
up; no, no they may often in a rage call for death, as they do, but when it
comes to, they dare not dye, and you cannot blame them: it is only the Saint of
Christ dares dye, and the reason why the one welcomes, the other dread deaths
approach; it is the Saint believes a gain, the other dreads a loss by a dying
time, And that is a second Use.

to you to live is Christ, why then, to dye shall be gain: And there is a
threefold account whereupon you may bottom comfort from this honey truth, as

First, here is comfort against your own death, how may this kill in every good
heart the fear of dying, do thou upon thy receiving the sentence of death in
thy self, shrink and give back? for shame remember thy self, thou wilt get by it,
I tell thee Friend it comes for no harm but good to thee, It was a worthy
Speech that Artabanus gave Xerxes, that mighty Emperor of Persia, who viewing
his huge Army of at least a thousand thousand Men, drinking up Rivers as they
went, and commanding Hills and Seas to give way unto them, he fell a weeping,
because it came into his mind that within an hundred years, not one of that
goodly Company would be found alive; to whom he answered thus, I would quoth he
that were the worst, for we endure more sorrow by retaining life, neither is
there any one of these or of all men living besides, so happy upon Earth, that
he does not often cast in his mind how much more pleasure there is in dying,
then there is in living, I am sure the Saints of God may truly say so, do
weep to think of death? I tell thee my friend, thou will get more by dying,
then ever thou shall get by living.

I have read of Trophonius and Agamedes, Venerantes Deum petie^unt mercedem
operis and laboris sui nihil certi sed quod ess toptinum homini.
who having built a Temple to Apollo, as they were worshipping god in the same,
they begged a reward of their labor and pains, and they would not ask any
certain or particular good thing, but only asked, quod optimum esset homini,
that which should be best for man, and says the Author presently upon the
request, mortui sunt reperti, they were both found dead, beloved, for Gods
Saints it were the greatest good indeed, I desire (says the Apostle) to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is (...) multo magis melius, much more
better or best of bests, Phill. 1.23. and that is the first branch of your
comfort, namely against your own death.

2. Then Secondly, here is matter of comfort and support against the loss of
your godly relations, it is true, it is hard to flesh and blood to part with near
and dear relations, and not to express immoderate sorrow, truly but that we are
inconsiderate at such a time, if we would set their gain against our loss, it
would be matter of great support: I am not against the sending our gracious
friends to the graves with tears, and grief next to tears for Gods dishonor,
and the Churches sufferings, I know no better use tears can be put to, then to
lament the departures hence of good men and good women; to let the world know
its great loss by their removal, wither related to us or not; and if nature
somewhat exceed for relation sake, I think it either no offense, or very
pardonable; I plead not against our sorrowing, but excess of it, as (...).
Naturales and irrreprehensibiles. Turbari lonum est sed non perturbari, i. e.
nimiopere turbari* Maerori succumubere animum despondere.
one says, these passions of grief and sorrow, they are natural and
unreproveable, but when they break their bounds and become inordinate, then
sinful; therefore Bernard distinguishes between turbationem and
perturbationem, it is good (says he) to be troubled, but not over-troubled:
when we give way to the excessive breaking out of those passions, sitting down
and sinking in our sorrows, and le^ting our greifs so swallow us up, that with
Rachel we refuse to be comforted; this I condemn and would strengthen you
against. I pray thee friend what is the cause of those thy excessive greifs at
the departure of thy gracious friends, is it thy own loss or their loss? thy
own, be quiet man, he that took away one might have taken away more, nay all,
had he pleased; is it their loss? nay there thou art mistaken, they have lost
nothing, but every way gained: Oh could our dead husbands, dead wives, dead
Parents, dead friends, (I mean dead in Christ) that have changed a poor earthly
Tabernacle for a Princely Palace, Sorrows for Joys, Earth for Heaven, Travel
for Rest, behold us here lying in tears for them, they would say to us, as
sometimes Christ to the daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for us but for your
selves; we are well, never so well, nay till now, never well; oh the gain that
the Saints have by death, may bear up the spirits of their dearest friends at
their parting with them; that is a second branch of comfort.

3. And lastly, here is comfort against all deaths Harbingers; your Crosses,
Afflictions, Persecutions, and trials, that on this side Heaven you meet
withal, all changes and chances, all troubles and losses, wherewith this life
is laden from the womb to the tomb, from the Cradle to the Grave, man is born
to trouble as the sparks fly upward, and if the Saints should escape them that
were strange indeed, I hope while you live in your enemies country, you do not
expect it; but be of good cheer, none of them all can harm thee; how prove you
that Sir? why thus, if the King of terrors cannot harm thee, none of his petty
underlings shall do it; if death be thy gain, these shall not be thy loss, run
therefore your race, though afflicted with hope and patience; thou may say
of the worst of troubles, or troublers, as he of that Tyrant, He may kill me,
but he cannot hurt me. It was a b^ave speech of Damindas, when some told him,
now Phillip was broke into their Country, they were afraid of suffering
grievious things. O Semi vir inquit quid nobis poterit acerbe accidere qui
mortem contemnimus.
O you half spirited men, what need we fear suffering who have learned to
despise even death it self? why so, here death shall be your advantage,
therefore none of these shall be your prejudice: that is a third Use, then,



1. To all that hear me, and my Council to you is, as ever you expect to have
death do you a kindness, so look you be found of this Saints number, of this
same poor scorned company of Saints; believe it those be they that can hold up
their heads in death, when others have cause to tremble and look ruefully,
these be they shall get by death, when others shall loose all, and whatever
your opinion of them be, now you will wish to be of them one day. I know not that
ever I met with that man, that would not have dyed a Saint though he lived a
very Devil, then with Baalam, Oh that my Soul might dye the death of the
Righteous, and my last end be like His, but don't cozen your selves, holiness
in Life, hope in Death, and happiness of death, follow each other; If not of
this number, as sure as the Lord lives, death will not pleasure you, but ruin
you. That Is the first.

2. To the Saints themselves, and my council is, that you would endeavor
after a full assurance, that your death shall be thus benefi^^^^ to you; to
know in your selves (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.34.) not only by Guess,
Conjecture, or Hearsay, but be able to say as the Apostle here, to me to dye
is gain, without which you will never be able to dye like your selves; but
timerously and doubtfully, which though we cannot say but may be sometime the
case of a good Christian, yet is much below his goodness. And therefore rest
not till you have got above dying fears, till you can say, I know that my
Redeemer lives. In a word till you can end with this Text in your mouths, and
that upon a good ground, To me to Live has been Christ, and therefore to me to
Dye shall now be Gain.

And now my Friends, having done with one Text, I know it will be expected I
should apply my self unto another, namely to speak something touching our dear
Sister, whose pilgrimage while here, has been exemplary, whose loss is so much
lamented, and whose life and death, I think if any could be so, has been a
perfect Comment on this Scripture, I am persuaded that you all think, that to
her to live was Christ, and if so, then sure I am, to her to dye has been Gain.

I confess it has been a custom very ancient in the Church of God, for the
living upon public occasions to commend what was praise worthy in the Dead,
and to hold forth their virtuous Examples to others, for their imitation,
witness Nazianzen, Basil, David of Abner; withal most infinite instances of
the like examples, both from Sacred Writ, 2. Sam. 3.33.
and Church History, and sufficiently warranted, by our Savior Christ himself
touching John Baptist, John 5.35. He was a burning and shining Light.

Not for partiality or by respects, because Neighbors, Friends, Relations, or
related to those to whom we owe respect.

Nor for Adulation or Flattery, to commend those that were most vicious, a Sin
in all, especially in Gods Ministers, who ought always so to speak and do, as
if they heard that voice read rationem etc. give an account of thy
Steward-ship, of all men it ill becomes them, by gilding rotten Posts to
strengthen the hands of the wicked in their wickedness; Methinks it should have
struck that preacher dumb, and filled his heart with trembling, of whom this
sad Story is related, who when preaching a Funeral Sermon for a Man, whom he
styled a Religious man, heard a voice at the same time in the Church crying,
Mortuus Sum, Judicatus Sum, Damnatus Sum,, I am Dead, I am Judged, I am Damned.

If I know my own heart, I would not for a World, give a Title undeserved, nor
speak with my mouth what my heart gain-sayeth; Thales being asked how much
truth differed from error, answered Quantum distant ab auribus oculi. Qui
audiunt audita loquantur qui vident plan^ sciunt.
as much as the eyes differed from the ears, and if at any time Ministers find
occasion for an Encomium this way, they should be sure to observe that good and
safe Rule Joh. 3.11. To speak but what they know, and testify but what they
have seen.

I have not been overforward this way when a public preacher, though in some
cases, I think it not only lawful, but convenient, and if ever I might do it
for any, I should wrong the memory of this precious and worthy Saint of Christ,
should I not Commemorate those excellent Virtues; with which God had rarely
endowed her, above the common Size; I fear not to be counted a flatterer by
those that knew her well, in any thing I shall say of her, but rather fear,
least I wrong her memory in speaking too little upon this sudden warning.

True she needs none of our Praises, her works while she lived, praised her
in the Gates, and being dead (by them) she yet speaks, she would have
despised them whiles alive, and wants them not now dead, but as he said, Lauds
quia merebatur contempsit and quia contempsit magis merebatur.
because she deserved praise, she despised it, and because she despised it, she
the more deserves it; therefore something I must and cannot but speak, and
methinks it fares with me in my entrance, as with a man coming into a Garden
where there are variety of Flowers, and therefore he knows not where to pick,
so amongst her many commendable parts, I know not which to present you with.
Should I but observe that Rule forementioned, to speak but what I know, and
testify but what I my self have seen, I might break a box of such precious
Spikenard as would fill the house with a sweet perfume.

1. First she was you know a young woman, but an aged Saint, I may say of her
as truly, as every the Emperor of his Piso, Hujus vita composita a pueritia
her life was grave and serious; she was even a woman from a child, she began
with God betimes, remembering her Creator in the days of her youth, she was
none of those who do Flo^em aetatis diabolo consecrare faeces Deo reservare.
consecrate the top to the Devil, and the bottom to God, and having began, held
on, an even and constand course in holiness, confuting that Devils proverb
Angelicus juvenis senibus satanissat in annis. Quo sempl rst imbuta recens
servabit adorem.
a young Saint and an old Devil, which as Erasmus says well (in his Pietas
puerilis) was a proverb devised by the Devil himself, contrary to that of
Solomon, Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it. I have known her a single woman, then married
to her former husband Mr. John Clerk a godly Minister, and then to her late
worthy Yoke Fellow now living, Captain Robert Fisher, during all which time,
never gave she the least fear, of having began in the Spirit, ending in the
Flesh, with too many in these late loose days, but on the contrary, the elder
the more Pious, the more years the better Graces, and her last Works better
then her first.

2. She was of a most sweet and courteous Nature, of as winning, affable, and
obliging disposition, as ever I met withal, of a friend endearing, and an
enemy winning converse, pleasantness of spirit without levity, affability mixed
with gravity, lovely, and loving, even to all, not knowing how to provoke any,
a very disciple of love.

3. She was a person of great humility, into which frame, till God has brought
a Soul, he takes no pleasure in it, but humble in heart, high in worth, (as
Nazianzen of Athanasius) that first, second and third Virtue, (as Aust. has
it) who being asked by one, what Virtue was first and most to be desired,
answered Humility, being asked what was the second, he answered humility, and
what was the third, he said still Humility, that grace that carries a Christian
flying to Heaven, as one says well, the humble man seems but to creep, but he
flies to Heaven, of this knew I never any better stored, though she had,
(especially during the time of her last Marriage,) of the things of the world,
(wherein Fools so pride themselves, and for which they so prize themselves) in
great plenty and abundance, yet like one resolved to follow her Saviors
pattern, of whom it is said Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Though in the form of God, and
thought it no robbery to be equal with God: Yet made himself of no reputation,
but took upon him the form of a Servant, etc. So this his disciple, outwardly
great, inwardly little, rich in the World, poor in Spirit, which grace though
it made her nothing in her own, yet it greatned her in the eyes of God and good
men, Math. 18.4, Whosoever shall humble himself as a little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of Heaven.

4. She was a woman full of mercy and pity, a sister-grace to the former,
which the Apostle Paul coupling together, we will not part, Col. 3.12. Put on
as the Elect of God, humbleness of mind, and bowels of mercy.

Mercy is described by Saint Aust. Alienae miseriae quaedam in nostro cord
compassio, quasi possumus subvenire compellemur.
to be a compassionate felow-feeling of another misery, that puts me upon
helping him so far as I am able, a grace that none ever lost by; as they say
the Dutch have a Proverb, Thefts never enrich, Alms never impoverish, and
Math. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, an hugely
honoring grace, that makes God the giver of our All, indebted to us for a
little of it again, and we shall find him a sure play master, and how largly was
this Saint of Christ stored with this, her estate was large, and I am persuaded
her heart larger, no question but what with lawfulness she might, she did this
way, Non pereunt sed pluriunt pauperibus impensa.
and she has lamented it, that she could do no more then she did, for such as
feared God, and made it her great wonder, that some should have such estates
and do so little good with them, her will was to do good to all, especially the
household of Faith, and where there is a will, comfortable is that saying of
Aust. Quicquid vis and non petes factum Deus computat.
what thou would do thou can not, yet God says it is done, and a greater
then Austin warrants it, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

5. She was admirable for her patience, that grace that enables a Soul,
cheerfully, and quietly, to submit its will to Gods, and to bear what ever
befalls it in its course toward Heaven, sweetly, and contentedly, because God
will have it so: her affliction was long and sometimes sharp, yet who ever
heard a repining word from her, how silently submissive to the divine pleasure?
her pain might sometime force her to groan, but never to grumble, having
learned Jobes lesson, cap. 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hand of the Lord,
and shall we not receive evil, or good old Elies, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good, or that of a greater or better then either,
John 18.11. The cup that my Father has given me, shall I not drink it, though
so wasted, that she became a pitiful Anatomy of frail mortality, yet a perfect
pattern of christian patience.

6. She was of a most meek and peaceable frame of spirit, her adorning was not
plaiting the hair, etc. but with the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God great price, 1 Pet. 3.4..

Queen Elizabeth was used to say, that next to the Scripture, she knew no book
that did her so much good as Seneca de Clementia, and her Clemency was such
that her brother King Edward was used to call her, his sweet sister Temperance,
I cannot say that our sister had so much Learning as to read that Book, but
sure I am as to the practice, she had so learned that, that none could exceed
her, and from a better Master then all Senecaes, Math. 11.29. Learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly in heart.

7. She was a constant frequenter when able, and an affectionate lover of Gods
Word and Ordinances; It is a great argument of an heart truly gracious, when it
can say with holy David, Ps. 26.8. Lord, I have leved the habitation of thy
House, and the place where thine Honor dwells. How often have I seen her at
the place of Gods Service in such weather, which hardyer then she, and much her
inferiors, would have pleaded as a tolerable excuse for their absence, and
when there, how curious and attentive in hearing, bringing as Bishop Hall cales
them, Aures bibulas, and I may add Animam magis bibulam, thirsty Ears, and a
Soul more thirsty, how rellishing were Gods saying truths to her at all times,
yea sweet, as David says, Ps. ^19.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste,
yea sweeter then honey to my mouth.

8. She was one of a most tender conscience, that Jewel of Jewels, and
infallible character of a true child of God, that soul-feasting grace; a good
conscience is a continual feast, that countenance cheering grace, Prove. 15.13.
A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance; and well might her countenance be
cheerful, when her conscience was kept quiet and peaceful; Eusebius reports of
the Martyrs under Severus, that coming forth after a long and hard
Imprisonment, they looked more like those that came out of a shop of sweet
Ointments, then out of a Prison, they carried in their countenances, Divinum
nescio quid in vultibus praeserentes
a certain divine Aspect; no question but it was that within, that made their
faces shine without; oh how pleasant would this our Sister be, during her
Lucida, intervalla her Mitigations of her distemper, pleasant in her speeches,
pleasant in her actions, which gave all to see there was peace within, the
cause of this pleasantness without this tenderness of conscience she evidenced,
by universal care to please, and fear to offend her good God in any thing. I
may truly say of her, as Acts 24.16. Her care was, to keep her conscience void
of offense toward God and toward Man.

I have read of Li^ius Drusus; being about to build a stately House; the
Workman told him that he would so contrive it that, that none should over look
him or see what was done in his house, to whom Drusus made this answer, Quin tu
potius si quid in te art is est ita compone domum meam ut quicquid agam ab
omnibus in spici omnibus.
nay rather if thou have any art, show it in so contriving my house, that
whatsoever I do, may be beheld of all, truly I think could such an house been
built, an Inhabitant fitter then this our sister to have dwelt in the same,
could no where have been found, I have known her long, but know not, that ever
I heard reported of her any one action, or heard from her any word unworthy the
best of Eyes or Ears.

9. In a word for her general practice of godlyness, (I hope and question not)
in the sincerity of heart I am sure in the unblame ableness of life, she was an
Israelitess indeed in whom was no guil, one of the ornaments of her Sex; well
reported of by all; yea of the truth it self; free from the crimes of sinful
Age, Non sine peccato, sed sine querela, I say not without sin, but without
complaint; and no marvel, for she set the Lord always before her; therrfore
she did not fall; the grace of God that appeared to her, wrought so effectually
in her, that it taught her, and enabled her, to deny all ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and Godly, in this present
evil World.

10. Shall I leave her in this respect, and speak of her as a Wife; she was her
husbands Crown, Prove. 12.4. A virtuous woman is the crown of her Husband, a
rich Portion of the Lords own bestowing, Prove. 19.14. House and riches are the
Inheritance of Fa^hers, but a prudent Wife is of the Lord.

She was one of Salomons wives, mentioned, Prove. 31.11, 12. One that the heart
of her Husband might safely trust in, so that he shall have no need of spoil.
She will do him good, and not evil, all the days of her life. Oh the tears
she shed for him while absent beyond the Seas; and the many prayers she put up
for his prosperous and safe return, besides her earnest desires to her Friends,
that in their Prayers they would still remember her dear Husband. Her desire
was exceeding great in this her last sickness, if the Will of God might be so,
that she might live but till his return, once more to see him and speak with
him; but God was pleased to deny her, as he did his Servant. Moses going over
into the land of Canaan, though both to their great gain; taking him up to the
land of Canaan above, instead of that below; and her to a far dearer husband
and head, namely Christ Jesus; where this beloved Disciple, now rests in the
bosom of her best love, as I nothing question.

11. Shall I mention her as a Mother, how tender and affectionate a parent,
winning by love, not ruling by rigor; indeed she had but one Child of her own,
a young Daughter; and was Mother in Law to one more of her last dear husbands;
who I dare to say, will ever testify, that she had not a mother in Law, of a
Mother in Law, but an indulgent, affectionate kind and endearing mother indeed,
and if she had travailed in pain of her, she would not have been more willing
to travail in pain for her in what had lain in her power to have done her good.

12. Shall I mention her as a kinswoman, friend, sister, relation, those dear
and mutual kindnesses, that I have both seen and heard of, between her and you
her dear relations, and that great love between you; tells me that I shall but
revive your gre fs, Peradventure add to them which I am loath to do, and
therefore will make an end, and set your patience at liberty, which I should
think and fear I had greatly tired; but only for your great love, that I am
persuaded you all bear to the memory of your choice and dear friend.

13. For her death I can say little, and therefore will say nothing, she
removed from us to the City, where I had not the happiness of being one of her
visitants, but I question not but she, whose life had been so exemplary; could
not but finish that well spent life as comfortably.

To conclude therefore; I have read of Apelles, that he was used to say, that
to draw the complete picture of a beautyful woman, he must take one part from
one, another from another, a third from a third, etc. and put them altogether;
methinks this Christian Gentlewoman, had followed this course in virtues and
spiritual excellencies; one Christian excels in one virtue, another in another;
but I scarce know any one necessary thing, that tended to make up a complete
Christian, but in some measure it was in her.

Well, she is gone, we following, and in the prime of her days, and flower of
her years, she is sent for hence, but the loss ours, not hers: Life is compared
to a Comedy, Ut fabula sic vita non quam d^u s^d qua^ ben abb^ r^fert.
no matter how short, if well acted; which how hers was you have heard, I know
her loss is much lamented by all neighbors that knew her, more by all her
friends that knew her better, and most of all by her dear relations that
enjoyed her; but show your selves Christians that are nearlyest concerned,
bearing Gods hand, as quietly and patiently in her death, as she bare it in her
life.

Your loss is great, confessed, but her gain greater; nay you have not lost her,
praema^stis no amisistis, she is but stepped before, not lost you will see her
again, them that sleep in Jesus God will bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Follow
you her example, make ready, Let your loins be girt, your lights burning, and
be your selves like them that wait for their Lord, when he returns from the
Wedding, that when he comes and knocks, you may open to him, Luke 12.35, 36.
And then you will see her again; see your wife again, your sister again, your
friend and kinswoman again; yea where all sorrow and mourning shall fly away,
and everlasting joy shall be upon all your heads.

Where youth shall never wax old, where your life shall fear no ending, where
there shall be no more sickness to wast and make pale, no more death to
separate dear friends, no more grief felt, no more signs heard; as Aust. most
sweetly Ubi juve^tus nunquam sen s^it, ubi vita terminum nescit, ubi amor
nunquam tep scit, ubi s^nitas nunquam marcescit, ubi gaudium nu^quam decrescit,
ubi dolor nunqu^m s^ntitur, ubi genitus nunquam audi ur, etc.
etc.

For the which place and time, the Lord in Mercy fit and prepa o us All; and
unto which in his due time, bring us as our Hope is; he has done this our dear
Sister; Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

