A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Coin.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants,
or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as by Our Royal Prerogative, We have power to establish, or alter
the matter of Coin, either Native or Foreign within Our Dominions, from time
to time, as We shall find fit for the good of Our Subjects; and Our Royal
Ancestors having been in constant use to raise and exalt the extrinsick value
of the Coin of this Kingdom, according as the Neighboring Kingdoms and States
have done their Standarts; and in some measure, to bear such a proportion with
Our Neighbors, as that the Coin of this Kingdom might not be exported: And
whereas the value of the ounce of Coined Silver has been raised from time to
time, as particularly in the year 1591. the value of the ounce of Coined Silver
was appointed to be forty two shilling Scots, being of eleven Denier fine,
which continued from that year to the year 1691, and was then raised to three
Pounds ten Pennies, and two sixth parts, and which has continued ever since at
that value: albeit in the Neighboring Kingdoms and States, the ounce of Coined
Silver is valued considerably above the same, which has been one great occasion
of the exporting of the greatest part of the Stock of Our own Coin, and whereof
Merchandise has been, and is still made; and the same species melted down by
foreign Mints and Goldsmiths, and imported again in foreign species, much
below Our own Coin, both in weight and fineness, whereby Our Authority has been
contemned, Our People cheated and abused, and the Trade and Commerce of this
Kingdom highly prejudged; and if the same be not timously remeided, the remnant
of the Stock of Our own Coin will in a short time be carried out, and nothing
left but foreign species of baser Moneys. And some of the most considerable of
the Merchants of this Our Kingdom, having made their application to Our Privy
Council, and proposed as a fit expedient, that Our four Merk pieces might be
appointed to be current proportionally to the intrinsic value thereof, and the
best of the foreign Current Coin; who having had the same u^nder serious
consideration, and having received from the Officers of Our Mint, an exact
account of the intrinsic value thereof, and of all other foreign species of
Coin, tolerated to be current; and finding, that at the rate of the ounce of
Silver now Current in other Countries, it is fit that Our Coin be in some
proportion with theirs in the extrinsick value. We therefore, with the Advice
of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do ordain and appoint, that in time coming,
the ounce of Our own Moneys shall be in value, three Pounds four Shillings
Scots Money: and to that effect, do ordain, that the four Merk pieces, which
are now current at fifty three shillings four pennies, shall hereafter be
current at fifty six shillings, and the inferior species of that Coin, viz.
the two Merk, Merk, Half merk, and Fourty-penny-piece proportionably. And
whereas it is most just, that now seeing we have advanced the value of Our Coin,
as aforesaid, the Merchants ought to have enccuragement to bring in their
Bulzeon with greater cheerfulness, We do ordain, that whereas they did receive
for each ounce of Silver, paid in by them, as Bulzeon of eleven denier fine,
fifty five Shillings nine Pennies Scots; the Master of the Mint is now to pay
out to them, for every ounce of eleven denier fine, given in by them as
Bulzeon, fifty eight Shillings Scots. And ordains all foreign species of Coin
to be current as formerly; And that these Presents be Printed, and Published at
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful, that none pretend
ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fifth day of March, One thousand six
hundred eighty and one, And of Our Reign, the thretty three Year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Ander^^^ (...)ter to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anne DOM 16^^


