Curia quasi Incuria
^^ld by Hen: Marsh. and Ios: Coniers. (...)

frontispiece

Fragmenta Aulica. OR, COURT AND State Jests IN Noble Drollery.

TRUE and REAL. Ascertained to their Times, Places and Persons.

By T. S. Gent.

London, Printed for H. Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet; and Jos. Coniers at the Black-Raven in the long Walk near Christ
Church, 1662.

TO THE COURT.
WE invite you here to these Fragmenta Aulica pieces of wit and festivity,
which make up the whole entertainment of the last seven Reigns of our (and
their cotemporary) Princes.

Some few scraps of these have been published in miscellanies and common
prostitutions of vulgar conceits, and like such issues have wanted both name
and place, being merely fathered on the credulous Reader; Such princely
incognito stories proving mere popular cheats and impostures.

These false citations are here rectifyed, the antique Authority of them
cleared, being (as by their presumptuous circumstances will appear) truly
reduced to their undoubted originals; both History and other tracts of the
times having been carefully and examinately considered.

Being thus assembled and in this train and Equipage, they return to the place
from whence they came as the suitablest and fittest for their reception.

There will be room enough amidst the throng of your business and employment,
for their entertainment, and if the Genius of the place be not different from
what it was, as Pasquil thinks not, they may perhaps justle out more serious
difficulties, and find easier access and attainment: as the air insinuates
it self where the other heavier and dull Elements cannot proceed or move of
themselves.

Some have wondered that among all the offices at Court whose vacancies have
been supplied, none have taken the reversion of Archee; The publisher therefore
of these Jocoseria officiously substitutes himself as to the public. Others
offended with the times, and the nature, name, and quality of the place, think
the whole collectively taken to be a representative body, of that venerable
function, and that there is no want or need of him; these are madmen because
they are not as fine fools as formerly.

But the reason is ascribed to the constant sweetness of his Majesty's temper,
which intermits not nor can be interrupted; so that it should need to be peiced
by borrowed mirth, the reparties of his own serene thoughts naturally indulging
his leisure such satisfaction, beyond the strains of the quickest and facetest
invention.

There are besides many very excellent in this way of Droll who are persons of
the highest Honor, that contribute much to this kind of recreation, and it is
all the unhappiness of these Collections, that they cannot trace nor recover
the quickness of those discourses: so that very few modern Joco's are here
inserted: but there is a further reason to be given of it, because the
presentnesse of the time will not suffer them.

These your disports and trifles we poor mortals admire as Oracles, and conceit
our discourse highly improved, if we can draw in one of these stories by the
head and ears to embellish and set it off: in earnest they are of as much
profit as delight, having a smatch or r^s^ of the Humor of (...) they pas^^
(...) ^^^etent view they are submitted, with a presumption they will not be,
even to you, useless and unacceptable.

Yours T. S.

COURT AND STATE JESTS. OR, Noble Drollery.
K. Hen. 8.
A Company of little Boys were by their Schoolmaster not many years since
appointed to Act the play of King Henry the eight and one who had the presence
(or the absence rather) as being of a whining voice, puling spirit, consumptive
body, was appointed to personate King Henry himself, only because he had the
richest clothes, and his Parents the best people of the parish, but when he had
spoke his speech rather like a Mouse then a Man, one of his fellow Actors told
him; If you speak not HOH with a better spirit and voice, your Parliament will
not grant you a Farthing.

Queen Elizabeth.
QUeen Elizabeth, a great lover of her Clergy especially of the persons and
acquaintance of those of the Prelacy or the next dignities to it, took much
delight in, and highly valued the company of one Doctor David Whithead an
accurate disputant and a very facetious person of a conscientious bluntness,
wherein one handsome clash or reported happened. The Queen one day, who had not
the same respects for married Clergy men said unto him Whithead, I love thee
the better because thou art unmarried. In truth Madam said he I like you the
worse because you are unmarried.

Henry Carry.
HEnry Carry Lord Hunsdon something a Kin to Queen Elizabeth Ancestor to the
Honorable Houses of Dover and Monmouth, was a stout and great spirited
Gentleman very choleric but not malicious and a lover of men of their Hands.
Once one Mr. Colt to whom he owed a grudge, met him coming from his House at
Hunsdon to London with a Lordly retinue, my Lord gave Colt a box of the ear,
Colt presently returned it with interest, thereupon my Lord servants drawing
their swords swarmed about him: you Rogues (said the L^.) may not I and my
Neighbor change a blow but you must interpose? so the quarrel began and ended
in a moment.

Lord Treasurer.
LYonel Lord Cranfeild bred a Merchant in London, who was said to be his Tutor
and own university, was especially conversant about the Custom House which was
the seminary of his Fortune, He being made Lord Treasurer by King James, 1612.
having married a Kinswoman of the D. of Buckingham thought himself able not
only to stand with out, but in some cases against him, which the Duke not
enduring, he was outed of his Treasurersship after he had held it four years,
and fined to the King in a very great sum.

How ever losing his Office he saved himself departing from that Office in an
Age when it was hard to keep it. Insomuch that one asking what was good to
preserve life was answered get to be Lord Treasurer, for they seldom dye in
their Places, proved to be true for four successions.

The Office of Lord Treasurer was always beheld as a place of great trust and
profit. One well skilled in the perquifit there of being demanded what he
conceived the yearly value of the place might be worth made answer, That it
might be worth some thousands of pounds to him who after his death would go
instantly to heaven, twice as much to him who would go to Purgatory, and No
body knows what to him who would adventure to go to Hell.

Chief Justice.
THe Chief Justice of the Common Pleas is in place beneath in profit above the
Lord chief Justice, for this reason Sir Edward Montague in Henry the eights
being demanded the reason of degrading himself from the Kings bench to the
other chief justiceship answered, I am now an old man and love the Kitchen
better then the Hall, the warmest place best suiting with my Age.

The Kings Wardrope.
IN the Kings Wardrope is a rich piece of Arras presenting the Seasight in 88.
which at several audiences of Ambassadors has been used for magnificence in
the banqueting House (as in Cromwels usurpation) and wherein were wrought the
living portractures of the chiefest Commanders in that service: on a time a
Captain who highly prized himself and his valor in that naval fight, coming
to Court and missing his picture therein, complained of the injury to his
friend professing of himself that he merited a place there as well as some
therein remembered for that he was engaged in the middle of the fight. Be
content said his friend, thou have been an old Pyrate and art reserved for
another hanging.

A Shoemaker no Gentleman.
SIr Philip Calthrop a very merry Gentleman of the County of Norfolk being
newly come from Court where he had observed the fashion to be upon great days
in those times of Henry the seventh to wear gowns of light colored cloth,
sent to his Tailor in Norwich as much cloth of fine French Tawney as would make
him such a vesture. It happened one John Drakes a Shoemaker of some wealth
coming into the shop liked it so well that he went and bought of the same as
much for himself, enjoining the Tailor to make it exactly after the fashion he
made the Knights, who sending for his Gown by his servant, he espied another
of the same in the shop and enquiring whose it was, the Master told him, and
the order he had for the making it up. This being told sir Philip he sent a new
command that the Tailor should cut in his as many holes and slashes as his
knife and sheares could find place for and so send it him: which he did and
accordingly cut the Shoomakers in the very same manner and carried it home,
where Prince Crispin began to be wroth but understanding it was the mode that
the Knights was made his comb fell saying he would be a Gentleman no more.

Sir William Clark.
SIR William Clark a Gentleman much conversant in Court, a great Masquer and
acceptable to the Ladies being a man of excellent shape and goodly feature and
proportion, was one night at a Masque in Whitball where were present King JAMES
and Queen Anne; after a scene or two he having some Office or charge for that
night while the stage was free passed over to the other side about some
business and with such a stately and strutting pace befitting his present
employment, that a Lady known unto him thinking to put a jeere upon him said
Sir -- pray have a care you hurt not your self by stradling so wide I wonder
what ails you; to whom he he presently and openly retorted, In troth Madam if
you had that betwixt your legs which I have it would make you straddle a great
deal wider.

Lord Spencer.
RObert Lord Spencer Baron of Wormleighton being a Man of a quick and clear
spirit, speaking one day in Parliament of the valor of their English Ancestors
in defending the Liberties of the Nation, the Earl of Arundel stood up and
replied, your Ancestors were keeping of sheep (that Lord and his Predecessors
being known for the greatest Sheep-masters in England) when those Liberties
were defended. If they were a keeping of sheep returned the other, yours were
then in plotting of Treason. This animosity for the present cost both of them a
confinement, yet so that afterward the upper House ordered reparations to this
Lord Spencer as first and causelessely provoked.

Doctor Preston.
DOctor Preston was the greatest Pupil-monger in England in Man's memory, having
sixteen fellow Commoners most Heirs to fair estates admitted in one year in
Queens College, and provided convenient accomodations for them. As William the
popular Earl of Nassaw Prince of Aurange was said to have won a subject from
the King of Spain to his own party every time he put off his Hat, so it was
commonly said in the College that every time Mr. Preston plucked off his Hat
to Dr. Davenant the Master, he gained a Chamber or Study for one of his Pupils,
among whom one Chambers a Londoner was eminent for his learning. Being
afterward chosen himself Master of Emanuel College, he removed thither with
most of his Pupils, and when it was much admired where all these should find
lodging in that College which was so full already, one replied, Mr. Preston
will carry Chambers along with him.

Sir Thomas More.
SIR Thomas More being committed to the Tower for refusing the Oath of
Supremacy, being, as in his time it was, the custom, and also to our memory
observed, that the Prisoners there were not dieted at their own but the Kings
charges, the Lieutenant of the Tower providing their food for them: when the
said Lieutenant one day said unto him by way of complement, that he was sorry
his Commons were no better, I like said Sir Thomas the diet very well, and if I
dislike it, turn me out of Doors.

A Courtier coming to him, while in restraint, with proffer of mercy from the
King if he would comply with his Majesty's will, and take the said Oath, he
replied that His mind was now changed, whereupon the Courtier departed, and
told the King that Sir Thomas would submit himself to his grace in that matter,
which the King willing to accept, gave him order to repair to the Tower again,
and receive it in a form under his hand. At his return challening Sir Thomas
with his promise, he wondering told him that he meant only by changing his
mind, that whereas he had resolved to shave himself before his Execution, he
would now let his beard suffer with his head: to the abashment of the man, who
so confidently had informed the King of Sir Thomas his conversion.

The same Sir Thomas during his Chancellorship, had his Lady well attended by a
handsome retinue, especially at going to Church, living then in Chelsey, where
her Gentleman Usher always after my Lord was out of his seat after Sermon,
used to wait upon his Lady, telling her Madam my Lord is gone. It happened that
upon this score of the supremacy sir Thomas was put from that dignity,
whereupon the next Sunday after as soon as Church was done, (having the week
before dismissed most of his servants intending to live privately,) he came to
his Ladies Pew himself, and said unto her alone in passing, Madam my Lord is
gone, (meaning the Chancellor,) and so walked home before her.

Sir Pallavicin Horatio.
ONe Seignior Pallavicin a Genoese who lived in England a kin to Sir Horatio,
boasting of his Nobility and high extraction, as descended from an illustrious
House, was thus answered by a blunt Citizen (who from mean Parentage had risen
to great wealth, reputation and honor, and so I (says he) also am come of an
illustrious House, where the Sun constantly shone through the rotten walls and
roofes thereof.

My Lord Bacon.
IT is storied of my Lord Bacon (to his advantage) that when he was Lord
Chancellor he had two servants one in all causes Patron to the Plaintiff (whom
charity presumed always injured the other to the Defendant (pitying him as
compelled to Law) but taking bribes of both, with this condition to restore the
money if the Cause went against them; Their Lord ignorant hereof, always did
impartial justice, whilst his two serants making people pay for what was given
them, by compact shared the money between them, which in conclusion cost the
Master the loss of his Office.

Dr. Perne.
DOctor Perne Master of Peter house, and Dean of Ely in Cambridge, this Person
was very facetious and excellent at blunt sharp jests, and loved that kind of
mirth even so as to be noted for his wit in them. This Dean chanced to call a
Clergyman fool (that indeed was little better) who replied that he would
complain thereof to the Lord Bishop of Ely. Do says the Dean when you will,
and my Lord Bishop will confirm you.

Yet was Doctor Perne himself at last heart-broken with a jest being at Court
in the time of Queen Elizabeth with Archbishop Whitgift his Pupil; It seems he
was noted to have altered his religion with the several reigns of Hen. 8. Ed.
6. Q. Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. It fell out at his being there as aforesaid,
the Queen was disposed and resolved that afternoon for all it rained very hard,
to go abroad contrary to the mind of her Ladies on Horseback (Coaches not
being then common) who were to attend her. Now one Clod the Queen's Jester was
employed by the Courtiers to laugh the Queen out of so inconvenient a journey,
which he performed in this manner. Heaven quoth he Madam disswades you it is
cold and wet, and Earth disswades you it is moist and dirty; Heaven disswades
you, this Heavenly minded man Archbishop Whitgift, and Earth disswades you,
your fool Clod such a lump of clay as my self, And if neither will prevail
with You, here is one that is neither Heaven nor Earth, but hangs betwixt both,
Doctor Perne, and he also disswades you: hereat the Queen and the Courtiers
laughed heartily, whilst the Doctor withdrew himself to Lambeth, and there
dyed out of mere conceit of this public dictery.

Queen Elizabeth.
QUeen Elizabeth was of an undaunted courage, so that once a prime Officer with
a white staff (whose name for his honorable Posterities sake shall be passed
by) coming into her presence, the Queen willed him to confer such a place now
void on one of her Servants whom she commended unto him: Please your Highness
Madam, said the Lord, the disposal hereof pertains to me by virtue of this
white stasse conferred upon me; True said the Queen, yet I never gave you the
office so absolutely, but I still reserved my self of the Quorum; But of the
Quarum Madam replied he, presuming on her favor; hereat the Queen in some
passion snatching the staff out of his hand You shall acknowledge me, said
she, of the Quorum Quarum Quorum, before you have your staff again.

Wood of Kent.
NIcholas Wood (I cannot but observe him as a living jest and merriment of the
times, though the greatest grief and sorrow to himself imaginable through his
Caninus Appetitus or doggish appetite) he was a Landed Man and true Labourer,
he would eat provision for twenty men at a meal, a whole Hogg at a sitting and
at another time thirty dozen of Pigeons; this by the modern trenchermen, is
called playing at a bit, and so is rancked here in that Topic,

Bishop Bancroft.
THIS excellent Prelate was very much abused by virulent tongues and pens of
the Puritan party, being he that managed the Conference at Hampton Court so
learnedly and acutely; so that as Mithridates their venomous tongues became
food to him. Once a Gentleman coming to visit him presented him a libell (lie
because false) bell because loud) which he found posted on his door, who
nothing moved hereat, Cast it said he to an hundred more which lie here upon a
heap in my Chamber.

A Pike.
IT is known of what voracity Pikes are, being called the Tyrants of Rivers:
Once a Cub-Fox drinking out of the river Arnus in Italy had his head seized on
by a mighty Pike, so that neither could free themselves but were ingrapled
together, in this contest a young man runs to the water takes them both out
alive and carries them to the Duke of Florence, whose Palace was near
thereunto. The Porter would not admit him without promising of sharing his full
half in what the Duke should give him, To which he hopeless otherwise of
Entrance condescended, The Duke highly effected with the rarity was on giving
him a good reward which the other refused, desiring his Highness would appoint
one of his guard to give him a hundred Lashes that so the Porter might have
fifty, according to his Composition.

Apes.
THere is a sort of Apes in India caught by the Natives thereof in this manner,
they dress a little boy in his sight and undresse him again leaving all the
Child's aparell behind them and then depart a convenient distance: The Ape
presently atyreth himself in the same garments till the Child's clothes become
his chains, putting of his feet by putting on his Shoos, as most of our
Gallants do, for French fashions leaving the old English manners.

Lord William Cecill.
HE was Secretary and Lord Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth for about 30. years
together Ancestor of the Earl of Exeter, being Moderator Auleae steering the
Court at his pleasure, and whilst the Earl of Leicester would endure no
equal, and Sussex no Superior therein, he by sideing with neither served
himself with both. Incredible was the kindness which Queen Elizabeth had for
him, or rather for her self in him, being sensible that he was so able a
Minister of State: coming once to visit him, being sick of the Gourt at Burley
house in the Strand, and being much heightened with her head attire, (then in
fashion) the Lords servant who conducted her through the door, May your
Highness said he be pleased to stoop; the Queen returned, For your Masters
sake I will stoop, but not for the King of Spain.

Sutton the Founder of that Hospital.
HE got his Estate by being Paymaster at Berwick under the Queen, and by being
thrifty and frugall in that employment, and then turned merchant. He had a
merchant his Comrade, with whom he had Company in common, but their charges
were several to themselves; when his friend in travel called for two Fagots Mr
Sutton called for one, when his friend called for half a Pint of Wine Mr
Sutton for a Gill, underspending him a moiety: at last Mr Sutton hearing of his
Friends Death and that he left but fifty thousand pounds Estate, I thought
(said he) he would die no rich Man who made such needless Expenses.

The Kings Champion.
SIr Robert Dimock being by inheritance the Kings Champion at the Coronation of
Henry the 7. came on Horseback into Westminster Hall where the King according
to custom dined and casting his Gauntlet on the ground challenged any who
durst question the Kings right to the Crown. King Henry being pleased to
dissemble himself a stranger to that Ceremony, demanded of a stander-by what
that Knight said, to whom the party returned, He challenges any man to fight
with him who dares deny your Highness to be the lawful King of England. If he
will not fight with such a one, said the King, I will.

Sir Thomas Gresham.
OSterley House was built by Sir Thomas Gresham (now it is Sir William Wallers
where Sir Thomas entertained Queen Elizabeth. Being there Her Majesty found
fault with the Court of the House as too great, affirming that it would appear
more handsome if divided with a wall in the middle: What does Sir Thomas but in
the night time sends for workmen from London who so silently and speedily
followed their work that the next morning discovered that Court double which
the night had left single before: the Queen was very well pleased, while a
Courtier disported her with this quibble, that it was no wonder he could so
soon change a building who could build a Change.

Disputation.
AT an extraordinary Act of Divinity kept at Cambridge before King James, when
Dr. John Davenant was Answerer, and Dr. Richardson amongst others the Oposer;
the Question was maintained in the Negative, concerning the excommunication of
Kings; Dr. Richardson vigorously pressed the practice of St. Ambrose
excommunicating the Emperor Theodosius, insomuch that the King in some passion
returned, Truly it was most insolently done by St. Ambrose; to whom Dr.
Richardson replied, This is a Majestic answer, and befitting Alexander; this
is not to untie but cut the argument.

Sir John Cuts.
SIR John Cuts of Cambridg-shire was a most bountiful housekeeper as any of
his estate, insomuch that Queen Elizabeth in the beginning of her Reign
(whilst yet she had peace with Spain) the sickness being at London, ordered
the Spanish Ambassador to this Knights house; the Ambassador coming thither
and understanding his name to be John Cuts, conceived himself disparaged to be
sent to one of so short a name, the Spanish Gentlemen generally having
voluminous names helped and stuffed out with Titles, usually adding the place of
their habitation for the elongation thereof. But soon after that the Don found
that what the Knight lacked in length of name, he made up in the largnesse of
his entertainment.

The Countess of Shrewsbury.
MAry Queen of Scots, Mother of King James, being committed to the keeping of
George Earl of Shrewsbury, who had married a Lady of a notable, pregnant and
undaunted spirit, the custody of so great a Princess on the Earls cost, was
quickly by her found to be chargeable, and which was worse dangerous, the
Papists of the kingdom daily practicing her enlargement; it happened this
Countess coming to the Court, Queen Elizabeth demanded of her how the Queen of
Scots did, Madam said she, she cannot do ill while she is with my Husband, and
I begin to grow jealous they are so great together. Whereupon the Queen who
liked not any familiarity of that royal Prisoner with so great and potent a
Peer, ordered her removal thence into the custody of others.

Sir Arthur Chichester.
SIR Arthur Chichester once Lord Deputy of Ireland, being recalled thence, was
sent Ambassador to the Emperor by King James, about that labor in vain of the
Palatinate, returning thence the place where he was, the City of Maynchin, was
besieged by Count Tilly the Emperor's General, to whom my Lord Chichester sent
word that it was against the Law of Nations to besiege an Ambassador, Tilly
replied, That he took no notice he was an Ambassador, the other rejoyned by the
Messenger, Had my Master sent me with as many hundred men as he has sent me on
fruitless messages hither, your General should have known that I had been as
well a Soldier as an Ambassador.

Thomas Stukely.
THomas Stukely the famous Glorioso was a younger Brother of an ancient,
wealthy and worshipful Family near Ilfracombe in the County of Devon, having
prodigally misspent his Patrimony, he entered on several projects, which centred
in a design and persuasion of his being a Prince. In this he was so confident,
that be blushed not to tell Queen Elizabeth that he preferred rather to he
Sovereign of a Molehill, then to be the highest Subject to the greatest King
in Christendom, adding moreover, that he was assured he should be a Prince
before his death. I hope (said Queen Elizabeth) I shall hear from you when you
are stated in your principality, I will write unto you quoth Stukely, In what
language said the Queen? He returned in the style of Princes, To our dear
Sister.

Earl of Oxford.
HEnry Vere the seventeenth of that name Earl of Oxford, and the last Lord
Chamberlain of England of his Family, whose sturdy nature would not bow to
Court Complements, but maintain what he spoke, came one day to the Court with a
great milk white Feather about his Hat, which was then somewhat unusual, save
that a person of his merit might make a fashion; a Lord an Enemy to his Family,
and one whose ancestors were blemished, said in a way of jeer to him, My Lord
you wear a very fair Feather; It is true, said the Earl, and if you mark it,
there is never a Taint in it. Indeed that Noble Family deserve their Motto, Vero
nil verius.

A Bite.
TWO Gentlemen's Servants falling out, one belonging to a Courtier of great
place, another to a Country Esquire, fell at last to vye the nobleness of
their Masters and their superiority; says the one, My master spends more in
Mustard then thine in Beef, whereunto the other returned, The more saucy men
his Followers.

Mr. Richard Hackluit.
Mr. Richard Hackluit a very memorable person, who writ that book of the
English Voyages so useful for all Seamen, for which he deserves well of this
Nation; dying, left a very fair Estate to an unthrift Son, who embezilled it
all away in a shamlesse manner, vanting that be had cheated the covetous Usurer
who had given him spick and span new money for the old land of his great great
Grandfather.

Beggars Bush.
THere is a place called Beggars Bush in Huntingtonshire grown into a Proverb,
This is the way to Beggars Bush; it happened that King James being in progress
in those parts with Sir Francis Bacon the Lord Chancellor, having heard that
morning that my Lord had prodigiously rewarded a mean man for a small present,
Sir Francis, said he, You will quickly come to Beggars Bush, and I may even go
along with you if both be so bountiful.

Name.
ONE immoderately boasted that there was not any of his name in all England,
and yet he was a Gentleman; to whom one in the company returned, I am sorry
Sir you have never a good man of your name.

Sir Walter Rawleigh.
SIR Walter Rawleighs first admittance to Queen Elizabeth's favor, was from
this occasion; he was one day at Court, after his coming out of Ireland, in a
very good habit (his clothes were then a considerable part of his Estate) and
there found the Queen walking, till meeting with a plashy place, the Queen
scrupled to go therein; presently Rawleigh cast and spread his new Plush Cloak
on the ground, whereon the Queen trod gently, rewarding him afterward with
many suits for so free a tender of so fair a foot cloth; after he had attained
her open favor he found many enemies (which worth never wants at Court)
besides cowardly detractions, of whom Sir Walter was wont to say, If any man
accuses me to my face I will answer him with my mouth, but my tail is good
enough to return an answer to such who traduce me behind my back.

An Italian Humor.
LET him that will be happy for a day go to the barber, for a week marry a
wife, for a month buy him a new horse, for a year build him a new house, for
all his life time be an honest man.

Law Suit.
A Lady would traverse a Suit of Law against the will of her husband who was
contended to buy his quiet (I forbear the names both of them and the judge
because so lately done and it becomes not the persons) by giving her her will
therein though otherwise persuaded in his conscience the cause would go
against her.

The Lady dwelling in the shire Town invited the judge to dinner (and though
thrifty enough of her self) treated him with very sumptuous entertainment.
Dinner being done the judge returned to the bench where the cause being called,
the judge gave it clearly against her. And when afterward in passion she
vowed never to invite judge again: Nay wife said he vow never to invite a just
judge any more.

Sir Francis Cheyney.
SIr Francis Cheyney made by Queen Elizabeth Baron of Tuddington in
Bedfordshire of a very ancient noble family and as great and larg demesnes and
Patrimony, was in his youth very wild and venturous, so that on a time he
played at dice in his travels in the quality of an English Peer with Henry the
second of France, from whom he won a Diamond of great worth at a cast;
whereupon being demanded by the King what shift he would have made to repair
himself in case he had lost the cast: I have replied my Lord, in an
hyperbolicall bravery, Sheeps Tails enough in Kent with their wool to buy a
better Diamond then this.

Earl of Carnarvon.
THe Earl of Carnarvon who so valiantly and resolutly witnessed his Loyalty in
several fights for King Cbarles the first of blessed memory who gave him his
Honor, was mortally wounded at the first Battle of Newbery: in his agony of
death, he was desired by a Lord to acquaint him what suit he would have to his
Majesty in his behalf, the said Lord promising to discharge his trust in
presenting his request and assuring him that his Majesty would be willing to
gratify his desire to the utmost of his power. To whom the Earl replied, I
will not dye with any suit in my mouth to any King save to the King of Heaven.

Ship Money.
THe beginning of our late unnatural broils, was among other causes inputed
chiefly to the imposition of Ship Money, for which Mr Hambden was condemned in
the Exchequer in a penal Sum by the consent of ten of the judges, who gave
their opinion that that Tax was legal, only Judge Hutton and Judge Crook
declared against it, so that a stop was put to the levying of it, whereupon a
Countryman no friend to the prerogative said wittily. The King may get
Ship Money by Hook but not by Crook. but since that time other Taxes ten times
heavyer have been taken from us by Hook and Crook together.

Coat of Arms.
IT is the rule general in Arms that the playner the ancienter, and so
consequently the more Honorable, to this purpose a memorable Gentleman, the
beginning of whose Gentry might easily be remembered for its late rise, was
mocking at the plain coat of an ancient Esquire, to whom the Esquire returned I
must be fain to wear the Coat which my Great, great, great, great, grandfather
left me. But had I had the happyness to have bought one as you did, it should
have been guarded after the newest Fashion.

Extraction.
IT happened in the reign of King James, when Henry Earl of Huntington was
Lord Lieutenant of Leicestershire, that a Laborers son in that County was
pressed into the Wars being to go over with Count Mansfeild into Germany. The
old man at Leicester requested his Son might be discharged as being the only
staff of his age who by his industry maintained him and his mother. The Earl
demanded his name, which the man for a long time was loath to tell (as
suspecting it a fault for a poor man to confess so proud a truth) at last he
told his name was Hastings, Cosen Hastings said the Earl we cannot all be top
branches of the same Tree though we all spring from the same Root. your Son my
Kinsman shall not be pressed.

Complement.
A Gentleman a Courtier and who had potent recommendations from King James to a
Lady of Quality and Honor, to set off his Suit with the greatest splendour,
came always attended with a large retinue, one whereof was to be near his
Person, now they were only hired for that day and so dismissed at night when he
came from his wooing. This was observed by the Lady. One night therefore taing
leave of her at the stayre foot where his man attended him he proffered to
salute her as the goodnight civility, to which Spare your Complement said she
for probably I shall shortly see you again, but let me I pray you salute your
servant whom I shall never see again.

King James.
KING James first coined his 22. shillings piece of Gold called Jacobusses
where on his head he wore a Crown, after that he coined his 20. shillings and
wore the Laurel in stead of the Crown, upon which mutation Ben. Johnson said
pleasantly. That Poets being always poor Bays were rather the Emblem of Wit
then wealth since King James no sooner began to wear them, but he fell two
shillings in the pound in public valuation.

Bishops.
SOon after those tumults and clamours at Westminster when thereby Bishops were
outed illegally from their places in the House of Lords, the assembly then
sitting at the Deanes House of Westminster, a reverend Bishop dyed, and was
buried (as otherwise it could not be obtained) by Mr Herle the President of
that Assembly, who the next day meeting with a friend of his of the Episcopal
persuasion, said unto him somewhat insultingly, last night I buried a Bishop,
dashing more at his profession then person, to whom the other returned with a
like latitude to both, sure you buried him in hop of Resurrection. And this as
to the sacred Function and order we see performed.

Goats.
IT is known that Goats are the principal brood of Wales and of great bigness
and are the best food where sheep cannot be had: during the restraint of Queen
Elizabeth by her Sister Queen Mary in the Custody of Sir Henry Benefeild, so
that none were admitted access unto her, a Goat was espied by a merry fellow
(one of her Warders) to be walking alone with her, where upon taking the goat
on his shoulders he in all have hurried him to Sir Harry. I pray (said he)
examine this fellow whom I found walking with her Grace, but what talk they
had I know not, not understanding his Language, he seems to me a stranger, and
I believe a Welchman by his freize Coat.

Another.
THomas ap William, ap Thomas, ap Richard, ap Howell, ap Evan, ap Vaughan, etc.
Esquire being born of Worshipful parentage at Moston in this County was
empannelled of a Jury by the aforesaid Names in the reign of King Henry the
Eight, whereupon by the advice of the Judge his name was contracted (he
consenting to it) into Moston the place of his Nativity and ancient
Inheritance. This leading case was a precedent to the practice of other Gentrey
in Wales who leaving their Pedigrees at Home carry only one Surname abroad
with them, whereby much time especially in winter, when the days are short, is
gained for better employment.

Bishop of Gloucester.
DOctor Goodman Bishop Gloucester in the reign of King Charles the first when
he dyed declared himself by his will a Roman Catholic, an intimation whereof
he gave at the convocation in 1640. where he refused to subscribe the Canons
and was therefore and for other Erroneous opinions inprisoned by his Brother
Prelates; was wont to say, complaining of our first Reformers, that Bishop
Ridley was a very odd Man, to whom one presently returned; He was indeed an odd
Man my Lord, for all the Popish party in England could not match him with his
equal in learning and Religion.

The Kings Porter.
WIlliam Evans Porter to King Charles the first was a Welchman of Monmouthshire
and may justly be accounted a Giant for his stature, being full 2. yards and a
half in height. He succeeded Walter Parsons, (who would take two of the
biggest of the Guard under each arm as a liver and gizard and so carry them)
and exceeded him 2. inches in Height, but far beneath him in an equal
proportion of body, for he was not only what the Latins call Compernis,
knocking his knees together and going out squalling with his feet, but also
bandylegd a little, yet he made a shift to dance at an Antimasque in Court,
where he drew little Jeffery out of his pocket, first to the wonder then to the
laughter of the Beholders.

Parson Bull.
UPON the happy and most auspicious restoration of our Sovereign to his
Kingdoms one Parson Bull a Minister, who had as loyally as learnedly
maintained and asserted his Majesty's cause, had a benefice of some value
conferred on him by the Kings gift, but before his Patent could be sealed, the
Lord Chancellor upon some presentation had disposed it, or some way it
happened that he was hindered so that the Parson had spent all his money in
town in attending of it; One day therefore seeing his money grew short he put
his hand in his pocket and finding nothing there but the Kings Grant with his
hand to it, he went confidently to his Majesty and told Him that he had lost
all the money, out of his pocket and found none but his Majesty's hand therein;
at which the King smiled and asked him if his business was not dispatched, he
replied no, Thereupon he was expressly recommended to the Chancellor for
expedition of his Patent who at his address understanding him to be a wit,
said unto him, pray what is your name; Bull said the Parson, where are then your
Horns said my Lord? if it please your Lordship replied he, the Horns always
go with the Hide.

Lord Goring.
GEorge Earl of Norwich Lord Goring being sentenced by the High Court of
justice, for that same crime of Loyalty with the ever Honorable Lord Capell
for their most noble defense of the Town Colchester in 1648. was at the point
of death by the potent intercession of the Spanish Ambassador reprieved from
Execution which Duke Hambleton Earl of Holland and Lord Capell deplorably
suffered. This Earl being visited after this reprieve and asked, how he did?
answered I had thought to have pulled off my Doublet, but now I have leisure to
Hook up my Breeches.

A Gentleman.
A Gentleman coming to Court, as he was lighting out of his Coach, asked a Page
or Lacquy that retained to some Person therein, very hastily what a Clock it
was? to whom the lad said, Sir what will you give me then. The Gentleman
wondering at the boy asked him what he meant by it. Sir (says he) I would not
have you mistake your self. We Courtiers do nothing without money.

Sir Henry Martin.
SIR Henry Martin Father to the unfortunate Harry Martin (a criminal in the
horrid murder of the King) was a very fine Gentleman, and a very learned
Person. By King James he was worthily advanced in the sphere of his study the
civil Laws, wherein he was very eminent, to be Judge of the Prerogative for
Probate of Wills, and also of the admiralty in Cases concerning foreign
traffic, so that as King James used to say pleasantly, That he (Sir Henry)
was a mighty Monarch in his jurisdiction over Land and Sea, the living and the
dead.

Boots.
WHen Doctor John Gostin was last Vice Chancellor of Cambridge being Master of
Caius College and an excellent Physician, it was highly penal for any Scholar
to appear in Boots, it being not thought civil. Now a Scholar undertook for a
small wager much beneath the penalty to address himself booted to the vice
Chancellor, which was thought a dangerous presumption, so carrying an Urinal in
his hand, he craved his advice for a cure of an hereditary numnesse in his
Legs, which he was fain to keep thus warm. The Doctor pittyed him, and dismissed
him with a remedy to boot with his wager.

Sir Gilbert Talbot.
SIR Gilbert Talbot being made Governor of Calis by King Henry the eight upon
some advice or suspicion that the French had some sudden design upon the place
by surprisal, was commanded peremptorily that presently and carefully he should
look to his charge and fortify the Town, to whom sir Gilbert replied, (being
unprovided of necessaries) as briefly as bluntly, That without money he could
neither fortify nor fiftify.

Sir Robert Naunton.
ONE Master Wiemark a wealthy Man, a great Newes-monger, and constant Paul's
walker, hearing the news that day of the beheading of Sir Walter Rawleigh, His
head (said he) would do very well on the shoulders of Sir Robert Naunton then
Secretary of State to King James; These words were complained of, and Wiemark
summoned to the Privy Council, where he pleaded for himself, that he intended
no disrespect to Master Secretary, whose known worth was above all detraction.
Only he spoke in reference to an old proverb, Two heads are better then one.
And so for the present he was dismissed. Not long after when rich men were
called on for a Contribution for St. Paul's, Wiemark at the Council Table
subscribed a hundred pound, when Mr Secretary told Him two Hundred was better
then one, which betwixt Fear and Charity Wiemark was fain to subscribe.

A Learned Maid.
A Certain learned Maid being presented to King James as a mirror of her Sex,
for her skill in Languages, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, besides the French, etc.
which she could perfectly write and speak. The King without any wonderment,
asked of her introducers, if she could spin? and some waggish Courtiers
answered, If it please your Majesty, she is at age to choose what occupation she
pleases.

Bishoprics.
JOHN WATSON Deane of Winchester, being informed that the Bishopric thereof
being vacant would be confered on him, came to the Earl of Leicester the great
Favorite, and privately promised him two hundred pounds that he might not be
made Bishop of Winchester but remain in his present Condition. The Bishopric
being void and the Queen expressing her intention to confer it on Watson, the
said Earl requested the Contrary, and would have used arguments against his
Nomination, but that not serving he was forced to tell the Queen that he had
promised two hundred pounds to him to keep him from that dignity, and it would
be so much out of his way. Nay then said the Queen Watson shall have it, he
being more worthy to have it who will give two hundred pounds to decline it
then he that will give 2000 P. to attain it.

Marston Moor.
ON that fatal day to the Royal cause, the Lord Goring in the beginning of the
Battle, which was about 3. a Clock in the afternoon July 2. 1644, having with
great valor and courage routed the left wing of the Parliament Army, wherein
the Scots were placed under Lashley their General, who upon the rout fled a
Yorkshire mile and weabit, the lord Diddup a Scotch Baron lately made therein
happened to be killed; when the account of the battle was given to the king he
came to be mentioned, as a balance to my Lord Carry eldest son of the Earl of
Monmouth slain on the Kings side. At the naming of which Scotch Lord his
Majesty said That he hardly remembered that he had such a Lord in Scotland, to
which one returned That the Lord had wholly forgotten that he had such a King
in England.

Wales.
A Right worshipful Knight in Wales who had a fair Estate therein, his rents
arising from much barren ground, heard an Englishman, perhaps out of much
opposition, to brag, that he had in England so much ground worth forty
shillings an Acre, you said he have ten yardes of Velvet, and I have tenscore
yardes of Freize, I will not Exchange with you.

A Welsh Gentleman.
KING James riding late home from Theobalds to Whitehall, it happened that in
the mid way it fell a raining very hard, whereupon the King who before kept a
due pace befitting his Majesty, commanded his retinue and the Gentlemen near
Him to put on and make what speed they could. Among the rest there was present
a Welchman a retainer to the Earl of Pembroke, but newly admitted to some
Office and attendance on him, who by the trick or slighting of the Groom had a
very ill Horse put upon him. As Soon as the word was given, from the King the
Train flew with swiftness and the King with them: The Welchman he spurred and
fluttered with his legs to keep pace with him and with much busle headed the
party near the Kings Person where he fell a belabouring his Horse as if he were
mad, the King hearing the stir he made, demanded who it was and what was the
matter, who replied, an't please Her Majesty Her is as good a Shentleman as the
best of them, but Her Cattle cannot travel so fast.

Lord Bacon.
A Parliament being called in the year 1621. Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor was
outed his office for bribery, the frequent receiving whereof by him or his was
plainly proved, yet for all this his taking just and unjust he was exceeding
poor and much indebted, wherefore when motion was made in the House of Commons
of fineing him some thousand of pounds, Sir F. S. a noble Member standing up
desired that for two reasons his Fine might be mitigated into forty shillings,
First because that would be paid, whereas a greater sum would only make a
noise and never be paid, secondly the shame would be the greater, when such
his prodigality, that he who had been so large a taker in offices was reduced
to such penury that forty shillings should be conceived a sufficient Fine for
his Estate. So that what he got by the trials at Bar as Attorney, he lost by
the trials at Bar as Chancellor.

Another.
THE same Sir Francis having once invited Queen Elizabeth to his Manor of
Gorhambury a pleasant seat, now in the possession of the Honorable Sir
Harbotle Grimston Master of the Rolls; the Queen was much taken with the
situation, contrivance and beauty of the Fabric, but as her constant custom
was to be a Critic in Architecture, told Sir Francis that the House had but
one fault, it was too little, to which Sir Francis replied Madam that is not
the Houses fault, but yours who have made me the Master too great for it.

K. Hen. 8.
KING Henry being a hunting came to the Abbot of Readings House to dinner (to
whom soon after he had little or rather a big stomach) and found a Surloine of
Beef, then so named by the King ready for dinner the Abbot not knowing who he
was, not guessing it by his small retinue, bid him welcome and set the Beef
before him, On which the King fed heartily, while the Abbot, no niggard or
unhospitable Priest merryly smild to see him lay no so, saying in a jest Sir I
would give a hundred pounds I had as good a stomach, and could feed so, but my
appetite is quite lost: say you so thought the King, and having thankt the
Abbot departed; A week after he sends a Pursivant to bring the Abbot up to the
Council Table, by whom without further examination he was committed to the
Tower where the King had given express order that he should be kept with a
very spare diet, and no releife admitted besides; this diet soon brought up the
Gentleman's stomach, so that he could be glad to have had a suffolk cheese and
a twelfpeny loaf set before him: being in this way to his cure, the King
appointed a Surloine to be made ready, and came and dined with him, where the
Abbot taking him for a friendly visitant upon the mending of his commons fed
lustily. Lo says the King am not I a good Doctor, your Physic shall cost you
but 50. pounds for your Fees, the other half you shall keep, and if ever you
fall into the same disease, pray send for me. And so gave him his liberty.

Evesham Bridge.
DUring our late unnatural War, this Evesham was made a Garrison by the King,
and Colonel William Leg Governor thereof, stormed afterward by Colonel
Massey with much bravery and as well maintained. It happened in that Town one
of the Garrison Horsemen going over the Bridge while the Town was in a hurry,
his Horse startled, took a freake, and leapt with his rider from off the Bridge
into the River, being a dangerous fall, but coming plump down Horse and Man
over head and ears, swom out safely to the shore. The Gentleman spurs him up,
and brings him to the same place of the Bridge again. Quoth he you did it with
a vengance before for your own pleasure, you shall leap it again now for mine,
and so spurd him over, and it pleased God they both came safe out again to the
astonishment of the spectators.

Organs.
A Gentleman would needs invite a Lady to see the order and beauty of the Kings
Chapel, and one day waited upon her thither: just as they came to the Door to
enter, the Organs went, he takes her in his hand to press through, no indeed
Sir, says she, (holding back) I pray excuse me, I do assure you I cannot dance.

Queen Mary.
GReat hopes there were by the Papists that Queen Mary was with Child, nor did
she think other of her self, so that by Whitsontide it was expected she should
be brought a bed; many Processions and set prayers to the purpose were used,
and a solemn thanksgiving for her inpregnation: the time of her delivery thus
Calculated, near thereabouts a Rumor was presently spread, that the Queen was
delivered of a hopeful Prince, whereupon many bonfires were made in London
with ringing of Bells and such like expressions of joy, and the like
solemnities were used soon after by the English at Antwerp. In all which as
there seemed a spice of madness, yet none was altogether so wild as the Curate
of St Anns near Aldersgate, who took upon him after the end of the procession
to describe the proportion of the Child, how fair how beautyfull and a great
Prince it was, adding The like whereof had never been seen.

Disputation.
AT the disputation at Oxford in Q. Mary's Times between the Papists and Doctor
Arch Bishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley and Latimer, then disputing for their lives,
Doctor Weston the Prolocutor opened the business in hand with this preface (you
must know that Transubstantiation was the thing to be maintained by the
Romanists) ye are assembled hither brethren this day to confound that
detestable Heresy of the verity of the body of Christ in the Sacrament: this
occasioned no small shame in some, more laughter in others which was heightened
by as bad a solecisme in his behavior, for during the whole time of the
coutroversy he had always a cup of Wine or other good liquor standing by him:
when a cogent argument for their side which he well liked was urged, having the
cup in his hand he cried out, follow this, insist upon this, this makes for us,
which was spoken too, in as bad Latin as manners.

Lord Hunsdon.
SIR Henry Carry of whom before was a great favorite of Queen Elizabeth's, and
who did her good service, of which she was no heedlesse regarder in any of her
subjects: It is reported of him as chief part of his Character that his Latin
and his dissimulation and Courtship were alike false. He was designed Earl of
Wilishire but the Queen for some reasons delayed the investiture: falling
dangerously sick, to comfort and revive him she then caused the Earls robes
and the Patent to be brought to his bed side and there would have created him:
No Madam said the stout Lord, you thought me not worthy of them while I was
living, and I think my self unworthy of them, now I am a dying.

King Philip.
CHarles the 5. having resigned all his hereditary Crowns and Dominions except
the Empire of Germany to King Philip the second his son, who was by the
marriage with Queen Mary the potent'st Prince in Europe, betook himself to a
retired life in the Monastery of St Justus, having then scarce attained to the
55. year of his life to the great admiration of all the World. After which act
he found himself so abandoned by all his followers, that sitting up late at
night in conference with Seldius his Brothers Ambassador, he had not a servant
within call to light the Gentlemen down stayres, whereupon the Emperor took
the candle into his own hands, and would needs in his own person perform that
office, and having brought him to the top of the stayres, said unto him,
Remember Seldius that thou have known the Emperor Charles whom thou have seen
in the head of so many Armies reduced to so low a state as to perform the
office of an ordinary servant to his Brothers Minster.

Term.
IN the 5. of Queen Mary 1558, there was such a thin Term that there was but
one Lawyer in the Kings Bench Mr Foster, and one Sergeant Mr Bouloise at the
Common Pleas, both having little more to do then to look about them, and the
Judges not more to do then the Lawyers had; who in the quiet times were much
increased, as may be gathered from the words of Heiwood the old Epigrammatist,
and one much made of by this Queen, who being told of the great number of them,
and that the multitude of them would impoverish the whole profession, made
answer, No; for that always the more Spaniels there were in the field, the
more was the Game.

Stumps the Clothier.
KIng Henry the Eight hunting near Malmsborough in the County of Wiltshire
(where this Tho. Stumps dwelt) in Bredon Forest came with all his Court Train
unexpected to this Clothier, being a Man of great wealth and the greatest Trade
of clothing in England. But great Housekeepers are as seldom surprised with
guests as vigilant Captains with enemies; for Stumps hearing thereof, commands
his little Army of Workmen, which he fed daily in his House, to fast one meal
until night, (which they might easily do without endangering their health) and
with the same provision gave the King and his Court Train, (though not so
delicious and various) most wholesome and plentiful entertainment.

Sir Thomas Wyat.
SIR Thomas Wyat engaging in that Rebellion of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk,
against Queen Mary upon pretense of her matching with a foreign Popish Prince,
being suspected thereof by the Queen was warned from her, by a Herald at Arms
sent to him, to desist from further intelligence or commotion in that business
on his allegiance, and the penalties of Treason and Rebellion.

The Herald coming to Sir Thomas his House in Kent with his Coat Armor on his
back, found it to be moated round, and the draw Bridge drawn up; whereupon
espying a Man walking on the other side, he called to him; told him the have of
his business, and enquiring whether there was no passing over, nor shallowes
in the place: The Man replied yes, he might go over there; The Herald
attempting it, was souced over head and ears, and his life endangered, but
recovering the bank he alighted from his Horse, and with great fury and anger
came storming into the House (missing of his guide) and complained of the
affront done him, and more to his Mistress the Queen who sent him. Sir Thomas
hearing of it protested his ignorance and innocence, declaring that whosoever
he should name of his servants that did it should suffer what punishment he
would inflict: All of them being then called before him, he espied the fellow,
that is a Madman said Sir Thomas, sirrah said the Herald, why did you serve me
so? did not you tell me I might pass well enough over the Moat; yea, said the
other, for but just before you our Ducks that have shorter feet then your Horse
passed to and fro without any danger.

King Henry the Eight.
KIng Henry the Eight, when he dissolved the Monasteries and Abbeys and other
religious Houses, had a Parliament chosen for his purpose, the old Men out of
tenaciousnesse to the old Religion and Clergy declining their Election, in
whose rooms a great many young Men who had their Religion to learn from their
profit and advancement, were substituted in their places who carried the vote
of the Country. These Men did the Kings business and devolved all those great
possessions and revenues of the Church into his hands: some discourse being
muttered about the rawnesse of such Counselors, and it being told the King by
some of his privado's what the people said of them, viz. That the House of
Commons had few or no Beards. No matter, said the King, they shall sit there
while they have.

King James a Hunting.
KING James with some of his Nobles having lost their way in a Forest in the
persuit of a Deer, came at last a hungry to the side of the same Forest where
they espied a little House; thither hyed the King and demanded first what
victuals in the House, then with some comfortable leisure the way; the good
wife sets before the King a good piece of powdered Beef and a bag pudding, the
King and his Followers fell to eat heartily, and having contented his hostess
rid away: by the road side at some distance, a boy presents himself scraping
with his legs, bareheaded, whereon was a thick scald: sirrah said the Lords,
cover your head, have you never a cap? where do you dwell? In yonder cottage
an't please you, (pointing to the place where the King dined) I had a Cap
yesterday, but to day my mother made use of it for a pudding bag; Quoth the
King it did me no harm in the eating, it shall do me less in thinking of it;
come put on, and let us jog it down, but it stirred the stomachs of his Train.

Sir Henry Rush.
SIR Henry Rush in Queen Elizabeth's time had by his great expenses very much
impaired his estate almost to the annihilation of it, He had a Son grown to
years and discretion, who seeing how the World went with his Father, applied
himself close to the study of the Law, and became a very contemplative kind of
Person much different from the temper of his Father, who coming one day to him
with some company, said to his Son after some words which he heeded not, what:
you are musing now, and building Castles in the Air? Indeed replied the Son, I
must build them there or no where, for you have not left me a foot of Land to
do it upon.

A Voyage.
THE Cardinal of Lorrain in the time of Queen Mary being to pass from
Marseilles to Genoa in order to his Embassy to Rome, took Bruschet the King of
France his fool along with him; as they came to be embarked Bruschet refused,
objecting the danger, replied the Cardinal I have our Holy Fathers benediction
in this passage, Oh quoth the fool I have heard the Pope had power in Heaven
Earth and Purgatory, but I never heard the sea of Rome could command the Sea.

Hispaniola.
UPon the design of Hispaniola in a secret Counsel held by Oliver Cromwell,
much debate there was upon the attempt of entrance, (as it afterward happened
betwixt the Generals Venables and Pen in the iustant of Landing on the place)
in the midst of the dispute up stood Coll. Skippon says he we are differing in
opinions how we shall get in, but here is no discourse how we shall get out.

Cardinal Wolsey.
Cardinal Wolsey was building himself a very costly and magnificent Monument
or Sepulcher, to which often resorting to see how the work went forward a
fellow under the notion of a fool, standing by, my Lord said be you need not
care how slowly it proceeds, for if you would use and occupy this grave you
must enter in it alive for it shall never entertain you when dead.

Ambition.
GReat men's haughty enterprises are well castigated and reproved by a moral of
a natural who being of the scullery to King James, and employed to bring the
wood into the kitchen, did usually pull out the lowermost billets from under
the load of great stacks, and being asked on a time by my Lord of Dorset, (who
by chance espied him a tugging of them out,) the reason thereof, be answered,
he did the difficultest work first, without climbing: quoth my Lord, This is a
way to spoil a Courtier.

A Moral.
SOme Fools together by a river side put their legs into the water, when they
had continued some time they knew not distinctly their own, none offering to
draw them out while they were assured: in the interim comes a man and seeing
them in this doubt gave them such a bange about the middle of their legs, that
they presently fetched them out, being taught by the smart to know them.
Applyable to Tyrants who in the stream of Prosperity mistake themselves, till
judgment and calamity strikes and overthrowes them.

Sir Thomas Roe.
SIR Thomas Roe sent Ambassador to the Grand Seigniour by King James, at his
Audience by the Prime Vizier, was forced to stand, through want of a seat,
after his business was delivered. Whereupon having a Robe or Vest about him of
value he threw it down and upon that seated himself, and after a little pause
rose up, and left it: being asked the reason of it by the Vizier, he said that
it was dishonorable for his Masters Ambassador either to bring or carry
stools from that Court.

A Polish Ambassador.
A Polish Ambassador was sent to Ferdinand the second Emperor of Germany, and
as the use and Custom of that Nation generally is to speak Latin, delivered
his business at a private conference in that language, the Emperor likewise
answered him in the same, but broke Priscians Head a little. That the
Ambassador caught at and noted to him: the Emperor smiling replied, that he
had forgot he was speaking with a paedagogue, while he supposed him an
Ambassador.

Another.
AT Constantinople betwixt the Ambassadors of the Emperor and the French King
a quarrel arose for precedence in the Church whereat that time the Frank
Christians being all of the same profession had one common Church; the Grand
Seignior hearing of it, commanded a naked Scimiter to be hung at the door of
the said Church, and by his declaration signified, he would not be tied by the
custom of other Princes but whoever spilt blood should answer for it to him.

Another.
AN Embassy was once sent by the States of Holland to King James entrusted to
three persons, one who had been a soldier his forehead was shot slanting away,
another an Advocate so troubled with the Gout that he could scarce stand,
another dull heavy fellow. Marry quoth the King here is an Embassy indeed, that
has neither Head Feet nor Heart.

Sir Jerome Bows.
SIR Jerome Bows was sent Ambassador to Evan Vasilowich the Tyranicall
Emperor of Russia from Queen Elizabeth; it fortuned at his Arrival at Musco he
found an Ambassador there likewise from the French King, who had audience
appointed him the same day before Sir Jerome. The French according to the
Europian Custom in delivering his Errand put his hat on, the Tyrant without
further ado, caused his hat to be lightly nailed to his Head, and with no
other answer dismissed him, soon after comes sir Jerome and uses the same
custom: says the Emperor know thou not what I have caused to be done to
the French Ambassador for the same presumption: yea replied he, but know you
likewise, what ever you think of him or his Master, dare but to touch me, I
serve a Mistress who shall avenge it a hundred fold upon you as sure as your
Cap is made of Furr. The Tyrant taken with this resolute Answer stepped to him
from his Throne and took him in his Arms saying to his great Officers about
him; you Dogs which of you would do so much for me, and at his departure
presented him with a Jewel, and this commendation in his answer and letters to
the Queen, thy slave Jerome Bows have done thee good and faithful service.

Another.
A Spanish Ambassador or Envoy came to the Turkish Court, and being scard, and
wounded in the face was slightly looked on by the Divan, and asked tauntingly by
one of them whether his Master had no person of Honor without such blemishes
to send to their great Lord. To which he replied, enough such my Master has,
but because I wear this wound before not behind am I on purpose sent hither, as
a testimony of the victory we got of you at Lepanto, where you were scared and
cowardly fled, and so escaped from being scard.

A young Maid.
A young handsome Maid belonging to my Lord Stanhop, was in Cherry time sent
by her Lady then in the Country to gather her some Cherries of such a Tree in
the Orchard. A servant of my Lords who infinitely defired the wench, after she
had by a ladder got up the Tree to the top branches, came sneaking under her
thinking to see her pudenda: the modest Maid espying him clapped her coats close
about her, and bid him go off, urging him with the unhandsomeness of the
Action: but the fellow still persisting in his libidinous speculation she
opened her Coats and discharged such a shore of thick and thin upon his face,
that the fellow was almost blind, and fell a rubbing his eyes, so that he could
not find the way to the House while the wench came down and sent him a guide.

A Spanish Captain.
ROderigo de Veles a Spanish Captain who had served Philip the second in
Flanders against the Hollanders with good fame and repute, growing old and not
able to undergo the diligence and extremity of that service retired home to
Spain having obtained his Conge from the Acrchduke Albertus with letters of
acknowledgement. With these upon his coming to Madrid near the Town, he
unexpected and incognito meets the King, who being a hunting thereabouts had
lost his way and his Company. He comes near and seeing him in the habit of a
Gentleman enquires who he was, he replies a Captain, demanded his name tells
it; the King further urges on what occasions he was traveling that way, he
tells him that having faithfully served Don Philip for so many years in the
Low Countries, he came now in his old Age to seek for a Pension, whereon to
live the rest of his life. Quoth the King does his Majesty owe you any
arreares? No said the Captain, why then suppose the King will not grant you a
Pension as he may refuse, why then quoth Roderigo let the King kiss my Mules
tail; well, said the King I belong to the affairs of Flanders, come to morrow
morning when the Counsel of War sets, and I will get you admittance, sending
your name in by the doorkeeper. Accordingly next morning he came and upon
naming himself as the King had before given order, was forthwith brought into
the Counsel, where he presently found it was the King whom he had met before,
Now quoth the King, Seignior Captain, what do you say if the King will not
allow you a Pension. Why Sir said he if he will not, my Mule is ready at the
Court Gate. The King highly taken with the bluntness of the Man gave him in
hand a good sum of Money and a yearly maintanance of 60. Pound per annum.

Margaret Countess of Richmond.
THis Lady was Mother to Henry the 7. descended from John Beaufort Duke of
Somerset, a right noble and pious Lady, witness her foundations in Cambridge
peculiarly that gift of Margaret professor in that university: she was so
addicted to the practice of Religion and a woman of so humble and meek a
spirit, that she would often say that if the Princes of Christendame would
join in one league against the Turks for the recovery of the Holy Land, she
would willingly accompany them and be their Laundresse.

An Astrologer.
ONE by the Stars had foretold that Henry the 7. should that year dye. This
came to the Kings ear. The fellow is Complemented to the Court and brought
before the King who gave him good words and demanded, if from the Stars any
thing could be told and if he had any skill in Prognostication; he answered
yea; then pray tell me said the King where do you think you shall be those Holy
days (Christmas then approaching) here he stuck, and being urged he said he
could not tell, therefore said the King I am skillfuller in this art then your
self, for I know you shall be in the Tower, and presently commanded Him to be
sent thither.

Of an unadvised Statesman.
IN the Corn-Market at Paris is a Grate or opening of the common shore of that
City, where a privy Councellor commanded himself to be buried as an expiation
of some evil Council he had given. The matter this. The French King was heavy
and pensive for want of money. To supply him, he advised him for two years to
lay a Gabell or Impost of two farthings upon some trifles out of the Country
for two years only, which rose to a great sum. When this exigence was over the
King continued the same Tax, nay more by this example were laid upon the
people. He seeing that he could not remedy this evil, not having the same power
in dissuading as he had in counselling, took snuff and dyed, and for a
Monument to all such Counselors, expressly provided in his will that he should
be buried in this Sink near the place where the Toll is paid. His Sepulcher and
the imposition do yet continue.

Henry the Eight.
A Nobleman had killed a certain Person, for which fact some Lords of his
alliance interceded with the King, and procured his pardon; it happened soon
after the same Nobleman slew another man, and again the same Lords came to
interpose, and to prevent other then their own information, did it as soon
almost as the murder was committed. Please your Majesty (says one of them) my
Lord of N. has killed a Man, but we hope -- Hold there said the King, it is not
my Lord has killed the Man, but it is the King has done it in not suffering
the Law to pass upon my Lord for the former murder.

Cardinal VVoolsey.
IT is known how inordinately and ambitiously this Prelate being then Lord
Chancellor affected the Papacy, King Henry knowing the mind of the Man,
resolved to put a trick upon him; he comes therefore on a sudden and tells him
he had received an express by his Ambassador that it was questionless that
Pope Paul was dead but yet kept privately by the Cardinals in Rome, for fear of
his Majesty's prevalence in the next Election. I wish (quoth Woolsey) some
Person were chosen to that Dignity who was well affected to your Majesty's
service. 'Twere well said the King, what if I procured you to be elected, would
your Majesty could said the Cardinal; I but (replied the King) money is
wanting; quoth the Cardinal I have three Tun of Gold by me; Give me that
speedily said the King, I will add the rest of my own, which being done News
came that Pope Paul was alive and live likely.

A Memorable thing.
A Scot at Cassels in Hussia in the year 1610, but of a mean stature, though of
wonderful agility and strength of body, lying flat on his back, having nothing
but his shirt on, sustained a stone of twelve pounds weight on his belly, while
three Smiths with great Iron Sledges broke it all into pieces, without any harm
at all done him: And also at Constantinople another such Person at the
Circumcision of the Grand Seignior, held an Anvile at Arms end of 200. weight,
while two lusty Smiths forged out a Horse-shooe; which done he tossed the Anvil
aloft, and received it again which his arms expanded. He would break a steel
Bow or Horshooe with his hands without any instrument or help whatsoever.

The Cardinal of Lorrain.
TO gratify this Cardinal for his great pains in suppressing the Hugenots in
the reign of King Francis, a messenger was sent him from the Pope with the
picture of the Virgin Mary holding her Son in her hands, drawn by the famous
pencill of Michael Angelo. This, the Messenger falling sick by the way delivers
to a Gentleman of Luca to deliver it withal trust and speed. He having
received some disgust from the Cardinal procures a piece to be drawn in Paris,
of the same bigness wherein to the life were painted the Cardinal, the Queens
niece, the Queen regent, and the Duchess of Guise all naked, their Arms
about one another Necks, and other lascivious postures; with these the Lucese
comes to the Cardinal and with his letters which imparted the kind of the
present delivers it. The Cardinal gladly accepts it: and for the Honor and
more graceful solemnity of this favor invites the Cardinal of Bourbon,
Tournoys and Guise, the Dukes of Guise, and Montpensier to be present after a
sumptuous dinner at the opening of it: where to the confusion and deserved
shame of the Cardinal this obscene piece (hinting at his debauchery) was
produced.

Emperor Maximilian.
THis Prince was very curious and inquisitively critic in his Genealogy and
descent, a Court Parasite to gratify the humor, told him that with some
industry and with his command laid on him, he doubted not to derive him
lineally (mentioning every Generation by Name) from Noah's Arc. This was
listened to, and much time was indulged to this vanity while the sycophant had
pretty well feathered himself by this device, in some time, some progress (or
rather retrogresse as going backward from the top to the root) being made
therein, while most men wondered and silently taxed this vanity but none durst
cross or reprove it, the Emperors Cook who served also as his Jester and
with whose facetious quibbles he was much delighted, took him up one day in
this manner. Sir it is neither Honorable nor profitable for you to enquire so
much after the originals of your family. For now says he, I as other your
subjects do reverence your Majesty and worship it as another deity, but if your
Dignity be once brought to Noah's Arc, we shall all be kinsemen, for from
thence we all Come, then farewell all your Imperial Glory.

King Charles the first.
IT is very certainly reported, that after King Charles the first had signed
the Bill for the trienniall Parliament, and another, whereby he declared he
would not dissolve that present, so terribly known by the name of Long, without
the consent of both Houses themselves, the Earl of Dorset last deceased coming
the next morning into the King Bedchamber as his Majesty was dressing himself,
saluted him with the Complement of good morrow Fellow Subject.

General Monk.
ADmirable and stupendous were those Actions of this renowned General toward
the restitution of his Majesty and the settlement of these Kingdoms after such
a horrid night of Confusions. Great was his vigilance, greater his prudence,
but greatest his reservednesse, without all which, having to do with those that
had Argus's eyes, and the old Serpents insinuations both of discovery and
temptation, it was impossible to humane expectation He could ever have overcome
such insuperable difficulties. It was his great saying and maxim, that if He
thought his shirt knew his thoughts and intentions, he would pull it off and
burn it. That honest privacy is now turned to public glory. But I remember
this passage also from the German Histories to have been usual with George the
valiant and illustrious Duke of Saxony.

Philip Landgrave of Hesse.
HEnry Duke of Brunswick and this Landgrave were at variance and feud; it
happened during the quarrel before any rupture, three Noblemen subjects of the
Duke being drinking hard in the Landgraves Dominions, fell a threatening what
they would do to the Landgrave if they had him there, one would pull him a
pieces with his nails, the second would run him through, another would give
him to be torn by his Dogs: Amidst these menaces, the Inne-keepers Son who was
a Natural, having overheard what they said, steps into their Room, and
sitting down begins his story too. I have perceived (says he) what you could
find in your heart to do against our good Landgrave, and I confess they are
exquisite cruelties, but if you will listen to me, who, if you know me not,
have some understanding too, we will punish the Landgrave, and kill him in this
manner, I will stop his mouth and his nostrils with both hands, so that no
breath shall come in or out, and you with your tongues thrust up his fundament
shall shut up and obstruct that passage also, that no Air break out, which
being done you will have no need to use your nails as you intended unless it
be to scratch your tongues clean. This spoken from one whom they knew to be a
fool, so dashed them, that they sneaked away and departed.

A Friar confessor.
CErtain Maids came to be absolved and confess their sins which they did with
a very low voice, it was a very stern Priest, and he more offended by this low
speaking which might be imputable only to their modesty, taxed them after this
manner. You mumble now and speak through your teeth, not opening your mouth
that scarce a third word is audible; but when you are alone with your young men
at your Wakes and Ale, you will be sure your legs and tail too shall be
stretched wide enough.

A Matron.
A Grave Matron much esteemed for her modesty and civility, reckoned one of the
prime of the women of the Town, as she came into Church through the snow, some
of it stuck to her shoos and gave her such a slip upon the free stones that up
flew her heels and her Coats: being terrified with the suddenness of it, like
the Thatcher falling from the Barn, she rapt out two or three bawdy words such
as were presumed were usual to her, (her tongue and her Coats disclosing her
shame at once) and so rose and made all confused have from her ill intended
devotions.

A Liar.
ONE affirmed that he had been in a certain Country, where their Bees were as
big as oursheep. This impudent lie one began to examine, and therefore said,
sure then the Bee-hives must be of a huge bigness; No says the other they are
no bigger then ours; how then can they get in said the one. This bogled the
liar like a Mouse in pitch, at last, he answered, let them whom it concerns
look to that.

Benjamin Johnson.
ONE was friendly telling Benjamin Johnson of his great and excessive drinking
continually. Here Is a grievous clutter and talk quoth Benjamin concerning my
drinking, but here is not a word of that thirst which so miserably torments me
day and night.

Lewis 12th of France.
THis Prince had suffered many hardships, under went many dangers contracted
many enmities when a subject and Duke of Orleans; having been forced to quit
his Country. At last by succession the Crown devolved to him, which he
prudently wore for many years being reputed one of the wisest of the French
Kings. Being thus seated in the Throne some Courtiers minded him now to revenge
the injuries he had formerly received, no replied the brave Prince, the
injuries that were done to the Duke of Orleans ought not to be revenged by the
King of France.

A Cavalier.
A Cavalier travailing out of the Country upon the Kings return, a foot,
having a heavy leagure Cloak on his back was so weary with the Suns vehement
heat burning through it, that he knew not what to do, at last within five miles
of London he see among the herd of People that were travailing the same way, a
prickeard fellow with a staff in his hand and no Coat nor Cloak; friend quoth
he I am a poor Cavalier pray do me the favor to lend me a Crown upon my Cloak
till to morrow morning, and tell me where your lodging is and I will when I
have been with my friends come and pay you with thanks. The fellow accepts the
bargain, gives him the Crown, and carries the Cloak, but as soon as he came to
the Towns end the Gentleman returns his Crown, takes his Cloak and with
thanks for his pains departed.

The foolish or little Parliament.
OLiver after the dissolution of the long Parliament in 1653. summoned by an
order of the Council of Officers a little convention of a 100. and odd
schismatics, who should assume the Government from him, which he knew they
would so rack and torture, that it would be thought good nature in him to take
it in that afflicted condition to himself. Accordingly after they had sat some
four months, and played their prankes, as before hand was supposed, he sent
Colonel White (since some of them would not agree to the resignation of their
power, as their speaker and others) to turn them out. White comes with a guard
of Foot, and demands the reason why they stayed there since their fellow
Members had given up their trust to the General, they answered they stayed and
would stay there a seeking the Lord. Push says White that is to no purpose, the
Lord has not been here any time these 12. years and so turned them out.

Peter House in Cambridge.
ONe Mistress Mary Dale of Bristoll for some reasons was a very affectionate
benefactour to Peter-House in Cambridge, she founded two fellowships and two
Scollarships there, and proffered more if on her terms it it might be
accepted. For she would have settled Lands on that house to the value of 500.
Pounds per annum, on condition it should be called the College of Peter and
Mary. This, Doctor Soams then Master of the House refused, affirming that St
Peter who so long had lived single, was now too old to have a Feminine Partner.

Count Maurice of Nassau and Spinola.
THis Spanish General being invited to an entertainment by the aforsaid Prince
at Breda soon after the publication of the twelve years truce, when Lemons and
Oranges were brought in for sauce at the first course, what a brave Country
quoth Spinola is my Masters affording this fair fruit all the year long. But
when Cream was brought up to close the feast Grave Maurice returned, what a
brave Country is ours that yields this fruit twice every day.

A Coward.
THere was a Soldier that vaunted before his Commander, of the hurts and
wounds he had received in his face: His Captain well knowing of him to be but a
Coward told him, you were best take heed next time you run away how you look
back.

Goldsmith Hall.
A Gentleman that had been ruined with his composition at Goldsmith-Hall being
met by a Country man of his acquaintance, was asked by him how he lived in
those times? replied the other no way dismayed with his fortune, I live like a
Prince, I do not know quoth the other what you mean by that, why says the
other I eat and drink and owe much money.

Count Gundomar.
HIS Embassy hither was much maligned by the meaner sort, being about the
Spanish Match of which without the restitution of the Palatinate they were not
desirous; hereupon there was an order made by Proclamation that men should
forbear to meddle with matters of State and confine their discourses to their
private Concerns: it happened that Gundomar coming up Ludgate hill in a Sedan,
one of the Porters casually fell and overturned the Sedan into the kinnel,
where the Count shut up called out for help. No quoth a stander by let him lie
there, there is a Proclamation we must not meddle with State matters.

Sir Thomas Moor.
HAD only Daughters at the first one of whom at the last was of a very
remarkable piety toward him, and his wife did ever pray for a boy. At last she
obtained her wish, the boy coming to man's estate proved but simple, Sir Thomas
thereupon said to his wife thou prayest so long for a boy that he will be a boy
as long as he lives.

Another.
SIR Thomas Moor on the day he was beheaded had a Barber sent to him because
his Beard and hear of his head was grown very long, which was thought at Court
would tender him the greater object of pity to the people. The Barber
accordingly came and asked him whether he would be pleased to be trimmed. In
good faith honest fellow said Sir Thomas, the King and I have a Suit for my
head, and till the Title be cleared I will be at no cost about it.

Again.
THE same Sir Thomas when Lord Chancellor of England had sent him by a suitor
in Chancery two silver Flagons. When they were presented by the Gentleman's
servant, he said to one of his Men have him to the Celler, and let him have of
my best Wine and turning to the servant said Tell thy Master if he like it let
him not spare it.

Courtiers.
IT is an old Adage that Princes Privados and Favorites of Kings were like
casting Counters, which are used in the Exchequer as in play to count by. That
sometimes they stand for one, sometimes for ten, sometimes for a hundred.

K. Hen. 8.
IT is reported of Henry the eight that disguising himself in a mean habit he
associated himself among some good fellows, in purpose to know what the
people thought and said of him. One of the company spoke something freely of
him, giving him a character which the King knew was not much out of the way.
Whom the King as a wary Concellour advised not to make discourses of Princes.
For if he should praise them he should lie: and if he dispraysed them he
brought himself into danger.

Lord Chancellor Hatton.
IN his time when the Councillors of two Parties set forth the Limits and
Boundaries of the Land in question by the Plat; And the Council of one part
said we lie on this side my Lord, and the Council of the other part said and
we lie on this side: The Lord Chancellor arose and said. If you lie on both
sides whom will you have me to believe?

Lord Chief Justice Richardson.
A Dilatory suit had been some time depending in the Kings Bench before him,
which the Plaintiff could not bring to trial, at last he obtained a
peremptory day, the Desendant moved again, and for some reasons showed desired
a longer day; 'Twas in Trinity Term, quoth Judge Richardson, you shall have
the longest the Court can grant, take the 11th of June, Saint Barnabies day.

Philip the Second.
WHen Philip the second conquered Portugal, he gave special charge to his
Leiutenant that the Soldiers should not spoil, lest thereby the hearts of the
people should be alienated: it came by this means to pass that the Army
suffered much want of victual. Whereupon the Spanish Soldiers thereafter used
to say. That they had won the King a kingdom on Earth as the Kingdom of
Heaven uses to be won, by fasting and abstaining from that which is another
Man's.

A Courtier in Debt.
THere was a Courtier that dyed greatly in debt, when the report of his death
came to some company (where diverse of his Creditors usually met) that he was
dead, one began to say, Well if he be gone then he has carried 500 l. of mine
with him into the other World, and another said 200 l. of mine, and a third
spoke of great sums of his. Whereupon one that was amongst them said, I
perceive now that though a man cannot carry any of his own with him into the
other World, yet he may carry away that which is another man's.

Another.
A Gentleman who had a debt due from a Lord lately returned into England by
Bond, came to him and acquainted his Lordship with it, who referred him to his
Steward or Solliciter; at his Address to him he looks upon the Bond, and
seeing it to be of an old standing, ever since 40. quoth he sir I have nothing
to say to this, this is an old debt, replied the other in a little heat, has
your Lord contracted any new ones? I thought there had been no more mad Men in
England to have trusted them.

In the Land of Hispaniola.
UPon the landing of the English Army upon that place, Proclamation was made
that no man should plunder or take any Plate, Bullion or Jewels upon pain of
death: the thirst and heat of travel did not more afflict and diminish their
strength then the Proclamation abated their courage, so that one merrier then
the rest after their defeat, said, the General had done well to have prohibited
their stripping the naked Molattos of their Breeches and Doublets also when
they should fall into their hands.

Parliament Coin.
A Country honest fellow upon the first coming out of that money, taking it in
his hand and turning it backward and forward when he had read the
circumscription of it, said, Here are crosses enough I trow me, but how long
they shall last I know not, for I see here the Commonwealth of England, and God
with Us are not of one side.

Lord Treasurer.
WHen my Lord came first to be Lord Treasurer he complained to the Lord
Chancellor Bacon of the troublesomnesse of the place for that the Exchequer was
so empty: The Lord Chancellor answered, my Lord be of good cheer, for now you
shall see the Bottom of your business at the first.

A Present.
WHen peace was renewed with the French in England, diverse of the great
Counselors were presented from the French with Jewels, The Earl of
Northampton being then a Privy Counselor was omitted, whereupon the King said
to him, my Lord how happens it that you have not a Jewel as the rest, my Lord
answered according to the Fable in Aesop, non sum Gallus ideoque non reperi
Gemmam.

Lord Bacon.
WHen Sir Francis Bacon was made the Kings Attorney, Sir Edward Coke was put
from being Lord Chief Justice of the common Pleas to that of the Kings Bench,
which was observed before as a place above it in dignity, below it in profit.
My Lord Coke meeting with Sir Francis, Master Attorney, (says he) this change
is all your doing, it is you that have made this stir. My Lord, replied he,
your Lordship has all this while grown in breadth, you must needs now grow in
height, or else you would be a Monster.

Judge Popham.
MAster Sarjeant Popham, afterward Lord Chief Justice Popham, (who said he
would make the Road so safe that a man might travel with a white Wand in his
hand, and performed his word) when he was chosen Speaker of the House of
Commons, who had sat long and done nothing in effect, coming one day to Queen
Elizabeth, she said unto him; Now Master Speaker what has passed in the House
of Commons, He answered, if it please your Majesty seven weeks.

Pace.
PAce the bitter and tart fool was not suffered to come at Queen Elisabeth
because of his bitter humor; yet at one time some persuaded the Queen to admit
him, undertaking for him that he should keep within compass: so he was brought
to her, and the Queen said come on Pace, now we shall hear of all our faults;
quoth Pace, I do not use to talk of that which all the Town talks of.

Bishop Latimer.
BIshop Latimer said in a sermon at Court, that he heard great speech that the
King was poor, and many ways were propounded to make him rich. For his part he
had thought of one way which was that they should help the King to some good
Office, for all his Officers were very rich.

Mendoza.
MEndoza that was viceroy of Peru was wont to say that the Government of Peru
was the best place the King of Spain gave, save that it was too near Madrid.

A Country man.
A Certain Countryman being at an Assizes and seeing the Prisoners holding up
their hands at the Bar related to some of his acquaintance, that the Judges
were good for tune tellers, For if they did but look upon a man's hand they
could tell whether he should live or dye.

A Pursivant.
THere was a Pursivant had lodged a Gentleman in a very ill Room who
expostulated with him somewhat rudely; But the Pursivant carelessely replied,
you will take pleasure in it when you are out of it.

Admiralty.
Mr. Giles Merrick a landed Man in the Bermudas was saying that his great
Grandfather, grandfather, and Father, died at Sea: said another that heard him,
And I were as you I would never come at Sea, why quoth the other, where did
your great Grandfather, and grandfather, and Father dye, he answered, where but
in their beds? he returned, and I were as you I would never come in bed again.

Sir Francis Bacon.
WHile Sir Nicholas Bacon the Lord Keeper lived, every room in Gorhambury was
served with a Pipe of water from the ponds distant about a mile from thence,
soon after during the habitation of Master Anthony Bacon the eldest Son of Sir
Nicholas, in the same House, the water ceased. Master Anthony dying, and my
Lord Verulam inheriting it, the water could not be recovered without great
charge. Being made Lord Chancellor he thereupon built Verulam House close by
the pond yard for a place of recesse and privacy when he was to do any
important business, being one time asked why he built that House there he
answered, that since he could not carry the water to his House, he would carry
his House to the water.

Another.
A Lady walking with Mr Bacon in in Grayes Inn walks asked him whose, that
piece of ground lying next under the walls was, he answered theirs. Then she
asked him if those feilds beyond the walks were theirs too, he answered, yes
Madam those are ours as you are ours to look on and no more.

Sir Francis Bacon.
WHen Sir Francis Bacon was newly advanced to the great seal Count Gondamor
came to visit him, and to complement him on the Honor conferred on him my Lord
replied, That he was to thank God and the King for that Dignity, but yet so he
might be rid of the burden he could very willingly forbear the Honor, and that
he formerly had a desire and the same continued with him still to lead a
private life, Count Gondomar replied, I will tell your Lordship a Tale of an
old Rat that would needs leave the world and therewith acquainted the young
Rats that he would retire into his Hole and spend his days solitarily, and
would enjoy no more comfort, commanding them upon his high displeasure not to
offer to come in unto him. In obedience to this command they forbear 2. or 3.
days, at last one that was more hardy then the rest incited some of his
fellows to go in with him and he would venture to see how his Father did, for
he might be dead, They accordingly went in, and found the old Rat sitting in
the midst of a rich Parmezan Cheese; my Lord laughed, but his necessityes after
that employment agreed not with the Fable.

Lord Henry Howard.
IN the time of Queen Elizabeth when the distressed Estates of Holland
supplicated the Queen for assistance, there came one Agent from them called
Caroon, and when he had often moved the Queen for further succors and more
Men, my Lord Henry Howard jested upon him thus, That he agreed well the name of
Charon Ferry man of Hell, for he came still for more men to increase Regnum
Vmbrarum.

Sir Fulke Grevil Lord Brook.
SIr Fulke Grevil being then a Member of the House of Commons, when that House
in a great business and large debate stood much upon Precedents said unto them,
why do you stand so much upon Precedents? The times hereafter will be good or
bad; if good, precedents will do no harm, if bad, power will make a way where
it finds none.

Affected Gravity.
MAny men especially such as affect Gravity have a manner after other men's
speech to shake their head, A principal officer of this Land used to say, it
was as men shake a bottle to see if there were any wit in their Heads or no.

Archbishop of Canterbury,
IN discourse of the Puritans and non conformists of the times, who pretended
to a greater measure of piety and sanctity, this Archbishop replied, That some
hypocrites and seeming mortyfied men which held down their Heads were like the
little Images in the Vaults or Roofs of Churches which look and bow down as if
they held up the Church when as they bear no weight at all.

A Tilting.
IN Queen Elizabeth's time when Tilt and Tourney and running at the ring was
much in Fashion, there came a Gentleman all in Orange tawney and ran very ill,
the next day he came again all in Green and ran worse, there was one of the
lookers on asked another what is the reason that this Gentleman changes his
colors, the other answered I think because it may be reported that the
Gentleman in the Green ran worse then the Gentleman in the Orange Tawney.

Sultan Selymus.
SVltan Selymus was the first of the Ottoman Emperors that did shave his beard
as Busbequius reports, whereas his Predecessors wore it long: one of his
Bashawes therefore asked him the question, why he altered the custom of his
progenitors, he replied because you Bashawes shall not lead meby the beard as
you did them.

Consalvo the great Captain.
AFter a great fight there came to the Camp of Consalvo the great Captain, a
Gentleman, proudly horsed and armed, another Spanish Captain asked Consalvo who
that Gentleman was, who answered, It is Saint Ermin who never appears but
after the storm.

Sir Henry Wotton.
UPon consideration of those many panegyricks and laudatory speeches, letters
and exhortations to great men, he once said, that though the manner of Painters
be to mend the picture by the life, yet with generous minded men it should be
inverted, viz. to mend the life by the picture, to become such as those
encomiums express a man to be.

Business.
IT was usual saying of my Lord Bacon, that it was in business as it is
frequently in ways, that the next and nearest way is commonly the foulest, and
that if a man will go the fairest way he must go somewhat about.

Robert Earl of Leicester.
THis Earl was the greatest Hypocrite and subtle enemy in England, much voyced
up by the non conformists, for his patronage of them, whereby he drew that
faction clearly to his side, he was always very distrustful and jealous, and
sad examples there were of his treachery, and it was his usual saying that we
read that we ought to forgive our enemies, but we do not read that we ought to
forgive our friends.

Earl of Essex.
IT was usually said of Robert Earl of Essex the Father of the last deceased
and who was altogether as military and popular (and I remember an observation
made that when the Son departed from London to Barnet and so onward against the
King, it was bruited, that with the same Pomp his father began his expedition
the same road to Ireland and soon after lost his Head which fate was suspected
to attend his Son, though a potion its thought did the same effect) that he was
the the greatest usurer in England for that he had turned all his Estate (
having wasted a great part thereof in his several voyages and expeditions by
caressing the the soldiers) into obligations.

Caesar Borgia.
THe supposed Nephew but son of Pope Alexander the sixth one of the worst of
that see, yet so great a Benefactor to the family of this present Pope, that he
has assumed his name by the name of Alexander the seventh: after long division
betwixt him and the Estates of Romania, came to an agreement with them: in the
Treaty there was an article that he should not call them at any time altogether
in person. Their intention was that knowing his treacherous and cruel nature if
he meant them any danger or treason he might not have the opportunity or
advantage to oppress them altogether at once. Notwithstanding he brought it so
about by his finesses and artifices that he won upon their confidence to
assemble together at Cinigalia where he murdered them all. The news hereof
was related to the Pope as a thing perfidious but happy, who upon hearing of it
said, It was they that had broke their Covenant first in coming altogether.

A Court Maxim.
IT is fathered on the Emperor Trajan, who used in speaking of the jealousy of
Princes, that seek to make away those that aspire to the succcession, that
there was never King that did put to death his successor; this was very rife in
the business of Mary Queen of Scots beheaded by Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Nicholas Bacon.
THis Knight was Sir William Cecils second in the service of the State being
Father also to my Lord Verulam and Lord Chancellor in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth; upon bills exhibited in that Court to discover where Lands lay, upon
proof that they had a certain quantity of Land but could not set it forth, was
wont to say, and if you cannot find your Land in the Country, how will you
have me find it in the Chancery.

Conbury Park.
THe Earl of Leicester Favorrite to Queen Elizabeth was making a large chase
about Cornbury Park, intending to enclose it with posts and Rayles, and one
day was casting up his charge what it would come to, a Gentleman standing by
that was a free spoken man, said to my Lord upon the sudden, methinkes your
Lordship goes not the cheapest way to work, why Sir said my Lord, In Troth my
Lord said he count you but upon the posts for the Country will find you Railing.

Knights.
MY Lord of Essex when he commanded at the Seige of Rhoan an Army of English in
aid of Henry the 4. of France against the league, made 24. Knights (after a
battle against the Duke de Main) which at that time was a great number, diverse
of those Gentlemen were of weak and small means which when Queen Elizabeth
heard, she said my Lord might have done well to have built his Alms house
before he made his Knights.

French Massacre.
AFter the Massacre of the French Protestants, in Paris, on St. Bartholomews
day an overture was made of a new agreement, to that purpose the Deputies of
the reformed Religion met there to treat of a Pacification, after some debate
they agreed on articles, nothing remaining but the security for the performance
of them, to this the Queen mother returned by way of question, whether they
would not accept the Kings security, no by St BARTHOLOMEW Madam answered the
Deputies.

Treasure.
A Spanish Ambassador coming to Venice, was there Complemented by the State
and as a particular Honor to himself and his Master had St. Marks Treasure,
reckoned then to be the greatest magazine of wealth in Europe, showed him, At
the opening of the same he pointed toward the great Chests and asked some of
the senators, whether those Iron-coffers had any bottom, they answered yea,
this is nothing then says he to my Masters wealth, that has a perpetual
spring in his Mines.

Retinue.
A Nobleman, who kept a very large retinue, was acquainted by his Steward, that
great part of that expense was very burdensome and useless, for that his
Lordship needed not so many servants, whereupon he ordered his Steward to bring
him a list and Catalogue of all his servants, and to mark their names which the
frugall steward did putting out by his note above half his retainers. When
this scroll was presented the Nobleman asked what he marked so many out for,
because Sir says he they are of no use to you; why then says the Lord if the
other must stay because I have need of them, these shall stay because they have
need of me.

Henry the fourth.
HEnry the fourth of France after he had married Mary de Medicis was for a
little while childlesse, upon news of the Queens conception, the Count of
Soissons, who was heir apparent to the Crown, gave out, that it was with a
pillow: these words came to the Kings ear, who, the Queen growing very big,
took the said Count to her lodgings and laid his hand upon her Apron, what
think you now Cosen quoth the King of this pillow, marry said the Count I think
it to be a Pillow for all France to rest its head upon.

Proud Prelate.
A Proud Prelate of England in imitation of his great example the Pope, would
admit no suitors in any other posture but prostration: a man reputed for his
wisdom petitioning of him was forced to comply with the custom, being taxed
by some for this servile flattery as unbecoming men to no greater a person then
a Bishop, he answered, that it was none of his fault, but the Prelat's who
carried his ears in his Feet.

Lord Wentworth.
AFter my Lord Wentworth Ancestor to the Earl of Cleveland had lost Calice,
through want of a sufficient Garrison being forced on a sudden by the Duke of
Guise to a surrender, who had failed of another great enterprise on Naples the
Queen never dawed day but with the complaints of (Quintili read legiones)
render me Calice, quite spent her self; the Lord Chamberlain delivering her
one night the Key she sighed and said, this is not the key of Calice: which was
always held for the Key of France.

Earl of Dorset.
ONE Captain Beale served my Lord with hats, which he prized at high and
excessive rates, my Lord understanding by his Steward the rate of his bills
sent for his Haberdasher, Sir quoth my Lord, what is your meaning to set me
such prizes in which there is no conscience, why my Lord quoth Captain Beale,
we citizens must balance accounts, if you do not pay me then you cheat me, but
if you do then I cheat your Lordship.

The grand Seignour.
DON John of Austria was General at the fight of Lepanto against the Turks,
where he gave them a signal overthrow, this being related to the Grand
Seigniour, who had lately taken the whole Kingdom of Cyprus from the Venetians
he contentedly said, that the loss of a Fleet to him was but as the shaving of
his beard which would grow again, but the loss of a Kingdom was like the
lopping off a member.

Philip the second of Spain.
HE was of so rare a temper that after his invincible Armado was defeated upon
the English Coasts, and dispersed with winds driven about the Coast of Ireland
back again; upon the news thereof he only said that he sent not out that Fleet
to fight against the Winds: Another time having writ expresses to Flanders
when they were fairly copyed he gave them to his secretary to throw sand upon
them, who mistaking the box throw'd Ink in stead of it and wholly defaced them,
he said no more but went into his Chamber and transcribed them.

Colonel Massey.
IT is commonly reported that at the seige of Gloucester, before the Citizens
burnt down the suburbs, after the King had summoned it, Prince Rupert sent word
to the Governor that if he yielded not presently he would forthwith fire him
out, to which Colonel Massey returned, let the Prince do so and I will meet
and fight with him in the Flame.

Lady Lambert.
MUch talk there was of some familiarity betwixt Oliver Cromwell and my Lady
Lambert, upon the device of the Instrument of Government, which was chiefly
assisted by Lambert upon mutual assurances that he should succeed in the
protectorship when that project took effect in December 1653, it was said by a
wag that Olivers Instrument was found in my Lady Lamberts Placket.

Olivers Commissioners of the Treasury.
THere was a great complaint of money (as occasion enough) in the public
receipts as they called them: in that Parliament which was called in 1656, great
stir was made for a supply, among the rest an Act was propounded for the better
regulation of the Exchequer, which some fingerers of that money (as most of
them were such) would have only to look forward to the future management of it,
says Thurloe the Secretary, Gentlemen, if a man has lost his purse whether
should he look backward or forward; my Lord has lost his Purse

Harry Marten.
THis Antimonarchical Person being condemned for the execrable murder of King
Charles, was after sentence (he coming in upon the Kings Proclamation) brought
before the House of Lords to show cause why he should not suffer due execution
of his judgment, to which he returned answer, that true it was he could not
nor did expect any favor from that House, whose extirpation he had
endeavorured and as to the King, he acknowledged he never had observed any of
his or his predecessors Proclamations save one, and for that he should be
hanged.

Lord Bruce.
SIR Edward Sackvile afterward Lord Dorset was challenged by this Lord to
fight with him in the low Countries upon some fend betwixt them, in the duel
they were both grievously wounded, yet would not give over: at last it was my
Lord Dorsets fortune to throw him upon a close and having him at this advantage
proffered him his life, no quoth the Scotch Lord I scorn to accept it at the
hands of an English man, and I then scorn says Dorset to give it to a Scotch
man.

Monsiure Bellieure.
WHen the King was in the hands of the Scotch at Newcastle and bargained and
sold by them to the English, this Monsiure being the French Kings Ambassador
came thither, and seeing the sale agreed upon departed, at his going away
Lashley sent a Guard of horse to bring him into the English Quarters, where
being arrived he called for the Corporal of the squadron, and having a half
Crown in his hand demanded of him what that piece was, thirty pence Sir said
he, even for so much the Jews betrayed our Savior take, this among you.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE NAMES OF Those PERSONS in these Collections.
Folio. HEnry the 8. 1 Queen Elizabeth. 2 Lord Hunsden. 3 Lord Treasurer. 4
Lord chief Justice. 5 King Wardrope. 6 Shoemaker no Gentleman. 7 Sir William
Clarke 8 Lord Spencer. 9 Doctor Preston. 10 Sir Thomas Moor. 11 Sir Horatio
Pollavieini. 13 Lord Bacon. 14 Doctor Perne. 15 Queen Elizabeth. 17 Wood of
Kent. 18 Bishop Bancroft, ibid A Pike. 19 Apes. 20 Lord William Ceeil. 21
Master Sutton the founder of that Hospital. 22 Sir Robert Dymock the Kings
Champion. 23 Sir Thomas Gresham. 24 Cambridge Disputation. 25 Sir John Cutts.
26 The Countess of Shrewsebury. 27 Sir Arthur Chichester. 28 Thomas Stukely.
29 Earl of Oxford. 30 A Bite. 31 Master Richard Hackluit. ibid Beggars Bush.
32 Name. 33 Sir Walter Rawleigh. ibid An Italian Humor 34 Law Suit. 35 Sir
Francis Cheney. 36 Earl of Carnarvon. 37 Shipmoney. 38 Coat of Arms. 39
Extraction. ibid Complement. 40 King James. 41 Bishops. 42 Welchmen. 43
Another. ibid Bishop Gloucester. 44 The Kings Porter. 45 Parson Bull. 46 Lord
Goring. 47 Gentleman. 48 Sir Henry Marten. 49 Boots. ibid Sir Gilbert Talbot.
50 Sir Robert Naunton. 51 A Learned Maid. 52 Bishoprics. 53 Marston Moore. 54
Wales. 55 Welsh Gentleman. ibid Lord Bacon. 57 Another. 58 Henry the 8. 59
Evesham Bridge 60. Organs. 61. Queen Mary. 62 Disputation. 63 Lord Hunsdon. 64
King Philip. 65 Term. 66 Stumps the Clothier. 68 Sir Thomas Wyat. 69 Henry the
8. 71 King James a hunting. 72 Sir Henry Rush. 73 A Voyage. 74 Hispaniola. ibid
Cardinal Wolsey. 75 Ambition. 76 A moral. ibid Sir Thomas Roe. 77 A Polish
Ambassador. 78 Another. 79 Another. ibid Sr. Jerome Bows. 80 Another. 81 A
young Maid. 82 A Spanish Captain. 83 Margaret Countess of Richmond. 85 An
Astrologer. 86 An unadvised Statesman. 87 Henry the 8. 88 Cardinal Wolsey. 89 A
memorable thing. 90 The Cardinal of Lorrain. 91 Emperor Maximilian. 92 King
Charles the first. 94 General Monk. ibid Philip Landgrave of Hesse. 95 A
Friar confessor. 97 A Matron. 98 A Liar. 99 Ben. Johnson. ibid Lewis the 12 of
France. 100 A Cavalier. ibid The little or foolish Parliament. 101 Peter House
in Cambridge. 103 Count Maurice of Nassau, and Spinola. ibid A Coward. 104
Goldsmiths Hall. 105 Count Gundomar. ibid Sir Thomas Moore. 106 Another. 107
Again. ibid Courtiers. 108 Henry the 8. ibid Lord Chancellor Hatton. 109 Lord
Chief Justice Richardson. 110 Philip the second. ibid A Courtier in Debt, 111
Another. 112 Hispaniola. 113 Parliament Coin, ibid Lord Treasurer. 114 A
present. 115 Lord Bacon. ibid Judge Popham. 116 Pace the Fooll. 117 Bishop
Latimer. ibid Mendoza. 118 A Country man at Assizes. ibid A Pursivant. 119
Admiralty. ibid Sir Francis Bacon. 120 Another. 121 Sir Francis Bacon. ibid
Lord Henry Howard. 123 Sir Fulke Grevil Lord Brook. ibid Assected Gravity. 124
Arch Bishop of Canterbury. ibid A Tilting. 125 Sultan Selymus. 126 Consalvo the
Great Captain. ibid Sir Henry Wotton. 127 Business. ibid Robert Earl of
Leicester. 128 Earl of Essex. ibid Caesar Borgia. 129 A Court Maxim. 130 Sir
Nicholas Bacon. 131 Cornbury Park. 131 Knights. ibid French Massacre. 133
Treasure. 134 Retinue. ibid Henry the Fourth. 135 Proud Prelate. 136 Lord
Wentworth. 137 Earl of Dorset. ibid Philip the second of Spain. 138 Colonel
Massey. ibid The Grand ^ignour. 139 Lady Lambert. 140 Olivers Commissioners of
the Treasury. 141 Harry Martin. 142 Lord Bacon. 143 Monsieur Bellicure. ibid

FINIS.
To the Reader.
THE Reader is desired to excuse the Collector of these Jocoseria, is in some
places Names be wanting, for it was neither safe, nor satisfactory.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed the History of the Commons War throughout these three
Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The like exact account never before
Printed; faithfully Collected by an impartial Hand: Sold by Joshua Coniers at
the black- Raven in the long Walk near Christchurch.

Books lately Published.
THE English ^ove^ (...) worth Gold, both (...) Act^^ with general applause,
now newly formed into a Roma^ce, by the ac^^a^^ Pe^ of I. ^, Gent.

A Compendious Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal, from Alphonso the first
King to Alphonso the sixth, now reigning.

Those excellent Fancies entitled Don Juan Lamberto, or a Comical History of
our late Times, first and second Part, by Montelion Knight of the Oracle.

A new English Grammar for Foreigners to learn English, with a Grammar for the
Spanish or Castilian Tongue, with special Remarkes on the Portugues Dialect,
for the service of her Majesty, whom God preserve.

The Life and Death of that reverend Divine and excellent Historian, Dr. Thomas
Fuller lately deceased.

Studii Legalis Ratio, or Directions for the study of the Law, under these
heads, the Qualifications for the Nature, Means, Method, Time and Place of the
Study, by W. Phillips of Grayes Inn, etc. price one shilling.

Books in the Press ready to publish this Term.
AN Exact Collection of the choicest Songs and Poems, from 1639. to 1661.
Relating to these Times. Written by the most eminent Wits.

A new Discovery of the French Disease and Running of the Reins, their Causes,
Signs, with plain and easy direction of perfect curing the same, by R.
Bunworth, the second Edition corrected with large Additionals.

The Poor Scholar, a Comedy.

All sold by H. Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery lane near Fleet Street.


