A YOKE For the Roman-Bulls. BEING A POEM written on the Royal Proclamation for
Exiling Popish-Priests and Jesuits, etc.

To which is added, A TELESCOPE For the New Astrologers: OR, A Looking-glass
for the Staring Star-gazers. WHEREIN IS A Reply to the Libellious and Seditious
Censurers of the late Fire in the City of London.

By T. S.

Licensed according to Authority, the 7th. of December. 1666.



Printed for S. Speed, at the Sign of the Rainbow in Fleet Street. 1666.

A YOKE For the Roman-Bulls.
A POEM Written on the Royal Proclamation for exiling Popish-Priests, etc.
before December the 10th. 1666.
-- Procul hinc procul ite nocentes. Statius.
POpe open thine Arms, and Rome make larger room
For thine own Darlings now are coming home:
So Fau'kners do receive their Birds of Prey,
When at their Game they can no longer stay.
Here is no room in England for your Breed,
We'll send for 'um again when we have need.
The awful voice is sent forth, and they had best
Be from their Machinations represt.
So Foxes when bold Trespassers they be
Are ready at the Landlords voice to flee.
Our holy Faiths Defenders pious care
Denies them here to fix their treacherous Snare:
So do the generous Lions nobly chase
Rapacious Vultures lurking in their Place.
And think ye not our Royal Lions will
From Wolves protect our Flock and Shepherds still?
It Is not the roaring of a Roman-BVLL
Can scare those Royal Beasts, or disanul
Their Sovereign Right; No, no, go tell your Pope
We are not to be bull'd by him; nor hope
To build your Roman Church by horrid Plots,
Perfidious as the Presbyterian-Scots:
Your holy Water, holy as it is,
Will never purify your souls in this,
Think ye that Heaven can in justice see
And suffer with success such Villainy?
No, for to sacred Truth it is as contrary,
As to make Prayers unto the Virgin Mary.
And it is as fruitless Labor I protest,
As to adore St. Francis and the rest.
I doubt not but your Cardinals will find
They had as good their CAPS throw against the wind,
Though to assist such impious intents,
Ye had as many Popes as Sacraments.
Prepare to march then, with your Romish-cheer,
Ye must not think to keep your Christmas here.
You Are no fit Christmas-Guests for England, so
When our blessed Advent comes, then you must go:
Make haste, and you will come time enough (I hope)
For New-years-gifts presented to the Pope.
But if ye do exceed the appointed time,
It Is no Popes pardon can absolve your crime.
Take with ye all your Relics, let no more
Your Romish-trumpery rest on our shore.
(Nothing of Rome we need within our Land,
Unless when Ladies write in Roman-hand.)
Let Jesuitick Ginns no more be seen
To gull the simple; root up all your green
Transplanted Innovations, don't ye know
From the beginning (that) it was not so?
Don't think to you so soon we will submit,
For all your boasts of Learning and of Wit:
Why may not a Person of mean document
Pray be as prudent as Pope INNOCENT?
I think upon Record it may be seen
That half your Popes too Innocents have been.
Then don't proud Emp^ricks through the Universe
No more your Epidemick drugs disperse.
Go heal your Pope; ye cannot deny I Am sure
But that his Holiness does need a cure.
And (as for him) it is also thought I see
That change of air is requisite for ye.
Why then be gone, and think not to delay
The Royal Mittimus to disobey,
For it is as vain for Residence to plead
As to make intercession for the dead.
No Papal dispensation can obtain
Connivance for ye longer to remain.
Your UNIVERSAL VICAR's wrested style
Will find but little Vigor in our Isle:
For though he Lord it over OTHER KINGS,
OURS are SACRED, and our sacred things,
As also Persons are (as is most fit)
Above his Usurpation, though he sit
As PETER'S (proud) SUCCESSOR by pretense,
Our Divine His Majesty's Royal Grandfather, and our first English Monarch.
JAMES his real one's immense
And Royal Title to his Monarchy,
The PAPAL INT'RST can and does deny.
O that our holy Vine were once but free
From the dead Ivy of each Enemy.
Those greedy Foxes seeking to devour
With equal malice her divinest Power:
Leaving with horror to succeeding Time,
Novembers Plots and Januaries Crime:
While both do madly loose by each extreme
The purest Church of Englands golden Mean.
Be silent ye Impostors, then, by whom,
Between the Church of England and of Rome
Is judged so little odds; ye that would fain
Over that Gulf an easy Bridge maintain.
Fie, don't demonstrate with so little sense
Your ignorance as well as impudence.
How many of her Sons (pray) for her sake
Have gone to Heaven from the Flaming-stake?
Don't so betray your malice then; it is true,
They are as much Her friends, I think, as you:
Though ye are more Vnnat'ral than the other,
So Viper-like to tear your own dear Mother.
Your bold Comparison is as uneven,
As 'twixt such Saints as you, and those in Heaven.
A LOOKING-GLASS For the Staring Star-gazers.
Hoc faciunt siulti quos gloria vexat inanis
SEctarian Sirs, who to the world declare
How great your own Religiousnesses are,
And are with Pharisean lips so free -- Limis oculu in res alienas inquirens.
Hor.

To cry Stand off, we are holier than ye;
And, God be thanked, we are not so much
Involved in sin as Publicans and such.
Who like so many Popes do often confess
Such large dimensions of your Holiness;
Who now can cry, These are your sinful crimes
That cause such judgments on these wicked times.
And even would force the Planets too to be
Predictive of a second Destiny.
Who have your Faith and Doctrine from so high,
Not from the holy Mountain, but the Sky.
Whence had ye (pray) your learning, that so soon
Your Study is as lofty as the Moon?
Your Conventicles I did never hear
At Gresham-Colledge ever did appear;
Who made ye (pray) such mighty Censurers
As if your They dropped about libels, therein pretending the Planets did divine
that Westminster and Southwark would be burnt in October. etc.
Libels were all falling-Stars?
From whom (I wonder) do ye boast your Rise?
From Mother Shipton? or was she too Wise
To be your Head? she doubtless too is staler;
Perhaps ye only rise from Saint James Nayler.
Why then beware his destiny, while you
Wish other men what to your selves is due,
Lest like Perillus ye tormented are -- Nec enim lex justior ulla, Quam necis
artifices art perite sua. Ovid.

By that which ye for others did prepare;
Or Thrasius-like become the Victim when
Ye did design the Lot amongst other men.
I fear it is not your Judgment, but desire
We may behold a second dismal Fire.
Or, is your wickedness so horrid, that
What ye foretell, ye'd also perpetrate?
Then don't (deluding Ones) pretend ye are
Inspired by a Planet or a Star:
While ye abuse (by your Hypocrisy)
The noble Science of Astrology.
Do not, great Pseudo-Prophets, pray ye, fain
Your selves to be of Sage who (as Homer in his Odysses reports) was as
famous among the Grecians for Prediction, as Aesculapius for Physic.
Melampus strain,
While your inept inventions plainly plods,
To make ye Psappho-like but airy Gods:
Let not such whimsies mount ye up so fast,
Owels that attempt to soar, will fall at last.
Gaze in the Skies no more, nor madly prate;
Look to the blazing-Comets in your pate,
Keep off your saucy hands from Heavens Rod,
As if ye would usurp the Throne of God. Quae Deus occulta esse voluit non
scrutanda sunt.

(Such is your pride, your pride (I say) is such,
Ye have been to usurping used so much.)
Let not conceits so giddy and so vain
Possess your factious, peace-disturbing brain.
These your transcendent errors do declare
Your minds as wandering as the Planets are?
But what your selves cannot believe, you will
(Seducers-like) affirm to others still.
Thus have we seen the Juglers often use
To do, that they the People may amuse.
You Will likewise Deifie your selves, Nisi quod faciunt nihil recte judicant.
and then
You Would fain make Devils of all other men,
As if to you that privilege were given,
Hugh Peters-like to see both Hell and Heaven.
Popes have (ye say) no power to make a Saint,
Nor ye to make a Devil, I Will maintain't;
But only thus far (sailing on such Shelves
Of Error) to make Devils of your selves.
Then ben't so forward to condemn all those
That are so honest as to be your foes. Judicet ille de alterius errore qui non
halet in seipso quod condemnet.

But while ye censure others, do but view
What reprehensions to your selves are due.
Look in your own hearts, and consider then
Your self-exaltings 'bove your brethren.
Mistake me not, I go not to deny
The Nations sins brings this Calamity:
No, I avouch it, but I Would have unfurled
Your own deluding Colors to the world.
All Whoredom, Drunkenness and Swearing, I
Abhor as much as you to justify.
Yes, but I Would have ye too, as well as these,
Consider how your own may God displease.
Was Corah, Dathan, and Abirams Crew, then?
Not such a kind of Cattle (pray) as you?
Was not their crime Rebellion? against whom
Was Moses not, and Aaron (pray) the men?
Don't ye the same in disobedience do
Against your Lord the King and Bishops too?
Are not your murmurings pray even such,
The Bishops take upon them too too much?
And (like that cursed Crew too) don't ye cry
The Clergy they are lifted up too high?
And did not on those Rebels this provoke
From angry Heaven a most hideous stroke?
Come, -- Sub dulci melle venena latent. Virg. In nomine Domini incipit omne
malum. -- Rabido gestans sub pectore Vulpem. Pers. Sat. 3.
come, this wilful disobedience
Masqu'd under Conscience is an high offense.
Religion and Conscience often be
Pretended in the worst of Villainy.
To wave all others, and to quote the highest,
Did not the Jews in crucifying Christ
Pretend the same as zealously as you
Did in (next unto that) the highest too,
When ye did act that execrable sin
On Martyred Charles, who is now as Cherubin?
Come, Qui curios simulant, and bacchanalia vivunt. Juv.
there is no sinner like the Hypocrite,
The Proverb says, No Devil like the white.
I make no doubt ye all your selves suppose
Shadrachs, and Meshachs, and Abednegos;
But pray did none of ye that were possessed
Of Habitations, burn among the rest?
I know your great pretense, forsooth, ye can
Obey the Will of God 'bove that of man;
But what obeying God is greater than
The obeying of just Authorized Men?
Then while blind Zeal just duties thus controuls,
Let not fond errors so seduce your souls.
No Golden Gods are by a Heathen King
Commanded now to worship, No, the thing
Required now, is to obey (I Am sure)
The living God in worship that is pure.
Then what pretense is left? O Conscience! now
These things ye cannot by any means allow.
Have ye forgot, when ye did scruple less
Rebellion, Murder, and all wickedness?
And does this Conscience still lack liberty?
Pray what to do? To swallow up the Sea?
Contend not then so foolishly, who is
Guilty'st of this sad Metamorphosis;
But let us all reform; I Would need but say,
Then let us but the King and Church obey:
Their Laws command I Am sure, of me and you,
Both What to Caesar and to God is due.
(Hear what the holy Churches STARS divine,
Fear not to what the others do incline;
The Superstition's in observing those,
When we imagine they so much impose.)
As for the Consistory-courts, I Am sure
Their Laws are wholesome, their due practice pure:
But what is the reason ye will those despise?
Because they punish your iniquities?
I never was questioned by 'um, but I must
Confess, I think, they are merciful and just:
But you are resolved only to oppose
Things legally ordained, and only those.
Come, come, obey, obey (I say) the King,
And wave each frivolous and foolish thing.
Ye cry down Bears; indeed it is too too true,
The Land's too full of such like Bears as you;
Ye blame the enmity between the Beasts,
But greater enmity lurks in your breasts.
Ye like no Plays, but chiefly those that be
Like unto Mass' annello's Tragedy.
No, those unmasque Rebellious wickedness,
And show ye how your conscious souls transgress.
To Theaters of blood ye can submit,
But not unto a Theater of Wit;
And with an Hewson-ey'd Zeal you will report
The sins not of the Country but the Court.
Perhaps ye never have been there, since White Hall
Was made an Acheron by stinking Noll,
When Pluto there a hellish Court did keep,
And cursed Hugh did preach his Imp asleep.
And so ye think it still the same: but know,
Now the just Steward's in it it is nothing so.
Persons make places quite anew become,
As Pompey's Residence made Africa Rome. Mrs. K. P.

Pray if ye are such Courtiers that ye know
In what the Courtiers sin, and what they do;
Come once again to Court, and see a thing,
Look on your gracious and indulgent King:
See, see how much of Clemency and Grace
Sits in his Royal and Majestic Face.
See whom ye do offend, it would convince
A Scythian to behold so good a Prince;
Perhaps your disobedient hearts will melt,
Having the power of such an object felt.
Remember his Amnestia, don't ye know
To him your lives and liberties ye owe?
Then ben't deluded (once again, I say,
If ye would Heaven please, the King obey.)
Your Tub-invading Rabshakehs never lack
Tricks to seduce additions to the Pack;
But though they Gowns refuse, yet be it spoke,
It Is not the longest Presbyterian Cloak
Will hide their knav'ry; that will be displaid,
Though they are as fly as He that whipped his Maid.
FINIS.

