THE HISTORY OF THE LOVES OF LYSANDER AND SABINA; A NOVEL.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by J. Tailor, at the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1688.

To the Deserving and Ingenious William Forrester of Dottel Esquire
SIR,
MY Lisander that never used to beg any bodies Protection but that of the
Ladies, now casts himself at your feet, and humbly sues for yours. If his
English be none of the finest-spun, I desire you would remember he has been a
Soldier and a Traveller: and if the mistakes in his Conduct cannot now and
then escape without observation, I would have other men learn Wisdom at his
expense, and make use of those Rocks whereon he split, for Sea-marks. I never
designed to draw his Character so great, that like Pantagruel's Doublet it
should fit no body else; it is far short of that which our men of Wit are used
to give their brain-born Hero's, and therefore he thought it dangerous to
Address himself to any but a very Candid Mecaenas. Such, I am very well
assured, you are, and for fear of being mistaken, I have all the Kingdom on my
side.

But your early Honors both Civil and Military have saved me the labor of a
Panegyric, (the ordinary entertainment of Dedications) and only left me room
to say, it is pity your Virtue is so singular, and that your merit has no more
Emulators.

(...) ^^^^^^cation that ever I made, and it may be the first that ever you
received; and if you chance to meet with any thing in these Maiden sheets that
shall please, I shall think my pen has lost her Virginity with honor, and
begin to arrogate to my self the Mighty Title of an Author, only for having the
honor of so great a Patron.

All that remains now Sir, is to beg your Pardon, for ventring to prefix your
name to such a Triflle without your least knowledge or Consent: All the excuse I
can make is this, I did it without making you acquainted, that you might hear
it condemned without blushing, and never think your self in the least concerned
to defend the Errors of

Your humble Servant T. S.

LISANDER, Or the SOLDIER OF FORTUNE.
THey that have taken pains to digest Moral Philosophy into a Body, or System
of Precepts, have always assigned Virtue the middle place between two Extremes.
And yet methinks, a very little Logic, more than what we suck from our Nurses,
might show a man of Sense such knots, and difficulties in the assertion, as
Aristotle himself (were he alive again) might find enough to do to resolve. For
Example, Covetousness, and Prodigality are the Extremes of Liberality: and so
are Cowardice and Fool-hardiness of Fortitude: and yet we must confess, that
both these Excesses are the more easily corrected, and so nearer to the Mean
than either of the contrary defects: Otherwise the terms of Magnificent, and
Heroic (which in all Ages have met with such a profound respect) could never
be either necessary, or suitable to the Character of a Great man. Were it not to
give my Reader occasion of suspecting my own inclinations, I might say as much
of the excess of Love, which though it have driven many out of the beaten
paths, and methods which the severer precepts of our Grandfathers have
designed, yet can the most of those Truants say, and the World will subscribe
to them besides, that they have commonly been persons of the finest Spirits,
and the greatest Souls, and have done such things, as may justly challenge an
honorable remembrance, as long as brave Actions have any Golden Legends, and
which it may be) they had never so much as enterpriz'd, under any other
Conduct, but that of the Blind God.

I do not offer you this Preface, as an entire and absolute Vindication of all
those extravagances, which the Gentleman, that furnishes the subject of this
Story, may perhaps have been guilty of, but only to mitigate the severity of
your censures, and to allay the rigor of your Justice, with a little generous
tenderness, and compassion. I will urge this Address on his behalf with no
other Argument, but that common Principle of Self-interest, which every one
finds so deep engraven in his own breast. For how can any man think, if by
chance he should be overtaken with the like surprise, to obtain that pity, and
connivance himself, which he has discourteously denied to others: And if he
shall tell me, he is in no danger, and that he is out of shot of those childish
Arms, I dare say he does not consider in the mean while, what an untoward
imputation he lays upon his good nature, or what an unmanly violence he does
his Reason, while all the world must needs censure him for a desperate
Opiniator, that will not believe his House is as combustible as his Neighbors,
till he see it on fire about his ears.

To keep you no longer in suspense, It shall suffice me to tell you, that our
Adventurer (whom in this Relation we shall call Lisander) was a Gentleman of
our own Country, of an Ancient, and honorable Family, and it may be the first
of his House, that for four Generations had crossed the Seas without the leave
of his Friends, and a competent Subsistence. The occasion of this bold Design
has been something uncertainly reported, but they that were of his Secrets,
(and he himself since) tell us, that meeting with some opposition in his
Amors, which neither pleased his nor the Ladies Friends, after a tedious
resistance of the two contrary Passions of Love and Anger, (between which his
Soul was distracted, and torn in pieces) he found himself unequal to the
burden, and therefore resolved to try, if crossing the Seas, he could leave his
Cares on this side the water. His heart was too great to think of any other
Employment, than the Sword; and so the War betwixt the House of Austria and
France, gave him a fair opportunity. Lisander had I know not what natural
Aversion to the French Nation, notwithstanding that Fortune and Victory at that
time seemed to have undertaken the Conduct of their Arms; and therefore
resolves to serve the Spaniard. The apprehensions of hard Duty, and bad Pay,
and all those Difficulties, which one that has served there knows but too well,
and a man in his Circumstances might very reasonably expect, had been enough to
have deterred any body, but Lisander, from the enterprise: and yet the heat of
his Youth, and the Greatness of his Mind, with the desire he had of scowring
those honorable Arms, which one of his Ancestors had purchased against the
French at the famous Battle of Agincourt, easily contemned, and surmounted
these disadvantages.

Thus he, and the Lady of his Vows, whose name was Sabina, (after a thousand
Prayers, and Arguments to divert him from this rough, design lost, and thrown
away) took leave one of another. They parted with the same painful Sighs, and
troubled Silence, that Souls leave their Bodies in the Agony of their
dissolution. Something they would both of them have said, but such was their
surprising grief, that their Passion found no vent. Tears, and Embraces were
the last, and only Rhetorical Expressions of their cross Love.

Lisander when he divided himself, and went one half for the Spanish
Netherlands, was about Twenty years old.

His complexion was not quite so clear as that of a woman's, but the Features,
and Lineaments of his face were pleasing, and Majestic to Admiration. Nature
was so kind to him, that he neither wanted, nor wore a Periwig, for (as if she
had foreseen his Military design) She had given him a lovely head of brown
Hair, curled all in such rings, as the Ladies of the last Generation called
Heart-breakers. He was something taller than the ordinary sort of men, and so
delicately well limbed, and shaped to his height, that you would have thought
Nature had intended him only for a Pattern. His very Mien, and Presence had
always something in them of Noble, and if ever he had denied his blood, would
have been sure to have given him the lie. But which made every body wonder) he
had a particular way of wearing his Clothes, though neither he, nor any body
else knew where the secret lay; for whatever Suit he had on, became him a great
deal better than richer Clothes did another man. He had already passed five
years in one of the Inns of Court, where you may be sure he had learned to know
which Pocket his money was in, and how many two and two are, without a
Conjurer. His Natural Abilities (without which it is impossible to be excellent
in any thing) were such, as drew every bodies eyes upon him, whatever he did or
said. He was of a strong, and piercing Judgment, a ready Wit, a most undaunted
Constancy and Resolution, an indefatigable Diligence, and of a wonderful quick
Dispatch. In a word, take him altogether, he was a man of a most becoming and
Gentile Address, and all his Actions were accompanied with a certain fatal
agreeableness, for which we have no name. Only his Disposition was a little too
susceptible of that sweet Poison, that gentle Torment, that desirable Evil, and
almost inseparable Plague of a great Mind, Love, which would now and then be a
little too busy in his Management, often stealing some Minutes from a serious
hour, and spoiling a good nights rest after a hard days labor.

Heaven, and the Sea were loath to crush so brave a Spirit in the setting
forth, and so he arrived at Dunkirk (once an English Garrison) in one
Afternoon, where the next Morning he took leave of the Master of the Vessel,
and with his Horse, and a hundred Broad-pieces, which was all his Stock, set
forward toward Brussels, (where the General of the Spanish Forces was at that
time) to lay the foundation of his Fortune of War.

His arrival at the out-guards before the Gates of the City, did him the Office
of a Court Address, and without any of those preliminary Solemnities, which are
ordinarily made use of to introduce men into the presence of a Prince, the
custom of bringing Strangers to be examined whence they come, and what their
business is, was his safe Conduct to the General. It happened, that the King of
England's Resident at the Court was at that time attending the General about
some business of his Masters, and so very opportunely served for Interpreter
between the General and Lisander. It is strange to observe what a gentle
influence Beauty has upon all men's affections, and how insensibly it makes it
self (...) our wills, for no sooner had Lisander told him his inclinations, but
the General was overjoyed to see a Gentleman of his Breeding, and appearance
come to offer his Service in the War. And being well assured of his Parts and
understanding, by the pertinence and good manage of his Address, received him
with greater Demonstrations of Courtesy, and more Affability than the manner
of that grave Nation, and the height of their Spirits does ordinarily
vouchsafe. And as he was about to Consult with the Resident, which way, or what
Method he should use to serve this Young Gentleman in his pretensions, (seeing
he had never born Arms) A Spanish Maestro di Campo, or Colonel of the Army,
that was just come from Gant, where his Regiment lay, and had heard all the
Discourse, told his Excellence (not without some Passion) that there was an
Alfier, or Ensigns Commission in his Regiment to dispose of, and if the
Gentleman (in regard it was a proper and an honorable Office for a person of
Quality to learn the Trade of War in) pleased to accept it, and his Excellence
would give leave, he would think himself extremely honored, and promised that
he would take a most particular Charge of him, as if he were his own Son; such
a mighty impression and prevalence had the very Presence, and Address of
Lisander.

The motion was very acceptable on all sides, only the General told Lisander,
he was almost ashamed to make him so little an offer, but if he pleased to
content himself till he was acquainted with the Spanish Tongue, and the
Discipline of War, he doubted not but to find means to do something for him
which might deserve his acceptance. Lisander made him a handsome and grave
return of his Compliment, and told him that he was too sensible of his own want
of merit, not to understand the honor he was pleased to do him, and that he
would study to avoid the imputation of an ingrate, more than he would the
preservation of his Life. That very night he accompanied his Colonel toward
Gant, who was almost extasied with his good Fortune, and verily believed his
good Angel had taken care to Conduct him into the Generals presence in that
lucky Conjuncture.

Four whole years did Lisander serve in that Regiment, in which time (young as
he was) he made a shift (almost without aemulation) to run through all the
Charges, and Offices from an Ensign, to a Lieutenant Colonel. And acquitted
himself in them all with so much Integrity, Conduct, and Gallantry, that the
whole Army was full of his name, and nothing troubled them so much, as that our
Hero had not been born a Spaniard.

When they lay in Winter Quarters, Lisander (who as I told you was Amorous
enough, and the fittest man alive to be so) to divert the trouble which he
conceived for the absence of his dear Mistress, did ordinarily pass a good part
of his spare hours with the Ladies of the best Character, and Quality in the
Town, and was every where so welcome, and his Company so much desired, that
oftentimes it bred such little heats, and Animosities amongst them, as without
doubt had been more public, and made more noise in the world, but for fear of
doing violence to their Modesty. And by this means he never wanted the choicest
Laces and Linen which the Country (famous for those Commodities) could afford,
or any thing else (in reason) which the Ladies had to dispose of.

And when Summer came, that the Army was to March into the Field, it would even
have grieved any bodies heart to see with what a Catholic sorrow (as if the
Sun had gone the wrong way) they received the killing news of his departure.
And which yet extremely aggravated the disaster, their Discretion durst not
complain, or show their grievance in Public, though among Confidents, and in
several little Cabals, his name was the ordinary Entertainment, both of Song,
and Drink, and Company.

And as often as any fair opportunity, and safe conveyance offered it self, it
was ten to one he had some of their Billets douces and sure it is more than pity
they are so many of them lost. I will only give you one in passing sent him by
a German Lady (as you will see) upon some March or other, which I have
accidentally recovered out of the merciless jaws of time, as well to testify
my obligations to, as assert the honor of the Nation, and to convince you they
were only French men that made Parler comme un Aleman to signify, to speak
like a Fool. The lines are in effect these.

SInce Fate Commands and we must part,
Farewell thou Conqueror of my heart,
Farewell the Kindest Englishman
That ever cros't the Ocean;
Farewell that Face, that has betrayed
The Honor of a German Maid;
Yet were to do again, I know
I had no power to say thee no.
I tremble still at those Alarms
That shook my Lover from my Arms,
A Maidens Curses be his doom
That first invented Fife and Drum,
Cursed be his Name, who ere begun
This Quarrelling with Pike and Gun;
Methinks a Trial at the Bar
Were easier than this Trade of War.
Cruel Bellona, now I guess
Thou envied'st my happyness;
The Gentle Youth thy Breast did move,
And thou wast fallen thy Self in Love:
O use him well, and with thy Shield
Protect his Person in the Field,
For know dear Goddess if he fall
The self-same Wound kills me and all.
What pity 'twere that Crimson juice
Should only Plants and Flowers produce,
Whose every drop might get a Line
Of Nobler worthies than the Nine.
How full of fear is Love! and yet
If Beauty, Honor, Valor, Wit,
Can save a man from Destiny,
And brave the Fates, I Am sure it is he.
Then let your Death-charg'd Engines fly,
Let Ball, and Thunder fill the sky
Let Rivers swell with showers of blood,
The Earth grow drunk with the purple flood,
The God of War shall Guard his Son,
Till these unfriendly days are done,
And then we'll Sacrifice one Kiss
To Venus Health, and one to His.
Till then may Victory and Fate
Conspire to make you Fortunate,
And may bright Honor ever rest
As in her Center on your Crest,
Nor shall a brazen Statue be
Enough to tell Posterity
Your Worth: a softer way shall raise
A living Image to your praise.
(...) (like a man that wanted Lodging) from one house to another, as long as
people were up, and then from one Guard to another, till day appeared, which
drove him to his Quarters, lest the world should have taken notice of his
disorder. He used all the means he thought safe, or proper, to inform himself
who this Beauty might be, but all proved ineffectual. And now he began to
repent he had not exchanged his Office, with the Spanish Lieutenant Colonel,
that so he might have had time to find his new Mistress, and with his own
diligence make himself amends for the rigor of his hard Fate. Restless, and
full of thought as he was, he rose from his bed before he had well warmed it,
changed his Clothes, and (under color of taking leave) visited most of the
Ladies in the Town, to see if he might find her in any of their Companies. But
he bestowed all his labor in vain, and only wearied himself against his March,
which was to begin the same Afternoon. About two of the Clock the Drums beat,
and the Regiment drew up in the Marketplace. At length came the
Lieutenant Colonel attended with the Magistrates, and Gentry of the Town, to
take a solemn leave. His trouble was such that it might easily be read in his
very looks. And every body knowing he was a man of such Spirit, and Resolution,
could not but wonder, that so small a matter, as changing the Country (which
was his own Election besides) should affect him so much, without ever hitting,
or so much as suspecting the true cause of his Discomposure. Sorry they were
(though they loved no Soldiers) to part with Lisander, his temper had so
little in it of the Spanish Insolence (though he had served long enough among
them to have learned it,) and therefore to testify their respects they waited
on him about a League out of Town, and then with a whole Volly of warm Prayers
committed him to the Conduct, and favor of his good Fortune. He was glad they
were gone. For, though their company would otherwise have been most grateful,
and pleasing, yet as his heart beat at that time, the compliment was
unnecessary, and the honor was troublesome. Solitude had been a fitter
Companion, and the shade of some ancient Wood or the bank of some considering
Stream would better have suited the violence of his Grief, than a matter of
Twenty starched Aldermen with Spanish-leather Boots, and
Holland-boot-hose-tops, with every one a mouthful of Wind, and an old Beaver
full of Smoke. In vain did his Officers strive to shorten the day with a
Bottle, or a Song, or a Story, or any new Amors they met with in the March. He
was never so much at his ease, as when he was alone, and could complain without
being overheard. Many a time when he was a convenient space either before, or
behind the Regiment, he would begin thus with himself. The Gods have seen, and
revenged thy wrongs, and my Cruelty (My dear Sabina, the first, and only
constant Mistress of my Vows, and Wishes,) making all those Wounds, which were
given me by thy first Beauty, pain me, and bleed again by the guilty touch of
this last. With what assurance, what Rhetoric, or excuses can I ever think of
returning to thee, after the Errors, and voluntary Absence of four whole years?

And, as if I had yet a mind in some measure to proportion the distance of
place, to the length of time, I am now running two Kingdoms further from thee.
Forgive me dear Sabina, this acknowledgment is but counterfeit, and I do but
flatter both thee, and my self with a repentance which in spite of my
resolution is but false and superficial. My Vows, my Virtue, my Faith, my
Constancy, have all forsaken me. And (though Fate in pity to thee have removed
the Object) yet have I no truce with my Passion. The Beauty of her Person, the
Sharpness of her Wit, her becoming her Address, like so many Familiar Spirits
have taken possession of my breast, and haunt my imagination day and night. But
above all her Courtesy which (if one might interpet ambiguities to advantage)
I should call Love, has pierced my very Soul, and has in it, such Charms as
sure a colder constitution, and a severer virtue, than that of mine could never
have been able to resist. Once indeed I thought I dreamed, I talked of nothing
but Sabina; and vainly resolved in spite of all the little stops, and lets I
might meet with in the way, to carry the respect I had for her, pure, and
undivided to my Grave.

But length of time (I see) and absence (which is my own sin) has almost
obliterated those old Idea's. It Is this Stranger, this new Face, (which I,
alas! must never, never see again) which has given me my mortal Wound. And yet
I am resolved, that as soon as I have delivered the Regiment at Barcellona, and
obtained my Discharge, I will, I must return to Flanders in quest of that Face,
whose Smiles, and Frowns determine the issues of my life and death.

These and such like were the pastimes of his Solitude. For as all other
Melancholy in its deepest, and most retired speculations is not without some
mixture of pleasure, and satisfaction; so especially in Love, the
contemplation, and remembrance of a Beauty we have loved, (though
unsuccesfully) fills, and extends the heart with warm blood, and fresh spirits
even in Despair it self. And this was the only consolation, which never quitted
the perplexed Lisander in all his march to Barcellona.

The Colonel and Clarinda made several little stops in their Journey through
France, but the Lovesick Lady found nothing there, that pleased her. Now and
then she met with some Amorous Addresses, and those from Persons very
considerable too, but they only served to fan, and blow the Fire which Lisander
had kindled in her bosom, and which had now seized upon her very bones, and
marrow. Every new City furnished her with new Admirers, but their Applications
always recoyl'd into their own bosoms, and did them most mischief at the
rebound. Clarinda stood like a Rock in vain importuned by the Waves, all the
effect their fine speeches had with her, was only to teach her how to set a
just value upon her self. Seven days after the Colonels arrival at Barcellona,
came Lisander with the weary Regiment.

He was welcome to the Colonel as an Angel, and he deserved to be so indeed, not
only for his former good Service, but for his ready compliance with him to
leave Flanders, and the great discretion and diligence he had used in the
March. The day that the Regiment arrived, the Lieutenant Colonel, and some
other of the Officers, dined with the Colonel, when after Dinner drinking a
Glass of Wine (rather like Soldiers than Spaniards) Lisander (as if his good
Angel had whispered him something in his Ear) was observed to be gayer, and
liker himself than he had been all the March. Clarinda, according to the
Ceremony of Spain, was not seen among the Gentlemen at Dinner, but eat in her
own Chamber, where the Servants were so lavish in representing Lisanders
Accomplishments, that the talk cast her into a deep sit of Melancholy, with
bringing to her mind the Image of that man whom she could never forget. When
the Company parted Lisander was invited to lodge there till he was provided of
convenient Quarters; and you may easily believe that when he accepted the
motion, Venus and her Son smiled at the Omen.

Lisander had heard of Clarinda in Flanders, and understood that she was now at
home with her Father, but little did he think, that she was the Lady, that had
cost him all the quiet, and content he had in the World, for these last two
months. However to do his breeding right, he resolved to Court the first
opportunity, to bear up to her, and make her a Reverence. The next morning at a
good hour (as if the Destinies had now repented of their anger, and were
resolved to make our Lovers satisfaction for their past sufferings) Clarinda
went to walk in the Garden, where Lisander, as he was dressing himself in his
Chamber, was quickly aware of her. At another time he had needed no other
admonisher to dispatch, and make himself ready for the encounter, than the
warmth of his own temper, and inclination, though now, the last impression his
heart had received, made him use the occasion with a great deal of
indifference. As soon as ever Lisander entered the Garden, (says the
Governante, who was waiting on Clarinda) Here Is the Lieutenant Colonel, (for
she had seen him, and described him to the young Lady (as I was saying) the day
before,) and as modesty and good manners obliged them, they walked softly into
a by-Walk, as it had been on purpose to avoid him, for it was early, and the
Lady was in her morning Dress. Lisander thought it no point of his civility to
go directly the next way up to them, (as if he had had no other design in the
Garden) but intended to drop on them, as it were by chance, and so he began to
round them, as one would do a Covy of Partridge. He was just come so near, that
Clarinda knew him to be the same Gentleman, she had seen at the Play at
Brussels, though, by the favor of her morning Dress, he knew not her. And just
as he pulled off his Hat, and said, Good morrow fair Ladies, the Colonel who
had been taking the Fresco, steps forth of an Arbor at the end of the Walk,
and saluted him, they two fell immediately into Discourse, which gave Clarinda
a fair occasion to march off, without making him any answer, but a Courtesy.
She was certainly much beholding to her morning Cloths, and more to the
seasonable interruption of her Father, for the prevention of that surprise and
disorder which must needs have attended the discovery on both sides, and
infallibly have given the Governante who was well acquainted with the vanities
of this wicked World) just occasion to suspect, even more than the very truth.
As they walked off, the Governante asked Clarinda, What think you now of my
judgment? Is it not as I told you? Is not the Lieutenant Colonel a very fine
man? Has he not a brave Port? And twenty other little Questions of the same
sort, to which when she observed Clarinda made no answer, and seemed not to
mind her: She went on laughing, I warrant your heart has taken wing already,
and you are in love with him at first sight. Truly (says Clarinda) if one may
be forgiven for falling in love with any man at first sight, this is he; for I
think him the handsomest, and goodliest person of a man, that ever I saw in my
life. You have reason, (says the Governante) and I must confess, that such
sights to a young Lady in a morning next her heart, are oftentimes of very
dangerous consequence. What dangerous consequence do you mean (says Clarinda)?
As long as Ladies confine themselves within the Laws, and Obligations of their
Sex, what danger can there be in an Honorable Love? The Governante presently
fancied (and well she might) that Lisander's presence had a little moved the
young Lady, but she never so much as dreamed of any former Acquaintance. For
though she had been with her in Flanders, yet the night, that the young Lovers
encountered one another at the Play, she was not with them, for she was busy
putting things in readiness for the Journey. Though since their Arrival at
Barcellona, (being well assured of the Governant's discretion, and finding some
kind of ease in the bare Relation of her Love) Clarinda had told her the whole
Story. When they were come into her Chamber, she bad the Governant shut the
Door, and calling her to her, to the Bed side, with her face, as full of
passion, and transport as her heart could hold, Dear Leonora, (says she) This
is the Gentleman. And with that, a sudden shower of Tears, and an impetuous
Storm of Sighs made her senses retire for shelter, and threw her tender Body
pale, and breathless on the Bed, where there was neither help, nor company (the
more the pity) but the frighted Leonora. She ran presently, and called two or
three of the Maids, and by that time Clarinda was come to her self again. This
was rather the transport, and excess of joy, than any thing else, for now the
day began to break up, and she began to conceive fair hopes of that love which
the Stars seemed to favor, as if they had moved by her direction. And
therefore, as soon as she had taken a little Cordial Water, and the Maids were
sent away, she began, and told her discreet Confident the Brussels Story (with
all the circumstances she thought necessary to the management of the present
business) over again. And now the matter is brought upon the Carpet, and a
Consult is held, what is to be done, or what Measures are to be taken in their
Proceedings.

The first thing they agreed on, was to pass an irrevocable sentence against
rashness, and precipitancy in the case: And so they resolved, because (now
there were no other Strangers, besides the Lieutenant Colonel, who lodged
there) she would be expected at Dinner, her indisposition should excuse her for
that day. This was done on purpose that Lisander should not see her at
unawares, but that they might have time enough to consider, what methods they
should make use of for an Interview, lest the surprise might give the World
some untoward apprehensions. All that day was wasted in uncertain Counsels, and
nothing particular was determined, but that Clarinda should make use of the
first proper opportunity to make her self known to him, and (since she was now
in Spain, and thought she had him fast enough) it was resolved, she should
treat him with more modesty, and greater reservation, than the first Encounter
had promised, which (that she might stand fair in his opinion) was to be
pretended only jest, and raillery.

The Colonel, and Lisander in the Garden, discoursed the whole story of the
March, wherein Lisander was observed to deliver himself all along with so much
coldness, and indifference, that being modestly urged, he told the Colonel
plainly, that he repented the Expedition, and had a design to pretend his Ben'
Servito, or Discharge of his Majesty, and so return.

The Colonel (as much as he could without entering into his secrets)
endeavored to diswade him, striving to possess him with good thoughts of the
Country, and laying before him the fair prospect he had of raising his Fortunes
in Spain, whereas the Netherlands wanted that choice, and variety of great
Employments either in Peace, or War. In short the Colonel laid before him so
many reasons of weight, interwoven with such tokens of his good will, and so
much passion for his conversation, that, before they parted, Lisander (tho he
was well enough resolved within himself) in complaisance to the Colonel
(because he saw what trouble it gave him) was fain to tell him, he would
consider of it. The Colonel had more than a hundred times in Flanders, and on
his Journey too, thought of a Match betwixt the Lieutenant Colonel, and his
Daughter: And to say the truth, almost as often as he looked upon her in the
Coach, within himself, he could even have wished her fairly in Lisander's Arms.
And now finding his inclination to return for Flanders, (though he thought it
inconsistent with his gravity to be seen in it) yet he resolved to show him the
fair Clarinda at the best advantage, and try whether flesh and blood (which
were as warm in Lisander, as in another) could resist the powerful charms of
her Youth, and Beauty.

The next morning going to see his Daughter at her Chamber, and finding her
pretty cheerful and hearty, he bid her dress her self that day, and come to
Dinner. She did so, and about an hour before Noon, either to get her an
appetite, or to give Lisander time and place to accost her before Dinner, she
walked out into the Garden. As if every thing had conspired to further her
design, it happened to be Post-day, and so the Colonel having some Dispatches
to make, kept his Closet the most part of the forenoon. Lisander having the
opportunity in his hands, went to congratulate the young Ladies Recovery, and
give her the rest of that Address, which the Colonel had interrupted in the
beginning. As he came up to her, Clarinda (who was alone) was stooping down,
and either gathering, or pretended to be gathering Flowers, with her back
toward him. Madam (says Lisander when he was come within four or five paces of
her) I am glad to -- whereupon Clarinda turning her head about, and looking on
him, he could go no farther, but stood like one of the Statues in the Garden,
that had stepped from the Pedestal. He knew her (such an impression her face had
made in his soul) as well as if he had never left her company, since the first
time he had seen her, and was so thunderstruck with the surprise, that except
she had pitty'd his disorder, and asked him how he did, he had certainly
remained longer in the Exstasie. As soon as he came a little to himself, he
offered to kiss her hand, but she, who had already resolved to make him
believe, she did but railly him at the Play, drew back, and denied it, telling
him with a smile, that the customs of Spain and Flanders were different. Though
the Countries be different, (Madam says he) I hope your goodness is still the
same, and that your Ladyship cannot differ from your self. No otherwise Sir
(says she) than what jest, and earnest make the same Person differ. I remember
I saw you at a Play at Brussels, and had a mind to make my self merry with you,
but, if that liberty of jest shall any ways influence your Addresses here in
Spain, you must not take it ill, if you see me very seldom. Alas! (Madam says
he) how disproportionate is it to the tenderness of your Sex, to make your self
sport at the expense of another ruin. For that jesting (if you call it so)
has undone me. And if your jest have such power, and charms in it, what mortal
strength can resist, or human force oppose it self to your earnest. The wound
which that fatal Edge-tool gave me at that time, had certainly killed me before
this, but that Fortune (I see) has kept me alive to make her self sport. Sir
(says she smiling) I think she has chosen a proper person for the Province, for
you do it to a miracle, and it is pity, but we were in some such place, as we
first met, that the happy Company might partake with us, and I not blush with
laughing at you thus alone. And that is my grief, (Madam says he) but when I
have told you, with a Soldiers freedom, that I love you, that I have done so
ever since I first saw you, and that I cannot choose but do so, as long as I
live, laugh on in the name of Merriment, and know that my Passion is not the
less serious for your turning it into Ridicule. These last words she thought
were a little Choleric, and Savoured of the Soldier, and therefore to let him
see he had met with his match: Pray Sir (says she, blushing to think how she
played the Hypocrite) if you have any kindness for me, let me never hear one
word more of it. You cannot choose but think, that at the Play, I had been told
your Character, and who you were, and I hope you had wit enough to understand
the Irony: But if you are not convinced of your folly with a jest, yet pray be
so, when I have told you, you are to blame in good earnest, and so
fare-ye-well. With that she mended her pace, and walked very fast toward the
house, and he to keep himself in countenance (if any body should by chance have
seen them) marched along with her, crying all the way (like an importunate
Beggar) Nay dear Madam, Sweet Madam, I beseech you Madam, But one word Madam:
What Is that Sir (says she?) That you would forgive (says he) what is past, and
take no advantage of Poor Lisanders weakness. It is your future behavior (says
she) that must obtain your pardon, and your better Conduct in time to come,
that must Apologize for your past weakness. Just as they came into the Hall,
the Colonel (who was coming down to Dinner) met them, and so she left them two
together, and ran to her Chamber to tell the Governante the success of the
Encounter, and how she had much ado to contain her self, and forbear laughing
in his face, to see him run along with her, like a Lacquay, Dear Madam, sweet
Madam, and so on.

The Discourse at Table was divided between the Colonel, and Lisander. The
young Lady (which would have seemed a little strange to one that had heard her
in the Garden, and were not well acquainted with the Customs of the Country)
only filled a mute place, and gave a negligent Audience. Lisander was that day
a little more Airy than he had been since his Arrival, and the Colonel was well
enough pleased to imagine, he was a little influenced by the Conversation of
his Daughter. And resolved from that very moment, to give her more Liberty,
than the Conduct of that wary Nation would allow, rather than Lisander should
want any honorable occasion of cherishing the tender Sentiments he might begin
to have for the Beautiful Clarinda.

That evening our Amoroso took a walk all alone about the Town-walls, where his
Encounter in the Garden with all its Circumstances (as far as his confusion
gave him leave to remember) came fresh into his thoughts. Clarinda he knew had
the better of it, and yet he found himself well enough satisfied for the
Defeat, with the unexpected retrieve of the Lady, whose loss had almost made
him desperate. He was not used to be nonsuited in Addresses of that kind,
which made him bear this with a great deal the more impatience. And (though he
had Conduct enough to dissemble it in Public) her Spanish virtue, and severity
did but serve to Fan the fire, and make his Passion grow the more impetuous,
and unruly.

It was never so troublesome to him, as when he was alone, and yet (which is
none of the least Plagues of an unfortunate Lover) he always studied to avoid
Company. This desire of Solitude, and some little indisposition which his
Melancholy had procured, kept him two, or three days in his Chamber, where it is
impossible any man should tell you how he passed his time, or what he endured,
but he, that has rowed in the same Galley.

Sometimes he would lay the fault upon his own bad manage, sometimes upon the
iron Manners of the Country, sometimes upon his own easy inclinations,
sometimes upon the case-harden'd temper of the young Lady, and by and by lost,
and confounded with the trouble, (like other miserable men) he would cry out,
and complain of (I know not what) Stars, and Influences, and Conjunctions, and
Aspects, which (I dare say) knew no more of the matter, than the Man in the
Moon. Sometimes he fancied he had let slip the Fatal moment, the Critical
minute in Flanders, and that now it was irrecoverable, and yet when he called
to mind her present rigor, and severity, his reason told him, that that
liberty was only sport, and Burlesque. And when he was once about to flatter
himself with her sudden indisposition after she had seen him the first time in
the Garden, being told upon enquiry, she had had more of those fits, and
remembering how coldly, and unconcernedly she had entertained him upon the
Discovery, all those thoughts abandoned, and left him full of suspense and
irresolution. While he kept his Chamber, Clarinda (for more reasons than he
knew) sent the Governante to make him several Visits, though the only way to
cure him had been to have come her self. Once as she had delivered her Ladies
Compliment (which was brisk, and Gentile enough) he told her smiling, that he
found so much ease, and benefit in every-one of these welcome Messages, that he
did really believe, that if her Lady were pleased to make a Truce with the
Spanish Ceremonies, and make him one Visit her self, her presence would work a
Miracle, and set him on his feet again in spite of his Distemper. As soon as
Clarinda had received this pleasant Address from her Patient, she (who had no
mind he should be lost for want of so small a Favor) went presently to his
Chamber, and with a look full of freedom, and Gallantry told him, that since he
had desired it, she was come to be his Physician. Madam (says he,) if you have
but brought the will of healing along with you, I shall never doubt the cure.
Indeed Sir (says she,) but I shall: For I my self know, that I want one of
those two main things, which make a Physician complete, That is Skill, and you
suppose me to want the other, which is Honesty, and it may be you want that
necessary qualification of a hopeful Patient Faith, so that, methinks, we have
a great deal of reason to distrust the success. By your pardon, Madam (says
he,) I can see none at all. For if it be true (which they say,) that every
observing man (though no professed Physician) knows readily what ails him,
where his Grief lies, and what will do him good, then am I confident of your
Ladyships Ability in my case, And then for my Faith, I am afraid I shall carry,
but too much of it, to my very Grave. But now, if you should (like some of the
Faculty, Pardon the Comparison) keep a body in hand, and retard the Cure,
either for the advance of some secret Interest, or the trial of some curious
Experiment, I know not whether I should have more cause to complain of you, for
the Cure, or the Wound. So Sir (says she) now it is out. Still the old Song,
Flames, and Fires, and Darts, and Arrows: If you have nothing else to say I
must leave you, lest instead of my curing you, you should infect me, and so,
Adieu. With that she stepped to the door, and without any parting Solemnity,
left the Distressed Lisander studying a Rejoinder. This haughty Carriage of
hers brought him a little to himself. For now he began to consider, that it is
the Adorer makes the Lady a Deity, that a pityful crouching, and submission,
only serves to make the Ambitious insolent, and where it does not meet with a
true Generosity, (such as is almost inconsistent with the weakness of a woman)
does but expose the devout to the greater Rigor, and Contempt. These, and some
other thoughts of the same kind, put the Cane into his hand and led him, as it
were in spite of Nature, and his indisposition to take a turn in the Garden.
Where he no sooner set his eyes on that Fatal turf, where he discovered his
dear Clarinda, but the very imagination of her Person, her Wit, and her
Address, called him Traitor to his face, and made all this mighty Resolution
vanish in an Amorous thought.

He found something within him that rebelled against his reason, and easily
softened, and overcame his most manly, and best advised determinations. His
Soul was (on the sudden) once again all Love, and Ecstasy, and something he
resolved to do in the prosecution of it, though he knew not what. And though
the Enterprise every way showed it self very difficult, yet the greatness of
his Spirit, which could not be baffled with Trifles, and the violence of his
Love which was deaf to all denials, prompted him to go on and prosper, or at
worst to fall and die bravely. He kept his Chamber no longer, though for
several days Clarinda gave him no occasion to see her but at the Table, where
he could say nothing to her, but what the Colonel might hear. Though indeed all
this aversion was but deep Hopocrisie, for she was affected (what pity it was
he had not known it) with every word he spoke, and every breath he drew, and
what ever the subject was, he always discoursed so well, and so pertinently
that every sentence was his Advocate, and made an impression in her very heart.

The first thing he resolved on was to dispossess that unfamiliar Spirit of
strangeness, which she hugged so close, and made so much of, as well to assure
her self of the Constancy, and Sincerity of his Love, as to convince him of the
Candor, and integrity of her own Honor. The fittest means, he could think of
to this purpose, was an Intrigue with the Governante, whom he met almost every
day in the Garden. For I must acquaint you by the way, that Clarinda had hired
her with a new Gown, and Petticoat, only to appear now and then where he was,
in hopes of receiving some dear Compliment, or other from him, though but at
second hand. The Governante, that very well knew both their minds, chanced to
be one day in the Garden, where Lisander, after a little sweetning Discourse
for a Preface, and her Confidence bought, and paid for with five double
Pistols, acquaints her with his Love to Clarinda, and his earnest desire of
some proper juncture to wait upon her alone.

She seemed to be in a little Disorder at the first hearing of that, (which
indeed was no News to her) but the Almighty Gold soon composed her Spirit, and
made her promise him her utmost assistance in any honorable Design, though she
were sure to incur the eternal displeasure of her Lady. Of such sovereign use,
and virtue is this Omnipotent Ore in the closing of all breaches, and healing
all differences between the two Blind Deities of Love, and Fortune. Hereupon
Clarinda resolves, the next day after Dinner, to walk about half a League out
of the City to a Countrey-house of her Fathers, and the Governante privately
acquaints Lisander with it in the morning (who had been there two or three
times with the Colonel. As soon as Dinner was done, he takes a birding Gun in
his hand, and about half a mile from the Town (as if it had been by mere
accident) he encounters Clarinda, and the Governante walking toward the
Countrey-house. They were both veiled as the Spanish Custom is; and though
Clarinda passed by him without showing her self, yet the Governante (whom that
office better became) uncovered her face, and Saluted him, which obliged
Clarinda in Civility (since they were known) to do so too. He offered her his
Attendance in the Walk, and that in such a powerful form of words, that a Lady
(less inclinable than she) could scarce have refused him without the imputation
of Discourteous, and in fine was accepted for their Salva Guardia. The
Governante presently put her self (as Gold, and good Clothes, and good Manners
obliged her) into the Vanguard, and gave our Lovers all the occasion of
Dialogue they could wish.

Lisander who had suffered enough for one, and now was jealous of losing
another Opportunity, began to tell the Lady that he believed Fortune both
without his knowledge, and merit, had done him this Honor to make him
satisfaction for all the Torments he had endured for her sake. If Fortune have
made you satisfaction (says she) then have you nothing to pretend of me. And
except you have a mind to make me bad Company, and your self troublesome, Pray
let me hear no more of this whining, puling-Love, that makes a man look like
one of those Hero's, that is just come from killing of a Giant, to lay himself
down and die, for the frown of a Mistress. For this will never take among
people that know the World, and what it is to live, I Will assure you. Why then
Madam (says he) let me tell you once again in the Rhetoric of a Man of War, I
am in Love. And in have too (says she) methinks, But pray take me along with
you, and tell me, whereupon is this Love of yours (that you talk so much of)
grounded? What do you see in this Face, that should make you think me such a
Fool, as to believe you can have any real affection for one that has so little
Merit, and is so much a Stranger to you? Madam (says he) the subject of your
Merit is a very large field, and the prospect is very fair; but because it
wants not my Praises, and because every man else might as well pretend he Loves
you for the same Cause, I will pass it by only in a silent Admiration. But when
you ask me how I can Love a Stranger, there you do but beg the Question, and
command Reason from him, that for your sake has entirely lost it. A very fair
Confession, Sir, upon my word, (says she.) And can you think, that a Young Lady
so Fair, as you say, and of such expectation as others say I am, should ever be
persuaded to throw her self away upon one that plainly Confesses he has lost
his Reason? And then to say you lost it for my sake is an Argument in the same
mood, and figure with his, that, because he had been Trappan'd for a wound he
received in his Majesty's Service, pretended to be made one of his Privy
Council, or another, who having lost his Leg in a Sea Fight against the Turk,
came to Madrid hopping, and hoping to be made one of the Kings Footmen. This
will never do your business, Sir, and till you have more Reason, let me entreat
you to trouble me with none at all. Lisander was almost Mad (and it would have
made any body so) that a man, that wore a Sword, should be run down, at this
rate, with a Distaff. And (stareing her full in the Face) Madam (says he with
some little heat) you may as well Command me not to breath, or bid my Pulse
stand still, as hinder me from Loving, where I see I must needs repent, though
(alas!) too late. A certain Demonstration I have yet Reason enough left me to
see I am miserable. Thus dull, and insipid were the poor Lisanders
applications, and he was never in his life known to have so little Wit, as now,
when he stood most in need of it. As it often happens to men of good sense,
that, when they have a mind to speak best, and deliver their minds in the most
proper, and apposite words, have many times enough to do, to keep themselves
clear of Nonsense, and Solaecism. Clarinda knew well enough, it was the trouble
of his mind that made his Wit run so muddy, for she had often heard him play
the Orator, and speak fluently on a dry Subject. At last his Passion quite
stopped his Mouth, she had the field to her self, and now she talked without an
Answer. It had certainly been a very pleasant Entertainment to see the
Ingenious Lieutenant Colonel March on, like one of Pythagoras's Undergraduates,
all Ears, and no Mouth, and the Lady all the while Philosophizing to him. Sir
(says she) (for she never designed he should despair) if you be not happy it is
your own fault. A wise man has more influence upon his own Fortune and content,
than all the Constellations of the Firmament, as well those that have beards as
those that have none. For where he cannot form his Fortune to his mind, he
forms his mind to his Fortune. Thus Happyness has oftentimes its foundation in
the Opinion, or Desire, so that Desire without hopes becomes a Disease, To
desire, or take a fancy for what we cannot obtain, is to lay Snares for our
selves, and to be Authors of our own misery. When she had finished this
Harangue, says Lisander, like a man that is going to take leave of the World
before his time; Let every body take warning by my Example, and may Heaven, and
good Fortune defend all honest Gentlemen from those Ladies, that have been bred
in Cloisters. With this, and such like Discourse, they passed the time, till
they came to the Countrey-house, where they had a neat Collation, and a glass
of Wine in Ice, and so home again. All the way homewards Lisanders Love was the
Ladies Game. It was well for him that Jeers do not go through ones Clothes,
otherwise he had (at that time) received more Wounds, than Julius Caesar in the
Senate. I will not undertake to tell you how he found himself all this while, I
refer you to those Gentlemen, that have smarted under the same lash. When they
were within half a mile of the City, comes a Gentleman (as if he had been sent
from Heaven for Lisanders Deliverance) in his Boots, and Riding-dress, and
presents him a Paper. Which when he had opened proved a Commission from the
King for him to go to Sea. Now it is the Custom of Spain, for some three Months
every Summer, to send five, or six Galleys, to scowre the Coasts, and secure
the Kingdoms of Naples, and Sicily, and the Places thereabout, from the
Corsairs, or Turkish Pirates. It was for this Service that four Companies were
Ordered to be drawn out of that Regiment, and the Lieutenant Colonel to Command
them. Lisander (whose will never disputed with the Kings Service) was well
enough satisfied with the Honor, though it may be, another, that had Loved, as
he did, would have received the Message with some surprise. He was glad to be
delivered a while from Clarinda's Tyranny, and he hoped that two, or three
Months absence (which has a wonderful Ascendant over young Lovers) might favor
both his Love, and Fortune. As soon as they heard Lisander, and the Gentleman
discoursing the Affair, Clarinda turned her self round about upon the
Governante, and looked like Death. The Governante who was afraid she should
have fallen down, immediately whispered in her Ear, that she was sure it was a
Design, and a Trick only to discover her Inclinations. This Invention of the
Governante's was very sudden, and seasonable; for had she scratched her head
for it never so little, her Lady had miscarried, and the Secret had taken Air.
But, as soon as she heard this, she presently recovered the trouble, without
the least notice, the Discourse was so earnest between Lisander, and the
Gentleman. As soon as they came into the House, the Governante hastened
Clarinda to her Chamber, for fear she should have met the News again, before
she came there. As soon as ever they were alone, and the door shut, Dear Madam
(says the Governante) be not suppris'd, but the News is most true, that the
Lieutenant Colonel is to go to Sea, but I persuaded you in the field, it was
not so, for fear you should have discovered your weakness, and he have gone
away with the Triumph. The Roses of Clarinda's cheeks crept into their Beds,
and all the time of the Governante's Relation, she stood still, and said
nothing; but as soon as the Governante had done, she fell a crying, and taking
on, like a Woman that had Buried her only Son. Had not the Governante held her,
she would have run directly to find her Lisander, so furious was her Love,
notwithstanding all her Coy pretenses, and dissimulation.

The Governante used all the Arguments, that the Affair in that conjuncture
would admit, and all little enough too, to keep her from betraying the violence
of her Love, by ways most monstrous and ridiculous. At last (when Clarinda
could hear) and the Governante came to tell her, that it was but for two or
three months, she was a little better composed, and begged the Governante to
help her to Bed. That night the Governante went to Lisander (who was to go
about his Commission very early next morning) in her Ladies name, to wish him a
good Voyage, and a safe Return; and told him she was weary with the walk, and
in Bed, or she would have waited upon him her self. This was all to dissemble
Clarinda's disorder, and keep it secret between them two. All that night she
never laid her eyes together. She rose more than twenty times, to look for that
sorrowful day, which she feared might be the last she was ever to see her
beloved Lisander. At length the day broke, and about Sunrising the Colonel,
and Lisander were both before the Gate under Clarinda's Window taking leave.
They embraced one another, and parted (as they were wont upon such occasions)
like good Soldiers full of joy, and warm hopes. For Lisander was going on an
Errand, which was like to bring him both Money and Honor, and for the Dangers
he might meet with, he never thought of them before they came, nor talked of
them when they were once passed. Clarinda was waiting in her Window, and though
it did not become her to speak, yet she bowed her self, and sent him away with
such passionate Wishes, as no heart, but one as warm as hers, can ever conceive.

All the time of his absence she pleased her self with nothing, but thinking
and speaking of Lisander. She, and the Governante would (I know not how many
times a day) be calculating, how far he might be off, how long he had been
absent, and when they might expect his Return. Sometimes they would be
mustering up their pretty Remarks upon his Actions, as his Walking, his
Speaking, his Saluting, his Laughing and his Frowning; and another while they
would be talking of his Person, his Face, his Eyes, his Hair, his Wast, his
Arms, his Hands, his Legs, his Feet, and what not. When they had spent
something above two months in these little Entertainments, News came, that the
Kings Galleys were in sight of Barcellona, and homewards bound. They had taken
more Prizes, and Prisoners that Summer, than they had in seven Summers before,
in which Honor Lisander had the greatest share, besides a Dividend of fifty
thousand pieces of Eight. That part of the Regiment, which stayed behind, was
drawn down to the Shore, and received the Companies on board with three Vollies
of Shot, who returned the Complement with three more. And thence, as soon as
they were landed, Lisander led them into the Town, which bad them welcomer than
ever they had done any Soldiers in then lives, because they brought Money with
them. There was, as much (and more) crowding to see Lisander, as if they had
never seen him in their lives. And as he marched through the Streets, in the
head of the Regiment, there was as many Windows open, as it had been at a
Coronation. The Colonel was at that time at Madrid, and was to stay there five
or six weeks to receive Instructions and Money for Recruiting his Regiment,
which had suffered great loss in the Wars of Flanders. So that Lisander chose
rather to provide himself Quarters in another House, than to give the World the
least occasion to censure, either his Prudence, or the young Ladies Conduct in
her Fathers absence. Clarinda was more sensible of Lisanders Honor, and
affected with his good Fortune, than he was himself; and therefore the
Governante advised her to keep her Chamber, as well for fear of being abroad
when he came to Visit, as for fear of discovering the Fire in her Heart, by the
light of her Countenance. And yet it was resolved between them, either because
they knew they had him fast, or to see how much a great Spirit could bear, she
should show him but just the same Curtezy, and receive him with the very same
Civility that she would do a mere Stranger. Alas, that any honest man's Quiet
and Satisfaction should be determined by the false weights, and measures, by
the Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation of a cruel, and ill-natured Woman!

Every body that knocked at the Gate alarmed Clarinda with the same transport,
and surprise, as if it had been Lisander himself, for, whoever knocked, she
still fancied it was he. The next day, about two of the Clock, when he thought
no body could either suspect, or observe his have, he went to make his dear
Clarinda a Visit. She had already resolved the manner of his Entertainment,
which was this: She met, and received him in her Antichamber, suffered him to
kiss her hand, and so led him into her Chamber. After she had discoursed him a
while, she sat her down upon her Estrado, and left this Child of Fortune to
Court her standing upon his feet, with his Hat under his Arm.

After he had signified his sense of the Colonels Absence, and then Comforted
both her, and himself with the great necessity, and advantage of it, he began
by gentle degrees, to make her new Tenders of his old Services. The Fame, and
Success of his Voyage, and his fair reception inspired him with mighty hopes,
that now his hand was in, he should carry his Mistress too. The torrent of his
words was brisker, and more luxuriant, than it used to be, and one would have
thought, he had reserved the choice Meditations of two whole Months, and more,
for this very occasion. I need not tell you what effect his Rhetoric had upon
Clarinda's Spirit, but certainly it was such, as no Lady in the world, but her
self, could have dissembled. The moment of Lisanders happyness, and her
yielding was not yet come, and therefore with three, or four Sentences, and as
many grave Regards she Answered him, That she was very sensible he was a person
every way complete, and hansom, and that his Character, and Employment had been
always such, as might render any man considerable. That his late Naval Service
had won him old Gold, and new Laurels, and for ever enrolled his Name among the
Favorites of Fame, and Fortune. That for these reasons, he would do well to
think of some Amors, that might be more to his advantage, and if these
considerations would not prevail with him to desist, she assured him, that
besides the inequality of their Fortunes, she had already disposed of her
Heart, and could not by any means think of altering her Resolutions. Lisander
heard all this with the very same looks, that a Convicted Prisoner receives the
Sentence of his Death. Little did he think where she had disposed her heart,
nor would the Agony give him leave, so much as once to imagine, it might fall
to his share. But as soon, as his cold fit was over, he told her suddenly, and
with a heat little less than that of Anger, how ill she had requited all his
past Services; and that if his Despair did not prove Mortal, he would hereafter
study to take such measures, as might give neither of them so much trouble, or
disquiet. Sir (says she) I do extremely applaud your Resolution, and I know no
other Expedient that can restore the great Opinion, I have always had, of your
Conduct, and discretion. Thus did Lisander take his leave, resolving to
maintain no other Familiarity with her, for the future, than what might just
vindicate him from the imputation of ill breeding.

That same night, that he might seem to take his leave Gentilely, he brought
two, or three of his Officers, who were excellent Musicians, and his
Confidents, before Clarinda's Lodgings, to give her this parting Serenade under
the name of Chloris.

CHloris your Rigor was to blame,
Your Ice has chilled, and quenched my flame;
Your Anger has my heat allayed,
Your Scorn has cured the wound your Beauty made,
I Will Sigh, and Vow no more in vain,
You Have freed a Captive by too strait a Chain.
I can your Pride no longer bear,
No longer hope, no longer fear,
The Arrow's fallen from my side,
Despair has done, what Love, and You denied,
My Passion's Murdered in your hate,
And tho you would Love me now, yet it is too late.
This was the pleasantest Scene in the world to Clarinda, and the Governante,
who were well acquainted with Lisanders Passion, and knew it was not in his
power to stay away above two, or three days at most. They were ready to fall
down with laughing to see him Cock his Hat, and act the Cruel, that, for all
this appearance, would at the same time have fallen down on both his knees for
a Pardon, and have broke all the Instruments to boot, with all his heart, for
consenting to the Song.

However, to make her believe he was in good earnest, and to try whether he
could make Clarinda jealous, the very next night he went, and made Love in
another place. It was a Spanish Address to a young Lady of Quality, performed
upon the Street (as the manner is) just before her Lodgings. He measured the
ground, more than a hundred times backward, and forward, with many a false,
languishing look toward the poor abused Lady in the Window. He had two of the
hardest parts to Act, at that time, that ever any man in the world undertook,
to pretend a false Passion, and dissemble a true one. The poor Lady was so
pleased with Lisanders Service (for all the Town knew him) that had not
Modesty, and the Custom of the Nation restrained her, she could never have
stood to make more than two words to the bargain, here is the one, here is the
other, and even have let him in to rights.

She began in the space of two, or three nights application, to value her self,
not so much upon her own, as upon the merit of Lisander, and made no more
difficulty of entertaining his Love, than one, that had fasted three days,
would to go to dinner.

In the mean while Clarinda who had still the news of all that passed, was
resolved to sail with the same wind, to entertain another servant, and see
whether he, or she could brook a Rival with less impatience. Having resolved on
the Design she communicated it to the Governante, who was the best Manager of
such an Intrigue, that could be, and so they presently pitched upon the
Gentleman. There was a Gentleman, you must know, that in Lisanders absence, had
made two, or three attempts to no purpose, to insinuate himself into Clarinda's
service, and growing choleric with the disappointment (which is the most
unpardonable weakness a man can be guilty of) was bold to name the Lady,
without that respect, and tenderness which were the unquestionable dues of her
Virtue, and Discretion. The words in the proper and usual sense signified well
enough, but, because they were ambiguous, and capable of a bad Construction
(which it may be he designed) he was thought the fittest man in the World to be
Lisander's Rival. For they could not but suspect, that when Lisander came to
understand his pretensions, he would certainly grow impatient, and his Passion
might at once revenge his own, and Clarinda's wrongs, in giving his Rival the
Bastinado. The Design being thus laid, the next morning they met the Cavalier
at Mass where (never dreaming that she knew how he had injured her) he was
almost ravished, to See Clarinda cast now, and then an amorous Glance upon him,
as it were by stealth, and as if she were afraid to be seen. He began to
consider whether he had altered his Garb, or she her mind, but wherever the
Secret lay, he was sure she had conceived some advantageous sentiments of his
Person, and therefore his Wisdom thought it fit to push his good fortune, and
strike while the Iron was hot. As they were coming out of the Church, she
looked back upon him again, which sufficiently confirmed his opinion, and made
him resolve to go Serenade her that very night. The good Gentleman spent the
whole day in providing himself of four of the best Musicians, that were to be
had in the City, to grace the solemnity. And, at night, full of expectation, he
made a fine Parade with his Fiddlers before her window, where he began to Sing
her such a parcel of doggerel Couplet, of his own making, as might very well
have given him a right to a good drubbing, though he had never done any thing
else amiss in all his life. Lisander, who had his Spies abroad, presently got
notice of it, as he was practicing Love in the next street, Sacrificing whole
Hecatombs of flying Kisses, and paying a thousand silent speaking Reverences to
his new Saint. You must pardon him, if he took his leave a little abruptly; for
the counterfeit Passion, he had for his new Mistress, easily gave place to the
true one he had for his Rival. Lest the Serenaders should have lost their
labor, away he goes in all have, attended only by two of his own Soldiers,
that brought him the intelligence, who were trusty fellows, and excellent
company in a doubtful occasion. As soon as ever they came up with the Music,
without any other greeting, at a matter of half a dozen blows, they broke two
fiddles, and as many heads, whereof his Rival's chanced to be one. This
Adventure was one of the stillest (of a rough one) that ever I heard of. The
Enemy took the retreat without so much as saying, what is the meaning of this?
So that there was not one word of complaint, or controversy, nor the least
noise in the World, besides that of the staves. For Lisander came not to fight
and quarrel, but to correct, and chastise, and the poor Fiddlers were so
frighted with the surprise, that they quite forgot they had any swords on.
Clarinda, who was a party in the action and saw all the circumstances of it,
from her window, better than they that performed it, was better pleased than
ever she was with any thing in all her life. And as soon as she could for
laughing, she vowed to the Governante, that the Gentleman's Dishonor should for
ever excuse her from showing him the least favor. But she might have spared
that breath, for Don was a Spaniard, and was so much ashamed to have suffered
such an affront, and so tamely before his Mistress, that he durst sooner
thought of dying, than of ever coming in to her sight again.

Lisander having by this action confessed the power of his Love, and his
impotence to dissemble it, presented himself the next day to Clarinda, made a
profound submission, and begged her pardon. She found her own strength, and his
weakness, and intending to make her own use of both, she told him, that his
relation to the Colonel, and his own merit, should at any seasonable hours
open him the doors of that House, and make him welcome as a Friend; But if he
still persisted to pretend any farther, she must be forced to make use of those
Expedients, which she was not willing to think of. Lisander had enough to say,
but durst not answer one word at that time, for fear of moving her displeasure,
which was more terrible to him, than a Cannon in a breach, charged with small
shot. However he still frequented the House, and was as familiar there as if he
had been at home. And though it was directly forbidden him, yet when he found
Clarinda in a good humor, he could not choose but give the old string now and
then a gentle touch, and let her see by Some passing Trope that his Love was
above her rigor. When he spoke so plain that she was obliged to take notice of
it, he was sure to lose her Company for that time, which made him day, and
night beat his brains, and weary himself to find out some desperate Remedy,
that might either kill, or cure; Some Expedient to set Clarinda on the rack,
and force her with one breath to determine the success of his weary Love. For a
downright Despair, he knew could make him die but once, whereas, that doubtful
hope, that tempered Cruelty, those corrected Poisons, made him ready to give up
the Ghost once, or twice a day. And what gave him very wonderful apprehensions,
his utmost diligence could never yet learn, who (as she told him) she had
disposed of her Heart; for he never heard, that she entertained any Gentleman,
but himself. In the midst of this perplexity, Love, and Fortune, who had long
pittyed his sufferings laid their heads together, and undertook his
Deliverance, which was thus.

Lisander having a mind to see the Regiment together, and exercise them,
Commanded them to be in Arms by the Seashore next morning at the opening of
the Gates. It happened the same Evening, that four tall Ships were come to
anchor near the shore to take in fresh water, and as soon as ever it was light
in the morning, loosed their foretop-sails, and were weighing anchor, intending
within two hours to be under Sail again. Lisander who was upon the shore with
the Regiment, gave his Captain Commandant instructions what to do, till he came
back, and went privately into the City to try his last practice upon Clarinda.
He came up to her Chamber door, and knocked in more have than he used to do,
and the Governante opened him the door; for her Lady was just up. As soon as he
entered the room, the Governante withdrew, imagining he might have some
extraordinary business, because it was so early, and he seemed to be in such
have. Now Madam (says he) to Clarinda, I am come to take my leave of you, and
(as I have often done in jest) bid you Farewell for ever, in good earnest. And
with that he led her to the window, showed her the Regiment on the Shore, the
Ships with their fore-topsails loose, and their anchors on peak. And then told
her, that, last night late, he had received News, that there were great
appearances of another War with France, and an Order to embarque, in those
Ships with the Regiment for Flanders again, where the Colonel was to meet them.

That he had not a moment to stay, but begged her a thousand pardons for all the
indiscretions, which his passionate Love might ever have been guilty of, and
wished her all the satisfaction she could ever hope, or promise her self in her
own unmovable Inclinations. Clarinda during this Narration, turned her eyes, I
know not how many times, from Lisander to the Ships, and from the Ships to
Lisander. And seeing the trouble, and confusion he was in, (which indeed was
for fear his Project should have miscarried) She threw her arms about his neck,
and fell on weeping most pitifully. Had it been to save both their lives, She
could not have spoken one word; but with the same hold, She kissed him a
thousand times, and wet all his face with her tears. Lisander seeing the fury
of her Passion, began to mistrust the Effects of it, and was ready to repent
the Experiment. And though he knew there was no reason for it, yet he could
almost have found in his heart to have wept for company. Dear Madam (says he)
speak, and let me go. Never, Never, my dear Lisander (says she,) and so she
fell on weeping again with that violence that she could not get out another
word. As soon as she was come a little to her self, False, and perfidious man
(says she) could thy Cruelty find no other way to put an end to this miserable
life of mine? Is this the fruit of all your Vows, and Oaths? Is this indeed the
end of all your pretended Love, and Constancy? Dear Lisander let me in pity
die by your hand to prevent that more cruel, and unfortunate death, which I
shall meet in your absence. Madam (says he, with no little amazement,) If all
this be Love, it is either very young, or you have been extremely in the wrong
to dissemble it all this while. For now, Dear Madam I must tell you, the time
is passed, and it is too late to recall it. Bear your fate, as well as you may,
though I am sure in a very little time to sink under mine. And whereas a
seasonable freedom might have made us both happy, this ill-timed Love of yours,
worse than Disdain, shows it self too late, like a flash of Gunpowder after the
Execution is done. May my grief, and hard fate (says she) light on them, that
first imposed this uneasy modesty, this self-murdering reservation upon the
frailty of our Sex. I have loved you, my Dear Lisander, as my own Soul, ever
since the first time I saw you; it is to you I have disposed my Heart, and
methinks a man of your reason, might have read as much in my very Eyes. Dear
Lisander, either stay here, or take me with you, or do something -- and then
her sorrow interrupted her again, that she could go no farther. Madam (says he)
I had been the happiest of all mortal men, had I but known you Inclinations a
little sooner; but it is now to late. I can neither take you along with me, nor
yet disobey the Kings Order, and stay here. All I can say, is this, If I have
but one half hours leisure, before we set Sail, I will wait upon you again to
receive your last Commands. With that they kissed, and Embraced one another
once again, and so they parted. As soon as Lisander was gone the Governante
came in, and found the sorrowful Lady grovelling upon the bed, with her face
toward the pillow, striving in vain to stiffle that Grief, which was now grown
stubborn, and unruly. She was a good while before she could tell her the sad
tidings, which when she had ended, she fell on raving, and cursing the advice,
and conduct of all such Governantes. Poor Leonora knew not what to say or do.
She would have told her, as she did the last time in the field, that it was all
mere design, and fiction, but she foresaw, that Wheedle was not like to pass
twice. And finding her Lady utterly incapable both of comfort, and counsel, she
told her, she would step down to the shore, and inform her self better. That it
may be, things were not altogether so desperate, as she fancied them; and if
there were any thing left to hope, they would leave nothing unattempted, that
might contribute to her satisfaction. Drowning men catch at any thing. And
seeing the Governante had yet some little heart, Clarinda raised her face a
little from the Pillow, and bade her go. The Governante made fewer strides to
to the shore, than ever she did in her life (though it were to an Assignation.)
And finding a huge crowd of people there (who were come to see the Regiment
Exercise) and seeing Mariners so busy at work she never so much as doubted
the truth of Lisander's Relation. As soon as ever an occasion presented it
self, she saluted one of those Officers, which I was telling you were Lisanders
Confidents, and wished him a fair Wind and a good voyage. What do ye mean Madam
(says he?) I mean to Flanders Sir (says she.) Not this year I hope (says he)
Madam, we were there but too lately. Pray Sir (says she) whither are you bound
then? No whither Madam (says he) that I know, but to Exercise. And just then
the Lieutenant Colonel called him to his command. This Officer presently
imagined there was something in the bottom of the Governantes discourse, but he
thought it inconsistent with his discretion to sound her, or enquire any
further. The Governante run home again like lightning, and by the way two or
three of her acquaintance asked her, if she had been to see the Regiment
Exercise, which confirmed her, that the Story of returning to Flanders was but
one of Lisanders Practices upon the Lady. The good News drove her home again in
as much have, as the fright had driven her abroad, and had it not been for
drawing the boys after her, I believe she had gone faster. As soon as ever she
came into the Chamber, Courage Madam (says she) Courage, And when she had
breath enough, She told her, We are abused, Madam. There is no such thing. The
Regiment is not going on board: It is only exercising upon the shore. And if
you please to come to the window here, you may see them, (For till then she
durst scarce have looked out, though a look would have stayed the Regiment.) It
was then, that Clarinda first began to reflect upon Lisanders Policy, and her
own weakness. And going to the window, she saw the Ships sail, and the Regiment
continue their Exercise upon the shore. The tacit shame, and sense of her
dishonor was almost as troublesome, as if the Regiment had sailed indeed.
Sometimes she fancied it a Judgment upon her from the God of Love, (if there be
any such Deity) for her hypocrisy in his service and her bad usage of
Lisander. Sometimes she thought Lisander had but paid her her own, and that
his Revenge was but just. And sometimes she was in pain to think, how she
should receive him the next time he came. When the Exercise was done, and
Lisander had led the Regiment to the Marketplace, and discharged them, they
saw him give his Pike to his servant, and come directly toward her Lodgings.
She bade the Governante step to the door, and tell him, her Lady was not well.
The Governante did so; to whom he made no other reply, but, that he was sorry
for it, and sent her his service, and so marched off. This Excuse (as he looked
upon it) of her indisposition, madded him to the very heart, and made him
resolve, now he knew her secret, that he would never see her again, till he was
sent for. Three days, and three nights did these Lovers keep their points, each
of them expecting the other should address first. In the end Lisander had the
better of it, and let her see what it was for a Woman to slight a Person whom
she loved. She could endure no longer than the fourth day, and then she sent
the Governante early in the morning, to meet him at Mass, and invite him to her
Lodgings. The Governante did so, and he promised he would come, though he told
her it could not be till afternoon, for he was engaged to dine with a Friend.

This was a little strange ta Clarinda, for she had known the time when he
would not have deferred the favor, to have dined with an Emperor. About four
of the Clock he came, and the Governante (as she was Commanded) went forth of
the Chamber, as she let him in. Clarinda was sitting upon her Estrado at her
Needle, where Lisander with a Smile marched up to her, and Saluted her, which
she returned with a grave, and Modest regard. She had not yet determined what
to do, or how to behave her self, but looked very Pensive and Melancholy, and
whatever he said, she Answered him all along with a Monosyllable, and Sennor.
At length Madam (says he) if I thought my Presence made your Ladyship uneasy,
I would take my leave. With that she stuck her needle in her Work, and looking
him full in the face. Sir (says she) Wherein have I deserved to be used so like
one of your Gallina's? Or what have I done, that you could think of exposing my
weakness thus? What is become of all that pretended Passion, and counterfeit
Tenderness of yours? Or where is that respect, and Civility, which in Justice
all Gentlemen of your Character owe the Ladies? But I Confess it is too good
for me. My easiness at the first Interview, made you think me fit to receive
impressions, and all my severity, since that minute, could never set me right
again in your Opinion. In vain, Alas! were the holy Sisters so many years in
building, and adorning a Structure, which this false Ingrate has in a moment
ruined, and laid in the dust. In vain have they inculcated the obligations of
our Sex, and read me so many Lectures of Decency, and Modesty, which were all
but like words written on a Wave, or like the Faith, and Promises of this
Wretch, whose Deceit, and Treachery has taken, and demolished all the Outworks
of my Honor, and left me nothing (Alas!) which I can call my own, but the
Maiden-Castle. And then she fell a weeping, which gave Lisander time to Answer.
Madam (says he) when you have heard me speak, if you think it fit, it will be
time enough to Condemn me. What Error have I Committed, in making you Confess a
truth, the concealment whereof (for ought I know) might have proved Fatal to us
both, and have cost us much dearer, than the Discovery? And as long as I am
just, and honorable (that is as long as I live) how can I think of exposing
your weakness? The Secret is among our selves, and, without you shall think
meet to Discover it, is like to remain so. And now you see how forced, and
unnatural the Sisters Breeding is: How insupportable those Customs are, that
oblige us to dissemble our strongest desires, to slight what we Love, and run
away from our own Happyness.

And whereas, Madam, you seem to find your self afflicted, for the indecency
(as you are pleased to call it) of this last Accident, and may suspect it may
have some untoward Influence upon my Love, I will tell you, Madam, that whereas
my Passion was always true, and sincere, yet before, it wanted this to make it
complete, to know I was beloved. And now, Madam (that you have seen the vanity
of it) if you please to set aside all starched Behavior, and Spanish
Formality, Let us be friends, and never fall out again; for I Love you better
than ever I did, and will do so whilst I breath.

At these words she threw down her seam, and rising up hastily, she threw her
Arms about his Neck, and Kissed him with as much tenderness, as she had done
when he pretended to return for Flanders. My dear Lisander (says she) we have
escaped the Storm, and are now in safe Harbor, where we may securely pity, or
laugh at the Distress of those, that must yet make sport for Neptune, and the
Winds. We have nothing left us now to do, but to Enjoy one another, and be
Happy. And so she took the willing Lisander by the hand, and made him sit down
by her upon her Estrado. I shall (for good Considerations) take no notice what
farther Endearments might pass between this happy Pair. Nor would I have any
longing Lover so much as desire to know. They were both persons, that
understood themselves well, and therefore it would be rude to doubt, or enquire
into their Conduct. Lisander continued his Visits, just as he used to do, and
yet when there happened to be any Strangers by, he kept as great a distance,
and used as much caution, and diligence in his Behavior, as he did in the
first of their Acquaintance. But when they were alone. their Conversation was
free, and Gallant, and had no reservation in it, but such as served to heighten
their Pleasures.

Sometimes they entertained one another with the curious Story of their Amors.
Sometimes he frighted her into his Arms, with the terrible Relation of some
desperate Adventure in the War. And sometimes she drew him into hers, with some
soft, and melting Air upon the Lute, which she touched to Admiration, and
Charmed him with some Passionate Song.

I cannot omit to give you one of them, wherein she does most excellently Paint
her own Passion, and (as far as the Cause would bear it) Apologize for her own
Infirmity. It was performed one calm Evening in a close Walk in the Garden,
when she had called for her Lute, and dismissed the Servants. The words were
these: HOw often have I vowed, that no Mortal should move
The pityless Heart of Clarinda to Love?
Yet in spite of my peevish Aversion, I see
That in vain we resist, what the Gods do decree.
How many Brisk Gallants, both in earnest, and jest,
In vain have pretended a room in this Breast,
Which a Soldier of Fortune, assisted by none
But his Valor, and Fate, has eternally won.
No Laurels, O Cupid, to your Conquering Bow,
It Is Mars, and not you, that has given me the blow,
Nor am I the first, that has opened her Arms,
Great Venus thou know, to a Warriors Charms.
I acknowledge, Lisander, it is too late for the Town
To treat of Conditions, now the Walls are your own,
Yet the ruins of my vanquished Virtue still cry,
Use your Conquest with Honor, or know I can dye.


But the Heaven was too clear, and the Weather too calm to continue long so,
And when their Bliss had once arrived at its Meridian, you cannot but expect it
should decline again. Within the space of one Month the Honey began to lose its
Taste, and both their Passions began to lose something of their Warmth, and
Vigor. There was neither of them so fond of the others Company, as they used
to be, though they were both willing to Conceal it. I know not whether they had
surfeited of their own Happyness, or whether some secret Guilt, or remorse made
their Love irksome, and embittered the fruition; but certain it is, that the
Familiarity they had Contracted by these tedious, and difficult Methods, did
(like a Rivulet exhausted by the Summer Sun) insensibly begin to fail, and
resolve its self into its first Elements of Strangeness; so that neither of
them cared, how seldom they met, but for fear of disobliging the other. It
chanced in the mean time that an English Seaman brought Lisander a Letter, of
some eight Months date, from his Dear, and Virtuous Sabina, to whom he had
plighted his first Vows, and whom in all his Gallantries he had never forgot.
The Contents were these: Sabina to Lisander.
My Dear Lisander,
IF this Paper should chance to come to your hand, believe it when it tells
you, your Sabina is weary of the world, and would hate the very Light, but that
she flatters her self, it will once again show her her Beloved Lisander: If it
never reach you, it does but follow the Fate of a hundred of its Brethren, who
(I know by your delays) have lost themselves (as well as I) in the enquiry, and
furnished matter of laughter, to those they were never intended for. Too too
fatal Emblems (alas!) of my Misfortune, and full of Love, and Impatience, as
any thing in the world but the poor Heart of

Your Distressed Sabina.




In the same Moment that he read this Letter, he resolved upon his return, and
began to think of an excuse for his long Absence. And calling for Pen, and Ink,
he delivered the Seaman (who was homeward bound) this Answer: Lisander to
Sabina.
My own Dear Sabina.
AS soon as I had opened yours, I found my own thoughts so well Expressed, that
I had like to have Transcribed it, and (having changed only the name) sent it
back again in Answer. I will only add, that Love, and Impatience have made me
resolve, to tell you very speedily in Person, that it is not in the power of
Seas and Mountains any longer to separate, and keep alive two Bodies, that have
but one Soul. Courage (my dear Sabina) and the joy which sparkles in your Eyes,
shall like some propitious Star, serve to light me back again through the
Ocean, and forever after influence all the Happyness of.

Your own Lisander.




Immediately in order to his Departure, he dispatched another Letter to the
Colonel, to satisfy him of his Resolution, and desire him to procure him his
Majesty's Discharge, and for some Considerations of his own enjoined him all
the Secrecy, the Affair was capable of. The Colonel (having lost all hopes of
having Lisander his Son-in-Law.) wrote Clarinda word, that he had provided her
a Husband at Madrid, and Commanded her to prepare for her Journey thither,
within fourteen days.

These two Letters of the Colonel, and Sabina were received by our Lovers with
equal joy, and concealed from one another with equal industry; and both of them
make private preparations for their several Journeys. Clarinda presently wrote
to her Father, that he would take no notice to any body of the Match, because
the event was yet uncertain, and so he never so much as mentioned it in his
Letter to Lisander. About fourteen days afterward, in the same Packet
(Directed to Lisander) came the Kings Discharge, and the Ladies Commands to set
forth for Madrid. They both began their Journey on the same day, and both under
false Colors, and Pretenses. And though they had been both very well content
with the whole truth, yet neither of them durst begin to declare. They were
each of them very sparing in asking Questions about the others Journey, for
fear of being obliged to Answer some about their own.

At parting they took a very Formal, and Composed leave without the least
Transport or Passion, at which they both extremely wondered. After parting the
only thing they were each of them very solicitous about, was the great trouble,
and perplexity which would seize upon the other, when the Mystery came to be
revealed. Lisander doubted how poor Clarinda would receive the News of his
Departure for England, and her greatest affliction was, to think how he would
endure to hear of her Marriage.

When Lisander came to Paris, he was informed by Letters in the Post Office
from the Colonel (for all things were now concluded, and made Public) that his
Daughter was happyly Married, which made Lisander finish his Journey to London
with great satisfaction. And the Colonel had told Clarinda upon her Arrival,
that Lisander had got his Discharge and was gone for England, which removed the
Secret grief, and trouble which would otherwise have been part of the furniture
of her Marriage Bed. He was not many days before he Landed at Dover, with about
threescore thousand pieces of Eight in Bills of Exchange, and Spanish Gold, a
Gentleman, Four men in Livery, and Seven Chosen Spanish Horses. He was received
at Dover, by several both of his own, and Sabina's Friends who had notice of
his Resolution by the Post, and were well agreed on all sides about the
Marriage, which now wanted nothing, but the Consummation.

When he came to London, he was Conducted to Sabina's Lodging, and very
splendidly Entertained, where the overjoyed Lady threw her self into his Arms,
and in the Ecstasy could not speak one word beside, Welcome, my Dear Lisander.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Faithorne, and John
Kersey, at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THe Case of the Church of England briefly and truly Stated, in the three first
and fundamental Principles of a Christian Church: I. The obligation of
Christianity, by Divine Right. II. The Jurisdiction of the Church, by Divine
Right. III. The Institution of Episcopal Superiority, by Divine Right. By S. P.
a Presbyter of the Church of England, in 80.

Summum Bonum, seu vera, atque Unica Beatitudo Hominibus per Christum
Communicanda, Sex Dissertationibus aliquatenus explicata: Per Edmundum Elisium,
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbyterum. 80. Price Bound 1 s.

Solomon's Song Paraphrased: a Pindarick Poem. 40. Price Stitcht 6 d.

Ephemeri Vita, or the Natural History and Anatomy of the Ephemeron, a Fly that
lives but five hours. Written originally in Low Dutch by Jo. Swammerdam, M. D.
of Amsterdam in 40.

Mathematical Magic: or the Wonders that may be performed by Mechanical
Geometry, In two Books, Concerning Mechan. Powers, Motions,
being one of the most easy, pleasant, useful (and yet most neglected) part of
Mathematics. Not before Treated of in this Language. By J. Wilkins, late Lord
Bishop of Chester. 80.


