A PUBLICATION, Of the Royal Authority, of the most Serene, most Mighty, and
most August Monarch, JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of God, King of Scotland,
England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
The Earl of Perth, Lord High Chancellor. The Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews.
The Duke of Queensberry, L. High Treasurer. The Lord Archbishop of Glasgow.
The Lord Marquess of Athol, Lord Privy Seal. The Lord Duke of Hamilton. The
Lord Marquess of Douglas. The Earl of Drumlanrig. The Earl of Wintoun. The Earl
of Linlithgow, Lord Justice-general. The Earl of Southesk. The Earl of Panmure.
The Earl of Tweedale. The Earl of Balcarras. The Lord Yester. The Lord
Kinnaird. L. President of the Session. L. Register. L. Advocat. L.
Justice-Clerk. L. Castlehill. General Lieutenant Drummond. Drumelzeer.
Abbotshall. Colonel Graham of Claver-house. Gossfoord
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the Almighty GOd, to Call CHARLES the Second, Our
late Sovereign Lord, of Glorious and ever Blessed Memory, from a Temporary
Crown, to Inherit an Eternal in the Heavens; Whereby the undoubted Right of
Succession, to Him, in the Imperial Crown of This, Realm, was immediately
Devolved on the Sacred Person of His Royal, and Dearest Brother, Our present
Sacred Sovereign (whom GOD long preserve.) Therefore We, the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, Authorized in that Capacity, by His Majesty's Royal
Letter, bearing Date at Whitehall, the sixth Day of February instant, Do, with
the Concurrence of Several other Lords, Spiritual, and Temporal, Barons, and
Burgesses of this Realm, Hereby Declare, and Proclaim to all the World, That
Our Sovereign Lord JAMES the Seventh, is by Lawful and undoubted Succession and
Descent, KING of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland, and, the Dominions
there-unto-belonging, Defender of the Faith, andC. (Whom GOD preserve and Bless
with a Long, Glorious, Happy Life and Prosperous Reign) And whom We shall
humbly Obey, Dutifully and Faithfully Serve, Maintain and Defend, with Our
Lives and Fortunes against all Deadly, as Our only Righteous King and
Sovereign, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as Holding His Imperial Crown
from GOD alone. And for Testification whereof, We here, in presence of the
Almighty God, and great number of His Majesty's Faithful People, of all Estates
and Qualities, who are assisting with Us, at this Solemn Publication, of Our
Due, Humble, and Faithful Acknowledgement of his Supreme Sovereign Authority,
at the Market Cross of the City of Edinburgh, Declare and Publish, That Our
said Sovereign Lord, by the Goodness and Providence of Almighty GOD, is of
Scotland, England, France, and Ireland, and Dominions thereunto-belonging, The
most POTENT, MIGHTY, and undoubted KING. And hereby give Our Oaths, with
up-lifted Hands, that We shall bear True and Faithful Allegiance, unto Our said
Sacred Sovereign, JAMES the Seventh; King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the F^^^h etc. And to His Lawful Heirs and Successors, and
sha;ll perform all Duties, Service, and Obedience to him, as becomes His
Faithful, (...)al, and Dutiful Subjects. So help Us GOD.

Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save King JAMES the Seventh.
By the King.
JAMES R.

JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and c.
To all and sundry Our good Subjects whom these Presents do or may concern,
Greeting.
Whereas it has pleased GOD this day to call out of this Life, from the
possession of an Earthly Diadem, to the fruition, of an Eternal Crown of Glory,
His late Majesty Our Royal and most dearly beloved Brother Charles the Second;
We have thought fit to publish Our Royal Pleasure, That all Our Officers of
State, Privy-Councillors, Magistrates, and all other Officers whatsoever, both
Civil and Military within Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, do, and they and
every one of them respectively, are hereby Authorized and Required to Act in
all things conform to the late Commissions and Instructions they had from His
said late Majesty of Blessed Memory, until new Commissions from Us can be
prepared and sent down to them. And for their so doing, This shall be to them,
and every one of them respectively, a full Warrant.

Given under Our Royal Hand, at Our Court at Whitehall, the Sixth day of
February 1684/5. And of Our Reign the Firs Year. By His MAJESTY's Command, To.
DRUMMOND.

Edinburgh, the 10th of February, 1685.
ORdered by His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland, that this Proclamation be
forthwith, Printed and Published.

Extracted by me Colin Mekenzie, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty; And Reprinted at London by The Newcomb, for Susanna Forrester, 1685.


