UPON His Majesty's LATE DECLARATIONS FOR TOLERATION, AND Publication of War
AGAINST THE HOLLANDER.

A POEM: By T. S. of GRAYES-INNE, Esquire;

Regum est -- Parcere Subjectis, debellare Superbos. London: Printed by J. C.
for Samuel Heyrick, at Grayes. Inne-Gate in Holborn, 1672.

UPON HIS MAJESTY'S LATE Declarations, etc.
SO Jove, when he has made his Anger known,
And finds the Trembling World his Justice own;
Discards his Thunder, and with man complies;
And at the last receives his Sacrifice.
The Penal Laws against Non-Conformists made,
Just like Joves Thunder, these three Kingdoms awed:
But this Indulgence shows that Kings can be,
Although as Dreadful, Merciful as he.
The Title of Supremacy is now
Not lessened, but increased: all Sects allow
Charles their Supreme, and him as Head obey;
Owning themselves Conformists from this day.
Thus has his Mercy added to his Store:
He Is Head of Churches now, but one before.
No more shall wandering Zeal miss-guide our feet;
All now are fixed, and ready to submit:
Our hands and hearts unan'mously shall join,
And against The Imperious Hollander combine.
The Cause so Just, that Heavens, to do us right,
Would plague them some way, were we not to fight.
Perfidiou^ States! whose Faiths no Leagues can bind;
But, like your Ships, still move with every wind.
Like floating Delos, may your Island be
By Pioneers unstak'd, and sent to Sea;
Where barking waves, set on by angry winds,
Pursue you till you have out-past the Lines:
And if they ever six it, may it be
Amongst Strangers unto all Humanity.
And since your Vassal-Fleet denies to do
That Homage which unto our Sov'raign's due;
Our English Oaks, framed into winged Forts,
The strength of Cities, and the pride of Courts,
Shall on the Surface of the Ocean move,
Our Right, as well over Sea as Land to prove:
A Right so Ancient, not to be denied
Since old Canutus checked the forward Tide,
And Xerxes-like, his Sovereign Power to show,
Did limit its Proud Waves how far to flow.
Is It not enough t'ingross abroad the Trade,
But must you too our Narrow-Seas invade?
From whose Exub'rous Spoils, you now are grown
From sneaking Fishermen, proud names to own;
As Hagen's Mogen's, High and Mighty States,
And bid Defiance to all Potentates.
In your Distresses, our Protections gave
You safety; whence you now your Beings have:
Unto our Empire you now did then agree,
And owned us Sovereign both by Land and Sea;
But now, Imperious Vpstarts, you are grown
So proud, as even your Fost'rer to disown.
So the ungrateful Serpent, ( Aesop shows)
Stead of Reward, his spiteful Venom throws
Upon those Courteous Hands that did replieve
His fading life, and him with warmth relieve.
And since you both alike ungrateful are,
You with the Serpent his Old Curse shall share;
Not to be beaten only, or outright
Be slain; but always creep when we are in sight.
We'll make the Belgic Lion Couchant lie,
And sculk himself for fear, when we pass by.
And now, methinks, I see Confed'rate Gales
Of lucky Winds inspire our Navy's Sails:
And first of all, the Prince, for State and Power,
Proud of her Royal Burden, quits the shore;
From whose Broad Sides thick-planted Canons show
Safety to us, and danger to our Foe.
Here York's brave Hero, in whose single Breast
The scattered valors of Famed Warriors rest;
With Resolution, big as Fate, commands;
And parting, shoots at the departing Strands:
His Complement the grateful Streams repeat
Unto those Groves, that to the Royal Fleet
Contributed their strengths, who nimbly move;
Grown sensible, not through Fear, but Love.
The Generous Billows emulous to bear
So brave a Fabric, crowd to take their share;
And over their Frothy Necks the Vessel rides,
And dances to and fro with sportive Tides.
And thou, Great Oss'ry, in whose spriteful Veins,
Nobility and Valor jointly Reigns;
With Digby, sprung from valiant Hero's Races,
Who both add Honor to your several places;
Whom nothing but Allegiance, and to right
Our Nations wrongs, engaged you to sight.
Go on, and make a difference appear
Between a Courage hired, and Volunteer:
You were Commanders born; such to obey:
You fight for Honor only, they for Pay.
Behold the brave Levina now, who brings
A General Wonder with her Canvas wings:
Within whose Wooden Walls a valiant Brood
Of twisted Nations, not well understood,
Unite their Valors; and in several Tongues,
Betray their Zeals, to right our Nations wrongs.
A Second Babel, fitted for the Seas;
Both for its Height, and choice of Languages.
Next, the Resolved Kempthorn her succeeds;
Preferred to Honor, not by Friends, but Deeds:
His valiant Acts are Registered by Fame,
And Algiers Pirates still shall Dread his Name.
The Azure Flags, upon his Masts, appear
Like the Blew Aprons which the Sea-Nymphs wear:
Which shows, that with those Nymphs h'hath often been
Familiar, and their Father Neptune's Friend.
The Loyal London follows next to these;
Some call her the Metropolis of the Seas:
About whose walls, not Thames, but Seas now cling,
Wondering to see a City thus on wing.
Venice no more shall Neptune's Darling be,
That stays ashore, whilst this pursues the Sea.
Here valiant Spragg, (like the Lord Mayor) appears;
Only this difference: Spragg his own Sword bears,
My Lord's supported is by other hands;
This rules the Sea, whilst the other rules the Lands.
Nor is there wanting, to increase his State,
A Cap of Maintenance: since his sober Pate,
Still to his active hands commends Advice;
It Is happy to be Valiant and Wise.
Brave Harman, now his Fiery Ordeal's past,
Submits unto his Watery Trial last;
Whose sober valor shall increase his Glory,
And gain new Plumes to enrich a future Story.
Jordan, within whose Aged veins does flow
A Spriteful Blood, not quenched by Ages Snow;
Like Reverend Nestor, on the Deck appears,
As well for Prudent Conduct, as for Years.
The Sovereign he Commands (a Ship for fight)
Designed as well for Wonder as Delight.
Great was his Skill contrived so proud a Frame;
But greater was his Mind designed the same.
Holmes, whose Resolves are not to be outdone,
Having of late new Wreaths of Honor won,
Assumes a Courage fit for English men;
And newly off, bravely falls to it again.
The Michael, once more, shall the Dutch perplex,
As once its Patron did the Devil vex.
His Dreadful Name, ever since Scevelin-Fires,
Affrights the Dutch; both Children, and old Sires.
All fly, if Holmes appear, and yield him place;
He gains a Conquest by his very Face.
And now my modest Muse, jealous lest she
Should be suspected of Dishonesty,
And have her Credit blasted by ill Tongues,
Forward enough to offer Virgins wrongs,
Retires, and dares not further board the Fleet;
And faith the Author's glad enough of it.
FINIS.

