THE ANSWER OF Sir Willam Scroggs, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
TO THE ARTICLES OF Dr. TITUS OATS, and Mr. WILLIAM BEDLOW.
I. TO the first he says, That the Lord Brudenel was Bailed by the Court of
the King's Bench in open Court, and afterward by the Court discharged; with
this, That William Bedlow did importune the Lord Westmoreland to See the Rules
of Court.
get the said Lord Brudenel discharged, for that he had nothing to say against
him, as he said to the Lord Westmoreland.

II. To the second he says, That as to his omitting or misrepeating the
Evidence at Sir George Wakeman's Trial, it is a Reflection upon the whole
Court, to suppose it true, and that they should let it pass. But he says, That
Mr. Oats being asked at that Trial, why he did not charge Sir George Wakeman
at the Council Table with a Letter under his own hand concerning the Death of
the King? he answered, He did not know but that he did: To which it was
replied, It is plain he did not; for then the Council would have committed him:
To which Mr. Oats replied, That that Council would commit no body for the
Plot. Which might be the cause of the Misdemeanour of Frowning in the Articles
mentioned.

III To the third he says, He does not remember that ever he expressed much
concerning their Credit before that Trial, but that there were some passage at
that Trial, which gave him great cause of doubt; which he hopes he might do,
without making it an Article of Misdemeanour.

IV. and V. To the fourth and fifth he says, That the Persons in the Articles
mentioned, were committed by him for publishing several libellous and
scandalous Papers, which were proved against them upon Oath: Which Commitments,
even of a Feme Covert also, notwithstanding Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow's Skill,
were according to Law; though there is no Law for these persons to call me to
account for Judicial Acts done upon other Men.

VI. To the sixth, which is an insolent Scandal, he refers himself to the
Testimony of that Gentleman of Quality, whoever he be.

VII. To the seventh he says, That the persons in this Article were bailed and
discharged by the Court, where the Attorney General was first called; but
indeed Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow's Consent was not asked.

VIII. To the eighth, he says, He conceives himself not obliged to do all the
business that Justices of the Peace may do; and though without an offense he
might have given such an answer as is mentioned, yet he did not, but a servant
of his did.

IX. To the ninth he says, That when the cause was tried, he told the Jury the
matter was plain, and so did the rest of the Court; upon which he went away,
without any Compilment to Mr. Oats, to try Causes in London.

X. To the tenth he says, that Osborne made only two Affidavits before him,
the substance of one was, That one Bowring a servant to Mr. Oats had said,
that he had heard Mr. Oats say, That the Kingdom of England would never
flourish, until it became Elective, and the Kings chosen by the People. The
other Affidavit was, when he was sent to him by an Order of Council to be
Examined, wherein amongst other things he Swears, That though at the Trial of
Knox and Lane, it was asked where Osborne was, and Mr. Oats his Counsel
answered that he was fled, yet Osborne swears, that he at that time was at his
Fathers House in the Country, and that Mr. Oats knew it; That he took his
leave of him the day before he went, and told whether he went, and saw a Letter
wrote by Mr. Oats to his Father to send for him; notwithstanding it was
carried at the Trial as if he had been fled no man knew whither; so that the
Affidavit which the Article charge me for permitting to be made, was not
Sworn before me.

XI. He says, it is more to be wondered how Mr. Oats should dare to Charge
that as an Article of Misdemeanour, which was said in the Kings presence, and
yet repeated false too.

XII. That at Monmouth Assizes he did tell Mr. Bedlow, that he was more
unsatisfied about Mr. Langhorns Trial than all the Rest; and the rather, for
that he was credibly informed since the Trial, that Mr. Langhorns Study was so
situated, that he that walked in his Chamber could not see Mr. Langhorne write
in his Study: which was Mr. Bedlow's Evidence.

XIII. He says, the matter complained of is a mere Contract with other Men, of
which he thinks himself not bound to give Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow any other
Account, but that by the taking of Twenty Guinies he lost forty; and that his
backwardness to go into Court to Wakeman's Trial, makes it look as if he had
not had Ten thousand pound to favor Wakeman in this Trial.

If these ARTICLES shall appear to Your Majesty to be frivolous, or scandalous,
or not true; I humbly pray Your Majesty's just Resentment thereon, in Honor to
Your Courts and Government. And that such an unknown Attempt may not go
unpunished, That the Promoters may be left to be proceeded against according to
Law.

FINIS.
THe Articles of Dr. Titus Oats and Mr. William Bedlow against the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs were heard this 21th of January, 1679. before the King and
Council; and upon the hearing of both sides, Dr. Oats and Captain Bedlow are
left to be proceeded against according to Law.


