THE Unhappy Kindness: OR A Fruitless Revenge.

A TRAGEDY, As it is Acted at the Theater Royal.

Ad Generum Cereris sine caede, and sanguine pauci Descendunt Reges.

Juv. Sat. 10. Wrirten by Mr. SCOT.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rhodes in Fleetstreet, S. Briscoe in Covent Garden, and
R. Parker at the Royal Exchange. 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, and will be speedily published a Collection of
Familiar Letters on several occasions. Written by the Right Honorable John
late Earl of Rochechester; the Honorable Algern. Sydnys Letter concerning
Bribery and Arbitrary Government; and Mr. Otways Love Letters written to a
Lady. Published from their Original Copies. Printed for Sam. Briscoe in
Covent Garden.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst a number of New Plays that of late have crowded the Stage, I thought
an old Subject, tho for no other account than the Respect we are for the most
part apt to pay Antiquity, might meet with some Civility; this was looked on by
some, well versed in the Rules and Beauties of Poetry, as a Piece that would
not be altogether unacceptable, provided it appeared with a new Air more
agreeable to the Humor of the present Age. It Is true, I found my self deceived
in the working it up, and perceived it required more labor than I at first
designed it; for what with making some Characters entirely new, and reforming
others, I found by that time I had done, I had little or none remaining but the
Design: As it is, it may bear up in the Winter, notwithstanding the little
Encouragement it met with at its first appearance from a thin Town, and the
Scarcity of Money. I must own the Town has been very favorable to Me, and they
who found nothing to commend, thought not fit to condemn what was writ purely
for their Diversion. It Is true, every thing is not to be judged according to
the Success it meets with on the Stage; it is an easier Task to divert than
please, forasmuch as the first. like a sudden flash, strikes only on the Fancy;
whilst the other is exposed to the Severity of Judgment and Reason. Alphonso's
Character in the last Act looks as if I had been resolved, whatever Absurdities
I committed, to make the Part for the Lines, and not the Lines for the Part,
and therefore killed him in Opposition to a known Rule in Poetry: I am almost
ready to confess it, tho, how far I have transgrest therein let the Critic
judge; if he is offended at his last Scene, let the rest, which are all new,
plead in my Behalf; I Am sure it improved his Character, and, through the
Excellence of the Action, appeared very beautiful on the Stage. The last Scene
in the Third Act had the Misfortune to offend some, who are often more curious
than becomes either their Modesty or good Manners; but that Man is in good
hands, who has Pride and Affectation for his Judges.

T. Scot.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Verbruggen.
I AM thinking, Sirs, how soon we are undone,
Deserted thus by the inconstant Town.
Where are those Friends, that did in numerous throngs
Crowd to our Music, and applaud our Songs?
Curse on this dull preposterous Soil! since all
The Winter gave the Summer must recall;
Tho more than Greenland Frosts prevailed elsewhere,
Yet then you found a warm Reception here,
But now Hide-Park scarce yields so fresh an Air.
Well then, we have resolved, till your return,
Since you, our Sovereigns, leave us, we'll adjourn;
Only once more your Subjects humbly pray,
You Would set your Hands to a few Acts to day;
Some new, but made on purpose to unfold
The meaning if the rest, long since grown old,
By your famed Ancestors confirmed to the Stage
In Fletcher's time, the Muses Golden Age:
It Is true, our Money may adulterate grow,
But Wit must still from one pure Fountain flow;
Pull not the well-plac'd Laurels from his Brow,
What pleased them then, we hope will please you now.
The EPILOGUE written, and spoke, by Mr. Haynes, in the Habit of a Horse
Officer, mounted on an Ass.
YOu have seen (before now) since this Shape-shewing age,
More Asses than mine, on a Beau-crowded Stage.
Wherefore by the Example of Famed Dogget, my Brother,
To show our Stage has Asses on it, as well as to other;
Thus mounted I Am come to invite ye often hither,
To Beaumont and Fletcher thus coupled together.
My Fancy, his Judgment; my Person, his Face;
With the mighty Interest he has in this place,
(For indeed, as I Am told, but pray let me not wrong ye).
My Ass has Relations, and Great ones among ye;
In the Galleries, Side Boxes, on the Stage, in the Pit;
What Is your Critic? Your Beau? Your Keeper? Your Wit?
Your Fighting Ass is a Bully,
Your Sneaking Ass is a Cit,
Your Keeping Ass is a Cully,
But your Top, Prime Ass is your Wit.
They all fool Cit of his Wife,
He fools them all of their Pelf;
But your Wit's so damned an Ass,
He only fools himself!
Writing one Play a Year, for a Wit he would pass,
His Lean Third Day makes out to him he is an Ass.
Be'nt I an Ass now thus to mount my Brother;
But he that is pleased with it too, is not he Another?
Are we not Asses all (twixt me and you)
To part with out Old Money till we were sure of New?
Since then so many Asses here abound,
Where an Eternal Link of Wit goes round,
No Poet sure will think it a Disgrace,
To be allied to This Accomplished Ass,
For he is a great Critic you may read it in his Face.
As for his Courage truly I ca'nt say much,
Yet he might serve for a Trooper among the Dutch.
Tho, of their Side, Im sure he would never fight,
His Passive Obedience shows I Am in the right.
Whips the Ass often, who by reason of the innate Dullness of the Beast never
flnches for it. He Is a Courtier fit to appear before a Queen;
Advance Bucephalus, view but his Mein:
Ladies, I Am sure you like his spruce Behavior,
I never knew ought but Asses in Their favor.
Fair Ones, at what I say take no Offense!
For --
When his Degree a Lover does commence,
You coin an Ass out of a Man of Sense.
Your Beaus that soften so your flinty Hearts,
They are Asses -- Tailors make them Men of Parts.
Now some have told me this might give Offense,
That riding my Ass thus is riding the Audience;
But what of that? the Brother rides the Brother,
The Son the Father; we All ride one another:
Then for a Jest for this time let it pass,
For he that takes it ill I Am Sure's an Ass.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
ALphonso, King of Naples. Frederick, his Brother, and Usurper. Valerio, a
Noble Neapolitan. Sorano, Frederick's Creature. Pisano, P^^^uchio, Alphonso's
Friends: (...) An old Officer. Mr. Verbruggen. Mr. Harland. Mr. Williams. Mr.
Disney. Mr. Mills. Mr. Hill. Mr. Neuth.
^^^EN.
(...) (...) ^other. Mrs. Rogers. Mrs. Powel.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Sorano and Evanthe. Sorano. THus to adore, and thus to be rewarded,
Still to desire, and still desire in vain;
Is there no end of all my Miseries,
And of your cruel and severe Disdain?

Evanthe. Alas! My Lord.


Sor. Can you have eyes to wound;
Yet want those eyes to see the wounds you make?
Why has Heaven given you Beauty to destroy,
And not a Heart to pity these you kill?
A long and tedious Service have I paid you;
Even from your Childhood I have been your Slave,
Courted the earliest glories of your Youth
With the sincerest Love, before you was
To others known, by me you was adored.
Madam, I am --

Evan. You are indeed my Lord
More than the nicest gratitude can speak you,
Here on my Knees to the great Gods I witness,
How much I love, how much I honor you,
My Father and my Friend, even then a Friend,
When Heaven it self had left me, severed me
From the loved care of an indulgent Parent,
Torn from my Arms all that was precious to me,
All the dear blessings for which still I bowed
In daily thanks before their sacred Altars.
Even then, my Lord, your charitable hand
Stood betwixt me and their severest anger;
All this I own, and to the Gods dare speak it.
But yet, my honored Lord --

Sor. But yet Evanthe
(Ungrateful I must call her) does reject
All the Endearments of an humble Love,
Contemns that hand that raised her thus to Life:
Raised her above the reach of Fortune, made her
The Idol of Men's Hearts, and Subject of their Tongues.

Evan. Alas! my Lord, if a sincere Respect,
Equal to that with which a pious Child
Meets the kind blessings of a tender Parent,
Are Marks of a Contempt, then let Heaven witness,
Let Heaven and Earth witness against Evanthe:
A more unworthy Wretch did never taste
A good Man's bounty; this is all I have,
How am I able then to pay you more.

Sor. Not more? Yes more than all the world can give,
More than the Gods themselves, should they vouchsafe
To crown Sorano with their choicest blessings.
How cunningly you would decline my Suit,
And knowing all, affect an Ignorance?
Are then these sighs and tears, these eyes, that speak
A passion far too great to be concealed;
No better known, no better understood?
Let me then on my Knees --

Evan. Let me on mine
Entreat my Lord to pardon his Evanthe,
If she confesses she can never love:
Some secret power, too great to be withstood,
Has thrown a fatal Bar between our Hearts,
Parted our Souls never to meet in love.

Sor. Be it so then, and by that power I swear
Never to court your scornful beauties more.
But know proud Maid there is a Man adores you,
Not all your artful Looks, your Woman's Pride,
Nor the rough hand of fate itself, should that
Stand betwixt him and his desires, can soften.
The King, the haughty King, loves thee Evanthe,
Dotes on thee even to Madness, and by Force
Will gather all those Virgin Sweets, which I,
With my best Services, could never merit.
Go and prepare you for the royal Sport,
Get to your Patches and your Paint, and try
By Art to please this mighty man of power.
Learn to look big, and strut it in the Court;
Y' have Pride enough, and there it will become you.
But when y' have done the business you was raised for,
When joys repeated dull the edge of Love,
And amorous heat, then to the Stews convey you,
There you may thrive, and there I hope to find you.

Exit. Evan. The King! the King's the Rock that must destroy me;
Whose stubborn Will, blown by unbounded power,
Runs over all Bars that check him in his Course.
O my Valerio hasten to my succor,
Let some kind power, the Witness of our Vows,
Inform thy Soul how much Evanthe wants thee.
The King! he shall be served; but how? not this way,
Death is a ready Friend on all occasions,
If I cannot live a Saint, I Will dye a Martyr.

Exit. Enter Q. Mother, Alphonso, Pisano, and Petruchio. Alph. Ha, ha, ha!
Indeed, Madam, you must pardon me. I grant you I can see every day a musty
Churchman railing at Covetousness in one Room, and his Wife gaming in the next;
a merry Poet laughing at a dapper Courtier, and a surly Officer grinning at him
again; nay, a rich old Alderman inviting the young fellow home to dinner this
morning, that lay with his Wife last night, and never be moved: but to see a
great Man, nay a Prince dancing to every Fiddler --


Q. M. Why, who ever did?


Alph. Did you never? bless your good fortune then, for it would make your
Heart ache to see as much as I have.


Q. M. Nay, gentle Son.


Alph. Nay, gentle Mother, I know what you would say; you would ask me what I
want, and alas I want many things; 'twould puzzle a Lawyers Atithmetick to
reckon how many things I want. But in the first place I want a Wife, for
between you and me, Madam, what should such tall overgrown fellows, like
myself, live any longer without Wives? I know you will say they make Fools of us,
why be it so, I have been my own Fool long enough, it is time now I should be
some ones else; for would one think it, nay friends you must bear me witness
too, would one think it.


Q. M. Think what, Son?


Alph. Nay nothing, never think on it, my brains are almost turned with thinking.


Q. M. For which of all my sins have I deserved this Curse?


Alph. What you weep now, and perhaps it is for my Father; and yet I have seen
some women, and they wise ones too, do as much for the loss of a Lap-dog; but,
Madam, tell me, did you ever see a Lawyer with a Fee in both hands?


Q. M. Belike I have.


Alph. Why then you saw the Picture of Justice, you will find his Breviate pinned
to his back.


Q. M. Alas, my Son, these are disjointed Speeches,
The issue of a rackt distempered brain.

Alph. That Is as much as to say I am a Fool, or a Madman; but go tell my
Brother on it, he will thank you for the discovery; for let me tell you, if 'twas
not for Fools, what business would Knaves have in this world.


Q. M. To see him thus, his Soul thus lost in darkness,
Is worse than death: ye Gods why did his youth
Disclose such early hopes of future greatness,
That blasted e're age could secure 'em to us.
Why in the Man do we with sorrow miss,
What in the Child we did with joy admire?

Alph. If the King would make me a Privy Councellor, as I may grow great before
I dye, I Would advise him to think more, and talk less, 'twill become his
greatness, for now adays there is but this difference betwixt your Wise man and
your Fool, the Wise man laughs at other men's Jests, and the Fool always at his
own, like a Cat playing with her own Tail, and so tickles himself with his own
fingers.


Q. M. Observe him Gentlemen, and whatsoever
A poor unhappy woman's Love can pay
You may rest well assured of.

Pis. We thank your Grace, our best care shall attend him.


Exit Q. M. Alph. So now I Am free, was ever Love and Pity
Unwelcome to a Wretch like me before?
Then when she follows, and pursues me most,
Then when she courts me with her tenderest love,
I shun her most.
A Mother's blessing is become my curse.

Pis. My Lord your causeless fears create this trouble,
Whilst even to her you dare not own your self,
Whom above all the world you ought to trust.
Disclose your self in time, and make the Queen
A happy Partner of the mighty secret.

Alph. No, tho a Queen she is a woman still,
A tender Mother, and who knows, my Friend,
How far her woman's weakness may betray her
Whilst my Head wants that Crown, to which she bore me,
And I live thus neglected and despised,
To her I must be mad Alphonso still.
But when my honorable friends we have finished
The glorious task the Gods have laid out for us,
Then like her first born Son she shall behold me,
Confessed a Monarch, and the Lord of power,
In whatever you command we shall obey.
Methinks I see this proud imperious Traitor,
This beast of Prey that ruins all about him,
Thrown by the hand of Fate from all his glories,
The untimely fruits of Parricide, and Treason.
Villain that in the midst of feigned pretense,
And smooth expressions of fair Filial duty,
Whilst on his Knees he begged a Fathers blessing,
Dared do a deed would damn one but to think on.

Pis. Thus mischief ever wears the clearest brow,
And like deep waters appears calm and gentle.

Petr. 'Twas difficult to hide his practices;
Blood cries aloud, and had it once alarmed
The Peoples Hearts, sure Frederick had wanted
That Crown which through such villainies he caught at.

Al. The People? a dull senseless lump of Clay,
Rude and unformed, fitted for any impression
The cunning Artist will impose upon it.
You know the Story (To Pisano) how by subtle poison
He took my Brother's life, attempted mine,
But the infusion met with a resistance
Too strong to be o'repower'd: however he thought
I lost, what more than Life Men ought to value,
My Reason;
For by your Father's Counsel I put on
This outward form of madness, to secure me
From any second blow, the event answered
Our expectations, for being thus despised
I live below his fears.

Petr. But sure my Lord,
The Sword of Justice, and Brandino's power,
Had been a safer, and far nobler refuge.
Why did you not inform your Royal Father,
Of that dire Plague, that Instrument of Hell,
Which at last fell on his devoted head?

Alp. Alas we did, but we did all in vain.
For the cursed Traitor, skilled in the arts of Court,
Had so prevailed, so won on his belief,
That 'twas as easy to persuade my Brother
To be what he was not, as make Brandino
Believe him what he was; besides my Father
Had nothing but the empty name of King,
The shadow left him; for my Brother knew
The Power lay lodged in bold Sorano's hands,
The cursed complotter of his dark designs.
But no more, fate that by them thought fit to punish me,
By me at length, I hope, will punish them.

Petr. My honored Lord, where e're You lead we'll follow
With an assurance that becomes our cause.

Alp. Nay it is a glorious one, and may be worthy
The admiration of succeeding ages.
It Is such a one those brave Old Roman Hero's*
Did they now live, would gladly be embark't in.
Who is there living, that e're heard of honor,
Or owned the motions of a generous Spirit,
Would tamely lie under the imperious hand
The proud disdain of an Usurping Tyrant.
Whip him ye Gods! aim all your Thunders at him!
Let furies haunt his Dreams, distrust and care
Hang on his thoughts, and poison all his pleasures.

Petr. My Lord, old Pedro, who has placed his Men
In the most secret corners of the City
Willed me to inform you that the time calls on us*
That all things now are ripe for Execution;
This morning he commands the Guard, by which means
The Gates will all be open to receive 'em.

Alph. Then e're to Morrow's dawn my Brother sets,
For ever sets in a dread Cloud of Blood
Naples once more shall raise her drooping head,
Whose rugged Virtues, hardened by Afflictions,
Shall be the wonder of this lower World,
And like old Rome give Laws to the Universe.

Pis. My honored Lord pardon your Loyal Slave,
Who with the foremost wishes to behold
That happy day, and never will know quiet
Till we are Masters of our great design;
Yet in my humblest duty I affirm
This day 'twill be impossible to effect 'em.

Alp. Impossible! were he like Jove himself
Closed round with Thunder, a guard of Gods,
Whose every look might awe the Universe,
Yet then it would not be impossible:
What can be so to minds resolved like ours?
But does he not lie open to destruction*
Do not his Friends, that live upon his smiles,
Raised by his favors from the lowest Earth,
Do not even they both fear, and hate the Tyrant?
Nay like base Slaves would help his ruin forward.
Is there a Sword in Naples will be Idle,
Will not strike home, when the great Gods shall call,
And lead us on to Liberty and Peace?

Pis. My Lord, all this I grant, and more, but yet --


Alp. But what?
Grant me but this, and what more can we ask for
The Gods are kind, we wanting to our selves;
Unstable unresolved; like heartless fools,
That still in expectation loose fruition.
I will not trust my fate to another hazard,
To be as great as fortune e're can make me.
At length we have got the unruly beast at bay,
On every side hemmed in with sure destruction,
And shall we now forego our certain hopes,
Trust to the bounty of another hour,
When this has given us more than we dared hope for?

Pis. My Lord, You used to be more moderate.


Alp. I Am moderate still, but Vengeance cries aloud.
Blood! Treason! Parricide! Who is there living
Can think of these, and keep his usual Temper?
Yet after all the labors of my Soul,
The Indignities I have with patience born,
To make revenge my own, which now seems ripe;
Waits on our Swords, and sues for Execution,
Thou go about to blunt the edge of Justice,
And calmly criest it is impossible.

Pis. My Lord, I hate this Tyrant more than you,
My Fathers Murder, Brothers Banishment,
My own disgrace, have sworn me to his ruin.
Yet when you have heard the reasons I shall urge,
Not to rebate or slacken your just Anger,
But to draw back your arm, that with a force
Greater and surer it may execute,
What Heaven, and your resentments have determined:
You Will think your Servant has not judged amiss.
It Is on this day the Young Soldier brave Valerio,
Whose active Sword deserves a worthier Cause,
In warlike form makes his triumphant entry:

Alp. Still, still the better; Can we choose a day
Fitter for our design? but that I Have known thee
Of an experienced faith, I should mistrust thee.
Then when his Slaves in their repeated Io's,
Their l ud applauses, raise him to the Skies,
And place another's Laurels on his brows,
Then, then to clip the Wings of this proud Falcon,
When he soars highest, and sink him down to Hell,
Will be added to mount us up to Heaven.

Pis. But Heaven is sooner scaled than this performed,
I mean this way, for sure my honored Lord
Has not forgot the custom of his Naples;
On the return of her Victorious Sons,
Who have with foreign Nations fought her battles,
None are to appear in Arms, the day of Triumph;
Throughout the City or the Court, but those
The General shall appoint; to show,
That he who fought so well abroad, deserves
To rule at home: Shall we then to trust our fortunes
To the success of such a rash attempt?
Suppose us armed, yet how can we prevail
Against such a multitude that will oppose us?

Alp. No matter, we are now by much too forward
To talk of going back, it will not be,
Surely fate interposes, and unravels
What our best care has been so long designing.
Must then my Soul be still locked up in Prison
Furled up in darkness and the Womb of Night,
Never to walk forth again in her own Majesty?
Why have I reason and yet dare not use it?
A Soul for Empire born, yet live a Slave?
I Will do it my self: methinks I do behold
My Royal Father, and my murdered Brother,
From yon' blue orb inciting me to action.
Now their pale Ghosts, all trembling full of horror,
Just as they fell, bloated with rankest poison,
In pitious action urge me to revenge:
Rest, rest in the cold beds of silent death,
'Till loud revenge shall raise you, to behold,
And wonder at my Justice, then in a peal of Thunder
Let conscious Heaven applaud my ministering hand.

Pis. My Lord, the day succeeding this of the Triumph,
It being that on which he first was Crowned,
The Tyrant dedicates to ease, and pleasure,
What hinders but we then complete his ruin?
The Gates lie open to receive all Strangers,
That come to grace his Pride, and praise his Fortunes.

Alp. O my best Friend, had I the World to give,
It should be thine for such another thought:
To do it then, will look as if high Heaven
Had still presided over our pious Counsels,
And the hand of fate had led us to his ruin.
Have my Petruchio, tell old honest Pedro,
The Gods are met in Council to determine,
And bless our high resolves: the Circle of his Reign
Begins to be complete; the Sun, that gave
His Empire birth, must light him to his Grave.

Exeunt. ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Frederick and Sorano. Fred. COME to my Arms, my Father, Brother, Friend.
To thee thy Frederick owes his Life, and Crown,
And what he values more than both, his Love,
To thee he owes Evanthe, his Evanthe;
Shall she be mine? Shall the kind tender fair one
Soften the troubles of ill purchased power,
And Usurpation? Shall the Charms of Love
Silence the clamours of a guilty Conscience?

Sor. She shall be yours, she is already so;
Sorano is the Slave of your desires,
Ready to fling his Soul upon your Service,
Nay more his Love; for know I love her too;
My active Father, when he first informed
My Mother what a Woman was, never knew,
Desires like mine; but yet she shall be yours:
I that have made you great will make you happy.

Fr. Friend! Father! Brother! are too feeble names
TO express my Love; I Will call thee my Sorano.
How has my Youth been hitherto misled?
Restless ambition, and the thirst of Empire,
Hung, like an Ague on my active Spirits,
Till beauty came to thaw the restiff Mass,
New framed my Soul, and taught me how to love.

Sor. Love then, and give a loose to your desires,
Let your Soul revel in those Charms, that drew
Great Jove himself from his Celestial Throne,
To taste on Earth Joys he never knew in Heaven.

Fred. Yes I will Love, but I Will Love like a King;
Not quit my Majesty to be a Slave.
Whine out an Amorous tale, and dully ask,
On my Knees ask, for what I can Command.
In Thunder I Will embrace this Semele.

Sor. First try by gentle means to win her Love;
If those fall short, then force her to your Arms:
I Have sent my Man unto her,
Upon some private business to come presently,
Hither she will come, Your Grace dare speak unto her
Large golden promises and sweet Language, Sir
You know what they work, she is a complete Courtier.

Enter Servant. Ser. My Lord, your Servant waits.


Sor. Bid him come in, and bring the Lady with him,
She Is coming in Sir.

Ev. Whither do thou go?
This is the King's side, and his private Lodgings,
I have no private business through his Chambers,
To seek him this way; O my life I find it,
Thou art Drunk, or worse, hired to convey me hither
For some base end. The King here, and Sorano?
I find I Am trap't; now gentle Love inspire me,
And Honor help in this unequal Combat.

Sor. Nay shrink not back, the good King will not hurt you,
He Honors you, and Loves you.

Ev. My Lord, you once did Love, and Honor me,
So you have told me often, and I believed it.

Sor. I do so still, my labors to advance you
Proclaim aloud how much I honor you.

Fred. Gentle Evanthe!


Ev. The gentle Queen is well I hear, and now returning home.


Fr. I talk not of the Queen, I talk of thee, sweet Flower.


Ev. Your Grace is pleasant to mistake a Nettle for a Rose.


Fr. No Rose nor Lilly, nor no glorious Hyacinth,
Are of that Whiteness, Sweetness, Tenderness,
Softness, and satisfying blessedness,
As my Evanthe!

Ev. Your Grace speaks very seelingly,
I would not be a handsome Wench in your way
For a new Gown.

Fr. Thou art all handsomness,
Nature will be ashamed to frame another,
Now thou art made, thou have robbed her of her cunning.
But Love Evanthe!

Ev. Good your Grace be patient,
I shall make the worst honorable Wench;
Shame your Discretion, and your Choice.

Fr. Thou shall not.


Ev. Shall I be Rich do you say and Glorious?


Fr. Thou shall be any thing.


Ev. Let me be honest too, and then I Will thank you.
Have you not such a Title to bestow too?
If I prove otherwise, I would know but this,
Can all the power you have, or all the Riches,
But tie Men's Tongues up from discoursing of me,
Their Eyes from gazing at my glorious folly,
Time that shall come from wondering at my impudence,
And they that read my wanton life, from Curses.

Fr. Stay Evanthe I Will Marry thee.


Ev. What shall the Queen do then?


Fr. I Will be Divorced from her.


Ev. Can you tell why, What has she done against you?
Has she contrived a Treason against your Person,
Abused your bed, does disobedience urge you?

Fr. It Is all one, it is my will.


Ev. It Is a most wicked one,
A most absurd one, and will show a Monster.
I had rather be a Whore, and with less sin,
To your present Lust, than Queen to your injustice.
I Will tell your Grace, so Dear I hold the Queen.
I Would first take me for my Love a Moor,
One of your Gally-Slaves, that cold, and hunger,
Decripit misery had made a mock Man,
Than be your Queen.

Fr. You are bravely resolute.


Ev. I had rather be a Leper, and be shunned,
And dye by pieces, rot into my Grave,
And leave no memory behind to know me,
Than be a high Whore to eternity.

Fr. Now my Sorano, where is that Resolution,
On which I fondly thought to build my Love?
Behold that frown; each look, each word she speaks.
At once inflame, and check my strong desires,
I Am like a wretched Slave, half starved to Death,
That has within his view a goodly Feast,
Yet dares not with one Morsel save his Life.

Sor. I know not what to think, some other gamester
Holds her in play, she durst not slight you else.

Fr. I Will find him out, though he lie next her heart;
Too cruel Maid will nothing win your Love?
Brought you those Excellencies to the World
To lock 'em in a Case, or hang 'em by you?
The use is all Nature bestowed 'em sor.

Ev. But how to use 'em right will be the hazard.
What Is Beauty with a lame decripit Soul?
Honor and Riches with a guilty Conscience?
A poor unhappy Orphan this Lord found me,
When I had nothing I could call my own;
But a variety of misery,
And with a tender hand relieved my wants;
Preserr'd me to your Noble Ladies Service,
Now my most Gracious Queen: where I have learned
And daily fed upon her virtuous precepts;
Still growing strong by example of her goodness:
And shall I now dare once but think to wrong her?
To violate the chaste Joys of her Bed?
Then farewell Virtue, and all truth in Woman.
You may find time out in Eternity,
Deceit, and Violence in heavenly Justice,
Life in the Grave, and Death among the blessed,
Sooner than tempt me to your vain illusions.

Exit. Fr. She Is gone and flew like swiftest Lightning from me,
But left a sting behind her as she went.
Shall I that broke all bars, that could oppose me
In my pursuit of large imperial power,
And in a Purple torrent swam to Empire,
Bear any opposition in my Love:
I must, Sorano, Frederick must enjoy her,
Though she turns fury in my circling Arms,
And breaths forth in her Kisses swift destruction.

Sor. Strive for the present to compose your self,
And with fair Signs of Love receive Valerio,
Though you have marked him down for death smile on him.

Fr. Yes my Sorano, the proud Slave must dye;
For I remember in my Father's time,
Who bred him with his Sons, one Table sed,
One Tutor taught, and one Purse still supplied us;
How he in scorn would laugh at my slow progress,
^th' Exercises he grew Master of,
Outrivalling my best performances;
For which I then did envy, and still hate him.
Besides he grows too popular, and looks
With a suspicious Eye upon my greatness.

Sor. Think him, my Lord, and cursed Alphonso nothing,
Whom, tho distracted, still the People love,
Death waits my pleasure and stands ready for 'em.

Enter Alphonso with Priuli and 2 or 3 Courtiers more. Alph. You say true, my
Lord, Jason was the man; but what are the times to us? they will burst and stink
when once they are swollen with Surfeits; stink so abominably that all the world
shall smell 'em.


Pr. What says my Lord?


Alph. I say it is possible for poor men to offend, and great forgive, but it
must not be in the Dog Days. Was you ever in Love?


1. Cour. Yes, my good Lord.


Alph. If you have a strong faith then you may be saved, but you must first
learn to ravish twenty or thirty coy Wenches in a morning; tho here they are so
willing it is a complement, for Sir you may be a Bawd, and yet counted an honest
man.


Fr. How do you Brother?


Alph. Well, I thank you, sound in body, and in my right wits; tho some hold
there is a great difference between a high born Princess and a Cowkeepers
Daughter, but of this you may consult your Council.


Fr. Trust me! it makes me weep to see you thus.


Al. I would bear you Company, but the world goes on so merrily I cannot find in
my heart, ha, ha, ha! Do you see that old Lord there? he lost his wits for want
of preferment; but bush you will tell the King. Your pardon, my Lord I did not
see you.


Sor. My Lord Alphonso.


Alph. Wipe your mouth before you speak, my Lord, you will spoil your Speech else.


A warlike Shout within. The Scene draws and discovers a Royal Throne on which
the King places himself, then Valerio enters in a Triumphal wanner, being
ushered in with a Song. Fr. Rise, to my arms, Valerio
And as a just Reward of all thy Labors
Accept my Love, and to confirm that Love,
Ask what thou will, thou shall not ask in vain;
Instruct thy King, teach him what he must do
To show how much be loves such early virtue.

Val. Low on my Knees I thank my royal Master,
And may I be most infamously wretched,
When I forget my Duty to my King.
Thus then encouraged I dare boldly ask,
Not as a just Reward to crown my labors,
For know, Sir, it is a gift above all merit;
Were I as great as ever Caesar was,
Like Pompey just, or Alexander valiant;
Were all the exalted Virtues of mankind
Blended together to inform one Soul.
Were that Soul placed in a majestic body,
Blessed with an everlasting youth and beauty,
Yet would Evanthe far exceed that wonder.
And her your Soldier asks for on his knees;
Join you our hands, my Lord, as Love has joined our hearts.

Fr. Ha, my Sorano! do thou hear the Traitor?


Val. Evanthe sent Valerio to the field,
For her I suffered all the toils of War;
Summer Fateigues, and tedious Winter Colds:
Evanthe led the Soldier forth to fight,
Evanthe gave the word of battle, fought,
Conquered, and here she comes to crown my Triumph.

Enter Evanthe. Evan. And here she comes to die within these Arms,
If Fate has not ordained she should live there.

Val. Live and breed wonders for succeeding ages,
Be like a never emptied spring of joys,
Sweeter than life, lovely as spotless honor;
Here let me press thee in the arms of Love,
Close to my breast, to which thou art far dearer
Than my own heart that sallies forth to meet thee.

Evan. What shall I say to answer all thy kindness?
I love like thee, but have no time to talk;
But fly to view the mansion of my bliss,
Where my blessed ears so often have been fed
With the soft notes of kind indulgent love;
My busy eyes in haste survey thee round,
For fear I should be torn for ever from thee,
Before they have renewed their old acquaintance.

Val. For fear thou should be torn for ever from me?
Life cannot part, and Death shall never divide us.
So well Valerio loves thee, O Evanthe,
That to be thine for one short month I Would give
My present fortune, hopes of future greatness,
That scene of joys which I still hope to find
Lasting as age in my Evanthe's arms.
The Sun may move and change the face of Nature;
We Will know no change, but blessed in one another,
Eternal love and never fading pleasures
Shall fill the course of each revolving year.

Fr. Guards separate those two.


Val. What means your Highness?


Fr. To interrupt you, Sir, lest you should surfeit,
And lose your self in your imagined bliss.
Thou rash presumptious Fool! that art so prodigal
Of love and service, but much more of thy life.

Val. I was, Sir, once, when in the face of Death
I fought the Cause of an ungrateful Master.
What have I done, Sir, to deserve your anger?
If it be error to desire to marry,
And marry her that Sanctity would dote on,
I have done amiss; if it be a Treason
To graft my Soul to Virtue, and to grow there,
To love the Tree that bears such happiness;
Nay, to desire to taste too, I am a Traitor.
Had you but Plants enough of this blessed Tree,
Set round about your Court to beautify it,
Deaths twice as many to dismay the Approachers,
The ground would scarce yield Graves to noble Lovers.

Pis. aside to Al. This goes as we could wish, for now Valerio
Enraged at Frederick's unjust Refusal,
Will with more ease be won to our Desires,
Love and Revenge have made him ours already.

Al. Love and Revenge? will those two powerful Ministers
Prevail with him that is deaf to Honors call?
Can he, who has with Resolution born
On his Sword's point the Quarrel of a Nation,
Yield up his Life so tamely for a Woman?
However I Will take him when his manlier Virtues
Sit over his Soul, and bring him home to honor.

Val. As for my Life I Have hitherto preserved it,
And wear it now only to do you service.
How I have served you, Sir, these here can witness;
I have some wounds too may plead strongly for me.
But since you have denied my first Request,
All other Offers, tho it was your Crown,
Bright as it is, I would with scorn look down on.

Fr. It Is well maintained. Just now I think you wish^
So much you dote upon your own undoing,
But for one month to enjoy her as your Wife,
Tho at th'expiring of that time you die for it.

Val. I could wish many ages, Sir,
To grow as old as Time in her Embraces,
If Heaven would grant it and you-smile upon it,
But if my Choice were two hours and then perish,
I would not pull my Heart back.

Fr. You have your wish,
Immediately I Will see you nobly married.
Your time take out in all content and pleasure,
But when that time's expired you must die for it.
Kneel not; not all your Prayers can divert me.
It Is true, immediate Death should be your doom,
But you have done some service that pleads for you.
Now mark your Sentence, mark it scornful Lady,
If, when Valerio's dead, within twelve hours,
For that is your latest time, you find not out
Another Husband on the same condition,
To marry you again, you die your self too.

Ev. Now you are merciful, I thank your Grace.


Fr. If when y' are married you but seek to escape
Out of the Kingdom, you, or she, or both;
Or to infect men's minds with hot Commotions.
You die both instantly: will you love me now Lady;
My Tale will now be heard, but now I scorn you.

Exit cum Sur. Ev. Is our fair Love, our honest and entire,
Come to this hazard.

Val. It Is a noble one!
Envy could not have studied me a way,
Nor Fortune pointed out a Path to Honor
Straighter, and nobler, if she had her Eyes.
When I have once enjoyed my sweet Evanthe,
And blessed my Youth with her most dear Embraces,
I have done my Journey here, my Day is out;
All that the world has else is foolery;
Labor, and loss of time; what should I live for?
Think but Man's life a month, and we are happy.
A Paradise, as thou art my Evanthe,
Is only made to wonder at a little,
Enough for humane Eyes, and then to wander from
Come grudge not my felicity,

Ev. I Will to the Queen his Mother.


Val. Do any thing that is honest,
But if you sue to him in death I hate you.
Ex. Ev. Friends we must have a Masque, I think Camillo,
You are a Poet, pray let me beg this courtesy.

Came. I Am glad to see you merry, Sir.


Val. It Would make you merry had you such a Wife,
And such an age to enjoy her in.

Men. An age, Sir.


Val. Is It not age to him that is contented?
What should I seek for more? such Youth and Beauty.

Cl. We confess you happy, but on what Price, my Lord?


Val. 'T were nothing else,
No Man can ever come to aim at Heaven,
But through the knowledge of an Hell. Who would live long?
Who would be old? it is such a weariness,
Such a disease, it hangs like Lead upon us,
As it increases, so vexations,
Griefs of the Mind, Pains of the feeble Body,
Rheums, Coughs, Catarrhs, we are but our living Coffins.
Besides the fair Soul's old too, it grows covetous,
Which shows all Honor is departed from us,
And we are Earth again.

Cl. You make fair use, Sir.


Val. I would not live to learn to lie, Cleanthes,
For all the world; old men are prone to that too
Thou that have been a Soldier Menallo,
Adopted thy brave Arm the Heir to Victory
Would thou live so long till thy strength forsook thee,
Till thou grew'st only a long tedious Story,
Of what thou have been, till thy Sword hung by.
And lazy Spiders filled the Hilt with Cobwebs?

Men. No sure I would not.


Val. It Is not fit thou shou'd'st,
To dye a Young man is to be an Angel,
Our great good parts put Wings upon our Souls.
They stay sure, come; I hear the Music call us.

Exit with Camillo. Men. We will attend you; Marriage and Hanging go by
Destiny; it is the old Proverb, now they come together, here comes the Ld.
Alphonso: how happy had we been if he had reigned.


Enter Alphonso. Al. Tho he is hasty, and his Anger Death,
His Will like Torrents not to be resisted,
Yet Law and Justice go along to guide him;
And what Law or what Justice can he find
To justify his Will?

Cl. He seems concerned.


Men. One of his melancholy Fits that never last long.


Alp. Yet after all Death is unwelcome never,
Unless it be to tortured and sick Souls.
That make their own Hells here on Earth.
The poor Slave that lies private, has his Liberty
As amply as his Master in the Grave;
The Earth as light upon him, and the Flowers
That grow about him, smell as sweet and flourish.
But whenever it comes crowned with Honor,
When Memory and Virtue are our Mourners,
What pleasures shall we then find in the Grave!

Cl. How does your Lordship?


Al. Very well; one, two, three, you cannot hurt me for all that.


Cl. What thinks your Lordship of this Wedding.


Alp. They have given him a hot Custard, and mean to burn his mouth with it.


Men. Pray, my Lord, what News? these Wars have made us Strangers to the Court.


Alp. You may be honest, and grow old as I am, and blow your fingers ends.


Men. My Lord, that is no News.


Alp. You may be Knaves then when you please, stark Knaves, and build fair
Houses, but your Heirs shall have none of 'em.


Men. These are undoubted.


Al. Truth is not worth the hearing: I Will tell you News then, there was a
drunken Sailer that got a Mermaid with Child as she went a milking, and now she
sues him in the Bawdy Court for it; the Infant Monster is brought up in Fish
street.


Cl. Ay, this is something.


Al. I Will tell you more, because y' are Soldiers; there was a Fish taken, a
monstrous Fish, with a Sword by his side, a long Sword, a Pike in his Neck, and
a Gun in his Nose, and Letters of Mart in his Mouth, from the Duke of Florence.


Men. With submission, my Lord, this sounds something odly.


Al. I do confess it; do you think I would tell you truths, that dare not
hear'em? You are honest things, we Courtiers scorn to converse with.


Men. He Will grow mad anon and beat us, let us to the Masque.


Exeunt. Al. Can there be any nature so unnoble,
Or anger so inhumane to pursue this?
Yes he, that could not hear the voice of nature
That called aloud, when by his barbarous hands
A Father fell, will have his Ears sealed up
In the commission of a meaner Act

Enter Pedro, Pisano, and Petruchio. Ped. Married! yes, when I mean to be
hanged; it is the surer Contract.


Al. Was not the Monster ripe for Hell already,
He should live something longer, to complete
This last design, and make his damning sure.

Ped. Why don't we about it then? What do we stand preaching for? You, my
Lords, may have your quirks and quiddles, your times and occasions; but I know
no more than a Word and a Blow; let us first cut his throat, and talk on it
afterward.


Al. Nay we'll do more than talk, the fatal thread.
Which held the Sword of Justice over his head.
H' has cut himself to make destruction sure.
The evening of his Reign draws on apace,
But if we don't with timely care prevent him.
He Will mark his way with ruin as he falls.
And like a fiery Meteor set in blood.

Ped. Why, so it be his own it is no matter. Why are we not in arms, and the
whole City given to know --


Al. Discreetly and privately it must be done, 'twill miss else, and prove our
ruins; when you all hear the Castle Bell take courage and stand like Men; mean
time be near his person to avoid suspicion. I must into the presence, my
Mother's fears will work else.


Exit cum Pisano and Petruchio. Scene draws and discovers the Court seated for
the Masque, that ended the King speaks. Fr. Come to the Banquet, Sir, when
that is ended
I Will see you in your Bed, and then good night.
Be merry; you have a sweet Bedfellow.

Val. I thank your Grace, and ever shall be bound unto your Nobleness.


Fr. I pray I may deserve that thanks, set forward.


Exeunt Omne^ ACT III. SCENE I.
Sorano Solus. Sor. TO love and be with Scorn and Pride rejected,
To see another revel in those Joys,
Those sweet Delights, I now must never hope for!
Love at the best, tho crowned with soft compliance,
Is but a sickly transport of the mind,
A weakness wise men ever were ashamed of;
Then when it is hopeless, what brave Soul can bear it?
Yet still I love, and loving must enjoy.
I feel that Fire I once hoped quite extinct,
Dilate it self with a redoubled fury.
The King, and this Valerio stand betwixt
Me and my hopes; therefore both shall dye.
Him I Will make odious for Valerio's death,
And mad Alphonso's, what is the consequence?
The people, mischief-ripe, raised by my power,
Shall kill the Tyrant, and at once make way
For Love and my Ambition. Here comes one
Ripe for the combat, and those fancied joys
Which like a shadow still shall fly before him.

Enter Val. Val. They drink abundantly, I Am hot with Wine too,
Lustily warm. I Will steal now to my happiness
It Is midnight, and the silent hours invite me.
The Dew of Wine and Sleep hang on their Eyelids;
Steep their dull senses in the healths they drink,
That I may quickly find my loved Evanthe.

Sor. How brisk he is; but I shall quickly cool him,
Make him wish he were dead on's Marriage night,
Or bedrid with old age.

Val. Is not the end of our ambitions,
Of all our humane studies,
Obtaining of our wishes?
Certain it is; and there man makes his center.
I have my wish, what is left me to accuse now?
I Am friends with all the world but thy base malice.
To Sor. Go, glory in thy mischiefs, thou proud man,
And cry it to the world thou have ruined virtue.

Sor. You Will sing me a new Song anon Valerio,
And wish these hot words --

Val. I despise thee fellow,
Thy threats, or flatteries, all I fling behind me,
I have obtained Evanthe, I have married her,
And Fate shall not withold me from enjoying her.

Sor. It Is very likely,


Val. And that short time I have to bless me with her,
I Will make an age. I Will reckon each embrace
A year of pleasure, and each night a jubilee;
Every quick kiss a spring, and when I mean
To lose my self in all delightfulness,
Twenty sweet Summers I will tie together,
I will dye old in love, tho young in pleasure:

Sor. But that I hate thee deadly, I could pity thee;
Thou art the poorest miserable thing
This day on earth, I Will tell thee why Valerio:
All thou esteemest, and build'st upon for happiness,
For joy, for pleasure, for delight, is past thee,
And like a wanton dream already vanish.

Val. Is my Love false?


Sor. No, she is constant to thee;
Constant to all thy misery she shall be,
And curse thee too.

Val. Is my strong body weakened,
Charmed, or abused with subtle drink?

Sor. Neither; I dare speak thee still as lusty,
As when thou lov'dst her first, as strong and hopeful.
The month the have given thee is a month of misery,
And where thou think each hour shall yield a pleasure,
Look for a killing pain, for thou shall find it.
Before thou die each minute shall prepare it,
And ring so many Knells to sad afflictions.

Val. Undo thy Riddle, I am prepared whatever fate shall follow.


Sor. Do thou see this Ring?


Val. Yes, and know it too; it is the King's.


Sor. Then mark me, by virtue of this Ring this I pronounce thee, It Is the
King's will.


Val. Let me know it suddenly.


Sor. If thou do offer to touch Evanthe's body,
Beyond a kiss, tho thou art married to her,
And lawfully, as thou think, may enjoy her,
That minute she shall dye.

Val. O Devil --


Sor. If thou discover this command unto her,
Or to a Friend that shall importune thee,
Ye both perish.
Upon the self same forfeit; how falls your month out now, Sir?
Now if you love her you may preserve her life still,
If not you know the worst.

Val. This Tyranny could never be invented
But in the Schools of Hell, Earth is too innocent,
Not to enjoy her when she is my Wife:
Thou can not be so monstrous,
As thou proclaimest thy self; thou once did Love her;
And there must be a feeling heart within thee,
Of her afflictions, were thou a stranger to us,
And bred amongst wild Rocks, thy nature wild too,
And unrelenting, as the Rocks that nourisht thee,
Yet thou must shake to tell me this, they tremble,
When the rude Sea threatens divorce amongst 'em,
They that are senseless things shake at a Tempest.
Thou art a Man --

Sor. Be thou then too. 'twill try thee,
And patience now will best become thy Nobleness.
See you observe it well, you will find about you
Many eyes set, that will observe your Actions
If you transgress, you know -- and so I leave you.

Exit. Val. The tale of Tantalus is now proved true,
And from me shall be registered Authentic.
Sure I walk in a mist, and with that silence
As if I was the shroud I wrapped my self in,
And no more of Valerio but his shadow.

Enter Camillo, Cleanthes, Menallo. Came. Where have we lost the Bridegroom?
sure he is gone to bed.


Men. No, here he is thinking no doubt on this nights happiness.


Came. Cheer up my Noble Lord, the Minute's come,
You shall enjoy the abstract of all sweetness,
We did you wrong, you need no Wine to warm you,
Desire shoots through your Eyes like sudden Wildfires.

Val. In troth my Lords, the Wine has made me dull,
I am I know not what.

Cl. O there is a Lady coming will inform you.


Enter Frederick and Sorano. Fr. Tho there are left small hopes for his
recovery,
That hope still lives, and Men's eyes live upon it.
And in their eyes their wishes for Alphonso;
Were he but cold once in the silent Grave,
As it is the fittest place for Melancholy,
My Court should be another Paradise,
And flow with all delights.

Sor. Go to your pleasures let me alone with this
But mark the Man you will scarce know it is Valerio.

Fr. Good pleasure to you,
Good night, and long too, as you find your appetite
You may fall to.

Val. I do beseech your Grace
For which of all my faithful services
Have I deserved this?

Fr. I am not bound to answer you.


Val. Nor I bound to obey in unj^st actions.


Fr. Do as you please, you know the Penalty;
And as I have a Soul it shall be executed.
Nay look not pale I am not used to fear, Sir.
If you respect your Lady good night to you.
Ex. cum Sor.
Val. But for respect to her, and to my duty,
Which anger has no power to rob me of,
The good night should be thine, good night for ever.
How my heart trembles
And beats my breast, as it would break it is way out.
Good night my noble friends.

Cl. Nay, we must see you toward your bed, my Lord.


Val. Indeed, it needs not, it is late, and I shall trouble you.


Came. No, no, till the Bride come, Sir.


Val. I beseech you leave me.
You will make me bashful, I am so foolish,
Besides I have some few devotions, Lords,
And he that can pray with such a book in his arms.

Came. We'll leave you then, and a sweet night wait on you.


Men. And a sweet issue of this sweet night crown you.


Cl. All nights and days be such till you grow old, Sir.

Exeunt.
Val. I thank ye: it is a curse sufficient for me,
A labored one too, tho you mean a blessing.
What shall I do? I Am like a wretched Debtor,
That has a sum to tender on the forfeit
Of all he is worth, yet dare not offer it.
Other men see the Sun, but I must wink at it,
And tho I know it is perfect day deny it.
I must enjoy her, yet when I consider
The Tyrant's will, and his power taught to murder,
My tender care controuls my blood within me,
And like a cold fit of a peevish Ague
Creeps to my Soul, and flings an Ice upon me.

Enter Q. Mother, Evanthe, and Lady. Q. M. Evanthe, make ye unready, your Lord
stays for you,
And prithee be merry.

Ev. Your Grace desires what is too free in me,
I am so taken up in all my thoughts,
So possessed, Madam, with the lawful sweets,
I shall this night partake of with my Lord,
So far transported, pardon my immodesty,
That tho they must be short, and snatched away too,
E're they grow ripe, yet I shall far prefer 'em
Before a tedious pleasure with Repentance.

Val. O how my heart aches!


Q. M I thank thee heartily
For learning how to use thy few hours handsomely,
They will be years I hope.

Ev. Good night, dear Madam.
Ladies, no farther service, I am well:
I do beseech your Grace to give us this leave;
My Lord and I to one another freely,
And privately may do all other Ceremonies,
Woman and Page we'll be to one another,
And trouble you no farther.

Q. M. Why then good night, good night, my best Evanthe,
Thou worthy Maid, and as that name shall vanish,
A worthy Wife, a long and happy.

Ev. That shall be my care.


Q. M. Be cheerful Lord, and take your Lady to ye,
And that power that shall part you be unhappy.

Val. Sweet rest unto ye, to you all sweet Ladies.

Exeunt Q. M. etc.
Ev. Will you to bed my Lord, come let me help you.


Val. To bed, Evanthe; art thou sleepy?


Ev. No; but I shall be worse if you look sad upon me;
Pray let us to bed.

Val. I am not well, my Love.


Ev. I Will make you well; there is no such Physic for you,
As your warm Mistress's arms.

Val. Art thou so cunning?


Ev. I speak not by experience, pray mistake not,
But if you love me --

Val. I do love so dearly,
So much above the base bent of desire,
I know not how to answer thee.

Ev. To bed then,
There I shall better credit you: Fie, my Lord,
Will you put a Maid to it, to teach you what to do,
An innocent Maid, are you so cold a Lover?
This is no stolen Love, or a sin we covet.

Val. May I not love thy Mind?


Ev. And I yours too,
It Is a most noble one adorned with Virtue.
But if we love not one another really,
And put our Bodies and our Minds together,
And so make up the concord of affection,
Our love will prove but a blind superstition.
This is no School to argue in, my Lord,
Nor have we time to talk away allowed us,
Come kiss me and to bed.

Val. That I dare do, and kiss again.


Ev. Spare not they are your own.


Val. My Veins are all on Fire, and burn like Aetna,
Youth, and desire beat Larums to my Blood,
And add fresh fuel to my warm affections.
Have thee, Evanthe, to the Genial bed,
The happy Scene of our approaching Bliss,
And Joys blessed Lovers never knew before;
Yes we will love, not all the powers on Earth,
Or Hell it self shall ever hope to part us.
Each Minute as it swiftly glides along,
Shall bear the pleasures of whole Ages with it,
And witness to the rest our spotless Love.
Great Love himself, with his officious Wings,
Even in the midst of all our furious transports
Shall gently raise and strengthen our desires.

Ev. Come lets dispatch then.


Ev. It will not be, for when I weigh her danger,
The thoughts of that lock up all powers of youth.
O what a blessedness 'twere to be old now,
Or half on Crutches to meet holy Hymen!
That that speaks other men most freely happy,
And makes all eyes hang on their expectations,
Youth, and Ability must prove my bane.

Ev. Fie, fie my Lord, if any one should come,
And find us at this distance, what would they think?

Val. No to enjoy thee is to be luxurious
O how I burn! to pluck thee from the Stalk,
Where now thou grow'st a sweet and heavenly Flower,
And bear the prime, and honor of the Garden,
Is but to violate thy Spring, and spoil thee.

Ev. To let me blow, and fall alone would anger ye.


Val. Let Us sit together thus, and as we sit
Feed on the sweets of one another Souls,
Where no allay of actual dull desires,
Of humane fire, that burns out as it kindles,
Can ever mix, let^s fix on that, Evanthe,
That Is everlasting, the other casual,
Eternity breeds one, the other Fortune,
Blind as her self, and full of all Afflictions,
Shall we love virtuously?

Ev. I ever loved so.


Val. And only think our love: the rarest pleasure,
And that we most desire, let it be humane,
If once enjoyed, grows stale, and cloys our appetite.
I would not lessen in my love for any thing,
Nor find thee but the same in my short Journey,
For my loves safety.

Ev. Now I see I Am old, Sir,
Old, and ill-favored too, poor, and despised,
And am not worthy your noble fellowship,
Your fellowship in Love, you would not else
Thus cunningly seek to betray a Maid,
Strive to abuse the pious love she brings you;
Farwell, my Lord, since you have another Mistress --

Val. Stay, my Evanthe,
Heaven bear em witness, thou art all I love,
All I desire, and now have pity on me,
As I shall want it much. Forgive me Justice,
Youth, and affection stop your ears unto me.

Aside: Ev. Why do you Weep, if I have spoke too harshly,
And unbeseeming my beloved Lord,
My care and duty pardon me.

Val. O hear me,
Hear me, Evanthe; I am all on torture,
And this lie tears my Conscience as I vent it.
I am no Man.

Aside. Ev. How Sir!


Val. No Man for pleasure, no Woman's Man.


Ev. Goodness forbid, my Lord, fure you abuse your self.


Val. It Is true, Evanthe,


Ev. He weeps bitterly.
It Is my hard fortune, bless all young Maids from it,
Is there on help my Lord in art will comfort ye.

Val. I hope there is.


Ev. It Is hard to die for nothing;
Now you shall know it is not the pleasure, Sir,
That Women aim at, I affect you for,
It Is for your Worth, nay I still honor you,
And with all duty to my Husband follow you.
Will you to bed now, you are ashamed it seems;
Pigmalion prayed, and his cold stone took life,
You do not know with what zeal I shall ask, Sir,
And what rare miracle that may work on you,
Still blush? prescribe your Law.

Val. I prithee pardon me,
To bed, and I Will sit by thee, and mourn with thee.
I pray to Heaven when I am gone, Evanthe,
As my poor date is but a Span of Time now,
To recompense thy noble patience,
Thy Love, and Virtue, with a fruitful Husband,
Honest, and Honorable.

Ev. Come you have made me weep now.
All fond desires die, here, and welcome Chastity:
As for this Tyrant, we'll so torture him,
With such a pious scorn, that we will shake him;
And when Valerio, and Evanthe sleep
In one rich Earth, hung round about with blessings,
He shall grow mad with shame, repent too late,
And sink I the ruins of our happier fate.

Exeunt. The end of the third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Frederick. Fr. MEthinks the Sun this morning mounts the Sky,
With a pale face, and Death plays in his Beams.
Why, be it so, they dart it on Alphonso;
But add new life to my continued pleasures.
Sorano's always witty in his mischief,
To Poison him, and by my Mothers hand,
Will be a double stroke, and sweep away
The only bars, that check my sweet delights.
Could I but gain this Maid too I were happy.
Come hither Time, how does your noble Mistress?

Enter Cassandra. Cass. As a Gentlewoman may do in her Case, that is newly
married,
Sickly, and fond on it, and please your Majesty.

Fr. She Is breeding then, and eats good Broths and Jellies?


Cass. I Am sure she sighs, Sir, and weeps, good Lady.


Fr. Alas good Lady for it!
She should have one could comfort her, Cassandra,
Could turn those Tears to Joys, a lusty comforter.

Cass. A comfortable man does well at all hours,
For he brings comfortable things.

Fr. Come hither, and hold your Fan between, you have eaten Onions;
Her breath stinks like a Fox, her teeth are Contagious,
These old Women are all Elder Pipes, do you mark me. He gives her a Purse.

Cass. But does your Grace think I am fit, that am both old and virtuous.


Fr. Therefore the fitter, the older still the better,
I know thou art as holy as an old Cope.
Yet upon necessary use --

Cass. It Is true,


Fr. Her feeling sense is fierce still; speak unto her,
You are familiar; speak I say unto her,

Cass. Alas she is honest Sir, she is very honest,
And would you have my gravity?

Fr. I, I, your gravity will become the Cause the better:
I Will look thee out a Knight shall make thee a Lady too,
A lusty Knight, and one that shall be ruled by thee.
Come, come, no ducking out of nicety,
But do it home, we'll all be friends too tell her,
And such a Joy --

Cass. That Is it that stirs me up, Sir.
I would not for the world attempt her Chastity,
But that they may live lovingly together.

Fr. For that I urge it too.


Cass. A little evil may well be suffered for a general good,
I Will take my leave of your Grace.

Exit. Fr. Go and be fortunate, I know he wants no additions to his tortures;
He has enough for humane blood to carry,
So many, that I wonder his hot Youth,
And high bred Spirit breaks not into Fury.
Yet I must torture him a little further,
My anger is too poor else. Here they come.
The old Woman seems an earnest advocate
They are strange things, but I must not be seen.
Exit.
Enter Evanthe and Cassandra. Ev. You think it fit then, Mortified Cassandra
That I should be a Whore?

Cass. If every woman, that upon necessity
Did a good turn, were termed a Whore,
Who would be honest.
Your Lords life, and your own, are now in hazard.
Two precious lives may be redeemed with nothing:
That we call lust, that Maidens loose their same for,
But a Compelled necessity of honor,
Fair as the day, and clear as innocence,
Upon my life and conscience, a direct way --

Ev. To be a Devil.


Cass. It Is a kind of rape too,
That keeps you clear; for where the will's compelled
Though you yield up your body, you are safe still

Ev. Thou art grown a learned Bawd, I ever looked
Thy great sufficiency would break out.

Cass. You may
You that are young and fair from us old Creatures.
But you must know my years e're you be wise,
And my experience too. Say the King loved ye
Do you think Princes favors are such trifles,
To fling away when you please? there are young Ladies,
Both fair, and honorable, that would leap to reach 'em.

Ev. They are the wiser for it; but can thou tell me
Though he be a King whether he be sound or no?
I would not give my youth up to infection.

Cass. As sound as honor ought to be I think.


Ev. But when I have lain with him, what am I then?


Cass. What are you? why the same you are now, a woman,
A virtuous woman, and a noble woman,
Touching at what is noble you become so.
Had Lucreece e're been thought of, but for Tarquin,
She was before a Simple unknown woman,
When she was ravished, she was a reverent St.
And do you think she yielded not a little,
And had a kind of will to be re-ravish't:

Ev. But suppose the King shou d so delight me,
I should forget my Lord, and no more look on him?

Cass. That Is the main hazard, for I tell you truly,
I Have heard report speak him an infinite pleasure.

Ev. Peace, thou old Bawd, thou studied old corruptness.
Do thou seek to make me dote on wickedness,
Because it is ten times worse than thou deliver'st it?
To be a Whore, O thou Impudence!
Have I relieved thy Age to my own ruin?
And worn thee in my bosom to betray me?
Can years, and Impotence win nothing on thee
That Is good and honest, but thou must go on still,
And where thy Blood wants heat to sin thy self,
Force thy decrepid will to make me wicked?

Cass. I did but tell ye --


Ev. What the damndest Woman,
The cunningst, and most skillfull Bawd, comes short of.
If thou had lived ten ages to be damned in,
And exercised this art the Devil taught thee,
Thou could not have expressed it more exactly.

Cass. I did not bid you sin.


Ev. Thou wood'st me to it.
Thou that art fit for Prayer, and the Grave,
Thy Body Earth already, and Corruption,
Thou taught^st the way; go follow your fine Function,
There are houses of Delight, that want good Matrons,
Such grave Instructors, get thee thither, Monster,
And read varitey of Sins to Wantons,
And when they roar with pains then learn to pity 'em.

Cass. This we have for our good will;


Ev. When thou want bread, and common pity toward thee;
When thou art starving in a Ditch, think on me,
Then die and let the wandering Bawds lament thee.
Begone I charge thee leave me.

Exit Cassandra. Enter Frederick. Fr. She Is angry, and the other gone, my suits
cold.
I Will make your heart ache, stubborn Maid, for this.
Turn not so angry from me, I will speak to you;
Are you grown proud with your delight, good Lady,
So pampered with your sport, you scorn to know me?

Ev. I scorn you not, I wish you scorned not me, Sir;
And forced me to be weary of my duty.
I know your Grace, would I had never seen you.

Fr. Because I love, because I dote upon you,
Because I am a man, that seek to please you

Ev. I Have one already, Sir, that can content me,
As much, as noble, and as worthy of me
As all the world can yield.

Fr. That Is but your modesty.
You have no man, nay never look upon me,
I know it Lady, no man to content ye;
No man that can, or at the least that dares,
Which is a poorer man, and nearer nothing.

Ev. Be nobler Sir informed.


Fr. I Will, tell you, Madam,
The poor condition of this poorer Fellow,
And make you blush for shame at your own error.
He has not rendered yet a Husbands duty
To your warm longing Bed.

Ev. How should he know that?


Fr. I Am sure he did not, for I charged him no,
Upon his life I charged him, but to try him.
Could any brave or noble spirit stop here?
Was life to be prefern'd before affection,
Lawful and long d for too?

Ev. Did you command him?


Fr. I did in policy, to try his spirit.


Ev. And could he be so dead cold to observe it?
Brought I no Love nor Beauty along with me?

Fr. I shou d have loved him if he had ventured for it,
Nay doted on his bravery.

Ev. Only charged, and with that spell sit down: dare men fight bravely
For poor slight things, for drink or ostentation
And there endanger both their lives and fortunes?
And for their lawful loves fly off with fear?
I wou^d have died a thousand deaths.

Fr. So wou d any,
Any that had the spirit of a Man.
I would have been killed, in your Arms.

Ev. I wish I had been,
And buried in my arms, that had been noble;
And what a Monument would I have made him!
Upon my breast he should have slept in peace,
Honor, and everlasting love his Mourners;
And I still weeping 'till old time had turn^d me,
And pitying powers above, into pure Crystal.

Fr. Had thou loved me, and had my way been stuck
With deaths, as thick as frosty nights with Stars,
I would have ventured.

Ev. Good Sir afflict me not too fast, I feel
I am a Woman, and a wronged one too,
And I am sensible of my abuses.

Fr. All reason, and all Laws allow it ye.


Ev. You may speak now, and happily prevail too.
And I beseech your Grace be angry with me.

Fr. If I should give him life he would betray thee,
That fool that fears to die for such a Beauty,
Would for the same fear sell thee unto misery.
I do not say he set your Woman on you.

Ev. Followed thus far, nay then I smell the malice,
It tastes too hot of practiced wickedness.
Shall my Anger make me Whore, and not my pleasure?
My sudden inconsiderate rage abuse me?

Fr. Nor he would have been himself Solicitor.


Ev. Nor do not dare, 'twill be an imprudence,
And not an honor for a Prince to lie.

Fr. How lie?


Ev. Shamefully, and I could wish my self a man but one day,
To tell you openly you lie too basely.

Fr. Take heed wild sool.


Ev. Take heed thou tame Devil,
Thou all Pandora's box in a Kings figure;
Thou have almost whor'd my weak belief already,
And like an Engineer blown up my Honor,
But I shall countermine, and catch your mischief.
Victorious Thomyris, never won more honor,
In cutting off the Royal Head of Cyrus,
Than I shall do in conquering thee, farewell.
And if thou can be wise learn to be good too,
'Twill give thee nobler light than both thy eyes do.
My poor Lord and my self are bound to suffer,
And when I see him faint under your sentence,
I Will tell you more, it may be than I Will yield to.

Fr. Yielding or not I Have sworn she shall be mine,
Tho I should wade through Seas of blood to meet her.

Enter Val. Val. He Is here and by himself, what hinders me,
But that I now make sure a noble vengeance?
The People do expect, the Soldiers wish it,
All Naples hang on me their expectations.
As if it was a debt, I owed my Country.
But still he is my Sovereign, and that thought
Pulls back my Sword, and turns the edge against me.

Fr. Now my young married Lord how do you feel your self?
You have the happiness you ever aimed at,
The joy and pleasure.
You tumble in delights, with your sweet Lady,
And draw the Minutes out in dear embraces.

Val. Would you had tried it, Sir, that you might know
The virtue but to suffer.
Your anger though it be unjust, and insolent,
Sits handsomer upon you than your scorn.
To do a wilful ill, and glory in it,
Is to do it double, and doubly to be damned.

Fr. You clearly see now, brave Valerio,
What it is to be a rival to a Prince,
To interpose agianst a raging Lion.

Val. You are grown a Tyrant
Upon so suffering, and so still a Subject,
That if your youth were honest, it would blush at.
But you are a shame to nature, as to virtue;
Pull not my rage upon ye, it is so Just
It will give way to no respect.

Fr. I know you have suffered, infinitely suffered,
And with a kind of pity I behold ye;
And if you dare be worthy of my mercy,
I can yet heal you.

Val. I fall thus low, Sir.
And my poor heart under your feet I lay,
And all the service of my life.

Fr. I o this then
Part with her for a while.

Val. You have parted us,
What shall I do with that I cannot use, Sir?

Fr. It Is well considered; let me have the Lady,
And thou shall see how nobly I Will befriend thee.

Val. Will she come do you think?


Fr. She must be wrought, I know she is too modest,
And that with Art.

Val. But who shall work her, Sir?
For on my conscience she is very honest,
And will be hard to cut as a rough Diamond.

Fr. Why, you must work her, any thing from your Tongue,
Set off with Golden, and persuasive language,
Urging your dangers too.

Val. But all this while
Have you the Conscience, Sir, to leave me nothing;
Nothing to play withal?

Fr. There are ten thousand, take where thou will.


Val. May I be bold with your Queen,
She Is useless to your Grace, as it appears, Sir,
And but a Loyal Wife that may be lost too,
I have a mind to her, and then it is equal,

Fr. How, Sir?


Val. It Is so, Sir; thou most glorious impudence,
Have I not wrongs enough to suffer under,
But thou must pick me out to make a Monster,
A hated wonder to the World! do you start
At my intrenching on your private liberty,
And would you force a high way through my honor,
And make me pave it too? but that thy Queen
Is of that excellent honesty,
And guarded with Divinity about her,
I would so right my self.

Fr. Why take her to you,
I am not vexed at this; thou shall enjoy her,
I Will be thy Friend if that will win thy courtesy.

Val. I will not be your Bawd though for your Kingdom.
Was I brought up and nourished in the Court
With thy most Royal Brothers and thy self,
And sucked the sweetness of all humane Arts,
Learned arms and honor to become a villain?
Was this the expectation of my youth,
My growth and glory. Do you speak this truly,
Or do you try me, Sir; for I believe not,
At least I would not, and methinks it is impossible
There should be such a Devil in a King's shape.
Such a malignant Fiend!

Fr. You Will find me worse if you persist thus rashly,
The next time you hear from me it must be
In rougher terms, and so I take my leave.

Exit. Val. Am I a Man and feel loves fire within me,
Youth and desire engaging me to taste,
Those sweet delights the law has given me?
Have I within my reach that precious treasure,
To purchase which I have sacrificed my life,
Withal my youthful hopes, and shall I not
Because a Tyrants power interposes
Dare once to touch that dear bought happiness.
Enter Evanthe. Come my Evanthe, fly into my Arms,
Let thy warm sighs dissolve that lump of sorrow,
That heavy load that hangs upon my soul.

Ev. Not all my sighs, nor the sincerest love,
That e're was paid by an unhappy Maid,
Can purge thy soul of its ingratitude.

Val. Ha!


Ev. Can thou look up to the peoples love,
That call thee worthy and not blush, Valerio?
Can thou behold me, whom thou have betrayed,
Yet know no shame?

Val. What means my best Evanthe?


Ev. To save thy life, and for so short a time;
It does betray so base a Cowardice,
That makes even me a Woman blush to think on it.
Had twenty thousand deaths attended me
I would have met 'em all, and di'd upon the pleasure.

Val. I Am all amazement!


Ev. To let a lie work like a spell upon ye,
A lie to save your life; the King himself,
Tho he be wicked, and our Enemy,
But juster than thou art, in pity of me
Told me this truth?

Val. What did he tell you?


Ev. That but to gain thy life for a few days,
Thy loved poor life, thou gave up all my duties.

Val. I swear it is false, my life and death are equal.
But Kings are men, and live and die as men do,
Have the affections men have, and their falsehoods.
Indeed they have more power to make 'em good.
It was to save thy life, thy innocent life,
That I forbore thy bed.

Ev. And was not I as worthy to die nobly,
To make a story for the times that follow,
As he that married me? do you think I chose you
Only for pleasure, or content in Love,
To lull you in my arms and kiss you hourly?

Val. I do not think so.


Ev. I might have been a Queen, Sir,
If that had caught me, and have known all delicates.
There Is few that would have shunned so fair an offer.
O thou unfaithful fearful man, thou have killed me;
In saving me this way thou have destroyed me.

Val. I honor you; by all the rites of marriage
And pleasures of chaste love, I wonder at you.
You appear the vision of a heaven unto me,
Stuck all with stars of honor shining clearly;
Why don't you chide me, you have so brave an anger,
And thus delivered flows so nobly from you,
That I could suffer like a child to hear you.

Ev. My Anger's gone, good my Lord pardon me,
And if I have offended be more angry.
It was a woman's flash, a sudden valor
That could not lie conceal^d.
You have with a cunning patience chek't my folly.
Once more forgiveness.
(She kneels)
Val. Will this serve Evanthe
( He raises and kisses her.) And this my Love, thou art all happiness,
Man is a lump of earth, the best Man spiritless,
To such a Woman, all our lives and actions,
But counterfeits in Arras to such virtue.
But did he tell no more?

Ev. More than I then believ^d or ever shall.


Val. Now we are both of one mind, lets be happy.
I am no more a wanting man Evanthe,
Thy warm embraces shall dissolve that impotence,
And my cold lie shall vanish with thy kisses.
Ye hours of night be long, as when Alcmena
Lay by the lusty side of Jupiter,
Keep back the day and hide his golden beams,
Where the chaste watchful morning may not find 'em.
Old doting Tython, hold Aurora fast,
And tho she blush, the day break from her cheeks,
Conceal her still; thou heavy wain stand still,
And stop the quicker revolutions;
Or if the day must come to spoil our happiness
Thou envious Sun peep not upon our pleasures,
Thou that all Lovers Curse be far off from us.

Enter Pisano with Guards. Ev. Then let us to bed, and this night in all Joys
And chaste desires --

Pis. Stay I must part you both, it is the King's Command.


Val. Ha! this from thee, Pisano;
Thou once wast honest, what can honor then,
And friendship too conspire against Valerio?

Pis. My honored Lord, you will find me still your Friend,
Bear off the Lady, and use her with all nobleness.

Exeunt with Evanthe. Enter Alphonso. Alp. Call up the Sun, and tell him I wait
for him.
He promised more I fear than he will perform,
To find three men, that are not errant Traitors.

Val. Is there a mystery beyond what I Have suffered?
Yet witness Heaven, this adds to my afflictions,
How do you my good Lord?

Alp. Why very well.
Who are you? For I Am sure I do not know you.

Val. Not know me,


Alp. How is it possible I should?
I well remember I had a foster Brother,
A noble youth, my Father called Valerio;
But what of that? I know you are not he.
Valerio was made up of nobleness,
Master of all those humane excellencies,
That make Men equal to the all perfect Gods;
His forward virtues shot him up to Man,
E're others could attain to a youth's strength.
He was so perfect as if heaven had sent him,
To witness to the world the worth of humane nature.

Val. My Lord Alphonso, am I sure I hear you!


Alp. He wore a soul so full of manly greatness,
As would have brook t a sceptered Devil sooner.
Than usurpation, or a lawless Tyrant,
And e're he would have spent those precious hours,
That pitying fate had liberally consigned,
For the redemption of his wretched Country,
In the endearments of a fruitless passion,
He would have sold himself to slavery.

Val. Go on, my Lord, for tho in your reproofs
Y' appear as dreadful as an angry God,
Y' have turned the stream of my o erflowing griefs,
And silenced all the Tumults of my Soul.
Go on, for whilst you speak, my busy sorrows,
Tho they exceed the tortures of the damned,
As if another Orpheus came to charm 'em,
Are calm, and gently sink down into peace.
Here on my knees silent as death I Am fixed,
And listen to the charge of awful virtue.

Alp. He was so true a lover of his Country,
That for her sake he would have given up
His life, and with it his Soul^s happiness,
But not have sold it like a trading Slave,
For the enjoyments of a short-lif'd pleasure.
He dared meet death with an undaunted courage,
On any score, but from the Hangman's hand:

Val. O all ye Gods, can I believe my senses?
Or do I dream? it is real; for my joys
Exceed the transports of deluded fancy,
But say, my Lord, O tell me I adjure ye,
What kinder power, in pity of our sufferings,
When you was lost and dead to all our hopes,
Has thus restored ye to your bleeding Naples?

Alp. Vain man, it is thou art dead and not Alphonso;
That vigorous heat that fired thy active Youth,
And drew the hopes of all good men unto thee,
Lies quite extinct, and now thou art no more,
Than the faint shadow of Valerio's greatness.
Ye Gods, that man, the Lord of your Creation,
The perfect image of your heavenly forms,
Should own the weakness of the vilest Beast,
And virtue, given us as a faithful guide
To lead us safe through a tempestuous Sea,
Should yield to every wave that dares oppose it!

Val. My Lord, I own all you can charge me with,
And in an humble sense of my own vileness,
I crawl thus low, to kiss your sacred feet.
Valerio owns you have searched him to the quick,
And laid his soul so open to her self,
That now ashamed of her own nakedness,
Dares not erect her head to view, and worship,
The Godlike beams of your severer virtue.

Alp. Let me then raise her up to her own greatness,
And heal her with the charms of holy Friendship,
Here let me fix her, honors sacred twin,
And breath the sweets of manly love upon her.
O my Valerio, we have been both to blame,
The hours of youth, that should have been employed,
In the pursuit of never dying glory,
And spent in the service of our wretched Country,
We have like headless Prodigals permitted
To glide as gentle waters unobserved.

Val. What shall I say, O teach me how to answer.
Thoughts crowd on thoughts, and press upon my Tongue,
Which cannot speak the language of my Heart.
Only thus much, I fling off all my duty
To your dead Brother, for he is dead to goodness,
And to the living hopes of brave Alphonso,
The noble heir of Nature and of Honor,
I fasten my Allegiance.

Alp. Once more Valerio,
Since thou art so nobly fashioned to my Arms
Thou Art welcome, thus and thus I press thee to me,
Wish we might grow so fixed, so linked together,
As Fredericks power might strive in vain to part us.

Val. Is there on Earth that power that can divide us?
That life my love so fondly gave away,
Honor recalls: for you I will preserve it,
That could not for my self. I Am yours, my Lord,
Valerio's yours, and to secure me so,
Witness ye Gods Valerio quits the world,
All but his love, and if my Lord commands it,
I Will quit that too; Evanthe shall be quitted,
And thrown off from me, that I may with ease,
Enter the list, and run the race of glory.

Alp. O thou wast born to recall banished virtue;
And fix her on her Throne; no, my Valerio,
May thou be ever blessed in thy Evanthe.
Live both the happy Stars of love and honor,
Two lights to guide us in this darker Age.
But listen now to what I shall unfold,
This afternoon, the Tyrant has determined
To try if fear will work upon Evanthe,
And win her to compliance, if to save,
Thy much loved life she will give up her honor;
If that will not prevail, it is then resolved*
By force to drag her to his impious lust.
Now can thou tamely see a Virgin wronged,
And not be touched with the indignity,
Perceive thy Wife forc^d to a Tyrant's bed,
And feel no love within to do her Justice?

Val. Why asks my Lord, by heaven I Would rather see her
Dragged to a bloody Altar, and there fall
A Sacrifice to Devils.

Alp. I do believe thee,
And that thou would be foremost to prevent it.

Val. I^d do it alone.


Alp. I grant it if no Friends
Can be found out to join in the undertaking.

Val. There can be none;


Alp. There are already hundreds
All armed, even now the fatal Sword is drawn,
That must ere night dispatch the bloody Tyrant.
Suspend thy wonder, and be like thy self.
O I could tell thee such a dismal story
As would add fuel, to thy enraged spirits,
Though they boiled higher than Alcides did,
When on his back he wore the envenomed Shirt.

Val. O you have given new life to all my wishes!
Is there, and shall we once again behold
A lawful Monarch seated on our Throne.
Methinks I see the Genius of our State
Resume with joy her once abandoned Seat,
Virtue returns, and injured Truth once more
Does happy Naples to her self restore,
Whilst the assembled Gods resolve to bless
Alphonso's Reign with a perpetual Peace.

Exeunt. ACT. V. Scene 1st.
Enter Frederick and Sorano. A Chair set on. Fr. BUT are you sure the Poyson's
Mortal?

Sor. Above the help of Physic;
Some two hours hence we shall have such a bawling,
And roaring up and down for Aqua Vitae,
I Have sent him that will make a bonefire in his belly,
If he recover it, there is no heat in Hell.

Fr. But was my Mother easy of belief?


Sor. At first indeed she did mistrust my kindness,
And gravely told me old experienced minds
Were not so quickly caught with guilt hypocrisy,
Then Sir I wept, and bid her as she was honorable,
Not add more Hell to my afflicted soul;
Told her I had cast off those glorious favors
Of sound and honor, wealth and promises,
Your wanton pleasures had flung on my weakness;
Resolved to serve my Countries cause and virtues,
Poorly and honestly, and redeem my ruins.

Fr. I guess the rest.


Sor. Then I produced the Viol,
Which at the price of half my wealth I bought,
So I possessed her, from an ancient Jew,
A learned Scholar, and a rare Physician:
And, she not dreaming of an Antidote,
I freely drank an health unto Alphonso,
Nay advised her to pledge it; if she does, Sir,
She Will find enough for both.

Fr. May both die then;
Now, my Sorano, we shall live indeed;
Methinks already I am mounted higher,
And with contempt look on the inferior world.

Sor. You must be speedy, Sir, with this Valerio,
Till he is cold in the Grave you are not safe;
There are some Lords, that buz about the Court,
And pry into our actions, they are such
The foolish people call their Countries honors,
As if they were the Patterns of the Kingdom:
He is their Head, and him they Idolize,

Fr. He dies this Afternoon, unless she yields:
And as for his adherents, to their shames,
Within this week I Will silence 'em, Sorano,
I Will suffer no proud slaves to be about me,
That are not followers of my will, bridles, and curbs,
To the hard headed Commons that malign us.

Sor. Now you speak like a King; as for Evanthe,
If she is perverse, remove her Paramour,
And then her love to him, which made her deaf
To all you could propose, must perish with him.

Fr. Thou shall command in all; but, O Evanthe,
I hasten on the wings of love to meet thee,
And die within thy Arms; were she but kind
As she is beautiful -- but that would be
Too great a happiness. Her cruel pride
May for some time, like the resistless tide,
My hopes on Rocks, and desperate Quicksands throw;
The Heavens may rage above, and the Seas swell below,
But the bold Pilates Love,
Securily touches the forbidden strand,
And gently throws me on the promised Land.

Exit. Sor. To thee 'twill prove a wandering Fairy land,
Enjoy Evanthe? no, it was enough
That I indulged him with a Crown and Scepter,
But cannot yield up my love so tamely to him,
He comes, and love plays in his Fiery eyes,
But darts his beams on an ungrateful soil;
Surely fate's busy, and the kinder Stars
Are in conjunction to make good my hopes.

Exit. Enter Fr. and Evanthe. Fr. Can neither Power, Promise, Threats nor Tears,
Draw from your eyes one kind consenting look,
To feed a Monarchs almost dying hopes?
Why would you kill me with this cruelty,
This stubborn pride? look on me, fair Evanthe,
Not as a King, that might command thy will,
But as a Slave that must be governed by it.

Ev. You are a King, I wish I might say worthy
That love all honest men are bound to pay you.

Fr. O make me yours, and mold me as you please.
I own Evanthe, I Am made up of mischiefs,
Have drawn the curses of all good men on me.
But do not thou learn cruelty from me.
To heaven we kneel for mercy, and obtain it.
To man we fly for Justice, and he gives it.
The senseless Beasts seem with relenting pity,
To join with us in our severest sorrows.
Be like the Heavens, all softness, tenderness,
The pride of nature, and the joy of life.

Ev. My Lord your power may force me to hear this*
But ever to comply with your desires,
Or to be brought to love you wantonly,
Not all the honors you can throw upon me.
Shall ever oblige me. I Have a noble Husband,
And when I do forget him, or in thought
Wander from my obedience, then may I be
Sold up, and lost to all those lawless pleasures,
That leave behind 'em nothing but dishonor,
The unhappy Subjects of a late repentance.

Fr. You have a Husband, but he dies this moment,
Unless you yield, and so redeem his life.
I am resolved, come do not, do not wind
My anger to that height; it may consume ye;
Yet I have mercy.

Ev. Use it to your Bawds,
To me use cruelty, it best becomes you.
Thou art a King of Monsters, not of men,
And shortly wilt convert this land to Devils.
O were I but so powerful to consume thee!
My tongue with curses I have armed against thee,
With Maiden curses, that heaven Crowns with horrors.
And could my hands but hold the fire of heaven,
Wrapped in the thunder that the Gods revenge with,
Then like stern Justice I would fling it on thee.

Fr. Though she is unexorable, still I love,
And loving must enjoy. Thou stubborn Maid
I Will beg no more for what I can command.
I know I am a King and thou my slave,
And as a King I Will bodly seize my right,
I Will not delay my bliss one Moment longer
Tho my dead Fathers Ghost should rise before me,
To shake my soul and fright me from my purpose.

Ev. Help, help, O help! is Providence asleep
Or are the Gods deaf to a Virgins Prayers?

Val. The Gods are Just, but proud oppression hears not,
Enter Valerio. Though dreadful Thunder shakes the frame of nature.

Fr. How now, what boldness brought you hither, Sir?


Val. Love and the duty of a faithful Husband,
The duty of a Subject to his sovereign.
Here on my knees I do entreat you, Sir,
To render back what you withold unjustly;
Your Father was a kind, and generous Prince,
Your Brother the Image of his Royal virtues,
Till subtle Poison robbed him of his reason.
Even you when first you seized the Imperial Crown
Promised the blessings of a gentle rule,
Till drunk with Pride, and arbitrary Power,
Like a wild Boar too strong to be withheld,
You broke the bounds of Nature, Law, Religion,
Reduced our Fruitful once, and flourishing State
Into a miserable, wild and desert wast.

Fr. How, Sir? who am I?


Val. I know not who you are,
You should be Frederick, brave Brandino's Son,
Whose reverend relics, tho laid up in Peace,
Mourn in the Grave to think he should beget,
And leave behind him such an Hellish Monster.
You should be --

Fr. What I am, a sovereign Prince,
And Master of thy Fate, Guards, seize the Traitor,
And see him dead.

Val. Hold you mistake your duty.
There stands the Traitor, Murderer, Parricide!
It Is not in words to express a guilt like thine,
Nor in all Hell, torments enough to punish it.
Nay frown not; though thy Eyes are Poisonous,
As are thy hands, and Monstrous as thy thoughts,
Thou can not kill me as thou did thy Father,
Thy innocent Brother, and thy noble Uncle.
If what I Have uttered is a falsehood, Frederick,
Draw, if thou dare, thy self the Sword of Justice,
And thrust it home, to prove Valerio false.

Fr. Here then, I ll once be Executioner
To my own Vengeance and to satisfy
Thy fatal Pride brag when thou come below
Amongst thy fellow shades, that Frederick killed thee
Thou arogant slave --

Enter Alphonso Cum Suis and Sorano. Al. Hold or you both shall die.
Unkind Valerio wou'd'st thou rob my Sword.
Of the only Justice my hopes ever aimed at.
My Fathers Ghost would still walk unrevenged,
If he should fall by any hand but mine.
Put up for shame, hark to the Bell that Rings,
Hark, hark, Proud Frederick, that was King of mischief,
The Sun of all thy pomp is set and vanished.

Ped. What do you shake, my Lord Sorano,
No speedy mischief to prevent this business,
No Bawdy meditation now to fly to.

Ev. O my best Lord let me with tears of Joy,
In these dear Arms sigh out my thanks to Heaven.

Fr. so tamely caught! lock fa^^ the Palace Gates.


Ped. Yes, Sir, we hear you, we have got the Keys,
And no doors here shall shut without our license.

Fr. Treason, Treason!


Ped. You can bawl well,
But we have found the Traitor in your shape, Sir,
And mean to keep him fast, Alphonso, King Alphonso!

All. Long live Alphonso, King of us and Naples.


Alp. Turn, if thou dare look nature in the face,
Turn, Frederick, and boldly meet my Sword,
For till the Royal throne by thee polluted
And daubed with innocent blood, is purged by thine,
Alphonso cannot, dares not, be a King;
And though thou well deserve the Hangman's hand,
I Will be my self the Minister of Justice,
Because I have not forgot thou once wast noble;
If thou prevail'st thou still may be a King,
Think Heaven looks down as witness of our Combat,
And will refix the Crown of the Victors Head:

Fr. Now thou art brave and in thy nobleness
My Guilty Soul beholds her own disgrace.
I do confess my unbounded sins, but find
My heart too stubborn for a true repentance;
What I by treachery purchased hitherto
I have maintained by force; and know, Alphonso,
Frederick with greater pleasure draws his Sword
In this dispute, than if he was to struggle
For a third Portion of the Universe.
Heaven be thy Umpire, I to Hell appeal,
If there be either, for as yet I know not;
Let but my Sword be constant to my purpose,
I Will call no other God to my assistance.

Alp. Thou Hellish fury sent by angry Heaven
To scourge this bleeding Nation for her sins.
Think on the mischeifs thou have thrown upon her,
The sighs and tears of injured innocence,
And curses the have entailed upon Posterity,
That after death will follow, and torment
Thy guilty ashes in their restless Urn.

Fr. Peace or I shall mistrust thy bravery.
Think thou to fright me with such tales as these?
If thy Sword proves as Idle as thy Tongue,
I shall begin to doubt if one Womb bore us both.
Come on, methinks I am now proud to see thee
A match fit for my Sword, and not that stupid
Senseless Alphonso I have often thought thee.

Al. Come then since thou art so brave.


Val. My Lord Alphonso --


Al. Hold on the forfeit of your lives I charge you,
That Sword that is not sheathed is drawn on me.
So nobly is my cause born out with Justice,
That I require no aids but those of Heaven.

Fr. O that the whole World were summoned to behold
Two rival-Brothers tugging for an Empire,
And with an Universal shout applaud the Victor.
Come on, we trifle, whilst the eager Crowd;
Divided in their wishes, grow impatient
Till Victory has taught 'em whom to obey.

Alp. Thus then I meet thee though my Mother bore thee.
Wounds Fred. There lie, and may thou be forgot for ever.

Fr. I feel the hand of fate upon me, whilst my Eyes
Labor in death, and view, brimfull of horror,
A dismal prospect of Eternal woe.
I now repent me of my cruelties,
And feel within my Soul the smarts already.
Alphonso, I bequeath thee all those honors
I have usurpt; but know thou can not long
Enjoy them, for thou have already drunk
Thy passport to the other world. But O
In death I do entreat thee to forgive me.
Hide not the noble nature of a Brother.
The pity of a friend from my afflictions.
I Have lived a wicked life, but now -- am nothing.
Dies.
Alp. Though he was wicked, still he was my Brother,
And should have lived, 'till Humble penitence
Had cast the load off of his wantonness.
I think he said I should not long survive him.
Sure fate spoke in him, for I feel already
Convulsive heats shooting through every vein,
Struggling for freedom in their narrow prison.
Enter Queen Mother.
Q. Mother, Where is my Son, O bear me to Alphonso,
My Son Alphonso! the great pains I felt
When first thou saw the light, were softest pleasures
Compared to those that rack my body now,
Which thou must feel e're thou lie down in Peace.
Millions of horrors, labors, all diseases,
Despairs and Plagues the hot Sun ever breeds
Are trifles to the torments I endure:
The shadows of the pains thy Mother feels.
O damned deceitful Hellish Poisonous Villain!

Alp. What says my Mother: O my mind misgives me!


Q. Mother, Thou Art Poisoned Son, by thy own Mother Poisoned
Who has her self drunk of the deadly draught,
To lead thee to the Mansions of the blessed.
Give me more Air, let inundations flow
Colder than Snow upon the Scythian Mountains.
O I Am all fire, Sorano is the Villain,
Let infinite tortures, such as those I feel,
Light on his Head, and then I shall die pleased.
Dies.
Alp. Now, my Valerio, where are all my hopes,
Ye Gods -- but still you must be merciful
Though man cannot search the ways of Providence,
But at a distance views you in your works.
O Mournful Triumph, fatal Victory!
The earth is now Alphonso's only Throne
And that in death I Will keep: I feel him coming,
Or am I dead already? no death's cold:
But I Am all fire, fire, the raging Dog Star
Reigns in my blood. O which way shall I turn me!

Val. Have thee, Pisano, fly for the Physicians;
Tell 'em rewards exceeding all their wishes
Shall Crown their cares if they will restore back to us
This one loved life. Look up, my honored Lord,
See willing nations courting ye to live.

Alp. Give me more Air, Air, more Air, blow, blow;
Open thou Eastern gate and blow upon me,
Distill thy cold dews, O thou Icy Moon,
And rivers run through my afflicted spirit.
Aetna and all his flames burn in my Head;
Fling me into the Ocean or I perish.
Dig, dig, dig 'till the springs fly up,
The cold, cold springs that I may leap into 'em,
And bath my scorched limbs in their purling pleasures.
O shoot me up into the higher region
Where Treasures of delicious snow are nourished
And banquets of sweet hail.

Val. Haste there, shut all the Palace gates and seize that Villain;
Tortures exceeding those of the damned in Hell
Shall be thy lot.

Sor. I dare your utmost malice
There I Am revenged, and in that thought rejoice.

Val. Go bear him to the rack. Was ever day like this?


Alp. What will you sacrifice me?
Upon the Altar lay my willing body
And pile your wood up, fling your holy incense,
And as I turn me, you shall see all flame,
Consuming flame, stand off me or you are ashes.

Val. help me to raise him, Sirs.


Alp. Bring hither Charity and let me hug her,
They say she is cold,
Infinite cold devotion cannot warm her.
Draw me a River of false Lovers tears
Clean through my breast they are dull, cold and forgetful;
And will give ease!
Let Virgins sigh upon me,
Forsaken souls, their sighs are precious
Let 'em all sigh, O Hell, Hell, Hell, O horror.

Val. What scalding sweats he has


Alp. I am enclosed in all consuming flames.
Like Phaton let me fly, let me fly, give me room
Betwixt the cold bear and the raging Lion,
Lies my safe way. O for a Cake of Ice now,
To clap upon my heart to comfort me.
Decrepid Winter hang upon my shoulders,
And let wear thy frozen Isicles
Like Jewels round about my head to cool me,
My eyes burn out and sink into their sockets,
And my infected brain like brimstone boils,
I live in Hell and several furies Vex me,
O carry me where no Sun ever showed yet
A face of comfort, where the Earth is Crystal,
Never to be dissolved, where naught inhabits
But night and cold, and nipping Frost and Winds.
That cut the stubborn rocks and make 'em shiver.
Set me there Friends I feel it, and am happy.

Dies. Val. There broke the noble heart I should follow him
In death did not the charms of love recall me;
Bear in the unhappy relics and prepare
Noble interments worthy their great lives.
For me I have some right to the succession
Which in a general Assembly I Will make known.
Death finds the Monarch seated on his Throne
With as much ease as the humble Cottager:
But Proud unthinking men are taught too late,
No power can save 'em from the hand of fate.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

