THE SCOTTISH Mist Dispel'd: OR, A clear Reply to the prevaricating Answer of
the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland, to both Houses of PARLIAMENT;
Upon the new Propositions for Peace.

And the four Bills sent to his Majesty, 1647.

By an English COVENANTER.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton at the entering out of
Lumbert-street into Pope's Head Alley. 1648.

THE SCOTTISH MIST DISPELD.
IT was a good saying of Solomon, P^ov. 10. 9
that he that walks uprightly, walks surely, but he that ^^ turns them
upside down.
perverteth his ways shall be known. Sincerity sits upon the lips of many;
but her competitresse keeps her out of the hearts of most: Pretense of Piety in
keeping Covenant, was Absoloms policy to raise a war what our Scotch
brethren mean by their late papers entitled, 2 Samuel 15, 7. 8.
The answer of the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland to both Houses of
Parliament upon the new Propositions of Peace, and the four bills to be sent
to his Majesty, is as much our wonder as the papers themselves: neither can we
judge it any other than a design, to prepossesse the people of England with
scandalous prejudices against their Parliament, calculating their scriblings
for the meridian of fools, which makes no observation of bygone transactions,
but are presently charmed into their Northern net, by the gilded language of
their devout chantings, as if the kingdom of England (like some of the Indies)
was a rich, pleasant, and golden Island, but the inhabitants thereof men in
statute, but children in understanding, ignorant of the value of their own
commodities, willing to sell their English treasures (and that upon trust) for
Scottish toys, receiving nothing in hand, but two credulously presuming upon
very fair and devout promises, and a solemn Covenant that their trading with
them, will be all for their good in the latter end. Brethren though the
naucious vapors of a SCOTCH MIST be sum'd up into the brains of some of our
weak brethren of our own country, rendering them a little lightheaded, and
making them speak like Englishmen on the otherside Tweed; yet are we not
infected therewith: We have read your papers, and shall let you know that we
ken the difference between plain juggling and plain dealing, and that others
may see as well as our selves* let impartial ingenuity examine your papers,
and judge of the case.

In the first place you tell the Parliament of England by your scratching pen,
and the people in print, Page 3. by figure, but the first in order.
with what patience you have in pursuance of the solemn League and Covenant,
and Treaties betwixt the kingdoms, used your best endeavors for the settling
religion, and a happy peace.

If you have used your best endeavors to these ends, Reply
it was in pursuance of the Covenant, and so you were bound to it,
nevertheless we thank you for it being concerned in it: only remember
Solomon's counsel, Let another man praise thee and not thine own mouth, a
stranger and not thine own lips. Prove. 27. 2. But what you mean by settling
Religion, is past our kenning: if by religion you mean discipline (for that is
all the religion some men mind) then you know we have many Religions contended
for amongst us: we have the Kings religion, and that is Episcopacy: we have the
Parliaments religion (we mean in the sense delivered, though we are confident
they do not place their religion in discipline) and that is Presbitery: we have
the Scotch religion, and (to give its proper name) that is Independencie; for
they call upon us like Oracles from heaven to hear them, though they
themselves will be Independent as to us. Which of these religions have you used
your endeavors to setle amongst us? If any of you (after Moses example) have
been taken up into the mount of God, and have talked with our Lord and Master
mouth to mouth, and immediately received the law of Church Government, from the
hands of Christ written by his finger in Tables of stone, and have Commission
from him to charge the people to hearken to you, upon pain of being cut off
from the people; we shall acknowledge your peculiar favor with the most high
God, and that you are the only independent people of God in the world, and
that all Israel must hearken to God, we repent of our former deafnes, and shall
henceforth submit to your judgments for conscience sake; but if it has never
bin with you after this manner; we have no cause to fear the guilt of
Rebellion, though we say to you as was said to Moses who made you rulers over
us? it is not our ambition to subject our selves to a rod of iron, a golden
Scepter will better please us, your Scotch Independency is as distasteful to
us, as that in England or Amsterdam. If you say it is the COVENANTED Religion,
according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches: we
wait with patience, and hearty prayers, and hands lifted up to the most high
God, for the speedy- settling of that amongst us; but assure your selves, except
you will impose your Scottish sense upon our English words (intolerable
slavery) we resolve to be, according to our solemn League and Covenant,
English Presbyterians, and not Scottish Independents. If your endeavors have
been in truth for the settling not only of Religion, but a happy peace, you
will take heed of wrangling with your peaceable brethren, we have no mind to
fight, nor yet to be beaten, and therefore we obtest you (your own words in
your several Letanies) by the conjunction and parity (that word sticks,
except with an English interpretation) of interests, by the treaty between the
kingdoms by the solemn league and covenant, by all your promises,
professions, and declarations, by the dreadful threatenings of Gods judgments
upon trucebreakers, by the anatomizing of all your hearts at the great day, by
the just retribution of the righteous judge to every man according to his
ways, by the everlasting separation between the upright and the hypocrite in
the day of the Lord, by the indeliable blot that will fall upon you and your
posterity, by the scandal of religion, and the just vindication of the
dishonor of God, by the prejudice of the Gospel, by the grief of the godly, by
the intolerable consequences of the enemies blasphemy, by the offense of the
Jews, by the rejoicing of the Turks, by the animation and encouraging of
Antichrist, by the cry of all the blood that has been shed in the just defense
of this kingdoms interest, by all the bonds of truth and righteousness, that
you do not engage us in another war.

You tell us in the front of your papers, that Propositions were agreed on,
Anno. 1644 with advice and consent of the Parliaments of both kingdoms,
presented to his Majesty at Oxford, by commissioners of both, and treated upon
at Uxbridge, 1645. that you did earnestly and frequently press the sending of
these Propositions again to his Majesty, wherein the Houses would not concur
with you: but on the contrary, after very long delay, thought fit to make
several alterations therein, which were principally in matters that did
concern the near union of the Kingdoms.

Propositions were sent to the King long before the time you speak of, Reply.
so that surely the Parliament of England did endeavor the peace of the
kingdom before our Scotch brethren put them upon it, you would make us believe
that you alone mind the peace and safety of the Kingdom of England, as if
your own interest was forgotten, and ours remembered, pure love, unmixed
friendship, if the Houses would not so suddenly concur with you to send the
Propositions again, we do presume they had reason for it; neither do we
conceive that the Scotch Commissioners have cause of offense, if the Houses did
not presently act upon their first motion, being not Commissioners to direct
the Parliament of England, if they thought fit, to make several alterations;
we think fit to acquiesce in their judgments, having chosen them to judge for
us, Vide, the Answer of the Commons in Parliament, to the Scotch Commissioners
papers of the 2d of October 1646 page 1^.
neither can we presume their least neglect of those matters which do near
concern the union of the Kingdoms, though perhaps with reason enough their
judgment and yours may not concur in those things; it is likely they were
careful to maintain a distinction, and prevent a confusion of both Kingdoms
interest: they would avoid an occasion of your claming from the new
Propositions something like a negative voice and right of joint consent with
this Kingdom in all things in relation between the King and the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, which heretofore you have taken from the Covenant, and
Treaty. Brethren, religion teaches contentedness, and the doctrine of
Community is reckoned in England among the novelties, for which we believe
there will be no tolleration. It may be the two kingdoms may not think fit
that though we are all of one language under one King, in one Religion, yea in
one Covenant, yet that we might be altogether one, The Marquis of A^giles
speech to the grand Committee of both Houses, June 25. 164^.
as was once the wish of one of your honest and honorable Commissioners, would
you not have the honor of the Kings of England preserved in their Royal Title
to two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and not that two should become one?
although we heartily desire to be one with you, one in religion, one in
affection, and one in assistance, yet let us remain two Kingdoms, though we
hold parity of interests in things spiritual and desire to be one with you in
Christ, and one in the Spirit, yet like united Israel, Covenanted Israel of
old, page 4.
(in their dividing of the Land of Canaan among their Tribes) let you and we
rejoice in our distinct portion, love one another, cleave together, and be
content: let Tweed divide, but nothing else. Brethren may be brethren without
community in each others Patrimony.

Again, Page 3.
you urge, that it was agreed upon betwixt the Kingdoms, that the same
Propositions should be presented again to his Majesty at his coming to
Holdenby; the performance whereof being delayed by the Houses for diverse
months, you did wair patiently, yet upon a sudden they did appoint a
peremptory day for sending the Propositions to his Majesty.

First, you had notice of the day, and were earnestly pressed unto the thing, and
the cause of your delay, Reply.
your own consciences can tell better than we, whether it was not by way of
design; yet nevertheless before you charged the Parliament with delays, now
you blame them for their haste: why should brethren be so froward? such
relations inhebits wranglings.

Secondly,
did not both Parliaments agree, that those very Propositions that were sent to
Newcastle, should again be sent to the King. If so, what show of reason can be
imagined, why you should not (though upon the sudden) concur with the sending
them, since they could not be altered? Brethren lets have fair play above board.

Again, Page 3.
in the same page you affirm thus, that finding no success in that way of
sending Propositions to the King, and insisting upon his positive answer
thereunto, without giving any reason for the justice of our desires, or hearing
any Proposition from his Majesty, we did in November last propose to the
Honorable Houses, and with much earnestness desire that their might be a
personal Treaty with his Majesty here at Land. it being in all probability the
best means to obtain a peace.

First, Reply.
whereas you appropriate the successelesnesse of sending Propositions to the
King, to your not giving reasons for the justice of yours desires, we demand,
Did not one of your selves rally a whole army of arguments and reasons against
the Kings refusal to sign the Propositions at Newcastle in a Rhetorical
speech before him to that purpose, See the Chancellor of Scotlands speech to
the Kings Majesty at Newcastle.
professing (among many other motives) that upon his Majesty's refusing the
Propositions, both kingdoms will be constrained (for their mutual safety) to
agree and settle religion and peace without him. And moreover, there was added,
If your Majesty reject our faithful advice, and lose England by your
wilfulness, your Majesty will not be permitted to come and ruin Scotland.
Further pressing him thus: We know no other remedy to save your Crown and
Kingdoms, than your Majesty's assenting to the Propositions. Yet now you are
pleased to say, that not any reason has been given for the justice of your
desires. If your desires were not just, why did you press him to grant them.

But secondly, is the case thus indeed? you were not always of this opinion,
as you confess, page 6. Brethren, let us make a little use of this: We see now
what reason there is of a brotherly forbearance of varieties of judgment, yea
and of the same persons, though changing their judgments over and over, yea
even in things civil, much more religious, being more enigmaticall than these
by far: you were against the Kings personal treaty with the Parliament at
London now you are for it. Suppose the Parliament of England has not yet
attained to your new light, bear with them a while, till your reasons prevail.

You tell us, that indeed heretofore his Majesty's presence might have bred
divisions, and continued our troubles; and when his Majesty desired to come
hither from Oxford, with freedom and safety, it was thought unfit, and denied
by the Houses, and the Commissioners from Scotland: but that argument now has
no force at all; for the case of affairs, the Kings condition and ours (which
were given for reasons in that answer to his Maibsty) are quite altered from
what they were, then the King had Armies in the fields, and Garrisons, and
strong holds to return unto: now he has none of these.

Brethren, Reply.
were these all the reasons then given, why you could not admit of a personal
Treaty with his Majesty at London? viz. because then the King had Armies in the
field, and Garrisons and strong holds to return unto? had it been our
assertion as it is yours, we should have feared that divine hand of Justice
which met with Ananias and Saphira, Page 6.
Acts 5. And that all might see your dealings herein, we have here added your
own words.

Concerning the personal Treaty desired by your Majesty, there having been so
much innocent blood of your good Subjects shed in this War by your Majesty's
Commands and Commissions, Irish Rebels brought over into both Kingdoms, as
also forces from foreign parts, etc. There being also forces in Scotland
against the Parliament and Kingdom by your Majesty's Commission; The War in
Ireland fomented and prolonged by your Majesty, whereby the three Kingdoms are
brought near to utter ruin and destruction. We conceive that until
SATISFACTION and SECVRITIE be first given to both your Kingdoms, your Majesty's
coming hither cannot be convenient, nor by us assented unto.

Now let God, Angels, and men judge of your proceedings in the present case;
Brethren, your lines do seem to carry a Christian Dialect, and you oftentimes
seem to be serious with us, give us leave to be serious with you; is this
suitable to your exellent strains and expressions of zeal for the glory of
God, the blessed Reformation, the solemn League and Covenant, Page 9th.
your pathetick pretenses, and devout exhortations to the Parliament of
England, to give testimony, and bear witness to the truth, and not deny it,
remembering that whosoever shall give testimony to Christ and his truth, by
confessing him before men, he will also confess them before his Father which
is in Heaven; and whosoever will deny him before men, them will he deny before
his Father which is in Heaven. Is this your zeal against superstition,
heresy, schism, and all such scandalous doctrines and practices, which are
contrary to the known principles of Christianity, or the power of godliness,
which you so devoutly desire should be suppressed by an act of Parliament, page
26. of your answer, what? one while to confess the name of Christ before his
Majesty, to deal plainly with him in telling him in so many words (to the
affecting of the hearts of all your Brethren, Ministers and others which did
see your zeal) that until his Majesty had given satisfaction for the
bloodshed, and security to both Kingdoms in relation to peace, his Majesty's
coming to London, could not by you be assented unto; and now to tell the
people that the reason why you could not formerly yield unto his Majesty's
coming to London, was because then his Majesty had Armies in the Field,
Garrisons and strong holds to return unto, now he has none; yea and to say
that this was the reason which you formerly gave, pretending to nothing else?
Brethren, what do you make of Religion, a mere piece of State-policie, or
somewhat else? Brethren, we would persuade you that integrity and uprightness
are jure divino, and that Brethren ought to speak the truth from their hearts
each to other. Shall we mind you of some other zealous passages concerning his
Majesty; see and review what is said by the general Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, approved by those that employ you and by you sent to the King.

The troubles of our hearts are enlarged, and our fears increased, in your
Majesty's behalf, perceiving that your peoples patience is above measure
tempted, and is like a Cart pressed down with sheaves, and is ready to break,
while as besides many former designs and endeavors to bring desolation and
destruction upon us, etc. our Country is now infested, the blood of diverse of
our Brethren spilt, and other acts of most barbarous and horrid cruelty
excercised by the cursed crew of Irish Rebels, and their accomplices in this
Kingdom, under the conduct of such as have commission and warrant from your
Majesty; and unless we prove unfaithful both to God, and to your Majesty,
we cannot conceal another danger which is infinitely greater than that of your
peoples displeasure: therefore we the servants of the most high God, and your
Majesty's most loyal Subjects, in the humility and grief of our hearts fall
down before your Throne, and in the name of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the world in righteousness both great and small; and in the
name of this whole National Kirk which we represent, we make bold to warn
your Majesty freely, that the guilt which cleaves fast to your Majesty, and
to your Throne is such, as (whatsoever flattering Preachers, or unfaithful
Counselors may say to the contrary) if not timely repented, cannot but
involve your self and your Posterity under the wrath of the everliving God,
for YOUR BEING GVILTY OF THE SHEDDING OF THE BLOOD OF MANY THOVSANDS OF YOUR
MAJESTY'S BEST SVBJECTS, etc.

How did the glory and luster of these plain, honest, and christian
proceedings dazell the eyes of your English Brethren, who did much rejoice
therein? how did your zeal provoke many to plead your cause against those
which did but whisper jealousies of you? Can we think that reverend Assembly
did not speak the truth in Christ from their hearts and souls, and lied not
(as the Apostle says) in these their addresses to his Majesty? and can we
suppose they will own with you this answer of yours, wherein you tickle the
hearts of the malignant party, plead for their design a personal Treaty, and
that at London, without any mention of Satisfaction for blood and Security to
the Kingdoms? we cannot conceive so irreverendly of them until we have
better reasons than yet we perceive, neither will we indulge the least
jealousy, that the Noble men, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses Ministers, and
Commons of your own Kingdom should ever so far decline from their first
principles of zeal for God, righteousness, and justice, against all
offenders, without respect of persons, and of love, friendship, and amity to
this Kingdom, whereof God, Angels, and men are witnesses, and will concur
with you in these expresses; how will the Firre-trees howl, 2 Samuel 1. 20.
if such Cedars should fall, if this should be once told in Gath, and
published in Askelon, how will the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, and the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph? and therefore to you we speak, and
not unto your Nation. Brethren, was his Majesty blameable in the spilling of
so much innocent blood of his best Subjects in his three Kingdoms yea or no?
If no, why is it charged on his score, representing him in such horrid, black,
and bloody colors, in the eyes of his Subjects? If he be guilty as the words
have expressed, what Satisfaction for blood, what Security has been given as
yet (at least to the two Kingdoms, for what you may call saisfaction, we know
not.) Brethren, we say no more but this, Prove. 11. 3.
the integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them.

Whereas you quote the Parliaments answer to his Majesty's Message of the 11th
of September, Page 6.
wherein they desired his Majesty's coming to London, as being the only means
of any treaty between his Majesty and them, with hope of success; thereby
insinuating the mutability of the Parliament from their present averseness to
a personal Treaty, compared with this answer.

We give you to know that we have perused his Majesty's Message, and the
Parliaments Answer, Reply.
and stand amazed that such a profession of zeal for God should ever be found
in conjunction with such unfaithfulness amongst Brethren, for thus stands the
case; The King (having set up his Standard at Notingham, set out several
Proclamations and Declarations, whereby the Parliaments actions were declared
treasonable, and their persons Traitors) did send a Message to his Houses of
Parliament, 25 August 1642. Vid. the book of Declar. page 580.
for a personal Treaty, whereunto the two Houses of Parliament sent an answer,
which because it is short and pertinent to the present case, is here set down
verbatim.

The answer of the Lords and Commons to his Majesty's Message of the 25. of
August, 1642.
May it please your Majesty,
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, having received your Majesty's
Message of the 25. of August, do with much grief resent the dangerous and
distracted state of this Kingdom, which we have by all means endeavored to
prevent, both by our several advices and petitions to your Majesty, which have
been not only without success, but there has followed that, which no ill
counsel in former time has produced, or any Age has seen, namely, Those
several Proclamations and Declarations against both the Houses of Parliament,
whereby their Actions were declared treasonable, and their Persons Traitors;
And thereupon your Majesty has set up your Standard against them, whereby you
have put the two Houses of Parliament, and in them this whole Kingdom out of
your protections; so that until your Majesty shall recall those proclamations
and Declarations, whereby the Earl of Essex and both Houses of parliament, and
their adherents and assistants, and such as have obeyed and executed their
commands and directions according to their duties, are declared Traitors, or
otherwise Delinquents: And until the Standard, set up in pursuance of the said
Proclamations, be taken down, your Majesty has put us into such a condition,
that whilst we so remain, we cannot by the fundamental privileges of
Parliament, the public trust reposed in us, or with the general good and
safety of this Kingdom, give your Majesty any other answer to this Message.

John Brown, Cler. Parliam. H. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

This Answer of the parliament occasioned several expresses mutually to pass
between the King and the Parliament, and amongst the rest, this Answer to his
Majesty's Message of the 11th of September. 1642. as appeared in the 586. and
587. pages of the book of Declarations printed by Authority: in which very
Answer they do profess themselves in no capacity to treat with the King
whilst his Standard was up, his Proclamations and Declarations unrecalled,
whereby the Parliament is charged with Treason; and having humbly advised him
what he should do upon the performance whereof they invite him to his great
Council, being the only means of a Treaty with hope of success; and in
pursuance of that very resolution of theirs, not to treat with his Majesty
until he had recalled his Proclamations and Declarations against his
Parliament, they have made that one of the four Bills which were sent to be
signed by his Majesty in order to a Treaty: Now let Heaven and earth, God and
man judge of your unfaithfulness in the business in hand: You tell the people
that the Parliament was once for a personal Treaty with the King, why should
they now be against it, and hide from the people the terms upon which they
were for it; have the Parliament forsook their primitive principles, or your
selves? has the King recalled those Proclamations and Declarations, yea or no?
has he given satisfaction for blood and security to the peace of the
Kingdom, yea or no? If not, Hosea 4. 15.
would you have the Parliament betray their trust, break their Covenant, treat
as Traitors? At Vxbridg.
do the Parliament forsake their principales? no: Though Israel play the har
lot, yet let not Judah offend? We know your objection, the Parliament did admit
of a Treaty since that time, it is true, but have you not read what David did
in a case of necessity when he was a hungry? the shewbread, which at other
times was unlawful for him to ear, was lawful then? The life of the Kingdom
then in danger, provoked the love of the Parliament to forget themselves to
save the Nation: but is the case now as it was then? piety and humanity will
allow a man to treat; yea beg for his life at the hand of his enemy in power
to destroy him; though the principles of either will not admit the like
submission in another case. Again, though they did treat, yet did they not
forsake the principles of humanity, or the rules of Justice, rather then they
would betray their trust, break their Covenants, enslave our just liberty into
the hands of tyranny; They broke up the Treaty, and resolving to sacrifice
themselves in the Kingdoms service, committed themselves to Gods providence,
who succeeded their desires acccordingly for Gods love, courage and constancy
in a good cause.

You tell us there are some things which properly concern the Kingdom of
England, their rights, Page 4.
Laws, and liberties.

But why do you stop there? Reply.
why do you not proceed in declaring your resolutions not to intermeddle with
such things? why do you notwithstanding this acknowledgment interpose in things
concerning the Kingdom of England, their rights, laws and liberties; as in
the disposal of the Kings person, while remaining in this Kingdom, in the 7th
page of your papers concerning the Covenant and Treaty, in the Kings negative
voice, page the 18th of this Answer, in the business of the Militia, page the
20. in the disbanding of our Armies, page 21. in conferring titles of honor,
page 22. the revenews of the Crown, page 5, etc. Nay why have you cast such
glosses, senses, and interpretations upon the Covenant and Treaty, which being
granted, confounds the interest of England, with the Kingdom of Scotland? for
these are your words in the 5th and 6th pages of your papers concerning the
Covenant and Treaty.

Unless we lay aside the Covenant, Treaties, Declarations of both Kingdoms,
and three years conjunction in this war, neither the one Kingdom nor the
other must now look back what they might have done SINGLY before-such a strict
union: But look forwards what is fittest to be done by both JOINTLY for the
common good of both, etc. And again page the 7. of these papers; If the
disposal of the Kings Person mentioned in the vote of both Houses be intented
for the good, peace and security of both Kinghomes, then it should not be done
without the mutual advice and consent of both. By the first of these
expressions do not your argument stand thus?

If we must not lay aside the Covenant, Treaties, Declarations of both
Kingdoms, and three years conjunction in this war; neither the one Kingdom
nor the other SINGLY, but both JOINTLY, must heareafter act for the good of
both.

But we must not lay aside the Covenant, etc. Therefore neither the one
Kingdom nor, etc.

Thus you would argue us into a confusion of interests.

Again, by the other expression quoted from your papers, page 7. do you not
argue thus?

Whatsoever is intended for the good, peace, and security of both Kingdoms;
must be done by the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms.

But the disposing of the Kings person, while in this Kingdom, (and upon the
same ground the disposing of all the Militia, Forts, Castles, Towns, and
Forces by Sea and Land, all offices and places of Trust, yea all our estates
and interests,) are intended for the good, peace, and security of both
Kingdoms.

Therefore these must be disposed of by the mutual advice and consent of both
Kingdoms.

Brethren: confident we are, you will sooner beat out English men's brains,
than force that argument into their heads; surely God has given us a better
stock of reason and humanity than thus to be charmed into bondage and slavery;
we have read your own words declared by you, 1641. viz. that neither by your
Treaty with the English, nor by seeking your peace to be established in
PARLIAMENT nor any other action of yours, you do acknowledge ANY dependency
upon them, or make them Judges to you or your Laws, or any thing that may
import the smallest prejudice to your Liberties. Are you so tender of the Mint
and Cummin of Scotlands Liberties, that you will not admit of the smallest
prejudice thereof; and shall the Parliament of England, the grand Trustees of
the Kingdoms Liberties, dispense with the Great things of Englands interest?
betraying their trust, and breaking their covenant; yea, and bringing upon them
the guilt and cry of so much blood as has been shed in the just defense of the
Kingdoms interest? Brethren, did you come to free us from slavery by others,
that you might enslave us? to save us from rods, that you might whip us with
Scorpions? to deliver us from the little finger of the King, that we might
feel the loins of the Scot? Doubtless, brethren, though we thankfully
acknowledge, that your help was seasonable in the day of our trouble, which we
hope we shall never forget; yet were we not so profane, as to contract the
parting with our birthright for that Scottish pottage, and therefore remember
your promise, page 4. That you would not stretch your selves beyond your line,
and that which is within the EXPRESS condition of your solemn League and
Covenant, the duty of your Allegiance, the Treaty and Declaration between the
two Kingdoms. And before we leave this, we pray again remember the word
EXPRESS, and do not press us with an extorted sense, for we shall never
abide it.

In the next place you begin methodically to speak unto two heads:

First, Page 5.
of the best and most probable means to procure a good agreement with the King
for setting Religion, and a lasting Peace.

And next, of the Propositions, which are to be the foundation of the peace and
safety of both Kingdoms.

We shall not take upon us to speak unto every particular expression of yours,
wherein you seem to reflect upon the Parliament, our daily imploiments, and
business of our callings, not affording us those opportunities of knowing and
understanding the several transactions which it is very likely have passed
between the Parliament and you, and we doubt not but an answer to satisfaction
will be given by that Honorable Assembly whom you have blemished by your
writings, and the publication thereof; but such things which are of most plain
and obvious observation (whereof there is plenty sufficient to take away those
scandals which are cast upon the Parliament) are these that we shall insist
upon:

First then in your method you begin with that which you call, Page 5.
The best and most probable means to procure a good agreement with the King
for the settling Religion and a lasting peace; and you say, It is still your
opinion and judgment, that it must be by a personal Treaty with the King; and
that his Majesty for that end be invited to come to London with honor,
freedom and safety.

If you are of that opinion, Reply.
we pray you tell us, what satisfaction for blood, and security as to peace,
you have received from his Majesty, that this Kingdom (if possibly) may be of
your opinion: Have you concluded a peace with his Majesty, without the
Parliament of England? Then have you broken your Treaty: If you have not, say
so. You know they are not of your opinion for a personal treaty: but we would
gladly weigh your reasons for it; we can better bear your reasons then blows:
you tender us your reasons by the half dozen. Let us see your Position, and
your reasons: your position is this:

The best way to procure a well-grounded Peace, is, by a personal treaty with
the King at LONDON.

Here we are to consider first the thing, a personal Treaty, secondly the
place, at London. We shall look upon your reasons with reference to both.
First for the thing, your first reason is;

The sending of Propositions without a Treaty, 1 Reason
has been oftentimes assayed without success, and the new Propositions are
less advantageous to the Crown than the former were.

1. Reply.
What if Propositions have been successelesse heretofore? Does it follow they
will be so still? English spirits (to speak without vanity) are more noble
and generous, then to despair because of repulse. So many Garrisons had not
been taken by some, and so few by others, if this Argument had prevailed with
all, as it has with some.

2. These four Bills were so modeled, as might have administered hopes of his
Majesty's concurrence, being in order to a Treaty, had you not anticipated by
charging the new propositions to be less advantageous to the Crown than the
former were; and which we have cause to suspect, has made this last address
to his Majesty, through your means, as successelesse as the former has been,
contrary to the hopes and expectations of many. And the truth is, his Majesty's
answer and your lines do so consimilate, that a man would think that Sir John
Cheisly was the Scribe to both.

Your next reason is this, 2 Reason.
The Kings removal from the Parliament, was the cause of the war: therefore
his return may be the means of peace.

1. Rep^y.
That may not follow, especially as the case now stands, when pretended friends
change principles for self ends, and forgetting their solemn League and
Covenant, decline the Parliament and the Kingdoms interest, and turn Royalists.

2. Was not this reason as valid when you did concur to send Propositions?

Your third reason is this, 3 Reason.
In a personal Treaty, the Commissioners of both Kingdoms may give reasons of
their desires; but Propositions without a Treaty, may be esteemed impositions.

1. Reply.
We make no question but the Parliaments propositions carry their reasons in
their foreheads, and may be easily discerned by an English eye. And do not you
know, that the King of England is bound by his Oath to grant the just desires
of his Parliament?

2. Were they not impositions as well when you did concur to send
propositions, as when you did dissent?

The King may have some just desires to move for the Crown, 4 Reason.
and for himself; as that be may have his Revenues, etc.

1. Reply.
It is true, the Crown aod Revenues go together in England, however it is in
Scotland; neither do we presume any propositions shall be sent by the
Parliament, in prejudice to the Crown or Crown-Revenues, both being for the
Kingdoms honor and safety.

2. Was not this likewise as good a reason when you did concur?

Your next reason A personal Treaty with the King, 5 Reason.
is the best way to beget a mutual confidence, etc.

1. Reply:
That is as the Treaty may be managed, and so may propositions as instructions
be given.

2. And was not this likewise as good a reason when you did concur?

Your last reason is this, 6 Reason.
we cannot expect his Majesty will grant in terminis, whatsoever propositions
shall be sent unto, etc. neither will the Houses of Parliament give full power
to commissioners to make altrrations as they shall see cause.

He is to pass Bills in terminis, why not propositions, being matter for Bills?
Confident we are, had he wrested the sword out of the Parliaments hands, as it
is wrested out of his hands, they should have had such propositions as he would
have judged fit for traitors, it may be the axe in stead of the halter, heading
in stead of hanging: for traitors has he proclaimed them without recalling it
to this day.

2. Was not this also as valid when you did concur, as now it is?

Thus your weighty reasons for the thing, A personal Treaty, vanish into the
air. Let us now examine your reasons for the place, at London; for there lies
the emphasis of your motion, and perhaps design.

1. 1 Reason
Propositions have been often essayed without success, and therefore the
personal Treaty must be at London.

2. 2 Reason.
The Kings removal from London was the cause of the war, and his return, or
presence may be a remedy: Ergo, the Treaty must be at London.

Thirdly, in a personal Treaty things may be mutually debated; for that is the
sum of your reason: Ergo, the Treaty must be at London.

Fourthly, the King may have some desires to move for the Crown: Ergo, the
Treaty must be at London.

Fifthly, a personal Treaty is the best way for giving and receiving
satisfaction: Ergo, the Treaty must be at London.

Sixthly, it cannot be expected his Majesty will grant all the propositions,
neither will the Houses give full power to their Commissioners to make
alterations, as they see cause, upon debate: Ergo, the Treaty must be at London.

Brethren, we shall not so much prejudge the weakness of our countrymen, as
to show them the difficiencie of these starved suggestions. Englishmens eyes
are in their heads, and they need no spectacles to see mountains, only we
would gladly know your meaning by the advantage of the Crown, and motions of
the Crown, which ever and anon you hint out to us (if our judgments fail us
not) as possibly they may; (for we are no Statesmen, but as the late times have
made us all enquire into State-cases,) we say, if our judgments be right, both
the King and the Crown, and all things belonging unto them, as such, are for
the Kingdoms advantage, and for no personal interest whatsoever in prejudice
of that, we have had many things which they call Aphorisms, divulged amongst
us, as that THE SAFETY OF THE PEOPLE IS THE CHIEFEST LAW, THE KING IS ABOVE
EVERY PARTICULAR MAM, BUT LESS THAN THE WHOLE KINGDOM, that THE KING IS THE
KINGDOMS, BUT THE KINGDOM IS NONE OF THE KINGS, (except with a distinction)
and twenty more such sayings, which are our ordinary discourse, and we think
there is a great deal of equity, justice, and reason in them, and a light to
instruct us to give unto the Magistrates their due, and to preserve our selves
from tyranny, and by these things were we rallied by the Parliament together,
to maintain the truth of these sayings, and we have paid for our learning, it
has cost us dear, and we would not quickly forget all like dunces, until we
are knocked into our former lessons: your talking so much of the advantage of
the Crown, and motions for the Crown, seems to us to interfier with these
sayings.

Having exhibited your reasons, Page 6.
(such as they are) for a personal Treaty, you fall into invectives with the
Parliament of England, thus, If they were esteemed enemies to the Parliament,
and peace of the kingdom, who advised the King to withdraw from his
Parliament, what estimation will the world have of them who will not suffer him
to return to his Parliament, when he offers to cast himself into their arms?

The plain English whereof is this, Reply.
to insinuate into the people, that the Parliament of England being against the
Kings treating at London, are the Kingdoms enemies, and so to stir up the
people against their Parliament: Is this like Commissioners of State? Would you
suffer such things in your own Kingdom? Is this according to your solemn
League and Covenant? Is this your brotherly love? your zeal for the parliament
of England, and the interest thereof? We say no more but better is a neighbor
that is near, Prove. 27. 10.
than a brother that is far off.

But secondly, if the Parliament be the Kings enemy, because they will not
admit of a personal Treaty at London; what were you when you refused the same
things? Do not you give a just occasion for the Cavaliers to call you Enemies
all-a-row?

Having dispatched the first particular in your method, Page 6.
viz. The readiest means for a lasting peace, which you say is, a personal
Treaty with the King at London; you fall to the second, viz. The consideration
of the propositions which are to be the foundation of peace: and therein,

First, to consider and remove the differences, which you divide into three
heads, which are,

1. Matters of Religion. 2. The interest of the Crown. 3. The union and joint
concernment of the Kingdoms.

First, you begin with that of Religion, and hint it in one of your biting
parenthesis, as a most flagitious neglect, that it is put by the Parliament
amongst the last of these new propositions.

1. Reply.
You know Brethren, that that may be primum in extentione, which is ultimum in
executione, we use to make our hedge, before we plant our garden.

2. Religion was not the first of those propositions which were sent to
New Castle with your consent, as appears in print, but now you are more
zealous than before.

3. The best sort of Englishmen loves Religion in the bottom, to have it in
design, as well as pretense, to make Religion the end and not the means unto
their intentions.

4. We have generally observed that the emptiest zelots are the greatest
advocates for the circumstances of Religion, time, and order, mighty matters in
some men's eyes.

You commend the King for mentioning Religion in the first place in his
address to the Parliament, Page 7.
and to charge the Parliament with profanesse for post-poning Religion.

But wherein does the piety of the King so much consist? Reply.
is it in asserting the Episcopacy, or the toleration of all sorts of
Religions, only prohibiting the Mass, and the publishing of Atheism and
blasphemy, Page 14.
or wherein else?

Is it true that the King (whom your general Assembly so deeply charged with
guilt of the shedding the blood of many thousands of his best Subjects) has
passed through the valley of Bacha, See the Remonstrance of the general
Assembly of the kirk of Scotland, sent by the commission of both Kingdoms,
June 12. 1645. to Oxford.
weeping and lamenting with ashes upon his head, and sackcloth on his loins
for his former ways, exhibiting his repentance as a door of hope, that his
three Kingdoms will be happy in him, notwithstanding all that is past? have
you heard that his heart is tender, that it has melted before the Lord for all
his abominations, that he has cut down the groves, broken the Altars,
destroyed the Images which were a provocation to the eye of Jealousy? has he
given satisfaction for blood, and security for peace; See the Parl. answer to
his Majesty's message to two Letters, the 26 and 29. of December. 1646, Page 5.
until which, you once professed you would never assent unto his coming to
London to treat; has he recalled his Declarations and Proclamations against
his Subjects English and Scotch as Traitors and Rebels, etc? is it thus indeed,
or See the Letter from the Commissioners of the Parl. of Scotl. to the
Commissioners of the Parl. of Engl. concerning his Majesty's coming to the
Scotch Army May 5. 1646. Ibid.
are you like men that dream, as once you were, that you applaud the King for
his zeal for Religion, putting the Reformation of that in the first of his
proposals to the Parliament, at the best and chiefest foundation of peace. If
the cause be thus; defer not our joy: your very feet would be beautiful to
us, would you bring us these glad tidings? it would be unto us as the
resurrection from the dead? but if you have no such news to cheer us with
all; no such fruit from the tree of life to revive our hearts sick through our
hopes deferred; what is your meaning of this Royal applause? do you think your
conscientious Brethren, Presbyterian or Independent, will commend you for this?

Having done with the Order, you now come to the material differences and
alterations concerning Religion, which you branch out into the Parliaments
error of omission and difficiency, and into that of commission and excess.

The first thing you complain of under the head of omission, is no less than
the solemn League and Covenant; and here you abound with your pathetick
interogations, to affect the hearts of those whose eyes are in their bowels,
whose understandings are drowned and swallowed up in their passions, after this
manner. And shall the Covenant which is as solemn a vow as creatures on earth
can make to God in Heaven, etc? And again, shall the Covenant for the
preservation of etc. And again (like the Papists, which holds up their
Idolatrous Eucharist in the eyes of the people, that they may fall down and
worship it) shall the Covenant which both Houses recommended to the Assembly
of, etc? Yet again, (as if here lay all your bait to catch gudgins) shall our
mutual and solemn League and Covenant subscribed by the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms, etc? Once more yet (for if this Spring fails, all our sport will
be lost) shall the Covenant even with those that took it to be already out of
date, etc. To all which we reply.

First, Reply.
What if the Parliament think it ^^^ fit to trouble His Majesty with pressing
the Covenant in the Propositions for Peace? was it not your own reason Page 3.
for the altering your judgments about sending Propositions? will you not give
the same allowance to others which you assume to your selves? are you all for
having? will you give nothing?

Secondly, If the Covenant be laid aside, out of date, deleted, as your words
are, your perverting it has been the occasion of it* did we promise to take
the Covenant; and after to submit to what sense thereof our Brethren of
Scotland would please to impose upon us? has not the Covenant been so
perverted, that many Covenanters are ready to enter into a new Covenant against
the sense that is put upon the old? Brethren, we have taken the Covenant in a
true, proper, plain English sense as well as your selves, and stand unto (...).

Thirdly, Whereas you (...)that the Covenant is brought in by the Parliament in
the 7th* qualification of the 14. P^^position, only as a hook to catch some
into the notion of Delinquency: we reply, that if any (...) on this side Tweed
should have said the Covenant was made a hook to catch men into Delinquency,
you would have marked him with an M. or an S. for a Malignant or Sectary; we
will not say the Covenant was first intended as a book to catch men into the
notion of Delinquency; though you are so bold and peremptory to charge this
upon our Parliament to their very teeth, and that in the face of the Kingdom,
tempting their civility and patience above measure, the like affronts we
presume were never offered to any Nation by Commissioners of another State: See
the Parl. answer to the Scotch papers of the 20. of October, 1646.
yet we wish it had not been used as a hook to catch not a few, but even the
Parliament and Kingdom of England into a new design, by introducing another
Nation to be one of the Estates of this Kingdom, and to have a negative voice
in all things concerning their welfare.

You tell the Parliament from their omission of the solemn League and Covenant
to your very much wonder, Page 9.
that they are so liberal in the matters of God, and so tenacious in what
concerns themselves.

Your zeal for the Covenant is your zeal for God, Reply*
that is, your zeal to introduce your Nation to be one of the Estates of this
Kingdom, and to have a negative voice in all things concerning our welfare.
Your zeal to intermeddle with the Militia of England, with disbanding our
Armies, with conferring titles of honor, with the revenue of the Crown; with
all our goods by virtue of the solemn League and Covenant: Is your zeal for
the matters of God, and the Parliaments care in their preservation of the pure
and unmixt interests of this Kingdom according to their solemn League and
Covenant, 2 Kin. 10. 16.
without suffering you to intermeddle therewith? is their profane
tenaciousnesse in that which concerns themselves? See my zeal for the Lord,
was Iehu's tone, when the tune of his heart played another game. Page 10.


As for the King you are pleased to tell us; Though His MAJESTY shall not come
up to the full length of your desires, yet WE must never depart from our
Covenant.

It seems you have a royal sense to bestow upon His Majesty, but vae
pauperibus, woe to the poor, they must abide the fire of this purgatory; is it
true here also, no penny, no Paternoster? Is there no allowance for tender
consciences except it be of Kings and Princes? Ibid.


You say your zeal for the Covenant does not abate or diminish your loyalty
and duty to the King, though he cannot come up to the full length of your
desires, etc. That is, take the Covenant.

Your zeal for the Covenant and His Majesty runs together, Reply.
though His Majesty and the Covenant are a great way asunder, your loyalty and
allegiance will suffer you to indulge the King in His refusing to subject to
the matters of God: the solemn League and Covenant; and yet your brotherly
affection and honesty will admit of quarrelling with the Parliament of England,
for not haling, urging, and pressing Him to come to the full length of their
desires, viz. to take the Covenant.

The Commissioners of Scotland can give a dispensation, but the Parliament of
England must not so much as appear to favor him upon pain of dispensing with
the matters of God, ashamed of Christ, denying him before men; and his denial
of them at the great day of the Lord. It seems you would make us younger
brethren, not only in the matters of the world, but in matters of God too.

Thus far for the business of the Covenant, the primum mobile of all other
motions, and therefore ever and anon you refer unto that.

The next thing omitted by the Parliament is, the Proposition for confirming
the Ordinance concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines.
Page 17.


The calling and sitting of the Assembly of Divines, Reply.
was not intended in sempiternum: neither do we believe but an authoritative
dismission of that revered Assembly, especially for a season, would be as
acceptable to thems^ as serviceable to the respective places whereto they
belong, for the weeding up of those tares of error and profaneness, which the
enemy has sown in their absence; and it is no parradoxe to affirm that the
sitting so long of so many learned and godly Ministers together for the
suppression of Error. Heresy, and Wickedness, and advancing the affairs of
Jesus Christ, has been an occasion through their absence from their people of
more Error, Heresy Profanesse and prejudice to the affairs of Christ than
did appear before; men err, not knowing the Scriptures; and how can men but
err, when their Teachers are long removed into corners. Ibid.


The next thing omitted was the Proposition for Reformation of Religion in
England and Ireland according to the Covenant.

According to the Covenant; Reply.
That implies that the Covenant must first be taken, and then the Reformation
must be settled according to the Covenant; you have said enough to the
Parliament for their profane neglect to press the King to the Covenant, that
they should omit no less then the solemn League and Covenant: though you can
dispense with him, but will you have the King to settle Religion in England and
Ireland according to the Covenant, and not take the Covenant? then would you
have Him settle a Religion against His Conscience, and is that reasonable? a
blind Sacrifice is not acceptable. Lev. 22. 22.


The next thing omitted, was, the Proposition for settling unity and uniformity
in matters of Religion between the Churches of both Kingdoms, Ibid.
according to the Covenant.

The reply to the last might well serve for a reply to this also, according to
the Covenant is the burden of your song, Reply.
and it seems the life of your game; by the Churches of God in both Kingdoms,
do you not mean the two National Churches, that is, the two Nations
themselves? (for it concerns us now to know your meaning) if you interpret
that which you call matters of Religion, as you have done the solemn League
and Covenant (for you have an excellent faculty of interpretation.) You may
call community and parity of interests matters of Religion? and if so, it may
be the Parliament may think fit to omit the Proposition for settling unity and
uniformity in matters of Religion between the Churches of God in both
Kingdoms, according to the Covenant: and one Kingdom at least is engaged to
them for it.

But secondly, why do you make the solemn League and Covenant the unicum
necessarium, the balance of your Sanctuary, and the golden reed to measure
your Temple, you have not a tittle of the word of God; but all your cry is the
solemn League and Covenant instead of the Word of God; the Jew has his
Talmud, the Turk his Alkeron, the Papist his Masse-booke, the Prelate his
Service-booke, and must we have the solemn League and Covenant instead of the
Oracles of heaven, the Word of God? Better it is that this brazen Serpent
should be broken to pieces, and ground to powder, then that men should fall
down and worship it, though formerly a healing benefit was received from it; It
was the hypocritical Pharise's pretending to heaven, though minding the earth,
who making void the Law of God, did teach for doctrine the traditions of the
Elders. Let us not put up man's posts the Covenant, by Gods posts the holy
Scripture?

Having done with the Parliaments omissions in matters of Religion, Page 11.
you fall upon their Commissions and excess; the first thing you complain of
under that head, is, that instead of the Propositions which they have omitted,
so far as concerns Religion, You find nothing but a mere shadow of
Presbytery Government: and instead of uniformity of Religion, a vast deformity,
or multiformity of Heresies and Sects. A liberty granted for all sorts of
service and worship of God, an opening a doere to Atheism, to all Religions,
to liberty of conscience, being indeed liberty of error, scandal, schism,
heresy, dishonouring God, opposing truth, hindering Reformation, and seducing
others.

First, Page 18.
do you find no more in the Propositions as concerning Discipline and Religion,
but a mere shadow of Presbyterian government? we have no reason to think but
the Parliament supposes it such a Presbiterian government in the very
substance thereof, as they can imagine, to be most agreeable to the Word of
God, and according to our solemn League and Covenant; If you can inform them
better, confident we are their ears are open? shall they receive the pattern
of the house of God from their Scotch Brethren, for the Word of God? If they
see but the shadow, they are not far from the substance? If they honor the
shadow, which is all they see, what will they do to the substance when their
eyes are open? Is it not better that they should do as they see, and see what
they do; than to drive a great trade of confidence about the will of God in
Discipline, with a small stock of Scripture to maintain the same? did all men
truly see what they act, and act what they see, we should have more love, and
less wrangling, more truth, and less show, men would not be so forward in
pretense of zeal for government in the house of God, with the neglect of the
government of their own tongues and pens, in reproaching and slandering whole
States and Kingdoms: you see little but the mere shadow of GOVERNMENT in the
Parliament; we see little but the mere shadow of RELIGION in some others.

Secondly, Perhaps the KINGDOM sees little as yet, but the meere-shadow of
Presbiterian Government, and so are fit for nothing more; let them be first
instructed, and then commanded. The Parliament are English men themselves, who
know the disposition of their own Countrymen to be such, that they will freely
run when they are drawn with the cords of men, viz. reason and love: but are
extreme headstrong in case of compulsion, they could never endure the bramble
should reign over them; when the Kingdom is taught in the substance of
Presbytery, its likely the mere shadow Will fly away.

Thirdly, It may be the Parliaments design may be first to feed the Kingdom
with substantials of Religion, the finest of the flower, the milk and honey of
the Land of Canaan, viz, the great Doctrines of faith toward God, and
repentance from dead works; and until the time of some proficiency therein,
the shadow of Discipline may be sufficient, the substance whereof is but a
mere shadow in comparison of these, our late Prelates, whilst they so hotly
contended for Discipline and government in pretense of suppressing a deformity,
and multiformity of Heresies and Sects, Error, Scandal, etc. Did destroy and
crucify RELIGION and her children; when they bowed the knee to DISCIPLINE,
crying hail Master, and kissed it, we hope the Parliament will not permit such
a Faction again.

Whereas you say, The Parliament has granted in their Propositions a liberty
to all sorts of Service and Worship of God, an opening a door to Atheism, to
all Religions, to Error, Scandal, Schism, Heresy, etc. we reply.

Brethren, Reply.
your language reflects upon your descent, and your expressions do disparage
your honorable employment as Commissioners of State; your pens seem to be
rather steered by the hands of some of the late scandalous Pamphlet writers,
then of the Scotch Commissioners. You callumniate boldly, but will any thing
stick? let us observe your charge; The Parliament you say desires the settlement
of a vast deformity or multiformitie of Heresies, and Sects, and grants a
liberty for all sorts of Service, and Worship of God, yea and the opening a
door to liberty of Error, Scandal, Schism, dishonouring God, opposing the
Truth, bindering Reformation, and seducing others: and all this is aggravated;
in so much as it is done, after a most sacred and solemn League and Covenant,
to suppress all these according to the Word of God, and the example of the
best reformed Churches. Brethren, two things you should have done before you
can make this good; you know that Religion and the Covenant requires the
suppression of these things, according to the Word of ^od, and the example of
the best reformed Churches. First then you should have showed by the Word of
God what are these Errors, Heresies, Scandals etc. which you say the Parliament
desires a settlement of.

Secondly, You should have proved the methods and ways, the rules and
directions of the Word of God for the suppression of these, and the Parliaments
practice in opposition to that, and then put it unto the judgment of ingenious
men to determine the case; have you done this in the eye of the Kingdom,
before whom you have slandered the Houses of Parliament, if not, were you not
Commissioners of State, we would tell you more plainly your deserts: Iam. 1. 21.
but for the present we say no more but this; If any man among you seem to be
Religious, and bridleth not his tongue (much more his pen) but deceives his
own soul, this man's Religion is in vain. Be it known unto you that we verily
believe that the things you speak of, much more the toleration of them, and
most of all the settling the same, are the firstborn of abominations unto our
present Parliament: and in the mean while we clearly discern, that while you
pretend to plead with such imparalleld zeal against Errors, Heresy, etc. you
stick not to abuse the repute, and blemish the good name of a whole
representative Kingdom at once; violating the most plain, evident, and
obvious rules, shall we say of Christianity? yea, of common justice and
honesty: and therefore we tell you as you tell the Parliament, and take notice
of it: Certainly (...) mocked.

You tell us page 7th, that it is far fr(...)ions that pious and peaceable men
should be troubled, because in every thing (...) cannot conform themselves to
Presbyterian Government: for you say you did never oppose such an indulgen^e to
their Persons as is agreeable to the Word of God, may stand with the public
peace, and is not destructive to the Order and Government of the Church; yet
you do from your souls a^hor such a general and vast toleration as is expressed
in the Proposition, etc.

Who shall judge of pious and peaceable men in England, Reply.
the Parliament of England, or the Scotch Commissioners? Again, who shall
determine what kind of iudulgence is agreeable to the Word of God, may stand
with the public peace, and is not destructive to the Order and Government of
the Church established in England? the Parliament of England, or the Scotch
Commissioners? what mean you by indulgence to their Persons; such a kind of
indulgence of their persons, as pious and peaceable men may have in Spain,
Rome, Turkey, among even Infidels themselves, or of a better consideration? If
we may plough with your own heifer, we may quickly expound your riddle; you
would not have a toleration of any Sectaries, and we see who they are by your
large Schedule, page 12 Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians, Familists,
Erastians, Brownists, Separatists, Libertines, Independents, Nullifidians,
Seekers, and the new Sect of Shakers: can any man in the least degree withstand
your Presbytery, and not be rankt among these Sectaries, except the
Episcopalians, for which it seems we shall have a toleration, Cum privilegio
Scotico. Brethren, we are not yet baptized into the spirit of Scotch
Presbytery: there we are Anabaptists, we cannot submit unto the Laws thereof;
there we are Antinomians holding that we have power and liberty of will
therein; here we are Arminians, neither do we judge it sinful, though we
should act contrary to your Presbytery, there we are Familists, perhaps we
judge that there is not so plain and clear a Form of Church Government, and
Rule of Discipline to be found out in the word of God, as some do suppose; and
therefore do hold that Christian Magistrates may establish such a discipline,
(it being not contrary to the word of God) as they shall judge meet, and that
we ought to submit unto it; here we are Erastians: and yet we judge that we
ought to come out of Babylon, and decline corrupt and superstitious worshipping
of God, there we are Brownists and Separatists: judging our selves free from
receiving the law of Church government from the Scotch Oracle; here we are
Libertines: neither will we depend upon your judgments as infallible, here we
are Independents: extremely doubting your judgments therein, not questioning
our salvation, though we have no faith therein; here we are Nullifidians: being
extremely in the dark, not understanding your ways, here we are Seekers. And
if the Lord in mercy do not afford us more liberty and indulgence in the quiet
enjoyments of our privileges and interests in things Civil and Religious,
then, for ought we see you would afford us, we may be quickly reckoned amongst
the new Sect of Shakers: you would make us tremble under your hands; from which
condition Libera nos Domine. Brethren, such Sectaries in the sense delivered,
the Parliament may well desire to tolerate: but your assertion of the
Parliaments sinful tolleration of the Sectaries of your Catalogue, is a
scandalous, false, and an unbrotherly aspersion. For have they not in terminis
declared against the tollerating of Popery, Mass, Service book, it is not the
property of a brother to be the accuser of brethren.

That next Religion, Page 17, 18
wherein you differ in judgment from the Propositions, is, concerning the
interest and power of the Crown, being obliged by our solemn League and
Covenant, Allegiance and duty of Subjects, not to diminish, but to support the
Kings just power and greatness.

You should have added, Reply.
In our several places and callings, a passage in the Covenant which ever and
anon does fly in your faces.

Next, you come to the question, Wherein the Kings Regal authority, and just
power does consist: and you answer it in the first place, that it is chiefly in
making and enacting laws; and upon this principle you document the Parliament
of England about the Kings power in making laws, etc. What have you to do to
busy your selves in such things which merely concerns another Kingdom? but
since you thus take upon you (confident we are) beyond your commission, we
desire you in your next, to declare faithfully the power of the King in making
laws in the kingdom of Scotland, and how valid his negative voice is there.
But in the mean while, why do you profess Ignorantium and facti and juris
alieni, and yet interpose in the power of making laws in the Kingdom of
England? Brethren, remember that golden passage in the covenant, Our places and
callings, and do not stretch your selves beyond your line. It is not the
property of wise men to be meddling. Again, if the King has a negative voice
in making laws, has he not the same in repealing laws? And if so, farewell
Presbytery and Directory.

In the next place you intermeddle with the Militia of the kingdom, Page 19,
20 Reply.
to that we pray you, hands of, would we suffer you to feize upon that, for
ought we know, the honor of Englishmen would be quickly contained in the
Court complement, Your humble servants; and the Catholic titles and terms of
Dominus dominantium, and servus servorum, would soon be divided between the
Scot and the Englishman: Englishmen are better soldiers than to part with their
weapons, and Militia of their kingdom, and suffer another nation to intermeddle
with that. We have not the patience to admit of a word of discourse of your
meddling with the Militia of England.

The next thing you complain of under the head of Commission, Page 21.
and excess, is the standing of our Armies: to that you tell us, You think
fit that neither King nor Parliament ought to keep up an Army in the field when
the war is ended.

You give your judgment before it is demanded: Reply.
we think fit you should forbear intermedling, until it appears within your
vocation and calling, according to the solemn League and Covenant. Brethren,
we do not interpose nor busy our selves about Your Army in Scotland, or
affairs particularly belonging unto that kingdom, neither do we envy your
mountains, but are contented with our own valleys. As for Our Army, they are
only Englands charge, why should they be the Commissioners of Scotlands
trouble? Page 22.
It is very true, the charge of the Army is great, but whether Needless, as
you tell us, the judgment of our P^rliament, and not the Scotch Commissioners,
must determine for us; a hand of mercy to our distressed kingdom, did at first
gather them, a hand of power has hitherto been with them, and a hand of
providence has kept them together to preserve the interest of their native
country entire and whole from the violence of those that would be fingring
therewith. And though it be true, Page 21.
that the sea is our Bulwark by Gods mercy from foreign enemies, which are
beyond it; yet you know very well, that our late wars have been fomented by our
own natives; for sometimes brethren prove unnatural, and Paul joins his
perils among false brethren, 2 Cor. 11. 26.
with his perils at sea. If you do indeed condole the griefs of the people
from the charges of our Army, you will take heed that we be not troubled with
any from foreign parts: for confident we are, the whole kingdom will never
abide it, no, though they should enter into a soleme League and Covenant, that
they would only help us to disband our Armies, and ease the people of the
oppressions thereof. You tell us, If the Houses had according to your earnest
desires of the 3 of March, 1644. when they modeled their Army, made choice of
such officers as were known to be zealous of the reformation of Religion, and
of that uniformity with both kingdoms, are obliged to promote and maintain,
etc. and put in execution their several declarations, as that of the 20. of
Sept. 1643. as also the 15. of Feb. 1644 ordering all Officers under Sir Thomas
Fairfax, to take the Covenant, etc. it would have prevented a world of
inconveniences and evils which have ensued upon the neglect thereof.

We judge ourselves to have cause to bind the sacrifice with cords to the
horns of the Altar, Reply.
and praise the name of the Lord for his wisdom and goodness in modelling the
Army even as he did, though contrary to the advice of the Scotch Commissioners;
(yet we plead not at all for any error or evil of judgment or practice
either of the Army, or any therein.) It Is true, we hear of all religions in
this Army, and of no religion in another; of error of judgment here, of error
of practice elsewhere; of quartering upon the country by this Army, of
quartering the country by another: of officers and soldiers, that through
scruple of conscience cannot t^ke the Covenant in this Army, and of officers
and soldiers that can both take the Covenant with hands lifted up to the most
high God, and yet strike hands with death and hell by cursing and swearing,
plundring and stealing in another Army. It is no pleasure to us to dabble in
the mire of another Army: neither can we endure that the Scotch Commissioners
should bespatter our Army. If the Houses had according to your earnest desire
the 3. of March 1644 when they modeled their Army, made choice of such officers
as were known to be ze^lous of the reformation of religion, and of that
uniformity which both kingdoms are obliged to promote and maintain: that is, if
they had made choice of such Officers as you would have preferred, viz. zealous
hardy men out of the north, whose judgment about the Covenant and Treaty had
concurred so, as to introduce your nation to be one of the Estates of this
kingdom, to have a negative voice in all things concerning our welfare, who
would have pleaded your co-intrest with the Parliament of England in the
Militia of the kingdom, disposal of places and offices of t^ust, in all our
particular and proper goods, we are confident with you, that it would have
prevented a world of inconveniences upon the King and his party his Armies in
the fields, strong Holds and Garrisons, which have ensued upon the neglect
thereof.

The last thing you speak unto under this head, is, viz, the interest of the
Crown, that is, touching the conferring titles of honor, which you call the
Flower of the Crown, and wherewith Kings do use to recompense the virtue and
merits of their good subjects, Reply.
etc.

Did you not formerly consent to the making void of the Titles of honor
conferred by the great Seal, after it was carried away from the Parliament?
have you better considered of the matter, and changed your thoughts touching
the virtues and merits of those who have assisted the King against the
Parliament? Is this your zeal against the common enemy of both Kingdoms,
according to the solemn league and Covenant? Is this that just and condign
pnnishment whereunto you engaged your selves to bring them? what that might be
rewarded for their helping the King against the Parliament (as we hear your
Secretary was, (as is supposed) for his care and pains in this your writings
against the Houses) with titles of honor. Page 2^.


Having finished the particulars of the second head, viz the interest of the
Crown, you fall upon the third, the union and joint interest of the kingdoms,
where you complain.

First, Reply.
That the Houses have omitted the Covenant in these Propositions.

We have given you an answer to that once and again* you do so toss the
covenant, that it is thought you will quickly bring it out of date; the word
Covenant is your Shiboleth: but we can both pronounce, and nnderstand it as
well as your selves.

Secondly you add, that the Houses have rejected all that concerns-unity and
uniformity in matters of Religion.

It is but a temporary Suspension, Reply.
because of their former successesnes (your own answer for your rejecting
propositions, and pressing for a treaty contrary to your promise) and not a
rejection of those things: Did they presume the religion of Scotland in the
principles thereof to justify your practices in abusing our Parliament as your
Papers have done, they would have reason enough to reject all that concerns
unity and uniformity with you in matters of religion. But confident we are, as
they have no reason, so the least jealousy thereof is not within the confines
of their thoughts.

Next you complain of the omission of several things even in heaps, all
which you summon up in this, That generally throughout the Propositions all
expressions of joint interest are left out. Page 23.


If by joint interest you mean such a joint interest as is according to the
express letter of the solemn League and Covenant, Reply.
and treaties between the Kingdoms, we cannot presume such an omission; though
there may be a prudentiall suspension at present of some particulars thereof,
though we know no such thing.

Secondly, See the Answer of the Commons to the Scotch Commissioners papers of
the 20. and their letter of the 24. of October. 1646. page 11.
if by Joint Interest, you mean such a Joint Interest as you would extort from
the solemn League and Covenant, and treaties between the Kingdoms, as the
sense thereof, which was never intended; nay, abhorred, As that the Militia by
sea and land in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, the power of making peace
and war with foreign States, the Kings consent in the enacting of any law, the
conferring of great places of honor and trust, making of Peers of Parliament,
conferring of titles of honor, what revenue the King is to have in England and
Ireland, and how to be disposed, etc. cannot be transacted and concluded upon,
without the joint advice and confent of the kingdom of Scotland. If such a
kind of sense and meaning only of the solemn League and Covenant, and treaties
between the kingdoms, will serve your turn, and the expres letter of these, is
too short for your satisfaction, the Parliament of England have reason upon
reason, that generally throughout the propositions, all expressions of joint
interest should be left out. Yea, if we may be understood in the observation of
our due distance from, and obliged duty to them, we obtest them by all their
vows, covenants and promises, by all their votes, orders and ordinances, by
all their declarations, proclamations and protestations, by all our blood,
blows and battles, by all our vexations, contributions and taxations, by all
our moneys, horse and plate, by all our servants, apprentizes and journey-men,
by all our wounds, sores and scares, by all the rents, rapes and ruins, by all
the plunderings, burnings and sackings, by all our widows, fatherles and
friendles, by all our sayings, doings and sufferings for our kingdoms
interests, by the sad effects of tyranny and slavery, by the great trust
committed to their charge, by our confidence of their faithfulness therein, by
the honor of English men, by the stain of their posterity, kindred and
progeny, by their principles of humanity, justice and integrity, by their great
account at the last day, that they do preserve our rights, laws and interest,
our privileges, liberties and immunities entire, distinct and whole, and that
they neither sell them, give them, nor grant them, nor yet suffer them to be
sold, given, or granted by any compact Covenant or Treaty (as we are most
assured hitherto they have not) to any Nation, Kingdom, or people; and more
particularly, that in all their transactions between themselves and our Scotch
brethren, they maintain the distinct interest of England, without confounding
it with the interest of Scotland? and that in all their neighbourly, friendly
and brotherly Associations for the jojnt benefit of both Kingdoms, they never
associate in that which is their several distinct and particular rights.

Whereas you complain that formerly Propositions of both kingdoms were drawn up
together in one body; now for separating the interests of the kingdoms, the
Propositions for England are drawn, up apart, upon the observation whereof,
with other things you desired a conference and it would not be granted. We
reply.

First, what mean you by one body? mean you the Commissioners of both Kingdoms,
making that up one body? or secondly the Parliament of England in conjunction
with the Scotch Commissioners? doubtless we cannot think that the Parliament of
England and Scotch Commissioners were ever known yet to be one body? we hope
that never such a monster shall be seen in England; neither can we imagine
that the Commissionets of both kingdoms in one body were to draw up
propositions for peace; therefore mean you thirdly, that this one body was not
made up of men, but of propositions; and though they were Propositions of both
kingdoms, yet they were sent together in one body; this does not argue but
that care was had by the Parliament that though the Propositions were sent in
one body or paper; yet there was a distinction, and no confusion of interests:
we perfectly know, that as it would be contrary to the Parliaments trust, so is
it against their jugdements and consciences to confound the interest of England
with the interest of Scotland; we trust they will never be sowred with the
leven of Levelling; but in the promotion of unity, they will beware of the
Doctrine of Community.

Secondly, what if Propositions for peace were formerly drawn up together in
one body, must all other Propositions whatsoever, which the Parliament of
England will please to tender to the King, be drawn up together in one body
with Scotlands Propositions? No, it is time now to separate all color of
interest of the kingdoms, and not to suffer the least appearance, or occasion
of scruple, that the Parliament of England did ever intend participation of
interests with the kingdom of Scotland, though Propositions of both kingdoms
were formerly sent in one body of writing; yet now their wisdoms may think fit
not to administer so much as a paper advantage, or the smallest ground of
jealousy and mistake about their intentions concerning the entire preservation
of the kingdoms distinct interests, and therefore our obligations are the
greater unto our Parliament, for that they would not so much as grant a
conference with you about this business, that the confusion of interests between
England and Scotland, should never procure so much advantage as the grant of a
Conference would administer unto it.

And had the principles of an unlimited prerogative power, been as timously
obviated and declared as your present principles of confounding interests are
now by our Parliament, it had as probably prevented the sad calamities and
miserable consequences of our late wars, as their present care we hope will
do; if the fault be not your own, which if it happen (as God forbid) we make
noe question but all English men of honor and interest, and common ingenuity,
will join together as on man, and so preserve the interest of their native
Country distinct and whole, as that all the gilded species, and devout
pretenses of piety and love which shall be used by the deceitful enemies of
the kingdoms interest, will never delude us, nor in the least divide us.

Your grand objection is the expres letter of the eight Article, Page 23.
wherein it is provided that no cessation, nor any pacification or agreement
for peace whatsoever shall be made by either kingdom, or the Army of either
kingdom without the mutual advice and consent of both kingdoms, or their
Committees in that behalf appointed, etc.

First, Reply.
this eight Article you flourish about like the sword of Saul, presuming it
will not return empty, though it proves to you like the sword of Goliath
serving only for your own overthrow; for who was the enemy with which no
cessation, nor any pacification or agreement for peace whatsoever should be
made by either kingdom, or the Armies of either kingdom, without the mutual
advice and consent of both kingdoms, or their Committees on that behalf
appointed? was it not the King and his party? if his party is suppressed by
conquest, and no peace is made with them by compact, then the only enemy that
stands out can be no other but the King? was not the Dutch Ambassador (as you
say) sent hither to mediate between the King and Parliament as the chief
parties at variance; do not all the expresses, Proclamations and Declarations
both from the King and from the Parl. relate to the differences between the
King, the Parl. the King and his People, etc. Did not the King proclaim the
Parliament, and the Army under them, Rebels, Traitors, enemies, etc? Did not
the Parl. declare that the King had set up his Standard against his people, and
thereby put his Parl. and kingdom out of his protection? what can imaginably*
then be the meaning of this Article; but that no cessation, nor any
pacification, or agreement for peace whatsoever can be made with the King by
either kingdom, or the Armies of eithers kingdom, without the mutual advice
and consent of both kingdoms, or their Committees in that behalf appointed;
has the Parliament ever secretly or openly, made any cessation, pacification,
or agreement for peace whatsoever; or in the least degree closely tampered with
the King without the mutual advice and consent of both kingdoms? did they
ever directly or indirectly by themselves or others invite him to their Army,
and upon his coming pretend to admire the wonderful providence, professing
astonishment and amazement, and that they were like men in a dream? Did they
ever accept of titles of honor, either at New Castle or Isle of Wight,
exhibiting so much as the least jealousy unto our brethren of Scotland, of any
compliance, much less agreement or pacification with the King without their
mutual advice and consent? Have they broken their Articles of Treaty, or your
selves? No, let not such a stain and blot be found upon any English men of
honor or interest, much less upon the High Court of Parliament of England,
the representative body of the whole kingdom; and we once more obtest you,
brethren, Commissioners of Scotland, by the jealousy and wrath of the most
high God* by all your professions and declarations, by your soleme League and
Covenant which you have made with God, the Parl. and kingdom of England; by
the eight Article of the Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms, by the dreadful demerits
of Covenant-breakers, Treaty-breakers, false brethren, deceitfulnes of
friendship, dissimulation with God and men, that you neither directly or
indirectly, secretly or openly make any cessation, pacification or agreement
for peace whatsoever with the King without the mutual advice and consent of
both Kingdoms. And we desire Almighty God to bless and prosper the Parliaments
and Commissioners of both Kingdoms according to their faithfullnes in keeping
Covenant on Treaties, that it may please him to bless them, or either of them
in their faithful endeavors to execute judgment and justice upon great and
small, fulfilling the whole mind and will of God without respect of persons
among men; that it would please him to keep up the spirit of the honorable
Lords, Commons, and Army of England, without declining from their late
resolutions, in a steady, constant, and faithful intention and purpose,
without fear or favor, and that they may not start aside like a broken bow
from their present righteous and just intentions, and that it may please him to
incline the hearts of all the people of the land to join with them to promote
righteousness, judgment and justice, and to keep the interests of both
kingdoms in their proper distinctions without confusion, to hear the cries,
and hasten the remedies of the many oppressions, sorrows and grievances of the
kingdom; and that it might please him to incline the hearts of the honorable
City of London, and all the Inhabitants thereof, to throw by all unhappy
differences and jealousies whatsoever, and to join together in the ways of
God, and to give them light from his word, and power from his spirit, in a due
and Gospel way, to suppress error, heresy, blasphemy, and whatsoever is
contrary to sound doctrine, and to maintain in their several places and callings
the undoubted interest of their native Kingdom; for all which with simplicity
and integrity of heart, quaesumus audias nos Domine: But to return to answer
our brethren.

If the King be not the only man with whom the peace is to be made; what other
adversary does appear at all? and indeed you often tell us that now the war is
ended, page 10. Again, the war is ended, p^g. 21. There is no enemy to sight
with, Ibid. Again, the war is at an end, and no visible enemy in the kingdom.
Again, now Armies are no more useful, Ibid. Then it will follow. First, that
the Parliament has not broken their Treaty in any Pacification or agreement
with the enemy without you, the peace being got by the sword, and not by a
Treaty; therefore you ought to recant your charging them in this particular. 2.
If the war be ended, we have no more to do with the Scotch Commissioners; for
we know no Covenant, Treaty, or Compact with them, that they should intermeddle
with us in the government of our kingdom, nor we with the^ in the government of
theirs. We thank you for your help (for we shall remember our own duty to
acknowledge you, and leave it to your ingenuity to remember both our ancient
and late respects unto you) we have given you 200000. l. (besides all other
things, we need not name them) in part of payment: 200000 pounds more we are to
give you; we pray your Christian and brotherly forbearance with us, you shall
find us honest, and without guile in our dealings with you.

The next thing you complain of is the omitting the proposition concerning the
City of London, Page 25.
etc.

The City of London (to speak without vanity) has not come far short of the
kingdom of Scotl. Reply.
in their deserts from the Parl. of England, And we make no question, but upon
the faith^ul cotinuance of their due respects to the Parl. of Engl. and the
interest thereof, whereof we have hopes (if but from this time, God bless
their ears from the gilded rhetoric of pretended devot o^ and deceitful
tongues, that they do not neglect their own interest) the Parl. of Engl. will
not forget their labor of love, and their perseverance therein, Ibid
nor yet remember every character of humane frailty that has been upon them;
the best Parliament has had its spots, as well as the best City.

Next, Reply.
you complain of the proposition for taking away the Court of Wards, etc. Has
not the King consented to that? and is not this beyond your line?

Touching the Proposition for the sale and disposal of the lands of Deans and
Chapters. Ibid.
You have some what to say, which is only this; That you have always heard
that those lands were reserved by the Houses for the maintenance of Ministers;
and the disposal of it otherwais would discourage faithful Pastors, and give
occasion to the people (where Minsters are wanting for lack of maintenance) to
follow after Sectaries, and Tub preachers.

It seems you are very inquisitive about the disposal of lands in England:
Reply.
we are not so dim sighted but we see and observe how quick you are of hearing,
and diligent in harkning after matters of that nature. The disposal of the
lands of Deans and Chapters otherwise the^ for the maintenance of Ministers,
would discourage faithful Ministers, Perhaps no more then the disposal of
Bishops lands have done, which are security for monys for our brethren of
Scotland: and if the Dean and Chapters lands had been so disposed of, we
believe you would have given us no occasion to have spoken to this point, it is
the desire and longing of our very souls, that some effectual course might be
speedily thought upon by the Parliament for the comfortable incouragment and
maintenance of faithful Pastors, yea and their widows and children, that they
may be delivered from that snare of dependence upon the benevolence and charity
of their dull hearers, and sometimes vicious patrons and benefactors. But we
refer the matter wholly to the Parliament, and heartily desire their most
possible expedition in that good work. But before we leave this, we desire you
tell us the original and meaning of that profound word Tub Preachers; we have
formerly presumed if it had its rice in England, it was from some of those
learned Ballad singers in dishonor of Pulpit preaching, who were bred up in
the University of Newgate. Should English Commissioners in Scotland have made
any mention in their addresses to their Parliament, of the opprobrious terms
of Red-shanks, or Blew-caps, it had reflected no small disparagement upon thofe
that employed them. Such light expressions (to say no more) we did never
observe to proceed from Commissioners of State before, neither do we believe
that Commissioners of the Indies, bred up in Wigwams, did ever use such
scurrilous terms in all their motions to the Magistrates at Bostonbay in
New England.

For the conclusion of all, Page 25.
you see down most of your desires, and tender them unto the Parliament.

If you have any desires concerning your own kingdom, Reply.
wherein the Parliament of England may gratify you without prejudice to the
proper interest of England, you may do well to tender them; but we shall not
trouble you to mediate for us with our own Parliament; we desire you brethren,
once more before we leave you, that you would remember that peace preserving
passage in the Covenant, Our several places and callings: you are ex^ream apt
to forget it, therefore are we so bold to put you in mind so often of it: you
have set down most of your desires, but not all, keep the rest within you,
perhaps it is better (at least for us) that your desires should be in your
Hearts, then in your Hands.

As for your intermedling with the four Bills sent by the Houses unto the King;
we say no more, but had you been mindful of the bounds and limits of our solemn
league and covenant, viz. our several places and callings, you had spared your
pains in that business, and your fig. leaves to cover that nakedness, See
Indepency of England, etc. lately set forth, pa. 18, 19.
has been totn from you by a better hand. Here we had thought to have taken
our leaves, but before we part, we have three or four Queries to propound unto
you, and one request to make, wherein if you will satisfy us in your next, it
will be an addition to our former engagements.

First, whether that your publishing to the people the transactions between the
Parliament and your selves, without the Parliaments consent, nay contrary to
their express commands concerning printing and publishing; yea, with malign
reflection upon them, be not contrary to the practice of all public
Ministers, yea and directly repugnant to all principles of common justice, and
infinitely unworthy that profession of love, friendship, and brotherly respects
which you have so solemnly made in the face of heaven and earth unto them?

Secondly, tell us, bona fide, whether you think in your consciences (for you
pretend to be very religiously conscientious) that the Parliament of England,
and people thereof, did ever intend any such sense of the solemn League and
Covenant, either concerning the interest of the kingdom, or government of the
Church, as you have endeavored to extort from it in your several papers, or
that they did intend (when they took it) any otherwise by it, than the
promotion of holiness in the general (though with difference of judgment
about discipline) and the uniting us together in our mutual assistance
against, and the discovery of the common enemies of both kindomes?

Thirdly, tell us, bona fide, whether you desire, or rather would permit that
the King should have the same power in Scotland, the same negative voice, the
same absolute command and authority every way, as you would he should have in
England, especially if he should refuse to take away Episcopacy to establish
Presbytery, to recall those proclamations and declarations whereby you are
declared traitors and rebels, to give satisfaction and security to your
kingdom, yea, or whether upon the performance of these things, you would let
him have such a power yea or no?

Fourthly, whether you think in the secrets of your hearts, it be agreeable to
the principles of religion, rules of equity, justice and policy, an acceptable
sacrifice in the sight of Almighty God, and comfortable for his people, to
advance the King, in statu quo prius, until he has according to the pious
advice, and Christian exhortation of the general Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, viz. Fallen down at the Footstool of the King of glory,
acknowledging his sins, repented of them, and made his peace with God in
Jesus Christ, whose blood is able to wash away his great sins. And whether
you think in your consciences he is a changed man, yea or no?

Fifthly and lastly, whether it would not be most agreeable to the will of God,
the declarations, protestations, promises and professions of love betwixt the
two kingdoms, the true intent of the solemn League and Covenant, and most
conducing to the glory of God, and the mutual support, security, safety and
benefit of the two nations united together, that you and we be true, faithful,
constant, and single hearted each to other, assisting each other according to
Our several places and callings, in the preservation of each others Peculiar,
proper, and distinct interest: And whether it would not be as great a dishonor
to God, scandal to the Gospel, scorn to Religion, rejoicing of the wicked,
grieving of the godly, gratifying the Devil, and the affairs of his kingdom
among Jews, Turks, Infidels, Papists, Prelates, and all sorts of profane men,
that You and We should be at variance? Should we not make our selves thereby an
abomination to the Lord, a hissing to all nations, a prey unto our enemies,
obnoxious to the wrath and curse of God and men, and bring upon our selves
swift destruction: for the prevention whereof, let us both bow our knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ night and day, that we being rooted and
grounded in love, may grow up together in Christ, perfecting holiness in the
fear of the Lord; and by all Christian forbearance and wisdom, may keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

OUr request is only this, that you would either give a Reply unto the Answer
of the Commons assembled in Parliament to the Scotch Commissioners papers of
the 20. and their letter of the 24. of October, 1646. or else to cease any
further to trouble Englands ears with what you call the sense and meaning of
the solemn League and Covenant, Treaties, etc. for if you do, you will but
sow the wind, and reap the whirlwinde for your pains.

Valete.

FINIS.

