A Course of Divinity: OR, AN INTRODUCTION To the Knowledge of the True
Catholic Religion; Especially as Professed by the CHURCH OF ENGLAND:

In two Parts; The one containing, The Doctrine of Faith; The other, The Form
of Worship.

By MATTHEW SCRIVENER.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft for Robert Clavil in Little Britain.
MDCLXXIV.

THE ENTRANCE.
FOR the better conceiving and judging of this ensuing Treatise, I have held it
necessary, Christian Reader, to premise and propound to thy consideration these
two things principally: viz. The Occasions me thereunto moving, and the manner
of proceeding in it.

One Occasion given me was the multitude and variety of the like Books set
forth by other Churches, whereby not only the persons under them, were trained
up in the Knowledge and Faith professed there, but the minds of many of our
Church were prepossessed, and their manners swayed by such Doctrines, which
seemed to me as foreign in nature, as place, to those of our Church, and the
Ancient.

I could have here given the Reader the names of above forty Tractates of this
nature, many of which have been translated into the English Tongue, to the
corrupting of weaker judgments. And not so much as the Christians of
New England have been wanting to the Interest of their Religion, so far as to
^mit so advantageous a Work, but by John Norton Teacher (as he calls himself)
of the Church at Ipswich in New England, have collected certain Principal Heads
of Divinity into a Body, called The Orthodox Evangelist.

And as the great number of foreign Books have incited me, so the Paucity of
the like, in, and from our Church, has no less emboldened me to undertake
this. I am prevented by Industrious Mr. Baxter, in giving any account of such
who have made attempts this way, and what has been done by them without
bringing their design to desired issue: Only that excellently Learned Person
Mr. Thorndyck (passed over by him) in his declining years, has given greater
demonstrations of his zeal and learning in behalf of the English Church, than
any extant before him, in one continued Body; purposing a Review in the Latin
Tongue, wherein he intended to have more clearly expressed his meaning in some
things, of which it might be said, as of St. Paul's writings, they were hard to
be understood: and he himself saw to be wrested to evil ends and senses: but
his declining body and years would not suffer him to accomplish so good a Work.

What Mr. Baxer himself has performed in his late large Volume, I shall not
give my censure: but how well he is qualified for such a Work, I may presume to
give the Reader in the words of Es^ Baxterus c^^is and desiinatis sententi^s
minime omnium hominun addictus, ut qui non plus faveat Presbyteriants quam
Independentibus, nec est infensus Hierarchicis, sed medius dubiusque partibus,
nisi in causa Dei and sanctitatis vitae. Ludovicus Molinaeus Patroni p. 12.
a great admirer of him. Baxter (says he) is of all men least addicted to any
resolute opinions, being one that favors not more the Presbyterians than the
Independents; neither is he sharp against the Episcopal Party, but between
them, and doubtful what side to take, except in the cause of God, and holiness
of Life. The greatest part of which Character is but too true: being as much
with me, as if he had said, He were of no Religion at all. For however Beza and
Cartwrights opinions of a certain and definite Discipline Essentially requisite
to a Church, as a Church is to Christian Religion, be by Puritans laid aside
for the present: and like embers buried up in the Ash-heap till they shall rise
again next day, and kindle a new fire; and now nothing but Get Christ, Purity
of Ordinances, is notorious amongst them, to the Vulgar; yet when people are
deceived by that, they call Pure and Powerful Preaching of Christ into new
Societies of their own Manufacture; then presently does most apparent Reason
and inevitable Necessity constrain them to invent, and impose new Covenants and
Bonds to conserve them in their new Fraternities, contrary altogether to that
General Liberty before propounded and promised them. No more than does the
charm of Christian Liberty sound in their ears. No more of the free use of
Indifferent things, so contrary to the Decrees and Practice of a Church, but
then come into credit again such sayings as these; There must be Order: There
must be Government: There must be unity in the Church: dealing herein with poor
simple Christians, as men do with their horse they would take up, carrying in
one hand provender, which they show him, and make a great noise with, and
behind them in the other hand, a bridle to hold him fast to them, and ride him
as they please.

And if Mr. Baxter be of no regulated determinate Society or Church, adheres to
no particular Communion, submits to no Government, nor Governors in special,
but to all, or any, as it should seem, be must bear it as well as he can, when
he bears himself (not out of passion or envy at his new and singular device of
going to heaven, but justice and reason) censured for a man of no Religion at
all, or if any, of his own making: which teaches him to persevere in that fond
and haughty design he once had, when he took upon him to top his Brethren of
the Ministry in the Western Parts, and to frame Grounds and Aphorisms for both
Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity of his own; with as little judgment and
humility as safety to the Church and State: as if he had aimed at nothing so
much, as to be according to foreign Phrase and Presidents, an Extraordinary
Pastor; without any Original or Rule, but from himself: but failing of this, he
now thinks it best to become an Extraordinary Sheep; of all, and no fold;
writing Books as uncertain and contrary, as himself, on all sides and for all
Palates: as if he had found out the Universal Character for Religions, like to
that of Languages; in which all men doing as he would have them, should agree
in going to Heaven. And now all that lately and most officious and serviceable
method of mounting our selves, and crushing and trampling on the necks of
others, and them our Governors, by most unjust and cruel acts, most false and
bitter language, must be laid aside, and thrown overboard, as the Turks did
their Cemiters, when they lost the day at the battle of Lepanto, not because
they liked them not, but because they could do them no more service; and least
they should come into the Christians hands, and be used against them. So indeed
Sectaries now-a-dayes call for modesty and moderation on all hands, casting
away that unchristian language which stood them in so much stead against them
they resolved to destroy, not without horrible Success.

And yet we see, while they call so charitably for moderation, and would have
no revilings of them that differ in opinions only; their churlish nature and
virulent tongues, cannot forget their wonted strains of dishonesty and extreme
spite and railings: witness one for all, the foresaid Ludovicus Molinaeus; who,
as civilly and reverently as he carries himself toward Mr. Baxter (for none of
his virtues we may be sure) as exorbitantly in the old Puritans language, and
on their Grounds, flies in the face of the Greatest and Best of the Rulers of
the Church and State too: who have at any time resolutely opposed the designs
and Schismatical devices of such unchristian Reformers as himself: only I must
confess he is favorable to his late Sacred Majesty, whose invincible Piety and
unparalled innocence of Life, and Ignominious, yet Glorious Death, has not
only struck Sectaries dumb, who once opened so loudly and perniciously against
him, but extorted cold commendations from them: not much unlike that
approbation given by that Parricide Antonius the Emperor, who when he
understood how the people of Rome magnified, and even de^fied his virtuous
Brother Geta, whom he had wickedly murdered, said, Sit Divus modo non sit
vivus; (i e.) Let him be Divine so he be not living. But whom does he, or his
Fellows (occasion serving) spare? Has he not raked the stinking Canal of all
^ld lies and feigned rumors invented to imbroyl the Church in Schism, and
Kingdom in Sedition and Blood, and endeavored to put new life into them, and
Authentize them to other Countries as well as ours?

It was soberly and seasonably said by that excellent Archbishop Speech
Delivered in the Star Chamber p. 2.
(whom he would traduce in basest manner, were not his merits above the
Calumnies of such wretched Fellows) in his Speech in the Starchamber, at the
Charge of Prin, Burton, and Bastwick, viz. There were times when Persecutions
were great in the Church, even to exceed Barbarity it self: Did any Martyr or
Confessor in those times Libel their Governors? Surely no; not one of them to
my best remembrance: yet these complain of Persecution without all show of
cause; and in the mean time, libel and rail without all measure: so little a
kin are they to those who suffer for Christ, or the least part of Christian
Religion. This witness is most true of these Cretians.

And it is my great glory, not only to be named among such eminent persons as
lately, but at present are living in our Church, whom this Molinaeus traduceth.
And why so? because of my rude usage of Mr. Daillee, whom I spit on (if any
will believe him) Lud. Molin. Antidure. Epist. p. 54.
rather then dispute against: That I spare not the memory of Diodate: That I am
no fairer to Mr. Bochartus. And why does be forget my railing too against his
Brethren the Puritans? This he might better say. But neither he nor any man
else can say that I imitate Puritans, in railing against my Betters or
Governors: that is their peculiar and inseparable virtue; and has been from the
first founding of the Discipline by Penrie, Whittingham, Goodman, and
Cartwright, with others, to the confounding of the Church, so far as lay in
their power. I ever was not only an approver, but an admirer of the personal
Gifts of Calvin and Beza, of Monsieur Daillee, and Monsieur Bochart, etc. but I
owe them no more respect in the cause of Religion than they do me, or any man
else of our Church: but I profess I owe more Reverence to the least of the
Bishops and Fathers of the Church, whom Puritans have so basely treated, then
to the greatest of them; and so do Sectaries too, as ill as they are galled to
hear of it.

But what, do I speak so irreverently (after all) against Mr. Daillee? Not a
word has this Zelote found in my whole Book against him, nor in that Action
against our Schismatics, whom I confess to have severely treated, in that I
give them their own; some men's dealings being so foul (as theirs have been)
that the very bare recitation of them is looked on as railing, though never so
faithfully done. If any of them, or their friends, can tell me wherein I have
done them wrong, in misreporting their Facts, I do here assure them I will make
them all the satisfaction I am able, in retracting and acknowledging my Error,
and that as publicly as I have injured them, with the next opportunity.
Cyprian, Optatus, Hierom, Austin, Nazianzen, and Chrysostom (as holy and sober
persons as they were in their Generations) made no great scruple to paint
Schismatics out in their Colors, with language which cuts where it goes: and I
am sure these upon no better grounds than they have, or can possibly offer, of
departing from, and dividing our Church, are no better. Nay, in this has the
Puritan Sectary transcended all Heretics and Schismatics that ever went
before them. For though diverse Factions were raised and fomented to a great
height in the Church of God of old, and Altar was erected against Altar, and
Chair against Chair (i. e.) Worship against Worship, and Governor against
Governor of the Church; yet do we find none, through all the Histories of the
Church, that ever became so presumptuous and desperate, as to endeavor the
total subversion of the Government of the Church in it self, and to set up
another in the room of it, quite of another nature, which we read not that
Aerius himself ever attempted, though he preached up the equality of Bishops and
Presbyters. And so far am I from such a spirit of meekness (I confess) that I
shall never smooth them, or their cause over so civilly, as to imply the
contrary, until they bethink themselves without their customary frauds and
dissimulations, of their duties, and return to the Peace and Unity of the
Church; which I shall not cease to pray for.

But one of the most material things charged on me is, That I liked Dailee's
Book the worse because it pleased the Puritans so much: which (says my Accuser)
is to be of the spirit of Maldonate the Jesuit. But he is mistaken. For
Maldonate indeed rejected a sense of Scripture which otherwise he approved,
because it was Calvin's. If I disliked Dailees opinions only because they were
Dailees, or our Puritans, he had been somewhat near the matter; but no such
thing has fallen from me. I disliked indeed his Book, because it so far
pleased the Puritans, that they were thereby notably confirmed in their
obstinate Opinions against the Authority of the Ancient, and our Present
Church. Here were evil effects also to be disliked.

Next let us bear how I abuse Diodate of Geneva, in that I rehearse this saying
of him against King Charles the first: viz. That Christ in the Gospel commands
us to forgive our enemies, but not our friends. This he calls Crassum
mendacium, A gross lie in me; whereas the lie (if there be any) must
necessarily be in himself, or his brother Puritan, Cook the Solicitor, against
King Charles the first, at his Sentence in that monstrous Court. For I no where
say of my self, that Diodate said those words, but I said that Cook reports
them as heard from Diodates own mouth: and I there give him the very Page where
those words are to be found: and this simple Quarreller and Vindicator of
Puritans, has no other way to evade this, then by a bold and senseless denial
of the thing so apparent.

Now to that excellently learned person Bochartus, what is it I say against
him, but that he would needs be meddling where it concerns him not; as the too
common practice has constantly been both of French and Dutch Divines? What
have they to do to interpose so often and uncharitably in behalf of Puritans as
they have? Is it not sufficient that they are not disquieted by us in their
singularities and inconformities to the perpetual constitution and orders of
Christ's Universal Church, but they must needs seek all occasions pragmatically
to animate Sectaries, to give them counsel and assistance, to give them
Communicatory Nisi me mea fallat opinio, afh^ mare au^^^ quamum familtaris
congress is gratia and l^p^re v^nour a Du^^llor antua illum a me superari
crationis scriptae nit^re and utilitate: cun ejus scriptio ^^ta prolixitate and
ariditate pariat fastidium and taedium lectori; hand dubium mea etiam ad
aperturam libri detmebit cum amaena and fincifera voluptate, capietque
desiderio alteriora legendi, nullis offuciis, Strephis, paralogismis, and
imprimis diverticulis cum a proposiio, tum a (...), and cardine litis
quaestioniqu^; quae inter Hi^ ra^chic ^^ and Puritanos vertitur deterritus and
con^^^s^^ ad aljiciendas chartas, ut in lectione vindiciarum Durellianarum.
Lud. Molin. ante Durel. Patroni. p. 2. 3.
Letters, in the height of their Seditions and Schisms, to write Apologies and
Vindications for them, as Bochartus has? In which, besides this, I think he
was in an error, to suppose that that great Truth he defends, of Subjects not
to take up Arms against their Sovereign, can be made good from the
Cabbalistical and Talmudical sayings of the Rabbis, upon which that Thesis is
chiefly built, and may be as easily pulled down by rejecting such Ornaments,
rather then Arguments of Speech. And this is all he objects against me in that
bold Work of his, saving several reproachful terms, which I will not trouble
any body with: Only concerning the Canina facundia, (i. e.) Dogged Eloquence he
taxes me with, I may tell him, I am not fit to be his, or his Brethrens
Scholar in such Speeches; And yet as Turpe est contra ardenter perversa
ass^rentes, (...) pra verita^^ frgidi res inveno i. Rus^ic. Diac. Advers.
Aceph^l
Rusticus Diaconus has it against the Acephali or headless Schismatics in his
days; It Is very absurd for us to be found more cool for the Truth, when we
write against such as vehemently assert the contrary. And concerning the
barbarousness and unevenness of my style, though I want not matter of defense
from several heads, I shall pass them over, and also his most polite and
elegant style, for which he praises himself so worthily and wisely; and only
refer the Reader to that one instance which he may find Page 2 and 3 of his
Patronus against Monsieur Durell: where this great and vainglorious Latinst,
while he magnifies his singular Talent of Elegance in the Latin Tongue, offends
in his tedious and ill-joynted Period against the Rules of Rhetoric, and in
worse concordance against the common Rules of Grammar: So unluckie is this man,
and that in more ways then I will object to him.

And now I must touch a farther occasion of my present undertaking; and that
was the many errors vented by dissenting persons in our Church, with which our
Adversaries commonly reviled us; as shall be seen by and by: in the mean time,
least any should suppose I go out Perkinsius qui in A^li^ (...) and (...) ^he,
legiae (...) ^xiul^^, and ^ujus (...) and (...) and (...) and (...). Vortius
Bi^lioth. l. 2 c. 3.
of the common road of foreign Reformers, so much trod by many Dissenters
amongst us, because I was not well skilled in Calvin's, Bezas, and Ursins Works,
I must tell them, they were the Authors first of all recommended unto me, and
read by me more then those of our own Church. And because I knew well of what
great account, as well abroad, as at home, Mr. Perkins his works were, I would
be no stranger in them: but finding in them a servile and credulous spirit, so
far addicted to such Modern Divines, that scarce any thing so new, harsh, or
inconsistent with the judgment of Antiquity fell from them, but Perkins
presently took it up for Scripture and Catholic Doctrine, and transcribed the
same into his Works: I have here collected in brief what I observed as
Heterodox in his Works, apt to corrupt young and injudicious Readers. But here
I shall say nothing of his known monstrous sense of Gods Decrees and
Predestination, but what a Learned Person, his great friend and defender has
said before me, Bishop Abbot in Thompson Di^^ c. 1. Perkinsius vir alt quin
eruditur and pius, (...), quam ille centra (...), c^ntra veteris Ecclesiae
fid^m cura l^ps^^ Alani absolu^^ d^cretam (...) non levem erravit. Perkins on
Gal. 3. v. 12.
Abbot: Perkins (says he) otherwise a very learned and godly man, in
describing Divine Predestination, which, contrary to our, and the Ancient
Church, he has determined to be decreed without the fall of Adam, has
committed no small Error.

1. The first I observe is his sense of Justification by Faith thus expressed:
The Gospel promises life to him that does nothing in the cause of his
Salvation, but only believes in Christ: and promises Salvation to him that
believes, yet not for his Faith, nor for any Works, but for the Merits of
Christ. The Law then requires doing unto Salvation, and the Gospel believing,
and nothing else. Both ends of this sentence are utterly false and scandalous
to Christianity it self; and most of all, as he there explains Non apprehendi
potest quod promittitur, nisi custoditu a fucrit (...) jubetur. Leo M. Ser. 9.
ad jejun. 7. Mensis. V. 18.
himself, thus; Believing and doing are opposed in the Article of
Justification, in our good conversation they agree: Faith goes before, and
Doing follows; but in the work of our Justification they are as fire and water.

To the same effect he speaks afterward: All which we have refuted, showing
that in no place of Scripture, are the works of Faith opposed to Faith in
Christ, in any consideration; but only the works of the Law, as opposite to, or
not done in Christ, nor in Faith.

2. Secondly, he says, A third benefit to them that believe in Id. ib. cap. 3.
p. 320.
Christ is, That they have liberty to live and serve God without fear of
damnation, or any other evil.

3. Thirdly, God never gave to any man power to effect a Chap. 3. and 5.
Miracle, either mediately or immediately. The Gift was Faith of Miracles. The
Faith was grounded upon the Revelation, and the Revelation was that God would
work such and such a Miracle when they prayed, commanded, or imposed hands.
This was invented still to drown all Christian Gifts and Graces in Faith.

4. Fourthly, The two Testaments, the Law and the Gospel, Id. ib. c. 1. P. 347.
are two in nature, substance, and kind. This I know is Calvin's Doctrine, and
his Followers; but not the Fathers, nor theirs, who follow them: For thus
writes Lactantius, The Jews use the Old Judaei veteri utuntur, nos novo, sed
tamen diversa non sunt, quia novum veteris a dimpletio es^: and in utreque Idem
Testator chrisius est. Lactant. l. 4. Instit. c. 20. Chrysostom. Tom. 7. Ser. 1.
p. 16. Iren. l. 4. c. 26. them. Fraeceptum timentitus Lex est, ama^tibus gratia.
Aug. ad Simpl. l. 1. qu. 1.
Testament, we the New; but yet they are not diverse, because the New is the
fulfilling of the Old, and Christ is the same Testator in both. And Chrysostom
thus, (...). If the New and old Testaments be divided as to time, yet they are
united as to their scope. And before both these, Irenaeus speaks thus, The
Precepts of perfect life are the same in both Testaments: and being the same,
declare the same God who urged particular Precepts agreeing with each, but the
most eminent and chief, without which we cannot be saved, are the same in both.
And after all these, and many more, Austin in sundry places affirms the same
thing, as does our Church Articles of Church of Eng. art. 7. Voet. Select.
Disp. part. 4. de lege and Evang q^^aest. 4.
It matters therefore not much with me, that Voetius would rather disgrace this
opinion, then disprove it by saying, The Socinians, and such as are much of the
same mind with them, as the Remonstrants and Papists, so hold: but his Party
deny it absolutely.

Fifthly, St. James cap. 2. v. 26. understands a pretended Faith or the
profession of Faith, as appears v. 14, 18. This does not appear any more than
it appears that such is that Faith whereby they hold they are justified. Why
have they, why can they not to this very day assign and describe plainly either
that special Act, or that special Proposition or Article of Faith whereby they
are justified without any works of Faith in Co-ordination to Faith or other
Graces.

Sixthly, There is no offense to say, He [ Christ] suffered the Ib. page 277.
Also on the Creed. p. 215.
pains of Hell so far forth, as this suffering might consist with the purity of
his Manhood, and with the truth of his personal union. This is right Calvin.

Seventhly, The Sacraments administered by the Second sort Id. Cases of
Conscience. l. 2. c 8.
(i. e.) ( Private Persons) having no authority ordinary is a mere nullity. If
this be true, what becomes of the Acts of diverse eminent Reformers, in case it
be proved they never had any Ordinary Authority, or Ordination? Why do not they
rebaptize those who are baptized by Independents, whom they must confess to
have no Ordinary Authority, or Ordination, or have renounced it, as some of
them have professed to my self?

Eighthly, Baptism is appointed of God to be no more but a seal Ib. p. 74.
annexed unto, and depending upon the Covenant. Afterward he repeats the same
in a far worse manner: As also on the Galatians. In Gal. p. 235.


Ninthly, If any man binds himself by Oath to live in single Perkins Cases of
Cons. p. 109, 110.
life without marriage, and after finds that God has not given him the gift of
Continence, in this case his Oath becomes impossible to be kept: and therefore
being reversed by God, and becoming unlawful, it may be broken without impiety.
This is a device to excuse we know whom, principally; and leaves men at liberty
to break such lawful vows, under pretense that God has denied his sufficient
Grace to keep them; and they are impossible to be kept: who shall determine
when God denies that Gift? Every man that is tempted to break his Vow?

Tenthly, The Vow of Regular obedience is against the word of God, 1 Cor. 7. 7.
ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men. And why is this so,
rather then for subjects to vow obedience to their Governors, and children to
their Parents? If you say, because God commands the latter, and not the
former; you imply that God could command contrary things; for this is to be
subject to man as well as that. St. Paul is quite mistaken by such Scholiasts
as thus interpret him.

Eleventhly, Whatsoever wants conformity to the Law of God Ib. p. 1. (...).
Nyssen. Catech. O rat c 7.
is sin, whether it be with consent of will or no. This supposes what is false,
viz. that any thing can be morally evil, the will altogether dissenting both as
to cause in general, and effect.

12. Zipporah's act of circumcising her child was a sin of Toleration. Ib. p. 8.
So is murder diverse times: and is this no other?

13. Second grace is nothing else but the continuance of the first grace. This
I wonder at as much as any thing in him, who advances Quid enim debet esse
incundius vel infirmis, gratid qud sanantur, vel pigris, gratid qud excitantur,
vel volentibus, gratra qud adjuventur. Aug. in Bonifacio Epist. 106. Cases of
Conscience, p. 66.
Grace so highly. It is contrary to Austin in many places, as (to name no more)
in his Epistle to Boniface, in these words distinguishing a threefold grace:
For what is more comfortable to the weak, then grace, whereby they are healed;
or to the sloathful, then grace, whereby they are quickened; or to the willing,
then grace, whereby they are helped?

14. Christ knew not that the fig tree had no figs on it till he came to it. He
might better have said, he knows not the day of judgment till it comes. The
Fathers Answer to the Arrians objecting this, will serve for both.

15. The fourth Commandment is Moral, and has nothing Ib. l. 2. c. ^4.
Ceremonial in it.

16. In regard of Conscience, Holiness, and Religion, all places Ib. p 78.
are equal and alike in the New Testament, since the coming of Christ. The
House, or Field, is as holy as the Church. And if we pray in either of them,
our prayer is as acceptable to God, as that which is made in the Church. The
contrary will appear afterward.

17. All virtues that are not joined with renovation and Ib. p. 335. Item Gal.
1. and 5.
change of Affection, are no better then sins. This point the Philosophers
never knew. No, I warrant them. For had they, they should have known more then
any good Christian, as it is thus crudely delivered. Austin vulgarly quoted,
favors it not.

18. Infidels do steal and usurp the blessings of God, to P. 14^.
which they have no just title, themselves being out of Christ. This is gross
enough, and dangerous.

19. In the Article of our Creed, Sitting at the right hand P. 174.
of God, signifies the inferiority of the Mediator in respect of the Father.
This wants a lusty grain of Salt.

20. The vow of single Life is a snare, or as the noose in the On Gal. 1. v. 7.
haltar, to strangle the Soul.

21. The third [ Succession] is of Doctrine alone: and thus our Ministers
succeed the Apostles, and this is sufficient. It is sufficient for the Peoples,
not Gods Ministers.

22. If in Turkey, or America, or elsewhere the Gospel should be Id Gal p. 196,
197.
received by the counsel and persuasion of private persons, they shall not need
to send into Europe for Consecrated Ministers, but they have power to choose
their own Ministers from within themselves: Because where God gives the word,
he gives the power also.

23. The Child of God falling into persecution and denying Id. Gal. 1. v. 22.
Christ -- is not guilty to condemnation: because, etc.

24. If, as Eusebius says in his Chronicle, Peter sat Bishop of Rome twenty
five years, then Peter lived in breach of the express commandment of God for so
long time, because the Jews were his special charge. Absurd and untrue.

25. We are born Christians, if our Parents believe, and not P. 235.
made so in Baptism.

26. The Sacraments are said to apply Christ, in that P. 242.
they serve to confirm Faith, whose office it is to apply, etc.

27. All the works of Regenerate men are sinful, and in the P. 381.
rigor of justice deserve damnation. Well therefore may he say this of
unregenerate men: but neither is it true so far of one or other, but the not
doing of such good works is much more damnable: It is true properly that they
do not of themselves save, but not so that they damn.

28. There be three parts of Penance, Contrition of heart, Id. Papist cannot go
beyond a reprobate. p. 396.
Confession of the mouth, Satisfaction in the deed: All these three Judas
performed.

29. As long as a man has his Conscience to accuse him of Ibid.
sin before God, he is in a state of Damnation, as St. John says 1 Ep. 2. 10.
St. John says not so.

30. The Church of Rome teaches that Original Sin is done Ib. p. 397.
Advertisement to the Roman Church. p. 622. Vol. 1.
away in Baptism. This is called a damnable Error: as if only the Chapter of Rome
held so, and it were not unanimously held by the Fathers.

31. That we believe the Catholic Church, it follows that the Catholic Church
is invisible.

32. We esteem of Repentance only as a fruit of Faith, and Reform. Catholic p.
615.
the effect or efficacy of it, is to testify the Remission of our sins, and
our reconciliation before God.

33. There is a twofold conversion, Passive and Active: Ib. p. 613. 614.
Passive is an Action of God, whereby he converteth man, being yet unconverted.

These are the Heterodox Dogmes which Mr. Perkins sucked in from Calvin's
Divinity, upon whose sleeve he seemed to have pined his faith; notwithstanding
Scripture is so vehemently pretended, which will warrant none of them. And by
these credulously assented to, and preached contrary to the mind of our Church,
by vulgar and lazy Divines, who would take no care or pains to look into the
Scriptures, or the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, but through such men's
Spectacles, have diversity of opinions been bred in the common peoples mind, to
their dislike of their Governors, and at last such a rupture as has wasted
and almost consumed us.

But here I am to give the curious Reader notice, least I may seem to
mis-report any thing quoted out of Mr. Perkins, according to the pages, that
upon examining them, and comparing them on this occasion, I find what I took no
notice of at first reading of his Works, that I followed two several Editions
of his Works in Folio: the one of the year 1626, and the other of the year
1631, which not having by me I could not rectify, but doubt not but they are
to be found in one of them.

And now because I perceive the Papists triumph when they can find such
blemishes in our Church, and charge it with all these, and such like, which
they may find among dissenters, I shall set down likewise their principal
accusations, as I find them collected and summed up by Fitz-Simons: Henricus
Fitzsimon Brittannomachia minist. l. 2 c. 3.
and the rather because he professes to have taken them out of a much more wise
and learned Adversary to us then himself, Alanus Copus, otherwise called
Nicolas Harpsfield; and they are these following:

1. The first Error he lays to our charge, is that we hold There are only two
Sacraments. This we stand to, as commonly explained by our Church.

2. Infants belong to the people of God before they are Baptized. This indeed
is the opinion of Sectaries, which Perkins before cited might have led them
into; but not of our Church, nor the Ancient Church; as may appear most
evidently from the testimony of (...) Theod. Haerer. Fab. l. 5. c. 28.
Theodoret, who in the behalf of the Catholic Church, absolutely disowns
unbaptized persons as Sons of God, though they believed and embraced the
Catholic Doctrine; telling us that the Church would by no means suffer such to
say the Lords Prayer: accounting it an horrible thing for any to call God
Father before he was baptized, speaking thus: This Prayer we teach not such who
are not initiated, but such as are partakers of that Mystery: For none that are
not initiated into that Mystery, dares say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc. not having received that Grace of Adoption.

3. The true Body of Christ is not in the Eucharist, nor any thing but the
substance of Bread. Sure this fierce Accuser forgets himself. Do we not also
hold the substance of Wine remains in the Eucharist, as well as that of bread?
Nay, do we not profess * Christ's Church C^techism.
Body and Blood are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
Lords Supper? And can they there be received, unless they be there? but the art
of such rampant, ignorant, and malicious Factors for the Roman Church, ever
consisted principally in wilful bungling, and by false stating of the
differences between us and them, to beguile the weak and unwary.

4. That the Communion under both kinds is necessary: It is as necessary under
both, as under one. The contrary is the Sacrilegious Error of the Romanists.

5. A Priest may not communicate alone. Another grievous Error, that we cannot
endure, Nonsense, nor to see Christ's institution bafled by such a ridiculous
Communion unknown to Antiquity.

6. It is unlawful to reserve or elevate the Eucharist. Not simply, as the
Ancient Church did, only to signify how Christ was lifted up on the Cross: but
as practiced in the Roman Church, to the intent direct and divine Worship be
given it.

7. Wicked men eat not the Body of Christ. Sure enough, in a proper sense, not
denominatively only, as the consecrated Elements are called the Body of Christ,
very often and currently.

8. That they who communicate not, are to be put out of the Church. This is
such an Error as the Ancient Church was guilty of as well as we, as your own
Vicecomes shows at large. Vicecomes Vol. 3. l. 1. c. 18.


9. The Keys of the Church consist only in opening the Word of God. No such
thing is held by us.

10. Private Confession is to be taken away. Not so much as Sectaries say this
absolutely.

11. The Ceremonies of the Church are to be abrogated. Simply and falsely said,
and directly contrary to the Articles of our Artic. 20.
Church.

12. Prayers in the Latin Tongue are barbarous, and against St. Paul's Precept.
Very true: where they are at first so instituted, and understood by very few or
none, and so are they in the English Tongue, or any other.

13. No man can fulfill the Law. This is true, or false, as it may be taken.

14. More Masses then one cannot be said in one day in one Church. Here our
Accuser says he knows not what: For neither does our Church inhibit more then
once to officiate Liturgically; neither did the Ancient Church practice, if
permit it, for above four hundred years after Christ: as appears from Dioscorus
Bishop of Alexandria, consulting with Leo the first, Bishop of Rome, what he
should Leo 1 Epist. 79, or as some So. See also Grecian consecr. Did. c. 51.
do, when Christians were so numerous, that they could not all be received into
the Church, at once? who answered: In such cases he might safely reiterate the
office. And the Council of Antisiodorum or Auxere held about the Year 578,
decreed that but one Mass should be said upon one Altar in one day: which is as
much observed by the Church of Rome nowadays, as other Canons of Councils
which lie in their way, thrown out. And where in the Ancient Church do you read
of above one Altar in one Church?

15. Unity is no Note of the Church. Discords and Divisions are certain signs
of Errors; but Unity is no certain sign of Truth; nor so much as of a Church,
how then can it be of a true Church?

16. Universal Councils may be repealed by Particular. This See Petrus
Gregorius Syntagm. l. 15. c 3.
is nothing: he might have said by particular persons, as the Popes: who may,
according to that Church, null Acts of Councils Ecumenical. But we only hold
that in things mutable, according to the condition Article 34.
of Time, Place, and other Circumstances, rendering some Decrees prejudicial to
some Churches, contrary to the intention of the first Ordainers of them, a
Provincial Church may make alterations.

17. The Church may err in Faith. And what of that? meaning any one Individual
single Church; as the Roman has, according to our Articles.

18. The Precepts of the Church concerning set Fasts are, A Doctrine of Devils.
It is rather a Doctrine of Devils to teach so.

19. Peter was not the Prince of the Apostles. Peter was A, or, if you will,
The Principal Apostle: but he was not the Prince of any one of them, much less
of all.

20. The Bishop of Rome is Antichrist. We are not so much agreed about this
point, as to give in a full verdict: but we agree, he is Antichristian.

21. The difference concerning Leaven and Easter is inconsiderable. Where no
danger of Schisms or confusions may alter the case, it is true.

22. It is Heathenish to invoke Saints that reign with Christ. Whether
heathenish or no, may be doubted, they never worshipping any relating to
Christ: But for all that, it may be, and is superstitious and idolatrous in the
sense very current in the Roman Church.

23. The Relics of Saints are not to be worshipped. We hold so indeed: though
we hold they are to be respected relatively.

24. The Saints in Heaven have no merits. It is true, taken strictly and
properly.

25. Indulgences of the Church are vain. They are not only vain but wicked, and
generally blasphemous and ridiculous, as mang^ed by the Church of Rome,
contrary, or at least without all Precedents of the Christian Church, for many
hundred years, viz. in remitting Sins or Punishments after this life, and that
diverse times before they are committed. Is not this fine, and wonderful
ancient, and Catholic?

26. Nothing is to be read in the Church besides Canonical Scripture. This is
rank Puritanism, contradicted by themselves in their practice, who read their
Sermons, as well as others: and pray (which is aequivalent to reading in this
case) out of their own heads rather than Scripture.

27. In Ecumenical Councils and Private for the explaining of the Doctrine of
Faith, the consent of Lay-Princes is necessary. It is necessary for the orderly
assembling of such Councils. It is necessary for the giving any Secular
enforcement unto them.

28. That it is lawful for Laymen alone, the Clergy opposing, to introduce the
Ancient Religion. This is true no farther then that of Gerson, which is
alleged to this purpose: A Layman with Scripture on his side, is to be
preferred before a Council without it. Supposing a monstrous Proposition no
wonder if a monstrous conclusion follows.

29. He is no Bishop that teaches not. This is also a Puritan strain: It being
only true, that he is no faithful, conscientious Pastor, but either proud, or
treacherous, or sloathful, or basely prudent, who does not in person discharge
his Office so far as he is able, without turning the care of his flock over to
others: using that for an argument of keeping close in his Cabin, which is
rather an argument of appearing in his charge; viz. storms on the Church,
Opposition the Faith and Orders of the Church meet withal, and difficulties
obstructing the truth: It being both shameful and ridiculous, both in Bishop
and Priest, to censure others for enemies to the Church, and for them so to
wast it, in all men's esteem, in deserting it, and delivering it up to the care
of others; themselves seeking little else then their temporal Harvest and case.
These men are over the Church indeed, but it is as the Extinguisher is over the
Candle, to put it out. They pretend for themselves they have been sufferers for
the Church: and so it should seem indeed by their carriage to it, in that
through their scandalous negligence, as to their charge, they take a course to
revenge themselves of it, by making it suffer as much, or more for them.

30. Faith alone justifies. How this is held, we have even now, as also we
shall hereafter more fully explain.

31. There are no Merits in Good works. There are none properly so called.

32. Priests and Monks may marry. It Is true where the Church has not denied
that Liberty, and where they have made no Vow to the contrary, bereaving
themselves of that Liberty.

33. There is no Purgatory. It Is little less then Heretical, to Artic. Chur-
Eng. 22.
affirm there is in the Roman sense.

34. There is no external Sacrifice. Most true in a strict proper sense.

35. Devils cannot be driven away by Holy Water, and the Sign of the Cross. By
these alone, we have few or none Instances in the Ancient Church, that Devils
were cast out of the Possessed. But many we find, and those most authentic
and undeniable, whereby it appears that the ancient Christians, even to St.
Chrysostoms days, did exorcise, or cast out Devils by Prayers and Humiliation,
with which were used the sign of the Cross; but not so ancient was Holy Water
to that purpose. And though we look on this as the Gift of Miracles, formerly
more general and effectual then nowa-days it is any where honestly to be found,
yet neither do we deny such power absolutely, nor hold such unnecessary Rites
utterly unlawful to be used.

36. It is unlawful, and an horrible wickedness for a man to erect the Image of
Christ in Christian Temples. No such matter: The wickedness consists in giving
it the accustomed Worship in the Church of Rome.

And thus have I given certain Instances of the injurious dealings of both
extremes against us, as by themselves stated: it being my design in the ensuing
Treatise to state, rather then largely dispute, matters more equally, and
thereby to discover the frauds and falsities current against us. I shall now
requite their pains in collecting falsely and fraudulently the opinions of our
Church, by a sincere and faithful proposing of the Heretical and pestilent
Dogmes of the Roman Church, as I find them laid down and maintained by
Bellarmine; that so even common reason, if not sense of indifferent Christians
may judge which Church holds most contrary Doctrines to Gods and Man's Laws.

1. The Books by us called Apocryphal, and so proved by Bellarm. De Verho Dei
l. 1. c. 7.
the general Consent of the Church in all Ages, are Canonical and properly
Divine.

2. It is neither convenient nor profitable, that the Scriptures L. 2. c. 15.
16.
or Prayers of the Church should be in the Vulgar Tongue.

3. All things necessary to Faith and Holy Life are not contained L. 4. c. 3.
in the Scriptures; but Traditions also.

4. Scriptures without Tradition are not simply necessary, C. 4.
nor sufficient.

5. The Apostles applied not their minds to write by God's C. 4.
command, but as they were constrained by a certain necessity.

6. Scriptures are not Rules of Faith, but as a certain C. 12.
Monitorie to conserve and nourish the Doctrine received.

7. Heretics deny, but Catholics affirm Peter to be the De Romans Pontif. l. 1.
c. 2.
Head of the Universal Church, and made a Prince in Christ's stead.

8. When Christ said, Simon son of John (so the Vulgar L. 4. c. 1.
Translation in Bellarmine corruptly for Jonas) Feed my Sheep, he spoke only to
Peter, and gave him his Sheep to feed, not exempting the Apostles.

9. Whether the Pope may be an Heretic or not, it is to be L. 4. c. 2.
believed of the whole Church, that he can no ways determine that which is
Heretical.

10. Neither the Pope, nor the particular Roman Church, C. 4.
can err in Faith.

11. The Pope cannot only not err in Faith, but neither C. 5.
in Precepts of Manners, which are prescribed the whole Church, and which are
concerning things necessary to Salvation, or things in themselves good or evil.

12. The Pope alone has his Jurisdiction immediately from C. 24.
Christ; but all other Bishops their ordinary Jurisdiction immediately from the
Pope.

13. The Pope has Supreme power indirectly in all Temporal L. 5. c. 1. and 6.
matters, by reason of his Spiritual power. This is the opinion of all
Catholic Divines.

14. The Pope, as Pope, may not ordinarily depose Temporal Ibid c. 6.
Princes, though there be just cause, as he may Bishops; yet he may change
Kingdoms, and take them away, and give them to another, as the highest
Spiritual Prince, if it be needful to the Salvation of Souls.

15. As to Laws, the Pope, as Pope, cannot ordinarily make a Ibid.
Civil Law, or establish or make void Laws of Princes: because he is not the
Political Prince of the Church: yet he may do all these, if any Civil Law be
necessary to the Salvation of Souls, and Kings will not make them, and so if
Laws be pernicious to Souls, and Kings will not abolish them.

16. Though the Pope translated the Empire, and gave a De Translat. Imp. l. 3 c
4.
Right to choose a Prince, yet he transferred not, nor gave that power Supreme
and most ample, which himself had of Christ over all the Church. And therefore,
as when the Cause of the Church required, he could translate the Empire from
the Greeks to the Germans, in like manner might he translate it from the
Germans to another Nation, upon the like reason, etc.

17. No obedience is due to a Prince from the Church, C^^. Ber^^^. c. 31. Tom.
7.
when he is excommunicated by public Authority. The Pope and his Predecessors
never forbad Subjects to obey their Princes: for being once deposed by them,
they were no longer lawful Princes. This is it we teach.

18. To call General Councils belongs properly to the Tom. 2. de Council. l. 1.
c. 12.
Pope: yet so, that the Emperor may do it with his consent.

19. Particular Councils confirmed by the Pope cannot err L. 2. c 5.
in Faith and Manners.

20. The Pope is simply and absolutely above the whole C. 17.
Church, and above a General Council: so that he may not acknowledge any
Judicature on earth above him.

21. The Church is a Company of men professing the L. 3. c. 2.
same Christian Faith, joined together in the Communion of the same Sacraments,
under the Government of lawful Pastors; and especially One Vicar of Christ on
earth, the Bishop of Rome.

22. Purgatory may be proved out of the Old and New De Purga^. 1. c. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8.
Testament.

23. Purgatory is a Doctrine of Faith; so that he who believes Cap. 15.
not Purgatory, shall never come there, but shall be tormented in Hell in
everlasting burning.

24. Invocation of Saints may be proved from Scripture. De Sanct. Bea^^^d l. 1.
c. 19.


25. It Is lawful to make the Image of God the Father in De Reliq. c. 8.
the form of an Old Man, and of the Holy Spirit, in the form of a Dove.

26. The Images of Christ and of Saints are to be worshipped, L. 2. c. 21. De
Imag.
not only by accident and improperly, but also by themselves properly, so that
they may terminate Worship, as considered in themselves, and not only as they
bear the place of the Example.

27. It may be granted that Images may be worshipped C. 23.
improperly, and by accident, with the same kind of worship C. 24.
with which the Exemplar, but not for their own sakes and properly --: and
therefore Latria is not properly and for themselves to be given for them.

28. A Vow is an Act of Religion due to God only, like L. 3. c. 9. De cultu
sanctor.
as an Oath and Sacrifice; as appears from the Scriptures, whose Vows are
constantly said to be made to God -- Yet it is most certain that in some
manner, Vows may be made to Saints.

29. It is not probable that Christ [in these words, this is De Eucharist. l.
1. c. 9.
my Body] would speak figuratively.

30. One Body may be in diverse places at once. L. 3. c. 3.


31. That the Elements in the Eucharist are turned into L. 3. per. tot.
Christ's Body.

32. It is a truth necessary to be believed, that whole L. 4. c. 21. and 22.
Christ is in the kind of Bread, and whole Christ is in the kind of Wine.

33. No more Grace is contained in one kind, then in C. 23.
both.

34. Worshipping the Host excuses from Idolatry, because C. 29.
they believe there is no Bread remaining, and no Catholic holds that Divine
Worship is to be given to Bread.

35. Our Sacrifice is truly and properly called a Sacrifice, L. 2. de missa c.
2.
no less than the ancient Sacrifices, as is shown in the former Book.

36. The Rite of Reconciling Sinners after Baptism, which De Paenit. lib.
consists of Repentance, discovered by external signs, and the word of
Absolution, Catholics affirm to be a true and proper Sacrament.

37. There is a treasure of superfluous Merits in the Church, De Indulg. l. c.
2, 3, 11.
which may by the Pope be applied to the benefit of other persons, by
Indulgences.

38. The Catholic Church does openly affirm Extreme Unction De Extrem. Unct.
c. 1.
to be truly and properly a Sacrament.

39. Orders are a Sacrament truly and properly so called. De Ord. c. 1.


40. Matrimony of Believers is a proper Sacrament. De Matrim. c. 1.


To these, innumerable other might be added of strange nature to the Word of
God, and belief and practice of the ancient Church: but these are more then
sufficient to confront those vainly objected to us by them: whereof some are
most false, others most true, others false or true, as they may be taken.

And now the manner of proceeding in this Discourse being propounded to be
touched in the second place, here must not be forgotten. In which I confess I
have not a little varied from my first intention and resolution, which were in
a plain compendious way, to set down the Principal Doctrine of Faith and
Worship, agreeable to God's Holy Word, and to the mind of the best Ancient
Churches, as well as our Own; and that without Passion or particular Reflections
on any Party or Person by name: knowing that of Synesius to be most true, (...)
Synes. Ep 57.
That Soul which would be a Vessel to receive God, must be void of all Passions.

But finding some things both approved and disproved by me, would scarce be
credited without such instances, I held my self obliged to forsake that
resolution in the process of my Discourse, and a little in the beginning, where
I was forced by ill Paper and Ink to write somewhat over the second time, to
make it legible: Otherwise I determined to avoid Names and Testimonies of
Authors, after the manner of them who before me have written Institutions and
Sums of this nature. Yet have I not taken upon me, in an imperious way, to
multiply Canons and Axioms, and impose them with expectation of greater faith
in them, then such men will allow to the Decrees of the Holy Councils, so
called. And this with a persuasion, I know not how, or why wrought into
credulous persons, that now-a-dayes only, Scripture is understood, and they
only speak Scripture, but others humane Inventions. Which most bold demand,
it is a wonder how many prone naturally to superstitious novelties do, without
the least suspicion of vanity and falsity, readily receive for a most certain
and fundamental Truth; but is indeed a fundamental Error, and the root of all
Heresy toward the Faith; and of all Schism toward the Church. I remember how
some years since, enquiring of one very near to me, what Divinity his Tutor
grounded him in, he answered me, Wollebius. And farther inquiring, what
Wollebius said of a certain point, he replied, as he there found it: against
which when I put in my exception, he wondered at me, and indeavored to silence
me, by telling me, It was a Canon. I have not here proceeded so Canonically as
others, nor yet so Polemically: but considering, according to St. John's
distinction, that there are Children in Christ, 1 John 2. 13.
and Young men, and Old men, commonly called Incipientes, Prosicientes, and
perfecti, (i. e.) Beginners, Proficients, and Perfect men; I have here pitched
upon the mean sort of these to whom to direct my Labors; knowing there were but
too many Catechises amongst us for the former, and too few Treatises, or none
for the second. And that to write Polemically for the satisfaction of the
third, required another more proper language, and a more Scholastical Person,
and much more large Volumes then this one; though this Book has increased
under my hands well nigh thrice as much as I at first intended. And in truth,
it is to be lamented and blushed at, that none of the Learned men of our Church
have yet appeared in so noble and necessary a Work, as the fuller and more
entire managing of the Elenctical part of Divinity, to the preventing daily
mischiefs arising from the necessity of repairing to our Enemies of both sides,
to perfect Theological Studies, without the due balance on our side to prevent
prejudice. I hope God will stir up the spirits of some to set their hands to,
and enable them to go through so good a Work.

Voetius of Utrecht, than whom I think none of this Age has Certum autorem
ejus qui solid, compendiose, and accommodate ad nestra tempora he ^gat,
h^ctenus non vidi, expectandum est ergo, etc. Voetius Bibl. l. 2. c. 5.
been acquainted with more modern Authors, much complains for want of some
compendious Body of Elenctical Divinity, which to that day he had not seen:
And therefore expected that long defired Piece of Famous Altingius, should at
length come forth; which was only in the hands of his Scholars, in writing. Yet
I find this Work of Henricus Altingius to have been published the same year
with Voetius his Bibliotheca; viz. Anno 1654. and called Theologia Elenctica
Nova: viz. New Elenctical Divinity: which in truth has not its name New for
nothing; in that manner of handling Divinity as none before him; and the Matter
it self far from judicious or solid, in many places.

Much more wisely and learnedly had Joannes Forbesius of Aberdeen in Scotland,
set forth his Controversial Work, called Instruct. Hist. Theol. l. 4. c. 4. 29.
Instructiones Historico- Theologicae: yet imperfect, as it should seem by
himself, who refers us to the twenty forth and twenty fifth Book of that Work,
there being extant only sixteen. And surely, as the Book argues great Learning
in the Author, so might it have proved no less beneficial to the Christian
World, had there been less compliance with Calvin in it: which might be the
reason that it found not that entertainment in England, that otherwise it might
have had: but was commended and published to the World by Andrew Rivett: the
Dutch Divines giving full approbation thereunto: to whom, it should seem,
declining the judgment of that Church he stood more obliged to, he submitted
his Work: which yet might be excused in part, it being a time (viz. 1645.) when
such havoc and dissipation of the English Church was made by the Calvinizing
Scots and Scotizing English, as were not to be excused, nor ever forgotten.

For mine own particular, I would not have any to expect here a Book of
Preaching or Devotion: of both which (and especially the former) there seems to
be little want amongst us; so neither purely Scholastical, but serving to all
these purposes: And therefore I have wrote it in the English Tongue, aiming at
no higher end, than to profit those of our own Church and Nation: And therefore
I call it An Introduction, intimating my principal Intention to be, to prepare
the way to the Readers ascent from this, to more high and ample Disquisitions:
And this farther, according to the mind of the Church of England, I say this
was my Purpose: I do not say that this I have always exactly and infallibly
attained, any more than those Learned Writers before me, who have endeavored
to give us the sum of the Laws of our Nation, as I have of the Religion of our
Church, have attained their ends, according to their desires, and therefore
much less to the expectation of others.

Wherefore the Apology, which Learned Dr. Cowell used to the Reader of his
Institutions of the English Laws, with some little variation may aptly enough
serve my turn against the proneness of some Censurers whom it may offend, that
I take upon me to determine what the Church of England holds: when as there is,
and always will be, and that in all Churches, some Diversity in the Writers.

But as Littleton of old advised his Son, so would I advise Vt autem
Littletonus suum ^um, sic ego v^^ praemonitus mult^o magis esse cupio, ne omnia
huc congesta Juri n^stro consentanea, statim ex^^i^etis. Neque enim hoc opus
est n^strae ^talia tamen esse non injuria forte polliceor, etc. Johan. Cowellus
Praefat. Institut. Juris Anglic.
you much more, that ye do not presently persuade your selves that all things
here collected are agreeable to our Law, for this is past our power: Yet such I
may promise them to be, as will not be unprofitable. -- And I may safely add,
I have not invented any thing which I know to be repugnant to the Established
Faith or Worship amongst us.

The Method that I here use, I hope is not obscure, nor unuseful to the Reader,
nor Illogical; but consisting of parts cohering with one another, and
succeeding each other visibly enough: though I know well I might have
subdivided several Chapters and Heads into more distinct Sections; and
peradventure might have erred and offended more on the other hand: as Seneca
has observed Philos^phiam in parts, n^n in frusira dividamidividi enim illam,
non concidi, utile est. Nam comprehendere quemadmedum maxima, i^ minima did
^^le est. Senec. Epist. 89. -- (...) Greg. Nyss^de vira Mosis, p. 180.
(and daily may be seen in the Compendiums on this Subject, of Foreign Writers)
they do, who are too curious; confounding by distinguishing. In the general
Division of this into two Parts I follow Gregory Nyssene, who summeth up all
Religion under these two Heads, Worship, which he calls (...), and the other a
Right Understanding of the true Nature of God. Only Natural Reason teaching
every man that he must Know aright, before he can Do aright, I have set
Knowledge, which is the same with Faith in a Christian, in the first place, and
Worship in the Second Part of this Draught of Religion.

It remains now that, according to the custom of Adventurers into the Censure
of this captious Age, I should bespeak the favorable opinion, and friendly, or
rather (in this case) charitable acceptance of my present endeavors, from the
true Christian Reader; for from others, my hopes are very small: but I shall
only crave the removing of that prejudice, and improving of that Purity of
Intention in the reading, which I may with a good Conscience profess to have
had in the writing. And especially shall pray God to prosper it to those
dissenting Brethren amongst us, who, I fear, are no less apt to take offense
then our professed Enemies; as disagreeing from their persuasions in many
things: But that is none of my fault. But my hearts desire and prayer to God is
(with St. Paul) Romans 10. 1.
that they might be saved: For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge.

To inform therefore such, was my principal design, as likewise to exhort them
in the fear, and for the love of God and the Truth, to consider at length, and
lay seriously to heart the scandalous and most pernicious evil of that
Division, for which as yet they have given no tolerable reason: which they can
with any confidence persuade themselves will hold before God.

And having themselves wrote so many and horrible things against such Schism,
all their allegations and complaints against their Governors for hard usage of
their tender Consciences, are no more to be regarded by the Church, than the
froward cries and carriage of Children, when their Parents would look their
Heads, and take out their Vermin. For what is that moderation and compounding
with us, they sometimes offer, and excuse themselves from the foresaid
accusations by, as if they sought Peace and Unity, but to imitate the worst of
Bankrupts, and thrive by breaking; now their open and most cruel dealings
toward us have failed them? And which is most unreasonable of all, neither
can, nor will give any just assurance of persevering in a true and cordial
communion with the Church so modelled, as they propound in their Moderation,
until it becomes such as they could wish: and that is quite to overthrow the
whole visible constitution of it; as their Oaths and Covenants, not disclaimed,
bind them. And to stick so immoveably, as too many do, at lighter things, such
as Rites and Ceremonies, which cannot possibly be convicted of moral evil, and
so unconcernedly to omit the weightier matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy
(or Charity in Unity) and Faith, what can Charity call this but mere
Pharisaism? and where must such Pharisaism end at length, but in Sadducism,
even denying of the Blessings and Curses of a Future Life? For (as Drusius has
Si Patres nostri selvissent m^r^^^s resurrectur^, and praemia manner ^ustos
^^st hanc vitam, n^n tantopere r^bellassent. Drusius in Mat. c 3. v. 7. Item in
c. 22, 23.
observed) it was one Reason alleged by the Sadduces against the Resurrection,
If our Fathers had known the dead should rise again, and rewards were prepared
for the Righteous, they would not have rebelled so often: not conforming
themselves to Gods Rule (as is pretended by all) but conforming the Rule of
Sin, and of Faith it self to the good Opinion they had of their own Persons and
Actions: which Pestilential Contagion now so Epidemical, God of his great Mercy
remove from us, and cause health and soundness of Judgment, Affection, and
Actions to return to us, and continue with us, to the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. OF the Nature and Grounds of Religion in General: Which are not so
much Power as the Goodness of God, and Justice in the Creature. And that Nature
it self teaches to be Religious. Chap. II. Of the constant and faithful
assurance requisite to be had of a Deity. The reasons of the necessity of a
Divine Supreme Power. Socinus refuted, holding the knowledge of a God not
natural. Chap. III. Of the Unity of the Divine Nature; and the Infiniteness of
God. Chap. IV. Of the diversity of Religions in the World. A brief censure of
the Gentile and Mahumetan Religion. Chap. V. Of the Jewish Religion. The
pretense of the Antiquity of it nulled. The several erroneous grounds of the
Jewish Religion discovered. Chap. VI. The vanity of the Jewish Religion showed,
from the proofs of the true Messiah long since come, which are many. Chap. VII.
The Christian Religion described. The general Ground thereof, the revealed Will
of God. The necessity of Gods revealing himself. Chap. VIII. More special
Proofs of the truth of Christian Religion: and more particularly from the
Scriptures being the Word of God, which is proved by several reasons. Chap. IX.
Of the several Senses and Meanings according to which the Scriptures may be
understood. Chap. X. Of the true Interpretation of Holy Scriptures. The true
meaning, not the letter, properly Scripture. Of the difficulty of attaining the
proper sense, and the Reasons thereof. Chap. XI. Of the Means of interpreting
the Scripture. That they who understand Scripture are not for that authorized
to interpret it decisively. The Spirit not a proper Judge of the Scriptures
sense. Reason no Judge of Scripture. There is no Infallible Judge of Scripture,
nor no necessity of it absolute. The grounds of an Infallible Judge examined.
Chap. XII. Of Tradition as a Means of understanding the Scriptures. Of the
certainty of unwritten Traditions; that it is inferior to Scripture, or
written Tradition. No Tradition equal to Sense or Scripture in Evidence. Of the
proper use of Tradition. Chap. XIII. Of the nature of Faith. What is Faith. Of
the two general grounds of Faith. Faith divine in a twofold sense. Revelation
the formal reason of Faith Divine. Of the several senses and acceptations of
Faith. That Historical, Temporary, and Miraculous Faith are not in nature
distinct from Divine and Justifying Faith. Of Faith explicit and implicit.
Chap. XIV. Of the effects of true Faith in General, Good Works. Good Works to
be distinguished from Perfect Works. Actions good four ways. Chap. XV. Of the
effect of Good Works, which is the effect of Faith. How Works may be
denominated, Good. How they dispose to Grace. Of the Works of the Regenerate.
Of the proper conditions required to Good Works, or Evangelical. Chap. XVI. Of
Merit as an effect of Good Works. The several acceptatations of the word Merit:
What is Merit properly. In what sense Christians may be said to merit. How far
Good Works are efficacious unto the Reward promised by God. Chap. XVII. Of the
two special effects of Faith and Good Works wrought in Faith, Sanctification
and Justification: what they are. Their agreements and differences. In what
manner Sanctification goes before Justification; and how it follows. Chap.
XVIII. Of Justification as an effect of Faith and Good Works. Justification and
Justice to be distinguished, and how. The several Causes of our Justification.
Being in Christ, the principal cause. What it is to be in Christ. The means and
manner of being in Christ. Chap. XIX. Of the efficient cause of Justification.
Chap. XX. Of the special Notion of Faith: and the influence it has on our
Justification. Of Faith solitary, and only. Of a particular and general Faith.
Particular, Faith no more an Instrument of our justification by Christ, than
other coordinate Graces. How some ancient Fathers affirm that Faith without
Works justify. Chap. XXI. A third effect of justifying Faith, Assurance of our
Salvation. How far a man is bound to be sure of his Salvation, and how far this
assurance may be obtained. The Reasons commonly drawn from Scripture proving
the necessity of this assurance, not sufficient, etc. Chap. XXII. Of the
contrary to true Faith, Apostasy, Heresy, and Atheism. Their Differences. The
difficulty of judging aright of Heresy. Two things constituting Heresy: the
evil disposition of the mind, and the falsness of the matter. How far, and when
Heresy destroys Faith. How far it destroys the Nature of a Church. Chap.
XXIII. Of the proper subject of Faith, the Church. The distinction and
description of the Church. In what sense the Church is a Collection of Saints.
Communion visible as well as invisible, necessary to the constituting a Church.
Chap. XXIV. A preparation to the knowledge of Ecclesiastical Society or of the
Church, from the consideration of humane Societies. What is Society. What
Order. What Government. Of the Original of Government; Reasons against the
peoples being the Original of Power: and their Right to frame Governments.
Power not revocable by the people. Chap. XXV. Of the Form of Civil Government.
The several sorts of Government. That Government in general is not so of Divine
Right, as that all Governments should be indifferently of Divine Institution,
but that One especially was instituted of God, and that Monarchical. The
Reasons proving this. Chap. XXVI. Of the mutual Relations and Obligations of
Sovereigns and Subjects. No Right in Subjects to resist their Sovereigns
tyrannizing over them. What Tyranny is. Of Tyrants with a Title, and Tyrants
without Title. Of Magistrates Inferior and Supreme, the vanity and mischief of
that distinction. The confusion of coordinate Governments in one State.
Possession or Invasion gives no Right to Rulers. The Reasons why. Chap. XXVII.
An application of the former Discourse of Civil Government to Ecclesiastical.
How Christ's Church is always visible, and how invisible. Of the communion of
Christ and his Members. The Church of Christ taken specially for the Elect who
shall infallibly be saved, never visible. But taken for true Professors of the
Faith, must always be visible, though not conspicuous in comparison of other
Religions or Heresies. Chap. XXVIII. Of the outward and visible Form of Christ's
Church. Christ ordained One particularly. What that was in the Apostles days,
and immediately after. The vanity of such places of Scripture as are pretended
against the Paternal Government of the Church. Chap. XXIX. Of the necessity of
holding visible communion with Christ's Church. Knowledge of that visible Church
necessary to that communion. Of the Notes to discern the true Church: how far
necessary. Of the nature or condition of such Notes in general. Chap. XXX. Of
the Notes of the true Church in particular. Of Antiquity, Succession, Unity,
Universality, Sanctity. How far they are Notes of the true Church. Chap. XXXI.
Of the Power and Acts of the Church. Where they are properly posited. Of the
fountain of the Power derived to the Church. Neither Prince nor People, Author
of the Churches Power: But Christ the true Head of the Church. The manner how
Christ's Church was founded. Four Conclusions upon the Premises. 1. That there
was always distinction of persons in the Church of Christ. 2. The Church was
always administered principally by the Clergy. 3. The Rites generally received
in the Church, necessary to the conferring Clerical power and office. 4. All
are Usurpers of Ecclesiastical power who have not thus received it. In what
sense Kings may be said to be Heads of the Church. Chap. XXXII. Of the exercise
of political power of the Church, in Excommunication. The Grounds and Reasons
of Excommunication. More things than what is of Faith, matter sufficient of
Excommunication. Two Objections answered. Obedience due to commands not
concerning Faith immediately: Laymen, though Princes, cannot Excommunicate.
Mr. Seldom refuted. Chap. XXXIII. Of the second branch of Ecclesiastical Power,
which is Mystical, or Sacramental. Hence of the Nature of Sacraments in
general. Of the virtue of the Sacraments. Of the sign and thing signified. That
they are always necessarily distinct. Intention how necessary to a Sacrament.
Sacraments effectual to Grace. Chap. XXXIV. Of the distinction of Sacraments
into Legal and Evangelical. Of the Covenants necessary to Sacraments. The true
difference between the Old and New Covenant. The Agreement between Christ and
Moses. The Agreements and Differences between the Law and the Gospel. Chap.
XXXV. Considerations on the Sacraments of the Law of Moses. Of Circumcision. Of
the Reason, Nature, and Ends of it. Of the Passover: the Reason why it was
instituted. Its use. Chap. XXXVI. Of the Evangelical Sacraments. Of the various
application of the name Sacrament. Two Sacraments univocally so called under
the Gospel only: The others equivocally. Five conditions of a Sacrament. Of the
reputed Sacraments of Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction in particular.
Chap. XXXVII. Of Confirmation. What it is: The Reasons of it. The proper
Minister of it. Of Unction threefold in Confirmation. Of Sacramental Repentance
and Penance: The effects thereof. Chap. XXXVIII. Of the proper Affections of
Repentance, Compunction, Attrition and Contrition. Attrition is an Evangelical
Grace, as well as Contrition. Of Confession, its Nature, Grounds, and Uses. How
it is abused. The Reasons against it answered. Chap. XXXIX. Of Satisfaction an
act of Repentance: Several kinds of Satisfaction. How Satisfaction upon
Repentance agrees with Christ's Satisfaction for us. How Satisfaction of
injuries, necessary. Against Indulgences and Purgatory. Chap. XL. Of Baptism.
The Author, Form, Matter and Manner of Administration of it. The general
necessity of it. The efficacy in five things. Of Rebaptization, that it is a
profanation, but no evacuation of the former. Of the Character in Baptism.
Chap. XLI. Of the second principal Sacrament of the Gospel, the Eucharist: Its
names. Its parts, Internal and External. Its Matter, Eread and Wine: and the
necessity of them. Of Leavened and Unleavened Bread. Of breaking the Bread in
the Sacrament. Chap. XLII. Of the things signified in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, the Body and Blood of Christ How they are present in the Eucharist.
How they are received by Communicants. Sacramentally present, a vain invention.
All Presence either Corporal or Spiritual. Of the real Presence of the signs
and things signified. The real Presence of the signs necessarily infer the
Presence of the Substance of Bread and Wine. Signs and things signified always
distinct. Chap. XLIII. The principal Reasons for Transubstantiation answered.
Chap. XLIV. Of the Sacrifice of the Altar. What is a Sacrifice. Conditions
necessary to a Sacrament. How, and in what sense there is a Sacrifice in the
Eucharist. Chap. XLV. Of the form of consecrating the Elements: Wherein it
consists: Whether only Recitative or Supplicatory. Chap. XLVI. Of the
participation of this Sacrament in both kinds. The vanity of Papists
allegations to the contrary. No Sacramental receiving of Christ in one kind
only. How Antiquity is to be understood mentioning the receiving of one Element
only. The pretended inconveniences of partaking in both kinds insufficient. Of
adoration of the Eucharist. Chap. XLVII. The Conclusion of the Treatise of the
subject of Christian Faith, the Church; by the treating of Schism contrary to
the visible Church. Departure from the Faith real Schism; not formally, as to
the outward Form. Of the state of Separation or Schism. Of Separation of
Persons Coordinate and Subordinate. Of Formal and Virtual Schism. All Heresy
virtually Schism, not formally. Separation from an Heretical Society, no
Schism: From Societies not heretical, Schism. Heretical Doctrine or Discipline
justify Separation. How Separation from a true Church is Schism, and how not:
In what sense we call the Roman Church a true Church. Some Instances of
heretical Errors in the Roman Church. Of the guilt of Schism. Of the notorious
guilt of English Sectaries. The folly of their vindications. That th Case of
them and us is altogether different from that of us and the Church of Rome. Not
lawful to separate from the Universal Church.
The Contents of the Second Book of the First Part.
Chap. 1. OF the formal Object of Christian Faith, Christ. An Entrance to the
treating of the Objects of Faith in particular. Chap. II. Of the special
consideration of God as the object of Christian Faith, in the Unity of the
Divine Nature, and Trinity of Persons in that. Chap. III. Of the Unity of the
Divine Nature as to the simplicity of it. And how the Attributes of God are
consistent with that simplicity. Chap. IV. Of the Unity of the Divine Nature as
to number, and how the Trinity of Persons may consist with the Unity and
Simplicity of the Deity. Of the proper notions pertaining to the Mystery of the
Trinity; viz. Essence, Substance, Nature, Person. The distinction of the
Persons in the Trinity. Four enquiries moved. How far the Gentiles and Jews
understood the Trinity. The Proof of the Doctrine of the Trinity from the New
Testament, and the explication of it. Chap. V. Of the proper Acts of God.
Creation, and Preservation or Providence. What is Creation. That God created
all things: And how? Of the Ministers of Gods Providence toward Inferior
Creatures, the Angels of God. Their nature and office toward man especially.
Chap. VI. Of the Works of God in this visible World. Of the Six days work of
God. All things are good which were made by God. Chap. VII. Of the Creation of
man in particular, according to the Image of God. Of the Constitution of him:
and of the Original of his Soul, contrary to Philosophers, and the Errors of
Origin concerning it. The Image wherein it consists principally. Chap. VIII. Of
the Second General Act of God toward the Creature, especially Man, his
Providence. Aristotle's Opinion, and Epicurus his rejected. What is Providence.
Three things propounded of Providence. And first the Ground of it, the
knowledge of God. How God knows all things future, as present. Of Necessity
and Contingencies, how they may consist with Gods Omniscience. Chap. IX. The
method of enquiring into the Nature and Attributes of God: Vorstius his grounds
of distinguishing the Attributes of God from his Nature, examined. Of the
Decrees of God depending on his Understanding and Will. Of knowledge of
Intelligence. Vision, and the supposed Middle knowledge. The Impertinency of
this middle knowledge invented in God. How free Agents can be known by God in
their uncertain choice. Indifferent actions in respect of Man not so in respect
of God. All vision in God supposes certainty in the thing known. Chap. X. Four
Doubts cleared concerning the Knowledge and Decrees of God: and free Agents,
and contingent Effects. How man, that infallibly acts, is responsable for his
Actions. The frivolous Evasion of the said difficulties by them of Dort. Chap.
XI. Of the Execution of Gods Providence in the Predestination and Reprobation
of Man. How the Decrees and Providence of God are distinguished. The Reason and
Method of Gods Decrees. Righteousness is the effect, and not cause of
Predestination to Life. Predestination diversely taken in Scripture, as also
Election and Vocation. God predestinates no man simply to Death without
consideration of Evil foregoing, as Calvin and some others would have it. Chap.
XII. Of Gods Providence in the Reprobation and Damnation of Man. Preterition is
without any cause personal, but the corruption of the Mass of Humane Nature.
Damnation always supposes sin. Chap. XIII. The occasion of treating of sin
here. What sin is. What Evil. Monstrousness in things natural, and Evil in
moral things, illustrate each other. Sin no positive or real thing. God the
direct cause of no evil. St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans makes nothing
for the contra-Remonstrants literally and primarily taken. Chap. XIV. Of Sin
more particularly. And first of the fall of Adam. Of Original Sin wherein it
consists: and how it is traduced from Father to Children. The Proofs of it.
The nature and evils of it: And that it is cured in Baptism. That Natural
Concupiscence has not the nature of Sin after Baptism. Chap. XV. Of the
Restitution of Man after sin. The Means and Motives thereunto. In what manner
Christ's Mediation was necessary to the reconciling of Man to God. Socinus his
Opinion of Christ's mediation refuted. That Christ truly and properly satisfied
by his Death and Passion for us. Chap. XVI. Of the Nature and Person of the
Mediator between God and Man. In the beginning was the Word, proved to be
spoken of Christ: and that he had a being before he was incarnate. The Union of
two Natures in Christ explained. Christ a Mediator by his Person, and by his
Office, and this by his Sacrificing himself. The Scriptures proving this. Chap.
XVII. How Christ was Mediator according to both Natures: Calvin's Opinion and
others stated. Of the effect of Christ's Mediation and the extent thereof. Of
the Designation and Application of Christ's death. Of the sufficiency and
efficacy of Christ's death. How Christ's death becomes effectual to all: The
necessity of Gods Grace to incline the will of man to embrace Christ: Of the
efficacy as well as sufficiency of Gods Grace on the Will of Man. Several
Gradations observed in the Grace of God. Chap. XVIII. Of the effect and benefit
of Christ's Mediation in suffering and rising again, seen in the Resurrection of
Man. The necessity of believing a Resurrection. The Reasons, and Scriptural
Testimonies proving a Resurrection. Objections against the same answered. Chap.
XIX. Of the most perfect effect of Christ's Mediation, in the salvation of man.
Several senses of Salvation noted. That Salvation is immediately after death to
them that truly dye in Christ. And that there is no grounds in Antiquity or
Scripture for that middle State called Purgatory: The Proofs answered. Of the
Consequent of Roman Purgatory, Indulgences: The novelty, groundlesness, and
gross abuse of them. The Conclusion of the first part of this Introduction.

The Contents of the Second Part, etc.
Chap. I. OF the worship of God, wherein the Second Part of Christian Religion
consists. Of the necessity of worshipping God. It is natural to worship God:
Socinus holding the contrary, confuted. Of the name of Religion; the Nature of
Religious worship, wherein it consists. Chap. II. Of the two parts of Divine
worship, Inward and Outward. The Proof of Outward worship as due to God: and
that it is both due and acceptable to God. Several Reasons proving bodily
worship of God agreeable to him. Wherein this bodily worship chiefly consists.
Certain Directions for bodily worship. Exceptions against it answered. Chap.
III. Of the second thing considerable in Divine worship; viz. The state wherein
we serve God. What is a state. The formal cause of a state Divine, Vows. What
is a Vow. The proper matter of Vows, Evangelical Councils. That it is lawful
and useful to make Vows under the Gospel, contrary to Peter Martyr. The nature
of Vows explained. Chap. IV. Of the matter of Vows in particular. And first,
of the Virginal state, that it is both possible and landable. And that it is
lawful to vow Celibacie, or Widowhood. No Presidents in the Old Testament
favoring Virginity. The Virgin Mary vowed not Virginity, no Votary before the
Annunciation. Chap. V. Of the second State of special serving God, the Clerical
State or Ministerial. Of the necessity and liberty of singleness of Life in a
Clergyman. The Opinion and custom of Antiquity concerning it. That it is in the
power of the Church at this day to restrain or permit the marriage of Priests.
The Conveniences and Inconveniences of wedded Life in Priests. Chrysostom's
Judgment of Marriage and Virginity recited. Chap. VI. Of the third State of
serving God, a Life Monastical. That it is not only lawful, but may be
profitable also. The Exceptions of Mr. Perkins against it, examined. The abuses
of Monastical Life touched. That it is lawful to vow such a kind of Life, duly
regulated. Chap. VII. Of Religious worship, the third thing considerable in it,
viz. The Exercise of it, in the several kinds of it: And first of Prayer, the
chiefest act of Gods worship: contrary to Sectaries who are enemies to it in
three respects: And first by their vain conceit of Preaching, wherein
consists not the proper worship of God, as in Prayer. Chap. VIII. A second
Corruption of the worship of God, not, especially in Prayer: by opposing
Setforms of public worship. Reasons against extemporary Prayers in public:
The places of Scripture, and Reasons and Antiquity for Extemporary Prayers,
answered. Chap. IX. A third abuse of the worship of God by Sectaries in
neglecting public Prayers without Sermons, censured. That Prayer in a public
place appointed for Gods worship, ought at all times to be offered to God.
Scripture and Universal Tradition require it above that in private places. The
frivolousness of such reasons as are used against it. The Reasons for it. Chap.
X. A fourth Corruption of the worship of God, by confining it to an unknown
Tongue. Scripture and Tradition against that custom. A fifth abuse of Prayer,
in denying the People their Suffrage contrary to the ancient practice of the
Church. Chap. XI. Of the Circumstances of Divine worship, and first of the
proper place of Divine worship, called the Church, the manner of worshipping
there. Of the Dedication of Churches to God: their Consecration, and the
effects of the same. That no man can convert any part of the Church to his
private use, without profanation of it and Sacrilege. Against the abuse of
Churches in the burial of dead bodies, erecting Tombs, and enclosing them in
Churches or Chancels. Rich men have no more Right to any part of the Church
than the Poor. The Common Law can give no Right in such Cases. Chap. XII. Of
the second Circumstance of Gods worship; Appointed times. Of the Sabbath or
Seventh-day; how it was appointed of God to the Jews, but not by the same Law
appointed to Christians: Nor that, one day in Seven should be observed. The
Decalogue contains not all moral duties directly. Gentiles observed not a
Seventh day. The New Testament no where commands a Seventh day to be kept holy.
Chap. XIII. Of the Institution of the Lords Day. That it was in part of
Apostolical, and partly Ecclesiastical Tradition: Festival days and Fasting,
derived unto us from the same fountain, and accordingly to be observed upon the
like grounds. Private Prayers in Families, to the neglect of the public
worship, unacceptable to God. Of the Obligation all Priests have to pray daily
according to their Office. Of the abuse of Holy Days in the Number, and
unjustifiable occasions of them. Of the seven Hours of Prayer approved by the
Ancient Church, and our first Reformers. Mr. Prins Cavils against Canonical
Hours refuted. Chap. XIV The third thing to be considered in the worship of
God, viz. The true object, which is God only. That it is Idolatry to misapply
this Divine worship. What is Divine worship properly called. Of the multitude
and mischiefs of New distinctions of worship. Dulia and Latria though distinct,
of no use in this Controversy. What is an Idol. Origin s criticism of an Idol,
vainly rested on. What an Image. What Idolatry. The distinction of Formal and
Material Idolatry upon diverse reasons rejected. The Papists really Idolatrous
notwithstanding their good Intentions pretended. Intention and Resolution to
worship the true God, excuses not from Idolatry. Spalato, Forbes, and others,
excusing the Romanists from thence disproved. That Idolatry is not always
joined with Polytheism, or worshipping more Gods than one. How the Roman Church
may be a true Church, and yet Idolatrous Chap. XV. Of Idolatry in the Romish
Church, particularly; viz. In worshipping Saints, Angels, Relics, and
especially the supposed Blood of Christ. No good foundation in Antiquity or the
Scriptures for the said worship. Chap. XVI. Of the fourth thing wherein the
worship of God consists, viz. Preaching. How far it is necessary to the
Service of God. What is true Preaching. Of the Preaching of Christ, wherein it
consists. Of painful Preaching. That the Ministry, according to the Church
of England, is much more painful then that of Sectaries. The negligence of some
in their duty, contrary to the rule and mind of the Church, not to be imputed
to the Church, but to particular Persons in Authority. Chap. XVII. The fifth
general Head wherein the exercise of the worship of God does consist,
Obedience. That Obedience is the end of the Law and Gospel both. That the
Service of God principally consists therein. Of Obedience to God and the
Church. The Reasons and Necessity of Obedience to our Spiritual, as well as
Civil Governors. The frivolous cavils of Sectaries noted. The severity of the
Ancient and Latter Greek Church in requiring obedience. The folly of Pretenders
to obedience to the Church, and wilfully slight her Canons and Laws more
material, than are Ceremonies. Chap. XVIII. Of Obedience to the Church in
particular, in the five Precepts of the Church common to all, viz. 1.
Observation of Festival days. 2. Observation of the Fasts of the Church. Of
the Times, Manner, and Grounds of them. Exceptions against them answered. 3. Of
the Customs and Ceremonies of the Church. 4. Frequentation of the public
worship. 5. Frequent Communicating; and the due preparation thereunto. Chap.
XIX. A Preparation to the Explication of the Decalogue, by treating of Laws in
General. What is a Law? Several kinds of Laws Of the obligation of Laws from
Justice, not Force only. Three Conditions required to obliging. Of the Ten
Commandments in special. Their Author, Nature, and Use. Chap. XX. Of the Ten
Commandments in Particular; and their several sense and importance. Chap. XXI.
Of Superstition contrary to the true Worship of God, and Christian Obedience.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE Knowledge of the true Catholic Religion.
Part the First.
Book the First.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Nature and Grounds of Religion in general: Which are not so much Power,
as the Goodness of God, and Justice in the Creature. And that Nature it self
teaches to be Religious.

RELIGION is the supreme act of the Rational Creature, springing from the
natural and necessary Relation it bears to the Creator of all things, God
Almighty. Or, a due Recognition of the Cause of all Causes; and Retribution of
service and worship made to the same, as the fountain of all Goodness derived
to inferior Creatures. For there being a most excellent order, or rather
subordination of Causes in the Universe; there is a necessary and constant
dependence one upon another; not by choice, but natural inclination: And the
Perfection of all Creatures does consist in observing that station, and serving
those ends, and acting according to those Laws imposed by God on all things.
Thus the Heavenly Bodies moving in a perpetual and regular order, and Psalm. 148.
the Earth being fruitful in its seasons, and the course of the Waters
observing the Laws given them by God, may be said to worship and obey him.
Which worship being performed according to that more perfect state of the
Rational Creature, and the prescriptions given to it, may be called Religion.
And nothing can be more fundamentally Just then for the Creature to refund,
according to its ability and rank, the Fruits (...). Philo Judaeus Allegoriarum
lib. 2. Papin. L. Siquis. ^f. De Religios.
of those perfections received from the Cause of all Causes; especially,
considering that such retribution is rather an augmentation then diminution of
such Perfections in the Creature. For not only are all things thus freely
derived from God to the Creatures, but by a perpetual act of Providence, called
Conservation, continued to them; together with a most various and bountiful
supply of all things requisite thereunto: to which no Creature could lay any
claim, either to have, or to hold. And therefore most just, equal, reasonable,
and honorable it is, for it to make such a Re-exhibition to God, as is called
Religion. Therefore that famous Heathen Lawyer said well, Summa ratio est quae
pro Religione facit. The highest Reason of all, is that which makes for
Religion. And Tullie in a certain place defines Religion thus briefly, and
aptly, Religio est Justitia erga deos, Religion is Justice toward the gods.
And Macrobius makes Piety and Religion, two of the seven parts into which he
divides Justice.

These not only truly Christian, but natural grounds of sober Men Macrob. Sa^.
c. 7. P. 37.
may suffice to put to silence the brutish Philosophy of some of late, who
acknowledge no other grounds of Dominion, either Divine or Humane, or of
Obedience thereunto, but Power, and Force enabling to exact and extort the
same; not considering that Protection on the part of the Governing, and Profit
and Benefit on the part Governed, do create a debt of veneration and service.
And therefore by the same reason should Justice have no place in the Ruler; but
only his Power and Pleasure, to incline him to govern well: as it should have
no place in the Governed, to obey well.

And not only from the special benefits derived from God, should Man return the
mite of his recompense, or recognition by Religion; but also from a
subordination of Creatures serving him, should he be moved to pay the like to
God. The Psalmist tells us that God has put all things Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8.
under Man's feet: All Sheep and Oxen, yea and all the beasts of the Field. The
Fowls of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the
paths of the Seas. From this example therefore, Subjection and subserviency of
all inferior Creatures to Man, by the appointment of God, does appear the
reasonableness of Man's subjection unto God. Neither was this (though forfeited
by Man upon his first disobedience against God) so lost unto him, but it was
confirmed unto him after the Flood in these words, And the fear of you; and the
dread of you, shall be upon Genesis 9. 2.
every beast of the Earth, and upon every Fowl of the Air, and upon all that
Quod non metuitur, contemnitur: quod contemnitur utique non colitur. Ita fit,
ut Religio, and Majestas, and honor metu constet, etc. Lactant. de Ira- Dei c.
8. Psalm. 111. 10. Prove. 1. 17.
moves upon the Earth, and the Fishes of the Sea; into your hand are they
delivered. This Fear therefore and dread of a Divine Majesty, is that which God
has in like manner laid upon Man, as the ground and cause of all religious
worship of him: Man being infinitely more inferior and subject, by nature, to
God, then the Beasts are to him. For as Lactantius has it, That which is not
feared is contemned, that which is contemned cannot be worshipped: and so it
comes to pass, that Religion and Majesty, and Honor consists of Fear. Which
the Scripture assures us of also; where it says, by David and Solomon both,
The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

And notwithstanding all Creatures do exhibit obedience unto Almighty God, yet
none may properly be said to be Religions, but Man. For Religion must be a
service, and a tendency to Perfection, and union with God; but the Blessed
Spirits of Men and Angels are out of their Apprentiship, and imperfect state,
and consummated in that fruition, and reward, and union with God, which they
are capable of. And the Apostate Spirits, though they give obedience to God,
cannot be said to be Religious, because their wills are constantly, and utterly
rebellious; and all is involuntary and forced: but Religion must be free, and
voluntary, as is intimated Psalm 110.
by the Psalmist. Again, Irrational Creatures or Beasts cannot be said to be
Religious properly, though they may be said to be Obedient: For Obedience may
consist, as with necessity in Devils, so with ignorance and necessity both, as
in Beasts: But Religion must be rational; as St. Paul implies in these words,
I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, Romans 12. 1.
that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable service. Whatsoever worship the Creatures give unto
God is principally performed by their Head, Man: Man being, as the first born,
and eldest Son to God, in comparison of them. So that as it was a natural Law,
that the eldest of the Family and most worthy should be as a Priest to the
rest, to offer Sacrifice unto God for all the rest; as Cain and Abel are
interpreted to bring their offerings to Adam to present them to God: so do the
Beasts bringing their several tributes to Man, through him offer their bounden
service unto God.

CHAP. II.
Of the Constant and Faithful assurance requisite to be had of a Deity. The
reasons of the necessity of a Divine supreme Power. Socinus refuted, holding
the knowledge of a God not natural.

ALL Religion supposes a Deity; as all Arts and Sciences suppose their
foundation upon which they are built, and not prove it. Yet notwithstanding for
the more effectual knowledge and persuasion hereof, and for the due exercise of
that natural notion of a God, which many times is very weak, for want of use
(as men sometimes loose the use of their bodily Limbs for want of due exercise
of them) we shall briefly recount (for methods sake) some of those many
demonstrations of a Divine supreme Being, which is God: and that by these
gradations.

First, That there are purer and superior Beings to Man, though not, obvious
to any of the five gross senses of man, may be gathered from the effects
supernatural to all corporeal Creatures, and ordinarily visible. Such are the
sudden and rapid translations of Bodies from one place to another. Such are
likewise, voices heard without any notice given to the eye of persons present:
Such are Apparitions made to diverse in all ages of Spirits, to persons, in the
likeness of Bodies indeed, but declaring by their manner of entrance, their
manner of motions and actions, their manner of departure and disappearing, that
such forms are only assumed, to render their presence more obvious to us. Such
are lastly the many Predictions and Revelations of closest and deepest secrets
of men, not possible to be known but by a preternatural subtilty: All which are
so frequently reported in Histories of all sorts, Divine and Humane, that who
ever will call in question must be judged purposely to have taken on him such
incredulity, that he might deny this thing; seeing there are infinite other
things, which upon no greater evidence, he firmly believes. And what greater
absurdity need a man be forced to than this singularity of judging in this
cause? For can they who resolve to doubt of this matter, allege any sense or
demonstration contrary to this? If they can, Why have they kept it from the
World all this while? If they cannot, Why should they not yield to better
grounds for it, than they have any against it, Viz. the concurrent testimony of
so many and sober persons affirming the same, from their experience?

But if this be admitted, then, by due gradations may we easily ascend unto the
most supreme Being of all, which is God. No man being able to determine any
point which may not be exceeded, until we come to infinity it self. And this
present visible World being but a draught of that super^^^, God was pleased to
ordain Man to bear his Image in a Supremacy over all earthly Creatures; that
from hence we may learn, that as one Creature serves another, and all, Man; so
Man is subordinate to Spirits, and created Spirits to God, as their only
absolute Lord. And therefore in Scripture it is said of them, They are all
Ministering Spirits (i. e. under Hebr. 1. 9. Hebr. 12. 9.
God) to them that believe: And that he is the Father of Spirits. Which
necessary and harmonious dependence of all things on One, is so consonant to
the common reason of Man, that the contrary, introducing a Deity or
independence, does withal bring in a manifest Anarchy, and confusion in the
Universe, repugnant as well to nature as reason.

Furthermore, the several Arts and Sciences minister several proofs of this, as
might be shown in particular; would it not be too long, and were it not to be
found performed by diverse already. That taken from the course of Nature may
here suffice. Nature it self, and common observation tell us, that there is
diversity in Cause and Effect, and that there is Generation and Corruption; and
that nothing in the World can produce it self: And (for instance) he that lived
many thousand years ago, could no more make himself, then he that lived but
yesterday, or was born this morning. So that either Man, and if Man other
creatures also (for there is the same reason) made himself, or was from
eternity, or was made by another. The first is disproved. The second is false.
First, because nothing has been esteemed more absurd in reason than for to
arise to an Infinity of Causes, one above another. Secondly, then certainly
would, the same man, yea all men be eternal consequently, as well as
antecedently; but the contrary to this, we daily see, and therefore may
conclude the contrary to the other.

Thirdly, The very nature of Creatures constituted of diverse and contrary
natures, which are opposite and avers to all union, as Fire and Water, Wet and
Dry, Heat and Cold, cannot move of themselves to that which is contrary to
them; but every thing naturally covers to be of it self, and in it self; Fire
making toward Fire, and Water to Water, and Earth to Earth; so that there must
be a superior power, as well to bring them, and join them together in one, as
to contain, and continue them there. Which must be the first Cause, and that
first Cause is God.

Fourthly, That common ground of all Societies, humane Justice, which is an
immovable and indelible principle in the mind of Man, approved of by all, does
evince this. For Justice supposes and infers a Deity. For all Justice does
suppose a Rule, according to which it is said to be just, and a Law: to
contradict and oppose which, is to be unjust and injurious. For otherwise, it
would be at the pleasure and arbitrament of every man, to make a Rule to
himself, and for another; according to which all that pleased should be reputed
just: But this would be one of the most absurd, ridiculous, and unjust things
in the world. Therefore must there of necessity be a common Rule of Right and
Just: which can proceed from none but the Author of all Beings, and humane
Society it self: without which, Meo judici^ Pietas est sumdamentum omnium
virtutum. Cicero pro Plancio.
it would be as reasonable, if it were profitable and safe, for any man to
murder his Prince, or his Father, as to kill a Nitt, or Flea, that troubled
him. For the Civil Sanction of Laws to the contrary, does not make the foresaid
impieties, sins; neither are they simply evil, because they are forbidden
thereby: But they are forbidden by Man, and fenced by humane Laws, because they
are evil: and evil they were absolutely, because God had so decreed them. And
as the Laws of all Sovereigns receive their Original vigor from God, so were
it not that Gods Law fortified, confirmed, and secured Kings, they, and their
Laws both would be no better then trifles, impertinencies, and impostures;
which every wise man might shake off, and confound, when ever it lay in his
power. For where obedience and subjection is due, it is for some reason, which
reason is formed into a Law. But no man can make a Law whereby he, of no King,
should become a King: for before he can make any Law, he must be a King or
Supreme: And therefore this reason or Law must be Antecedent; and being so,
must have an Author: And who can that be but God, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords?

Fifthly, Add hereunto that argument which is commonly taken from the common
consent and agreement of all Men, esteemed most rational; all People, all
Nations, concurring hereunto. Which must needs be the effect of a Divine power,
and influence, so inclining men's minds, so that, one says, It is so apparent
that there is a God, that I can scarce think him to Cicero.
be in his right mind, who denies it. And when we speak of Nature, and a Law of
Nature, we would not be so understood, as some would needs take them, to help
them out here; for such a necessary and inevitable principle, and impulse as
none should be able to dissent from; for there is no such Law to be found, but
so natural we make it to all indifferently and equally disposed, that the thing
once fairly and duly propounded, shall not find contradiction without violence
offered, at first, to the mind of man, bent to such a truth.

Sixthly, It is no weak argument of an overruling and supreme Power, which may
be taken from the contrary attempts, the vanity and infelicity of them. For it
was just now granted, that great Wits (as they would be called) may, nay have
disowned this truth. But first, consider we the silliness of their reasons, and
weakness of their arguments against a Deity, who will yield to nothing but
manifest, palpable, and invincible demonstrations for it; and it will be
sufficient to confirm any sober mind in the faith of it. For how many has
Pride, to be thought some body extraordinary in maintaining Paradoxes;
Singularity, to find out somewhat new (as Lactantius observed of those
Philosophers that were reputed Atheists) (...). Chrysoft. In Hebraeos Ser. 4.
that took upon them such opinions, because they could find out nothing else to
make themselves talked on and famous: How many has boldness and impudency,
vainglory and to appear free and illimited in their opinions and practices?
How many has Riot, Lust, and such like excesses converted to this kind of
infidelity, more then Sobriety or Philosophy? It is, alas, no wit, no choice,
no freedom, or generousness of mind at all: If (as Chrysostom has said) the
nobleness of the mind consists in believing the high and noble things) but a
contracted stupidity, or sordid servility, and unavoidable necessity to enjoy
themselves in their low and base courses, which constrain them to these
persuasions unnatural to them. But I deny not but some of the Learned, and for
ought we know, grave Philosophers, have inclined to Atheisin, as have many
Great, Rich, and Powerful. But first, however some Princes have been dogmatical
within themselves, and Practical Atheists in their unjust dealings toward
others, yet never dared they to commend or encourage such principles in their
Subjects, nor discover professedly such to their Neighbors by reason of the
visible and monstrous mischiefs presently and naturally rushing out of them, to
the ruin of themselves and others. And can that be a truth which is so
pernicious to the Authors, and promoters of it, all over the World? Again, Can
there be any thing more required to prove a thing to be irrational, and absurd,
then that it should never by all countenance and advantages given to it by
Power, and Learning, be able to prosper into any one Society upon earth? That
it should never prevail so far as to be generally and publicly owned in any
one Land or Nation? But, like a flash of wildfire, make a noise, and a show,
and presently come to nothing. Never could Atheists yet, from the Creation to
this present, unite into a Body, or become a Commonwealth; but against all
endeavors and devices, when Religion has for a time been discountenanced and
crushed by impious Agents, it has recovered it self again in despite of its
adversaries. Which shows that it is implanted in Man, as a natural principle,
which may be oppressed, but never extinguished.

For whereas Socinus and his crew of late, would prove that Religion is not
natural to Man, from some remote Indians, who, he says, acknowledge no God. It
is hard for any to make that good: But were it so: It does not overthrow our
opinion here, which teaches chiefly such a naturalness, as upon presentation of
the thing to the mind of man, outwardly; does meet with such compliance
inwardly, as may well be called Natural. And besides, a principal doubt was,
whether infinite People directly and positively asserting, and believing a
Deity, any one can be found which dogmatically oppose the same? None of Socinus
his instances reach to this. And it is not so improbable but inhumanity it self
may have prevailed over some people so far as to have buried all Civility in
them. And what wonder is it, or what weakening to our Cause in hand, that they,
who have ceased to be men, should have laid aside Religion? I do not think
Divinity, or the belief of a God more inseparable from Man, then common
humanity: and yet I may hold it natural too.

CAHP. III.
Of the Unity of the Divine Nature, and the Infiniteness of God.

NOthing is so intimate and necessary to the very Being of a thing, as the
Unity of it; as say Philosophers. Of the Unity of the Deity, therefore as
necessary to Faith, we shall here briefly speak. Where first it is to be noted,
to the advantage of the Faith holding there can be but one God, that though
many great Wits have attempted boldly to deny a God; yet none of them, who have
granted a Deity, have ever so much as denied the reasonableness of that
Opinion, which asserts the Unity of such a Deity: All generally looking on it
as an Excellency to the Divine Nature, to be but One: However it is written of
some ancient Heretics, what is scarce to be found amongst the wiser sort of
ancient Natural Philosophers, that there was a God of Evil, as well as of Good;
conceiving indeed so far aright, that the most Perfect absolute good, cannot
produce directly what is evil; but erring herein, that they either thought that
to be evil which was not so in it self; as evil Beasts, poisonous Plants,
excessive Tempests, and the like; or supposing that what was really evil must
have some positive and direct Agent to produce it; which upon due examination
will be found contrary to reason.

And surely, though the first thing, and most obvious to common apprehensions
is, that there is a God, absolutely; yet this being granted and supposed, it is
much more easy to convince an adversary, who shall call in question the Unity
of God, that he is but one, then that he is, simply: So immediately and
necessarily does it follow from the very subject it self. For what does the
very notion of God imply and include in it, Deum cum audis, substantiam
intellige, sine initio, sine fine; simplicem, sine u^la admistione, invisibilem
incorpoream, ineffabilem, inest^^abilem, in quo nihil ^adjanctum, nihil crentum
sit, sine autore. Ruffinus in symbolum.
but a thing most absolute, most perfect, most glorious, most entire, and
whatsoever, and more then what ever the mind of Man can comprehend of
excellency? But if there be more then one God, and these distinct and separate
in nature, or space, then is there in one, what is not in the other; and the
one is what the other is not, for else they were not diverse, or many, but one,
which is argued against by Doubters: And if the properties or perfections of
one be not communicated to the other, but remain peculiar to each, nothing can
be more certain and apparent than that all perfections are not united into one
Being: and so consequently, that Being imperfect, and defective in something,
and so not absolutely and simply perfect, and so not God; whom we suppose to be
most perfect, or not at all.

And the general and wise concord and harmony found in the World, do strongly
convince the unity of the First Cause, and mover thereof. Athan. cont. Gentes
p. 41. Tom. 1.
True indeed, some contrarieties and contentions are seen in particular
creatures of opposite natures, and qualities; but this does rather argue the
Unity of a Sovereign power, which does reconcile them into a commodious
agreement, and ornament of the Whole. So that as in Music, some light passing
Notes of discord do add grace and sweetness to the Parts, the petty particular
disagreement of Creatures illustrate and commend the excellency of the Order of
Creatures in the World. And as it Athanas. ib. p. 42.
is yet further impossible, but if two several Musicians should compose a
Lesson, or Song consisting of several Voices, not consulting with one another,
but from their several phansies and humors; these put together must needs make
horrible jarring, and discord; so were there more then One God, who should have
an hand in framing this Universe, it could not possibly have been avoided but
the infinite and destructive inconveniences in the parts thereof would betray
the absurdness of such different Agents. Again, if there were more Gods then
one, there may as well be believed Si sint duo quare non plures? Terrul. cont.
Marcionem l. 1. c. 5.
to be more then a hundred, then a thousand, then ten thousand, and so on. For
who shall limit or determine them? And so the World would be like a
Commonwealth, which should have more Sovereigns then Subjects. Neither can it
be imagined with any reason, that such a multitude of gods should hold a Common
Counsel, and lay their heads together (as Poets have devised) for the wiser
management of their Kingdom of this world: because all such deliberations and
consultations do imply a particular defect Quid intersint Numeri quum duo paria
non differant uno? Una enim res est quae cadem in duobui. Id. ibid.
of power, and knowledge, which are made up in some manner by the concurrence
of many, supplying such single defects: But this supposition quite overthrows
the Divine Nature.

And farther, either these supposed Gods must be equal, or inferior to one
another, in their Attributes: If the latter, then must such inferior ones be
turned out of the List, as insufficient and incapable of such an Equidem unum
esse Deum sine initio, sine prole naturae, sew Patrem magnum atque magnificum,
quis tam demens, tam mente captus neget esse certissimum?
high dignity. If equal, to what purpose are many invented, when two or more
differ not from One?

Sixthly, Infiniteness and Unity are convertible in the inquiry after the
nature of God: For if God be Infinite, he must necessarily be but One; if he be
One, he must necessarily be Infinite: Nothing less then Infinite answering the
only less then Infinite necessities of Creatures in the World: which all stand
in need as well of support and governance, as of a First Cause to produce them.

7. Lastly, The same consent of Nations and People, as has been intimated,
Hujus nos virtutes per mundum esse diffusas multis vocabulis vocamus, etc.
Maximus Mad. and August. Epist. 43.
agreeing in but one GOD, as well as in this, That there is a God, sufficiently
evinceth this. For not to speak of the more stupid, who are no competent Judges
in such cases (who notwithstanding readily assent to this noble truth, once
propounded) but the more Learned and Wise, who, upon disquisition and search,
duly and thoroughly made, have ever unanimously received this for a most certain
truth.

CHAP. IV.
Of the diversity of Religions in the World. A Brief censure of the Gentile,
and Mabomitan Religion.

HItherto have we treated of Natural Religion, as it were, that which all men
by the light and force of principles put into Man by the hand of God, who made
him; so that scarce does the Infant turn more naturally to the breast of the
Mother, than does Man arrived to the years of reason and common understanding,
seek to God, by way of recognition, and dependence on him. But this one end, to
which all tend so unanimously, admits of many roads leading thereunto: which
particularly to enumerate, were both superfluous and tedious; and therefore may
well be reduced to these four, Heathenish, Jewish, Mohammedan, and Christian,
which are so many Religions according to which One God is worshipped.

The Heathen, or Gentile (as the Scripture calls him) worship a God; and surely
desiring (as all men naturally do) not to err, or be deceived, especially in
such matters, as are of greatest importance (as the choice of a Deity is) do
likewise rudely intend to adore none but the true God. For (as St. Paul well
notes, and teaches us in his Epistle to the Romans) Romans 8. 20.
the Creature was made subject unto vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him
who has subjected the same in hope. By which creature he does certainly mean
the Gentile; who according to the phrase of Holy Writ, speaking according to
the received sense and opinion of the highly opinion'd Jews, was reputed no
more of then a simple creature, and nature: in opposition to which St. Paul
often makes mention of another, and New creature, as He that is in Christ Jesus
is a New creature: and elsewhere. And by Vanity 2 Corin. 5. 17. Gal. 5. 10.
Jonah. 2. 8.
is commonly understood, False Gods and Idols; as in Jonah, They that observe
lying vanities, forsake their own mercies, meaning False Gods: as the Prophet
Jeremie likewise affirms of the Heathens Gods, They are but Jerem. 10. 15.
vanity, the works of men's hands. Now the Creature, or Gentiles were
unwillingly made subject to these Vanities and false worships, in respect of
that general Principle inserted in Man, whereby he chooses truth before error,
and consequently the true God before the false: however, through some
particular Blindness of their understanding, and darkness, their Ephesians. 4. 18.
hearts be alienated from the Life of God, or from the living God, which is the
same. Which Darkness of the heart may well be imputed to that Original defect,
or sin traduced from Adam to all his Posterity. Yet notwithstanding, even after
that general waste made in the Soul of Man, God, as St. Paul well tells them,
left not himself without a witness, in that he Acts. 14. 17.
did good, and gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness. So that the Invisible things of him (as says
the Romans 1. 20.
same St. Paul) from the beginning of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and godhead; so
that they are without excuse. And the reason hereof goes before, Viz. V. 19.
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has
showed it unto them. The invisible things of God are said to be seen clearly,
because they are sufficiently exposed to be seen; and therefore if they do not
see them, it must be the affectation of some sensual error which so darkens
their mind, that they cannot, or will not.

And being thus first corrupted, no marvel if their Religion be like unto it,
not only false but unreasonable and abominable; as may appear from these few,
amongst infinite reasons. First from the Object of their worship generally
directed to a multitude of Gods; and patching up a plenitude of power out of
the shreds of innumerable Demigods, or pieces of Gods; whereof one should have
power and virtue in one thing, and another in another: but this is to deny God
in effect, who, if he be not absolute, is not at all; and indeed, all the
arguments before used to prove there can be but one God, do prove that to be a
false and foolish Religion which allows and worshippeth more than one:
Neither can it suffice to excuse them, to say, that the wiser of the Heathens
acknowledged but one God; because it avails nothing at all but to add to
their condemnation, for any persons to have a right sense and meaning reserved
to themselves, and to proceed directly contrary to such found judgment, in
their practice and worship it self.

And therefore the most absurd and abominable manner of worshipping their
pretended Deities, is sufficient conviction of the Religion it self. For
whereas, modesty, sobriety, temperance, chastity, truth, justice, and the like
moral virtues, were such as the Light of Nature did commend to all men, and all
consented to be excellent and laudable: All these were contemned by the
admirers of these Gods, yea the very Religion it self tempted and incited many
to offend against all these; and that (which is most intolerable) from the
examples of the pretended gods so choosing to be worshipped; from whence must
needs follow what St. Paul affirms of the Gentiles Religion, and gods. The
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils and not to God.
They were impure, and wicked 1 Cor. 10. 20.
spirits delighting in absurd and vicious practices. And therefore, upon this
subject, no more need be spoken at present.

The Neat pretender to true worship may be the Mohammedan, who worshipping the
True God so far as may be discerned, yet fails egregiously in the manner of
exhibiting the same: the very grounds, and end also being false and
unreasonable. For, first; that the Author and Coiner of that worship was an
impostor, and made pretenses of Sanctity in the midst of impurities and
infirmities he was subject unto, is apparent out of Histories of those times
and places, where he, by the assistance of a Fugitive Nestorian Monk laid the
plot and whole design of his Religion, and that among a people altogether rude,
ignorant, barbarous, easy to be deceived, and cheated into a credulity of
pretended Revelations.

Again, the many absurdities and contradictions of their Law most sacred: as
misnaming of persons, mistiming of Facts, mistaking of Histories in the gross,
impossible, profane, blasphemous opinions concerning the nature, the will, the
Actions of God, contrary to common philosophy and reason; Ridiculous and
foolish imaginations of Angels, utterly false opinions of the nature of things,
and such like, being duly and soberly weighed and examined, do convince the
whole Fabric of that superstition, of Idleness and foolish fictions.

And not to multiply more arguments here: The way of propagating this Erroneous
Fashion of serving God, discovers the Error of the thing it self. For it is
a general and most rational Principle deserving admission and belief of all,
That Religion, being the most excellent act of humane Creatures, ought to have
the most high and noble Faculty of the soul for its proper seat and fountain,
from whence it should proceed; such as is the intellectual faculty of Man. But
this superstition is carried on by the ministry of the Senses, chiefly. And
moreover, It ought to have for its end the most sublime and divine of all. But
the Mohammedan constituteth the low pleasures of the Senses, as the sufficient
and proper end of all their service: making the beatitude of Heaven to consist
in perpetual Licentiousness, and fresh delights of senses. And therefore no
need of insisting on this subject, here: What is here spoken being for method
sake rather then necessity, or a formal confutation of those Errors.

CHAP. V.
Of the Jewish Religion. The Pretense of the Antiquity of it mulled. Their
several Erroneous grounds of the Jewish Religion, discovered.

DUT the Religion of the Jew requires more diligent examination, as well
because of a notable presumption from ancient Tradition, and a certain
preoccupation of divine truths; and auctority of divine Constitution; as
because the consideration thereof is an introduction to Christian Religion, and
the disproof of that, a proof of the Christian.

And if according to Christians own concessions, and the eminentest Apostle St.
Paul, they were once the people and true Church of God, To Romans 3. 2. cap. 9. 4.
them were committed the Oracles of God. To them pertained the Adoption, and
the glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of
God, and the Promises: Why not always a Church? If once Gods people, Why not
always so? If once confessed to be pure and Faithful, When did they cease to
be so? When first entered corruptions into their Church? Under what High Priest?
And who brought such errors first in?

This is the sum of what they can say either for themselves, or against the
Christians; of whose Religion (which undoubtedly they do, and will call
Heresy) they can give the time and place, when, and where it sprang up; and
the person who first founded and advanced the same. And if any Church or
Society of men in the world can lay claim to the Promises of perpetuity and
infallibility, surely the Jewish will pretend much more, from the Prerogatives
peculiar to them: as do witness every where, the Law and the Prophets,

To all this a sufficient answer shall be comprehended in the prosecution of
the contrary Grounds. which here follows, which I reduce to these two; whereof
One concerns their Error about their Law, and the Other, about their Messiah.

The first general Error concerning their Law is first that they suppose that
the word of God given to Moses for their proper use, was equally to oblige all
Nations: saving where certain privileges were pretended to Jews by birth,
which they suppose no people were worthy or capable of, except the stock of
Abraham. But that all nations could not be included in that Covenant which was
made with Abraham, nor were all obliged to the Rites and Ceremonies thereof,
appears, from the ordinary impossibility of being observed by all People. For
how could people of the remotest parts of the earth appear thrice a year at
Jerusalem, as was commanded the Israelites by God, who dwelt in the Land of
Canaan? How Levit. 12. 6.
could all Nations at any time bring their Sacrifices to the door of the House
of the Lord, to be there received and offered by the Priests?

Another Error concerning their Law received by Moses is, that they say, It
was it whereby men should be justified. Which is false; and that, First,
because the most ancient, holy and renowned Patriarchs of the Jewish Line were
not so Justified: They were not justified by the works, rites, or Ceremonies of
the Law delivered them by Moses; as Saint Paul has not only taught us, but
irrefragably proved against them in several places of his Epistles. For the
sum of his Argument, and force may truly be reduced to this form, as it is
laid down more largely in his third Chapter to the Galatians, Judaizing, after
the embracing of the Gospel of Christ: Galat. 3.
That way whereby Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the most holy and renowned
Patriarchs of the Jewish Line were justified before God, must needs be it which
God chiefly intended for the Justification of their Posterity, to whom all the
promises of God were made, through them: But neither Abraham, nor Isanck, nor
Jacob were Justified by the Law of Moses, so religious and rigorously now
insisted on. The first part of this reason will be easily granted by the Jews,
because they were the principal of the Jewish nation, and honored by God above
any that succeeded them; and therefore undoubtedly Justified by God. But that
this justification could V. 17.
not be according to, or by the Law of Moses, Saint Paul in the forecited
Chapter apparently proves: where he shows that the Law was four hundred and
thirty years after Abraham. And how could that which then had no being be a
cause of justification of Abraham?

Again, the accounting of Righteous before God, is to be justified before God:
But Abraham was accounted Righteous before God, by Faith, and Galat. 3. 6. Genesis
16. 6. Gal. 3. v. 7.
not by Law: For so says the Scripture, Abraham believed God and it was
accounted to him for righteousness. Therefore, They that are of Faith, they are
children of Abraham. that is: They, who believed and live as did Abraham, are
Abraham's spiritual seed, and heirs apparent of all the Promises made to him,
whereby all nations (not the Jewish only) should be blessed.

Furthermore, No man could ever be Justified by that law, but may rather be
said to be condemned and cursed by it, which he nor no man else did ever Deuteronomy.
27. 26.
keep: And the law says expressly, Cursed be he that confirms not all the
Gal. 3. 10.
words of this Law to do them: which Confirming is well explained by the
Apostle by Continuing. For who ever by disobedience breaks it, cannot be said
to confirm it, or continue in it. Now, seeing all flesh failed more or less in
the due observation thereof, there must be provision otherwise made by God, if
so be he would have any saved. It will perhaps be here said, That God in such
cases had appointed Sacrifices for expiations, and reconciliations with him:
But against this, not so much the Auctority, as the Argument of the same
Apostle makes in his Epistle to the Hebrews, saying. In those Sacrifices there
is a remembrance made of sins, Heb. 10.
once every year. That is, notwithstanding there were daily Sacrifices made
according to the Law, every day; and upon special sins peculiar Sacrifices made
by the offender for an atonement; yet every year, to show the insufficiency of
the Precedent Ceremonies, mention was made of the sins of the People, when the
High Priest entered into the Holiest of Holy. And the reason of this
imperfection is given by the Author to the Hebrews, when V. 4.
he argues, First, from the nature, the Sacrifices themselves, That it is
impossible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sins: or as
one of their own Prophets before him intimates, saying, Wherewith shall I Mic.
6. 6.
come before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? Shall I come before
him with Burnt offerings and Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased 7.
with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of oil? Shall I give
my first born for my transgression? The fruit of my body for the sin of my
Soul? And so again in the book of the Psalms: Sacrifices and offerings thou
Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
did not desire, mine ears have thou opened: Burnt-offerings and
sin offerings have thou not required. Then said I, Lo I come, in the volume of
the book it is written of me, etc. All which, with many such like places, do
declare what esteem Good and Godly men had of the Legal Sacrifices, that were
but in themselves insufficient and unacceptable to Almighty God, for either the
expiating and satisfying for sins, or the appeasing of God offended by the
same: and therefore some further remedy, some more excellent means of
reconcisiation were necessary: And this appears from the ends of such
Sacrifices instituted: which principally were these. First, to declare a right
that God had in all those Creatures, which he had given man for his use, and
service. Secondly, to represent to man the guilt and punishment, unto which he
was subject, by his sins; as verily, as that beast so slain and sacrificed
before his eyes. Thirdly, to insinuate unto him the true means of becoming
reconciled unto God offended: which was,

A Second general end of the Old Law, which was to prefigure the Messiah, and
only true Savior of the world: who related not only to Abraham's seed, but to
all, to whom the promise made to Abraham, related, viz. Genesis 22. 18. Galat. 3.
10.
In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. And therefore if
such an objection be made, Wherefore serves the Law, if not to such Ends?
Saint Paul answers thus, It was added because of transgressions, to whom the
Promise was made. Because of Transgression, First, by reason that the Oral
Covenant made with Adam, and renewed to Abraham, suffice not, of it self, to
contain man in his duty, without the additional statute committed to writing
by Moses, called signally, The Law. Secondly, this became to them under it, a
rule and direction, until such time as the seed, to whom it was promised,
should come. i. e. The fullness of the Gentiles, to whom, through Adam and
Abraham both, the Messiah was promised. Whence appears the vanity of the
Jews imagination, supposing that God, by an immutable decree, had affixed the
privileges and benefits of the Gospel, entirely to the Jews. And this inferrs
another argument used by Saint Paul against the perfection, and perpetuity of
the Jewish Law. For nothing was promised to Abraham and his seed peculiarly,
but upon the Covenant of Circumcision. But Abraham was not reputed righteous
before God, by virtue of Circumcision; but being Righteous, was Circumcised;
and all the principal Promises made to Abraham, as the Father of the Faithful,
were before Circumcision, as the history in Genesis assures us, and Saint Paul
to the Romans argues; and concludes against the Jews, They which are the
children of the Flesh, are not the Children of God: that is, in that respect,
or for that cause; because they were lineally descended from Abraham's flesh and
blood: but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed. i. e. They
were the persons comprehended in the Covenant, and promises made to Abraham:
all which sufficiently nulls the Jews pretensions, taken from their Law. We now
proceed to the Second general Head against them, taken from their Messiah.

CHAP. VI.
The Vanity of the Jewish Religion, showed from the proofs of the true Messiah
long since come, which are many.

BOth Jews and Christians agree, that the Covenant made by God with Adam and
Abraham, was through the Messiah. But the difference between them is
notwithstanding very great. The Jews, still expecting the Messiah to come, and
the Christian believing it, as the first Article of his Faith, that he is
actually come, and has delivered his Laws, and performed all things prefigured
and promised by the Law of Moses. If this supposition of the Christian be not
true, then is the whole Body of his Faith a mere shadow, and false. And if the
Messiah be come, then is the Religion of the Jew false, and no better then a
vain Superstition. This therefore is diligently and Faithfully to be enquired
into: though with this Caution premised, That it is a thing to be supposed no
less, and taken for granted in the Christian Religion, that Christ the Messiah
is come; then it is to be supposed to Religion in general, that there is a God.

These following Circumstances evince the Messiah to be come. First the certain
expiration of the time prefixed by the Holy Scriptures, and the Jewish Doctors
themselves, for the coming of Christ. The great Masters of the Jews affirm that
the world shall continue six thousand years; whereof two thousand are to go
before the Law, and two thousand should be under the Law of Moses; and that in
the fifth thousand year, the Messiah should Sixtus Senenfis Bibl. lib. 2.
Genebr. Chro. initio. Vid. Rayl. mundum Martini Pug. fidei Part. 2. cap. 6.
come into the world. Who these are, and from whence they collect this, is no
place to show here; Genebrard, Galatinus, Raymundus Martini, have done it; and
many of the Fathers receiving their tradition from them, have spoken to that
purpose: But the Jews themselves do reckon from the Creation to this day, above
five thousand four hundred years: and yet there is no appearance of a Messiah
for their turn. So that being driven to this (...)
extremity, they have been constrained to take up this curse, to secure their
suspected Cause, viz. Let the Spirit of all them be burst in pieces who compute
times: as Buxtorfe relates to us. And if it be so, as some Jews have Buxtorf.
Synagog. cap. 3. Vid. Ray mundum Martini, Pug. fidei Part. 2. cap. 6.
phancied, viz. That the Messiah was born the same day their Temple was burnt
at Jerusalem; Where has he spent his time all this while? Why does he not
appear to their deliverance? They are wont to say, It is for their sins. In
which I agree with them, that indeed it is for their sins, that they are never
like to see that Messiah, whom they dream of, because they rejected See
Chrysostom. Sermon. 3. Against the Jews. Tom. 6. p. 338, 339.
him who came to them, as the true Messiah.

Secondly, The apt Analogy and correspondence between the Messiah received by
Christians, and foretold by the ancient Prophets, does declare him come. For
instance, that of Genesis, That the seed of the woman should Genesis 3. Deuteronomy. 18.
15.
break the Serpents head. That in Deutronomie, A prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up of your brethren, like unto me etc. That of Esaias the seventh and
thirty fourth verse, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bring forth a child,
Esa. 7. 34.
and they shall call his name Immanuel: (however modern Jews endeavor to
pervert and corrupt that text.) That of the Psalmist The Lord said unto my
Psalm. 110.
Lord, fit thou on my Right hand, until I have made thine enemies thy
footstool. That of Micah, And thou Bethlehem Judah art not the least amongst
the Princes Mich. 5. 2.
of Judah: For out of thee shall come a Governor which shall rule my people
Israel. And many more like places are interpreted of the Jews themselves, of
the Messiah. And it being so, whom have they to show (now the time is past)
that many stand in competition with Christ, our true Messiah?

Thirdly, several Events prove the Messiah already come. In Genesis it is Genesis
49. 10. Numb. 24. 17. Esa. 9. 6. Esa. 4. 2. John 5. 43. (...); Athanasius de
Incarnatione. Chrysostom. Ser. 2. against the Jews, p. 333, 334. to 6. shows
how that thrice they were confounded in attempting to rebuild their City and
Temple.
said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the lawgiver from between
his feet, until Shiloh come etc. And so in Numbers, there shall come a Star out
of Jacob, and Scepter out of Israel. And in Esaias, To us a Son is born, to us a
Child is given: and the Government shall be upon his shoulders. And by the same
Prophet it is said, In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious etc. To which many other places might be added: All which we urge, not
upon our own authority but the judgment of their ancient Rabbis, especially
that Famous Chaldee Paraphrast so applying them. Now these can belong to none
but him, whom we acknowledge for the Messiah, Christ Jesus: though diverse
Impostors, and false Christ's have pretended to such Prophecies, to the delusion
and confusion of that unhappy and blind Nation: as Christ truly foretold. And
however great variety may be found amongst Learned Christians concerning the
precise times, wherein the said Predictions had their verification, yet all
unanimously agree that they are fulfilled; the Jew in vain dissenting.

Fourthly, the Destructions and Dissipations of that Nation and Church prove
the truth of the Messiah come. For now so great obscurity and confusion are
found in their best Records, and especially, their Genealogies, upon which
depend their assurance of their Messiah, that not knowing now, them of the
Tribe of Judah, from them of any other Tribe; and much less the Line of David,
from others: They are not able to distinguish a vain pretender, from a real
heir of David, and so must needs suspect all pretenders to be the Messiah.

Fifthly, by virtue of the Ancient Phophecies and promises made unto the Jews,
by their Predecessors, their form of worship was to continue unto their Messiah
at least: but nothing is more plain than that this is actually dissolved; and
that in the most material parts of it. Their holy City Jerusalem, their more
Holy Temple in it, and their most Holy Altar in that, are all ruined and buried
in oblivion: and a Mock City built in opposition to that, by Alius Adrian and
from him called Aelia properly.

Sixthly, The unparralell'd Judgments of God continually pursuing that Nation,
until the accomplishment of all things foretold by Christ, and his Apostles,
concerning destruction to come upon them, to the utmost, confuteth their
Expectations, and confirm our Faith in Christ, as the true Messiah. For First,
about the time of Christ's Coming into the world, the Scepter of all Political
and Ecclesiastical Power was utterly taken from them. Herod Scaliger. Proleg.
in Chron. Eusebius.
that Alien (what ever Scaliger and some others siding with him say, making him
a Jew) invaded all civil Power, and kept it to himself; and then proceeded to
baffle all Sacerdotal Rights; Killed most of the Heads of the Principal
Families: and, at his pleasure, put in and out Priests: as also the Romans did
likewise. All which some find in the Mystery of Christ's age, when he was put
to death. For it is observed that there were thirty Jubilees from the time that
the Israelites first entered into the Land of Promise until the Coming of Christ
to preach and publish the Gospel: at which time the Scriptures tell us, that he
was about thirty years of age: after which time, there were never any more kept
by that People. And that John the Baptist, (who was the Voice in the wilderness
preparing the way for Christ) was that Trumpet, which was to sound at the
Publication of the Evangelical Jubilee; and cessation of the Legal; and
abolition of the whole Fabric of that Church. For (to proceed in the history
of their miseries and ruin) about the Fourtieth year after the birth of
Christ, and scarce seven years after his death and Passion, (whereby they had
brought the curse of innocent blood upon themselves, and children) a very sore
calamnitie seized all that people at once; by the Emperor Caligula his
commanding his Statue to be erected amongst them, as a God: which caused a
great slaughter of them at Alexandria, and coufusion in Judaea. And when Philo
Judaeus of Alexandria attempted to satisfy and pacify the Emperor, Philo
Judeus de Legatione ad Caium.
without it; himself witnesses, with what shame, scorn and sharp reprehension
he was repulsed, and thrust out of the Emperors presence. Who thereupon, with
his philosophy, endeavoring to comfort his brethren, with expectation of
Divine assistance, found himself deceived; their troubles multiplying upon
them, until the death of that Emperor. About the same time in Babylon and
Seleucia perished about 50000, under the Grand Mutinier Annelus. About the year
of Christ 68, Florus Procurator of Syria crushed the Jews two years together,
until rebelling against the Romans they were set upon by Cestius the Roman
General; who slew great numbers of them; wasted their Country, took their
strong holds of Defense, held against the Romans and rased them; came to
Jerusalem it self, and might have taken that also, but that God had reserved
them to greater mischiefs, and vengeance; the Roman army being called off upon
other occasions. In the thirteenth year of Nero, the year after, Vespasian
under the Emperor was recalled out of Achaia to invade and reduce the Jews, to
more absolute obedience and subjection, who coming into Gallilee destroyed the
Country, and put to death no fewer then 100000 persons, and led captive with
him to the number of forty thousand: in the year 72, Vespasian himself being
Emperor, sent his son Titus into Jewrie to finish the conquests of those
mutinous and obstinate Countries, and after devastations of the same, coming to
the siege of Jerusalem it self; so many and unparalled were the miseries
suffered by them that no age or history could equal them till at last taking
the City, firing the Temple against his will and strong endeavor, by the tacit
and irresistible decree of God, there were numbered of those that perished in
the City no fewer then 1100000; and about forty thousand Captives: with the
sale of which all persons were glutted, refusing them at the lowest and basest
rates: the prophecy of old being at this time especially verified, Ye shall be
sold to your enemies for bondmen Deuteronomy. 28. 68.
and bond-women, and no man shall buy you. This ruin and waste so quelled and
broke them that they were disabled and disheartened for diverse years to attempt
any mischiefs, but about the year 116 under Trajan the Emperor, Gods Justice
began to awake against them farther. For in several parts of the Roman Empire,
as it were by consent, at the same time rebelling, they slew of Greeks and
Romans above two hundred thousand, and as many in the Island of Cyprus alone;
but Trajan sending the Roman Forces amongst them, destroyed innumerable
thousands of them. In the year 130. mutinying again under Adrian the Emperor,
being seduced by a false Prophet, and Christ, Barchocab, they were destroyed
with great slaughter. And five years after mutinying again, Julius Severus was
called out of Britain, and going against them, destroyed fifty thousand of
them, with fifty strong holds, nine hundred principal Towns, rasing eighty to
the ground, leaving the Land in a manner desolate. And the year following
finished the work by destroying five hundred and eighty thousand Jews, besides
an infinite multitude which perished by Exile ansd Famine: all the Jews being
forbidden to remain in any part of Judea, or so much as to look back upon it:
Jerusalem is laid quite waste, and another City built not far from it, named
(as is said) Aelia, from Aelius Adrianus the Emperor. And to pursue these
miserable obstinate wretches no farther, since that time (which is as great an
Instance as any has been, or can be given of Divine wrath against them) though
they be in numbers great, and in riches too, and industrious, and zealous for
their superstition, they have been both so infatuated and blasted in all their
counsels, and designs, that they could never make a Society amongst themselves,
so far as in any part of the World to be governed within themselves, or
exercise their Religion, but by restraint, and at the will and pleasure of
others. Now to conclude; That that should be the true Religion which for these
sixteen hundred years could no where be truly practiced, or exercised according
to the pretended obligations of their Law, the ground and form of the same, is
incredible, and next to impossible. Or that the true Messiah should not be
actually come, or Christ should not be he, whose predictions and Justice have
been so manifestly verified upon his implacable enemies, and withal, has so
far raised and exalted, and asserted, and propagated, and defended the
believers in him, is most unreasonable to doubt of, after such convictions and
evidences.

But last of all, Let any indifferent judge compare the Doctrine and Services
of the Jewish Superstition, with the received Rule and ground of it, the Old
Testament, and he shall easily discern, how they have by their many Talmudical
inventions, their bold and ridiculous Comments upon the Scripture, held in no
less, if not much greater veneration than the Scripture it self, their infinite
absurd and directly false Traditions (imposed upon all of their way) as
Oracles; turned their Faith into Fables, and their Facts to have no agreement
with the Letter of their Law; but newly invented most of them, except
Circumcision: (which we have showed they have not as Jews) and he will
undoubtedly conclude against their antiquated Religion, and Innovated
Superstitions.

CHAP. VII.
The Christian Religion described. The General Ground thereof. The Revealed
Will of God. The Necessity of Gods Revealing himself.

AFTER the consideration of Religion in General, and the reasonableness
thereof, with the Exclusion of the principal false pretenders of worshipping
the true God; it follows to treat of the Christian Religion, and the
Reasonableness, and several incomparable Prerogatives thereunto proper. And
first, it is to be known, what we mean by Christian Religion, and what it is?

Christian Religion is the worship of the only true God in the unity of nature
and trinity of persons, through one Mediator between God and man, the Man
Christ Jesus; according to his Will and Laws revealed in his holy Word,
commonly called the Scriptures. This description whether artificial enough I
will not contend, but full enough I suppose it is, to declare as well, What it
is in it self, as Wherein it is distinct from others. And therefore omitting to
treat of the more curious and formal part thereof, we shall here show briefly
What great advantages it has above any other, to the obliging us to a more
faithful and devout observation thereof; and that this only, and no other can
truly please God, and lead us to him, and crown us hereafter with eternal bliss
and glory.

And it having been proved that by the consent of all Nations there is a God;
and it following more strongly upon that ground supposed, that such a Supreme
and Infinite being is to be worshipped, and that this worship is that which we
call Religion; and that of the Religions pretending to be divine, the others
have been found vain and deficient, the Right of being received, as the only
proper worship of God, must of necessity devolve upon the Christian Religion,
as that which is least obnoxious to the same, or like exceptions; and has many
more sober and rational inducements to persuade the same to any equal judgment.
Which argument might well be drawn from the very Body of this Religion, and the
several parts whereof it consists, together with manifold Pregnant
Circumstances attending the same. But because this would ask a far longer time,
and more tedious labor both to Writer and Reader then can consist with this
intended Compendium, it may abundantly suffice to give such probable and
credible proofs of the Scriptures, That they are the revealed will of God as
Christians do believe, without question. For the sum and substance of all
Christian religion, so far as it is truly so called and professed, being
founded on the Holy Scriptures, and there expressly contained, if it be evinced
that they are of divine Original, it will follow, That what they deliver is so
likewise; and consequently, the Religion built upon them.

But because it is one Principle which Christian Religion is built upon, in
common with all Religions, that somewhat must so be believed that no natural
reason or Mathematical can invincibly demonstrate. And the reason hereof is,
because the ground of all such demonstations is settled upon the order of Nature
between Cause and Effect; in point of right rather than matter of fact. But
that the Scriptures are so the word of God, as to be revealed by his Holy
Spirit to certain select Persons to that end, is altogether matter of fact: and
that not proceeding from such a necessary and natural Agent, as that according
to the course of Causes and Effects it could be no otherwise; but from a free
Agent which certainly might have suspended such acts of Revealing his Will. And
the same Reason holds against all proper Demonstration from Effect. For as it
cannot be demonstrated that such a Cause must necessarily have such an Effect,
it cannot be infallibly proved that such an Effect must have such a Cause. For
unless it could be proved that fire must necessarily burn, it could not be
proved that what we see burnt must necessarily proceed from fire. For before
this can be don, it must be showed that nothing in the world has the same
virtue, but fire: and this supposes that we have a perfect and exact knowledge
of every thing, and the nature of it, in the world. Take we an instance yet
nearer to our present subject. It is a common Maxim amongst the Schoolmen,
That no Creature can work a Miracle of it self, but it must have the
Supernatural power of God, either immediately or mediately: and, That
whatsoever Effects are wrought by any Spirit inferior to God, deserve not the
name of a Miracle. And yet it is confessed withal, that diverse such works
which appear to us as extraordinary, and above nature, are not of God, but some
(perhaps evil) Creature. Must it not then first be known, what those
extraordinary acts are, and how they are wrought, before it can be concluded
that they are of God? And how can this infallibly be discerned but by another
miracle, and this by a third, a third by an infinity, of which there can be no
knowledge? So that in truth the received doctrine of the Schools being thoroughly
examined, the contrary will appear the more reasonable of the two* and that we
must rather first of all acknowledge a Divine Power precedent and effecting this
extraordinary stupendous work, before we may call it a Miracle; than first
admit this to be a Miracle; and then, and thence infer a Divine Power. So that
it seems very difficult and dubious to make scientifical conclusions of any
thing divine: And that after all, there may be sufficient presumptions to
render a thing credible without lightness and rashness, yet the Arguments
persuading shall not be so pressing and cogent, but due place should remain for
a Faith, or assent, which may not be properly humane and natural, (which it
must needs be, if it proceeded simply from sense or reason natural) but divine;
and an admirable temperament be found in that we call The true Christian Faith;
wherein the Grace of God inwardly moving and inclining the Will to embrace
that, to which it might notwithstanding all reasons to the contrary, not
altogether unreasonably have dissented; and yet with reason does assent: the
Grace of God pulling down 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought,
unto the obedience of Christ. As St. Paul excellently says, speaking of the
carnal warfare of humane ratiocinations, either for, or against Divine Faith
and Doctrine; which have no might but through God, as he suffers by his justice
the reasonings and eloquence of men to take place against his doctrine, or to
prevail toward the receiving of the truth, by the superadded Power of his Holy
Spirit: as to this end St. Paul speaks in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
thus, And my speech, and my preaching was not 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5.
with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power, That your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God. Signifying unto us, that the power of God is no more than necessary to
concur with humane reason to the heightning it to such great effects: though
the Grace of God be all sufficient of it self to produce such effects; without,
yea contrary to such reasons as humane Philosophy or Eloquence can minister to
a man. And this I have held not unnecessary to be premised to this great
difficulty of asserting and evidencing the Scriptures to be the word of God, as
well ingenuously to profess, there appear no such convincing reasons to prove
the same, as some make show of, and promise; as to discover the error of such
who would have Christian Religion to stand upon humane Faith. For if Christian
Faith be built upon the Scripture, (as is most undeniable) and the assurance we
have that the Scriptures are the word of God, can be absolutely wrought by
outward reasons, (which cannot be drawn from the Scriptures, being supposed, at
present, under question) certainly all our Faith must hang upon the veracity
and certainty of such Reasons. Therefore must this middle way be chosen to
acknowledge such prerogatives, even of outward reason, preparing and disposing
men's hearts, that no other Religion or writing can lay any tolerable claim to;
and yet such as shall stand in need of a divine concourse to perfect the same,
to the nature of a truly divine and Christian assent and Faith. Now the
foresaid preparatory and justly inclining motives may be these following,
peculiar to the Scriptures. The first thing then which must be supposed in this
case, is, that which all Religions, and even common Reason require, that it is
the will of God that some of mankind should be saved, that is, become blessed
and happy after this Life is ended, in heaven: But this cannot be supposed
without due obedience and worship given unto that great and bountiful Creator
and Savior: and this Obedience or worship cannot be given unto God, in a
manner acceptable to him, unless this manner be first of all known unto man:
and this cannot Vid. Thomam. 1. ^^. q. 1. 1* cor.
be known, unless God teaches him that knowledge. And this teaching of him must
either beby inward, or outward Revelation; Inward Revelation is the natural
endowment of the understanding given by God unto Man, enabling him to judge of
things: and this all People equally share in, (not that there is a necessary
equality, or so much as disposition to knowledge in all men, but that no order
of People are denied this benefit; which some persons stir up and improve to a
more high and excellent degree of knowledge) yet not so, but we see many
persons, and almost people so degenerate as not to perceive those things which
conduce necessarily to the ends of common humanity and civility. Therefore God
at first in creating of man, purposely instituted him least the greatest part
of his own workmanship, and that by his own intention, should miscarrie in the
due ends of being; or the defects of him originally redound on himself. To
determine this more accurately, is the office of some other place: only this
may suffice here to note, that man apparently being defective in this so
necessary a point, stands in need of some supply to perfect him in it; divine
inward Revelation failing him generally, even in matters of an inferior nature
to devine worship. Wherefore, that his will be cleared and revealed outwardly,
which inwardly is obscured and corrupted, is necessary to the foresaid ends:
And therefore that the Word of God, which is received by Christians as
proceeding from him, and a Declaration of his Will to mankind, is to be made
appear so far, as it may be credible to an indifferent and imprejudicate mind:
and serve the ends for which it was ordained of God, viz. Instruction of man in
the mind and will of God, and leading him unto eternal happiness.

CHAP. VIII.
More special proofs of the truth of Christian Religion; and more particularly
from the Scriptures being the Word of God, which is proved by several Reasons.

IT coming to the same end, to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and
the Religion built upon them to be of God; we shall here endeavor to give
farther evidence of both together, in this order.

First, If the Scriptures and Christian Religion have been preserved and
asserted by God himself, it is plain that they proceed originally from God. For
as the Scripture tells us (not without the assent of rational men) Whatsoever
plant God has not planted, shall be rooted out. Mat. 15. 13.
But God has specially and wonderfully owned and maintained the Doctrine of
the Scriptures, therefore by his appointment, were they ordained. For it is a
Rule in Natural Philosophy, which holds no less true in Supernatural; We are
nourished and conserved by those things of which we consist. Neither is it
probable, that God should give any direct countenance to that as Divine, which
is forged and counterfeit. But we see that whereas many eminent and Learned
men's Works highly approved and applauded, have perished, the Holy Scriptures
have been preserved entire.

And this attestation of God to them has been more apparent in the concomitant
Acts and Miracles wrought by Christ, the immediate Author of them, and his
Apostles and Servants under him. Christ says expressly, My Doctrine is not
mine, but his that sent me. This he thus proves elsewhere, Joh. 7. 16. Joh. 10.
25. Joh. 14. 11.
The works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me. And again.
Believe me for the very works sake. And again. If I do not the works of my
Father believe me not. From all which fair dealing, it appears that Christ Joh.
10. 37.
intended not to impose a groundless, and reasonless Faith upon the world, but
to commend such an one as had such competent demonstrations, as that subject
was capable of, or the like Moral things. Now, that such miracles were wrought
by Christ, and that not by sleight of hand, after the manner of cunning
Impostours, the Effects themselves in himself, and which is much more, his
Followers and Servants in his name, is matter of Credit as much as any thing
delivered unto us in humane Histories. Besides, Christ's Apostles professed they
delivered nothing but from God and Christ to us: and this they prosecuted with
many and great difficulties, dangers, distresses, and generally with the loss
of their very blood, cheerfully poured out, and their lives prodigally spent in
that testimony, that no men of reason or common sense would have gone through
so much dry service, but upon a divine impulse and assurance of the truth they
delivered an expectation of an everlasting reward for it.

Here therefore both Jews and Gentiles enter their Caveat, and affirm, That
what Christ did, was by indirect means of Evil Spirits: Some Jews specially
traducing him with abusing the Sacred name of God privily born about him to
that purpose. The Heathens have compared to him Apollonius, Tyanaeus; and
Jannes and Jambres, withstanding Moses before Pharaoh; being all notorious
Magicians. But these have received answer from most of Arnob. cont. Gentes.
Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 1. Eusebius. Demonst. Evang. lib. 3. c. 3. and 8. etc.
the ancient and Learned Fathers, who have met with this Exception and to this
purpose answered. First, that it is not true, that they ever wrought such
miracles as did Christ, and his Servants. Secondly, the wonders they wrought
were not done with such simplicity and perspicuity as the other were. Christ
and his Apostles only by the word of their mouths commanded the winds and seas,
and cured the sick, opened the eyes of the blind, gave straitness and strength
to the Lame and Creepled; whereas Magicians are constrained to use many
horrible and ridiculous Rites to the inducing of Evil Spirits to act for them.
Thirdly, The end of this doctrine and Miracles mutually justify one another,
as to the divineness of them. For, most or all Magical wonders were wrought to
ends agreeable to such Evil Spirits as set them on work, viz. For Cousenage,
for Lust, for wantonness, for malice, for revenge, and such like unreasonable
passions. But the ends both of the Christian doctrine and Miracles, were no
other then Temperance, Continence, Patience, Meekness, Charity, and the
complete exercise of all such Virtues as nature it self approved and magnified:
And declared openly to be done against vainglory, and Licentiousness, and in
opposition and confusion of such wicked Spirits as abused mankind generally
before Christ's coming in the Flesh. And as Christ argues strongly, How can
Satan cast out Satan? How could he give Tertul. Apol. cap. 23. Lactan. 8.
Institut. cap. 27. Hieron. ad Marcel. ep. 17. (...), etc. Athan. de Incarnat.
Hotting. Hist. Orient. lib. 2.
any countenance or aid to them that ejected and dispossessed and confounded
him? yea made him pronounce his own unhappiness, and inability to resist the
Divine virtue in Christ's servants by Exorcisms tormenting him; as the ancient
Fathers frequently assure us: telling us how they openly challenged them to
stand it out with them. Now these things were effected by the Word of God.
Which insinuates,

A Third ground of the Divineness of the Scripture and Christianity also, viz.
The nature of the Doctrine, whose simplicity, Majesty, Purity, Humility and
Sublimity are such as will admit of no Competitors. It is written of Mahomet
indeed, That having patched up his Alcoran, he openly boasted and bragged what
he had, done and challenged those pitiful, ignorant, and stupid people, to show
any man that could compose such another piece. But it is certain that himself
was so altogether illiterate and ignorant, and so continued, that he could
neither write nor read, but caused it to be set together by better Wits but no
better hearts then his: And the very vainglory discovered sufficiently the
imposture. But such was the doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, that, so
far as any thing can prove it self from its native truth and Excellency, this
did manifest it self to the world, and captivated more with its plain dealing
than ever any of the most profound Philosophers works, or the Eloquence of
humane Orators. Which yet further appears from,

A Fourth head, viz. The incapacity and infirmity of the Chiefest Agents under
God, in inditing and framing the same, which amazed the Elders of the Jews
themselves hearing Peter and John deliver such wonderful doctrine, Acts. 4. 13.
accompanied with such mavelous works, until they resolve themselves in the
reason of it, considering that they had been with Jesus: who had taught and
enabled them, being but simple unlearned and ignorant men of themselves, so to
speak and act. And the like may be said of the rest of the Apostles: who
likewise having been with Jesus, and afterward more amply furnished with the
Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, spoke the wonderful works of God, to the
Admiration of all their Auditors. Which makes St. Chrysostom in several
places to triumph over all other Doctors, in their behalf speaking to this
purpose. Where are now your Chrysostom. Tom. 2. page 560. H. Tom. 4. page 611.
grave and learned Philosophers, with their affected habits, their long beards,
their solemn gate? Where are your Eloquent Orators? A Poor Tent-maker, as was
Paul: An ignorant Fisherman, as was Peter, and the rest of the simple Apostles,
have carried the world from them all; have drawn* all Nations after them. Can
this proceed from any but a Divine power?

And Fifthly, could it be ascribed to any thing but a Divine power, That so
many wise, so many learned, so many noble, so many rich, so many young and old
Virgins, tender and delicate, should so humbly and devoutly embrace, so stoutly
and hardily maintain with the loss of their lives, and relations, and fortunes,
such a doctrine as brought them no Credit, no profit, no pleasure, but rigours
and Severities, and self denials, but by Divine inspirations? How many has
Mahomet's Religion won unto it, for so many hundred years, besides those who
have either by early education, sucked in those corrupt Principles, or by
Terror and Power over them, have been constrained to it? or corrupted by the
flatteries of Licentiousness and Pleasure countenanced by it? Alas* so few
that they are not worth the reckoning up.

Sixthly, The admirable harmony between these diverse Authors far distant in
place, at the time of their composing Holy writ, with themselves, and also with
the Ancient Prophets before Christ, insinuating the same things they, at
Christ's coming, explained and published; is no small argument of Gods finger in
the work. Which are Tertullians two Tertul. Adver. Marc. lib. 3. cap. 5.
reasons given against Marcion: who blasphemously affirmed, One God to be the
Author of the Old Testament, and another of the New.

Seventhly, consider we the manner of propagating this word of God, (...) A
than. de Incar not.
and worship: that, as is already intimated, was not only by weak and
illiterate Instruments: but altogether in a meek, peaceable, and gentle
persuasive, not coercive way, by civil fore or violence; but less toward such
as once having freely given their names to God, and were incorporated with
them, proved false and made defection from them. Though it has appeared, that
the vengeance of God has wonderfully pursued the Persecutors of his faithful
Servants.

Lastly, (aiming at brevity) It is a notable argument of its Native Excellency
and Perfection, That all the greatest Wits of the world being bent against the
Word of God, and endeavoring to pick holes in it, and convict it of error,
have failed in such their attempts; and have rather rendr'd it more undoubted
and conspicuous. Whereas no sooner are other Pretending writings brought to due
light and examination, but they are convicted of impostures.

CHAP. IX.
Of the several Senses and Meanings according to which the Scriptures may be
understood.

IT being found what is the Letter of the Word of God: It is necessary to know,
what is the true sense of it: For this is only in truth, the Word, and not the
Letters, Syllables, or Grammatical words. To know this, we must first
distinguish a Sense Historical and Mystical.

The Historical Sense is the same as the Literal; so called because it is that
which is primarily signified and intended by such a form of words. And this is
twofold. For either these words are to be taken in the proper and natural
signification (as I may call that which is in most vulgar use) or in their
borrowed and mataphorical Sense. As when I call a thing hard, and apply it to
Iron, or Stone, I speak properly; and according to the Natural sense: but when
I apply Hardness to the heart, I speak improperly and Metaphorically, and yet
Literally too, intending thereby to signify not any natural, but moral quality
in the heart. The Seven Ears, (says Joseph in Genesis) are seven years, and
the Seven fat Kine are Seven years. And so Christ in the Gospel, This is my
Body; and infinite others in Scripture, are Metaphorical and Literal Senses
both.

The Mystical Sense is that which is a translation, not so much of words from
one signification to another; as of the entire Sense to a meaning not excluding
the Historical or Literal Sense, but built upon it, and occasioned by it. And
is commonly divided into the Tropological, Allegorical, and Anagogical: which
some (as Origin) make coordinate with the former, saying, The Scripture is a
certain Intelligible world: wherein are four Parts, Origin. Homil. 2. In
Diversos.
as four Elements. The Earth is the Literal Sense. The waters is the profound
Moral Sense. The Air is the Natural Sense, or natural science therein found.
And above all, the sublime sense, which is Fire. In another place he mentions
only, the Historical, Moral, and Mystical: And generally Idem. Homil. 5. in
Leviticum.
the Fathers do acknowledge all these, though with some variation, not
distinguishing them, as we have; as might be shown, were it needful to enlarge
here, on that subject. The Moral Sense is that which is drawn from the natural,
to signify the manners and conditions of men. The Allegorical is a sense under
a continuation of tropes, and figures. The Anagogical, a translation of the
meaning of things, said or done on earth, to things proper to heaven. The Ox
being suffered to eat, while he trod out the Corn; according to St. Paul, in
the Moral sense, signified that the labourer was worthy of his hire. Mount
Sinah and Mount Sion (as the same Gal. 2. 24, 25.
Apostle says) signified the two Cities of God, Earthly and Heavenly,
Allegorically. And the Church of God upon Earth, the Church Triumphant in
heaven. It is therefore without reason and modesty both, that some strickt
Modern Divines have set themselves against the Ancient, in contracting all
these senses into one, so as to allow no more: which is of very ill consequence
to the Faith both of Jew and Christian. For generally all the hopes of the Jews
concerning the Messiah to come: and all the proofs of the Christian taken from
the Old Testament, That he is come, would come to little or nothing, seeing
there is manifestly a Literal or Historical sense primarily intended; upon
which the Mistical is built. So that the arguments of the Evangelists, and St.
Paul in his Epistles convincing that Christ was the true Messiah, must needs be
invalid, seeing their quotation to that purpose had certainly another Literal
Sense. And it is against the condition of the whole Law it self; which, as St.
Paul Heb. 10. 1.
says, was a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very things themselves.

It is here replied commonly; That all these are but one Literal Perkins on
Gal^^. 22.
sense, diversely expressed: which is to grant all that is contended for; but
with a reservation of a peculiar way of speaking, to themselves; that having
been so unfortunate as to judge of things amiss, they may in some manner solace
themselves with variety of phrase; too commonly found amongst such as resolve
to say something new, where there is no just cause at all.

And to that which seems a Difficulty. That no Symbolical sense can be
argumentative or prove any thing in Divinity; we answer, That it cannot indeed,
unless it be known first to be the true Mistical sense of the words alleged;
For neither is the Literal sense it self, until it be known that such was the
true intent of the Speaker. But those things which were symbolically and
Mystically delivered in the Law, being well known to Christ and his Apostles,
as likewise to the Learnedest of the Jewish Doctors by a received current
tradition amongst them, were of force to the ends alleged by them. But where
such a Mystical sense is not received, nothing can be inferred from thence,
which is conclusive.

CHAP. X.
Of the true Interpretation of Holy Scriptures. The true meaning, not the
letter, properly, Scripture. Of the difficulty of attaining the proper sense,
and the Reasons thereof.

IT avails a Christian as little to have the Letter of the word of God
without the genuine sense, as it does a man to have the shell without the
Kernel. For the sense is the word of God, not the Letter. Wicked men, yea the
Devil himself makes use of the Letter to contradict the truth it self, as St.
Hierome has observed, and other Fathers, and constant experience certifieth
not without the consent of the Scripture it self, which says of it self, In it
are some things hard to be understood, which 2 Pet. 3. 16.
they, that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do all other Scriptures,
to their own destruction. Therefore, because it is very necessary to be
informed of the difficulties and dangers in misinterpreting Scripture, before
we can thoroughly apply our selves to prevent and avoid them, we will First show
briefly, That many things are difficult in Scripture, and the Reasons why: and
after proceed to the most probable means rightly to interpret the same.

And these obstacles in attaining the true sense of Gods word, are either found
in our selves or in Gods wisdom and Providence; or lastly in the Word of God
it self. Some indeed piously but inconsiderately make all the reason of
difficulties (not denied by them altogether) in the Scripture, to be in Man:
supposing they hereby vindicate Gods Providence from that censure it might
otherwise be liable unto, if so be that God should deliver such a Law to man
which could not well be understood, but apt to mislead men into error. And
therefore, say they. It is the darkness, and perverseness of man's understanding
and will, that make things in Scripture obscure, and not the condition of the
Scriptures themselves. But this no ways does attain its end. For when did God
deliver his written word unto Mankind? In his state of innocence and
perfection, or imperfection and blindness of mind? God certainly knew that man
was frail, and apt to mistake, when he delivered his Law: How then is this an
Apology sufficient for him, who gave such a Law, as was disproportionable to
his understanding at the time of giving it? But then secondly, considering that
the understanding, and the thing to be understood are Relatives; and that it
comes to the same end, whether the Faculty be unapt to conceive, or the Object
unapt to be conceived; such an excuse is to no purpose. But yet withal woe must
note that man is not to be excused from guilt in misunderstanding. First, be
cause he willingly brought this defect upon himself by his Original ^^lly and
Fal^ of Secondly, Because he, through vile and vicious affections does
oftentimes contract a greater darkness and disorder than is natural to him,
even in this state of Original sin. And God, as all other Lawgivers, did not
proportion the Law given, according to the contingent dispositions of
particular men's understanding, but according to that common Scantling found
generally in Man: So that undoubtedly some men are the proper authors of their
own ignorance in divine matters, through their affected evil manners: as the
Scripture, and the Fathers jointly show.

A second General reason is from God. 1. Calling man to the knowledge of
himself, and that by his word; and never intending to alter the course of
nature, and general state of man in this life, which was, and is, to be
fallible (Infallibility being the portion of the blessed in the life to come;)
^t were not impossible that God should either by so framing his word, or so
reframing man, have secured him from erring about it, but he has not so done:
neither does it appear, how such Exemptions and privileges could consist with
his Providence more general. For,

Secondly, The Providence of God having determined to preserve humane and
divine Societies, as he had constituted; this can hardly be understood to be
more readily and safely effected than by mutual obligations, and a necessity of
mutual offices to be done one toward another. And the first thing conducing
hereunto, is, the Order of Governors and Governed, of Masters and Scholars; of
such as teach, and such as are taught in the Word. But if every man were wise
in the Laws of man, had the power of the Sword justly given into his own hands,
or the power of the Word in his own breast, then would there be no need at all
of Rulers or teachers to teach or instruct; or reprove and redress errors in
manners: because, Every man is supposed to be an independent Prince: and though
he should offend against nature it self, was not to be punished by one who had
no authority over him. Hence there fore it is, that God most wisely has
suffered an inequality of Persons in all Ages, all Faculties, all Policies, as
well divine as humane, that the more strickt the bond is, the more entire the
society and unity might also be.

Thirdly, As this discrimination secures the necessary relations between men
within themselves, so does it the dependence between God and Man, which must
never be forgotten. For, as for the Father to deliver all the writings of his
Estate to his son, and to put him in present and full possession of all his
wealth, is the next way to tempt his son to forget and disrespect him and no
more to acknowledge any duty to him; in like manner, were it so that God, at
once, should have put man in ample and absolute knowledge of his holy writings
and will, without reserving to himself the farther manifestation of difficulter
matters, there would be no address to God, no worship, no seeking to him for
satisfaction and information in the Care of his Soul. One main end and office
of prayer would be extinct. So we read that God designing the Law to the
Israelites, provided aforehand, That the ordinary Rulers should judge the people
at all time; but the hard causes, they should bring to Moses; and Moses
himself, cases too hard for him, to God: As in the Case of him that gathered
sticks on the Sabbath day, and of Zelophehads daughters.

Fourthly, God suffers this, to the end he might quicken, and excite our
Endeavors and industry in the search after his holy will so reveiled unto us.
For, were it so that all things were presently and readily obvious unto us,
there would be wanting that excellent virtue of labor, to which God has
ordained all men since the fall; to perserve them from greater mischiefs
incident to weak man. And besides, contempt and slighting are Besides those
Texts of Scripture, which by reason of wisdom and depth of sense, and mystery
laid up in them, are not yet conceived; there are in Scripture of things that
are (...) and (...) seemingly confused, (...) carrying semblance of Contrariety
and Achronisms, Metachronisms, and the like, which brings infinite obscurity to
the text. There are I say, more of them in Scripture then in any writer that I
know secular or divine. Dr. Hales Sermon. 1. p. 22.
always the consequent of what is plain and familiar to us. And therefore,
that argument which some use to prove all things evident in Scripture, and
others contrariwise, that all things are unquestionable in the Church, so that
according to the opinion of the one, a man committing himself to the holy
Scriptures, and according to the other, submitting himself to the Church, in
all things, he may promise himself security, rather than safety, do make more
against this; It being more certainly the Will of God, (while we war in the
Church militant) we should never rest secure from due solicitudes, and
temptations; but by often contentions with him to preserve our selves from
falling from the true Faith, or falling into a false Faith.

A third General reason of the obscurities in Scripture may be taken from the
Scriptures themselves: which not compared with the general ability of man's
reason and understanding only, but with other writings also, are of difficult
access: and that will be thought no calumny, if it be considered, First, That
the languages in which they were originally written are so far perished now
adays, that they are familiar to no nation, neither can the many Idioms and
proprieties of the phrase be well understood by us. Secondly, The Histories
thereof, and the several customs, rites, Civil and Religious, amongst the
Heathens, as well as Jews and Christians; the habits, gestures and acts, very
easily known and readily apprehended by such as lived in those days and
places, are now hardly to be understood. Thirdly, The difficulty of
distinguishing between Canonical and Uncanonical Writings. Fourthly, The
subtilty and artifices of Heretics, in their corrupting, if not the Letter,
yet perverting the genuine sense: Yea, the very Orthodox Expositors are
themselves so various and unconsenting in the true meaning, that they much more
distract and unsettle, than guide or promote men in the knowledge of Scripture
it self; which naked would be better understood and resolved on, then with
them. Fifthly, The seeming opposition and contradiction in Scripture, are no
little impediments to the settling of men's minds in the knowledge of them.
Sixthly, a Sixth difficulty will be, The distinguishing of things Judicial,
Ceremonial and Moral, so far as to be assured, How far it is lawful to use, or
necessary to refuse, what is prescribed by Precept, or example in the Old
Testament. Seventhly, To name no more; The several various Lections may much
offend the simplicity of such, who shall not be well informed concerning the
substantial integrity of Divine writ. And all these I recite to no other end,
than to flacken the precipitancy, and cool the impetuous and presumptious heat
of such, who, the less able they are to examine and judge, the more confident
they are to conclude out of Scriptures, what they fancy and like best:
refusing the outward and ordinary means of receiving the true sense, upon
indeed a certain truth, That Gods Spirit is the best interpreter of its own
Laws; and God is able to direct them in the sober use of them; but a most
unsound and unsafe inference from hence, that God does, or will so assist them,
when they neglect those sober outward means he has no less ordained to that
end then the former. Of which means we are in the next place here to treat.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Means of interpreting the Scripture. That they who understand Scripture
are not, for that, authorized to Interpret it decisively. The Spirit not a
Proper Judge of the Scriptures sense. Reason no Judge of Scripture. There is no
Infallible Judge of Scripture, nor no necessity of it absolute. The grounds of
an Infallible Judge examined.

THE Opinion, That all things necessary to salvation are plainly enough
delivered in Scripture, is pious, and reasonable enough, taken with its due
qualifications and limitations; namely, of Persons, of Times, of Places, and
such like. For of things supposed to be necessary, all are not to all men alike
necessary, no not to the same man, at all times. For there are some Articles of
Faith that are sufficiently explained and propounded to him, others are not so;
and therefore in relation to such a person, not so necessary to be explicitly
believed. Again, some points of Religion are necessary to be received for their
own sakes, after due proposal, others are necessary to be received for the sake
of others; and so imediately only necessary. The Articles in the Creed of the
Apostles are most of the former sort, to be, for their own sakes, believed: But
the Articles of the Church, and its power, and authority, (which I take not to
be mentioned in the Creed as most do) are necessary for the preservation of the
true Faith it self: For without the use and receiving of Discipline, there can
be no Church properly so called (as may hereafter be prooved) and without a
Church there can be no long continuance of Faith. Therefore, from hence it is
not difficult to null the pretensions of some rank Disputants, who lay it as a
Principal foundation, and so reasonable, that it scarce needs any thing but
clamours and out cries to make it take effect on them that shall dare to reject
it, That nothing is necessarily to be offered to the Faith of any, or to be by
him received, which is not expressed in holy writ. For in holy writ, it is
necessary to observe and obey such as are set over us in the Lord, so far as we
are not convinced, that they determine or impose any thing contrary to the word
of God. And for ought does appear, it is as necessarily required that we should
depend upon our Guides in the Church for the due meaning of the Scriptures, as
upon the suggestions of Gods Spirit which refuses not, but requires such
outward means concurring with its direction. For nothing can be more absurd or
vain than simply to depend upon divine intimations of Gods Spirit, because it
is all sufficient, of it self, to such purposes. For it is not only sufficient
to them, but to all other, as well divine as natural ends; and yet to so rest
on it as to neglect or pass over contemptuously other means, is rather to
provoke God to deny the ordinary assistance of it. For God does not act in the
world according to his power, but according to his Will and Promise made unto
us. It is true, that Christ has promised in St. Matthew, Whatsoever ye ask in
my name believing, ye shall receive; and Math. 21. 22.
by St. Luke more expressly, If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts
Luke 11. 13.
unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy
Spirit to them that ask him. These, and such like promises of being invested
with Gods blessed Spirit, must not be so absolutely understood, as that all who
simply crave it, should forthwith certainly be therewith endowed; because St.
James (as other places of Scripture) explains and restrains this large promise,
according to the Oeconomie, or more general tenor of the Gospel, i. e. That we
ask aright, and believing, which whether we in prayer do duly observe, may be
well doubted of us; though we doubt not of the Thesis it self, or Rule, That he
that asks aright shall receive.

And besides, these are senses in which such promises are truly verified, and
Gods Spirit truly given, and yet not a full importment of all the graces which
flow from it. For they, who at first were called to the Faith of Christ, and
baptized, were endued with the holy Spirit, and yet not presently instated in
the discerning of all the mysteries of Christian Faith, but still depended upon
the Prophets and Apostles, and interpreters of Gods will, for the attaining of
his will even revealed in General. For according to the known distinction,
there are spiritual Gifts signally so called, and spiritual Graces. And some
men may receive the influence of Gods Spirit in the way of Grace, which
sanctifies the will and affections, and not of Gifts, which illuminates the
mind and understanding; and that not only to the use of things absolutely
necessary to our Salvation, but to the benefit of others.

Add hereunto, That notwithstanding the Spirit is so sufficient of it self, and
God does grant it to them who ask it of them; We know that generally it is not
granted to any, but in the way which Christ ordained the same, and that was,
that first, it should descend (as it also did) immediately and primarily upon
the Church representative, or Ruling; who were then his Apostles and holy
Disciples; and in like manner is it still to be expected soberly, through the
mediation of such as are by Christ set to govern the Church, and rule under
him, herein succeeding the Apostles; and not immediately, and by a leap from
the head to the lowest members: which though it may be, yet is so rarely, that
none can without another extraordinary confirmation, rest satisfied that so it
is really with him.

Lastly, for our clearer proceeding, We are herein to distinguish between the
attaining to the true sense of Scripture, and the decision or determination of
Controversies according to the Scripture. And that the most important Query is
not so much, Whether a man has the Spirit, or not, or whether he has the
truest and most genuine meaning of the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures, or
not; but how this should be made known and manifested so far unto others, as
that they should rationally and soberly rest satisfied in the opinions of the
said pretenders to such truths. For, its well and smartly said in this doubt,
The Question is not, Whether the Spirit in a Man or Church, or the Scripture,
(though this last way is very improperly expressed) be the best Judge of the
Sense of Scripture; but where it resides, to such purposes? And what a great
stir is made to little purpose, while the former is so easily granted on all
sides, and there is nothing done at all to convince a sober man or Christian,
That such or such persons are they we ought expect the dictates of Gods Spirit
from. For, Judgment, properly so called, can never be separated from Authority,
or lawful presiding over others, joined with power to oblige to such sentence
as shall be passed: but how this should be competible to single, or many
Persons agreeing in the same thing, in their private capacity; yea though
enabled with the spirit more than ordinary, cannot well be understood. So that
at most, they can be judges of controversies only for themselves, and that at
their own peril; and can do no more than persuade, advise, and exhort, not
oblige others to think as they do: But Judges must, and ought to do more, or
they had as good do nothing. So that, that which has found great acceptance
and applause by too many, does upon examination prove very insignificant and
impertinent to the resolution of the difficulty in hand, viz. That things that
are necessary are obvious in Scripture, and, Every man is Judge to himself:
granting; I say, This; (which is yet really untrue) yet scarce any thing is
said to the purpose; which enquired not so much, How a man might persuade
himself, but how, and with what influence he may proceed to the conviction and
reducing of others; so that the essential to a Church be not destroyed, as it
certainly must be, where no communion is; and there will infallibly cease all
communion where it is merely arbitrary for Christians to believe and judge and
walk and worship as they please. For, this it is for every man to judge for
himself. Will it be yet farther said, That we should bear with one another, and
live peaceably and charitably one with another, and not molest each other for
his Judgment; If it be, as I know it is; I reply first, That this
plausibility, without possibility, is not true according to the opinions of
them who use it. For they certainly hold, That Heresy and Schism are not to be
endured or born withal. Christ and God must not be blasphemed by unsound
opinions, or profane or superstitious actions: and this diversity, yea,
contrariety of judging, must needs find these faults in one another, very
often; and consequently, be of opinion, That they are not to be suffered; and
Charity must not be so far mistaken or abused, as to licentiate such enormities.

But, What if after all this contention for the Spirit, it be not judge at all,
as in truth it is not, in any proper sense? For, the Spirit is only the due
qualification of the Person, or Persons, not simply to judge (for that descends
upon them by being ordinarily, and orderly constituted over the Church of
Christ) but to judge aright; and to give faithful and unerring sentence in
matters under debate and question.

And the same may be, in proportion, affirmed of Reason termed by some, who
would seem to excel others in reason, most improperly, as well as
unreasonably, Judge of Controversies; For all judgment, disquisition, and
expositions, are made by Persons, not by things. Reason indeed is the
Instrument whereby a Person is enabled to judge, or find out the truth; unto
which unless there be a due accession of Authority and Power, such reason,
though very exquisite and happy, must keep within its own doors, and judge at
home for it self, and not for others: nor contrary to more public and
autoritative determinations, without the peril of being taxed of Arrogance, and
it self justly condemned, if not for the Inward errors of the mind, for the
outward errors in ill managing truths.

If it were so, That Reason in men were infallible, we ought not to stand upon
nicities of terms, or improper language. But for men to deny others the Seat
and Power of Judicature, because they may err; and to take it to themselves, as
if the spirit of Error had no power over them, is at the same time a grievous,
though pleasing error, both against Reason and common justice too.

And if it be said, That every man is bound by the Law of nature, being endued
with reason, to use that reason, and not bruitishly to suffer himself, he knows
not or cares not whether, to becarried by others Reasons, and not his own: I
retort, And every man is obliged by the Law of Nations, which is a more refined
principle than that of gross Nature properly taken, to contain himself in the
order of Community he is placed, and to submit to the reason of common
Judgment, no less than his own. For, undoubtedly, until every man in private
and particular, be unerrable (which is not to be expected on this side heaven)
there will diverse inconsistent judgments prevail, and divide one from
another; and cause such a breach as the society, whether divine or humane, will
soon perish, and come to nothing. But granting what was before demanded, That
every man must act according to his reason above the nature of beasts; this
does not conclude, That therefore he must be let alone; and not brought, even
by force, to submit to others, against such reason. First, Because it is not
resolved by any but a man's own deceitful opinion, That it is really reason
which is so presumed to be. Secondly, Because he that is so constrained to
submit his reason, is not thereby denied either the nature or use of his, but
still much transcendeth the capacity of beasts: For, He discusses, he
discourses, he judges rationally, after the manner of men; even when the effect
of all these Acts are contrary to reason. And lastly, In wise men, and good
humble Christians, there is a superior principal of reasonableness to that of
mere direct nature: For, That he that has most reason on his side and (when
that it self is controverted) he that according to appearance of Circumstances,
may lay the fairest claim to that, is to be followed, no rational man can deny.
Therefore, should a Man's private reason persuade him, That he has found out
the truth, and yet at the same time assure him, That he is no less fallible
than another man; and therefore may possibly embrace and hug a false conception
with as much fondness as a true; and withal, That private Judgments are not in
themselves so safe as public, nor single, as many. What violence were this to
his reason, nay, how much more rational than the first simple Act, to comply
with the Reason of others, whom reason also requires to listen to and obey; and
Scripture much more?

From hence we may rightly conclude against both extremes in these days, who
yet agree in this very ill-grounded opinion, That there must be an Infallible
Director or Judge, or we cannot submit to them, in matters of Faith and our
Salvation. This is absolutely untrue, both in humane and divine matters. Who
sees not indeed that it were to be wished for, and above all things desired?
Who sees not the great inconvenience for want of such a standard of opinions as
this? But can we rationally conclude therefore, that so it is? Or has God, or
ought he, of his necessary goodness and wisdom (as some have ventured to
affirm) to grant all things, that are infallibly good for man? Is it not
sufficient, that a fair (though not infallible) way is opened to attain the
truth here, and bliss hereafter; but every one must find it? Is it little or no
absurdity, That infinite never come to means of truth, and so great, that many
who enjoy them, do not receive the benefit by them.

Again, Are good manners and virtues no less essential to Salvation than Faith?
and is there no infallible Judge of manners? Is there no infallible Casuist?
And must there be of points of Faith? How many have the infallible Rule of holy
Life, and yet mistake either in the sense or application of it, so far as to
perish in unknown Sins? And yet none have, to prevent that great and common
evil, called for an infallible Censour, whose determinations might settle
doubtful consciences in greatest safety, and silence all apologies which are
wont to be made for our sins and errors, and so bring us nec essarily to truth
or leave us under self and affected condemnation.

But, The Ground of this mistake being farther searched into, will be found
very weak and fallacious. An infallible Faith (say they) must have an
infallible Judge: And of these some assume thus. There is no man infallible;
Therefore no man can be Judge of Faith: Others assume thus. But there is, and
must be an infallible Faith; Therefore, there must be an infallible Judge. So
that we see, both would have infallible Judges; but differ only in their choice
of them. For, The former would have the Scriptures Judge and Rule, which is
very honest; but very simple. The later would have some external Judge; which
has much more of reason in it: And fails only in the choice of this Judge, or
in the description of him. For, There is nothing more unreasonable than to
ordain that which is under debate to be Judge of it self; besides the great
absurdity of confounding the Rule or Law; and the Interpreter and Judge. And,
There is nothing more fallacious than to confound Causes and occasions
together; as the later opinion does. For, If the Church, or whatever Judge may
be supposed, were the true direct cause of our Faith; then indeed it would
necessarily follow; That our Faith could no ways be infallible, unless the
Judge were also infallible; the effect not exceeding the cause, nor the
Conclusion the Premises or propositions from whence it was deduced: But,
Because the Church is only on Occasion, or a Cause without which we should
neither believe the Scriptures in general to be the Word of God, nor any
sentence to be duly drawn from the same, there is no necessity at all of such a
consequence. For, The Infallibility now spoken of, is either the thing
believed, which is the Word of God, of which the Church, I hope, is no Cause,
or the Grace of Faith excited and exercised by us through the Spirit of Grace
in us: the mynistery of the Church serving thereunto: acording to St. Paul
saying, We therefore as workers together with 2 Cor. 6. 1.
him, beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.

For, as in things natural, He that applies Actives to Passives, that is, the
Cause proper, to the matter about which the Action is, is not the proper or
natural cause of the Effect, but the occasion only: yet is said vulgarly, so to
be; as when a man applies fire to combustible matter, he may (though
improperly) be said to burn it, when it is the fire, and not he, that burns it:
So the Church or Judge of Scriptures sense applying the same to a capable
subject, the effect is true and infallible Faith, but it is not the effect of
the Church, or instrument (or mean rather) but of the Holy Spirit, of Grace,
which takes occasion from thence to produce Faith, and that infallible. For;
Were this Infallibility, we now speak of, the Churches then, when ever the
Church should so propound and urge points of Faith, they must needs have an
effect in the Soul: For, if they say, The Church teaches in an humane way, they
say she teaches in a fallible way: which overthrows all. And from this is
cleared that difficulty, which opposes a Judge of Scripture and Faith, because
none could be found infallible; For not making the Judge the cause of Faith but
occasion, he may be necessarily required to Faith: God who is the only
principal cause with his holy word, seldom or never concurring without those
outward means. And therefore, though I readily enough grant, That the
Scriptures are so plainly written, that a single simple person wanting greater
helps to attain to the abstruser sense of them, and using his honest and simple
endeavor, may easily find so much of the Rule of Faith and holy Life, as to be
saved by them; yet I cannot say the same of any men who presuming on Gods
power, against his promise, which includes the use of outward means, or
mistaking his promise for absolute, when it is conditional, shall look no
farther than their own wits shall lead them.

Now, The outward means to which God has annexed his promise of Grace may be
these.

First, That which we have here handled, a general and sober submission to the
Guides of our youth and our spiritual Fathers and Pastors in Christ; which to
forsake, is the part of a wanton and fornicating Soul, according to Solomon.
This, common Reason and nature it self seem to require of all Prove. 2. 17.
under Authority, by the disposition of Almighty God; That they in the first
place hearken unto the voice and explication of the Church, wherein they are
educated, until such time as a greater manifestation of truth shall withdraw
them unwillingly from the same. For, so long as Senses are equally probable on
both sides, we are obliged by conscience to our proper Fathers in Christ. For,
to do otherwise, is to provoke God to deliver such over as light and gadding
Huswifes, to the impure embraces of any seducer to Schism and Heresy. But,
when such a conviction shall be wrought in us, of the errors and unsafety of
that communion in which we were educated, That we must either forsake that, or
Christ; then must the advice and sentence of our Savior prevail with us, in
St. Luke. If any Lu^. 14. 26.
man comes to me, and hate not his Father and Mother and Wife and Children, and
Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own Life, also, he cannot be my Disciple. And
as we should go against common prudence and humanity it self, out of an
opinion, That our Parents natural may err, and set us upon unwarrantable Acts,
to turn them off, and deny all obedience unto them, least they should lead us
into errors; so should we do very unchristianly, and against apparent precepts
of Scripture, contemptuously and proudly to deny submission both of Judgment
and practice unto our spiritual Parents, because, forsooth, they are men, and
may err, the Spirit of disobedience tacitly insinuating unto us a much more
pestilent opinion, That while we do as best likes our selves, we shall be much
more safe, if not infallible, as if we might not err. But of this, as we have
already spoken in part, so may there offer it self a more proper place, more
fully to speak afterward.

A second general means to attain the true sense of Scripture is indeed the
Spirits assistance, by which it was at first composed: There is certainly none
like to that. For, (as St. Paul has it.) What man knows the 1 Cor. 2. 11.
things of a man save the Spirit of a man, which is in him? Even so the things
of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God.

The only hazard we here run is, (and that no small one) That we presume not
lightly upon such a peculiar guidance of the Spirit, which we have not.

The general remedy therefore of this evil, is that prescribed by our Lord
Christ, viz. Prayer. For, Thus he speaks by St. Matthew. All things whatsoever
ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. And more Mat. 21. 22. Luke 11.
13.
particularly by St. Luke. If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts
unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy
Spirit to them that ask them.

And a Third means is when, being soundly and well instructed in the general
Augustine. de Doct. christ. Lib. 3. cap. 2.
drift and design of Faith, or Gods holy word, we by the Analogy which one part
of Faith must bear with another, do judge of the truth, or error of any thing
contained in Scripture.

And, To this belongs a Fourth, as it is commonly reckoned, viz. due and Id.
16. cap. 3.
prudent comparing of several places of Scripture; knowing that no sense can be
admitted of Scripture, which disagreeth with any part of Scripture.

Skill or knowledge of the original tongues in which they were wrote, may be
accounted a Fifth means, and herein a special observation of the several
Idioms of both Old and New Testament.

Lastly, Consideration of the Histories of Countries, Persons, and Customs, to
which Holy writ do relate. To these, several others of inferior Order might be
named, but I here pass them, to come to a more exact and seasonable treatise of
Tradition, so much conducing to the abovesaid ends.

CHAP. XII.
Of Tradition as a Means of Understanding the Scriptures. Of the Certainty of
unwritten Traditions; that it is inferior to Scripture, or Written Tradition.
No Tradition equal to Sense or Scripture in Evidence. Of the proper use of
Tradition.

TO this place is due the Treating of Tradition, as well for the better
completing of what may yet seem wanting in directions for the attaining the
proper sense of the Rule of Faith, the Scripture, as because of the
pretensions, in its behalf, made by some to an equal share in the Rule it self;
by laying down this fundamental Division of the Word of God, into Written;
commonly called Scripture: and Unwritten; called Tradition.

And, That the Word of God may be left unwritten, as well as written, is
Moreman said, the Church was before the Scriptures -- Philpo^ showed that his
argument was fallacious. For he took the Scriptures only to be that which is
written by men in letters, whereas in very deed all Prophesy uttered by the
Spirit of God was counted to be Scripture. Fox Martyr. Vol. 3. page 29.
undeniable; nay, That actually it was delivered by word of mouth, before it
was committed to writing, is evident from the infinite Sermons of the Apostles,
Evangelists, and Evangelical Preachers, who declared the same. For, To them who
were contemporary to the immediate Disciples of Christ, the word of God was
delivered by speech, to the end it might be written, so far as it seemed
expedient to Divine Providence, for the perpetual benefit of succeeding
generations: but to us, The word of God is preached vocally, or orally, because
it is written. And so we read our Savior himself used it against the Devil and
incredulous Jews: not quoting the uncertain and unecessary Traditions remaining
with the Jews, but the written Word, saying by St. Matthew; Mat. 4. V. 4. 7. 10.
Joh. 8. 17.
It is written, man shall not live by bread alone. And verse the seventh, It is
written again. And the third time, It is written, thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, etc. And so by St. John, and innumerable other places, It is written
in your Law. Christ in all his disputes against his Jewish adversaries, seldom
or never arguing from their Traditions, which were many, but from the written
word of God only.

And notwithstanding, speaking Philosophically, it is not repugnant to reason,
That things delivered from Father to Son, through many ages, should persevere
in their pristine integrity, and be preserved incorrupt in the main; yet is it
inconsistent with the Fallibility of humane nature, to secure them in all
Points from violation, either without writing, or with. All the world
concurring in this: That the Invention of Letters was a special gift of God
toward Mankind, for the more safe and profitable continuance of things passed
to following times. Such an intolerable Paradox Cresies Exomologesis.
is that which modern Wits (their scarce tolerable Tenets urging them
thereunto) have of late vented, and to their best defended; That Tradition,
taken in contradistinction to Writing, is more safe than writing; as if writing
had not all the privileges belonging to oral Tradition, with great advantage:
or because written monuments may suffer by tract of time, and passing so many
hands, unwritten traditions might pass so many ages and mouths inviolate: When,
while we see too great variety in the reading, or letter of books, we could be
so blind as not to behold infinite more of the same nature in Traditions: It is
as seldom found, That a tale should be reported in the very same phrase or
words it was at first told, as it is that things transcribed with any common
honesty, or diligence, should fail considerably, so much as in the Letter. And
if they say, in Tradition, forms of words are not so much to be stood upon,
does it not altogether hold as good when this Tradition is written? How then do
not men blush to argue so boldly, and at the same time so weakly?

There is therefore a twofold Infallibility to be distinguished, as well in
Relation to unwritten Doctrines, as written; the one consisting in the Matter
delivered; the other in the manner so delivering: And truly, as to this later,
it cannot be said, without some strong Presumption to the contrary, the written
Traditions which are the Scriptures, have been so precise^y and absolutely
defended from either the common injuries of time, or special miscarriages
incident to humane frailty, or perhaps, as some conjecture, the studious
mischiefs of sacrilegious hands laid on them, as not one title, one word, one
period should not have been damnified thereby. The Providence of God (granting
some such minuter defections from the Original Copies) has been singular in
preserving them in that degree of perfection and entireness, we now enjoy them:
So that infinite is the disparity in this case between them and unwritten
Traditions, which none have been so audacious positively to affirm (though
indeed their large and loose reasons seem to tend that way) that any one
unwritten doctrine has been conserved unto us in the same form of words it was
at first delivered to the Church.

And the like, though not so great advantage is to be acknowledged on the
Scriptures part, compared with the pretended unwritten word of God, in
reference to the matter: and that in these three respects. 1. The Evidence. 2.
The Importance; and 3. The Influence that the doctrine of the Scriptures have,
and ought to have over all Traditions.

And for the first; It is impossible (taking traditions as they are
distinguished from Scripture) that the like grounds of Faith should be offered
to us, as we have above shown are to be found, proving the Scriptures to be the
word of God. For are all, or some only Gods word? All cannot be, because
Traditions in several Places of the world have been diverse, and even contrary.
Because some are acknowledged to have been the Constitutions of Men, or the
Church, since the Apostolical Age. Because many are acknowledged to have been
quite lost. Because many have been confessed to be changed, of them which
remain. Now if the Church has failed in the due Custody of such treasures
committed to her, How can any man be assured sufficiently of the integrity of
the remainer? How can the Church be esteemed an Infallible Witness of
traditions? And who can but admire the Confidence of such Patrons of the
Churches fidelity, or rather felicity (for I would not, nor need I call in
question its good will and Honesty) in her Office of Preserving the Monuments
of our Religion untouched by errors, who by reasons would demonstrate that that
cannot be, which we see done before our eyes? For at other times the same
Party, if not the same persons, stick not to profess, that diverse Antienter
Traditions are perished, and more modern have succeeded them. They say, that
some Traditions are as (...) as sense can make them: The Tradition that there
were such famous Cities as Nineve and Babylon, and are such as Constantinople
and Rome, requires the same Faith, as the beholding them with our Eyes. But
first, It should have been said in the argument, They are as evident as those
things we are informed of by our senses: but this is far from truth: All the
testimonies of Past and present persons affirming that to be so which I have no
sense of immediately, being abundantly sufficient to beget a belief, but not
equalling in evidence the testimony of any man's well-disposed senses. For does
not this so general testimony it self, depend upon a man's senses receiving the
same? Or can any man be so well assured, upon the Credit of any persons
whatever, that the Apostles delivered such things to be believed and observed
by the Church, as if he himself immediately received the same from them?

If it be said, that the case of Ecclesiastical Tradition is far different from
humane, in that the Church is divinely assisted to such ends, supposing this at
present, still we are no less intregued then before. For, as is said, The truth
of a thing, and the Evidence whereby it appears to be true, are very much
different: And here it will be no less difficult to make such a supposed
Assistance appear, then the tradition it self, which it commends to the World,
upon such pretenses. And therefore, they who have sifted this matter more
narrowly, and stated it most rationally, have thought it best to forsake such
topics, at present, as Extraordinary Assistances: and Hen. Holdeni Analysis
Fid.
tell us plainly, that what the Church does in this case, she does it not as
divinely directed, but as so many Men delivering their testimony, which is
true, but then, what becomes of Infallibility; all men singly and conjointly,
as men, being fallible? Well therefore they proved to tell us, That to a jugde
of Controversies, Credible Testimony, or moral infallibility may suffice; and
to this I agree in the main, though the term Moral Certainty, and Moral
Infallibility, seems to me as vain and improper as it is modern: it upon
inquiry, amounting to no more then the old Probability well and reasonably
grounded

The next thing in Holy Writ, is the much greater importance the things therein
contained are of, above unwritten doctrines. For who of all the Ancients, but
such as are by tradition stigmatized for Heretics for such their Basil. Ma.
de spiritu sancto (...).
opinions, did constitute any rule of Faith distinct from the Scriptures; or
bring any to stand in competition therewith? Some ('it is true) have
distinguished between Dogmes of Traditions and doctrines of the Scripture, and
haveaffirmed, That as well the one as the other ought to be received by a good
Christian. All this we agree to; how, we shall show by and by more fully; and
here by comparing this by the words of St. John, saying, This Joh. 4. 21.
Commandment have we from him, that he that loves God, love his brother also.
By which it is not required that any Christian should with the same kind or
degree of Love, love his neighbor, with which he loves God. For we must love
God only for his own sake, and our brother for Gods sake. Nay, when God says
we must love our neighbor as our selves, he does not exclude difference in
degrees of love: In like manner, when it is said, That we ought to believe and
receive the unwritten as well as written traditions, it was never intended by
that excellent Father, that we should admit them in equal veneration. For most
things there by him instanced in, are apparently extrinsical to Faith.
Therefore the true meaning is, That no good Son of the Catholic Church, can,
or ought to refuse the customs, or practices, or forms of words concerning the
doctrine of Christ, because they are not so expressed or contained in Scripture
as other matters are.

And if we mark, we shall not find any one thing exacted of Christians in the
purest and most flourishing state of the Church, as points of Faith, which only
depended upon unwritten Tradition; and were not thought to have the written
word of God for their warrant and foundation. And in this one thing (were there
no more) does the prerogative of the Scripture manifest it self sufficiently
above Traditions distinct from it: That whatever virtue or credit they have, is
first of all owing to the Scriptures. For otherwise, why should not the
Traditions of the Jew or Mohammedan be as credible to a Christian as they of the
Church; but that he sucked in his principle with his Mothers milk; That the
written word of God has given so fair testimony of the Church and its
traditions? For the testimony of the Church otherwise, would certainly be no
more to be valued than that of any other society, of like moral honesty. So
that the Scriptures must be the very First principle of all Christian belief.

But here steps in the old objection drawn from a most eminent Father of the
Church, which Extollers of tradition can as well forget their own names as
leave out of their disputations on this subject; though according to their
Augustine.
custom they have a very bad memory to bear in mind what has been
sufficiently replied to it. I should not, says that Father, have believed the
Scriptures but for the Church: and yet we have said we should not have believed
the Church but for the Scriptures. How can these stand together? Very well, if
we please to distinguish the several ways of information: for in the same
there must be granted a repugnancie. And the distinction is much the same with
what we have before laid down, viz. Of the Occasion, and the direct Cause of
Faith. For though the Churches tradition be an Introduction to the belief of
the Scriptures, and such a necessary Cause without which no man ordinarily
comes so much as to the knowledge of them: yet it does not at all follow, that
through the influence of that supposed Cause, an effect of Faith is wrought in
the Soul concerning them; but from a superior illumination and interior
power, which has been generally Joh. 4.
required to such praeternatural Acts. As the Woman of Samaria brought her
fellow Citizens to Christ, but was not the author of that faith which after
they had in him as the true Messiah; or as the Horse I ride on carrying me from
London to York is not the proper Cause that I see that City, but mine own
senses; though I perhaps should never have seen it otherwise.

But another more Ancient and no less venerable Father of the Church is
Irenaeus.
here brought in, demanding, What if nothing had been written, must we not then
have altogether depended on the Traditions? To such as extend this quaerie too
far, I move the like question. What if we had no Traditions at all; must not
then every man have shifted as well as he could, and traded upon the final
stock of natural reason in him? Or was it impossible that man should come to
bliss without the superadded light outwardly exhibited? That as the case
stands, man ordinarily cannot be saved without such received revelations, as
are dealt to us from the Church, I believe: But upon supposal, that no such
means were extant, that there should be no other Ordinary way of Gods revealing
himself to man in order to his salvation, believe it who will, for me. I answer
therefore directly, No question but tradition would have sufficed, if nothing
had been committed to writing. For either God would have remitted of that
rigor (as no man can doubt but he might have made the terms of the Covenant
fewer, and lighter) with which we now stand obliged to him according to that
most equal Law of the Gospel, as well as Reason, Unto whom much is given, of
him shall be much required: and to Luke 12. 48. Mat. 25.
whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. Neither is it
probable, against the intent of Christ's most excellent Parable, in St. Matthew:
that of that Person, or that People to whom he has delivered but two, or five
Talents, he should extort the Effect of ten. Well therefore does that Father
argue against such as should dare to consine God only to Scripture, and so
superciliously or contemptuously look on the Traditions of their Christian
Fathers, as not worth the stooping to take up; yea, as necessarily warring
against the Word written: Whenas it is certain, a thing is written because it
is first declared; and is the Word of him that speaks, no less before, than
after it is written; and not so, because it is written. St. Paul therefore
joins them both together, in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, saying:
Therefore brethren stand steadfast and hold 2 These. 2. 15.
the Traditions, which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle.
Here are plainly both written Traditions, and unwritten; and written Word of
God, and unwritten: and they differ only in the several ways of promulgation,
and not in the Law of God. And it is more then probable, That those first
principles of Christian Faith were not received of St. Paul in writing; of
which he speaks in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4.
concerning the Incarnation, Passion and Resurrection of our Savior, nor
delivered in writing at his first publication; yet were no less the word of God
then, than afterward.

Yet, as this sufficiently allayes the heat of hostility indiscreetly conceived
against all Traditions, even for the very names sake, which is become odious to
us; so does it not so much favor the contrary party, as has been phantasi'd.
For it is observable, That there is a very great difference between the
Tradition now touched, and that so commonly and passionately disputed of in the
Church. That was, and may be called a Tradition, as every thing expressed by
Word or Writing, whereby one man delivers his mind (for so the English Phrase
has it, not amiss) to another transiently: But the Tradition now under debate
may be described, A constant continuation of what is once delivered, from
Generation to Generation. For, No man can with any propriety of speech, term
what is not a year or two in standing Tradition. Tradition is a long custom of
believing. The things which are so called in the Scriptures, are not such; and
therefore can be no president for those of these days. There being not the
like reason, that we should give the same respect, or esteem so Apostolical,
that which now is so reputed, and that which any man's memory might assure him
was so in very deed the Apostles Doctrine.

This controversy then seems to come to this issue. First, in Reason, Whether
Oral and Memorial Tradition can be so secure, as Scriptural? The resolution of
which doubt almost every man may make sufficiently, of himself, and has been
competently treated of above.

The other Question is about matter of Fact, Whether the Church of God did ever
so unanimously agree in the necessity, validity or Sacredness of any Traditions
not contained in the written Word of God, as to equal them with this? This we
absolutely deny: And upon the account of Tradition it self: There being no such
Tradition to be found in all the Records of the Church; that Tradition is so
highly to be valued. Again, there appearing consent sufficient in the Church
for many ages, That as to the Material parts of Christian doctrine the
Scriptures do sufficiently instruct us, as a Rule, and Law of believing. For,
If the Law of Moses, as a Law, was sufficient before the Prophets added to it,
for the People of God under that Dispensation. And the Law and the Prophets
were still sufficient till John and Christ, is to believed, That the Law of
Christians delivered by Christ's appointment should fall short of the same ends
now? It is truly affirmed. That what St. Paul writes in commendation of
Scripture, was intended chiefly, if not only of the books of the Old Testament,
viz. That they were able to make a man wise unto Salvation through Faith that
is in Christ Jesus: and, All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for correction, for instruction in Righteousness: That
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Now, if
the Scriptures of the Old Testamant were sufficient to bring a man to the Faith
of Christ, and to instruct him to Salvation, can any man reasonably doubt,
Whether the much clearer, and fuller manifestation of the Doctrine of Christ,
and Salvation, by the books of the New Testament, are sufficient to the same
end, joined to the obscurer of the Old? I know there are that say expressly, No:
and endeavor to make it good by several instances very material to Faith; and
yet not expressed in Scripture; and yet again, of force to be believed by all
that would be good Christians: As the Articles of the Trinity, and of Christ's
Person consisting of humane and divine nature: Of his being born of the blessed
Virgin. Some other are added hereunto, but they are either such as are neither
favored by Scripture, nor good Tradition; as Invocation of Saints, Purgatory,
etc. or have only a general warrant from Scripture and Tradition; and such are
they which are of a mutable nature, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church: which
ought not, when confirmed by long consent and use in the Church, lightly to be
refused and cast off; so when any Church, having power over its own body, shall
think fit to alter, is that Church to be refused as a true Church, by others.
But to the first of these, we stick not openly to profess, That it suffices to
believe so much only as is really contained in, and soberly deducible from the
Scriptures; taking these articles of Faith separately from certain accessory
obligations of all good Christians. For instance. It is not required to believe
the doctrine now established in the Catholic Church concerning the Trinity, in
the forms at present received from the nature of the Articles themselves, which
may with safety sufficient be assented to, as they are simply found in
Scripture: yet considering, That Heretics have stirred up most dangerous and
sacrilegious doubts, to the obviating them, and securing the main stake which
would be endangered if farther explications were not found out and imposed, it
is needful to receive them also, or at least not to oppose and declare against
them. For it is very well known, there passed some ages before the Articles of
the Trinity of Persons were so much stood on, or so well settled as now they
are, and that Tradition was as much to seek as the written Word of God, to
bring things to that pass they now are in.

And for Christ's manner of birth, I know no such Tradition either written or
unwritten which required anciently any more than to believe barely, That the
eternal Son of God became man, and was incarnate, and born of a woman, who was
a pure Virgin; but probable circumstances and reverence to the high Mystery of
Christ's Person obliged to the honorary part of that Article. And the like
answer may be made to another instance about Paedobaptism, which some, as
occasion offers, will say is required in Scripture; and again, it serving at
other times their turn better to deny Bellarmin.
it, will hold the contrary. For Baptism of Infants, as Infants, is not indeed
required by Scripture; but as persons saveable, it is: the rule general in
Scripture running thus, Except a man be born of water and the Holy John. 3. 5.
Ghost he cannot be saved. It is not said, unless a man be born by water, while
he is an infant or Child, but absolutely. For had it been so expressed, just
doubt might have been made, whether a man baptized at his full age, were
effectually baptized? Neither is Baptism appointed signally and precisely for
men in years (though none but such at the first preaching of the Gospel who
could profess their Faith could be capable of it) but indefinitely is it spoken
without any limitation; and therefore sufficiently implied. Other instances
against the plenitude of Scripture as a Rule of Faith have either already been
touched (as that which tells us, It is nowhere contained in Scripture that the
Scriptures are the word of God, neither can it be proved by it: for no more can
it be demonstrated by Tradition) or may be easily brought to the same end.

To conclude this point, having showed what we mean by Tradition, and what it
serves not to, it were unreasonable to leave it slurr'd so, and not to give it
its due in showing the great use thereof in the Church of Christ. For however
we make it not supreme, nor coequal with the written word of God, it may
without any offense or invasion of Divine Right or Authority claim the next
place to it; and as Joseph to Pharaoh be greater then all the the people
besides, but inferior to Pharaoh in the Throne. Of God it is said, Thou satest
in the Throne judging right. God now judges by his Word Psalm. 9. 4.
written, as by a Law and Rule of faith, as is showed. Yet, I see no reason for
the injudicious zeal and reverence of such who think they cannot give enough
unto the Scriptures, unless in word and pretense (for it is no more, themselves
constantly acting contrary to their profession) they ascribe all the Form of
Judging unto the Scriptures, and all things determinable to their decision. I
wish with all my heart (so far am I from an evil eye or niggardly affection
toward Scripture) they could make their words good, when they tell us all
things are contained in Scripture, It is a perfect Rule of all emergent doubts
and acts in the Church, It is Judge and Law both of Controversies; but alas,
they cannot: For they take away from it more then by this rank kindness they
give to it. Gods word is Perfect as a Law, and so far as he intended it: but it
must cease to be a Law and take another nature upon it, if it were a Judge too
in any proper sense: And the Canon of Scripture must be it self variable and
mutable, if it could particularly accommodate it self to all occasions and
exigencies of Christians. But this is not only absurd, but needless. For God,
when he made men Christians, did not take away from them what they before had
as Men, but required and ordained that humane judgment and reason should be
occupied and sanctified by his divine Revelations. He in brief gave them
another, and far better Method, Aid, and Rule to judge by; and did not destroy,
or render altogether useless their Judgment even in matters sacred. To the Law
and Esaias. 8. 20.
to the Testimony (says the holy Prophet) if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. This indeed plainly declares the
Rule by which we are to walk, and Judge: but it does not tell us that the Law
it self does speak; but men according to it: And this is to Judge. Now, because
no one man, no one age, no one Church should judge for all, no nor for it self,
contrary to all, does the necessity and expediencie of Tradition, not to
affront or violate, but secure the written word of God; and that in two special
respects, appear.

First, as giving great light and directions unto the Rulers of the Church, and
limiting the uncertain and loose wit of man, which probably would otherwise
(according to its natural pronitie) fly out into new and strange senses daily,
of holy Scripture. The Records of the Church, like so many Presidents, and
Reports in our Common Law, giving us to understand Low Consuetudo etiam in
Civilibus rebus pro Lege suscipitur, cum deficit Lex; nec differt Scripturd, an
ratione consistat, quando and Legem ratio commendet. Tertul. de coron. mil.
cap. 4.
such places of Scripture were formerly understood, and on which side the case
controverted passed. And why this course in divine matters should not be
approved, I see not, unless unquiet and guilty persons shall seek, under color
of a more absolute appeal to Scripture (which is here supposed to be sincerely
appealed unto before) to wind themselves into the seat of Judicature, and at
length, not only as fallibly, but also usurpingly, decree for themselves and
others too. This event has so manifestly appeared, that there is no denying of
it, or defending it. They therefore who professedly introduce Tradition, to the
defeating and nulling of Scripture, deal indeed more broadly, and in some sense
more honestly, (as being what they seem) than they, who give all, and more then
all due to it in language, but in practice overthrow it. But we making
Tradition absolutely subordinate and subservient to Scripture, and in a word,
of the nature of a Comment and not of the Text it self, we are yet to seek not
what deceitfully and passionately (for we know enough of that already) but
soberly can be objected against it. For if it be said, Tradition is it self
uncertain, it is obscure, it is perished, it contradicts it self, and so can be
of little use: we readily join with them so far, as to acknowledge that such
traditions, and to them to whom they so appear can with no good reason be
appealed to: But we deny that there are none but such; and that such as prove
themselves to be true and honest men upon due trial and examination, ought to
be hanged out of the way, because they were found in company with thieves and
Cheats.

Supposing then, That such honest Traditions are to be found in the Church;
another great benefit redoundeth to the Church from thence, in that it does, in
some cases, supply the defects of the Law it self, the Scripture. But here, I
must first get clear of this reputed Scandal given, in that I suppose the
Scriptures defective, or imperfect: I have already, and do again profess its
plenitude and sufficiency, as far as a Rule or Law is well capable of. Now,
what God by his infinite wisdom and power might have done, I cannot question,
in contriving such an ample Law as should comprehend all future and possible
contingencies in humane affairs; but this I say, That he disposing things by
another Rule, viz. to act according to humane capacity and condition, never
did, or so much as intended to deliver such an infinite Law. Is not Moses, and
Gods dealing to him, and his ministry to God, and the people, frequently
alleged as a notable argument to convince us of the amplitude of the New
Testament? Moses (say they) was faithful in all his house: And therefore much
Heb. 3. 2.
more was Christ. Very good: and what of all this? As much as comes to nothing.
For wherein did the faithfulness of Moses consist? In pouring out unmeasurably
all that might be said touching divine matters: Or rather in delivering
faithfully and exactly all that God commanded him? This truly did Moses; and
therefore was very true and faithful to him that sent him, and gave him his
charge. This did Christ, and this did the Apostles of Christ, and his inspired
servants; and therefore were all no less faithful to God than Moses. But did
not Moses leave more cases untouched in the Administration of the Jewish
Policy, then were literally expressed? Yes surely; judging it sufficient,
that he had laid down general Rules and Precepts, according to which,
Emergencies (which might be infinite) should, by humane prudence, be reduced,
and accordingly determined. And so (choose they or refuse they) must they grant
did Christ, and his Instruments, leave the Law of the Gospel; which yet not
wanting all that can be expected from a Law, cannot modestly be pronounced
imperfect, notwithstanding (as is said) manifold particulars are not there
treated of. Now those are they we say, Tradition does in some measure supply
unto us; and the defect of Tradition it self (which has not considered all
things) is made good by the constant power of the Church, given by the
Scriptures themselves, in such cases: which require determination of
circumstances of time, place, order, and manner of Gods service, according to
the Edification of the Church of Christ.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the nature of Faith. What is Faith. Of the two general grounds of Faith.
Faith divine in a twofold sense. Revelation the Formal reason of Faith Divine.
Of the several senses and acceptations of Faith. That Historical Temperance,
and Miraculous Faith are not in nature distinct from Divine and Justifying
Faith. Of Faith Explicit and Implicit.

HAving thus spoken of the Rule of Christian Faith, and its Auxiliary,
Tradition; we are now to proceed to the Nature and Acts, the Effects, Subject,
and Object of it. For as all Christian Religion is summed up in one Notion of
Christian Faith, so all Faith may be reduced unto the foresaid Heads. Faith
taken in its greatest extent, contains as well Humane as Divine: And may be
defined, A firm assent of the mind to a thing reported. And there are two
things which principally incline the mind to believe. The Evidence of the thing
offered to the understanding, or the Fidelity and Veracity of him that so
delivers any thing unto us. For if the thing be Fides, est donum divinitus
infusum menti hominis, quae citra ullam haesitantiam credit esse verissima,
quaecunque nobis Deus per utrumque Testtradidit ac promisit. Erasm. in Symbolum.
apparent in it self, to our reasons or senses, we presently believe it: And if
the thing be obscure and difficult to be discerned by us, yet if we stand
assured of the faithfulness of him that so reports it to us, and his wisdom, we
yield assent thereunto.

But Faith properly Divine has a twofold fountain so constituting and
denominating it, The Matter believed, which is not common nor natural, but
spiritual and heavenly. But more especially that Faith is Divine, which is not
produced in the soul of Man upon any natural reasons necessarily inferring the
same, but upon a superior motive inducing unto it, that is, Authority divine;
and because it has declared and revealed so much unto us, as St. Peter
believing Christ to be the Son of God, it is said, Flesh and Boood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. This Mat. 16. 17.
was a divine Faith upon a double respect. 1. by reason of the object, Christ,
a divine person. 2. by reason of the Cause, God, by whose power he believed the
same, it not being in the power of flesh and blood, any natural reason, to
convince the judgment so far as absolutely to believe, That Christ was so the
Son of God, so that to be revealed is that which makes the Faith properly
divine, and not the divine object or thing believed. For as it has been
observed by others, any thing natural, and which by natural reason may be
demonstrated and so must be believed by a natural Faith, being also commended
unto us upon divine authority or revelation may be also believed by a divine
Faith. That there is an invisible Deity is clearly demonstrable from the
visible things of this World, and accordingly may and ought to be believed,
upon the warrant of natural reason it self, as St. Paul teaches us saying, The
Invisible things of him from the Creation of the Romans 1. 20.
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead: so that they are without excuse. That is, If God had
not revealed all this, yet men ought to believe this, out of sense and reason:
but this hinders not, but this very thing should become an article of our Creed
also, and so, because it is revealed, Form in us a divine Faith.

But we must be aware of an ambiguity in Revelation, which may mislead us. For
sometimes Revelation is used for the thing revealed: And sometimes for the Act
Revealing: that which we call now, The Revelation of St John, and in truth all
Scriptures as we have them now, are the things God did reveal unto his
servants, but the Act whereby they were revealed or the Act revealing this to
them, ended with the persons receiving them.

And this is no superfluous or curious observation, because of a received maxim
in the Schools, That without a supernatural act we cannot give due assent unto
a supernatural object, nor believe truths revealed by God without a super added
aid of Grace illuminating and inclining the mind to assent thereto. From whence
does follow, That, of all divine Faith is most properly, if not only divine,
which does believe that such things are Revealed of God, and not, That, which
supposes them to have been revealed by God, and that he said so as is expressed
unto us does believe. For this latter, even any natural man and greatest
infidel in the world would believe, who believes there is a God: it being
included and implied in the very notion of a Deity, that God cannot lie or
deceive, or affirm a thing to be, which is not. But the Christian Faith mounts
much higher then Heathens, and by the Grace of God believes that God has
Revealed such things, wherein consists his Christian Faith.

The first thing then a true believer indeed must believe, is, That the
Scriptures are the word of God; and this as it is the most fundamental, so is
it most difficult of all to one not educated in the Faith of Christians;
because it neither can be proved by Scripture, nor whatevermen, who promise
nothing less in their presumptuous methods then clear demonstrations, may say,
and argue by Tradition: The Scriptures, (though not testimony of it self, yet)
matter and manner may induce, and Tradition fortify that; but the Crown of all
true Christian Faith must be set on by Gods Grace.

A Second thing in order, is, when we believe that God has spoken such things,
that we believe the things themselves so delivered to us of God. For though as
is said, any rational heathen may well do this, yet many a Christian does it
not. For, The foo^ not in knowledge so much as practice, (...) 14. ^. ^ Ti^. ^.
9.
has said in his heart, there is no God: says the Psalmist, and St. Paul,
that many out of an evil conscience have made Shipwreck of their Faith, which
really once they had.

A third degree of Christian Faith, is, When not only we believe that God has
revealed his Law unto us, and what he has so revealed to be most faithful,
true, and holy; but obey the same. For in Scripture Faith is taken for
Obedience, and Obedience for Faith; as in the famous instance of Abraham, who
is said to believe God, and that his Faith was counted for Righteousness. And
why is Abraham said to believe God so signally* Because he was persuaded that
God bade him offer up his Son unto him? No, but because he did it by Faith, as
is witnessed in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And this acceptance of Faith is
much confirmed by the contrary Heb. 11. 17.
speech of Scripture, in whose sense, they who obey not God, are commonly said
not to believe him: as in the Book of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 9. 23.
Likewise when the Lord sent unto you from Kadesh-Barnea, saying, Go up and
possess the Land which I have given you, then ye rebelled against the
Commandment of the Lord your God, and believed him not, nor hearkened unto his
voice. And therefore in the Acts of the Apostles it is said, A great Acts. 6. 8.
company of the Priests were obedient unto the Faith. That is, believed what
was Preached by the Apostles. And yet more expressly St. Paul's phrase to the
Romans declares this, where he says, But unto them that Romans 2. 8.
are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath. For no man can so properly be said to Obey, as to
Believe a truth.

But that distinction of greatest moment to the illustrating of many
obscurities, and solving many doubts arising to Christian Readers out of the
Scripture, and especially St. Paul's Epistles, is that of Faith, into the
Doctrine of Faith or Object, and in sum, the whole New Covenant as manifested
in the New Testament: And the Act and Grace of Faith in a true Believer. The
former is that which we are required to believe: The latter signifies the
inward propension to the receiving the things so manifested in the Gospel: And
is again subdivided into Faith complexly, or generally taken, and specially:
that, as comprehending the whole duty of a true Believer, and all Christian
Graces flowing from that Fountain, and built upon that Foundation: This, as
distinct from the two other Theological Graces, Hope and Charity; of all which
St. Paul treats distinctly, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
concluding his thirteenth 1 Cor. 13. 13.
Chapter thus, And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity. And that Faith is
taken for the Doctrine of Faith, or of Christ revealed in the Gospel, is Acts
6. 7.
very plain and very necessary to be noted; as in the place to the Romans even
now touched: where, as Obedience is taken for the act of believing; Faith is
taken for the Gospel it self: And in the same Book it is written that Felix
sent for Paul and heard him concerning the Faith in Christ: that Acts. 24. 24.
su^^^y was the Gospel or Doctrine of Christ, or through Christ. And St. Paul
to Timothy, Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times, 1 Timothy
4. 1.
some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and
doctrines of Devils: Where Doctrines of Devils is opposed to Faith, the
Doctrine of Christ. And in the Acts, Elimas is said to seek to turn away the
Governor Acts. 13. 8.
from the Faith. And so Act. 14. 22. And Faith is not only so taken for the
Gospel as opposed to Gentile, but Jewish works and worship, or the Law of
Moses; and that most frequently in St. Paul's Epistles, as shall appear more
plainly by and by.

In the mean time, here preparing grounds for a more important disquisition, it
will not be amiss to note other supposed kinds of Faith: of which four are
vulgarly by modern Divines pitched upon, as of a quite different nature and
form. They are Historical Faith, Temporary Faith, which last but for a season,
Miraculous Faith, seen in working of miracles. All which terms of Faith I
without any more adoo, grant to have ground in Scripture as so many distinct
Acts, but not kinds of Faith. They are very unadvisedly distinguished as
several Species because several events or effects: they may be all brought
under that of Justifying Faith, not as Species under their Genus, but as parts
are reduced to the whole, or degrees inferior, to the highest. For undoubtedly
Historical Faith, as they call it, whereby a man gives a general Credence or
assent to what is delivered in Scripture, is a degree and good step to that
called Justifying Faith, and there is no Justifying Faith without it: And so
are the Acts of a Temporary Faith, and Miraculous Faith, acts of a Justifying
Faith. For, as for the temporariness, or failing, it distinguishes Christian
Faith neither from Gentile, nor Jewish belief; nor true from false, but only as
to the Event, that the one continues and comes to perfection, and the other
comes to untimely end. Which puts no more difference between the Justifying and
not Justifying Faith: then the untimely death of a child does distinguish him
from a man: which is in growth, not in nature; according to which all good
distinctions ought to be made. For, if nothing be wanting to the denominating
this failing Faith, a Justifying and saving Faith, but duration, how can they
be thus reasonably distinguished? And as to the Faith producing miracles, it is
the very same in nature with that which was required by our Savior Christ, to
have miracles wrought upon them that were by him miraculously cured, than which
nothing occurs more frequently in the Gospels: and is an act of Justifying
Faith; as supposing the belief of Christ, according as the Gospel describes
him, which as it shall be showed presantly, is the true Justifying Faith. For
as Christ himself says in St. Mark, No man shall do a Mark. 9. 39.
Miracle in my name that can lightly speak evil of me; So that by Faith in
Christ such miracles being wrought, who can deny it to be the effect of a
Justifying Faith? But that which may have deceived men, is an opinion, That
what ever proceeds from a Justifying Faith, must needs proceed from it, as it
justifies. For in truth, Miracles, or the gift of the working them, is not that
which commends us to God, to our justification; but to men: and Graces rather
than Gifts, both Sanctify and justify. Yet this hinders not, but Justifying
Faith may be the spring from whence that Gift proceeds, and so not opposite to
it. But it is here commonly said, That Heathens and Reprobates may have the
three sorts of Faith, here opposed to Justifying Faith. But I must crave leave
to deny, and declare their error herein. For, It is a contradiction to say, A
man can so much as Historically believe all the Gospel, and yet continue an
Infidel. The Devil therefore believing, as St. James tells us, (for his words
are much stood upon in this Case) is no Infidel. And yet he, nor profane
Believers and reprobates are not true Christians; not because they have nothing
faithful in them, but because this good ground and Justifying Faith Inchoate,
being, as the Schools speak, unformed, and destitute of a proportion of Charity
and obedience, never increases to act, or reap fruits of Righteousness, which
is to ^e Justified. And Reprobates Faith may be true Faith, so much as they
have of it, and so long as they hold it: For God forbid that their Faith should
make them Reprobates: It is their want of Faith in perfection, and perseverance
that so distinguishes them. For were not that Faith true, real, and and saving
which they have, or had; they might be damned for having no Faith at all, but
they cannot be damned for not continuing and growing in that Faith, as the
Scriptures assure us some shall. And no more at presant needs here be alleged
than what St. Peter at large delivers, 1 Epistle. C. 2. V. 13, 14. 15. 20,
etc.

Some add hereunto an Hypocritical Faith: which indeed must needs be quite of
another kind, but what it is no man can tell further then from the negative
notion, viz. That it is not true Faith; and so no Justifying Faith, but a
shadow of it, not the thing: but the forementioned Faiths are, or may be, real
and Good: but Hypocritical can never be so as Hypocritical. But we shall
conclude this Chapter with an other observation, we conceive, has occasioned
misbelief concerning Justifying Faith. For it is too commonly believed, That
all Justifying Faith* must and does necessarily and actually Justify all in
whom it is: But that is not so, but that is truly Justifying Faith which in its
own nature tends thereunto, though peradventure defeated of its effect. For,
if natural causes have not always their proper effects through outward
impediments, may it not be much rather the case of spiritual things which work
not naturally, but freely?

To the former distinctions of Faith may be well added another; and that of
Faith Explicit and Implicit, much insisted on, and therefore here to be
considered. And it cannot be, neither is it denied, but really such cases there
are in which good Christians have not that plenitude of Faith desirable, and in
some cases, necessary. For otherwise, we must condemn the Faith of St. Peter
himself, so much commended by Christ himself; Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18.
when he openly professed the Deity of our Savior Christ. For not long after
Christ sharply rebuked him for his ignorance of this Passion of him; Mat. 16.
23:
saying, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me. And, so were
the Disciples ignorant of the Resurrection of Christ, and of the Ascension of
Christ, supposing his Kingdom should be rather a Temporal than Spiritual and
eternal; as appears by their Question, Will thou at this time restore Act. 1.
6.
again the Kingdom unto Israel? And I make no doubt, after so much evidence
from the Histories of the Primitive times, that many Eminently holy persons
suffering martyrdom for Christ, were very meanly seen, and settled in diverse of
those Articles of Faith, which have been since imposed as necessary on the
Church, and indeed ought to be. How this can be allowed is therefore to be
inquired into. And to this end; First, it must be determined, what may be meant
by Implicit, and Explicit Faith. That we call Explicit Faith, which clearly,
distinctly, and expressly believes an article of Faith, or any divine truth
revealed. Implicit then, must be such a Faith that believes obscurely and
confusedly only. Secondly, it is necessary to distinguish this distinction it
self. For, Faith may be said to be Implicit, either in respect of its object:
or of its Act. The First Impliciteness consists in this, That a Christian
believing some one material article of Faith clearly and expressly, may be said
to believe that which is included in that, and necessarily follows from it. As
he that shall believe that Christ consists of a divine and humane nature, may
be said to believe that article contained, as it were, under it, viz. That
Christ had a humane will, as well as divine; though his ignorance be such as
never to have particularly considered the same. But the Act of Faith I call
implicit, is when a man being, (as they say) a Christian or Believer at large,
and liking that Religion very well, shall without search, without knowledge of
the principal points of Faith, shuffle all together, and conclude all (as he
thinks) sufficiently in this, That he believes as a good Christian or Catholic
believes; as the Church believes.

The First of these kinds of Faith must necessarily be allowed as good and
laudable, provided it be not accompanied with an affected ignorance or sloth,
hindering a man's proficiencie in the Extent and Intention, or degrees of it.
For surely this means the Holy Scripture, when it says, I have fed you with
Milk, and not with meat: for hitherto, ye were not able to bear it, 1 Cor. 3.
2. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
neither yet now are ye able. And again, Howbeit we speak wisdom among them
that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, etc. Which intimate unto
us, That the servants of Christ imitating their Master herein, did not
presently pour forth all the several Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and of
Faith, but proceeding gradually laid first the foundation, Christ Jesus, and
according to the capacity of their Converts, opened the rest more Explicitly
afterward. And I make no doubt but the obscure and narrow Faith of the
unlearned, being generally more sincere and firm than that of the knowing and
inquisitive, shall lead them to Heaven, no less than that more ample: Christ's
equal proceedings being such, as not to require the same of all, in quantity
of measure but of proportion to their state, and his Gifts and Graces conferred
on men.

But that other sort of Faith which satisfies it self with the sincerity and
Catholickness of it, and that it is of such a sort, not attending to or
endeavoring after any further illumination, or information in the branches
arising from that root, we cannot see how men can speak reasonably, or
conscionably in the commendation of it, or such who are owners of it, can hope
to receive any greater benefit, than to be numbered amongst true Believers
without the reward. For, it is expressly against Gods word, which requires that
the Word of God should dwell in you richly in all wisdom, etc. And Col. 3. 16.
Ignea res fies est, ubicunque ociosa est, non est. Sed quemadmodum in lucerna
oleum alit flammam ne extinguatur, ita Charitatis opera fidem alunt ne
deficiant. Fides gignit bona opera: Sed illa vicissim nutriunt Parentem.
Erasmus in Symbolum.
the reason hereof is, because the obedience of Faith (of which before) is
generally proportionable to the Faith it self from whence it springs. How then
can any man act (as all men are tied) with an universal obedience, who know not
nor believe what they are obliged to do, but by that Faith which is wanting in
them? And rudely and effectedly to rest quietly under the immaginarie
protection of believing as the Church believes, may indeed keep men (which is
all commonly looked after, here) from being Heretics, but it does not secure
them from being Heathens. For, what ever is said and pretended, such ignorant
persons do not believe as the Church believes. For when the Church believes
Expressly, and they believe confusedly, do they believe as the Church believes?
When the Church believes she knows what, and they believe they know not what,
do they believe as the Church believes? Lastly, when the Church believes
directly and positively things as they are propounded, and these believe
negatively, that, is no otherwise then the Church, not oppositely to the sense
of it, do they believe as the Church believes? May not a Heathen believe no
otherwise then the Church, and yet be an Heathen? Nay, the more naturally
stupid and indocil men are, the safer Catholics they should be, because they
do not believe contrary to the Faith of the Church. It may be said that Baptism
alone is sufficient to distinguish such implicit believers from Heathens: which
I grant, as to the Essence or nature of Christianity, but not to the Life and
exercise of a Christian: for that, as St. Paul has by his word and example
certified us, is, by the Faith Col. 2. 20.
of the Son of God who loved us and gave himself for us. Therefore, as I am so
charitable to all well-disposed Christians, to be persuaded there is no
necessity for all to have either the like measure or manifestation of Faith in
any one point of Faith (our Savior Christ requiring Faith but as a grain Math.
17. 20.
of Mustard Seed, sometimes;) so am I to all Churches, as to be persuaded, That
they all require, and that in all a some measure of Faith explicit, as
necessary to Salvation, and that, besides this, Believing as the Church
believes. For in truth, this is nopoint of Faith in the ( Actus Signatus or)
general notion; though to believe the Church Catholic, may be. For who sees
not a vast difference, between believing the Church it self, and believing what
the Church believes? And that may be completed in believing the Being, and
Extent of it, which is much short of the body of Faith which it receives, and
professes.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Effects of True Faith in General, Good Works. Good Works to be
distinguished from Perfect Works. Actions good four ways.

THere is a great difference between Good works, and Perfect works: For the
first has respect unto the thing done; and the other, unto the manner of doing
it, agreeable to all due forms and Circumstances. And every work that is good,
is not Perfect: though every work that is perfect must of necessity be Good.
And to the doing of a Good work, there seems to be no more absolutely Act. 17.
11. Romans 10. 17. Si Fidelis fecerit opus bonum and hic ei prodest liberans eum
a malis: and in illo saeculo ad percipiendum regnum coelesto, magis autem ibi
quam hic. Si autem Infidelis fecerit bonum opus, hic ei prodest opus ipsius,
and hic ei reddit Deus pro opere su^. In illo autem saeculo nihil ei prodest
opus ipsius. Opus imperfectum. in Math. Hom. 26.
required than that a man should act according to well informed and regulated
reason, and true affection. So that the works of natural men may be good,
though heathens; such as are, Visiting the sick, and relieving the poor,
defending the Fatherless and widow oppressed: and especially such outward moral
Acts as may be done by natural men tending to their Conversion and Salvation,
as willing hearing, and equal judging of the doctrine of Faith, even before
actual Faith conceived: for which St. Paul esteemed the Bereans praise worthy*.
So that they are not absolutely Splendid Sins: for were it so, they were by no
means to be done, and no man did well, who, before his Conversion, went to hear
Christ preach; or gave any attentive ear to what St. Paul wrote, or taught, for
want of Faith: whereas we are taught by common reason, as well as by St. Paul,
that Faith it self comes by hearing of the word of God. For how can any man
possibly believe what he never heard of? So then, some duties and Acts are
laudable and acceptable to God, without Faith: though not arising to the
perfection of Evangelical Goodness, by which a man pleases God* and is
acceptable unto him even to his Justification and Salvation. There may
therefore be distinguished a fourfould goodness in Actions. 1. Natural, when a
man acts agreeable to the perfection of the Rule of natural Beings, as a man
acts agreeable to the perfection of the Rule of natural Beings; as a man is
said to walk well, when he goes according to the nature of man, and limps not,
nor halts: and to write a good hand, when his letters and words do answer
exactly a Perfect Rule or Copy. This, Religion takes no notice of at all. 2.
A man is said to do a Good Act when it is so morally, and in its kind, as
tending to the honor of his Creator, whose Instruments mere Moral men are, in
exercising his Paternal providence; and to the benefit of others. For, it being
the proper Character of God which is spoken of him by the Psalmist, viz. Thou
art Good and thou do Good. They whom God Psalm. 119. 68.
chooses and stirs up to minister under him in good and useful things to
the Community or any particular, do that which is good; however not absolute.
3. There is a Religious or divine goodness in Actions, which are done agreeable
to the Revealed Will of God, passing natures sagacitie or search. And this is
twofold, Legal and Evangelical, both exceeding the former, but the one exceeded
of the other, viz. Legal of Evangelical. Vere enim, quando declinamus d malo
and facimus bonum, quantum ad comparationem caeterorum hominum nolentium
declinare a malo and facere bonum, dicuntur bona quae agimus: quantum autem ad
Veritatem, secundum quod dic itur in hoc loco, Quia unus est bonus, bonum
nostrum non est bonum. Orig. Hom. 8. in Matthaeum.
For as Natural Acts are good, done according to natures intention and
institution, by themselves; but are not good compared with moral duty
performed: and moral Acts are Good in themselves, but not so in respect of a
Superior Order and end of working instituted of God in his holy Law; So are
Legal Acts wrought according to Gods word given to the Israelites under that
dispensation or Covenant as required of God, and serving to those ends God
propounded to himself and his people. Wherefore it is that the Children of
Israel revolting from God, and forsaking that instituted worship of his Law,
are thus censured by the Prophet Hos. 8. 3.
Hosea, Israel has cast off the thing that is good, the enemy shall pursue
him. And St. Paul, (than whom no divine writer more opposes the Law, occasion
being offered, yet) gives his suffrage 1 Timothy 1. 8.
The Law is good if a man uses it Lawfully. (And the Gospel it self is not
good unless used Lawfully:) Therefore were the works of the Law also, good
works, within their bounds; but not so compared with the Perfection of the
Gospel; but displeasing to God and pernicious to men, who being delivered in
the fullness of time, by the coming of Christ from the Pedagogie and beggarly
Elements of the Mosaical Law, should presume to retain that vail which was done
away in Christ, and embrace those shadows, the body Christ being present. Hence
it is that St. Paul as in many other places, writing to the Corinthians,
speaks thus at large, -- The Letter kills (i. e. the Literal sense and
observation of the 2 Cor. 3. 6.
Old Law, after the New became of force, destroys rather than saves the
observer of it;) but the Spirit, (i. e. the Spiritual Law) gives Life. But if
the ministration of death, written and graven in Stones, was glorious, so that
7.
the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the
glory of his Countenance, which glory was to be done away: How shall not the
ministration 8.
of the Spirit be rather glorious? For even that which was made glorious 10.
had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels. All this
does show the great disparitie between the Law and the Gospel, and the
pre-eminence of This above That. So, be the Law in it self, and for that
season, and for that people, glorious and good; yet upon the approach of the
Gospel and its being in force, all that perished and the works thereof no
longer good works, much less justifying, because they were not done in Faith:
not in the Faith of Christ, but in the Faith of Moses. The principal then, yea
only Good works that are now of any account as to absolute acceptance at Gods
hands, are those which are done in an Evangelical manner. Now the manner of
acting thus Evangelically to the denomination of our works, Good, is thus
described by St. Paul, For by Grace are Ephesians. 2. 8.
ye saved through Faith: and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God.
Not 9.
of works, least any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in
10.
Christ Jesus unto Good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. Which certainly implies, that Grace being taken for the Gospel
of Grace, in opposition to the Law, Christ in opposition to Moses, and Faith to
the belief of Moses Law; we are no longer of the Old man but the New man, we
are created anew in Christ, and that Good works from him, and through Faith in
him, are they only that properly can be so called, and to these we are
fashioned, and as it were, created by the Gospel. So that if we should describe
Good works of Christians, we may call them, Acts, done in the Faith of Christ,
according to the tenor of the Gospel, as a Rule directing us to the manner and
End of working.

Nevertheless, though these be good, and every Good and Faithful Christian
stands obliged by virtue of his Holy Faith professed, and the Covenant of Grace
entered into with God under the Gospel, and the hope of obtaining the special
promises of the Gospel; yet are they not in themselves Good as to the
perfection prescribed by that Rule, and in Justice might be exacted by God
through the ordinarily inseparable defects from humane frailty, so long as we
are in this world. And how far they avail, it now follows to be examined.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Effect of Good Works, which is the Effect of Faith. How Works may be
denominated, Good. How they dispose to Grace. Of the Works of the Regenerate.
Of the proper conditions required to Good Works, or Evangelical.

SUpposing then, that there are such works which both God and man esteem Good;
it is next to be sought into, how far their Goodness does extend: and of what
efficacy they are, or what are the Effects of them. Remembering withal, that
here, Faith is no way excluded, but advanced rather: seeing Good works being the
Effects of Faith the Effects of Good works must of necessity be likewise the
Effects of Faith; as the fruit ows no less to the Root, which gives life and
growth to the whole tree, than it does to the branch from which it immediately
proceeds. Yet is it here to be noted, answerable to what is said before, That
all good works do not proceed from Faith. For the works of the Gentiles have a
real goodness in them, and that much more than they of the Jew, as they are
Jewish; and yet not done in Faith, nor attaining to the Decorum or perfection
of the Gospel, and therefore frequently called sinful, and no ways conducing
directly to salvation, or Justification, as do the works wrought in Faith. I
say directly, because as in nature a man is said to live the Life of a sensible
Creature before he come to the perfection of humane nature: so may there be a
preparatory or previous goodness in the works of Infidels, which may dispose
to, not merit the life or form of Faith. But because the Regeneration, called
sometimes the Creation of the New man to show the absoluteness and independence
of the Divine power and pleasure in such Acts, does not proceed as nature does:
For that which may be as predisposing, is not simply requisite to the
introducing the form of Spiritual Life: but by the most free and powerful
providence, many are elected and brought to Spiritual Life, without any such
previous goodness. And if we should grant natural or moral Justice were
necessary as an Antecedent to Faith, it would not follow that it were so by way
of merit, or disposing God to perfect that rude beginning, with the accession
of his Grace. For, we are to make a necessary difference between Preparation to
Grace, so much talked of. For there is a preparation of a man's self, or the
subject which is to receive this holy impression: and there is a preparation of
the Agent which conferrs this, by moving or inclining him to such an End. I
suppose the Schools, and severer assertors of the Freeness of Gods Grace, to
which a man cannot by acts of nature dispose himself, do mean the latter, viz.
that no man by any principle of nature, or habits of virtue acquired and
exercised according to the Rules of Justice and wisdom, can thereby be said to
have done any thing which of it self might incline God to regenerate him by his
Grace. For it seems to me, keeping to the Rules and sense of Scripture, as
unlikely that a Christian should be author any more of Spiritual Life, than a
man is of his Natural: But no man can with any sense be said to contribute to
his natural Life, no more can he to his Spiritual Life, which is commonly
called the First Grace. But that the natural man, living soberly, Justly and
temperately, is not thereby in a greater readiness, and less distant from the
divine Grace perfecting the same, were hard to affirm; as well considering the
method that God usually takes (though not always, nor is bound to any,) is to
proceed, not per saltum (as they say) or from one extreme to another, on the
sudden; but by apt gradations, as the encouragement is from hence given to
immortality it self. And yet, as wood being orderly laid can never thereby
merit or claim a kindling; or as a conveiance of a great Manor being fully and
fairly drawn can never deserve, nor so much as for its sake, dispose the Lord
whose it is, to pass it away by setting his hand and seal to it: so neither can
any fair hand of natural works induce God to conferr on a man the State of
Grace. For this Passive preparedness we speak of, does not so much as either
open the eye to discover the use or benefit of Grace, nor in the least incline
the Will to desire it. Now because the holy Fathers, and especially St.
Augustine and moderner Divines, do speak of the Works of the Unregenerate, as
not only insufficient and imperfect, but sinful, yea sin; it is very requisite
to take their true meaning: which cannot possibly be, as if they were simply
evil, for then were they simply to be forborne and omitted; but Synecdochically,
they intend always to intimate a sinfulness in defect, of what was due to such
Actions, compared with the divine Rule. Or they called them Sin, not so much
from the nature of the Actions themselves, as the inseparable evil of
Commission always accompanying them; as was Pride and presumption upon their
such laudable works; as sufficing of themselves without a Savior or Sanctifier
Extraordinary, which they were either wholly ignorant of, or contemptuously
rejected, to entitle them to exact Philos^phers, and observers of the law of
Nature, whe^ein the blessedness of a man in this life consisted, according to
them; and afterward to open the door of a Paradise framed to themselves. Of
these Good works thus mischievously attended, as constantly they were in
Natural men, truly might be said by St. Austine on the Psalms, Good works
without Faith do but help Aug. in Psalm. 31.
men to go faster out of the way. And by Chrysostom sometimes speaking more
than enough of the use of works preparatory, Nothing without Faith is Good, and
that I may use such a Similitude as this, they seem to me who flourish with
good works and are ignorant of Gods worship, to be like the Relics of dead
persons finely adorned. And the voice of Scripture is so clear, that there is
no need to alleadg the same against the inefficacie of the best natural Acts to
spiritual ends and purposes.

The more principal and useful enquiry then, is, concerning the works of the
Regenerate, done upon the grounds, by the virtue, and to the proper ends of
Faith, what they may avail a true Believer. For that they are beneficial, and
that most of all to the benefactor himself, Man, is in a manner consented to
unanimously: or if it be not, we shall make no great scruple plainly and
stoutly to affirm so much, after the holy Scriptures have so clearly and
positively delivered the same; as amongst many in these places, Finally
brethren whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, Phil. 4. 8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have both received,
9.
and learned, and heard, and seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be with
you. And Heb. 6. 8. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes Heb.
6. 7.
often upon it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them for whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God: But that which bears Thorns and Briars is
rejected, 8.
and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Who sees not here, that a
good Christian, fruitful in good works, is compared to good ground, which is
blessed of God; and evil Christians barren and unfruitful, compared to ill
ground, next to cursing? And elsewhere, This 2 Cor. 9. 6.
I say, he that sows [the seed of good works] sparingly, shall reap
sparingly: but he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. And the
Psalmist Psalm. 62. 12.
agreeable hereunto, says, Unto thee O Lord belongs mercy, for thou
renderest to every man according to his works. And Jeremie rendereth it as a
Jerem. 32. 19.
reason of Gods greatness, which is an inseparable and essential attribute of
God, that he is so equal in this case; saying, Great in Counsel, mighty in
work: For thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the Sons of men, to give
every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. And
yet more plainly, St. Paul to the Romans speaking of God: Who will Romans 2. 6,
7, 8, 9.
render every man according to his deeds, to them who by patient continuing in
well doing, seek for glory and honor, and immortality, eternal life: But unto
them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of man that does
evil, of the Jew first and also of the Gentile. But glory, honor, and peace,
to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. I
shall add but one more Text, and that found in the Epistle to Titus, which not
only in sense but almost in terms proves what I laid down concerning the
beneficialness of good works. This is a faithful saying, and these things Tit.
3. 8.
I will that thou affirm constantly; That they which have believed in God,
might be careful to maintein good Works: these things are good and profitable
unto men. And so far as we now urge good Works, the answer is very sufficient
to that place alleged against the Effect of good Works in general; Luke 17. 10.
where our Savior says in St. Luke, And when ye shall have done all things
which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: We have done that
which was duty to do. To this, I say, it is fully answered (though more might
be said,) We are unprofitable to God our Master, who commanded us to work: for
so says David likewise, My Goodness extends Psalm. 16. 3.
not to thee: but it is not said, We are unprofitable unto our selves, or, that
no good accreweth unto our selves thereby. And I would to God that though no
good Christian can deny the usefulness of Good works in general, that do not
deny the Scriptures or common sense, yet they would be more firmly settled in
the belief hereof than too many are, and suffer this Faith to have its proper
influence upon their lives, which might be safely admitted, and that without
any offense or prejudice to the freeness of Gods grace, as will yet further
appear.

For the Effect of Good works does not only confine it self to certain temporal
blessings of this world, and outward prosperties, which in truth was the proper
portion and promise made by God to the Jew, under the Old Law (so far as it was
Ritual and Mosaical) upon their obedience; but it extends it self plainly to
the spiritual blessings upon earth, and immortal in heaven, as our blessed Lord
expressly teaches us in his Sermon on the mount, saying, Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter Mat. 7. 21.
into the Kingdom of heaven: but he does the will of my Father, which is in
Heaven: that he shall, is to make no criminal addition to Scripture, the sense
being so plain. And so St. Paul to Timothy teaches. It is a faithful 2 Timothy 2.
11, 12.
saying, If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we
shall also reign with him. And is it not certainly implied that we shall
receive the promises of God, which are as well of Eternal and Spiritual things,
if we do the will of God by Faith and works of Faith, when it is said, Ye have
need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might Heb. 10. 36.
receive the promise? And I should wonder at the subtilty of Perverters of
divine Writ, if they shall be able to draw any other sense from the words of
Christ expressing his Rule of proceeding at the day of Judgment, thus, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Mat. 25.
34, 35, 36.
foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; Naked, and
ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came
unto me. How can any thing be spoken more plainly to make Eternal Life the
reward They falsify our Tenets saying, That we hold that Good works are not
means of Salvation. Francis White Epist. Dedie.
of Good works, than is here spoken? Or how can any man affirm that all things
necessary to salvation are plainly taught and easily to be understood in
Scripture, and shall deny this to be plain, and such good works as are here
specified, necessary to salvation? For to bring in any Scholie which shall
elude this, will do them much more mischief in other cases, as leading to the
corrupting all places of Scripture, which they allow to be plain, and rendering
them altogether useless to the ends for which they are alleged. For, to say
only that Faith must be here understood, is most true, but insufficient to make
the testimony void; because otherwise, they were not good works. And this must
always be retained in memory which we have before laid as a foundation, That
they are not the good works of natural Reason, or humanity, nor the good works
of the Law now voided which we here in this dispute contend for; but they are
the works of Faith qualified with all the due conditions of the Gospel of
Grace, and actuated by the Spirit of Grace.

And here it may be useful to instance in some of those principal adjuncts
which make our works truly evangelical and leading to that blessed end spoken
of. And here I do not make Faith so properly a condition, as a cause and a
common Essential foundation supposed to all Evangelical Acts: as the root is
not aptly termed a Condition of the fruit, but the intrinsique Cause thereof.
But others there are very necessary though not in the same degree: such as
these; First, that they be done in obedience to the will and command of
Almighty God ordaining Good works; Anew commandment, John. 13. 24.
says Christ, I give unto you, that ye love one another. And how far this
extends St. Paul tells us, saving, He that loves another has fulfilled the
Law. Romans 13. ^. Ephesians. 2. 10.
And yet more expressly to the Ephesians he says, We are Gods workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we
should walk in them. And again to the Thessalonians, he says, This is the
These. 4. 3.
will of God, even your sanctification. Secondly, the merits of Christ's
Passion, whereby we are redeemed to God, and sanctified according to St. Paul
to Titus speaking of Christ, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem Tit.
2. 14.
us from all iniquity, and purisie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
Good works.

A third thing requisite to constitute a work Good according to the Gospel is,
that it proceed from a Person adopted or made a Child of God by Grace. For,
this is required of all true Christians; That they be born again of John. 3. 5.
Joh. 3. 9.
water and the Holy Ghost. And as the same author elsewhere has it, Whosoever
is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God.

A fourth, is the inward Grace of God working and moving the mind to holy
works: and this preventing us, so that we are first excited of Gods Spirit
without any natural inclination of our own to do that which is the good and
acceptable will of God. For to this end make our Saviors words in the Gospel,
where he says, Without me ye can do nothing, that 1 John 15. 5.
is, no Good work answerable to the perfection of the Gospel, and the promises
thereof.

A fifth, is the outward Grace of God remitting and passing over the several
Omnia mandata facta deputantur quando quicquid non fit agnoscitur. Aug. Retract.
defects and blemishes adhering to Good works, even of the Regenerate. For then
(says an holy Father truly) is the Law fullfilled, when what is committed
amiss, is pardoned: And to this relate the words quoted in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, as an ingredient into the Covenant of the Gospel, viz. I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will
Heb. 8. 12.
I remember no more.

Sixthly, Perseverance in good is likewise necessary, though not to the
essence of the Act done, to make it Good, (for perseverence does not of it self
add good or evil to an action, but supposes the same, and continues it as it
finds it) yet to the reward it is absolutely necessary. Forasmuch as Gods
Judgment, as man's likewise, is always passed according to what a man actually
is found to be, whether good or evil, and not to what a man has been, or
possibly afterward might have been. For, says the word of God, Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. And Revel. 2. 10. 1
Cor. 7. 8.
elsewhere, Waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall also
confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless unto the day of our Lord
Jesus.

Last of all, to make a good Work rewardable, is requisite the freeness of Gods
promises made to accept the same, and to reward it, not for its own sake, but
for his sake, and Christ's sake. And that God has promised blessed rewards to
those that work according to the tenor of the Gospel, as now described; doing
it as his children, under the protection of Christ's mediation and merits, to
the glory of God, through the operation of Gods Spirit, persevering therein,
till God shall call them off; resting not upon themselves, but his promises; is
most undeniable, and a Principle necessary to be maintained and practiced by
all faithful Christians, does appear from what is before alleged. And what
(if any thing may be) is yet more clearly asserted by Christ, saying, He that
receives Mat. 10. 41.
a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. And he
that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a
Righteous man's reward. And so to those that suffer for Christ, which is reputed
amongst the chief of Good deeds, Rejoice and be exceeding glad: Mat. 5. 12.
for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets. And
Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water
Mat. 10. 42.
only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you he shall in no wise
loose his reward. And in St. Luke, Christ says, But love your enemies and do
good Luke 6. 35.
and lend hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye
shall be the Children of the Highest. For he is kind unto the unthankful and
evil. Here, besides the positive promises, is added a reason to assure all that
shall do good works, that great shall be their reward: viz. because Gods
goodness and mercy is such that he imparteth of the same unto the wicked, he
does good unto the ill-deserving and shall he not much more do good to those
that are good, and abound in Good works? To ascribe therefore so much to a
modern notion of Faith as many do (though the Learneder favorers of it closely
dealt with, are constrained to depart from this new rigor, as I could show by
diverse instances) as to divide it from it self, that is, the works of Faith,
from Faith; the fountain in order to Justification, and Sanctification, and
Salvation, is in effect to deny the Christian Faith, and introduce one of
their own invention, to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of Christian
Faith; which consists in these two things principally, Evangelical Obedience,
and a Glorious reward. And now least some prejudiced mind may suppose that I
have stated this point too favorably to the Roman sense, and injuriously to
the Franckness of Gods grace and mercy, in relation both to our Sanctification
and Justification, and also to the virtue and efficacy of Faith in order to
them, I shall end this discourse with the Stating of this cause as I find it by
Vortius a most severe and rigid Calvinist: as they call such men, in this
negative Vort. disput. Select. Part. 2. p. 728. 726.
way. The Controversy therefore (said he) between us and the Papacy. First is
not Whether good works are to be done; For, we affirm it. 2. Neither whether
they be necessary and profitable to salvation: we affirm both. 3. Neither
whether they are pleasing to God, which we affirm. 4. Nor whether God grants a
Remuneration and Reward to them. For, we affirm it, 5. Nor whether it be lawful
to do good works with an eye to the reward; We say so. 6. Nor yet whether good
works are sins; we stoutly deny. 7. Nor lastly, Whether the just be worthy of a
Crown; For this we yield, with this limitation, Not out of their own worth, but
the worthiness of God, etc. And if all this be honestly and fairly agreed to, I
see no reason to fear the empty cavils and vain exceptions of some men, who
have run themselves they can scare well tell whether themselves, from Popery:
but I may venture to tell, Why? viz. Partly out of a blind implicit Faith in
the Teachers they raise to themselves: and partly to save their Credit and
purses by a strange and monstrous notion of Faith, rather then their souls. But
the main block of Offense taken, not given, by this doctrine, seems to be an
opinion of Merit favored hereby. Of this therefore we shall speak next.

CHAP. XVI.
Of merit as an effect of Good Works, The several acceptations of the word,
Merit. What is Merit properly. In what sense Christians may be said to merit.
How far Good Works are Efficacious unto the Reward promised by God.

TO merit is of a very various and ambiguous sense, among the the Ancients
humane and divine. It were superfluous to note all, and to omit all, injurious
to our present design. These three are the most needful to be observed. For
sometimes it is used in profane Histories, for Service military; as the
soldier under such a Commander, is said to merit, Mereri, under him. Meruit
and sub Servitio Isaurico in Cilicia, sed brevi tempore, etc. Suet. de Julio
Caesare in Vita. Aere mere^t* parvo -- Lucan. lib. 9. Vocabulum merendi apud
veteres Ecclesiasticos Scriptores, fere idem valet quod consequi, seu aptum
idoneumque fieri ad consequendum. Id. Cassand. Schol. in Hymnos Ecclesiast. p.
179
It is likewise frequently used by humane and Ecclesiastical Authors for to
obtain or acquire only by just and due endeavors, without any just deserts of
the Party said to merit, but rather of Grace and favor of him who has
appointed and promised freely to reward such actions as are enjoined and
assigned with such ends and remunerations, which far exceed the proportion or
value of the work. For, surely in public and ancient Games (from which
practice St. Paul has borrowed many a Metaphor describing the service and
contention of Christians in the service of God) to outrun, and prevent by
footmanship, him that was matched with one, did not properly deserve such a vast
reward as was usually conferred on him who excelled his Fellow: (For what title
of justice can the hasting to take a crown give to him that receives it?) yet
was he said to deserve it, and that either comparatively, because he in reason
ought to be preferred before any other that came behind him; and therefore
merit it rather than he. Or because the Authors of such rewards having solemnly
and fairly quitted all their Rights, and by public promise settled the same
upon other, upon certain conditions they shall judge fit, there is a
conditional Right thereby devolved upon others: yet not out of the worthiness
of the acts leading to the accquiring the same. But a third notion of merit
implies such a proportion between the Act, and the end or recompense, that it
were no less than unjust and unreasonable for him who is concerned in the
reward to deny it to him, or detain it from him, the work being accomplished.
It being a Principle of common justice what Christ pronounces as Christian
reason too, The Labourer is worthy of his hire: i. e. he merits it. And
therefore Luke 10. 7. Jam. 15. 4.
James says well in the like case; Behold the hire of the laborers which have
reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the
cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath: i. e. they cry for justice against them who are indebted to them for
such service which deserve much reward.

Upon these general grounds thus premised, we shall have easier access to the
difficulty of meriting in relation to God, and the reward he holds forth to
his faithful servants. For in truth, this latter sense is scarce maintained or
allowed by any Good Christian; or if it be, we shall not account it worth the
expense of so much pa^ns and time, to refute them any further than the thing it
self does, rightly considered For merit (as is said effect) is the just right
that a man has to a thing in possession of another, there being no difference
in such cases between what man enjoys, and what he does not enjoy, but that the
one is in the possession of himself, and the other, of another: both being of
right his own, the one by ancient, and the other (perhaps) by moderner
purchase. And this is founded upon the equity of Commutative Justice, whereby
one thing is exchanged for another, as about for reward; such a
commensurateness of the Action of a Christian being never to be found in order
to the end promised: For al^ that we can do, is our duty to God, and not our
desert. And though God may have seemed to have receeded in some manner from his
original R^ght over us, in that he stipulates with his servants, and Covenants
with them for such im^ense ^ecompence for such light labors; yet this does not
extinguish his domin^on absolute over us, nor extenuate, or bring down the
va^ue of the reward it self, so far as to balance the account between God and
man, so that they should relate to one another as do Debtor and Creditor.
Because, whether man contracts or not, whether he promises or not, Justice in
behalf of the Servant claims a proportionable reward: and a Debtor he is
really, though perhaps Legally he be not: But between God and man the^e is no
such natural mutual obligation, before a free promise on Gods part issued out.
And therefore, after such promise made, impossible it is that any or many Acts
on man's part should be commensurate to the goodness of the reward expected: but
it must all depend upon favor and grace. For, who has p^evented Job. 41. 11.
me (says God in Job) that I should repay him? And St. Paul to the Romans; Now
to him that works is the reward not reckoned of Grace, but Romans 4. 4.
of debt.

The principal enquiry then, is about the works of such as acknowledge a
Freeness of promise in God, (as most, or all Christians do) what proportion
they may bear to the reward so freely promised? And in truth, there seems no
less then a contradiction, after an acknowledgement of the freeness of a
promise infinitely exceeding the labor or work, made to impute the reward
rather to the work, than to the promise. For he that cannot merit the cause
absolutely required to the effect, cannot be said to merit the Effect: so that
he who protests against the sufficiency of his work to merit the promise, can
have no tolerable pretension to merit the effect. Hence it is that Paul says
against such as may glory in their works, Where is boasting Romans 3. 27.
then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of works? Nay, But by the Law of Faith. And
yet in the two more favorable and less proper senses above specified, may a
man, without prejudice to Gods free Grace, or Faith on Christ, be said to
merit; there being more exotiqueness to Scripture Phrase, and harshness to ears
tender of Gods free Grace, than guilt in that word. For first, who can deny
that he is the servant of God (that he is) according to the vow in baptism, a
Soldier of Jesus Christ; that he serves under him in the work of the Gospel,
against the world, and flesh, and Devil, to the increase of Grace and virtue
according to Godliness? This is to merit many times with the ancient, without
any implication of obligation upon God or Christ toward us for our service.

The second acceptance then is chiefly to be discussed, which allows not only
a service, but an efficacy to Good works so far as to render them capable of
such a term as Merit. For there is a wide difference between a sufficiency of
a work to obtain a thing, and the efficiencie. The former indeed is absolute:
The latter not so St. Paul saying to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6. 1.
We therefore as workers together with him, i. e. God; does certainly imp^ie
somewhat of activeness, and efficiency (by way, at least of Instrument)
subordinate to that of God, toward the great work of advancing the Gospel: but
he disavows a sufficiency when he says, Who is sufficient for these 2 Cor. 2.
16. 1 Cor. 3. 5.
things? and when he says, Who then is Paul and who is Apollos, but Ministers
by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man, and so then neither is
he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the 7.
increase. No man can be a minister or instrument to another but he must act
Non est tamen alienum n^c arrogans si etiam David remuner^tionem a Domino Deo
suo pro egregiis latoribus pos^ulet. Praer^gativa est f^d^i atque justitiae de
Domini favore mercidem usurpare. Ambros. in Psalm. 119. 1. Et tamen si been
cogites ipse dedit fidem: primo qua cum promeruisii, non enim de tuo
promeruisti ut tibi aliquid deberetur, etc. Aug. Tract. 3. in Joan. Ipsa vita
aeterna quae utique in fine sine fine habebitur, and ideo me^iti^
praecedentibus redditur, quia ea merita quibus redditur non a nobis parata sunt
per nostram suff^cientiam, sed in nobis facta per gratiam etiam ipsa Gratia
nuncupatur, non ob aliud nisi quia gratis d^tur. Aug. Ep. 105. ^
together with him. Again, No man that is an instrument or minister to another,
can entitle himself absolutely or principally to the effect. So then, supposing
that upon works evangelical reward certainly follows of course, of Gods
promise, vet this glory is not to be assumed to the Instrument, but Principal
causes moving thereunto: which are three, principally arising and overruling a
Christian. The inward Grace of Gods spirit in respect of man working: The
Indulgence of God in remitting the rigor of the Law, according to whose
exactness the work is to be, but seldom or never is performed: And the promise
of God condescending to such low and favorable terms in bestowing his rewards.
So that notwithstanding (as is said) there be certainly an efficacy (which
sometimes the holy Fathers call merit) in Good works, there is never found a
sufficiency or such a worth in the best Christians actions, which may be
commensurate to our Salvation. For though (as many of the reformed have truly
spoken) we be saved by our Good works; we are not saved for our Good works; no
more then being saved and Justified by our Faith we are Justified for our
Faith, as shall be seen by and by.

So then, all the merit of a true Christian consists in this, That being by
Faith built upon that sure and only foundation, besides which none can ^ay any
other, neither is there any other name under Heaven whereby a man may be saved;
Christ Jesus, this Faith is so active and operative in holy works proceeding
from it, that the Person is qualified thereby, according to the frankness of
Gods Covenant made with him in Christ, to become capable of the benefit and end
of the Covenant, Viz. More Grace here, and fruition of Glory hereafter. For
notwithstanding a the sufferings [no not of Martyrdom for Christ] of this life,
are not worthy (of themselves, nor indeed by the accession of Gods Grace) to be
compared to the glory to be revealed; yet may they be a means, and Romans 8. ^
way leading to the same. And though, Tit. 3 5.
We are saved, Not by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according
to his mercy, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost;
Yet this we are not capable of so freely, but Gal. 5. 6.
by Faith working by Love. Which moves the Apostle to exhort us thus, Phil. 2.
12.
My beloved as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much
more in my absence, work Out your own salvation with fear and trembling, And
left any man should conceive amiss of the Grace of God, as perfecting all
things without our concurrence; or should presume so far of his own strength as
to judge himself able of himself to effect that, it is most wisely and
seasonably added; v. 13.
For it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.
Whence it is that Eternal life is termed expressly, Romans 6. 23.
The gift of God. Nay moreover, the means conducing hereunto next under God, is
acknowledged owing unto God, by the same Apostle to the Ephesians; Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God. Not of Works, least any man should boast. Yet, notwithstanding
these, and many other places of holy Scripture magnifying the grace of God, are
not Works of Faith excluded any more then Faith it self, from their proper
virtue in obtaining the promises. For still the reward is not of Debt, but of
Mercy, as some of late distinguish; and yet it is not so of mercy, as, that
Justice, subsequent and conditional to the promise, should be wholly exploded.
For, what can the Scripture else intend when it says, If we confess 1 John 1.
9.
our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. And does not St. Paul join them both together,
saying, That Romans 3. 26.
he might be Just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Is it not
here as plain as words need make it, that the Apostle concerns the justice of
God in the justification of him that believes? How then can these be
reconciled, but by distinguishing a twofold Justice in God, in reference to the
work of Man: An absolute or antecedent Justice, before his promise freely made;
and a consequent conditional Justice, supposing a free stipulation made by God,
which never could be deserved, neither is deserved by the completion of the
terms to which Man stands obliged to God. So that St. Paul joins them both
together, thus considered, without any suspicion of contrariety: For, says he
to the Thessalonians, It is a righteous 2 These. 1. 6, 7.
thing (and that is no less then just) with God, to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you: And to you who are troubled, rest with us, etc.

But some have said concerning the reward in such cases, as holy, faithful
working, promised, that it is promised to the Person, and not to the Work.
Which if it were so, as upon trial would scarce prove so; what an evasion does
this prove? Seeing, in such cases, it is most absurd to divide and oppose those
two which are inseparable. For, God neither does reward the work without the
person, neither the person without the work: but the person working, as the
person believing. Therefore, when St. Paul says in his second Epistle to
Timothy, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith, he declares his holy Life and good works: and when he adds,
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous (or just Judge as the old Translation had it) shall give me at that
day, and not unto me only but unto all them also that love his appearing; does
sufficiently implie an inseparableness of the person from the work: and that
which puts the person into a capacity of the reward or Crown, is the
dutifulness of the person toward God. So that there must of necessity be a
Causality in good deeds, in order to our Salvation: though considering the most
vulgarousness of the word merit, and not the sense diluted with the abovesaid
qualifications, it is both immodest and unsafe to apply the same to Acts which
are Good neither for their own sake, nor for the Agents sake, but for Christ's
sake, and the liberal promise sake of God. So that to say, That Christ merited
that we might merit, is very improperly, as well incroachingly, spoken upon the
Grace of God: but to say, That Christ merited to the end we might effectually
work out our Salvation, is to say no more then St. Paul intends in his
Epistle to the Thessalonians; where he affirms that God has not appointed us
to wrath: but to obtain Salvation by ^ ^hes. 5. 9.
our Lord Jesus Christ. And how obtain? the words going before and following,
speaking of good works, sufficiently declare; and yet shall be more fully
explained in the succeeding Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the two special Effects of Faith and Good Works wrought in Faith,
Sanctification and Justification: what they are. Their Agreements and
differences. In what manner Sanctification goes before Justification; and how
it follows it.

WE have showed the Effect of Faith to be Good Works; we have also showed how,
and in what sense the Effect of good Works is Salvation: but there remains two
other effects both of Faith and works of Faith, here to be considered, before
we proceed: and they are Sanctification and Justification. For good Works are
fruitful not only in reference to an ample and manifold reward, but in Serva
ergo mandata Dei-Sanctifica cor tuum ut Deus inhabitet in te. Et quotidie magis
and magis invenies Deum. Opus Imperfect. in Mat. Him. 4.
reference to good Works: as the Parable of our Savior in the twenty fifth of
Matthew plainly informs us: where it is said, Then he that had received the five
talents went and traded with the same and made them other five talents. These
five talents acquired to the first five, cannot be interpreted, the reward
ultimate; for that is expressed afterward to be the Joy of the Lord: but they
were the intermediate effects of the stock of Grace treasured up in the Soul,
and exhorting and improving it self by the continual supply of the Spirit of
Christ, according to the Mat. 25. 16.
doctrine of St. Paul to the Corinthians, saying, Insomuch that we desired
Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also finish in you the same Grace
also: Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in Faith, in utterance, in
knowledge, and v. 7.
in all diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in this Grace
also. Of this influence of Christ's Spirit to the augmentation of Grace in the
hearts of the true believers, speaks the same Apostle to the Colossians,
thus, The Col. 2. 19.
Head from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment, ministered
and knit together, increases with the increase of God. Sanctification then may
be described The Grace of God infused into the Soul of a Sinner, and purifying
it by Faith: as Justification is the reputation and acceptance of a person for
Just by almighty God, through the intuition of the merits and mediation of
Jesus Christ: And yet more distinctly to declare their mutual agreement and
difference, it will conduce much to the due understanding of them both.

First then, Justification and Sanctification agree in their Subject The true
believer, the same person who is Sanctified being also Justified; and he that
is Justified being Sanctified also: For so says the prophet Nahum of him. The
Lord is slow to anger and great in power and will not at all acquit the wicked.
Nahum. 1. 3.
And when we find St. Paul affirming the contrary in appearance, viz. that God
justifies the ungodly, we are to understand him to speak not in Romans 4. 5.
[ Sensu composito] in such manner that he is justified, while he is so
ungodly, but in [ Sensu diviso] a distinct sense and season, as if it had been
said. Him that was once ungodly: as he seems to interpret himself in his
Epistle to the Corinthians; where having spoken of the many abominations men
were subject to, he says, And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye
are 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by
the Spirit of our God. Secondly, Justification and Sanctification agree in
their foundation, which is at least inchoate, and initial holiness. For, though
no man's inherent holiness arises so high as to denominate him truly Just, or
holy, for its own sake; yet both to Sanctification and Justification, is
necessarily required some preparatorie and imperfect holiness, consisting
principally in the Conversion of the mind to God, from sin. Thirdly, both
Sanctification and Justification are alike owing to Faith, as their immediate
Cause, next under Gods Spirit; as may be gathered from the prayer of Christ for
his disciples: Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is Joh. 17 17.
truth: That is the doctrine of Faith, received. To which Faith, the effect of
Sanctification is ascribed by St. Peter in the Acts, whereby the Act. 15. 9.
hearts of the Gentile were purified or Sanctified. Fourthly, they are both
equally imputed unto us through the Righteousness of Christ. Therefore says
St. Paul to the Corinthians, To them that are Sanctified in Christ Jesus, And 1
Cor. 1. 2. Heb. 10. 29.
to the Hebrews, it is said, We are Sanctified by the blood of the Covenant. So
that no less are we Sanctified then Justified by Christ's death and merits, and
the imputation of them.

But on the other side, they are distinct in some formalities; such as these
may be; for First, the immediate cause of our Sanctification is in holy
Scripture imputed to the operation and influence of the Holy Spirit, as our
Justification is more properly attributed to Christ the mediator between God
and man: As appears from St. Paul's words to the Thessalonians. But we are
bound to give thanks always for you brethren beloved of the Lord, 2 These. 2.
13.
because God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. And St. Peter. Elect
according 1 Pet. 1. 2.
to the foreknowledge of God the Father, and Sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience. Thirdly, Justification looks backward, being an absolution of the
guilty, from sins formerly committed, and holding him Just: but no man is
justified actually from sins which hereafter he may fall into: But
Sanctification relates chiefly to the time future. For not only is a sinner by
the Spirit of Regeneration and Sanctification purged from the old Leaven of sin
and malice, but he becomes a New Lump, and unleavened; 1 Cor. 5. 7. Romans 6. 13.
and whereas he has yielded his members as Instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin, he does yield himself unto God, as those that are alive from the dead. And
old things are done away in him, and all things become new. And whosoever is 1 John 3. 9.
(thus) born of God; does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he
cannot sin because he is born of God. Fourthly, to the Act of our Justification
the will of man does not necessarily concur, though it dissents not, but is
rather passive than Active; but to our Sanctification is absolutely required
the cooperation of the will and affections of man with the Grace of God, in
all those who have attained unto the use of reason. For indeed by baptism
Infants are so far Sanctified as to be freed from that hereditarie evil
incident unto them, which their will concurred not to: but to actual
Sanctification from those evils our wills did freely consent, actual
concurrence of our wills is necessary, Fifthly, Our Justification is entire and
absolute at once; no man being partly Justified and partly not Justified,
though he be partly Just and partly unjust or unholy: But no man in this Life
is so perfectly Sanctified as that there wants not somewhat to consummate the
same; because Justification being altogether the Act of God, and not at all of
Man, God may, and does wholly and freely remit the guilt of sin to the penitent
offender: But Man being also concerned in the Sanctification of himself, his
acts are imperfect and defective, so that the effect it self partakes of the
same, and so Sanctification continues imperfect. And it is not all at once, but
answerable to our natural man proceeds by degrees, Until we all come Ephesians: 4.
13.
in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ: which
fullness of stature is that we are to hope for, and enjoy only in heaven.
Lastly, to search no farther into this point, before Justification there must
of necessity go some degree of Sanctification, even in the opinion of such as
contend most rigorously for freeness of Justification: for to make
Justification altogether inconditionate, and absolute on man's part, is to
blaspheme the immutable Justice of God, and withal, destroy the use of Faith
in order to our Justification: For it is impossible any thing bearing the name
of a cause or condition, as Faith certainly does, when we say We are Justified
by ^aith, should be posteriour to the thing it so relates unto. The promise
indeed of pardon and Justification of a sinner is actually made to those who do
not actual^y believe and repent, but promise answerably and covenant to
believe, and repent: Non enim ut f^^^ eat, ignis call facit, sed quia fervet:
N^c ideo ben^ currit ro^a ut rotunda s^t, sed quia rotunda. A^g. ad Simplic.
Qu. 1.
but the Execution and performance of this promise is not made before there be
an actual fulfilling of our Covenant with God. But then on the other side,
there must be perfect Justification before there can be that perfect
Sanctification, which we all aspire unto, and God expects from us. For then are
we truly Sanctified, when our works are holy and acceptable unto to God, which
they are not until they proceed from a person so far Justified as to be
accepted of God. Whence may be resolved that doubt, about Gods acceptance of
the person for the works sake, or the work for the persons sake. For wisely and
truly did the wife of Manoah infer Gods acceptance of their sacrifice from
the favor and grace he bore unto their persons: and at the same time prove the
favor God bore to their persons from the Acceptance of their sacrifice,
saying, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he Judge. 13. 23.
would not have received a burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our hands;
neither would he have showed us all these things, nor would, as at this time,
have told us such things as these. That God therefore accepted their
Burnt-offering, it is a sign he approved their persons, but the reason
antecedent of Gods acceptance of their sacrifice, was because he first
approved their persons. And yet, notwithstanding the goodness of the person is
the original of the goodness of the work, nothing hinders but the goodness of
the work may add value, favor, and estimation unto the person. As (to use
Luthers comparison and others after, and before him) the tree bears the fruit,
and not the fruit the tree: And the goodness of the tree is the cause of the
goodness of the fruit, and not the goodness of the fruit the cause of the
goodness of the tree: Yet the fruit does procure an esteem and valuation from
the owner to the tree; and endears it to him, to the cultivating the ground and
dressing, it and conferring much more on that than others. In like manner, the
Person Sanctified and Justified produces good works, and not those good works,
him: but some actions accompanied with Gods grace, antecedent and inferior to
the fruit it self: Yet does the fruit of good Works add much of esteem and
honor from God to such a person; and render him capable of an excellent
reward: for St. Paul to the Philippians assures them and us, when he says, I
desire fruit that may abound to your account. Phil. 2. 7.


CHAP. XVIII.
Of Justification as an Effect of Faith and Good Works. Justification and
Justice to be distinguished, and How. The several Causes of our Justification.
Being in Christ, the Principal Cause. What it is to be in Christ. The means and
manner of being in Christ.

TO the informing our selves aright in the much controverted point of
Justification, (which whether it be a proper effect of Good works or not, does
certainly bear such a relation ^o them as may well claim this place to be
treated of) it seems very expedient, after we have distinguished, and
illustrated it by Sanctification explained, to proceed to distinguish it
likewise from Justice. For as Righteousness or holiness, the ground of
Sanctification, is to be distinguished from Sanctification it self, so is
Justice the ground to be distinguished from Justification its complement, and
perfect on: This being omitted or confusedly delivered by diverse, has been no
small cause of great obscurities. For, Righteousness or Justice seems to be
nothing else but an exact agreement of a man's actions in general to the true
Rule of Acting, and that Rule is the Law or word of God. For he that offends
not against that, is undoubtedly a Just man of himself, by his own works, and
needs nothing but Justice to declare and ackowledg him for such, no mercy, nor
favor. As that thing which agrees with the square or Rule is perfect. But
notwithstanding such supposed perfect conformity to the Law of God be perfect
righteousness, yet is not this to be Justified: Neither can any man in Religion
be said more to Justify himself, than in civil cases: where it is plainly one
thing to be innocent, and to be an accurate, unreproveable observer of the Law
in all things, and to have sentence pronounced in his behalf, that so indeed he
really is: For this is only to Justify him: though in pleading his own case,
in clearing and vindicating himself, a man is vulgarly said to Justify
himself. And no otherwise, if we will keep to the safe way of proper and strict
speaking, is it in Religion. Supposing that which never happened since Christ,
that a man should have so punctually observed every small, as well as great
precept of Gods Law, that no exception could be taken against him, yet is he
not hereby Justified, though he may be said to be the true Cause of his
Justification, and that he has merited it. Which St. Paul seems to implie unto
us saying, For I know 1 Cor. 4. 4.
nothing by my self yet am I not hereby Justified. For in truth, Justification
is an act of God only, as Judge, no less then author of his own Laws, upon the
intuition of due Conformity to it, or Satisfaction of it.

And, as a man may possibly be just and yet never be Justified (taking things
abstractly;) so may a man be unjust and guilty and yet be justified: does not
the word of God, as well as common reason and experience, certify so much? He
that Justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even Prove. 17. 15.
they both are abomination unto the Lord. This then surely may be. No man then
can be justified by himself, or any Act, or Acts of him, no not through Christ.

But though he cannot thus Judicially and formally Justify himself, it is not
so repugnant to reason or Scripture to be said Materially and Causally to act
toward his Justification. Nay, he cannot come up to the rigor of the Rule,
nor excel so far in Justice and holiness, as to demand at Gods hands, his
absolving sentence: yet that he cannot contribute toward it, is not only
false, but dangerous doctrine leading men into a sloathfull despondencie, and
despair, so that they shall do nothing at all, because they cannot do all that
is required of Justice.

But to arrive in this doubtful and perplexed way to the right end of this
Dispute, it will be necessary to pass briefly through all the several Causes
of our Justification, and so much the rather, because diverse before have so
done, and failed in their Divinity, because of a mistake in Logic, in
miscalling Causes. And first we must know otherwise then some have taught, That
the Material Cause of our Justification is not the graces in us, nor the pardon
without us; nor remission of sins, nor obedience of Christ, nor of our selves;
but the person justified is the subject of Justification. For who with good
sense can say, Our sins are justified, our good works are Justified? Acts. 13.
3^.
True it is St. Paul says, by him (Christ) all that believe are justified from
all things, from which ye could not be Justified by the Law of Moses: Showing
hereby, that we are Justified from our sins: but not that our sins are
Justified. And so where St. James speaks so often (of which hereafter) that we
are Justified by Works, he intends not to say our Works are Justified. For
it is the person, not the qualities of him, that is Justified. And if any speak
otherwise, they must be helped out by recurring to Figurative not proper
speaking. In such cases as these, if ever we would judge aright, we must hold
as precisely as can be to propriety of speech.

About the Final cause of our Justification, I find nothing singular, but in
common with all the Acts of God toward man* and all the Actions of Man toward
God, viz, The glory of God. Neither is there any difference of parties herein.

But concerning the Formal Cause of our Justification before God, some discord
is found; yea concerning a Formal Cause, in General, what it is; and wherein it
consists; which is very necessary to be understood to attain to the true
notion of being Formally Justified. A Formal Cause then is that whereby a thing
is, what it is; subsists in it self, and is distinguished from other things;
being always essential and intrinsecal to the thing, so by it constituted, that
it cannot be so much as conceived without it, and cannot possibly but be, with
it. This, whether artificial or not, I weigh not much; but is a true
description of that Cause. For instance sake, A man is a man properly by his
soul, and not by his body, his soul being his Inward form; and as it is
impossible that he should be so without it, so is it impossible but that he
should be so, with it; whatever outward visible defects or imperfections may
appear otherwise. So in the present cause, it must necessarily be, that the
Formal Cause of our Justification be intrinsecal to the Justified person; and
that not being, that he should not be justified: Contrary to what some have
affirmed upon this occasion; who from an instance of an Eclipse, would show
that the formal Cause is not always intrinsecal to that which it forms. For,
say they (as it should seem by the authority of Zabarel) In an Eclipse of the
Sun, the Moon interposing, is the formal Cause of the Darkness of the Earth,
and yet it is not intrinsecal to it, but separate. But the mistake is plain;
that the Moon being not the cause of the earth it self, but of the darkness of
the earth only, it is not the Formal Cause of that, and so may be extrinsecal
to it, and intrinsecal to the darkness, as the formal cause: but whether this
be so or not, we are here only to show that no cause formal can be external to
the thing of which it is the form; and by consequence, that nothing without us
can be the formal cause of our Justification, or that whereby we are
denominated Just before God: So that neither Christ, nor his merits do render
us so Justified. And therefore, they who to magnify the mystery of our
Justification do object to themselves, How a man can be Just, by the justice of
another, and how righteous by another persons righteousness, any more than a
man can hear with another man's ears, or see with another man's eyes, do tie such
a knot as they can by no means loose. For in plain truth, neither the one nor
the other can formally be. But they may say, As it is Christ's righteousness
indeed and rests only in him, so we cannot be said to be justified formally by
it but as it is made ours especially by Faith, and is applied unto us, so we
may be formally Justified by it. To which I say, that if that individual formal
Righteousness which is in Christ were by any means so transferred formally unto
us and infused into us, that we should in like manner possess it, as did
Christ; then indeed the argument would hold very good, that by such application
we were Justified formally by Christ's righteousness: but no such thing will be
granted, neither is any such thing needful. For, though the Scripture says
directly that Christ is The Lord our Phil. 3. 9.
righteousness, and St. Paul desires to be found in Christ not having his own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. Yet we are not to
understand hereby that the formal righteousness of Christ becomes our formal
Righteousness; but that he is, by the Gospel he revealed unto us, the teacher
of Righteousness, and that far different from that Righteousness of the Law,
which St. Paul calls his own, as that which he brought with him to Christ: and
he is Justification is neither -- but a certain action in God applied unto us,
or a certain respect or relation whereby we are acquit of our sins, and accepted
to life everlasting. Perkins Gal, 2. 16. Romans 8. 30.
the Prime Cause of our Righteousness, sending his holy Spirit unto us, and by
his merits appeasing the wrath of God, and satisfying his Justice for us: all
which is not the formal cause of our Righteousness or Justification. For
neither is that formal righteousness in us, which is inherent Righteousness,
the formal Cause of our Justification. But our Justification formal, is an Act
of God terminating in Man, whereby he is absolved from all guilt, reputed Just,
and accepted to Grace and favor with God. When God has actually passed this
divine, free and gracious sentence upon a sinner, then, and not before, is he
formally Justified. This is the end and consummation of all differences between
God and man; and the initiating him into all saving Grace here, and Glory
hereafter: as St. Paul writing to the Romans witnesses in these words, Whom he
predestined them he also called; and whom he called, them he also Justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Efficient Cause of Justification.

IT remains therefore now that we proceed to the means, causes and motives,
inducing God Almighty thus to Justify Man a sinner; whom he might rather
condemn for his unrighteousness. And these, as many and diverse in kind, as they
are, may all be reduced unto the Efficient causes so often mistaken for the
formal. And truly, to proceed herein regularly and clearly, we must begin with
the Cause of all Causes, God himself. For though Christ be the Cause of all
Causes visible, and in the actual administration and execution; yet he is not
the first, but subordinate (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 27. in Joan.
Cause of Man's reconciliation to God, his Justification and Salvation. For as
holy Chrysostom divinely and sublimely enquiring into the reason that might
incline God to restore Man being fallen, and lost by his Apostasy from God,
unto a state of bliss again; to admit of any terms of Reconciliation with him;
determines it, it is nothing but the divine Philanthropie of God, his free,
undeserved, unscrutable love toward man, springing, (as it were,) from his own
breast, beginning within himself, and of himself absolutely, irrespectively to
any outward motives, but to show as St. Paul says, He would have mercy on
whom he would have mercy, and he Romans 9. 15.
would have compassion on whom he would have compassion: and because as the
Psalmist has it, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven Psalm. 135.
6.
and in earth, in the seas, and in all deep places. He pleased to leave the
fallen Angels, and he pleased to restore fallen man; and that because it so
pleased him. For not so much as any consideration of Christ could dispose him
to decree so favorably on the behalf of man: but first, this decree passed,
and then followed the determination of the means, most convenient thereunto:
which was, to send his son, to give him to be Incarnate and to be the great and
powerful Mediator between God and Man; mighty to save. Christ then was that
which in general moved God Externaly to the Justification of Man, after he had
conceived of himself a purpose to reconcile man to himself; as S. Paul clearly
asserteth in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, All things are of God who
has reconciled us to himself, 2 Cor. 5. 18.
by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation. To wit,
that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing 19.
their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation. And more particularly elsewhere, he describes unto us the
several parts of our reconciliation to God, saying, But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, Sanctification and
redemption. Therefore it is, that so often in Scripture Christ is called a Gal.
3. 20. Heb. 8. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 9. 15. Heb. 12. 24.
Mediator between God and man; for the bringing to pass, and causing to take
effect, the General decree of God for the redemption of Mankind. For through
Christ we were by God predestined, as is taught us by St. Paul to the
Ephesians, Having predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Where Ephesians. 1.
5.
we see plainly, that Christ was not the Cause that we were predestined in
Christ, but the Good pleasure of his Absolute will. Again, we were called in
Christ, as St. Jude implies, saying, To them that are sanctified Jud. 1.
by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called. And as we are
called and sanctified, so certainly are we justified freely by Christ. And
there is nothing more requisite for us to be fully justified in the presence of
God, then to be made partakers of Christ: and, as St. Paul says, To be found
in Christ, not having our own righteousness, which is of the Law, Phil. 3. 9.
[ whether of Nature or Moses] but that which is through the Faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God by Faith. From whence, and several other
texts of Holy Scripture testifying the absolute necessity of Christ to the
Justifying and saving of us, it appears that nothing can be more contrary to
the Eternal purpose of saving man through Christ, yea nothing indeed more
tidiculous, then to but imagine that there can be any Act in man contradistinct
from Christ, and not receiving all its worth and virtue from Christ, which can
avail any thing toward the salvation or Justification of him: Or that a man
being grafted into Christ, and partaking of his graces and merits, can fail of
being accepted of God unto Justification, and salvation. For as St. Paul says
to the Romans, All have sinned and come short Romans 3. 23, 24, 25.
of the glory of God: Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, etc. Now there
are three things in General which truly denominate us to be in Christ, and
partakers of him: To be partakers of the benefit of his Passion satisfying for
us: To be partakers of his spirit, and graces thereof renewing and sanctifying
us: and thirdly, to be partakers of his Intercession before God on our behalf.
For as the Scripture tells us, He ever lives to make intercession for us. And
this Heb. 7. 25.
his intercession, an Act of his Sacerdotal office, is it whereby Christ
properly meriteth for us. For the Passion of Christ does sufficiently discharge
us of our former Obligations and obnoxiousness to the Law of God, and the
punishments therein denounced against the contemners and violaters thereof; and
so may be said, having fully satisfied all the Law justly demanded of us, to
have merited pardon and remission of what is passed, does not thereupon entitle
us to any graces or blessings from God, but yet puts us into a capacity of
them; but the actual collation of them is rather owing unto the uncessant
mediation of him before God in behalf of us. And this the Scripture intends,
when it says, We have a great high Priest Heb. 4. 14.
that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the son of God. And thus we have made a
second step toward the clearing our Justification in its Efficient Causes,
viz, That it is wholly effected by Christ made righteousness sanctification and
Redemption unto us.

But a third thing and that of no mean necessity and difficulty both, is
behind, how we come to be so entirely partakers of Christ, how Christ so
becomes ours as that God should upon the intuition hereof freely Justify us?
For as St. Austin has observed of the giving of the Holy spirit of God to
those that ask aright (whereas none can ask aright but by the Holy spirit,)
herein is a great mystery that a man can be said to be capable of the Spirit
before he has the Spirit: In like manner, can no man be said to be capable of
Christ and his Benefits, before he be in some manner actually in Christ. For if
all our works are Sanctified by Gods Spirit, and acceptable to God, only as
they are done in Christ; how can any such Acts lead us unto Christ, or make us
capable of him, seeing it is one of the greatest perfections and excellency of
good Works, or Faith (for unless it, and we be in Christ, it cannot be a saving
Faith. i. e. leading us to Salvation) to make us effectual partakers of, and
one with him?

These difficulties constrain us to distinguish both Faith and being in Christ
into (I cannot say properly, two kinds as) two eminent Periods, and Degrees of
Faith, and being in Christ. The one is initial, and preparatory as a
foundation; which is not a distinct building from the house finished and
furnished, but a part of it; and material Cause thereof. The other is
consummate and formed: yet not so, but addition of perfection, though not of
Parts, may be made; all men's Faith being capable of farther degrees in this
life. And from hence that mystical sense of our Saviors words in St. John's
Gospel, may both give, and receive illustration. For in the sixth of John,
Christ has these words, No man can come unto me except the Joh. 6. 44.
Father which has sent me draw him. And in the fourteenth of John he says, I
am the way, and the truth, and the life; no man comes unto the Father but by
Joh. 14. 6.
me. Teaching us, That notwithstanding, God is the First cause to bring us to
be in Christ, and that by his Predestination before time, and his Calling and
Electing us in time, to the knowledge and Faith in Christ, yet he is not
reconciled unto us; he does not pardon us, nor justify us, before Christ brings
us unto him: and offers us to him as a new l^mp, and as capable of his grace
and favor, which obtained, we are then truly justified by Christ.

And as there are two distinct acts of God, the one of his good Providence in
bringing us to the Covenant made with mankind in Christ; and the other of his
special Grace in accepting us through Christ, being in the Covenant; So are
there two principal Periods (as I said) of being in Christ: and the First is
when we are taken within the Covenant of the Gospel of Grace, by baptism;
whereby we are made members of Christ's mystical Body and inheritours of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Not that immediately and necessarily, All baptized persons
are sure to go to heaven, but all baptized persons are thereby put into a
capacity and Right to heaven. To this St. Paul Gal. 3. 27.
to the Galatians gives us his fair suffrage, saying, For as many of you as
have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. And the same is implied in
this his salutation: Salute Andronicus and Junias my kinsmen and my Romans 16. 7.
fellow Prisoners, who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ,
before me. Where doubtless these persons are said to be in Christ, before St.
Paul; because they were baptized, and made profession of Christ, before St.
Paul. And so when he speaks of the Churches of Judea which are in Christ Gal.
1. 22.
he means no more than such who were become of Jews, Christians in Judea; not
intending that every one who so professed Christ should be infallibly Justified
and saved by Christ, as they shall who are arrived to the more perfect state of
being in Christ; of which the Apostle thus speaks to the Colossians.; Whom
[Christ] we preach, warning every man, and teaching every Col. 1. 28.
man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

Now what is, or wherein this perfection in Christ does consist, is I suppose
past any man's apprehension or Judgment precisely to determine; that is, what
degree of holiness in Christ, God will accept to our Justification: but in
general these two States of a Christian are plainly deseribed thus by St. Paul
to the Corinthians, If any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new creature. 2 Cor.
5. 17.
Where being a new Creature, and being in Christ, are distinguished as Cause
and Effect: our being in Christ Jesus being the reason and cause of becoming
New creatures. So that we may well observe in this case a twofold Conversion
requisite to make a man truly in Christ. A conversion to Christ, by renouncing
false Religions, and false opinions of a Deity, and assenting to, and embracing
the doctrine according to Godliness. This every man does, who takes on him the
name, profession, and mitiating Sacrament of a Christian: of this is to be
understood what is spoken of the conversion of the Gentiles. And this
conversion is rather (to speak properly) Acts 15. 3.
a conversion to the truth of Godliness, than to true Godliness; Or a
conversion to the Truth of Faith, rather then to the life of Faith: of which
St. Paul to the Galatians, The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by
the Faith Gal. 2. 20.
of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. The sum then of all
this, is this, That to be in Christ effectually, to our Justification and
Salvation, is so to be converted unto him as to believe the Faith of Christ and
to Live the life of Christ.

This being cleared, nearer access is made unto the solution of the prime
Doubt; which is, What is that which so far and fully enstateth us in Christ,
that thereupon God does freely justify us? For it is now supposed and granted
that our so being in Christ making us partakers of the merits, mediation, and
Righteousness of Christ, does immediately and absolutely qualify to
Justification: and secondarily, that which brings us into Christ may properly
enough be said to be it whereby we are Justified. And here comes in the grand
dispute about the virtue of Faith, Whether that only, and wholly performs
this? For in what sense Faith may be said to bring us unto Christ, or thus to
lay hold (as they say) of Christ, in the same may it be truly affirmed that,
next under God and Christ, we are Justified by it.

This I know not how it can be effected better, then by the help of a most
obvious and necessary, but most neglected distinction of the use and notion of
Faith in holy Scripture; omitting that threefold Faith abovementioned, and
several others impertinently invented and ill employed in this case. For Faith
is taken in Scripture either Complexly and Generally for the whole Body of
Christian divinity, and Graces contained in the New testament: Or it is taken
Simply, and distinctly, for a special Grace separate (I mean in nature not in
Operation) from Hope and Charity, which together constitute the three
Theological Graces. Instances of the former have been given already in the
twelfth Chapter, and need not here be repeated in particular. For let any man
of common equity and understanding, weigh the subject and end of all St. Paul's
Epistles to the Romans, to the Colossians, to the Galatians, to the Hebrews
especially (not excluding the other,) where he most expressly and zealously
urges Faith against works, and he shall soon perceive that his intention and
drift is, not absolutely to oppose works of Faith to the doctrine or Grace of
Faith, but the works of the Law; which infirmer Christians, newly entered into
the Faith of Christ, had so venerable an opinion of, that they imagined Christ
could profit nothing without the works either Ceremonial or Moral of the Law of
Moses. For whereas they for instance, depended absolutely on Circumcision, for
their Justification, and thought that without so sacred and solemn a Rite, they
could not be profited by Christ himself; St. Paul on the other side, resolutely
and positively determines thus, Behold I Paul say unto, you that if you be
circumcised Gal. 5. 2. v. 4.
Christ shall profit you nothing. And presently after, Christ is become of no
effect unto you, whosoever of you are Justified by the Law: ye are fallen from
Grace. Can any thing be more manifest then here it is, that Grace is opposed to
the Law? And that to trust in that, is to fall from Christ? And when it
follows, We through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by Faith;
is it not v. 5.
as plain as need be, that Faith is here taken for that doctrine (and not Act)
of Faith, whereby men are instructed in Christ, believe in Christ, adhere to
him, relinquishing the imperfect and antiquated doctrine of the Law, and its
practices; which by St. Paul are all called Flesh in opposition to the
spiritual worship of the Gospel: as to the Philippians, For we are the
Circumcision, Phil. 3. 3.
which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh, etc.
4. Romans 3. 21.
And to the Romans, But now the Righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested (that is, surely now is the doctrine of Righteousness published
through Christ, without the Law) being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets.
Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all 22.
20. 27.
and upon all that believe. And verse the twentieth, By the deeds of the Law
there shall no flesh be justified, etc. And verse the twenty seventh, the Anti
thesis, or opposition does most evidently declare the Apostles intention. Where
is boasting then? It is excluded, By what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of
Faith. The Law of Works then is the Law of Moses, and the Law of Faith is the
Law of Christ. And to be Justified by Faith in Jesus, of which immediately
before, is to be understood of the whole Covenant of Grace or Faith, which is
made to us in Christ Jesus, and revealed in the Gospel as contradistinct to
that Covenant of Works given by Moses: and not of any special Grace or Act of
Faith, as Faith is sometimes distinguished from other Evangelical Graces.

It may be said that the works of the Law are excluded expressly, and therefore
no competition is to be made between them and Faith, in the case of our
Justification. To which my answer is, That though I grant, that not only the
works of the Law, though moral, do not Justify, but not the works of Faith, of
themselves; yet I may confidently say, None of these places commonly alleged
by the Exalters of Faith, and Depressors of Good works, to null the merits of
works done even in Faith of Christ, do, according to the literal meaning,
really perform so much: yet I rather choose to affirm* That the works excluded
by St. Paul are not works of the Law moral, so much as Mosaical. For the
morality of the Old Law was not properly of Moses, but the Ceremonial only, and
consequently the Law from these taking its denomination of Mosaical, when works
of the Law are mentioned in the New Testament, we are to understand Mosaical
Works, rather than Moral: but not at all works of Faith. So that, whatsoever is
contended or pretended, our being justified freely by Grace, and justified
(again) by Faith do Romans 3. 24. Gal. 2. 16.
not at all deny our Justification by works of Faith: or that the efficiency of
such a Faith is quite of another nature from that of works done in Faith.

But yet it is plain from the whole design of the Epistle of St. James, the
Quoniam haec opinio fuerit exerta [sine operibus justificari hominem] aliae
Apostolicae Epistolae Petri, Joannis, Jacobi, Judae, contra eum maxim^ dirigunt
intentionem, ut vehementer astruant fidem sine operibus nihil prodesse, etc.
Aug. de Fide and Operibus. c. 14.
second Epistle of St. Peter, the Epistle of St. Jude, that diverse of Old did
so mistake St. Paul as of late days he has been understood: which moved St.
Austin to say directly that these Epistles were on purpose contrived and
published to obviate such a misconstruction of the Blessed Apostle, as if he
had intended, when he often says, We are Justified by Faith only, a separate
notion of Faith from works and effects of Faith: which was far from him; from
whence we have a very compendious, solid and clear reconciliation of St. James
his Epistle especially with those of St. Paul. For, as is showed already,
certain it is, that it being his principal end to oppose, and void the
pretensions of the Jews to Justification without believing in Christ, or as a
more moderate sort of them weak in the Faith of Christ, admitting no
sufficiency in Christ to justify them without a dash, as least of Moses's Law;
he declared freely for an absolute sufficiency in the Faith of Christ, to
justify and save such as believe in him. This doctrine of St. Paul was quite
mistaken by some who supposed that the act of believing, simp^y taken, or the
Grace of Faith specially used was it whereby they were in a certain way of
being justified, leaving out the fruits and effects of that lively Faith, and
making it a dead Faith, as St. James calls it: who thus argues against such
a fond and dangerous presumption, What does it profit, my brethren, though a
James. 2. 14. 17.
man say he has Faith, and have not works; can Faith save him? Faith without
works is dead. For the use and end of knowledge and Faith being only obedience,
and a life according to Faith; what a monstrous and ridiculous thing would it
be, to divide the Cause from the effects proper to it?

But it is usually replied, No, God forbid we should divide Faith from good
Works. Where there is true justifying Faith, there will be, there must be good
works: and that for several other reasons, but not for our Justification. This
is most true, wherever there is a Justifying Faith there will be, good Works,
but what do they there in order to Justification? Just as much as the fair gay
train of a Peacock to the bird that draws it after it, make a fine show, and
that is all that we know of. But the difficulty is yet very strong behind: And
that is, seeing it is granted that some, Faith in Christ is Justifying, and
some is not Justifying; whence comes this about? Is it not because one is a
lively and operative Faith, and the other is dry and unactive and unfruitful?
So that Faith which is said to Justify, is it self first Justified by its
works. For though, as has been said, Faith does absolutely produce good Works,
and not good Works Faith: yet good Works are they in which its goodness
consists next unto its object, Christ, and consequently render it Justifying
actually.

And whereas they would evade his, and elude St. James's authority, by
distinguishing the Cause and Sign of our Justification: saying, That we are
Justified only by Faith ( effective) effectually, but by works (as St. James
says ostensive) declaratorily, as signs that we are Justified, it is a sense
merely obtruded upon the Apostle: there being no more grounds or occasion given
by St. James, why they should understand him, that works justify only
declaratorily, than are given by St. Paul, that I should interpret that
Justification which he ascribes to Faith, to be only Declaratorily. For though
Faith received in the mind is not apparent, yet when it is professed, then it
may be said no less to declare our Justification then good works, as the
Scripture it self testifies, saying, With the heart man believes unto
righteousness Romans 10. 10.
(i. e. to the doing of works of righteousness, which proceed from a true
Faith) and with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Special Notion of Faith; and the Influence it has on our
Justification. Of Faith Solitary, and Only. Of a Particular and General Faith.
Particular Faith no more an Instrument of our Justification by Christ, than
other coordinate Graces. How some Ancient Fathers affirm that Faith without
Works Justify.

ALL this while we have treated of the complex notion of Faith; or at least, as
it is that first general Grace whereby we are inserted into Christ, and
justified by it together with its blessed retinue of subordinate Evangelical
Graces, which are reduced to these three, Faith, Hope, and Charity: where Faith
stands by its self, and is a peculiar Grace of it self, and has in this
acceptance a more then common prerogative attributed unto it in order to our
Justification, or the bringing us to Christ, and partaking of Christ. For that
is it whereby we are only properly justified; and all Graces serve for no other
end here, than to adopt us for the benefit of Justification through Christ, and
for Christ's sake alone. So that no man can as yet complain, That though I
derogate somewhat from the virtue and value of Faith in reference to our
Justification, as it is explained by moderner Divines (some I mean;) I do not
in the least detract from the sufficiencies, freeness, and absolute necessity
of Christ's Merits and Grace toward us. Yea, I establish it; nay, I augment
and commend more the Free Grace of God, then do they who have chose another way
to express it. For all this while I do not compare Works with Christ, nor Hope,
nor Charity, nor Obedience, with Christ; (as is plain) but I compare now one
Grace with another; and Faith simply considered, with the obedience of Faith.
For, Faith taken as in general for the embracing of the Fundamentum ergo esi
justitiae Fides. Ambr. Offic. Lib. 1. cap. 29. and Lib. 2. cap. 2. Habet vitam
aeternam fides, quia est fundamentum bonum: Habet and facta, quia vir justus
and dictis and factis probatur, etc. Id. de Basilicis non Tradendis. Fides quae
est justitiae fundamentum, quam nulla bona opera praecedunt, sed ex qua omnia
procedunt, ipsa nos a peccatis nost^ is purgat, etc. Prosper Lib. 3. de Vita
Contemplativa, cap. 21. Fides est omnium bonorum fundamentum: and humanae
salutis initium, etc. August. in Vigilia Pentecostis.
whole Body of the Gospel, has this undoubted prerogative to be the Grace of
all Graces, the Mother of all, the Fountain from which all flow; and, as the
Fathers generally do justify, because it is the foundation of all access to
Christ. Which assertion of theirs, however later Wits have slighted and
contemned, as not giving Faith its due, in order to our Justification, does in
my opinion, with much greater perspicuity and simplicity and soundness, express
its proper office, then those newly invented; and several distinctions and
sub-distinctions confunding, rather than settling the judgment of a good
Christian.

And first, They ascribe this virtue of Justifying to a special Faith: Then
they say, this Faith does not justify as a Work, or Act, but Grace. Then they
proceed to affirm, That not as a principal cause, but only as an instrument
created by God in the heart to that end. And yet farther, Not as an Instrument
active and operative; but as an Instrument rather receptive and passive, as
appears by the example given of an Hand, which is no true cause of an Alms
given; but yet it properly receives it. But first, What a disorder must these
multiplied niceties needs breed in the minds of the simpler sort, who are not
able to comprehend them; and so are brought into great troubles of conscience,
whether their Faith be directed to Christ under the true relation it ought to
bear? How much more clear and easy is that Doctrine that teaches, First; That
neither our Faith nor Works proceeding from thence, can avail any thing,
without Christ, and that all their sufficiency is of Christ. And next, That
this Faith and good Works do but qualify us, according to the Free Covenant of
Grace, for Christ. Secondly, If it be denied, as in truth it is, That Faith is
any more an Instrument, whether active or passive; or a Hand, as it is called,
to lay hold (especially in another kind) of Christ, than Hope or Charity; I do
not find how they can prove it. For I may, and do yield a greater degree of
virtue in Faith special, well founded on God, than in other Graces distinct
from it; but I do not yield that this is the Faith properly by them contended
for: For, It is a mixed compound Grace, consisting of Hope and Love, which they
call [ Fiducia] Confidence, and resting upon God. This indeed is a special
Grace as considered in subordination to the general Grace, whereby we assent
and submit to the Gospel of Christ: but it is not special, as distinct from
other coordinate Graces with it. Calvin. Inst. Petrus Mart. Lo. Com. class. 3.
cap. 4. number. 6.


But what manner of Faith (say they) do we suppose that, which goes so ill
attended alone? First, I suppose there is such a Grace distinct from others,
and that which was set up against others to justify, and now crouding into it
all others to make it justifying, they affirm what at first they were so much
denied; namely, That justifying Faith is not so much a single, or singular
Christian Grace, as a confluence of many Evangelical Graces together; which
render a man capable of being justified; according to the Covenant of Free
Grace, before God, though never worthy. To which we readily assent. Again, If,
as they say, Faith [ Sola, non Solit^ri^] Only, not Alone justifies, it will be
no less difficult for them to give either good authority or reason, why the same
may not be ascribed to Love, or Charity, or to Hope; and when the
insufficiency of either of these be declared, to that effect; it may not as
reasonably now, as before he replied, and said, Charity only does justify, but
not alone, because Faith and Hope must be conjoined with it. There is little
judgment or sincerity in such manner of disputings as these.

But here, to prevent suspicion of mis-reporting the opinions of such as
contend for a modern notion of justification by Faith, which the Holy Fathers
were ignorant of, I find my self constrained to set down the state and reason
of the Question, as that learned man, Mr. Perkins has explained, Perkins on
Gal. 3. v. 10. etc
and defended Justification by Faith. In his Reformed Catholic, Point the
fourth: And in his Comment on the Galatians he moves this necessary Querie, as
most material to the clearing of the Controversy; What is that very thing that
causes a man to stand righteous before God; and to be accepted to Life
everlasting. To this in both places he answers, altogether to the same sense
and purpose, and with very little alteration of words; saying, The Obedience,
or Righteousness of Christ, and it stands in two things, his Passion in Life
and Death, and his Fulfilling the Law joined therewith: which he calls the
Active and Passive Obedience of Christ. In which resolution there is no
difference between us; no exception justly to be taken. Perkins Reform.
Catholic. page 570
Now says he afterward ( page 570. Reform. Cath.) All, both Papists and
Protestants, agree that a sinner is justified by Faith: This agreement (says
he) is only in word. And why so? The Papist saying, we are justified by Faith,
understands a General or Catholic Faith, whereby a man believes the Articles
of Religion to be true. But we hold, That the Faith which justifies is a
Particular Faith, whereby we apply to our selves the Promises of Righteousness,
and Life everlasting, by Christ. But if we say, That even the General Faith
(not taken for the Object or Articles of Faith, but Habit exercised) performs
this sufficiently, though not immediately (as in truth we do) by the influence
it has upon inferior and subordinate Graces, whereof a Particular is but one;
then in vain is all laid upon the Particular Faith. And that place by him
alleged out of Galatians 2. 20. makes more against what he would prove by it,
than for it: viz. I live by the Faith of the Son of God. For it is directly
denied, That hereby is intended such a Particular Faith as is before mentioned
by us: The words of the Apostle before, and the main design of his Epistle
declaring that he understood no other Faith in Christ here, than that General
whereby he relinquished the Law of Moses, with all its imperfect umbrages, and
betook himself, by Faith, to Christ; and lived now according to Christ, and not
to Moses. Neither does that which follows prove the specialty of this St. Paul's
Faith, as he conceives: viz. Who has loved me, and given himself for me,
particularly. For this is apparently a Predicate of Christ, and not of the
Faith there spoken of: It is a description of Christ, and not of the Faith in
Christ; which if it were, would make but little to the purpose. For who knows
not that a General Faith comprehends a particular Faith, and the Faith whereby
we believe and receive the Gospel, disposes us to believe that Christ died for
us, which is one part of that Faith: And the Faith that believes that Christ
dyed for all, does necessarily lead us to believe that Christ dyed for me
particularly. Therefore, still it remains unresolved, what singular and
signal virtue there is in the Particular Grace of Faith, which other
Evangelical Graces depending upon the General Faith, as well as does this
Particular Faith, may not be capable of in order to our Justification.

Hear we then, to understand this better, what the same learned Author says in
the entrance to that Treatise of the Reformed Catholic. A man is justified by
Faith alone, because Faith is that alone instrument, created in the heart by
the Holy Ghost, whereby the sinner lays hold on Christ his Righteousness, and
applies the same unto himself: There is neither Hope, nor Love, nor any other
Grace of God within man, that does this, but Faith alone. Thus he. Where
several things are taken for granted, not to be granted. First, That Faith is
any more created in the heart of man, than any other Grace, there expressed or
employed. Secondly, That it is an Instrument Active, laying hold of Christ, in a
special different manner from other Graces. For in truth, we are not so much
justified or made partakers of Christ, by our laying hold of him; as by his
laying hold of us. Thirdly, That in what sense Faith may be said to lay hold on
Christ, in the same, the other Graces may not likewise be said so to do;
because all Graces (speaking properly) which are indeed operative (as is said)
toward our Sanctification, are but Passive in order to our Justification,
which is an act of God only, declaring, and holding us Just in Christ Jesus. So
that the old Querie here returns upon us again, Which of all these Graces
prevail most to the inserting us into Christ: which I grant to be the General
Faith, as a foundation and first mover of all Graces. And as for the particular
Faith compared with its fellow Graces, it may be allowed a greater virtue, but
not of another kind, in reference to our union with Christ. For, when an humble
and desponding Christian considering his own unworthiness, and the
unsufficiency of his repentance it self, and graces to incline God to mercy, so
far as for their sakes to accept him in Christ for just and innocent; he, as
the last refuge he has, quitteth all worth and capacities in himself, and
flees with a strong confidence (which in this case is called Faith) unto the
free and absolute Grace of God revealed in Christ Jesus unto us: upon which God
beholding the whole glory of the Absolution of such a sinner, to redound to his
Grace, is pleased to receive such a person to mercy, according to that of the
Prophet Esaias, Thou shall keep him in perfect Is^iah 25. 3.
peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Than which
words I find no testimonies of Scripture, of the many alleged, more pregnantly
proving the power of that fiducial Faith (as I may so call it) in order to the
Justification of a man before God: and yet it must here be granted, That this
trust is much different from the Faith contended for. And that from hence, or
the like Texts, not a different virtue in nature or kind, though peradventure
more effectual and prevalent, is ascribed to it above other Graces, in order to
our Justification. All which is no less true of our Sanctification than our
Justification. For we are altogether as much sanctified by Faith alone, as we
are justified by Faith alone, or only: as appears from the Scripture, which
says, That our hearts are John 15. 3. Acts 15. 9.
purified by Faith. So that in this much disputed Question, I know no readier
way of satisfying the fearful and dubious mind, than by taking a due estimate
of the power of a General or Particular Faith in reference to Fides nos a
peccatis omnibus purgat, mentes nostras illuminat, Deo concliat. Prosper. ubi
supr.
our Sanctification, and judging alike of our Justification thereby. For we are
sanctified as freely by Grace, as we are justified, and as much by Faith too:
as Prosper before cited, says.

And therefore, lastly, in answer to diverse places of the Ancients which are
produced to confirm the modern sense of Justification by Faith alone, I answer
in a word. That it is true, their words seem to attest so much, but their
meaning was plainly no more than this; That Faith many times does justify
without Works, that is, any outward manifestation of their Faith, by such
fruits: but never without inward acts of Repentance and Charity distinct from
this special Faith: nor without such a devotion to good Works, which wants
nothing but opportunity to exert them; which is by an extraordinary Clemency
and Grace of God, accepted for the thing it self. This appears by the example
by them given, to manifest their meaning, of the Thief on the Cross; who was so
justified and saved by Faith alone, without good Works answerable thereunto,
because his sudden faith was prevented by sudden death. Nevertheless, That his
Faith was so much alone as to exclude Repentance, and such Graces as were
competible to one in his condition from a proportionable concurrence to that
effect, is no where said, nor intended by any of the Fathers, whose judgment is
of account in the Church of God.

CHAP. XXI.
A third Effect of Justifying Faith, Assurance of our Salvation. How far a man
is bound to be sure of his Salvation; and how far this assurance may be
obtained. The Reasons commonly drawn from Scripture proving the necessity of
this assurance, not sufficient, etc.

ANother effect of Faith, or at least consequence upon it, has the certainty
or assurance of our Justification and Salvation been commonly reputed. The
better to understand which, we must take as supposed and granted the difference
between the Truth of a thing, and Evidence of it: or the Certainty that such a
thing is, and the knowledge that so it is. So that the doubting of our
Justification or Salvation, does not make the thing infallibly so, but leaves
us under fears, and sometimes disconsolations: But a competent remedy seems to
me to be ready at hand, if we consider that our opinion of our selves is no
good conclusion against our selves; but rather, being founded in humility and
disowning of our worth and righteousness, an introduction to a comfortable hope
in Gods mercy, who has begun at least the work of Grace in us, by rendering us
studious and anxious about his service, and our salvation: unless it could be
proved (which we shall see presently whether so or not) out of the word of God,
that it is his will and direct command that we should have this assurance in
us. For as saint John says, Hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall
assurt 1 John 3. 19, 20.
our hearts before him: For if our heart condem us, God is greater than our
heart, and knows all things; i. e. the hearts and consciences of the children
of God do frequently condemn them; but their comfort is, that God is greater
than their hearts, and does not judge according to what opinion, good or evil,
we have of our selves, but according to his own Wi^dom and Grace. So that it is
no just inference at all, I do not believe I shall be saved, therefore I shall
not be saved. Nor this: I do believe I shall not be saved, therefore I shall
not be saved. Only they have great cause thus to argue and conclude against
themselves, who are wont, on the contra^y, to reason I believe I shall be
saved, therefore I shall be saved; abusing and corrupting the Doctrine of Faith
two ways most dangerously. First, In making it the simple and direct cause or
means unto Justification; and then a reason of a Reflex act, whereby they stand
assured that they are so acquitted, and justified before God. But St. John in
the former words cited, reasons much otherwise. For having in the 18. verse
exhorted to, and urged the duty of mutual Christian Charity, he infers from
thence, in the 19. verse, Hereby we know that we are of the truth, etc. i. e.
from the Indication of Love and Charity to the Brethren.

^ere is then an assurance, and that before God; and yet, as we have seen,
there rests and consists withal a diffidence and doubting, as we have
showed: The reconciliation of this seeming opposition does lead us to a
necessary distinction tending to the resolving of the principal Querie; and it
is between the State of Justification, and the Act of Justification. And again,
as to Assurance here spoken of, It is one thing to be assured of our
Justification, and another of our Salvation, as shall hereafter appear. First
then, I hold it sufficiently demonstrable out of Scripture, That a man may, and
every good Christian ought to be assured that he is in a state of being
justified and saved likewise. This we teach well in our Church Catechize in
answer to this Question, Do not thou think that thou art bound to believe,
as they have promised for thee? thus. Yes verily; and by Gods help so I will:
and I heartily thank our heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State
of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Every Christian that in Baptism
has put on Christ, and is entered into a Covenant of Grace with God, is bound
to believe assuredly, that thereby he is in a state of Salvation and
Justification. For thereby, God has especially elected him to salvation: of
which Election the Scriptures chiefly, if not only, speak; which are drawn to
signife the Eternal Decree of God, choosing not only men estranged from God to
the Covenant of Grace, but such as are first within the Covenant, to an
infallible Justification and Salvation. This I say is rarely, if at all
intended by any of those many Texts of Scripture alleged to prove the same,
they meaning no more then Gods Election to the state of Grace; that is, the
Faith and Profession of the Gospel. Whence it is that the persons so called and
converted to Christ, are by St. Paul called the Election: as Romans 9. 11. For
the children being not yet born, neither having done good Romans 9. 11.
or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of
works but of him that calls. Here the purpose of God is distinguished from
the election of God; meaning That, what God had before-time purposed and
resolved on, he in time executed in electing the younger, and relinquishing the
elder, and that rather from his own Free Will, then my difference in the
Persons so elected inducing him thereunto. And so Chapt. 11. v. 5. The remnant
according to his election, is the remnant elected. Chap. 11. v. 5. 7. 28.
And again, verse 7. he says, The election has obtained. And verse 28.
Touching the election they are beloved. In which three places, it is to me
plain, That by election St. Paul does mean the Persons elected from Jewish
Superstition to Christian Profession. As St. Peter also uses the same word,
saying of the Jewish Converts, Elected together with you. And 1 Pet. 5. 13.
1 Pet. 1. 2. Matthew. 24. 22, 24, 32. and several other places, in which nothing
more is intended by the Holy Ghost, than they who were in outward communion of
Faith. So that being sure of a man's Election, as every ordinary Christian is,
he becomes in proportionable manner sur^ of his Justification and Salvation;
that is, sure that the Faith he professes is altogether sufficient to lead him
infallibly to salvation; which neither the Religion of the Jew or Gentile can
assure him of. Yet to the reapin^ of the fruit hereof, it must always be
supposed, That such condition^ as God requires on the Party stipulating be not
wanting.

Now of this sort of Assurance I make no doubt but the word of God is more
genuinely interpreted and applied, than of that personal assurance peculiar to
some, who frame another notion of being elected; which is of being signally
chosen out of the former Elect to an infallible assurance of their
Justification and Salvation: which though I willingly grant o be true; viz.
That God has his peculiar ones amongst Christians too, as Christians amongst
Heathen; yet I find little or nothing spoken of under the said Appellations of
Elect, Elected, Election, in Scripture, but of the first sense generally. My
appeal shall be to the indifferent judge, by laying the testimonies before him,
which are principally these, many coming nothing near the point. St. Paul says
to the Romans of Abraham, That he did not doubt of the promise of God through
unbelief; but was strong Romans 4. 20, 21.
in says, giving glory to God. And being fully persuaded that what he had
promised, he was able also to perform. How far this is beside the matter every
sober man will easily see, that shall consider seriously; That these Promises
were made directly and expressly to Abraham's person, and not in common with
other persons. And can any man be so unadvised as to conclude, That because
Abraham having such a particular and personal Promise made to him by God, and
indeed absolute and inconditionate, that he should have a Son by Sarah his
wife, which he believed, and without staggering was assured of; therefore they,
who have no such personal assurances given of God, but only general, and
always conditional, of their Justification and Life Everlasting, can be in
like manner assured of the same: or ought to believe that they shall be saved,
as much as Abraham did, that God would send him a Son, as he promised? The sum
of Gods infallible Promise to Christians is this in St. Matthew, He that
believes Matthew. 16. 1^
and is baptized shall be saved: where it must of necessity be granted that,
Believing is a very comprehensive word, according to our distinction of Faith
above given; and consequently that it cannot be so evident to a man that he
believes, according to the Tenor and intent of the Covenant of Grace, as it
was to Abraham, that God himself made such a Promise to him; and therefore has
not the like footing for his Faith, assuring him that he believes aright, as
that he should have a Son, when his common sense told him that God had promised
he should.

It is said, that Faith is opposite to doubting: For, Christ said to Peter,
Matthew. 14. 31. O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? This is very
true: and therefore we say, It is no article or object of our Faith, to believe
that we shall be infallibly saved: but it is rather an object of our Fear, and
more properly of our Hope. For though it be said in the Apostles Creed, I
believe the remission or forgiveness of sgins; it is not meant, that any man
should thereby stand obliged to believe, as an Article of Faith, the actual
forgiveness of his own sins: but that his own sins and all other Christian
peoples are remissible: and that in the Catholic Church, there is forgiveness
to all that repent and believe. And this is no more then that General
Assurance; that by being baptized we are in a state of Salvation, as is
abovesaid.

To multiply many Texts to infer this from Gods faithfulness, who promises:
and from his gifts being without repentance, and such like, are not worth their
time that use them; nor would it be worth mine to examine them, any farther
then to say, That they are a great deal too large, to have any particular
relation to a man's personal state: As if God must needs change, if a man falls
from his steadfast purpose. Or God, when he in his own counsel determines to
save any man infallibly, must inseparably annex thereunto this Evidence of his
will to the Party, any more then it is necessary that all men, who leave others
their Estates, should tell them so much; and require at their hands that they
make no question of the same, under the penalty of forfeiting all.

The surest grounds therefore for this seem to be taken from revelation; which
no Christian can absolutely oppose: For not only may God, but God has revealed
this to others, by the testimony of his Spirit, or other sufficient Evidence
for to beget an assurance. But two exceptions are made against this way; the
one, That the dispute is only about the Ordinary dispensations, common to all
true believers. The other, That these places alleged prove no more than the
common Justification of believers, and their Adoption: As for instance, John 1.
12. As many as received him, John 1. 12.
to them gave he power to become the Sons of God: even as many as believe in
his name. Here, say they, believing is put for receiving; so that true faith
receives Christ: and this it does by a particular application of general
promises unto a man's self: Therefore a man ought to be particularly assured of
his being in Christ. The whole Antecedent I grant; viz. That every man
believes Christ when he receives him; and that Christ is received by Faith:
And that every man is bound to apply Christ particularly, and his Promises to
himself. But the consequence here made, follows not from hence: For by the
former, a man believes assuredly that the Promises of Grace made through Christ
to the Church, do particularly belong to him: he has a right to them, being
called to the Covenant: Neither do we promise any other security of Salvation
by only Faith, but to those that labor in their calling, and be fruitful of
good Works. Dr. Fulk on Rhem. Test. Phil. 3. v. 11.
And thus far a man is, and ought to be sure of his Salvation. But there being
employed in all Promises of Everlasting Salvation, certain conditions of obeying
and repenting, as well as believing simply, whether a man is to that degree
proficient in these, as to put him in actual possession of Christ; this is no
where revealed, neither are we commanded to believe it.

And when St. Paul says to the Romans; Romans 8. 15, 16. See likewise 1 John 5.
9, 10
Ye have not received again the spirit of bondage to fear, but ye have received
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. What is more plain than
that his meaning is, to distinguish the general state of the Church of the Jews
from the Church of the Gentiles: and the spirit of Moses (as I may so say)
which tendered to bondage, from the spirit of Christ, which is that free
Spirit: For as it is elsewhere said, If the Son make you free, then shall you
be free indeed. And from hence no more can be concluded to any single person
than to the whole Church of God, in which there are many reprobates, as all
agree. Neither is the matter helped out any whit by what follows; The Spirit it
self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God. I presume,
few will be so severe and ignorant as to deny the large acceptance in
Scripture of the Children of God, and Sons of God, and Saints, viz. That
generally they signify no more than those who were elected outwardly to the
Faith and Profession of Christ, and to the means of becoming, not only
denominatively, and of Right, but really, and effectually in Fact, the heirs of
Eternal Salvation. To be then the Sons of God, here with St. Paul, signifies no
more than by Faith to be the peculiar people and favorites of God, above all
such as were not thus brought home to Christ's Fold. Now that such singular
Grace and Privileges belonged to Christian, St. Paul proves from the testimony
of the Spirit, namely; That the Christian Religion is only the true Religion,
thus. The Spirit bears witness with our Spirit: Our own Judgment, our
Consciences does steadfastly assure us that we are the Children of God: but this
is not all: this proves nothing to another to the convincing of him that we are
the true Servants and Children of God; but the Spirit of God bearing witness
with our Spirit, does. And the Spirit of God bears witness with us
sufficiently, when it declares openly by miracles, signs, and wonders wrought
before the eyes of our Adversaries, that what we preach and believe is the
truth: Which is the same with what St. Paul writes to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
2. 4.
saying: And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power: That your faith might
stand not in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God. In which words he
plainly shows the ground of the Corinthians faith, not to be taken from any
fair or plausible Rhetoric, or form of words, whereby men are led oftentimes
to believe against reason; but on the more solid grounds of extraordinary
miracles, wrought by the power of God, and which did demonstrate to all equal
judges, That it was the Spirit of God which both taught them such mysteries of
Faith as they preached, and confirmed the same by such signs and wonders, as
did appear generally at the publication of the Gospel. Now what does all or any
of this concern the supposed particular, inward, tacit testimony, whereby it is
said a man is to be assured of his Salvation: And no more do the words of the
Apostle in the end of the same Chapter prove, too long to be recited: but this
Romans 8. 35, 36 37, 38, 39.
is briefly to be answered. 1. That they speak not at all of any individual,
single Christian, but of the Church of God, and that indefinitely or at large:
viz. That God has so determined to plant, propagate, and maintain that
Religion, into which diverse were collected by the ministry of the Apostles,
that whatever, or from whomsoever, evils might befall the Church of God, yet
they should never prevail with such persecutions to separate the faithful from
Christ: no not all the Powers nor Principalities on Earth, nor all the Angels
of Heaven, or of Hell.

But to secure these and the like testimonies the better, to their opinions,
some much admired persons of the Reformation (peradventure suspecting what
might be answered) have proceeded to say, That what promises Calvin. Inst.
Christ has made to his Church, do equally concern every Christian as well as
the Church: which I cannot yield to, without these Exceptions: First, That it
may be understood of a particular Church, as well as particular Persons. But
(as may hereafter appear) God has made no absolute promise to any particular
Church so far, that it can be any point of Faith to believe that Gods counsel
and decree are such to it, as never to suffer it to Apostatize from him: So
that no individual Church can be sure of its perseverance in the truth: and if
not that, how should any particular person claim so much? But the Promises of
Christ being taken (as they ought) of a Church indefinitely, it is most
agreeable to Gods word to maintain an infallible perpetuity of the same. Again;
It is to be remembered, that all this while, we are speaking, not so much of
certainty before God (according to which we may yield the Salvation of men to
be infallible) but certainty before men; or to the party concerned immediately,
which we call Assurance or Evidence. In the body of an Orthodox Church, it is
certain in it self, that many men shall be saved, but not certain to us that
any one therein shall; nor evident to any one, that he shall.

To the reasons taken from the Power of God, who is able to save, and reveal
this; And the truth of God, who is faithful in his Promise; And the Knowledge
of God, that he knows who are his; what need we make any answer, besides
showing the vanity of that inference which is drawn from the possibility of any
thing, to the Fact it self? and of that presumption, rather than faith, which
leads men to assure themselves of the benefit of the promises, which are
conditional, before it be evident unto them that such conditions have been duly
observed by them. The consideration of this uneven dealing and unreasonable
conclusion, upon such a supposal, has prevailed with some to make the promises
of Salvation so free, as not to consist with any condition, but peremptory, and
absolute, yea, excluding Faith it self (the last thing of all that their
Religion will suffer them to deny God) as a Condition; making the only use of
it to be, to receive what is so freely given them, as they falsely and
profanely imagine.

It will not, after this, be necessary to lay down the reasons of the contrary
opinion, having already showed, That there is no Precept for such a point of
Faith, no Proposition declaring it, no Article of our Creed requiring it, that
falling very short of it which teaches us to believe in God: wherein they say
three things are imposed on us to believe. First, That there is a God.
Secondly, That this God is my God. Thirdly, That I must trust and put my
confidence in him for my salvation: All which we readily assent unto. But the
most pertinent of all these come not home to the case before us. For every man
may, and ought to put his confidence in God for his Salvation: and yet be never
so much as confident of his Salvation, as is plain: and that upon this reason,
That the well grounding of such a confidence as this latter, may be very
obscure to him, and so the thing it self not clear. Again, It is prescribed by
the Lords Prayer, and other places of Scripture, to pray daily for Remission of
Sins, saying, Forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
this we are no less to pray for than for our daily bread. Therefore since we
are not ordinarily so assured of the Pardon of them: For as a man hops not
properly for what he has, neither does he pray for it, knowing he has it.
This St. Paul's argument to the Hebrews Heb. 10. 18.
proves, saying; Where remission of sin is, there is no more offerings for sin:
i. e. where the remission of our sins is known to us. Praying being our
Sacrifice under the Gospel. This were ridiculous, and displeasing to God, we
thereby implying that we have not that which we know we have; which were
unthankfully done of us. God in such cases expecting justly from us,
acknowledgment of his Grace, conferring such a blessing by all humble and
devout Praise and Thanksgiving for it, and not absurdly petitioning him as if
we had it not. And this is so convincing upon some, that I find a bold
profession in these words, The fourth Petion [in the Perkins.
Lords Prayer] must be understood not so much of our old sins or debts, as of
our present and new sins. I grant we must petition for pardon for our new sins:
but I deny that we are not daily to repent and beg mercy at Gods hands all the
days of our Life, for our ancient, as well as moderner offenses. And therefore
the same Author suspecting (it may be) the insufficiency of this answer,
proceeds; I answer again: We pray for the pardon of our sins, not because we
have no assurance thereof, because our assurance is small: we grow on from
grace to grace in Christ, etc. Which is very soundly and soberly spoken, but
quite overthrows what was before contended for about Certainty. For Assurance
that is weak and small, is no assurance; but a competent degree, and a
comfortable measure of hope and probability: which we not only allow, but know
to be enjoined us in holy Scripture by St. Peter, saying; Make your calling and
2 Pet. 1. 10.
election sure, for if ye do these things ye shall never fall Where we grant,
That a man is bound so to walk, believe, and live, as becomes the Faith he
professes, that his Salvation is sure before God, and that he shall in that
conjuncture, never fall; but this is not made so sure thereby to himself; and
one reason is included in the very words, which are, If ye do these things:
which implies that such things may be omitted, and express the consequence
thereupon.

And not only does this premature Certitude take us off from Prayer and
Repentance, which alone destroy all true Faith in us, and under a glorious show
of most supreme and firm assurance, leave us really destitute of the proper
means to attain that good degree of persuasion to the quieting of the troubled
and distrustful Conscience, but it also quite alienates the mind, and enfeebles
the hands of faithful men, in the vigorous pursuit of obedience; without which
no man shall be saved. For, as a man cannot, needs not, repent of what he knows
to be so fully forgiven, nor ask that pardon again, which he is thoroughly
persuaded is granted him: So neither can any man with that solicitude and
resolution pursue the means of Salvation principally seen in obeying Gods Laws
with Faith in Christ's merits, when his mind shall be wholly possessed with an
opinion, that the principal end next to the glory of God, is absolutely
satisfied, namely his soul saved.

They say indeed that the meditation hereof should rather quicken, and incite
men to a more exact walking with God, out of a greater obligation of gratitude,
and common ingenuity, to make returns answerable to the singular Grace
conferred. It Is true, it should so, indeed. And so should an inheritance put
actually and irrevocably into the son and heirs hands, before the death of the
Father. But how many instances have we, That so it is not; for one, That so it
is? Or who can say, That ingenuity and good natur'dness are generally as
powerful to keep up order and virtue in the world, as the proposing of future
favors and penalties to the persons concerned? We are not therefore to judge
of the future motions, of Quod non metuitur contemnitur, quod contemnitur
utique non colitur. Ita fit ut religio and majestas and honor, metu constet,
metus autem non est ubi nullus irascitur. Lactant. De Ira Dei, cap. 8
men so much from some moral obligations, as from natural propensions. And who
can say, That naturally we are are as prone to do good to others, as to
ourselves? To obey God abstractively, i. e. secluding the fears and hopes we
have from that service, is to do it for Gods sake, which is confessed to be the
most noble principle a man can act by; but when the Evils imminent on
disobedience, or the Blessing ensuing our obedience thoroughly affect us, we then
will move upon a natural principle actuated and promoted by Faith.

But to conclude this, the Sum of what a good Christian is to believe in this
point, is

First, The immutableness of God in his covenanting with man, and the
mutableness of man on his part, in fulfilling the terms he is tied to God in.
Both these are intimated to us in these words of St. Paul, which are vulgarly
brought against us; viz. Nevertheless, the foundation of God 2 Timothy 2. 19.
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his. And, let every
one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. The first foundation
of God, is that which he has laid in his assuring us, that he will have a
Church in despite of all Enemies and Persecuters, which would destroy it. The
second is the seal to this Charter; which relating to special persons, is
twofold: The First, That God knows who are his; that is, (according to
Scripture phrase) owneth and asserteth the cause of those that are his, and
will never forsake them, otherwise than he has declared; that is, they not
violating egregiously the Covenant on their parts. The second is that which
follows; viz. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from
iniquity. This is the seal set to the Covenant made by God; which if not duly
and proportionably, to the favourableness of the Evangelical Covenant, observed
by man, the seal of God avails but little to the benefit of a Christian.

A second conclusion may be, That notwithstanding God has no where enjoined
us, under any forfeiture, to obtain this assurance; yet he requires us to be
always so pressing and proficient in Faith and Holiness of Life, that, above
his Capitulations or ordinary Promises made in his Word, he may communicate his
pleasure unto us, and good will concerning the particular salvation of us. This
has been imparted unto diverse, and may again, when it seems good to God: But
it is no Rule to us.

Thirdly, A faithful Christian ought to endeavor the attaining to a strong and
true degree of Hope, by Gods grace, and the working out of his Salvation with
fear and trembling. For St. John says, That a man may arrive to such a state
of assurance (as it is called) that, considering and believing the undetermined
mercy of God in the Gospel, he may have confidence of Gods love toward him,
his own conscience not condemning him: as St. John says, Beloved, if our heart
condemn us not, then 1 John 3. 21.
have we confidence toward God.

Lastly, This sense serves much to the comfort and tranquillity of the mind of
scrupulous Christians, more than the holding of a peremptory assurance of
Salvation: which they, who require it, cannot deny to be wanting to many
faithful servants of God. For, when they consider that the want of this
assurance is no indication or character of a Reprobate, as some would make it
(and they must, who bring it under precept and promise) then are they heartened
still to press toward holy and devout exercises, believing that God, not
seeing nor judging as man judges, nor as they of themselves, but out of his
incircumscribed mercy, may accept them, and have mercy on them. And here
properly does that doctrine of Faith, commended in the Articles of our Church,
as very comfortable, take place; viz. as that which, when we have done all, we
must betake ourselves unto, and which brings us nearest to God: namely, not
that we believe we are justified for, or because we believe we are, freely; but
because Faith, and trust in God, as it is the first stone in our heavenly
building, so is it the crown and consummation of all, when we disown and
disavow all sufficiency in ourselves, or our most Christian Acts, even Faith
it self; and trust in his mercy to be accepted, under all our fears and
reasonings to the contrary; not manifestly violating the Covenant with God, for
which our own hearts and ordinary apprehensions may condemn us.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Contrary to true Faith, Apostasy, Heresy, and Atheism. Their
differences. The Difficulty of judging aright of Heresy. Two things
constituting Heresy. The Evil disposition of the mind, and the falseness of
the Matter. How far and when Heresy destroys Faith. How far it destroys the
Nature of a Church.

THus having sufficiently treated of the most general and principal Effect of
Faith; before we leave this, we are in reason to enquire into that which
privatively relates to true Faith, and that is, Heresy; What that is? and
wherein it consists? For Heresy cannot properly be applied to any but such
who are of the Faith; and in some degree belong to the Catholic Church:
wherein it is distinct from Atheism, Apostasy, and professed Infidelity. For
Infidelity, though it carries with it in its name, a sense which comprehends
both Atheism and Apostasy, yet use has prevailed so far as to apply it only
to such who do receive some Articles of the Christian Faith, and them
fundamental too, though not as the Christians. For Example: Infidels may
believe there is a God, and that God but one, and that there shall be a
Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, and Life everlasting, either in misery or
bliss: yet being either wholly ignorant of, or directly denying some
fundamental Points of Faith, as Christian, they continue Infidels, though not
Atheists. Neither can they be accounted Heretics, having never been of the
Church, nor initiated into, or embraced the true Faith. These are Negatively
only related to the Church, as Logicians say, Dissimilary things relate one to
another, viz. A black thing to a white: But Heresy is of a privative sense,
and an opposition to the true Catholic Faith, with an Obligation not only
taken from the matter of Faith it self, to which all the world owe homage and
obedience, but from some extrinsecal formalities whereby some men more
especially contract a relation to the Church of Christ. And the first and most
principal cause hereof is, the solemn dedication which is made by ourselves, or
others (we not oppugning it) of us in the initiating Rite of Baptism: wherein
renunciation is openly made of all things, persons, and opinions, contrary and
inconsisting with that Doctrine we there submit unto, and vow to observe. This
Dedication of us to Christ, does make and denominate us Christians; and
Catholics, according to the less ancient use of the word, of which we shall
hereafter speak.

Now, according to the degree or manner of violating this most solemn and
sacred Vow in Baptism, are men said to be Apostates and Heretics. And an
Apostates are Heretics, but not all Heretics, Apostates. The principal
difference consists in this: 1. That the Apostate does renounce even the
first principles of Christian Faith, as Christian: And they are they which are
expressly contained in the form of Baptism, whereby he became a Christian. 2. In
a formal profession contrary to such Covenant made with God in Christ. But
Heresy does not absolutely deny the Grounds of Christianity it self, but,
whether by affected error, or invincible; does resolutely and firmly assert
things contrary to true Doctrine.

But to give a precise definition of Heresy, as St. Augustine of old, so we
find at this day, very difficult, and not to turn to the right hand or to the
left; not to make it too broad and wide, nor too narrow and rigorous. The
Reason hereof may be first taken from the name, which imports such (...) dictae
G^^^^ voce ex interpretatie^^ electionas, qu^ quis sive ad instituendas
su^cipiendas utitur, etc. Tertullianus Praescript. cap. 6. Vide (...).
Hispalens. Origin. lib. ^3.
a singularity of choice and addiction to an opinion, which may as well be true
as false; good, as evil: Thus the ancient Heathens, as well Roman, as Grecian,
used the word; and so did the Christians too for some hundred years after
Christ. And when it began to be restrained to the evil part, a second thing
made the notion of it no less difficult and obscure; viz. the largeness of it,
for those errors, which were not material, or of any great consequence to the
Christian Faith or Church, as for to stigmatize them which were of note and
moment in the same. And a third thing obscuring the true nature, is the manner
of asserting and maintaining great, as well as small Errors. The word Heresy
generally signifies any opinion either good or bad. More especially it
signifies an Error in Religion. Thus Ecclesiastical Writers take it. -- Yet
most properly it is an Error in the Foundation of Christian Religion taught
and defended with obstinacy. Perkins on Galat. 5. v. 20.


To understand this, we must know how that a twofold Criminalness in Heresy,
according to the two more essential parts constituting it, according to
opinions generally received. The one is called the formal part, which relates
to the manner of holding such opinions as are erroneous. Inter Haeretic^s non
sunt deputandi qui aut ab Ecclesiasticis seducti sunt a parentibus: in errorem
lapsi nulla pertinaci anim^sitate defendunt, quaerunt autem (...) solicitudine
veritatem, corrigi parati, quum invenerint. Augustine. Epist. 168.
For lighter errors against the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and peace of the
Church, being maintained with obstinacy, and against due proposal of the truth,
do characterize and constitute an Heretic. The other is the material part;
namely, That about which men do err in Faith. And this has a peculiar
difficulty in it, arising from the undetermined points of Faith, and, I think a
moral impossibility (as they call it) to define what are those so necessary
points of Faith, to be believed; the denial where of makes an Heretic. This is
thought generally to be sufficiently explained in the Creeds of the Church, by
some. But others find many considerable points not therein comprehended, unless
by such a reduction whereby any thing, almost, may be compelled to come under
another wing. There are therefore that hold that the decrees and resolutions
of Counsels fully and only can satisfy this scrupulousness; and no question
but all these conduce very much to the acquiring a settled Judgment, in matters
of Faith; and espeially this latter: against which notwithstanding, there may
be made these following exceptions. First, That all things defined by Councels,
and that with the affixing of Anathema's, are confessedly not of Faith, but of
Rites, and Order also. Secondly, That those Canons which are of Faith are so
variously and miserably handled, and distracted by Learned Interpreters, that a
sober well-meaning Christian may, without any heretical pravity of mind, fall
involuntarily into a reputed Heresy. Thirdly, That contrary things have
sometimes been determined in several ages. From all which it is manifest, That
it is much more easy to define Heresy then an Heretic: because there is an
ingredient of personal aversion from, or opposition to the Truth, which can
scarce be discovered: but in the abstract, Heresy may properly enough be
defined, to be (not an opinion) but a False Proposition contrary to the
Catholic Faith.

And if it be thus uncertain and obscure what Heresy is, through so many
various kinds and degrees thereof, answerable to the several branches;
therefore, it cannot be easy to prove, all Heresy in the common notion, as
opposite to Faith, to be destructive to Faith. That it destroys that Part of
Faith against which it is bent, is undeniable: but that any particular Error
should destroy the whole, any farther than it is opposite to the whole Body of
Faith, is incredible. Some Heresies pluck up the Tree of Life, Faith, by the
roots; some cut it down to the root; some lop off the arms; some, lesser
branches; and some, which have been reputed Heresies, do only brush and beat
off the leaves and ornaments. An example of the former is given by St. Paul to
the Corinthians; some of whom, it should seem, denied the Resurrection in
general, and by necessary implication of Christ, who was as dead as any mortal
man else. But if there be no resurrection 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14.
of the dead, then is Christ not risen: And if Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. It were to no purpose to believe
any point in Christian Religion, dis-believing that of the resurrection. And in
short, to deny any thing expressed, or necessarily, and immediately included in
the form of words used in Baptism, is to root up all our Creed, and render all
our Faith vain in other Articles. An instance of the second sort of Heresy,
may be, to deny the Mediation of Christ by way of satisfaction for us,
restraining the intercession of him to that supposed one, now in Heaven: Of the
third, may be Errors about Free Will, and affirming a positive necessity to
commit sin against God: Of the denial of the efficacy of Good works done in
Christ, toward our salvation: and the affirming a meritoriousness in them
toward the same: Of the last, the affirming it unlawful to use any Ceremonies
in Gods service, but what are specially commanded in his word.

And from hence it seems necessary to distinguish Heresies and Heretics,
into Formal or direct, and Virtual and real. A Formal Heresy is Propositio
sapiens haeresim est ex cujus concessione, co-assumpto aliquo quod non potest
rationabiliter negari, sequitur ^aeresis in fide: vt siquis diceret quod beatus
Gregorius non fuisset Papa. Gerson de necessitate Salutis.
that which is expressly maintained and asserted in terms, but denied in the
inference and consequence, whichyet certainly and necessarily follows upon such
positions: as supposing a man should, with the Monothelites of old, affirm that
Christ had but one Will. This is a formal and direct Heresy, but if (as it is
possible) the same person should deny the true consequence hereof; viz. That he
consisted but of one Nature; He were not a formal Heretic in this latter;
because, though this Error does certainly arise from the former, yet all
Heresies being erroneous apprehensions, and affections of the mind, this Error
being not received into his mind, does not so affect him as to denominate him
formally an Heretic: Yet must he answer for Heresy, in his account before
God, because the movers and promoters of such shall no more escape, then he
shall from the punishment of drunkenness, who puts the bottle to his
neighbors mouth, provoking him to drink to excess: or of Theft, who will by no
means steal himself, but is aiding in his advice, and putting advantages into
his hands to take another Goods. In like manner, the necessary consequence of
a light Error being very notorious, though a person be not formally an
Heretic in the conclusion, which he may protest against, as not following from
his erroneous proposition, yet if in truth it does so, and is generally so
reputed, to the mis-leading of Christians, such a man is really or virtually an
Heretic, and obnoxious to the guilt and punishment due unto such Errors which
he denies. For instance; It is a notorious Heresy to hold it unnecessary there
should be any Church of Christ, and to affirm, That it suffices that every good
Christian has the word of God, and believes, and lives by himself, (though the
word of God contradicts this impiety sufficiently) and to be a Christian at
large. If any person heretically inclined, shall deny that this is his opinion,
or that thus he would have it; yet if he preaches such Doctrine, and publishes
such Opinions, which do necessarily infer thus much, he is a notorious Heretic
in reality, though not in the formality; As also, if he should teach, The
Church has no power to enjoin any thing besides what the word of God requires.
This Error taken simply and nakedly, has no such monstrousness as may not
pass for tolerable, but in the necessary consequence, it is as pernicious to
the community of Christians, as to preach against Christ himself. And therefore
the argument of late Rationalists is very false founded upon this ground,
Socinus. Chi.
viz. That Christians are not to be obliged under pain of damnation, such as
Anathema's and Excommunications are, to any thing which Christ has not by his
Law prescribed: For this indeed taken strictly, is true, Christ (for ought may
appear) does not in Scripture command Rites in use with the Church; but Christ,
under pain of his displeasure, does require that we should do all things not
contrary to his injunctions, for the keeping up Non sunt parva existimanda sine
quibus magna consistere enim possint. Hieron.
of the nature of a Church and Christian Society; and therefore, though the
Error be in it self light, it falls in the event, heavy upon Christianity it
self, and deserves no less rigor than is used toward the offender in Faith it
self.

Lastly, From hence we may reasonably judge of the frequent denunciations of
alienation from the Faith and Church, against them who erred heretically:
affirming in general, That Heresy quite alienated from the Church, and that
Society could not be of the Church which maintained an Heresy. For first, we
are to note that few or none before St. Cyprians time, were so severely
censured by the ancient Fathers, but such as were offenders against the very
principles of Christianity it self. St. Cyprian indeed, and others from him
extended this censure to such as were less criminal: For it is a very hard
matter to instance in any one Article of Faith (though I know some great Clerks
have attempted it) which Novations or Donatists rejected, or offended against.
So that (abating somewhat for the vehemence of the zeal conceived against such
enemies to the Church, in the writings of Fathers against Heretics) it will
appear, that it was matter of Fact, rather than Faith, or Heresy which exposed
them to such censures. For uncharitableness will as certainly damn, as
unfaithfulness: And he that dies for Christ (as diverse Heretics did) in
animosity, groundless against his brother, and especially against the Church
(of which he is, or ought to be a member) may notwithstanding, loose his Life
hereafter, as well as here. But of this more, now we are to speak of the Church.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the proper Subject of Faith, the Church. The distinction and description of
the Church. In what sense the Church is a Collection of Saints. Communion
Visible as well as Invisible, necessary to the constituting a Church.

HAving spoken of the Nature, Kinds, Acts, and Effects of Christian Faith, we
proceed now to speak of the proper Subject of Faith, which is the Church: Which
word is commonly used as well for the Place where our Lord is publicly and
solemnly worshipped, as for the People of God serving and worshipping him. But
of this latter only we art to treat at present: which we define to be, A
Calling and Collection of Saints from The Church is an universal Congregation
or fellowship of Gods faithful People and Elect, built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head and corner stone. Hom.
Chur. of Engl. Part. 2. pa. 213.
their vain Conversation in the world, to the Faith and Worship of God
according to the Rule and Laws of his Holy word; and to visible communion with
themselves: which description I doubt not to be grounded in all its parts upon
the Scriptures themselves. And that God is the Author and only Institutor of
such a Church, if it needed any proof, the Scripture would soon afford it: St.
Paul says to the Corinthians, Chap. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 17.
But as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one,
so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches. And so exhorts the
Thessalonians to 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12
walk worthy of God, who called them to his Kingdom and Glory. And so in very
many places else where, as will appear farther now we consider the Term from
whence God does call and choose his faithful people, and that is the World; the
world not taken in its natural sense, signifying the Natural bodies of all
sorts, of which it consists: nor absolutely from it in the more special
sense; in which Mankind is sometimes called the world; for civil conversation
and humane, mutual Offices may be maintained, and ought between Christians and
Heathens or Infidels: but rather in a moral sense, that is, unnatural, unjust,
unrighteous communication with the wicked of the world, as wicked: as St. Paul
explaineth himself to the 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10.
Corinthians: I wrote unto you in an Epistle not to company with fornicatours.
Yet not altogether [to refuse to converse] with the fornicatours of this world,
or with the covetous or extortioners, or with Idolaters: for them must ye needs
go out of the world -- but if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicatour, etc. St. Peter takes most of the terms in our description,
speaking 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
of Converts to the Faith. Ye are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar People, that ye should show forth the praises of God,
who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light, etc. And St.
Paul to the Ephesians. According as he has chosen us in him, before the Ephesians.
1. 4.
foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without blame before him
in love.

And it has been showed before, how that, when in the New Testament. we read
of Gods Calling, and choosing and electing, we are not so much to understand
the eternal purpose or decree of God, but the execution thereof in Gods actual
calling and electing certain persons to the profession and belief of the Faith
of Christ: which he effected by the fulfilling of the Prophecy made by Christ
in St. Matthews Gospel, relating to the Matthew. 24. 31.
destruction of the Jewish Polity and Church; and erecting of the Christian
instead thereof: viz. And he shall send his Angels [that is his Messengers and
Ministers] with a great sound of a trumpet, (i. e. the Gospel preached and
published) and they shall gather together his elect (i. e. such as he shall
make choice of) from the four winds, (i. e. from all quarters of the world)
from one end of heaven to the other.

Now these persons, by Gods word and good will called from such vanities,
ignorances, and vices, are in the Scripture called Saints; not so much because
they were all so thoroughly, or absolutely sanctified from their former,
natural, or moral impieties contracted in their state of Nature and Gentilism,
as that they should retain no sin; and none of them should fail of heaven
hereafter. But first, either from the better part, the whole was denominated
actually holy; which is not unusual in all speech: Or because, having made
renunciation of the World and Flesh and Devil in Baptism, they were called and
consecrated to Holiness: Or lastly, because they made open and solemn
profession thereof, however some so called, might be, and did appear to be
reprobates: And names and appellations are given not from any inward affection
or quality, which sense cannot judge of, but from such things as are visible
and apparent. And thus in the Old Testament, as well as New, it is used. As in
the Psalms, Gather my Saints Psalm 50. 5.
together unto me: those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice: which
imply the whole body of the people of Israel, as the words going immediately
before, do also declare. And wherever in the Book of Psalms (which is in diverse
places) we find the Congregation of the Saints, is meant the Israelites in
general. And in Daniel, Chap. 7. v. 8. 21, 22, 25, 27. is the word necessary
taken. Now it being most customary with the Penmen of the New Testament, to
borrow the phrase of the Old, this term Saints was translated from the Jewish
Synagogue to the Christian Church, by St. Paul, expressly to the Romans, saying:
To all that be in Rome beloved of Romans 1: 7.
God called Saints; so the original better then the insertion of to be, made in
the translation. As likewise in his first Epistle to the Corinthians; To the
Church of God, which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ 1
Cor. 1. v. 2.
Jesus; called [to be] Saints withal that in every place call upon the name
Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours. And the like salutation we shall find in
most of St. Paul's Epistles, as also most frequently in the body of them: as may
be obvious to any reader: though I deny not but sometimes in the New Testament
it is taken in a more restrained sense, signifying especially the victorious
and triumphant, not Militant Saints. From all which it does sufficiently appear
in what sense the Church may, and ought to be described a Society, or
Collection of Saints: And withal, how miserably and mischievously they err, who
giving that title to a Party, hold themselves bound to gather a certain select
number out of Christians not accusable of any notorious error from the Faith
of Christ, (as the Apostles of Christ did out of Heathens and Jews) and to
constitute and call them Saints.

Another thing requisite to the constitution of a Church is, That it be a
Communion of Saints, it sufficing not, that persons elected or selected (as
abovesaid) be many in number, but holy by nature or institution; as God
ordained of old in the forming of the Jewish Church, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. Thou art Deuteronomy.
7. 6. 26, 19. 18, 9.
an holy people unto the Lord thy God: The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be
a special people unto himself, above all the people that are upon the face of
Earth. Which words are with advantage applied unto the Christian Church, by St.
Peter. Whence it is that the same St. Peter makes it an 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. 2
Pet. 1. 4.
end of calling this company together, That they may be partakers of the Divine
Nature; or, as it is otherwise more plainly rendered, Of a Divine Nature:
Holiness drawing us near unto the Nature of God himself. As the Wiseman also
writes: The giving heed unto her Laws is the assurance Wisdom 6. 18, 19.
of Incorruption, and Incorruption makes us near unto God. And not only must
they be holy, but to that end, must of necessity hold a twofold communion. The
one Invisible with one Head, Christ. The other Visible and external, with one
another. For the Apostle tells us, speaking of Christians, The head of every
man is Christ. And to the Ephesians; The 1 Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23.
husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church: and
and he is the Savior of the world. There can therefore no question be made,
but it is most essential as well to the Church in general, as every particular
Christian or Member of the same, that Christ be the Head of his Church: as St.
Paul yet more clearly expresses it to the Colossians, excepting against such
Professors of Christian Religion as held not the Head, from which all the Body
by joints and bands having nourishment ministered and knit 2 Col. 2. 19.
together, increases with the increase of God. Therefore leaving that, as on
all hands granted, we come to the external communion of the Church.

CHAP. XXIV.
A Preparation to the knowledge of Ecclesiastical Society or of the Church,
from the consideration of humane Societies. What is Society. What Order. What
Government. Of the Original of Government: Reasons against the Peoples being
the Original of Power: and their Right to frame Governments. Power not
Revocable by the People.

IN the outward Communion of the Church two things are to be enquired into:
First, the Nature of it, wherein it consists. Secondly, the Adjuncts or
Affections thereof. First, we shall treat Civitas a conversatione multorum
dicta est, pro eo quod plurimorum in unum constituat and contineat vitas.
Origin. Homil. 5. in Genesim.
briefly of the Nature of this Communion. To understand which clearly, it will
be expedient to begin with the definition of Communion in General, or Society
humane: For Communion is nothing else but Humane Society. And Humane Society is
nothing else but a conversation of men out of natural reason inclining and
moving them thereunto, for the mutual supply of the particular defects and
exigencies each man is subject unto in a separate condition. And this Society
thus combining or concurring together is commonly called a Republic: the word
signifying, The common good: it being the design and end of all Republics or
Commonwealths for men, first in order to seek the common interest and good of
the whole Society, and so through that to derive particular and private benefit
to each member thereof, and not, as some blindly and brutishly addicted to
their private personal profits, to begin at home; and not to secure the Public
stock. These are no better than such Pilferers and Thieves, who being in
partnership with others, pocket up in the first place all that they can lay
hold on, and contribute no more to the common stock than they are by force
constrained unto.

Now this Society may be divided into three sorts, Natural, Civil, Divine or
Ecclesiastical. Natural, is that Order and Regiment constituted Ord^ est parium
and disparium rerum sua cuique loco tri^uens dispositio. Aug. Civ. Dei 19. 13.
Bernardus. Gerson entitiloquio. Gubernare est movere aliquos indebitum finem,
sicut nanta gubernat navem emendo eam ad portum. Thomas 22. Q. 102. 2. co.
by God in every man's soul: which consists of the Superiority of the Rational
faculties, and the Subjection and Obedience of the Inferior or Sensitive
Affections. For Order, as several of the Ancient have described it, is nothing
else but The Disposition [or placing] of equal and inequal things into their
proper places: which Order is the foundation of Government. And Government
(according to Thomas) is the moving of men to their due end. There being
therefore a twofold end of man; secular and spiritual: Government likewise must
be answerable. And both agree in this, viz. to be the Administration of the
Weal Public to ends agreeable unto them. In which we are yet farther to
consider these things. 1. The Original of Government. 2. The Form of
Government. 3. The Rule and Reasons of Government. 4. The Obligation upon Men
under Government. And of these briefly; as a necessary Introduction to the
Doctrine of the Church.

And concerning the first, the Cause and Fountain of all Government: Some
pretending to fetch the Fountain head of all humane Rule from its first rise,
have quite forgot what they went about; and inverting the order of nature, have
begun at the end; which is rather the effect, then cause. For now we do not
enquire, why, or to what end it is? but who made it, and whose hand it was that
framed this Tool to bring to pass such a work as humane safety and tranquillity.
That this must be the same cause with that of man himself, seems reasonable to
me to conclude, from the necessity of the same, and the wisdom of Divine
Providence; which having given generally such instinct and common prudence unto
Creatures to do nothing which shall serve for nothing: nor to erect any thing,
but with competent provision to conserve and continue the same in that being,
so far as the Supreme Wisdom shall not oppose the same; How is it credible that
God should make that Masterpiece of his, Man, upon earth, and not at the same
time provide for that subsistence and continuance Sevorum and bestiarum (inquit
Aristoteles Polit. 3. cap. 6) non est Civitas (...).
which are necessary? But it is plain, that man though as brutish, and a
sensible creature, he may wear out, possibly an unhappy, ignoble life, yet
without society and community and unity, through the bands and ligaments of
sound and reasonable Laws, cannot subsist, as civil or rational, or as easily
improvable to perfection of natural state upon earth: but must necessarily
degenerate into the rank of Brutes. Therefore sure Divine Wisdom left him not
destitute of such helps as were proper to this end; but together with his very
nature instills into him an inclination to Society; and by his own Act and
Ordinance, whereby he ordained that man should propagate and multiply,
prescribed the best and only manner of civil Regiment; investing some with a
natural right of dominion over others: As the man over the woman; and the
parents over the children: from whence it is ready and easy to approach to a
community, and that with a subordination. This is so plain, that the
perspicuity and simplicity does, rather then any thing else, offend the
unsatisfied acuteness of rarer wits; and move them to pry farther to confound
themselves, others, and the Order God has set in the world: beginning at the
feet and ending in the head, and putting counsel into the tail to teach the
head how it should rule the body: and empowring children to enact Laws for
Parents, how they ought to govern; which they certainly do, who affirm that the
grosser body of the people did first of all agree upon Government, and
constitute their Ruler: which dogmes have no fewer nor higher arguments to
confute and oppress them than these. First, they are Ridiculous. Secondly,
Sacrilegious and Impious. Thirdly, Impossible. Fourthly, Pestilential and
Pernicious to all Government.

It is first ridiculous, as that opinion which inverts all order, and contrary
to a much more sound and sober Rule in Politics; viz. That no man can create
one greater than himself. And if it be said that therefore no single one can
confer greater power than he himself is possessed of on another, but Many who
are greater than one, may: I answer, This is true, where the supposition which
is here false, and taken for true, is granted; viz. That many men have in such
cases as these any more power then one. For I wholly deny that any are, or
altogether have any right, whatsoever power they may usurp, to create such
Powers: And it still remains absurd to suppose that any, or all whose only
place and capacity it is to serve, should more then command: For, it is a true
saying, It is more to make a King, than to be a King. For still I hold this
which I have not found shaken by the many attempts of innovating Wits, that
there is a real Paternal Power in lawful Princes. And though we should suppose
that, which was rarely, if ever done, that a man should adopt any man into the
place of a Father, as men usually did some, as their sons; yet can we not
suppose, that hereby any paternal Power is really conferred on such an one, but
only imaginary; and impediments removed whereby Paternal power, which has an
acknowledged common right to Rule, take place over such a person, as has so
submitted unto it. So in like manner, it cannot be denied against innumerable
instances to be given; that the People, in certain exigencies and faileurs,
have as it were adopted one man specially as their civil Parent, whom we call
commonly a King: and hereupon absurdly and proudly conclude, they have made a
King: but we know this to be nothing so. For it is not choice, but Power that
makes a King: and in this case no power at all is given, or can be given; nor
in truth ought to be taken away as the manner is from Princes entering through
the populacie, into the Throne. For God only is the proper and immediate Author
of Right and Power, which he has inserted into Parents over their Children;
and has proportionably prescribed to Kings and Princes, without ever advising
with the People, or expecting their consent or confirmation: This the Scripture
it self calls Jus Imperii, or 1 Samuel 8. 9.
lefs significantly with us, The Manner of the King. Reason calls the same
Justice: which never takes its measure from earth originally, but from heaven:
not from the People, but from God. And that Similitude found in the works of a
very judicious and learned man, to show the Prophets right to institute, at
first, Kings, from their right to restore Kingly Power lapsed by reason of the
visible Heir to it ceasing; viz. That as the Lord of a Manor resuming the
estate of a Tenant whose legal Heirs are unknown to himself, does argue that it
first proceeded from him; so the right of the People to constitute a Prince
over them, upon a total cessation of legal Pretenders, do imply, an original
right to be in the People of founding Monarchs; does to my apprehension infer
the contrary, being better stated. For it shows no more than this, That in
truth God being the true and proper Lord of the Manor, this dominion is
devolved unto him, and not to the People. And that even in such cases a tacit
hand of God is seen by many eminent Instances in Histories, designing the
Person receiving that Rule; the People being but so many Stewards of Gods
Court, in admitting a new Tenant to Kingly Power. For by me (says the Prove. 8.
15. Dan. 2. 23. ^^testas (...) est apud Electores, ergo nec ab ipsis datur sed
ab ipsis tamen certae personae applicatur. Grotius, De Imperio Summarum
Potestat. cap. 10.. 2. Idem de Jure Bell. and Pa. lib. 3. c. 3. 8. 1.
Simpliciter esse verum negat. Populum creare Magistratus.
Scripture) Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. And the like does Daniel
assert to God: He changes the times and seasons; he removes Kings, and
sets up Kings: he gives wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge, etc. The most
therefore that the People do when they act most in creating Kings is, under
God, to apply the Person to the Place or Office of Governing: And therefore in
the second place it is no better than Sacrilegiously done by them to mutilate
that Power which God has given by the necessary and common Laws of Natural
Justice to Supreme Rulers, and transfer of it to themselves: as it would be for
a Guardian to an Orphans estate, to pare and pill it, and bestow it on himself;
although perhaps out of terror the consent of the party so defrauded be
obtained, lest he should loose all. Yet does not all this contradict the
general practice of Subjects, who having long continued under equal and
reasonable Laws, explaining and particularly applying the common Supreme Law of
Justice to a State or People, do present such Rules of Regiment to their future
Prince, for his confirmation: unless they be so far urged on him who has a
Personal Right by Birth to succeed in the Throne, as to deny absolutely to
submit to him without such conditions yielded unto. Indeed, could they prove
the Right of Choice of the Person, to be the same with the Power belonging to
the Place, they might mangle, alterate, and adulterate it as they pleased: For
it is a Law, that a man free from Rulers (as these are supposed now to be) may
do what he will with his own: and choose whether he will part with any of it,
or not; and what, and how much he will give away: but it not being so, and a
duty lying upon him of being Just: He that (as our Savior says) is unjust in
the Luke 16. 10.
least, is unjust also in much.

But thirdly, to show that there can neither be Divine nor Natural Right in the
People to choose or create Governors, and much less Government, the
impossibility of the real and just execution of this power abundantly
suffices. For if men, as some have been so blind and bold to affirm, were
naturally free until they brought this subjection upon themselves: Then first
this were general and without exceptions; or but partial, and with exceptions:
If this latter be true, and some were naturally subject, This will destroy the
principal dogme it self, and open a way to the unanswerable reasons against
natural freedom: For that which we have by nature, we have in common, and
without exception of the thing it self, though peradventure with some
discrimination in the degree and measure. But if the first be granted, That all
are free; then must cease of necessity subjection natural of children to their
parents; which has been with better advice and reason received, then it has
by some been well-nigh quite disowned, to the making way for Novel Politics.
And again; Grant that all men were once (but no body could never tell when) and
in a certain place, (but no body could ever tell where) equally free, or at
least, all of years of discretion, which is most uncertain; It would be known
first, How men dare to be so presumptuous as to make such a breach of the Law
of Nature as this must be; viz. To part with their birthright, and to imbezel
that which God had given them, concomitantly with their own lives. I say, what
a notorious ingratitude, and an offense against God to alter nature it self,
who, we may well suppose, does all things most consonantly to Divine reason. If
therefore men had this Liberty naturally in them, I hold it no less a sin to
give it away, than for one to cut off a member of his body, or to destroy ones
reason, if it lay in his power. And to say that the People, in such cases, do
not absolutely divest themselves of power, nor part with what God and Nature
has placed in them; because they commit only to such the Administration of
such power as is resident in them radically; it being neither commodious nor
possible for the universal Body to manage it self, to the due ends of civil
Society; but reserve unto themselves a right of Revocation, upon the
Maladministration, or abuse of Power so delegated: This is to traduce Divince
Providence and Wisdom notoriously. For what can be a greater reproach to a wise
man, or the most wise God, than to admit such a gross error, as to so
constitute and frame a thing to such ends and purposes, which it can never
attain; and to endow a people or person with such a faculty which can never
avail, nor succeed to the intention of it, and never be executed, as certainly
Supreme in the People cannot, but must be delivered over to another more
capable subject. Thus it seems to me that such supposed power ought not to be
translated from that subject to which God had annexed it, to that which the
people likes better, man here in mending Gods ordinance. Therefore surely
there being found a necessity of having power otherwise posited than in the
people; and it being an egregious absurdity of altering that God had ordained;
it must follow, to reconcile these things, That there never was any such power
in the people at all; but what they have, is unto them derived from another
Power originally.

And this is further confirmed from the Impossibility as well as impiety of
making any such translation of power from its natural subject, the People;
because it cannot ever fairly or justly be brought about: seeing that the
People cannot unanimously, much less ever did concur to the Election of any one
Government or Governor. They cannot all give in their Votes to such an end;
always some were dissenting: and if they did not enter their Protest against
the proceedings of their fellows, it must be because they were deterred,
curbed, and oppressed by a more prevalent faction obliging them, and
constraining them most unjustly to comply with their Opinions and Decrees. For
there appears no sound reason why a more numerous and powerful faction may not
as well take away my Estate, because they are stronger than I, as take away my
birthright, which Liberty is here asserted to be. So that the very first step
to Liberty must be founded in injustice, in taking away that from me, which I
might no less in natural reason spoil them of: and in servitude too, in
bringing me whom they acknowledge to be naturally free, into unwilling
subjection. Neither is the difficulty solved in saying, That Reason and Nature
also require that for order sake and regulating humane Society, the Minor part
must yield to the Major. For upon this supposition indeed that power is so
absurdly and inconveniently posited, there does presently appear such a
necessity: But my Argument is taken from the absurdity of any such necessity of
natures creating, that the supposition is very false. And if it were true, yet
were not that Maxim true which is here brought to control and correct the
same. For Nature does not teach us, much less necessitate us in any case to
follow the most numerous; but rather reason, and experience, and the judgment
of diligent and wise discussers of this Point inform us, That the multitude are
more inconsiderate, undiscerning, and injudicious, then the fewer in number,
many times: the world being generally thicker set with fools, than wise men;
and fools, being commonly more apt to be led by fools, than with deeper and
sounder reasons of the Wise.

Now as to the right of Revocation resting still in the People, even after the
supposed investiture of Power made to a Prince, or other Magistrates; I must
confess (upon supposition of a native right in them) it to be very reasonable,
yea though the contract be very binding upon them to the securing of the
persons so inaugurated, in that State. And that from the grounds already laid
down, which prove that no alteration ought to be made contrary to Divine or
Natural Institutions; and consequently, the People being by natures Law
Proprietaries in that Power, all alienations attempted must needs be void, any
farther then they judge fit, yea and farther too; because they themselves are
bound to keep themselves to such innate Rights, and observe them duly. And
besides Civil and artificial Law, as I may well call Humane, can never
extinguish Natural, absolutely and justly And therefore what they gave, the
People, they may require back again; because they received that entailed upon
them and their Posterity, which they ought not, nor can cut off. And this I
say, not being ignorant what others have said to the contrary, who are said to
yield supreme Power in the body of the People, which they may dispose of to
another, but not revoke again, any more than a man may recover back his Estate
once lawfully made over to another. But the disparity of the cases makes the
answer very easy: which is, That no man being so naturally invested with a
temporal estate, as is here supposed the People to be with this Right of
Dominion, that may without any violation of a superior Law be parted with, and
not this. For supposing equally, that God who has given only a general right
to man to possess the earth, and not assigned any particular Lands to
particular persons to be holden of Divine Right, had done this latter, it would
have followed, That he ought not to sell them; and that such sale made, were
void before God: As does plainly appear in the distribution of the Land of
Canaan unto several Tribes, by no means to be confounded: and of entailing of
Lands unto particular Families, by no means so to be alienated, but they might
return, at a time prefixed, to the same House.

But the Right of Rule in the People is looked upon as by Nature and Divine
ordinance belonging to them, and therefore cannot [ de Jure] be transferred;
or, if attempted, must needs, by the same Right, be revokable. But I look not
upon that Argument much used, as concluding against the pretended power of the
People, which stands thus. No man has power of life and death over himself.
Therefore he cannot communicate this power essential to the Supreme, to any
other. For, is it not possible a man, who has no such power over himself (as
in truth no man has) may yet have over another, and this give unto another;
from a concurrence wherein One may receive a general dominion over many? But if
no man could give the power of Life and Death to another, who cannot dispose of
his own Life; How could Kings themselves grant that power to inferior
Magistrates, whenas themselves have no power to take away their own lives,
neither can they give power to another to take them away?

The last thing to be censured in the doctrine of the Peoples power, is the
perniciousness of it to all Empires and States, where it is infused into the
minds of the Commonalty, and improved to actions naturally flowing from thence,
as experience has sufficiently proved, as well as reason informed: of which
latter (omitting here the odious instances, Histories, and our own senses have
ministered unto us) we shall give these three only. First, That if it were true
that such Power were radically and revocably in the people, the people never
being able to judge with general consent aright of the same thing, nor soberly
and quietly to concur to the same conclusion, through the infinite variety and
d^scord found in several free minds, such license of constituting and repealing
their own Acts, must of necessity produce great divisions and confusions
amongst them, without any insinuations or instigations of subtiller and more
turbulent heads, which do constantly watch and improve such occasions to bring
ruin to a Nation, upon some remote contemplation of a possible advantage
arising out of the fall of a well built State. But this perpetual plague of
discontented, ambitious Incendaries, both Divine and Politic, plying the
common people with language agreeable to their humor, (and nothing ravishes
them more than to be told what an interest they have in modelling States) is
that which alone suffices to overthrow all order in a Republic: And this we
intended for a second Argument. A third, may well be the common and villainous
gloss inseparable from such pestilent Principles executed. For the same
Histories that relate to us how crafty and seditious Ringleaders of Ego
^^nquam existimavi universi populi Judicio eam rem [constituendi reges]
permitti deberi, sed ut prope ad consuetudinem nostram ex omnibus ordini bus
Selecti ad Regem in consilium^ coirent. Buchananus, DeJure Regni apud Scotos,
page 11
an enchanted multitude have deluded them, by infusing such false Dogmes, do
tell us that they finding it impossible to obtain the concurrence of all
persons (who according to the pretended Laws of Liberty and Equity ought) as
one, to agree in one design, do first with great injustice interpret their Rule
to hold and be fulfilled in the Major part of the people only. Then finding
themselves most commonly destitute of that advantage, they proceed to expound
it more to their purpose tyrannical, and and boldly affirm, That by the People
is not meant necessarily the most, but the best, and soberest, and godliest,
and such only that study really the good of Religion, and the Liberties of the
People. And are not these fine doings? Do not these popular tenets hang well
together, and end well, which in process of their own reason and practices,
confute the very first Principle of all; viz. That People have an absolute
Supreme Power to frame Governments, when before they can bring matters to their
intended conclusion, they are forced to deny them? But this popular dogme will
appear yet as more false, so more odious from what we shall now speak of, the
Second Point in this general discourse of Government.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Form of Civil Government. The several sorts of Government. That
Government in General is not so of Divine Right, as that all Governments should
be indifferently of Divine Institution, but that one especially was instituted
of God, and that Monarchical. The Reasons proving this.

THE Second thing to be here examined is the Form of Government. To speak
orderly of which, it is necessary to call to mind the several forms or kinds of
Government extant in the World: which though according to the infinite variety
of prevailing Factions, may also be infinite; yet may best be reduced to these
two, Monarchy, or the Supremacy of One presiding over all others within such or
such Dominions; and Polycrasie, or Polyarchie, where many have the power in
their hands of administering the Republic. And this again is subdivided into
many forms. As Polycrasie here properly and strictly taken (not as before, for
any number opposite to One, but) for a great number of persons invested with
Civil Power. And Aristocracie, consisting of a Few comparatively with the
others, and them of the Nobler, and richer of the People: And Democracie,
wherein the People are said to retain the Power of Government in their own
hands. But this last is only said, and by some ignorant and undiscerning people
phansied to be, rather than in reality is so, or ever was or possible for to
be; and that upon the reasons, amongst diverse others, already given against the
Peoples power. This the Philosopher in This Aristotle shows Politics lib. 4.
cap. 4. initio.
his Politics, does in effect, as far as he dared, confess, amidst so many
pretenders to it. And they who dispute of it, are constrained to desert the
proper genuine sense of the word Democracie, which should comprehend the people
generally without exclusion of any, and to affix a new meaning to it, whereby
many of the inferior and ignobler sort are taken into the numerous Counsel,
and Court of Judicature, administering the Public: And thus at this cheap rate
are the people choused into a fond and empty opinion that they are some body,
when it is not the thousand part of them, who are at all actually concerned in
Government. The Histories of the frequent and vain, but fatal attempts made by
the Roman and Grecian Populacie to become Masters of themselves, and to Rule
their Rulers, are more than enough to confute any man willing and able to learn
what a Chimera such a Government is, and what devastations rather than security
such presumptions have exposed Cities unto: who, when they were most popularly
governed, and so should be most free, never regarded in the least the adjacent
peoples freedom, which lived without their City, never admitted their Vo^es,
never advised with them as they ought to have done, if they would have made
good their principles, which teach that Power is of right in the People, and
consequently that they ought to govern, and by no violence or fraud ought they
to be defeated of this their pretended Birthright: and they without the Gates
in remoter parts are of the same condition with Citizens. And if they recurr to
the old hold of the Patrons of such natural Rights in people, to say, That,
notwithstanding them, there must be some overruling power to bring things into
settlement, and order; and therefore, the universal judgment and approbation of
every person must not be expected: I as easily reply, and more strongly
conclude, That therefore there can be no such natural Right in them so much as
to prescribe to themselves; it being most ridiculous to affirm, as well as
dishonorable to God, to believe, That the Allwise Providence should so dispose
of Power, that unless humane wit mended it, nay, quite changed it, it could
never be exercised to the benefit of mankind.

And this being made good, not only must this Democracie be found a mere
imposture upon people, but the pretended Right of Government communicated unto
the Chief in the other two Species's of Government, Aristocracie and
Polycracie. For these persons must either profess a right growing up unto them
from the powerful usurpations and oppressions made by them over their brethren,
the rest of the people, who naturally and justly were, and ought to be as free
as themselves (and so all the frame is founded in injustice) or this was freely
communicated unto them from the people. But against this is sufficient what we
have often both said and showed before, That the People never had any such
Power, and if they had, ought not, nor could part with it, or remove it from
that place and proper subject wherein it was by God seated and settled. And
therefore none of these can be just or natural: for nothing that is unjust can
be natural, or agree with the Divine Will.

And from hence is refuted the vulgar Warrant that is used to justify, as
indifferent in their kind, all sorts of Civil Government, telling us, That God
has instituted Government in General, but not limited it to any one kind, but
left it to the wisdom and choice of men to pitch upon what Government best
agrees with a Nation. But to what men's wisdom? to some few? or to many? or to
all men of that Nation? All, or the major part have no wisdom, nor possibility
to choose: Few, or many choosing does manifest injustice to the others. But
what needs repetition of what is said quite opposite to all this? This
therefore is only here to be added, That the supposition here made is utterly
false, and incongruous to the nature of all things else constituted by God, and
contrary to the course of nature, and Gods manner of working, which apparently
is not to begin with Generals, and so to proceed to Particulars: but first he
makes Particulars, and creates only [ Individuums] single beings: and by a
necessary consequence, whatever existence the General Nature has, it borrows
from thence. As God did not at first make man in General, and then left some
body else (as they thought) to make Adam and Eve and the rest: nor did he irst
and only make a living Creature in General, and then left the Angels, or some
other unknown Creatures to us, to make what special Animals they pleased out of
that: but he first made Adam, and so man's nature was made. He first made the
Sun and Moon (so far as we read) and upon that followed, that he made great
Lights. And the like method must of necessity be acknowledged in Gods
Institutions Moral and Civil: and he must inevitably (so far as humane wit can
reach) first ordain some one Government in particular, before he could be said
to be the Author of Government generally taken.

Now if it does not at all appear, That God had any more than a common hand
(whereby evil as well as good does spring up in the World) in the institution
of any more than one sort of Government; and that he did particularly pitch
upon one, and gave instances and intimation of his choice of one, and nothing
can be alleged in behalf of the opposite to that, as proceeding, in any
direct special manner, from him, then will the form of Government, we now seek
after, commend it self unto us. And this we shall do by giving the Divine
Prerogatives, which Monarchical Government has above others invented by man,
to stand in competition with it. And this not by wading deep, or wandering far
into an uncertain and tedious Disputation of finding out reasons on both sides,
which may seem to commend and prefer one above another, and so consequently to
conclude a divineness in one especially; but by certain visible indications and
motives evidencing this to every imprejudic'd mind. And they are these.

First, Consider we that simple and imperfect Regiment, which is Natura enim
commenta est Rege^^, quod and ex aliis animalibus licet cognoscere: and ex
apibus, quarum regi amplissimum cubile est, medioque ac tutissimo loco. Seneca
de Clement. lib. 1. cap. 9. Vide etiam Hieron. Epist. 4. Isidorum Pelusiat.
Epist. lib. 2. ep. 216. Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 4. page 217. Basil. Ma. Hom.
8. in Hexaem. Chrysostom. in Romans Sermon. 23. page 189.
found in Animals, and there will appear a resemblance of this Monarchical
power only, as in herds of Deer, and Cattle, and Bees, in which is observed the
Superiority of one over all, so far as there is any subjection at all. Yea, St.
Cyprian, and diverse other Fathers writing against Gentile Idolatry, do prove
the Monarchy of God over all the World, from the Unity of Inanimate things, as
the Sun in the firmament reigning, as it were, over all the other Celestial
Bodies.

Secondly, The more proper and refined Law of Nature written in men's heart, and
inclining them to this kind of Government only, do not a little argue the hand
of God in its institution. That being received for a Law of God natural, to
which all people without syncretizing, consulting, or combining mutually, do
consent and practice. Now it is evident, so far as any History does inform us,
That all Nations were at first governed by a single person. And whereas Nimrod
is reported by some, first to have usurped Regal Power over men, because the
Scriptures tell us, how he was a mighty hunter before the Lord, it has more of
fancy tha^ substance in it: Yet possibly he might be the first that collected
many petty Princes of Families together, constraining them to lay aside their
Domestic Monarchy, and to be subject unto him: Or that he brought his
neighbor Princes all to his Dominion, and so became a Tyrant overthem. And at
this day, if we advise with those People in both Indies discovered, we shall
find that they scarce ever heard of any other Government but that of Monarchy,
and that almost Paternal, being extended to* very few Persons, compared with
the multitude of which Kingdoms or Governments generally consist. And in truth,
it may give some repu^e to the Government of many that Christian Religion
favors it: but it can give no credit to Christian Religion, That it only
practices and acknowledges a different way of Ruling people from all the known
world besides. For it will be hard to find any other but Regal Power out of
Europe: and in Europe, not the tenth part owning Antimonarchical Government.
And of those that do differ from Monarchical Power, not two agree^ng in the
same form, but only negatively against a single Persons Suprenacy. So that we
may see they have no general Rule to go by, but every Nation are a Rule to
themselves.

Thirdly, the Paternal Power being acknowledged to be natural, and of Divine
institution, and differing from Monarchical and Regal, but as [ Magis and
Minus] the lesser degree does from the greater, the thing is in a manner
yielded.

But fourthly, Divine Presidents and Examples do further confirm this and that
taken from the Word of God; in all which there is no mention at all made of any
Government but Regal, though not always under that name. For, before the
children of Israel went into Egypt, the Father or Patriarch of them had this
power without competitor. In the the Captivity, and Servitude of Egypt, they
had no public Government besides that of the Kings of Egypt, unless
peradventure every Tribe had a Chief by succession over them, without any Civil
Authority. From their departure out of Egypt to the death of Joshuah, the
Supremacy was in one; notwithstanding subordinate Councels and Rulers
constituted by Moses. After Joshuah, arose Judges by Gods special appointment,
not many at once, thereby framing an Aristocracie, but one Eminent person
giving Law to all others. And these differed from that of more formal Regal
Persons instituted by God at the desire of the discontented people, in that
before Saul, God kept the choice of their Governors more immediately in his
own hand, and ordained them Deliverers and Judges according to his pleasure,
and occasions offered: which was the reason (together with their rejecting of
so eminent a Servant of God, as was Samuel) that God 1 Samuel 8. 10.
said of the People, they had rejected him rather than Samuel. From Saul to the
Captivity, it is manifest what their Government was; and from thence it matters
not, as to our present purpose, how they governed themselves, seeing they were
ruled by the Regal Power of Foreign Princes: until shaking off that yoke, they
were brought under that form by their own Deliverers, which was again extorted
from them by usurping Tyrants. So that when Philo-Judeus and Josephus seem to
write of an Aristocratical Government instituted by Moses, they can no
otherwise be understood to write faithfully, but in reference to Ecclesiastical
Courts, and Cases of Religion, purely; wherein the Counsel of many was to take
place, but not to the administration of Civil Justice, unless, as is
abovesaid, when they were themselves subject to Foreign Princes.

The Objections against this Form thus asserted, I leave to be answered from
the positive grounds thus laid down: And commend the Reader to the learned
Disputations of others, which are many, concerning the excellency and benefits
of one Form above another. But as to Hereditary and Elective Governments, what
is convenient may be gathered from the general discourse now made: Now we
proceed to the Third thing in Government, the mutual Obligation of Governor
and Governed.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the mutual Relations and Obligations of Sovereigns and Subjects. No Right
in Subjects to resist their Sovereigns tyrannizing over them. What Tyranny is.
Of Tyrants with a Title, and Tyrants without Title. Of Magistrates Inferior
and Supreme, the vanity and mischief of that distinction. The Confusion of
Coordinate Governments in one State. Possession or Invasion gives no Right to
Rulers: The Reasons why.

THAT we read not in the New Testament of any Rules or Advice given to Kings
and Princes, how to govern the people under them, the reason is plain, viz.
Because in those days there were none Christian: and St. Paul says, What 1
Cor. 5. 12.
have I to do to judge them that are without? the Church: For doubtless, had
any been of the Society of Christians, they had fallen under the Christian
Discipline and Precepts of the Apostles: But that occasion of instructing Kings
in the due administration of their power, failing, we are to seek for
satisfaction from the old Testament: where not much is found, besides general
moral Precepts of Sobriety, Temperance, Justice, and the like enjoined Solomon
by David his Father; and left by Solomon in his Book of Proverbs for Rules to
succeeding Princes. Moses likewise, not without Gods appointment, has drawn up
some special Precepts for Kings to follow, in the real and cordial embracing of
Gods word and worship: and taking the defense and protection thereof. Of which
to speak, it little behooves us at present.

Neither purpose we out of Humane Arguments and Authority, to prescribe to
Supreams what they ought to do, or how to govern any farther than the known
Rules of Justice in common do require: For, no doubt there is a mutual
Obligation between Sovereign and Subject, and that he is tied and circumscribed
in the exercise of his power, by God; as really, as this is in his Obedience to
him: and that upon the common duties expressed by St. Paul of Masters to
Servants, and Husbands to Wives, and Parents to Children. For it does not at
all follow, That because Princes are not subject to their Subjects, therefore
they are free from all subjection. Ephesians. 6. 8.
No, St. Paul's Rule holds good to Kings as well as to Masters, viz. That they
should know that their King and Master is in heaven: and that Kings are to be
subject as well to the Laws of God, as their Subjects are to the Laws of Man.
And though Children ought to obey their Parents in all things: yet there is
tacitly understood certain Laws of Limitation restraining the boundless tyranny
of both civil and natural Parents. For Subjects and Children are to know that
they have a higher Lord, and a more powerful Father, to whom in the first place
obedience must be paid. And we must withdraw our selves from the commands of
our Earthly Sovereign, when our Heavenly, who is his Sovereign, does require
it: as all rational Kings do grant, as well as People.

But neither ought we to restrain the will of Princes to the literal and
express will of God only, but even to the most just and reasonable Laws of
Humane Authority: but only we must distinguish the vast difference between the
obligation of Subjects to the just and equal Laws prescribed and imposed on
them, and that of Princes, in relation to those Laws concerning their
governing. For all Laws contain two special causalities in them: The one
Exemplary, whereby a Form and Rule is prescribed, directing such as are to be
guided thereby, to the observation of Justice, Equity, and Reason, as well to
the public as private good: And to this (so far as it is reasonable) Kings are
no less bound than Subjects: they ought to observe entirely and religiously
these sound and profitable Laws, and that under pain of Gods displeasure. The
other causality which Laws have, is Efficient and Compulsive; whereby a Civil
penalty being denounced, and impending over the head of the infringers thereof,
they are better guarded from transgressions, by either loss of outward good, or
life it self, according to the merit of the Offense.

It cannot either consist with the Law of God or Nations, to inflict
punishments on Princes Sovereign. Not but that, for instnace, murder, adultery,
unjust spoil, and robbery of the Subjects, may no less (considering the nature
of the Crime) deserve such punishment of Princes, as they do of People; but
because there is none in such cases that can, or ought duly and regularly to
execute such Laws, because there can be no such execution without the power of
the Sword; and there can be but one proper subject of that power in any one
Republic. Every man must not put to death him that is a notorious offender, no
not though he be justly and legally condemned to dye; but he, or they only who
are thereunto rightly empowered and authorized by the Supreme: And though every
man may in his own mind and judgment, sentence a malefactor whose crime is
high and apparent, to death; yet cannot he in civil judicature, render him
obnoxious to it. And the reason hereof is plain, because Justice must be done
justly, or else there is incurred no less guilt than is sought, and intended to
be revenged. And of all guilt, I know not whether any be greater than the
assuming of such a power, which no ways belongs to a man. For better it were
to take away ones horse, or to ravish another man's wife, or to extort unjustly
another estate, than to divest a Prince of his Right of Rule, and usurp it to
himself; and that, first, because no man's estate, or any thing that is his,
does descend to him, or otherwise becomes his, by the like Divine title as the
Supreme Power rightly posited and possessed, does to the owner thereof: and,
therefore this being more sacred, the invasion of this right is much more
wicked and unjust. Secondly, Because a public mischief, and of general
influence upon all, is much more intolerable than a private. But such a
violation of Princely Right, must of necessity draw on a public mischief upon
the whole civil Body; I mean, all the Subjects in such a Nation, who shall be
distracted between the sense of obedience known otherwise to be due, and the
terror of usurped Power threatening ruin to such as comply not with their
unjustice.

This being so necessary and convincing a truth unto most men of competent
reason, though incompetent conscience, they have sought out an evasion, which,
as occasion may serve, may unqualifie Princes, and ennoble and enable Subjects
to oppose in hostile manner the tyrannies, as they call them, of Princes. And
the one strikes high, and through the loins of all Supremacy in single
Persons; affirming that one man is not capable of such a mass of power, without
apparent tyranny. And as for manifest tyranny, no great scruple, they think,
ought to be made in repressing and curbing it, and reducing it into its proper
bounds. This must be refelled by a more reasonable and sober judgment of
tyranny. For it is a gross and dangerous mistake to look upon tyranny with such
a vulgar and evil eye, as to conceive that Plinipotencie and illimited Power is
presently tyranny: And that tyranny is not so much the abuse and unjust
exercise of power (which is the truest description of it) but power it self:
and that it is not separable from some kind of Government, as that which is
absolute and unconfined by Laws. But the first thing here supposed, and so
commonly and boldly taught, is very false. For there is no such thing as a
Government in it self tyrannical: and there is no one of all those which have
been, or may be invented, but may equally be subject to that imputation. And to
be brief, there can no possible reason be given why the Government of one
should be tyranny, rather than that of many, of a Senate. Or, why people should
not be said more truly to be free under that, than this; the Laws being more
benign and equal there than here? as who can deny but they may be, whatever
actually they are? Nay, we see, that where most plausibly and gloriously
Liberty is pretended by Governors, and presumed on by the credulous multitude,
there commonly the yoke of obedience is most heavy: and that a bold affirmation
of a Free people prevails to the persuasion of men, that so in truth they are,
contrary to common sense: And all this chiefly from that fundamental Error,
taken for an unquestionable truth; viz. That to be governed by many is a state
of Freedom; and by a single Person, of tyranny. But tyranny is not proper to
any one kind of Government, whether consisting of one, or more: It is in brief,
no Government at all, but the excess and (...) Arist. lib. 3. Polit. cap. 4.
and 5.
corruption of Governing; and is in it self equally incident to all kinds;
however, where Learning most flourished of old, that extreme has been, as it
were, appropriated to one, the better surely to secure the hold which many
Usurpers possessed themselves of; commonly taking occasion from the
miscarriages of such persons as were the managers of Power, to invade
Government themselves.

And if it be a true and reasonable distinction of Tyrants into Titled and
Titleless; how is it possible, those great, many, and zealous assertours of
Popular Liberty, and invaders of Government, (as Junius Erutus with his
Fellows) should escape the due censure of the worst of Tyrants, who expelling a
Tyrant who had a Title, usurped a power, to which he had no Title; and then
proceeded to exercise an act, to which he had no power; viz. the thrusting out
of his Equal and Colleague, collating, because, possibly he might have afterward
committed an offense, not that he had. This was a piece of tyranny, not
exceeded by any before him. But it may be alleged, That there is a Law,
whereby it was free for any man to kill Tyrants; and some late Demagogues have
written, for the promotion of Religion (forsooth) as well as Civil Liberty,
that to kill Buchananus De Jure Regni apud Scotos.
Tyrants (and here I will not show whom they call Tyrants) is as good an act,
as to slay Wolves, Lions, and Bears. But I would fain know, whence such a Law
proceeded, if not from tyranny it self? Even such persons, who, under color of
natural Law of returning evil for evil, and self preservation, have done the
greatest injustice imaginable, not only against the person persecuted, but the
people, who never at any time had power so to deliver themselves, nor, if they
had, did generally and unanimously, or could confer the same on the new
Pretenders to it. That Law therefore of killing Tyrants, invented by Tyrants,
takes place on the Authors of it, as much as any body else; and, where the
like power can be snatched up, may have the same event on popular Statesmen,
as well as Kings and Princes: For they are Tyrants too.

The other ground of Resistance of Supremacy abused by a single Ruler, is
commonly taken from a supposed right in Inferior Magistrates, (as they are
vulgarly called) to restrain the exorbitancies, and chastise the fury of
immoderate Princes. This invention has so much more of speciousnes, than the
former, by how much there is a sound of Authority, and hope of greater order,
and prudence, and formality of Justice, than could be expected from a
disorderly, ignorant, loose and precipitant multitude: But being examined duly,
will be found very rotten, and vain. For, as has been well observed before me,
and is easy to be apprehended Groti^s, De Imperio summarum Pat.
by the meanest capacity, Magistrates here, are no more than common people: it
being plain, That no man can be properly termed a Magistrate or Governor, but
as he has power and authority either derived, or originally in himself, over
others; and not as he is himself subject unto another. Therefore any person
bearing the name and office of a Magistrate, though he be called also a Peer,
is no more than a Subject, in relation to him who gave him that power and
dignity. And having no power but what he received, and having received no power
but to such and such ends and purposes, (and no man did ever intend to enable
another to offer violence or injury to himself) to disown a power borrowed, and
to make it absolute; and to draw the Sword of Justice against him that first
put it into his hands, is not only base ingratitude, but as notorious
rebellion, as if any of the vulgar rank should do the same.

St. Paul does indeed require good Christians to make supplications, 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2.
prayers, and intercessions, and giving thanks for all men: For Kings, and all
that are in authority, etc. which has been so understood by some, as if he had
intended here, to distinguish and establish a co-ordination of Governors over
the same people; but there is no necessity at all of such a consequence: and
St. Peter expressly distinguishes their relations, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
not to be coordinate but subordinate, saying; Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man, (that is, not, as some weakly and presumptuously would
interpret the Apostle, as if Kings and Princes were men's creatures, and by them
constituted, but humane Creature (which is the word in the Original) does
signify such Persons as have authority over men, as men, and not as
Christians, such as were then Civil Governors amongst the Gentiles, which the
phrase of the Jews commonly called Creatures barely; and Humane, as having no
such Divine Graces conferred on them, as had the Jews) for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto Kings as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well. Here Governors are said to be of two sorts, (not coordinate and
subordinate; but) Supreme and Subordinate: such as have authority immediately
and absolutely in themselves, without dependence upon others, and such as are
of an Inferior order, and under the said Supreme, rule and execute Justice. So
that nothing can be more absurdly and sediciously taught than to make such as
are constituted by another, to have any authority at all over their Founder and
Lord, the author of their power.

I know infinite instances may be brought of Commonwealths which have
admitted, and been governed by such a Co-ordination, or at least a power
reserved in store in the hands of certain persons, whose proper office and care
it should be, to regulate and reduce to a safe mean, the extremes which single
and absolute Monarchs may easily fall into. But all these varying so
exceedingly from the natural form of Government, sway not much with me. For
that which is natural, and of Divine Ordinance and Institution, cannot possibly
be uncertain and mutable, so that no man shall be able to know where to place
his duty of Obedience, which God requires to be paid to such as are in
Authority: And obedience being due only to the Supreme himself immediately, or
to those that derive authority from him, how is it possible to understand, but
by the sad effects of power pressing and afflicting a man, where he is to yield
his obedience. Therefore surely God can have no hand in such modellings of
States which shall perplex a man in rendering his subjection. For it is not a
great, empty, and ridiculous Title which makes a Supreme, but entire power,
and absolute freedom at least from subjection to others, especially of his own
Dominion. All Titles without this, are honorable Mockeries: but the real
Supremacy is actual (I say not how justly or injuriously, in those Tutours of
Princes and Keepers of the Liberties of the people, as is commonly given out:
and in this case (supposing that Right and Power are not separated) not these
Proveditors or Senators, who thus chastise Princes are rebellious, but they
who bearing the name of Kings and Princes, being in truth but mere subjects,
refuse to submit to the decrees of their Superiors.

But if possession gives not Right, which is the most Christian, as well as
rational opinion, it may be doubted how a just title can be acquired by any
Persons in co-ordination to the Supreme power, when as we have shown, the
People never had any such themselves, and therefore can transferr none; nor
such select persons had any of themselves, who assume this, nor is it to be
conceived how any natural Right should descend upon many persons, as the
Paternal power does upon one, from whence Monarchical Power and Right may flow.
And If Senators as they call them, or suck like Statesmen cannot regularly
found their title in nature, or Divine Writ, or revelation, It was no act of
Rebellion, that greatest act of Hostility in Julius Caesar, to reduce the Roman
Commonwealth to Monarchy. For there are two things to be considered in Civil
Authority, The Government it self in its form and kind; and the Governor
invested with this. The Person Governing may doubtless offend notoriously,
though I dare not say forfeit to any other his Authority: but the Government it
self being abused cannot be in fault, or for any miscarriages of the Person,
lapse to other. The Government is religiously to be observed and secured from
adulterations and corruptions, even when the Monarch is irreligiously discarded
and dethroned. So that the Tyranny of a single person invading the Government
administered by States, and arrogating the Supremacy to himself alone, must
needs be less criminal than for many conspiring into a Commonwealth, to change
both Person and Government from the Natural to the Artificial, and merely of
Humane invention and pleasure.

Now that Possession does not always include a Title, nor Might, Right, in
Civil Affairs, is both most reasonable and Christian to believe. Reasonable
from several heads: First, from the notoriousness of the mischiefs which crowd
in upon all Societies of Men, where this Tenet is received. For what a powerful
motive will it be to all discontented persons to invade others and dispossess
them, when there lies no other difficulty before them, but the means to attach
successfully, whom they intend to destroy; but having overcome that, by
whatever villainies, they shall be reputed as legal owners of what they are
become Masters, as the most innocent and just person of all. But can ever any
peace, or security be expected by that Society wherein it shall be lawful for
any man to intrude himself into Power? No, say some, Power acquired and
possessed does give Right to hold, but not justify the Act of inordinate
acquiring the same: But if it be true in Logic, That the Conclusion does
always partake of the weakness of the Premises: and in Nature, That an evil
cause, be it but of the nature of a Circumstance, corrupts the whole effect,
is it not altogether as rational, that such an heinous act in the acquiring
such Power here, should quite mar the effect? Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? not one; says holy Job 14. 4. Recte factum est ut id quod male
caeptum est Autoritate publica destrucretur. Damasus. Epist. Acholio, Eurydico,
etc. apud Holstennii Collectionem pa. 40. Part. 1.
Job. So not one can, by an unrighteous Act produce a righteous effect. Neither
can the inveterateness of an Evil any ways mitigate the same; nor tract of
time wipe away that Guilt which was at first acquired: For prescription in such
cases never gives just Title, but where other Titles are extinguished, which is
by accident. Then indeed Possession it self gives not a good Title, but has
less evil and inconvenience than that attempt which has neither one, nor other.

Secondly, From whence comes the difference made between private spoils and
robberies, and public; that the one should once and always remain unjust, the
other not? This would be known.

Thirdly, How irrational and intolerable must that Dogme be which degradeth
humane order and claims, into them, of beasts and reasonless Creatures? Is it
not to be supposed by all pretenders to Reason, That Reason is the proper and
noble principle of man, whereby he is distinguished from mere Animals? And can
any man find a more sound principle, or more essential to humane Society, than
Justice? Now if Title or Right to a thing be the same with posession and never
fails to succeed upon that; what advantage has man above beast in his
acquisitions? Or what reason has not a beast to endeavor to make prey of all
he can master? Indeed he has much more reason than man acting after this
manner, seeing he does proceed therein according to that Law of natural
instinct and impulse given unto him, and has no more superior principle than
self-preservation to direct him otherwise: but man has; and therefore
neglecting, or contemning that for advantage unnecessary, becomes more vile and
brutish in his doings than beasts themselves, to whom it is as natural to live
one upon another, as for men to live in Society under the direction of reason,
and protection of common Justice.

Fourthly, Humane and Civil Society require some Rule according to which it
ought to be framed and administered. Now either this Rule can be known, or it
cannot be known: If it cannot be known, it is all one as if it were not extant
at all, because that which is unknown cannot possibly have any influence upon a
man: But if this rule of humane life and actions is only in power, and no
established right of Justice, it must of necessity vary according to might and
strength in the possessour of Dominion: which being uncertain, and every day
almost changing, a man should stand obliged to accommodate his obedience
answerable to the degrees of Power, and so sometimes should be bound to give
obedience to the fourth degree, which we here suppose to be the highest,
sometimes to a third, sometimes to the second, and sometimes to one only, and
these degrees being absurd and obscure to him, he must of necessity be
perplexed and undetermined in his resolutions.

Lastly, To add no more, the inverting of the argument brought against fixed
obedience upon the score of Justice, from Gods omnipotence over the Creature,
makes much more against mutable obedience. For whereas it is supposed (not at
all so much as offered to be proved) that the ground of our obedience to God is
laid in his Omnipotence, and we are bound to serve and obey him because we
cannot otherwise choose; This is grossly false: For though God be of such
infinite and absolute power as he could compel us to obedience, even against
our resolutions and will, yet in truth he does not, but, as is apparent, leaves
us at Liberty either to obey, or rebel against him. And if obedience were only
due where power constrains, or fear of evil impels a man; then where no actual
force were upon a man, and where he could carry his offense so well that he
feared no evil, there he owed no actual obedience because as the habit of
Authority does answer the habitude of obeying, so the act of obeying must
answer the act of power; which being not exercised, neither should it be
needful to exercise any act of obeying. But further, Power in God does not
properly or immediately entitle him to the service and worship of the Creature.
For though all things proceed originally from the power of God, yet from his
good will and pleasure actuating his remoter power, do all things take their
being and subsistence, and provision immediately; and therefore from hence much
rather than from that, are we to take an estimate of our obedience; and where
brutality and monstrousness have not so far confounded and debauched men's
understandings, as to deny themselves to be men (which they do who destroy all
principles of knowing and doing) this must be received as a sure ground; viz.
That every man must have his due, and his due is his own, and therefore our
very beings proceeding from God, our preservation and provision being the
effect of his good Providence toward us, if there be any reason of men's
actions in the world, this must of necessity be such, that what we have
received of God, we should acknowledge to be received of him; and apparent
Justice (more than Power) requires we should return God his own, so far as we
are able: Now our very beings we cannot without violation of his will, who gave
them to continue according to his will, not our own: Therefore so far as we
can, we are bound to a recognition of him, out of Justice, were there no such
thing as power to constrain us; or else we should do him 1 Chronicles. 29. ^^, ^^,
12. 13, 14.
wrong in detaining his due from him: and this Recognition improved is nothing
but Religion. And hitherto relates the argument of the Apostle St. Paul,
saying; What? know ye not that your body is the Temple of the 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20.
Ho^y Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own,
etc. From this one ground the Apost^e argues, viz. Ye are not your own: being
made by God, and not by your selves; and possessed Psalm. 100.
by the Holy Spirit, in Gods Right; and purchased by a price after ye had (as
far as in you lay) made away your selves, so that ye are not your own, not at
your own disposing; the Justice of the cause is manifest, that therefore ye
ought to render what ye are, and what ye have thus received to the Author of
All, God Almighty, and that by Religious observance of his will. And this in
proportion holds in matters Civil, between Prince and Subject. For though (as
has been said) all things proceed primarily from God, yet subordinately we are
owing to the benign Influence humane Authority has over men, to keep them in
due bounds, so that one preyeth not upon, nor spoileth another: For to this
profitable protection, is justly due submission and obedience: For there are
three general Arguments couched in the Apostles exhortation to obedience in the
thirteenth Chapter to the Romans. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
1. Fear of mischief and evil, v. 3. Will thou not be afraid of the power? do
that which is good. 2. Expectation of benefit from it, v. 4. He (the
Magistrate) is the Minister of God for good to thee. 3. And lastly, for
conscience sake; which was the second Argument mentioned above, and intended to
lead to obedience to Civil Powers. And Conscience having for its rule, not only
natural and common Justice, but the revealed and written will of God, it may
suffice to have alleged testimonies out of Gods Word already confirming this
duty, and to leave others to every ingenuous Christians diligent use of it, to
avoid prolixity. And for the objections which may be made, and are commonly
found against what is above delivered, for the same reason I pass them over; as
likewise because I intend not here Controversy, but Positive Institutions.

CHAP. XXVII.
An Application of the former Discourse of Civil Government to Ecclesiastical.
How Christ's Church is always visible, and how invisible. Of the Communion of
Christ and his Members. The Church of Christ taken specially for the Elect, who
shall infallibly be saved, never visible. But taken for true Professors of the
Faith, must always be visible, though not Conspicuous, in comparison of other
Religions or Heresies.

THE Reasons moving me to insist a while upon Civil Government, before I entered
upon Ecclesiastical, are, First, because I find Authors of the grounds of
Christian Religion to treat of the same, generally. Secondly, because, where
breaches have been made often in the Faith and Discipline of the Church; there,
necessary provision ought to be made to secure them for the future; but for
want of due understanding of this Doctrine, licencious zeal blinded with
presumption has transported very many into unchristian practices. Thirdly,
because it is a necessary introduction to the more clear and compendious
pursuing of our subject of the Spiritual Society of the Church of Christ, and
particularly its Form.

The Form of Christ's Church may be distinguished according to the vulgar
Notion, into invisible and visible; or inward and outward. Invisible we here
call that which does not at all offer it self to our outward sense of seeing,
cannot be beholden with our eye: Or that which may in some manner appear to our
sight, but not as a Church of Christ, though in truth it so may be. According
to the first acceptance of invisible, we understand the Body Mystical of
Christ, consisting of himself the only proper Head, the Holy Spirit animating
and influencing the same, and the particular members of the holy, most happy
invisible Spirits in heaven, and Saints on earth spiritually united to them by
Christ in the divine band of holiness. And hitherto do the words of the Apostle
to the Ephesians seem to be applied; saying, Having made known the mystery of
his will -- That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather
Ephesians. 1. 9, 10.
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are
in earth, even in him: signifying hereby the mystical conjunction of Men and
Angels in Christ Jesus: although there are who not improbably and more
literally do understand these words only of the collection and uniting of Jews,
(who in respect of their peculiar exaltation to Gods service and favor, are
styled in Scripture heavenly compared with the Gentiles) and Gentiles into one
Faith, and Church of Christ, which therefore diverse times is called a Mystery,
as Romans the 16. 25, 26. Ephesians. 3. v. 3, 4, 5. Col. 1. 26, 27. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
because, as is there expressed, it was an hidden and incredible thing to the
Jews, that the Gentiles should be taken into the like privileges and rights of
serving God, as were once esteemed incommunicable to any so fully as to the
Jews. But whether the Scripture, according to its most genuine and literal
sense, intends at any time to comprehend into one Society, Angelical Peings,
and Humane, as the Church of Christ, as I do not find (though the Ancients as
well as Modern have held such an opinion) so do I not oppose; the Mystery of
which we now speak being sufficiently verified in the preternatural and
invisible conjunction of Christ and his Church, in the indissoluble bands of
his Spirit, guiding the members thereof into all sufficiency of Grace here,
and immortal absolute glory hereafter in heaven.

To understand this co-union or conjunction of Christ and his Members the
better, we are to call to mind a threefold union intimated in holy Writ unto
us. First a conjunction of Nature when more are of the same individual nature:
as the three Persons in the Holy Trinity are united in the same Divine Nature,
though in themselves distinct; which is so proper to that mystery of the
Trinity, that it is not to be found elsewhere, no not in that intimate
communion we now speak of, between Christ and his Members, their natures
continuing distinct. Again, another conjunction proper to Christian Religion is
the union of two natures into one Person; as in the Mystery of Christ's
incarnation, when the humane and divine Nature become one, so far as to
constitute but one Person, Christ Jesus: So do not Christ and his Church. But
by a third way are Christ and his Church united into one aggregate Spiritual
Body or Society; which is effected by his Spirit, which yet do not make
properly a Part of that Body, but by its manifold divine Graces do produce and
conserve the same: Christ thereby and his Church being, as St. Paul says, One
Spirit. He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit. And 1 Cor. 6. 17.
St. John likewise says, Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit.

This truly, and only in a proper sense is invisible, and that always: and
has two Parts, the triumphant in Heaven, which is a most perfect, pure, holy,
and blessed Society which have through the blood of the Lamb and the power of
his Spirit, overcome the three grand Enemies, Sin, Death, and the Devil, and
reaped the fruits of their sufferings and labors; all tears being wiped from
their eyes, all sorrows being fled away, all temptations for ever conquered,
and ceasing to molest them. Now this part of Christ's Church remains always
invosible unto us here below.

And as for the other Part which is called Militant, and are described to be A
number of faithful and elect people living under the Cross, and aspiring
toward the perfection of Grace and Glory hereafter, supposing at present what
may hereafter be farther discussed; viz. That such a peculiar number of holy
persons there are within the visible Church of Christ, which shall infallibly
attain to everlasting bliss in heaven; yet neither are these, as such, at any
time visible or discernable to our common senses. It being scarce, if at all,
possible to judge infallibly who shall be saved, and who shall not be saved: it
being much more difficult for any man to be assured of another man's salvation,
than of his own: seeing that, as is said, hereunto an inward testimony of Gods
Spirit is required, which is the ground of that sound hope which is commonly
called Assurance; but the Promises of God in holy Scripture do not extend in
like manner to the assuring of any man that another shall be saved, as that he
himself shall; or that another faith shall not fail as that his own shall not;
but thus far only probably a truer and more certain sentence may be pronounced
by others, who are ordained of God to be judges of our state of Grace, upon the
discovery of our consciences to them, then can be by our selves; which is
sufficient: but of the unalterableness of that state no man can certainly
affirm any thing. Which holds true likewise as to the contrary state of
Damnation. For though a more than probable judgment may be made of the state of
Damnation of him who continues impenitently in notorious sins, yet may no man
pronounce a peremptory sentence against any such person, that he inevitably
shall be damned; because he cannot see into the abstruse Counsels of Almighty
God so far, as to deny a Liberty left in him to confer such efficacious grace
upon such a notorious offender as may reduce him to God; no more than withdraw
grace from him who at present stands in all probable way of perseverance.

This being so, it follows from hence necessarily, That the Church of Christ,
taken for the so faithful and elect, that they shall without all peradventure
attain the Crown of the Triumphant, is, evermore in its own nature, invisible,
that is, not to be distinguished by us, nor known certainly; and if so, then in
vain and to no purpose at all are such Disputations as are made about the
invisible Church, in that sense of invisibility which signifies that which can
in no manner appear certainly to us.

The other sense of invisibleness, according to which a thing is possible to be
seen, is an object of sense, but actually is either not to be seen, or with
very great difficulty. For as in Philosophy, it is with Divisibility; so may it
be with Visibility in Divinity. Every thing that has Quantity, according to
the Philosopher, is divisible or is capable of being divided into lesser parts,
even without end: but yet so small may the parts so divided become at last,
that no Artist shall be able to cut them any more in pieces. So may we
understand a thing to be visible, which is so small and inconsiderable, that
actually it can hardly, if at all, be perceived: But visible and palpable being
taken for things which not only affect the senses simply, but with some more
than common notoriety; the usual question, Whether the Church of Christ is
always visible, ought to be understood of such a competence of perspicuity as
may ordinarily be discerned by persons rightly disposed in their
understandings; taking here, right disposition of our inward apprehensions, in
a proportionable manner to that which relates to our common outward senses;
which if it be called into doubt, (as it may) no wonder that the other may be,
and that without remedy.

Now according to the most strict acceptance of Visible, for whatsoever may
possibly be discerned, the reasolution will be easy, That Christ's Church is,
and must always be visible: For thus to be Invisible, is as much as not to be
at all. For seeing the Parts of which it consists (be they but two or three
persons in the most rigorous sense) are Visible, the whole must needs be
visible too, of it self: however it may in the more received sense be termed
invisible, because compared with the Church of Christ, as prophesied of, and
promised in the Gospel, it is so inconsiderable, as may deserve rather to be
accounted invisible, it being out-shined, and over-shadowed by other Pretenders.

But there being two things which constitute the Church; one, the association
of many persons into outward communion one with another: the other the inward
communion in the true Faith of Christ: and the former being common very often
to Heretics, as well as true Christians, it may be doubted, whether the true
Church of Christ, as opposed to heretical Societies is at all visible? For
seeing the true and orthodox Faith, together with its practical holiness, do
not occur plainly to our senses, the true Faith cannot be discerned visibly
from the false, by any outward sense: How can it possibly be said, that the
Church of Christ is at all visible or apparent to a man? It Is true, a man may
discern a real man from a painted man, or from any other creature from the
outward notices of his body, though he cannot see his soul, which does
primarily constitute the person of man; but he cannot see whether he be a true
and honest man in a moral sense, from any thing appearing outwardly. So may one
discern the Faith professed in general to be Christian, by the outward frame
and fashion of the Church professing the same: but the soundness of the same,
and sincerity according to Christ's will and institution, he cannot from thence
conclude upon. And therefore, if the Catholic Faith, as Catholic (in the
stricter sense) can never be visible; the Catholic Church so being and
denominated from that Faith, can never be said to be properly visible, but only
as a Society, not as the true Society of Christians in opposition to the false.
For instance, sense or common reason not informed from the word of God, could
never judge whether the Arrian or the Catholic Faith (as it then began to be
called) were most truly Christian: but they both might judge that they were
Christian Societies, and so at least outwardly, made a true Church. But because
it is one thing to profess the true Faith; and another quite distinct from
that, Truly to profess the Faith, as it is one thing to profess Justice and
Truth and Honesty, and another truly to profess these and practice them,
therefore can there be no estimate taken of the true Catholic Church from the
persons professing the Catholic Faith, who are always uncertain and mutable,
but judgment must be made from the outward constitution only, which are
Discipline or Government, and not Doctrine or Faith. For where the former is
not rightly composed according to the mind and institution of Christ, there
cannot be said to be a true Church. And where the second is wanting, there must
likewise be no Church, the foundation of the Church and Rule failing; viz. the
true Faith. But wherever these be inviolately and incorruptly preserved, and
publicly professed, though we should suppose every particular Member of such a
Society to be notorious Hypocrites, yet the Church might be said to be a true
Church: because the Church does not receive any more than its material
subsistence from the persons believing: but its formal and more distinct Being
it has from the true Regiment and Faith, which it is possible, though scarce
probable, may be sufficiently preserved under hypocritical and wicked members
of the same. This is not only true in it self, but appears so to be from the
necessity of having any knowledge of the true Church at all; and its being
visible at any time. For it never being certainly visible who are the
predestinate infallibly to Life, and who are not; who shall constantly stand,
and who shall fall; who are inwardly hypocrites, and who are faithful and
sincere indeed (seeing notwithstanding the exactest judgment and search of man,
there may be a falling away:) It could never appear which is the true Church,
if judgment were to be made not from the outward Forms and Faith professed, but
from the affection and inclination of Persons: or from the invisible decrees of
God, of granting or denying persevering Grace to persons in the Church. So that
it is manifest from hence, how lurious, frivolous, vain, and sophistical
disquisitions must needs be, which are founded and managed upon the ground of
an invisible Church properly so called.

The improper acceptance then of Invisible can only occasion a just
controversy: i. e. as it is taken comparatively, and in relation to a much
more conspicuous and glorious Society; and that either of Infidels who may by
numbers much exceed in outward glory much outshine it, in power overruled it;
and by persecution and oppression so far straiten, lessen, and crush it, that
it may be termed obscure and invisible. Or otherwise compared with the
Societies of much more public and outwardly glorious Heretics and
Schismatics, pretending the Catholic Church.

And truly, if acute and exact Geographers computing the several professions of
Religion, and their possessions of the earth, deceive us not, the Church of
Christ may comparatively with other superstitions Mohammedan, Jewish and
Gentile, be not unaptly said to be invisible: Christian Religion being allowed
but Five parts of Thirty, Mohammedan six, and Idolaters nineteen parts of the
earth. But if we shall divide Christian again into Catholic, according to the
Judgment of several See Brerewoods Inquiries, Chap. 14.
Writers, there will not remain at present above two parts of all the Thirty
parts of the earth to be possessed by the Catholics: and if so, what will
become of the visibility of the Church, thus understood? And if a moderate
sense of visibility be admitted, signifying a real and apparent being only of
the Church, though inferior in pomp and number unto others, how does the great
end and benefit for which chiefly the Church is to be maintained Catholic and
Visible, shrink up into little or nothing, when it cannot commend it self, for
any such glory to the beholder, nor signalize it self to the doubter of the
true Faith in the Church? as may hereafter appear more fully when we shall come
to speak of the Notes of the Church: It may suffice to conclude this Point with
these two:

First, That Christ's Church is essentially, and so long as it is at all, must
necessarily be a Society or a communion of many. For so we are taught to
believe out of the Apostles Creed: which speaking of the Catholic Church,
exegetically interprets what we are to understand by that term: viz. The
Communion of Saints. And therefore we are to distinguish between being of the
[Catholick] Church, and being Christians. A man may be a Christian, and yet not
be of the Church: For no man can be of the Church who does not hold communion
with it. For to deceive himself, and say, though he be not of the visible
Communion or visible Church, he may be, or is of the invisible and mystical, is
to take for granted that which he ought to prove, but never can be able, but
from somewhat external; and the ordinary method and most effectual means of
being mystically united unto Christ, is by being Politically united (which must
be visibly) unto the Body of Christ, the Church. It has been therefore ever
matter of greatest wonder to me, to hear, and read how freely all struglers and
Factions of Christians (how inconsiderable soever) do assert to, and
confidently to assert that common Rule, Without the Church there is no
salvation, and are so obscure, nice or absurd in their sense of it: having very
little or nothing to secure themselves from self-condemnation, besides an ill
grounded presumption that they are inwardly united to Christ, and are of the
invisible Church; which in truth is no Church: but a certain state wherein
there is no administration or order, that we can learn* now all Society must
necessarily have order and administrations for their regulating: but none such
do we read of to be in Christ's invisible Body, Christ himself being all in all;
and therefore improperly called a Church. And therefore all such being
infallibly saved who are so of Christ's Body: they that so abruptly and
peremptorily assure themselves they are of that invisible State, do in effect
contradict themselves, and mean they shall be saved without being of the
Church: For surely the Author of that saying meant nothing else, but that
before one could be (according to Gods ordinary dispensation revealed in his
word) of Christ's mystical Body, called abusively the Invisible Church, he must
belong to the visible communion of Christ's Political Body or Church. So that it
is not* sufficient to comfort our selves with an opinion that we are good
Christians, and hold the same Faith entirely and purely, that is required of
us, unless we hold outward communion.

And therefore, secondly, as Christ's Church must necessarily be a Society
communicating, so must it be a visible communion, and outward. For how is it
possible that such communion which constitutes a Society, should be entered
into, unless it be visible? There shall therefore, as well out of the very
nature of the Design God and Christ had to establish a Church, as from the many
promises fortifying that Resolution, and perfecting that Design, be evermore an
outward visible company of Professors of Christian Religion in the world,
which shall retain the Faith of Christ, and the necessary effects of it in
Worship, to that degree of perfection, which shall, or may lead a Believer
certainly to Salvation, as will more plainly appear from what is now to
succeed; viz. the outward Form of the Church.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Outward and Visible Form of Christ's Church: Christ ordained One
particularly. What that was in the Apostles days, and immediately after. The
vanity of such places of Scripture as are pretended against the Paternal
Government of the Church.

FOR the Church to be, and to be visible, or appear to be, I reckon the same
thing: and therefore thought good to speak of that, and premise it to what in
order follows on this subject: viz. The Visible Form 2. The Adjuncts or
Affections: And 3. the Power of the Church of Christ. By the Form of the Church
we mean that frame and outward constitution, whereby the Society of Christian
believers are not only united mystically and inwardly to Christ, as their
proper Head, and universal, nor as agreeing in the substance of one Faith and
Worship, but as conventing and consenting in one outward Discipline, or
Administration of this Body so collected. So that Discipline, otherwise called
Government, is, by principal Sectaries themselves, rightly affirmed to be an
essential ingredient into the nature of a Church: which will manifestly appear
if we distinguish between the nature of a Christian, or many Christians
separate in themselves from any Jurisdiction, and the nature of a Church. For a
Christian, or a true Believer, differs from a Church, in two things
principally: First in the matter. The material part of a believer, as he is a
Christian, (not as he is a man) is his Faith, consisting of its several
Articles and Branches. But the matter of the Church is the Christians
themselves, whereof it consists. Secondly, they differ in their Form too: For
no man is properly a Christian, though he believes all the Articles of a
Christian, and lives accordingly* unless he be formed and fashioned Formale
autem Ecclesiae Catholicae est professio fi dei Christi int^gra sub suis
Legitimis Rectoribus and a Christo institut ^^ ministris, cum Sacramentorum
obsignatione, and participatione, Sec. Marcus Anton. Spalat. Lib. 7. cap 10..
26.
by the Sacrament of Regeneration, which is Baptism. But the Form of Christ's
Church does consist in that outward disposition and order of Superior and
Inferior communicating mutually in all Christian Acts and Offices necessary to
the conservation of the whole Body; and the edification and increase of every
Member thereof. This Description of Christ's Church is warranted us from St.
Paul to the Ephesians: who expressly makes Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Colos. 2. 19.
Christ the Head of his Church. From whom the whole Body fitly joined together
and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every Part, makes increase of the Body, unto the
edifying its self in Love. The like words to which we find to the Colossians,
chap. 2. 19.

It must therefore from hence be granted, That there is to be Government in
Christ's Church: and that the Government ought to be proportionable to the Body
thereby ordered and ruled. To the Internal Body of Christ, or Mystical Church
not visible to us, an Internal, Mystical, and Invisible administration, is very
agreeable and sufficient from Christ the Head, and by the influence of the Holy
Spirit: but the external Church stands in need necessarily of external Rule
and Direction, as much as it does of external Doctrine, Instructions and
Sacraments, though it be inwardly informed by the Spirit of Christ.

Now if it be enquired what that Government is whereby Christ would have his
Church directed, (which is the most famous Question of late days, though
scarce ever called in question for some hundred years after Christ) the
resolution will be facilitated from what we delivered concerning Government
civil. For first, if Government Ecclesiastical be so essential to the
subsistence of a Church, that without it, it cannot be of any continuance,
without a Miracle; it cannot be imagined with any probability of Reason, that
God or Christ should make one part of his Church; and leave it to the liberty
and pleasure of Man to make the other: but least of all can they be of this
opinion, who think so sacredly of all Ecclesiastical Orders, that to admit any
of humane invention or prudence, is to profane the whole Systeme. Again, upon
the grounds laid down in civil Government: If Christ be the Author of
Government Ecclesiastical in General, he must also be the Cause of some one
Government in Particular, otherwise he could not be the Author of any at all:
seeing Institution Political, as well as Creation Natural, must of necessity
have some Object to terminate it, as its effect: Generals, in all cases
following Particulars, in the things themselves: though the way of knowledge,
or learning these things, is to begin with the General, and so to descend to
Particulars.

Thirdly, to understand what kind of Government Christ instituted in his
Church, what more certain and compendious way, what more equal, than to judge
rather from matter of Fact, than long and uncertain Disputations built on
Arguments which are subject to diverse casualties from man's Passion, and
Interests prosecuted thereby: whereas there is evidence sufficient from the
thing it self, to settle belief in that Point.

Fourthly, we are here to note, That when we speak of Government, we intend not
to comprehend therein all Accruments, Ornaments or Additions, which happened
after the thing it self: For these may be, and doubtless oftentimes have been
the effects of humane Prudence, regulated by general Precepts: but we speak of
the Form it self, or the Kind of Government: For though we said, God was the
Author of All well grounded Government, and do not mean, that every particle
thereof, or inferior, additional Grace must proceed from the same hand: For
God having permitted, if not ordered, that every nation should conform it self
in outward matters, to the condition of the time and place; God must have made
for several Ages and several Places, several Regiments, which no man has
presumed to affirm; the Divine Right or Institution extending only to those
things, wherein all at first agreed. So that as children receive from the
Nature of man, at first created by God in Adam, their fouls and bodily shape,
with the several parts necessarily thereunto belonging; but their behaviors,
gestures, gates, favor and complexions are commonly derived from their
immediate Pare^^s. So does every true Body of Christ, every Church, receive
common forms and shapes from the first Institution of Christ extant in the
Primitive times, but their particular modifications and customs are owing to
to their Spiritual Fathers, whether mediate or immediate. Which frowardly and
peevishly to reject, or disobediently to oppose, without higher warrant, what
is it else but to imitate such graceless and unnatural children who are ashamed
of their own Parents?

Fifthly, A distinction ought to be put between the nature and degrees of any
thing, and especially of the Church; which had its conception in the womb of
the Jewish Church; its infancy, during our blessed Saviors Tum maxim Deus ex
memoria hominum labitur, cum beneficiis ejus fruentes honorem dare divinae
indulgentiae deberent. Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 1. de Origin Erroris. (...).
Nazienz. Orat. 1. contra Julianum.
abode upon the earth; its minority, during the Apostolical Age of One hundred
years; its perfect state, soon after the first Christian Emperors advanced it,
and augmented it with secular strength and glory: And it is certain, that as
the Roman Empire became more corrupt and declined, so Christ's Empire
degenerated in many things, contracting deformities in Doctrine and Discipline,
even from secular advantages granted unto it by the Devotion and Bounty of the
best Wishers to it. We are not then to be so narrow in our judgment of the
Churches state, to allow no more to it then when it but just crept out of the
womb, or when, having gathered a little strength, it could stand alone, but not
act according to the prime Institutours intention; but as it was habited and
affected in its riper years, when we may behold that in more conspicuous
manner, which at first was obscurer, yet essentially the same.

For as nothing is more evident to all, but such as resolve they will
understand nothing that they dislike, than that, in nature, the Father is made
before the children, and not the children before the Parents; so is it as
plain, according to the course of Christ's Church, and the history of the
Scriptures, that the people at the first did no more make or appoint their
Government, or Governors in Christ, than they did teach or instruct them: For
by the word of God were Christians at first begotten to 1 Cor. 4. 15. Philem.
10.
a new and spiritual life.

The method which Christ used in procreating and prosecuting his Church, is
therefore thus made plain: First he himself, as the Father and Head of us all
under God immediately, (according to that of St. Paul, The 1 Cor: 11. 3. Ephesians.
5. 23.
Head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the
Head of Christ is God) did by his divine Doctrine and Miracles beget unto
himself his twelve Apostles, his children: these being first consummated by
Christ unto a capacity of Fathers also, and enabled to multiply into spiritual
children of Grace; when Christ ceased visibly and politically (for he never
ceases spiritually) to assist and direct his Church, were by him, as so many
Princes of his Ecclesiastical Monarchy, commissioned and authorized to dilate
the same, and amplify it, according to the Power, Prescriptions, and Grace
given them to that end. And Christ foreseeing his Kingdom to be of that vast
extent, that it would surpass the strength and ability of any one man to
administer the whole, did not leave any Delegate so plenarily endued with Power
Ecclesiastical, as that all should derive from him, as they did from himself:
For then it had appeared by some Act of Christ, and some instance in them, in
their receiving subordinate power from that eminent Person, during his abode on
earth, which could have been no more derogative from Christ, than it is thought
to be now by any. But the Twelve were alike called by Christ immediately, and
not the least intimation of any prae-eminence, unless in order, which cannot be
avoided, where there is found never so great and just equality.

Now because they were rather inhabitude and Right, than Act, Rulers and
Fathers of the Church, and the whole Earth was to be their Diocese, therefore
it behoved and was most just that they should set in Common Counsel together
touching the general design of reducing the whole World to the knowledge and
obedience of Christ: as we read they did in the Second to the Acts, and in the
Fifteenth, and elsewhere. But being enjoined to depart from Jerusalem, and
every one to betake himself to such peculiar Quarters of the World as fell to
them by Gods Providence and Assignation, it was no longer so absolutely
necessary to hold assemblies for the special management of each ones proper
Cure, but full power resided in every Apostle of Christ, and accordingly was by
them exerted, to ordain matters necessary to the Flock collected by them. So
that notwithstanding what was of public concernment to the whole, fell under
the cognizance of all the Apostles, as Peers of Christ's Kingdom, yet were
limited Districts or Diocesses disposed of by the council and authority of one
presiding there. And if there were called more to consult of that portion of
the Church, it was rather of humane reason, than divine Institution. For it was
ever far from Gods intention in appointing extraordinary Methods and Rules for
his Church, utterly to extinguish or evacuate humane Reason: which his own hand
had planted in man's soul before; but it was to be subject to the Superior Law
given by him, and where that which was never intended to be of that unnecessary
and immense latitude as to take in all contingencies, prescribed not otherwise,
Gods will, we may be sure it was, that that other help of reason should not be
denied its office, and right of ministering to our uses. And what is more
agreeable to reason, then, That In the multitude of counsels there is Prove. 11.
14.
safety, (many being able to discern more than one alone, and more willing and
ready to execute when their head in determining goes before their hand in
executing: And on the other side, That For the transgression of a Prove. 28. 2.
Land many are the Princes thereof. Nature it self teaches us that many
Counselors and few Commanders is the most rational and secure course to
prevent discords and confusions.

But I am far from disputing or arguing this Question any farther than the
ground I have laid already will allow, and that is only, to enquire after
matter of Fact in the Government of Christ's Church; thinking it most reasonable
and pious to conclude that to be the only Divine which Christ instituted, and
that Christ only instituted that, which only appeared in the World at his being
upon earth, and his Apostles after him: who, though they brought not
Ecclesiastical Government to that visible Form and Order as it afterward
showed it self in, to the world; increasing with the number, and magnificence
of professors of Christ; yet gave the Idea and Pattern in all the main
substantial parts of it. For, as the Father has sent me, even so send I you,
says Christ. Christ faith John 20. 21.
not to any one of his Disciples, So send I thee: for then it might have been
understood so as if he had endowed some single person with such a plenitude of
power, whereby he might succeed him in presiding over all his other Disciples,
and consequently over the universal Church: but so send I you: signifying the
imparting of his absolute and entire power unto all his Apostles, so far as
might consist with the co-ordination founded amongst them, and conduce to the
benefit of the future Church: Between Christ then and his Apostles, there was a
likeness, but no parity or equality of power: Between the Apostles themselves,
there was an equality: But upon the raising of a Church, and multiplying of
Christians immediately sprang up discrimination of Persons and Officers in the
Body of the Church. Neither can any argue from the Parity of Christ's Apostles,
that there ought to be a Parity also among all that succeed in the Ministerial
Office, any more than, that this Parity should extend it self to the whole Body
of the Church: For so it was with the Church first of all; not only all the
Ministers, but Members were equal.

And whether it were simple necessity, or humane prudence, or divine
Inspiration, that first moved the Apostles to limit that General Right, which
Christ had given them indefinitely to Go and teach all Nations; and each of
them to be universal Pastors, in assuming to themselves the special care and
tuition of some one place, Province, or Country, it matters not much to
enquire. For the supposition which some make of an Obligation upon every
Apostle to keep himself so strictly unto the commission of Christ, empowring
him to minister to all Nations, that it was not lawful for him, of himself, nor
by general and mutual counsel and consent amongst themselves, to be determined
to any one Province or Nation, is very groundless and injurious to the whole
design Christ had in propagating the Faith. For the said commission of Christ
given to his Apostles was not Lex but Jus: a Right to Act, not a Precept
indispensably enjoining the execution according to the full extent of the
Letter. Again, It was not said to each singly, Go and teach all nations: but to
all conjoyntly. So that to all it was a direct Precept which was fulfilled, if
all Nations were by all the Apostles, not all by each of them instructed in
Christ. But the interpretation which taks All nations to be rather understood
negatively in opposition to the Jewish Church, which enviously denied the like
Privileges of salvation to the Gentiles which they claimed proper to
themselves, rather then positively, as if by virtue of Christ's injunction they
were necessitated to pass all the world over, (which it is certain that neither
any one, nor all ever did; the intention of Christ being to open a wide door of
Grace to all Nations, so far as humane ability could ordinarily promote the
work) quite disables that argument. As it was lawful therefore for all the
Apostles, and every one of them, to pass into any Part of the world, so was it
not unlawful to make choice of some one considerable portion, wherein to move
and officiate according to his Place. For otherwise, how should it be lawful
for them to continue in some one City two, three, or seven years, as it is as
certain, as any thing in History can be, that some of them did, taking a
peculiar and pastoral care thereof, and its Appendages?

Now, because as their Presence was finite in reference to place, so their
lives were to time; therefore, when in any one large Province they could not
manage immediately themselves, every City of note and command, they assigned
certain Substitutes to continue and promote what they had begun, even during
their lives, in many Countries: And departing this life, left them to succeed
in a perpetual line to all ages; not by intrusion and spontaneous invasion
possessing themselves of Rule and Authority over others, but according to the
same form that themselves were sent by Christ. For Christ not only sent his
Apostles, but enabled them to send others in the like Pastoral charge. And
these Apostolical Pastors, together with that personal Power given them to be
exercised by them, had also a real paternal Power to constitute others of the
like, or inferior order, as necessary emergencies required, upon the increase
of the Professors of Christian Religion, as may in due place be more clearly
proved.

From hence a reason may be rendered of the Opinion of some very sober Bilson.
and learned Defenders of Episcopal Government, who seeing neither the Apostles
alone to govern the Church, nor Bishops alone, have said, It is very hard to
determine what was the Discipline of the Church in the very Primitive times of
all. For surely, while the Apostles lived, the Government of the Church was
Apostolical, and not properly Episcopal; because those Elders (otherwise called
Bishops) said in Scripture to be set over Cities, were themselves wholly at the
beck and disposal of the Apostles ordaining them, and governed and taught under
them: no otherwise than a Priest may be under a Bishop in all subjection. But
the Apostles dying, and their entire power also with them, part of it devolved
unto that Person, who before in their Right presided over such a Church, (the
Apostolicalness excepted which consisted in an immediate Ordination to that
Office by Christ, and illimitedness, as to the exercise thereof; with other
signal gif^s and graces, not here to be insisted on) and was properly
Episcopal: which consisted in an Authority derived from the Apostles, and
consequently from Christ, to govern the Church; and not only present, for their
days; but because it was to continue to all Ages, (which it could not without
Governors and Teachers) to ordain such who should ordain others without
interruption) for ever: And these not only such who should succeed them in the
like Pastoral care, but who might together with them (though under them) by
their counsel and labors, as the common Fathers of the Church, take part of
his charge upon them, in teaching and governing such a portion of that Church
as was allotted them. And these were called Priests or Presbyters. And as the
Bishop was constrained, Christians multiplying, to ordain an assistent
Presbyter to him, so when the People under that Presbyter increased so far that
it was too difficult for him to discharge all Offices of public and private
ministration, it was found expedient to ordain an inferior Officer in the
Church, to him, for his assistance, called a Deacon or Minister. Not that these
two last Orders themselves were of humane or moderner Institution than the
Apostles days, but that they might be likewise undetermined, in the place of
their Function, to any particular Person, until the consummation of the
Apostolical age: But in truth, it is hard to determine what the Scripture
intends speaking of Deacons; and therefore, I offer this mean opinion, as not
inconsistent with theirs, who hold them of Apostolical Institution; nor with
theirs, who make them much later: For the first may be true, as to the Office
which was a degree Ecclesiastical, as St. Paul intimates: and the other, as to
the manner of exercise, in reference to one place, and one presiding there.

And the like seems most probable concerning the Evangelists, who were persons
commissioned by the Apostles to preach the Gospel under them, without any
determination to a certain place or people; and saving this large License, were
in no higher degree than simple Presbyters: the Apostles themselves presiding
in all such places, as Pastors: But when they were by their farther Authority
fixed to one City and Country, with a power to create Successors or Co-adjutors
in the Government of that Church, then they became formal and proper Bishops.
For the allegation of them is most frivolous, who would elude the express
testimonies of Scripture, affirming that Timothy and Titus were Bishops, by
saysaying they were Evangelists: For by the same reason they may deny they were
Presbyters, because probably they were Evangelists, and so make them of no
order in the Church, or of another, which is yet unknown to the world: which,
whatever it may please men to call it, certainly it must be founded on Priestly
Power, or else they could not have regularly acted as they did. Neither was it,
as some may fancy, to degrade such Evangelists whose faculty extended to all
places, to be confined to one afterward, as Bishop. First, because such power
was more truly indetermined to one, than extending actually to all: For it
depended on the pleasure of the Apostles to send them to what place they
thought fit: Secondly, this fixing of them to one place was not without the
accession of power of Government, as well as preaching, which is no where found
to be in them before; and which does more than countervail such antecedent
liberty of simply teaching, as was then in some manner fixed. Thirdly, there
was in such cases as this, added a Power and Right of instituting others as
occasion offered, which is unknown to have been in them as Evangelists.

From it follows that of all the forementioned kinds of Government; that of the
Church approached nearest to that called Monarchical, which was only absolute
and universal in Christ, the Sovereign Head thereof; but Ministerially under
him, and over the Church under their circuit Politically, as proper Heads and
Rulers: and whatever power (after extraordinary Callings by Revelation from God
ceased) any one dispartake of in the Church, was ctrtainly at first derived
from such single Persons alone, however to the solemnity of such ordination
others of an inferior Order concurred thereto. And as the Government of the
civil World was originally without exception, so far as search can be made by
the most curious Antiquaries, Monarchical, though it were not governed by one
man alone, but by Civil Supreme Princes of several Dominions, into which the
earth was parcelled. So though no one Father or Bishop ever presided over all
the Christian world, yet several single Persons in their respective Provinces
governing the Church as Principal, the Government of the Church may rightly be
termed Monarchical in Particular; but Aristocratical as to the whole: For as
the Apostles were all Monarchs compared with their Proselites, Converts, and
Churches by them founded, but were but Peers compared one with another: So was
it with the Bishops and Patriarchs of the Church succeeding them: whereby the
Prophecy of Christ in St. Matthew was verified, spoken not so much (as some
mistake it) of his Heavenly Kingdom, but earthly, his Church and its ensuing
glory. Verily I say unto you, that ye which M^ ^^.
have followed me in the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the
throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel. That when the Church of Christ should flourish, then there
should be such as, in lieu of the twelve Tribes of Israel, should Rule as in
Thrones, the Church of God under the Gospel.

They who object against this the words of Christ in Saint Matthew, Ye know
that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and M^tt. 20, 25.
26.
they that are great exercise authority upon them: But it shall not be so among
you. Do declare no less against Aristocratical then Monarchical Government, yea
all Government over the Church. And their favorable g^osS in behalf of one,
will be as valid for that which they reject. For as it was not at all the mind
of Christ that there should be no Governors at all over his Church; so does it
not at all appear that what was lawful for many to do, was not lawful for one.
But here the old cheat again takes place to suppose that the Government of one
is in it self tyrannical, and of many, free: but neither Christ nor nature ever
taught them how to prove this presumptuous imagination. And to this may we add
another such mistake from St. Peter's words, That men should not be Lords over
Gods heritage. And what then? Must there be more 1 Pet. 5. 3.
than one over a Church, and not only one? May a company of Presbyters oblige
Christians to do, or believe such things, and not Lord it, but if by a
principal Person bearing Rule, this same thing be done, then is the Precept
violated? Besides, who sees not, that has not a mind to be blind, That the
Apostle speaks nothing at all in these words of the kind of Government, but the
exercise of it, and abuse? Surely if Episcopal Government could not choose but
tyrannize, and Presbyterial could do nothing but according to Scripture and
equity; this Objection were unanswerable, otherwise not worth the mentioning,
much less answering, as common as it is, and as confidently* urged.

And as to that Pretense intended to overthrow our prime ground of Christ's
institution taken from what was first actually found in the Church: viz. That
Imparity of Christ's Ministers was not found in the Church till about an hundred
and forty or fifty years after Christ (when it is confessed by the Enemies of
Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, that it prevailed.) Let the Huggers of this Device,
First consider what a pitiful addition is made to their cause from hence;
seeing that it is undeniable there was a disparity all the Apostles days, who
in order excelled all Ecclesiastical Persons; and that almost one hundred years
were spent of the said term, in their time: So that about fifty or sixty years
only this imaginary Government had its being, and then was lost again for
fourteen hundred, and then was better lost then found, and taken up again. But
a far worse inconvenience spoils this jest, as being founded and raised only
from conjecture; and that conjecture upon the obscurity of those ages, not so
clearly known as afterward.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the necessity of holding visible Communion with Christ's Church. Knowledge
of that visible Church necessary to that Communion. Of the Notes to discern the
true Church: how far necessary. Of the Nature or Condition of such Notes in
General.

IT being so necessary (as we have above showed) to be in communion with the
visible Church of Christ, and the Nature of things themselves being more
intrinsic, many times, than to characterize sufficiently them to the Enquirer
into them; it has been thought necessary to explain them farther by more
apparent and observable notices given of them. And in the Doctrine of the
Church these seem to be of greatest consequence; Visibility, Universality or
Catholickness, Sanctity and Perpetuity. Of all which we shall briefly speak in
order: yet first premising somewhat concerning Notes in General.

For seeing (as we have said) it is necessary to know the true Church from the
false, and the Natures of things are oftentimes so abstruse and hidden from us
that we cannot discover them from their own Light, therefore it has been
judged very reasonable to pitch upon certain outward Notes, eading us
unerringly to the knowledge of the thing it self. And in truth, I cannot wholly
approve of that course chosen to certify us, and point out to us the-true
Church, taken from the very being of it: such as are, Faithful and sincere
Doctrine taught therein, Sacraments duly administered, Worship purely performed,
and Discipline rightly constituted: because these are rather of the very
intrinsic nature, and definition it self of the Church, than notes and
characters outward, whereby the nature it self should be certainly known. We
all, indeed without exception, consent that that Church is the true Church,
which is thus qualified and affected; believes aright, is governed aright,
administreth the Sacraments aright, and worshippeth aright; and in one word,
which follows most exactly the Rules of Holy Scripture; but in the Assumption
and Application is all the doubt, and infinite differences; which of all
Pretenders to these, are assuredly so affected, and blessed most with them.
Therefore, these are not sufficient lights and demonstration of themselves to
us. For we grant readily, That whatever Church has all them, is without
controversy a true Church of Christ; but whether this or that Church
pretending to them, has them really, remains to be enquired into. Hence it
has been judged expedient to repair to some more sensible and apparent Notes
or Indications to certify us of matter of Fact; viz. that so it is with this
Church, and not with another. And it is well said, That Notes of a thing must
necessarily be distinct from the thing they notify unto us: and that
especially in these two things. First, in reference to the thing described,
than which they must be more evident and apparent: as the argument must always
be more clear than the thing in Question to be proved therewith. Secondly, in
reference to other things, they must not be common to more than that thing they
are used to express and signify: As no man that never saw an horse before, can
know it from an Ox, by being told that, an Horse has two ears, four legs, and
a long tail. And a third note of a true Note may be added, and that is, that it
be inseparable. For though no more but one thing has such a mark by which it
may be known, yet if that thing be moveable, and not constant to it, it cannot
at all times be known by it; as the Moon cannot always be distinguished and
known from other stars, from horns or Angles which many times it wants.

This speculation is very rational, but yet not exempt altogether from the
inconveniences of the former opinion, it failing little less in the Invention
and Application of such unfailing Notes as are presumed and promised. For those
being the very choicest of many more Notes mentioned by some for the guiding us
to the true Catholic Church, they are either obscure, or inconstant and
separable, or lastly common to those Churches not received for pure and
Catholic, as will appear by and by: Therefore, I suppose, a mean opinion may
in this case be most true and safe: as that, First, there can be no such
infallible outward means of coming to, or discerning the true Church from the
false, as may secure any one from error. For the Prophesies and Promises of
Christ concerning the glory and conspicuousness of his Church; viz. that it
should be as a City set on a hill: That it should be the Light of the world;
That it should be a Mountain unto which all Nations should flow, and such like;
infer no more than this, That, whereas under the Law the Doors of Christ's
Church were in a manner shut against the greatest part of the world; under the
Gospel Christ would keep open house to all comers: and that it should be more
possible and easy to enter into the communion of his true Flock, than formerly
it had been; not that it should not be possible to mistake, but upon affected
and wilful ignorance, next to malice. Neither does there appear any greater
reason, why any man should be infallible in the choice of the true Church, than
when he is in the true Church, that he should be infallible in all points of
Faith therein truly professed. In a word, No greater inconvenience does appear
from the want of infallible means to lead men to the true Church, who are in
sight, but not knowledge of it; than to bring Heathens into an ordinary
capacity of entering into it. A man may be damned in that corrupt and degenerate
state he now is in, for want of that grace, he could not of himself acquire,
and yet God be under no imputation of injustice or tyranny, who gives him no
more than he deserves, and denies him no more than he may justly detain from
him. For the mercy of God exceeds all, not only merit, but admiration that so
many find the way to the truth; while some (as St. Paul has it) are Ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3. 7.
But were it so, that those means to salvation, whether general or particular,
did work naturally, not Evangelically or morally by the co-adjutancie of grace
accompanying them, and inwardly disposing the mind to assent to, and embrace
them, then indeed ought there to be certain and infallible causes outward to
that end; but it is not so: for as liberal as God has shown himself in the
Gospel and means outward of attaining to the truth, he keeps the reins still in
his own hands, and the key of knowledge by him, the efficacy of the most
probable means, even that of distinguishing and knowing the true Church,
depending upon his free and inscrutable Grace; which would in this particular
be superfluous and useless, if certain access might be made unto it by
demonstrative notes to that purpose.

A second thing commending herein a mean opinion, may be the due acknowledgment
of the use of such outward marks and means guiding us to this prime truth of
the Church. For notwithstanding, we have said the Grace of God has a main
stroke in every man's right choice of such dubious undemonstrable truths, yet
does it not ordinarily concur (and we have nothing to know of extraordinary
acts of God) but by such ordinary means as he has instituted and tied us to
observe, to be capable thereof: and therefore are we to embrace and improve all
outward helps which may best conduce to that end; otherwise we either forfeit
or repel such grace from us. And of such means I know none more reasonable and
probable to bring us to the knowledge of this point, then are they above
mentioned.

Thirdly, the use of those means or notes upon trial, will be found to consist
not so much in the Affirmative, as Negative sense: that is, not characterizing
Catholic Churches in opposition to Heretical, by being found only in any
Church, because they are also found in such as are reputed Heretical: but being
not found in Churches pretending Catholicisme, stigmatizing them for false and
defective. And truly it is well worth the labor to be informed of errors, as
that which prepares to the knowledge of the truth.

Lastly, it is to be observed of the nature of Notes or Properties, that they
are either of the whole Species or kind, as that given by Plato of a Man, That
he is a two-footed creature having no feathers on his body: or they are
Particular, relating to some Individuum or single one of that kind: as that
given of God himself to distinguish Saul whom God had 1 Samuel 9. 2. 10. 24
designed King, from the rest of the people, from his stature, That he was
higher by head and shoulders than the rest of the people. And thus was Elijah
the Tishbite known to Amaziah, That he was an hairy man, girt with 2 Kings 1. 8.
a girdle of Leather. Now in this question it is not so much enquired into, how
absolutely one man may be known from another; nor how one Church may be
distinguished from another, as the Roman from the Greek, or the English from
the French Church; for this, thought it be very easy, is scarce worth the
labor: but the doubt and material difficulty is, How to know which of these
are Catholic and true Churches of Christ, and which are Heretical or Erroneous
in any degree? I say, the Enquiry is not, which is which Church, as a man might
be known to be such an one by name, from his stature, his hair or the like: but
which of these are true and orthodox Churches. This can be by no other notes
infallibly, but such as are truly and constantly proper to true Churches, and
are no less found in other true Churches than in this. And therefore it is most
true, what is commonly said, That the true Church is known by the true Faith
professed, right Discipline administered, and the holy Sacraments duly used; but
not before it be certainly known that all these are actually so observed, and
really not pretendedly only. And so is it as true, That, it being known
certainly which is the true Church, it must be known likewise by necessary
consequence, that all these three are faithfully observed in that Church; which
could not be true without them. Now if we first must judge of Churches by the
three General Instances and Indications, we must first judge of these
Ingredients into its Nature: and before we can do so, must run through a whole
body of Divinity, and that with fallible judgment in the search of it. On the
other side, if we would know which is the true Religion, from the true Church;
to know the true Church first, we must pass through infinite Disputes and
Controversies, with the like uncertainty of judging aright as before: and in
doing both these, we forsake the pretended method of judging by Notes, for we
are hereby immersed in the indagation of the thing it self, without
consideration of Notes: which if they could be had apparently and infallibly,
would prevent that long and tedious labor of examining the matter it self. But
such (as I have said) I know none positive: the nearest we can come to the
point, is Negatively, when there is apparently wanting such things as declare
at least the unsoundness and imperfection of the whole Body, so defective.

CHAP. XXX.
Of the Notes of the true Church in Particular. Of Antiquity, Succession,
Unity, Universality, Sanctity: How far they are Notes of the true Church.

THE four principal Notes of the true, or rather false Church, not found in it,
are Antiquity, Unity, Succession, Universality: and as moderner Controverters,
in England especially, the name of Catholic it self.

To the first of these we say, That her Antiquity is not to be compared with
things of quite another nature, but with things of the same nature, and
comprehended in some eminent Period of time. For the Natural worship was more
ancient than the Mosaical, and the Mosaical than the Christian, in such things
wherein they differed. For we have before shown, That Christian Religion,
according to the material and natural Part of it, which was that connatural
light and reason shining clearly in the heart of man, and directing him to the
belief and worship of one God, exceeded in time the Jewish worship, yet was not
to be preferred before it; and the like may be said of the Jewish and
Christian. But the enquiry is chiefly about those of the same Economy, the
same profession and denomination. As if it should be demanded, which of the
natural Religions were the truest? answer might well be made, That which was
most ancient and agreeable to prime Institution. And in like manner, That must
be the purest of the Jewish or Mosaical which agrees most exactly with the most
ancient and first instituted, of that kind: and so of the Christian
undoubtedly; that which retained most of the divine Truths and Worship, ought
to be preferred as the best of that kind; as is plain from the Prophet
Jeremiah, advising that degenerous people and Church thus; Stand ye in the
ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. -- Nay, we may extend this to
the Mohammedan Religion thus far truly; viz. to be informed from antiquity,
which of all the several Sects are most truly Mohammedan, weighing their
agreement to, or discrepancie from the Institutions of the first Author of that
Superstition.

But here it will be necessary to distinguish between things agreeable to the
institution, things instituted, and things contrary to institution; and that as
well for our better satisfaction in the following notes, as this present:
though I confess, all this is overthrown if that be taken for granted, which
some mischievously would obtrude upon the Christian Church in these last days,
That nothing, whether intrinsic or extrinsick to Religion it self, in the
substance, must be instituted but by Christ, and such as were divinely inspired
by him: But this at present I shall take for groundless, senseless, and
unpracticable by the Assertours and Defenders of it; some other place being
more proper for its confutation. But this diversity being allowed, as all
reason requires, the resolution of this case will be much facilitated: For
surely, that Church (have it never so many and fair advantages otherwise to
commend it to the world) which shall either have lost any material Article of
Christian Faith, or notably corrupted and perverted, or introduced any Tenet
which is contrary to the first Institution, and for which no good ground or
reason can be alleged out of the all-sufficient Rule of Faith, must needs be
false: and that no such warrant can be there had, the total silence, or
contrary Doctrine of the Ages next under the Date of Scriptures (which we here
make the Rule) do prove. For where neither the Scriptures most ancient
expresses, or necessarily infers any Doctrine of Faith; nor Tradition has
never so understood the Scriptures, there no greater evidence can be found upon
earth to discern truth from falsehood, and consequently the Catholic and
Apostolic Faith from the Spurious and Heretical. And from this head it was
that we find the ancient Fathers to oppose and confute the Heretical Inventions
and Innovations of men contrary to sound Faith. For supposing that Christ was
the first founder and dispenser of Christian Doctrine, and that he delivered
this to the Apostles to be farther propagated in the world; what could be said
more effectually against perverters of the same, than to show that such fond
and impous tenets as Heretics obtruded upon the world, could never have Christ
for their Author, because those who immediately drew from that Fountain, never
taught any such thing, but the contrary rather. And that they did not, they
proved from instances in all the principal Sees of the Apostles, and their
immediate and following Successors, who never delivered any such Doctrine to
the world. Upon this Innovating Heretics were forced to seek subterfuge from
revelations, and extraordinary discoveries promised (as they corruptly
understood Scripture) by Christ in St. John, saying; I have yet many things to
say unto you, but ye Joh. 16, 12, 13.
cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth shall come he will
guide you unto all truth, etc. Hence they collected, That Christ communicated
not all to his immediate Disciples, but reserved diverse things to be imparted
extraordinarily to them: and the fancy of such extraordinary favors from God
is such a bewitching device, that few, not soundly settled in Faith, can chose
but expect and thirst after, and at last conceit that so God does deal with
them, when there is no such matter. And of this Sacrilegious and Heretical
folly are those Churches, no less than simple single persons, guilty, which
under pretense of power in the Church (which must not be denied) of declaring
the sense of Scripture and Faith; do in very deed invent and introduce new
Articles of Faith; and absurd Scholies unheard of before, either in substance
or form, and say, They do but explain only, what was before employed and
included in holy Writ. For all Articles of Faith, all necessary and due
Discipline, all true Administration of Sacraments, wherein the truth of
Christian Churches are generally affirmed to consist, must long since have been
discovered from the Rule of all these, or otherwise; they, who were ignorant
of, or defective in these, could not lay any just claim to be true Churches of
Christ. So that in truth, Antiquity thus understood is an excellent Note of the
true Faith, and the true Faith (not contradicted in worship, as is possible)
more than a Note or Sign of a true Church, it is the very Being it self.

But where Antiquity it self is obscure, the condition of a Note (according to
the Canvasers of this point) being to be more clear than that which is in
question, it cannot do this good office for us: And to argue backward, as too
many do very incongruously, endeavoring to prove that which should prove; is
to discover the fondness of their opinions and falsness of their cause at the
same time. For instance, to say, the Church cannot err in Doctrine, therefore
we must believe this to be most ancient: And to affirm that no man can
precisely declare the time and place when such a Doctrine entered the Church
taxed for innovation, is very absurd as commonly and confidently as it is used.
For St. Augustine, on whose grounds they seem to build this supposition;
supposed that First, no time could be instanced in, when such an usance was not
in the Church: but many times this can be done against pretenses to
Apostolicalness; though the direct time when it began may not be instanced in.
For whenas most Doctrines of Faith have some practical worship proper (...).
Aristoteles Polit. Lib 5. 8. 175.
to them, and evidencing them, (such as are the form, the matter, the rites of
prayer, none of which recorded in the Church, insinuate any such opinions in
that age of the Church, especially of public approbation) is it not an
argument more than conjectural, there was then no such thing believed in the
Church; though we be not able to determine when it first sprung up? Again, it
is very weak and frivolous, which is presumed as unquestionable, that all
abuses and corruptions in the Church had some proper period wherein they must
needs show themselves, according to that formality as afterward they appeared
in, and became notorious. No doubt is to be made, but points of Doctrine had
their conceptions, augmentations, and progressions insensible as infinite other
things in nature, and manners have had, and daily have. A man may better demand
the hour in which an Apple began first to rot, or the week in which an old
Groat began first to be defaced, and loose its form, than require a determinate
point of time, or perhaps the year in which such a Doctrine began to be
corrupted into an heretical sense and practice. But many of these are very
exactly and faithfully set down, and found short of immemorialness of Tradition
as they term it.

For Succession another note of the Church; I find it by some, divided into
Succession Doctrinal and Personal: meaning better than they speak. For I know
nothing properly succeeding, but where something is departed or lost. Now the
Doctrine of the Church being incessant and perpetual, and not diverse from it
self, cannot be said so properly to succeed it self, as to persevere in the
Church. But if we should pass that order, and allow this language; yet the
thing it self seems here quite to be mistaken: it being not at present enquired
into the Faith of the Church (which if it were granted to be sound and
Catholic, does not of it self necessarily and fully infer a true Church: and
upon the reasons before agreed to; viz. Due administration of Discipline to be
essential to a true Church) but into the Form constituting it a Visible and
Formal Church; to which is indispensably required proper Pastors, and that by
the appointment of Christ, as St. Paul thus witnesses speaking of Christ
leaving Ephesians. 4. 11, 12
the earth, and ascending into heaven, and deputing thereupon certain Officers
in his stead, in a visible ministration, which he cease now to exercise. He
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers; For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ. Now it is not necessary here to
determine the quarrel about the kind of Officers here mentioned, it sufficing
to our purpose what is very evident, that they who are Governors of the
Church, must be given to the Church by Christ. But Christ acting no longer
politically or visibly (as has been said and must be yielded) but mystically;
he cannot be said to ordain any immediately in his own person, but by the
ministry of others. Now how is it possible to distinguish them whom Christ has
appointed to constitute others in the Church, from them to whom he has given
no such order, but by this succession we now speak of, namely a traduction of
that faculty which is in one deriving it originally, though by many
intermediate hands, from Christ himself, to another succeeding him: because (as
the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks) the Priests are not suffered to continue by
reason of Death. This Hebr. 7. 23.
surrogation then of Pastors and Priests is not to be at the pleasure or
arbitrament of men, to institute; but must be by the will of Christ: and this
will of Christ must be revealed unto us either by the ordinary line and course
from himself and Apostles, or else must by some extraordinary and miraculous
way be made known to men. For though we deny it to be Christ's practice to
commission men to these ends, we do not deny it to be in his power so to do:
but that he has so done actually to the fairest Pretenders, we shall deny
until better demonstrations than can be made from their own asseverations, or
appealings to the extraordinary effects of their Ministry. Christ says in the
Tenth of John, Verily, verily -- John 10^ 1.
he that enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some
other way, the same is a thief and a robber. That the Sheepfold is the Church,
that the door is the ordinary way of entering into office in that Church, that
the Shepherd is Presider over the Church I find none to doubt; nor that
climbing in at the windows is extraordinary thrusting ones self into Office in
the Church; nor that such as do so, though they be never so conscionable,
painful and orthodox otherwise, are not thieves and robbers, if not shearing
and abusing the Flock, yet taking that upon them without ordinary grant, which
belongs not to them. This evil is only remedied by a successive and ordinary
transmission of that Power which Christ left, with certain peculiar persons he
called, Apostles, with authority to communicate the same to others, to the
worlds end; according to the several ranks and orders of his Ministers, of
which his Church consists. So that succession not of Doctrine only, but
Officers in the Church, is no less essential to a Church properly so called,
than Officers themselves or Discipline. And as for the distinction invented
without any precedent in antiquity, without any warrant from Scripture, without
any justice or reason humane or divine, to stop men's mouths, and blind their
eyes who are very simple, of Vocation internal and external, it is utterly
rejected as a vain, frivolous, impertinent fancy. For internal Vocation, (as
they called it) is nothing but an ability competently serving to such an end;
but this is no Vocation at all properly, any more than it is for me to take
another purse, because God has given me strength, power and opportunity to do
so. It may be an exception will here be put in against the comparison from the
unlawfulness of this latter, and not of the former: but I suppose as well an
unlawfulness in the former, though not so notorious, as in the latter: And
add, That however, considered in it self, it be unlawful for me to spoil
another, yet if God calls me to it, it is not; and according to the new
Doctrine of Vocation, a man is then inwardly called, when he is enabled to do a
thing. But an Outward call too is commended, and that ordinary too, when things
are settled to our mind, otherwise extraordinary calling must suffice. And truly
an extraordinary calling will suffice at any time; but then very much better
proofs are expected to make such extraordinary Vocation apparent to equal
judges, than we can any where find in the Apologies of them that rest wholly
upon that, as their safest Anchorage in this unhappy fluctuating Vocation.

By what therefore we can judge from the description the Scriptures give us of
a formed Church, and sentence of the Ancient, no Society a Nibil^lind est,
quantum ego quidem intelligo, Ordinaria Dei ad altquod munus vocatio, quam ab
his penes ques est plena and legitima de ejusmodi rebus statuendi potestas,
personae ips^rum judicio non in-id^n^ae, nullo intercedente prava ambitione,
dolo malisve artibus, designatio. Sander sonus Praefat* ad Tract. de Juramento.
Church, can be truly and formally called, which wants lawful and ordinary
Pastors and Priests; and no ordinary Pastors or Priests without due
Ordination, and no due Ordination but from such who have that power in a right
Line communicated unto them, in a succession of mortal Persons, to an immortal
faculty in the Church, as may hereafter in convenient place be farther proved.
So that it may well be admitted, that Succession (not when one steps up
unappointed, or illegally appointed into the place and office of another, but)
thus explained is necessary to the Being of a true Church of Christ. And yet I
do not say it is necessary to Christianity, or simply to salvation, where it is
not despised or scornfully rejected. For we may well suppose that Gods promises
will notso far fail as to leave a Christian people destitute of such ordinary
means of becoming a Church, without notorious forfeitures of his grace on their
parts; or will remit of the general rigor of his Laws requiring Unity of a
Church, as well as Unity of Faith to the being good Christians and true
believers.

And for these who are most troublesome and loud in demanding Succession, or
rejecting all Churches defective therein, as scarce in saveable condition;
though I hold it an high temptation of God and provocation of highest
displeasure, to flock to such Societies as are not known to have this
succession of Pastors without such interruption that the Renewal and
restitution thereof were mere Laical, and consequently void; yet where
invincible ignorance, through education or incapacity natural of judging, has
subjected a Christian to that unhappiness, who dares exclude him from
salvation? And the greatest boasters and magnifiers of succession should do
well to consider, how they can better, than hitherto they have, quit and secure
themselves from the retort of want of succession. For however a numerous, a
glorious Roll is shown of succeeders in their principal See, yet we find
unanswerable difficulties in their due succession and ordination: of which
these two will take them up more time, and cost them more care and pains than
their lives length may suffice to; viz. The uncertainty of Succession from
Intention necessary to that Sacrament of Ordination, which can never be
sufficiently known to have been present at that time, no, though the Ordainer
should swear solemnly to it, more than Morally, which amounts to no mo^e, upon
trial, than Probably: And the more then probable suspicion of Simoniacal
contracts in ascending the Pastoral throne; which the common Law declares,
nulling such indirect Invasions, and voiding Ordinations.

For the third sign of the true Catholic Church, Unity; the more I look into
it, the less I find considerable in it: It being necessary according to common
Philosophy, That every thing which has a ^eing, should be but one, and not
many: and if the Catholic Church be so in this sense, what great matter is
acknowledged in it above other things? For when a thing is divided into many
parts, it ceases to be what it was before, but still there is unity in the
Parts severally considered. And so if we suppose the Universal Church divided
schismatica^ly into distinct and opposite societies, it can scarce be supposed
but the Parties so divided are, though infinite, yet in unity with themselves.
And how then can that which is common to so many be a specific character of
one especially? By this separation therefore it may be concluded, That one, or
perhaps both are in fault, and guilty, but agreeing within themselves equally,
(as well they may) and for ought appears, the Schismatical may be in greater
unity within it self than the Catholic, how can any man discern from unity,
which is the Catholic or true Church. The Unity therefore, which may any wise
describe or distinguish the sounder part of Christ's Church from the heretical,
must not be taken from that which it holds within it self, but with some
other, which is acknowledged for Catholic; wherein comes the use of Antiquity
again: because the Ancient Churches of Christ were saved by the same Faith and
Worship that all succeeding Churches must be; therefore, if it may appear that
a Church does not agree in all necessary or considerable points of Faith,
Worship, and Government with them of former ages, supposed to be truly
Catholic, it self cannot be Catholic or a true Christian Church. But they who
look no higher than one Age, or two, and no farther then one place or two, and
finding convenient agreement amongst themselves, do characterise themselves for
Christ's Church, fall into the censure of St. Paul to the Corinthians -- who
measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing 2 Cor. 10. 12.
themselves among themselves, are not wise. And in the Revelation of St. John,
we read of some Nations into whose heart God has put to fulfill Revel. 17. 7.
his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the word
of God should be fulfilled. I hope this unity of consent, will not be taken for
any argument of the faithfulness of their consent or Catholickness. But more we
shall have occasion to speak of Unity in the treating of Schism. In the mean
time, I see no force at all in the places alleged out of the Old Testament,
to prove so much as may be well allowed to the unity of the Church; as where it
is said, My Beloved is but one, and to the Cantic.
like purpose. For such places, taken in relation to Fact, and not to Precept
and counsel rather, that Gods Church should be so, and endeavor to keep the
Spirit of Unity in the bond of peace, as the Apostle speaks, can Ephesians. 4. 3.
be understood strictly, only of that single Nation of the Jews, which was
alone chosen so peculiarly to himself. Or of the future Coalition of Jew and
Gentile into one Body, as the same Apostle in the same Epistle speaks of
Christ's Passion, That he might reconcile both unto God in one Chap. 2. 16.
Body by the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby; i. e. between Jew and
Gentile.

These difficulties and uncertainties in this Note of Unity have constrained
the Patrons of the Roman Cause to find out such an Unity which indeed is more
apparent, and certain to him that commits his Faith to be guided by some
outward sign; but so much repugnant to all ancient Churches, so wholly strange
to them, and unheard of, that it may seem to do them much more mischief than
advantage, as that which excludes all Antiquity from having any suffrage in
this cause. And this their Note is, Unity Bellarm. de Notis Eccles. lib. 4.
cap. 10. init.
with the Bishop of Rome: as boldly said, and as weakly proved as their enemies
could wish. St. Hierom indeed says to Damasus, he is resolved to hold as He
and that See believed in one particular of the Trinity, and used not simply,
and abstractly considered this as a probable argument of Orthodoxness and
preserving the peace of the Church, but with the concurrence of other
Circumstances rendering his Opinion probable. But does he, or any ancient
Author, deserving with themselves the name of a Father, teach, as they would
persuade, indefinitely, That to hold communion with the Bishop of Rome is to be
assured you are of the true Catholic Church. Christ's Charter much stood upon
to St. Peter, and the Rhetorical flourishes many times of the Holy Fathers
extolling St. Peter and his Successors, but never categorically affirming, or
soberly determining so, will not amount to this.

Hence they proceed to Universality too, as a sign of the true Church, and an
help to Unity it self. For it profitteth nothing that there be some one Church,
and that in one Age and Place which is at unity with it self, if it be not
universal. Christ's Church is said to be universal, but so many senses are given
of Universality it self, that it is hard to apply it positively to any
pretending to it. For nothing so plain as that the Christian Faith does not,
and never did possess all Nations; nor all the persons of those Nations where
it has flourished. No man therefore can know the true Church by that which is
not true of it. And therefore I make no doubt but the most anciently genuine
and proper sense of that expression in the Apostles Creed, where it is said, I
believe the Catholic Church, Vide Augustinum, Epistol^ 50.
aimed at no more than to cause us to believe that Christ's Church was from that
time forward, no longer to be of one Nation or one Denomination, as it was
before Christ's Incarnation, but Catholic; that is, Universal, and
indifferently to extend to all People: For at that time when the Creed was
composed, the secondary sense wherein Catholic and sound Believer signified
the same thing, was scarce at all heard of; no not before the Council of Nice
under Constantine. Afterward it was applied to particular Sees, as well
Alexandrian, Antiochian, and some others, as Roman. In Theodosius the second
his days, which above 400 years after Christ, a Sozomenus Ecclesiast. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 4.
Law was made that none should call themselves Catholics but such as believed
aright concerning the Holy Trinity; the rest should be termed Heretics.
Afterward, notwithstanding every Sect and Heresy usurped that name: as may
appear from that very place corruptly cited out of Austin August. Epist. ad
Epistolam Fundamenti.
by some, to prove the true Church from the Title of Catholic it self. For
says he, however all Heretics desire to be called Catholics, yet if any
enquired for a Catholic Church, they were directed to the Orthodox, and not
Heretical Churches.

But if we take the word Catholic in a more restrained sense, not for that
which is all over the world actually, but so far as it does extend, passes
generally through all; and that not Places, but Ages too, where shall we find a
Catholic Church? Christians never for fourteen or fifteen hundred years not
conspiring into one belief, no not in things held very important to Faith: and
I mean not only single persons, but Societies of Christians. Therefore, neither
from hence can we conclude directly of the true Church, in opposition to
Heretical. And therefore the Patrons of this opinion of the Universality,
finding themselves harder pursued with difficulties, than they can evade being
taken in their own snares, are forced, according to their very vain custom, to
leave off the trial of the truth from matter of Fact, which is most plain and
ready, and proceed to say, It ought so to be: for certain reasons they draw at
their pleasure out of Scripture, and the necessity of our knowledge of it:
which is as solid a way of proceeding, as if I finding my self by natural sense
cold, another should attempt to demonstrate the contrary, because it is
Midsommer.

But this use we may yet make of Universality to jude of Catholickness of
Faith, taking it for the most constant for time, place, and persons, according
as all humane account requires to ascribe that to the more numerous and
eminent, which is strictly proper only to the whole entire Body, as a Council
or Senate is said to decree a thing, when the chiefest do so, some dissenting:
surely this is a very probable argument of the Catholickness of that Faith, and
consequently that Church so believing: But what we before observed must not be
forgotten here, viz. That in all such enquiries as these, the Estimate must be
taken from the whole Church passed as well as Present, and that there is as
well an Eminency of Ages, as Persons, to preponderate in this Case.

Lastly, the advantage Negative from Universality is very considerable to
discern the true Faith and Church from false, because it is most certain, if
any Doctrine or Discipline shall be obtruded on the Church, which cannot be
made evident to have been actually received in the Church (and not by
colorable and probable conjectures and new senses of Scripture invented to
that purpose) in some former Age, that is Heretical and Schismatical, and in no
good sense Catholic.

The last Note which we shall mention is Sanctity, which we hold very proper to
this end, taken abstractedly from all Persons, as considered in Doctrine and
Principles. For if any Church does teach contrary to the Law of nature, of
moral virtues, of Justice, or the like, we may well conclude that to be a false
Church, though it keeps it self never so strictly to the Rule of Scriptures in
many, or most other things. For it is in the power of man's wit, and may be in
the power of his hands, to devise certain Religious Acts, and impose them on
others, which shall carry a greater show of severity and sanctity than there is
any grounds for in Scripture, or Presidents in the best approved Churches: and
yet this is not true Holiness of Believers. For to this is principally
required, that it be regulated and warranted by Gods holy Word: Yet neither so
directly and expressly as if it were unlawful to act any thing in order to
Holiness without special precept from thence. For I see no cause at all to
reject the ancient distinction found frequently with the Fathers of the Church,
of duties of Precept, and duties of Council: For there ever was, and ought to
be in Christ's Church several ranks of Professors of Christ's Religion; whereof,
for instance, some live more contemplative, some more active lives. But if all
commendable and profitable States were under Precept, then should all sin that
do not observe the same: but God has taken a mean course in not commanding
some things of singular use to the promoting of Piety in true Believers, but
commending the same unto us: Such are Virginal chastity, Monastic life,
Traveling painfully not only toward the salvatian of a man's own soul, but of
others likewise; and certain degrees uncommanded of Duties commanded; as of
charity toward our Christian neighbors, and Watchings unto Prayer, and
spiritual Devotion; which being prescribed, no man can determine to what degree
they are by God required of us precisely: some therefore are left to the
Freewill-offerings of devouter persons, who thereby endeavor either to assure
themselves more fully of their salvation; or increase of the glory afterward to
be received: For as Christ tells us in the Gospel, Much was forgiven to Mary,
because she loved much, so shall much be given upon the same reason.

They therefore that teach contrary to such wholesome and useful means of
Holiness as these, or the like, under, perhaps, vain suspicion of too great
opinion may be had of their worthiness, incur, at least with me, the censure of
being enemies to the holiness of Christ's Church, and render their Churches more
suspected for the opposing of them, than others for approving or practicing
them.

The Holiness then of the Church commending it to the eye and admiration of the
World, does consist in the divineness and spiritualness of its Doctrine and
Ecclesiastical discipline in use in it, exceeding moral civility. For it may be
that such a severe hand of civil Justice may be held over a people that they
may live more orderly and inoffensively to the world than some true Christian
Churches: but if this be done, as often it is, out of civil Prudence, natural
Gravity, or a disposition inclined rather to get an estate, than riotously and
vainly to spend on, which brings such scandal to Religion, then is not this a
sign of a true Church, or Christian, because it proceeds not from principles
proper to Christian Religion, but secular interest, how specious soever it may
appear to the World.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Power and Acts of the Church. Where they are properly posited. Of the
Fountain of the Power denied to the Church. Neither Prince nor People Author
of the Churches Power: But Christ the true Head of the Church. The manner how
Christ's Church was founded. Four Conclusions upon the Premises. 1. That there
was always distinction of Persons in the Church of Christ. 2. The Church was
always administered principally by the Clergy. 3. The Rites generally received
in the Church, necessary to the conferring Clerical Power and Office. 4. All
are Usurpers of Ecclesiastical Power who have not thus received it. In what
sense Kings may be said to be Heads of the Church.

AFter the Church found, and founded as abovesaid, the special Acts thereof
claim due consideration, and the Power or Right of so acting. And this Power we
make twofold in General, Political and Mystical, or Sacramental: Of both which
we must first enquire after the proper Subject, before we treat of the proper
Acts thereof.

That all Power which is given by Christ does reside in the Church as its
subject, no man can, or does question. But because the Church it self being (as
is said) a Society united in one Faith, and administered outwardly by Christian
Discipline, according to Christ's mind, admits of several senses and
acceptations; therefore it must be first understood, which, and in what sense
is according to Christ's intention, the proper seat of this power. And before we
come to Scriptural grounds, we take no small help in this Enquiry from the
common state of all Government: which we have already shown to be such as is
not ascending, but descending: It comes not originally, nor can, from the
multitude or people, who are the object of this power, i. e. the Persons
properly to be governed, and not governing; all the Examples of former Ages
confirming not only the unnaturalness and unreasonableness, but impossibility
of the People governing themselves.

For though infinite Instances may be given of Cities, and Nations, which have
wrung the Civil Power out of the hands of their Princes and Magistrates, and
pretended they would be ruled by their own Counsels and power: yet could they
never effect this, but were constrained, after all devices used to no purpose,
to let go their hold, if not Pretensions, and suffer the assumed Power to
return to a more capable subject. Which incapacity of using such Power is no
less then an unanswerable Demonstration to me that it was never there placed by
any divine Will or Right; but somewhere else. Now though some eminent Reformers
of the Late Age have been so superfluously, and in truth, superstitiously nice,
and as is pretended, jealous for Christ's honor and absolute Headship over his
Church, that would not so much as allow the name of Government to the Church or
any in it, least Christ should suffer loss, but administration must be the
Junius de Ecclesia.
name signifying power and Rule exercised in the Church; yet in truth, all this
is no better then a Superstitious fear, where there is no fear. For they are
not names, but things that are so much to be heeded: And if these men in their
Charge, had not acted the part of Governors, as well as others, we might have
allowed this invention for tolerable, but the truth is, the honor pretended
to Christ, and the Gentle usage of the People have ended in the same thing
which the other more openly and honestly professed to do: the difference being
only in the Hands so acting. But it is no new thing to beguile dissetled people
with new words, into new orders, neither will it ever be left off, as common a
Stratagem as it is, so long as the People, are people, and Craft and Ambition
shall spurrmen of Fortune to currie, and scratch that unruly beast, to the end
that, when they find it convenient, they may get up of them, and ride them at
their pleasure.

This incapacity of all Christians to rule themselves being the same with the
other, necessarily infers a more proper subject of that Power, which not
being assumed but delivered, any more then the Faith it self, founds a
distinction of Christians and the Church, as ancient as the Church it self; not
unknown to Civil Societies. For as has been said, a Kingdom or Commonwealth is
said to decree and act such a thing, when not the thousand part thereof so much
as know any thing of it, till it be done: so that clearly, there is a Nation
Real and Representative, and Formal and proper. This consists of all Persons
in that Society, and every member of that Political Body: The other, of such
Principal Parts of that Body as are in Possession of authority and power to
Rule the rest: and whose Acts are interpreted to be the Acts of the whole
State. And that the Church consisting of infinite Persons incapable of
consulting or acting Decretorily, must, and always had certain Select Persons
representing the whole, which it should conclude; the thing it self together
with Precedents of all Places and Ages do prove. The greatest arguments and
most colorable are taken from the Infancy of the Church, to the contrary. For
both Heretics and Schismatics endeavor at contrary conclusions from the
Scripture. Patrons of the Popes absoluteness argue from a Superiority or
Primacy of order in St. Peter when the Church consisted, it may be, of twenty
persons to make good the Popes pretensions to supremacy over the universal
Church, when it consists of so many Nations. But to this our answer is ready:
First, that the like power was never in St. Peter over his fellow Apostles and
the Rest that is claimed by the Present Bishop of Rome. Secondly, That if such
a Power as is asserted to St. Peter for the Popes sakehad ever been in him
really, yet it could be no good ground of his Successors claiming the same over
the Catholic Church. And that First, because there is no probability of the
like Gifts and Graces requisite to such Authority in the Popes of Rome, as were
given by Christ to St. Peter; yea, there are more instances to be given of the
Ignorance, and horrible vitiousness of Persons possessing that Chai^, then in
any other Patriarchal See in Christendom. Secondly, There is no Rule of
Certainty (setting aside the Personal incapacities and imperfections) how far
the Apostolical power was derived to their Successors, but what may be taken
from the end of such power, which was to conserve the Church in due order of
Government, Devotion and Faith, and this may as well and better be performed
without one Persons engrossing to himself the Disposal of all things Primarily,
though not in the Execution. Thirdly, the difference is vast between the Church
consisting of so few, and contracted into so narrow a circuit as at the first
founding of it, when one man might have with great facility taken the whole
management of the Church upon him, and in following Ages, when it was diffused
into so many and far distant quarters of the Universe, not to be inspected or
managed by one man, though an Apostle.

On the other side, Persons of Democratical Principles and purposes, finding in
holy Writ that the whole Church without distinction of Persons were often
assembled together, and that during their such meeting, matters concerning the
due administration of the Church, were treated of, collect from thence, that in
right, and not rather occasionally, they concurred to Public Acts of the
Church: but this likewise is a fallacy, without any necessity of consequence,
as will appear from the original and orderly search made into the first
Constitution, and the gradual Progress of Ecclesiastical Persons and functions.

First then, That Christ is the Head of the Church, and under that General
notion of Power, life and motion does communicate his influence unto his Body,
the Scripture is so manifest, and it is so generally and willingly by all
assented to, that it were lost time to insist on it. He is then by immediate
consequence the fountain of all Power resting in that Body; as does appear from
the several Appellations subordinate to that of Head attributed unto him in
Scripture. For Hebrews the third and first, he is called The Apostle of our
profession. And in the Book of the Acts he is styled that Prophet Heb. 3. 1.
Acts. 3. 22. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Luke 4. 18.
which was in Deuteronomie promised to the true Israel. And an Evangelist he is
made to us by his own words verifying the Prediction of Esaias upon himself,
Saying, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach the Gospel. And St. Peter calls him our 1 Pet. 2. 25. Mat. 23. 10.
Bishop. Doctor or Master he claims as proper to himself in St. Matthew: And to
the Hebrews, as before, he is called a Priest, an High priest, yea lastly, a
Deacon or Minister, for the words properly used signify the same Romans 15. 8.
thing. From all which we may gather both the Efficient and Exemplary cause of
the several orders in Christ: For first, we read how he called unto himself
twelve Apostles, as well to minister under him, during his abode upon earth, as
to Preside and inform his Church after his departure out of this World: which
according to St. Hierome were prefigured by the twelve fountains, the twelve
Patriarchs, the twelve Tribes, the twelve Princes of Exodus 15. 27. Mark. 3. 14.
the Tribes. There he not only elected, but ordained also, as St. Mark
testifies, that they should be with him, and that he might send them out to
preach, naming them Apostles, as St. Luke writes. After the choice and Luke 6.
13. Mat. 10. 1. Luke 9. 2. Math. 10. 1. Math. 10. 10.
Ordination of them, he gave them actual Mission, as it appears by St.
Matthew, and Commission to preach, and to work miracles to the confirmation of
his Doctrine: and to receive a reward for their pains.

And when the Harvest was too great for so few Laborers as twelve, St. Luke
tells us, he added Adjutants to them, seventy Disciples answerable to Luke 10.
1. Numb. 11. 10
the seventy Elders, by Gods appointment set over the children of Israel: and
the seventy Souls that went with Jacob into Egypt. These two orders Genesis 46.
Ephesians. 3. 5.
are thought to be intended by St. Paul to the Ephesians, where he makes
mention of Apostles and Prophets: by Prophets meaning such who bare that part
of the Prophetical office, which consisted in ordinary instruction of the
People, of which in other places likewise he speaks. Now adding to these the
common sort of Christians or Disciples, which were if not at the time of
Christ's abode upon earth, yet afterward, Christians: as St. Paul intimates,
where he affirms Christ was seen after his resurrection of 1 Cor. 15. 6.
above five hundred brethren at once. We have three distinct orders of
Christians. First Apostles; secondly Evangelists, or the seventy; Thirdly
simple Believers or Christians. And it is most certain that as the Apostles did
not so much as choose their Lord, nor the Evangelists the Apostles, so the
Common sort did not then constitute or choose their Preachers or Evangelists:
but while Christ continued on earth he kept the power of Ordination of whom he
pleased in his own hands, and never is it so much as insinuated that upon his
departure he left any power in their hands to dispose Ecclesiastical Affairs or
Persons therein: but that with his Apostles as succeeding him in visible
Administration, he deposited this power many arguments are offered us out of
Scripture. For in the Person of St. Peter he gave power to all the Apostles
saying, Feed my sheep. And that this same power Joh. 21. 15*
resting in them was by them transmitted unto others, the very same form of
words almost used by St. Peter himself to be the Governors of the 1 Pet. 5. 2.
Church, do prove: where he says, Feed the Flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, but willingly. And St. Paul in
the Acts of the Apostles likewise. And that the whole Ecclesiastical Acts. 20.
28.
Jurisdiction was entirely in the Apostles and Apostolical Persons, does appear
from the enumeration of the most principal parts of which such Jurisdiction
does consist, which may be these as we find them in Scripture recorded. 1.
Power of determining Controversies of Religion, as appears from the Question
agitated about keeping the Law of Moses, Acts. 15.
and concluded by the Apostles, and Elders which were of the second Order after
the Apostles. And in the eleventh of the Acts, the same resolved Acts. 11.
the doubt concerning the Conversing with Gentiles. 2. Of imposing Laws and
orders for the due and sober conversation in matters of Moral nature, as may be
gathered from St. Paul to the Thessalonians, where he advises, That Christians
study to be quiet and to do their own business, and to work with 1 These. 4. 11.
their own hands as we commanded you. And so in the second Epistle he thus
writes, Now we command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2
These. 3. 6.
that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the tradition which he received of us. And so verse the twelfth of
the same Chapter.

Thirdly, Censurings and Punishments of the refractory and disorderly: and that
of two sorts, First of suspension and interdicting, as did the Disciples of
Christ suspected Preachers of him; in St. Luke, John answered Luke 9. 49.
and said, Master we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, and we forbade
him, because he follows not with us. And so others they restrain who preached
without their command or exceeded their commission: as may be read in the acts
of the Apostles; by virtue of the same censuring Power St. Paul Acts. 15. 24,
25. 1 Timothy 2. 12.
interdicts women from preaching in the Church. Secondly, the Censure of (...)
and separation of (...) and notorious offenders in the Church from communion in
the Church: For St. Paul writing to the Corinthians in this manner; What will
ye? shall I come unto you with a rod or in Love, and in the spirit of meekness?
does evidently, distinguish a twofold 1 Cor. 4. 21.
power resident in him: of severity to chastise, and meekness to comfort and
support. And this power is more plainly expressed in the exercise thereof upon
the scandalous offender in incestuous marriage: As also 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5.
in the formidab^e proceedings against Hymeneus and Alexauder, whom St. Paul
delivered unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme: and several other
things more proper for some other place.

A Fourth instance of Jurisdiction is seen in the power of Ordination
pertaining to the Apostles, by imposition of hands. For they did ordain those
Deacons mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. And St. Paul to Timothy,
exhorting Acts. 6. 5, 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
him to Stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of his
hands, does declare the Act of Ordination used by himself.

From al^ which, these four conclusions do necessarily follow. First, that by
Christ and his Apostles intention, there were always, in their days,
distinction of persons in the Church: some having the power of Rule, and some
being subject: according to the Comparison of St. Paul to the Corinthians of
the natural order and superiority of, and subjection of the 1 Cor. 12.
Members in a natural Body, to one another: and coming to application, v 28.
be says, And God has set some in the Church, First Apostles: secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles: And by demanding, and
Questioning, v. 29, 30.
does vehemen^ly deny a Parity in the Church. And this distinction of Persons
was no otherwise known at first but by the common name of Brethren, given to
such as were Christians, without any authority in the Church: and therefore we
read often of the Apostles and their Party on the one side, and Brethren on the
other. But the Officers and Rulers of the Acts. 11. 1, 12, 17, 15, 23, 16. 2.
Church are not found to have any general name distinguishing them from others,
but were by their particular charges and Offices known to men: as Apostles,
Elders, Bishops, Evangelists, Deacons. But afterward, compendiousness of
speech, general cemprehension of them so distinct requiring, they received
their several Names, not, as Socinus, Salmasius, and some such presumptuous
traders for Anarchy in the Church would have it, the things themselves, or
being. For it is granted, that at first all true believers Clerus dicimur quia
sors Dei sumus. Hieron. Item Praefat. ad Enarrat. August. Psalm. 1 Pet. 5. 3.
were called indifferently (...), or Gods Portion or Clergy as we now speak.
For it is very probable that St. Peter using that word which we render Clergy,
does intend to comprehend thereby all Christian People, as well as they who (as
St. Hierome says are the Lords portion more peculiarly: But with good advice
afterward, they who were more especially dedicated to Gods service, and
attended his Altar, were signally called the Clergy: and the other the Laity or
people: very agreeably to the phrase of the Old Testament, where we find not
only a distinction in the things themselves; but in the names of such as served
any ways in Gods house, and those who were only Israelites at large. For these
were called simply (...) Sons of the People, or the Laity (as we now adays
speak) 2 Chronicles. 35 7, 12. Vid. Vatab. in Locum.
in opposition to the Levites, which discrimination in terms was thought to be
introduced in Josiah's time.

Secondly: From what is said we may conclude that even before, and after this
distinction, all the administration of Church affairs passed through the hands
of these Persons of the Clergy or Ecclesiastical Functions, and that their
Votes and Acts ever went under the name of the Church, it may be that in the
beginning of the Church, when Christians had not so many advantages, as after
they had, and their convenience of assembling was not so great, but they were
constrained to teach, and pray, and determine controversies, and ordain Laws
for the Church, that the Laity (as we now call them) were present at all these;
but that this fortuitous presence should infer a right, nothing appears.

A third Conclusion may be, That, observing the orderly Rites used to invest
any person with a Clerical Power, it must necessarily follow, that they who
wanted them, never attained the thing it self. For the Author to the Hebrews
asserts plainly the sacredness of Evangelical Ministering, Heb. 5. 4.
from the Prescriptions and practice of the Levitical, saying, No man takes
this office upon him but he that was called of God, as was Aaron: and least it
might be presumed that this strickness concerned the Old Law only, he
proceeds to that greatest of Precedents, Christ himself: who, though he
needed not any Institution, being absolutely free to all such purposes, of
himself; yet was called of God in signal manner; to show that all that exercise
such Sacred function should much more be thereunto orderly called. Now to
understand what this ordinary and orderly call is, the better, it is worth the
observing how Aaron was called, for so in proportionable manner ought all under
the Gospel be ordained to the Ministry. And here first, we may note, there is
not the least intimation given of such a Call as is Internal, upon which many
vainly rest: But Aaron was called not only internally, by certain proper and
sufficient Gifts to that Office; but externally, and that not of himself, but
of another: He was called by God. Now least it should be here suspected that a
bare and bold presumption of being called of God, without some outward evidence
prooving the same, might suffice to justify an Intruder of himself into the
Ministry; the Scripture tells us how Aaron was called of God; and that is not
only of God and immediately, but mediately, by man; that is, by Moses. Nay
farther, because many content themselves with such an Ordination as comes from
another, not examining much what power or Right such persons have so to ordain
others, the Scriptures tell us, that Aaron was called by another, and him
appointed specially by God so to do: as we read, Exodus the 28. 1. where Exodus
2. ^.
God commands Moses saying, And take thou unto thee Aaron thy Brother, and
his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that they may minister
unto me, in the Priests Office. Here is their Election or Vocation: Their
consecration or ordination follows afterward, described particularly
according to its several Ceremonies, in the next chapter: So that we see the
great Example or Figure of Evangelical ordination, directs to such a form as
ought to be of God, by the hands of some who are thereunto appointed: And if
any should here interpose that Moses himself was no Priest properly himself,
though he were of the Tribe of Levi, and yet he consecrated Priests, being
himself rather a Civil Magistrate; and from hence argue a power in Laymen,
especially Magistrates, to do the same now adays. I answer, here indeed does
Calvin's defense of himself, and such as are in like condition take place of an
Ordinary call and an Extraordinary. For before God had settled a Rule and Order
in his Church, the extraordinary and immediate hand of God, did appoint persons
to minister before. It was therefore first of all, an Extraordinary Act in God
to call Moses, rather than any others, to direct and Rule his Church; it was
next an Extraordinary Act in him to separate the whole Tribe of Levi to
Minister before him: but from that time forward, there was no such thing heard
of, as an Extraordinary Call. Secondly, I answer that God prescribing to us
Rules and Precedents, does not thereby so tie his own hands, as he does ours;
but when he pleases, he may create Persons in Extraordinary manner, to what
ends he will: And his Authority infallibly granted to those, we call now,
Laymen, is altogether sufficient to make a Priest of what Order or dignity
soever he shall be. But until such infallible Proofs of either Gods immediate
Calling, which is Extraordinary indeed; or his immediate enabling or empowring
any other Person, not having in the ordinary Course established in his Church,
received such a power, be given; all such Extraordinary assuming of the
Ministry on a man's self is more then one way Extraordinary, and to be rejected
as void. And with such no good and conscientious Christian ought to
Communicate, as with Priests; that is, as Offering the Spiritual Sacrifice of
Prayer and Praise unto God as a Legitimate and Public Minister of God, or
Mediator of the People, or that Mistical Sacrifice in the Eucharist; and
especially going upon the grounds of Luther, Calvin, Perkins and some others of
Great note: that all Sacerdotal (they may call them if they please Ministerial)
Acts done by him who is no true Minister, are really null and void.

Fourthly, we conclude, that seeing all Ecclesiastical power, as
Ecclesiastical, does proceed from Christ, and his Successors, and that by
Ordinary and visible means, they who have not received the same by such
Ordinary Methods, are usurpers of the same, whether Political or Mystical. And
that to deny this to the Church, is to deny that which Christ has given them,
and such a Principle of the Churches well Being, without which it cannot
subsist; and it not subsisting, neither can the Faith it self. And to the
reason above given we may add Prescription, beyond all memory. For from Christ's
time to this day a perpetual and peculiar power has ever been in the Clergy
(which has constantly likewise born the name of the Church) to assemble,
define, and dispose matters of Religion. And why should not Prescription under
Unchristian, as well as Christian Governors for so many Ages together, be as
valid, sacred, and binding to acknowledgment in the Case of Religion, as Civil
Matters; will ever remain a question, in Conscience and common Equity, even
after irresistible Power has forced a Resolution otherwise.

It is true, such is the more natural and Ancient Right Civil Power has over
the outward Persons of men, than that which Religion has over the Inward man,
that it may claim a dominion and disposal of the Persons of even Christian
subjects, contrary to the soft and infirm Laws of the Church: because (as has
been said) Men are Men, before they are Christians; and Nature goes before
Grace: And Civil society is the Basis, and support to Ecclesiastical. Yet the
grounds of Christianity being once received for good and divine; and that
Religion cannot subsist, nor the Church consist without being a Society; and no
Society without a Right of counsel, and consultation; and no consultation
without a Right to assemble together; the Right of assembling must needs be in
trinsique to the Church it self. Now, if no man that is a Christian can take
away the essential ingredient to the Church, how can any deny this of
Assembling? For the practice of it constantly and confidently by the Apostles
and brethren, contrary to the express will of the Lawful Powers of the Jews and
Romans, and the reason given in the Acts of the Apostles of obeying God rather
then man, do imply certainly a Law and Charter from God so to do, and if this
be granted, as it must, who can deny by the same Rule, necessity of Cause, and
constant Prescription, that they may as well provide for the safety of the
Faith by securing the state of the Church; as for the truth, and stability of
the Church, by securing the true Faith, by doctrine and determination.

The Great question has ever been, Whether the Church should suffer loss of
power and privileges upon the Supreme Powers becoming Christian: Or the
Supreme power it self, loose that dominion which it had before it became of the
Church? For, if Christianity subjected Kings necessarily to the Laws of others,
not deriving from them, then were not Kings in so good a Condition after they
were Christians as before; when they had no such pretenses or restraints upon
them: and so should Christ's Law destroy, or maim at least, the Law of God, by
which Kings reign. But there may be somewhatsaid weakening this absurdity. For
Granting this, That there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped, and that
as he appoints (all which we must by nature believe) it seems no less natural
to have these observed, than the Laws of natural Dominion. Now granting that at
present, which (if we be true to our Religion) we must not deny: viz. That
Christian Religion is the true Religion, and that God will be worshipped in
such sort as is therein contained; For any Prince absolute, to submit to the
essentials of that Religion, is not to loose any thing of his Pristine Rights
which he had before being an Heathen (for he never had any Right to go against
the Law of God, more then to go against the Law of Nature) but it does restrain
his Acts, and the exercise of his Power. And if the Supreme, after he has
embraced Christianity, shall proceed to exert the same Authority over the
Church, as before; yet the Church has no power to resist or restrain him,
Civilly; any more than when he was an Alien to it.

Now it being apparent that Christian Faith and Churches had their Forms of
believing, and Communion before Sovereign powers were converted; and that he,
who is truly converted to a Religion, does embrace it, upon the terms which he
there finds, not such as he brings with him or devises; therefore there lies an
Obligation upon such powers, to preserve the same, as they found it, inviolate.
And truly, for any secular Power to become Christian, with a condition of
inverting the orders of the Church, and deluting the Faith, is to take away
much more than ordinary accrues unto it by such a change. It is true, the
distinction is considerable between the Power of a Christian, and unchristian
King, exerted in this manner; because taking the Church in the Largest sense,
in which all Christians in Communion are of it, what Christian Kings act with
the Church, may, in some sense, bear the name of the Church, as it does in the
State, acting according to their secular capacity, but much more improperly
there than here: because there are no inferior Officers, or Magistrates in
such a Commonwealth, which are not of his founding and institution; whatsoever
they do referr to him, and whatsoever almost he does, is executed by them. But
Christ (as we have showed) having ordained special Officers of his own, which
derive not their Spiritual Power at all, from the Civil; and to this end that
his Church might be duly taught and governed, what is done without the
concurrence of these, can in no proper sense bear the name of the Church. But
many say, the King is a Mixed person consisting partly of Ecclesiastical and
partly Civil Authority: but this taken in the ordinary latitude, is to beg the
Question, and more a great deal than at first was demanded. For who knows how
far this Mixture extends, and that it comprehends not the Mystical Power of the
Church, as well as the Political: And how have they proved one more than the
other, by such a title? It were reasonable therefore, first to declare his
Rights in Ecclesiastical matters, as well as Civil, and thence conclude, he is
a Mixed Person; and not to affirm barely he is a Mixed Person, and from thence
infer they know not what Ecclesiastical power themselves. And if he has such
power, whether it is immediately of God annexed to his Natural Right; or, by
consent of the Church, is attributed unto him. For by taking this course we may
reconcile many otherwise contrary opinions found amongst the Ancient Fathers,
sometimes ascribing much of the Ecclesiastical Power to Christian Emperors,
and sometimes calling the same in question.

The Church of England, so far as she has declared herself herein, seems to
take the mean way, and follow herein the Prescriptions of the Old Testament:
and the Precedents of Christian Emperors found in the Ancient Church, under the
Gospel, and does profess to be the due of our Kings, as much as ever any Kings
upon earth, to sway in Ecclesiastical matters. In execution of which power, as
there was always approbation moderated according to the customs of the
Church, so was there always Opposition when the bounds were exceeded. And
undoubtedly true is That we are taught by our Church to acknowledge, That
whatever in Church Constitutions and Canons Church of England Can. 2.
matters was the Right of Jewish Kings, or Christian Emperors of Old, is so
now the Right of our Kings.

But some not content herewith have out of the Title of Head given at the first
attempts of Reformation to our King, and made by acts of State Hereditary to
his successors, drawn an argument to prove all that power which rested in the
Church to be devolved on the Kings of this Nation. But this has ever been
disowned and disclaimed in such a large sense by themselves, as appears by
Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, and an Act of Parliament in confirmation whereof:
I shall here only recite the opinion or testimony of Bishop Jewel in his view
of Pius Quintus his seditious Bull Bishop Jewel against the Bull of Pius 5th.
against her, in these his own word. Where is the called Supreme Head? Peruse
the Acts of Parliament, the Records, the Rolls, and the Writs of Chancery or
Exchequer which pass in her Graces name. Where is she ever called Supreme Head
of the Church? No, No brethren, she refuses it, she would not have it, nor be
so called: Why then does Christ's Vicar blaze and spread abroad so gross an
untruth? etc. This was her Judgment and modesty then when there was greatest
cause to apprehend some such thing: and what she thought of it, I never could
learn was ever otherwise interpreted by her Successors. For notwithstanding
that, according to the most ancient and undoubted Rights of this Emperial
Crown, our Kings are supreme Governors of the Church as well as State: yet
never was it expounded of the Church as they were Ecclesiastical, but as they
were of Civil capacity: For herein differs the Right of Kings according to
our Reformation from that of Roman Persuasion. That Clergy men becoming Sons of
the Church, in more especial manner than they of the Laity, are not thereby
exempted from the Civil Power, either in matter of property, or Criminalness.
But the Roman Church so far exalted and extended their Ecclesiastical Power, as
to withdraw such Persons and their Cases civil from Civil cognizance, and
judgment, and assume it to themselves. And this the Pope claiming very
injuriously, as Head of the Church: To root up this usurpation, Henry the eight
nulled that his pretense, and took the title to himself intending nothing more
then to vindicate his Prerogative in that particular.

For though it cannot be denied that many and great Privileges to this effect,
have been of Old granted by Christian Emperors to eminent Bishops to judge of
their own Sons (as they were called) within themselves: yet did they never
claim this, as a Native Right of the Church, or Christianity; but as an act of
Grace, from the Civil Power. And though the Church, following therein the
Council of St. Paul, to go to Law rather before 1 Cor. 6. 1.
the Just, than unjust: and that Christians should rather determine Causes of
differences amongst themselves, by arbitration, than scandalously apply
themselves to the Judgment Seat of Heathen, did ever endeavor to determine
business within it self, and yet more especially, the Clergy: Yet they never
denied a Right in Civil Authority to call them in question, upon misdemeanors,
or to decide their Cases of Civil nature. And for the other, of Divine nature,
or purely Ecclesiastical, Princes never expected or desired to intermeddle
therewith. This the Roman Deputy of Achaia, Gallio understood, not to concern
his Juridical power, when Act. 18.
he refused to be a Judge of such matters, as were esteemed Religious, though
in that violence was offered to the body of St. Paul before his face, he might,
and ought to have shown his Authority. But when the Sovereign Power became
Christian, it was not thought unlawful at all, nor scandalous to address
themselves to it for decision of Controversies. And this is it which is
intended to be demanded now by our Kings in their Supremacy, in Cases
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and acknowledged by the Clergy of this Church to be
his due, without that servile way of seeking leave from the Bishop of Rome, or
any under him. Only where it may be showed that Peculiar Grants of Exemptions
from the common course of Justice have been made by Princes to the Clergy of
the Church, may it not seem equal that they should enjoy the benefit of them,
as well as others, in other Cases.

But nothing is more unreasonable or intolerable then the impudence of those
spitefully and maliciously bent against the Religion professed in our Church,
who argue from the Kings Supremacy over the Church, such an absolute dominion
there, as they will by no means acknowledge due to him in the State. If by Acts
of Parliament a thing be confirmed to the Commonwealth, it is looked on as
inviolable by the King; and unalterable without the like solemn Revocation, as
was the Constitution: But by virtue of the Ancient Right of the Crown, they
would have it believed, the King may at his pleasure alter such solemn Acts
made in behalf of the Church. Without the concurrence of the Three Estates
nothing is looked upon as a standing Law to the Civil State: but by virtue of
this Supremacy Ecclesiastical, they would have it believed that without any
more ado, without consent or counsel of the Church, he may make what alteration
of Religion he pleases; which was never heard or dreamt of; Yea, and whereas
not only his Civil but Ecclesiastical Power always acknowledged the Bounds of
common benefit, and extended not to destruction, they would have it thought
that he may, when he pleases, by virtue of such Headship, destroy the Body of
the Church and Religion, and leave none at all, so far at least as the
withdrawing of all secular aid and advantage do hasten its ruin. But they will
not be of this opinion any longer than they have brought about their
mischievous purposes. Surely St. Paul, who had 1 Cor. 5. 12.
nothing to do at all with State matters, and could not touch one that was
without the Church by Ecclesiastical censure, was as much the Head of the
Church as ever any Prince in Christendom, does expressly declare that
whatsoever authority he had, it was for the edification and not destruction 2
Cor. 10. 8.
of the Church. The argument therefore taken from an Hereditary Right in the
Crown of England of being Governor and Defendor of our Church to the apparent
ruin and destruction of it, we know very well from whence it proceeds, and
whether it tends: but where it will end, as yet, God only knows. This we know
that Papists are mad when that scoff and reproach which they have constantly
put upon both King and Church, from that Title, upon due enquiry makes so
little to their purpose. And therefore they will fight with us, with the name
only.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Exercise of the Political power of the Church, in Excommunication. The
grounds and Reasons of Excommunication. More things than what is of Faith,
matter sufficient of Excommunication. Two Objections answered. Obedience due to
Commands, not concerning Faith immediately. Laymen (though Princes) cannot
Excommunicate. Mr. Seldom refuted.

NAture in all Bodies that have Life casts out of it what ever corrupts,
afflicts or oppresses the same; and by Struglings and contentions endeavors
to deliver it self from such noxious humors as would destroy it. And this is
the reason men take Vomits, Purges and Sudorificks, that the deadly humor
being expelled, the wholesome may prevail, and the Whole be preserved. There
can then be nothing more reasonable or Christian than to put this in practice
in Bodies Political or Ecclesiastical. We see how Thieves, Robbers, Murderers,
and such like malefactors who are enemies to humane Society, be denied (and
that justly) the benefit of that Society against which they have so offended by
confinement in Prison or deprivation of Life it self, forfeited justly in
seeking or acting the ruin of another. And can any that grants the Communion
of Christians to be a Body knit together by its several joints and nerves, and
consisting of several Members, deny but the like Evil may befall in its kind, to
it, what does happen to others in another: viz, that some noxious humor of
Heresy corrupting the Faith in which, as the Scripture says of the Blood, is
the life of a Christian and the Church it self; may poison it: And some
violence of Schism may dissolve or dismember it? And shall not it be allowed
the like remedy or means of Cure which are held necessary in like cases? No
opinion, how heretical or immoral so ever, is more pernicious to Christian
Society than that which absolutely denies power to the Church to eject unsound
and tainting members out of it, and to provide for the security of the Body
even by the abscission, and destruction of any one Part infesting it. For this
opinion strikes not at one part of the Body, but all; neither at one point of
Faith, but all; though not immediately and directly, but indirectly and by
consequence. For as upon the fall of the House, the persons within must needs
be crushed to death, so upon the dissolution of the outward Frame of the Church,
the Faith itself must of necessity in a short time perish, and be reduced to
nothing. And therefore, those men of reason (as they would be accounted) give
us but little cause to think them better men, than Christians, who affirm rawly
and loosely, without qualification or due explication of their mind, that no
man is to be cast out of the Church but for something which is necessary to
salvation, or which Christ does not require or forbid absolutely: either
denying, or not considering (a man can scarce tell which by their works) hereby
that Christ, and St. Paul, and our Creed it self require conservation of the
unity of the Church, both as a thing admirable in its self, and necessary to
the Faith it self. For any man therefore to broach or publish such an opinion
as this, That every man may use what Ceremonies he pleases in the public
service of God; or if he pleases he may use none: and this, That the Church
has no power to command or forbid any thing which is not expressed in the
Scripture: when as Rules general, and several Examples in Scripture justify the
contrary. These I say being contrary, not only to some one Church, but all;
even those they would by no means have touched thereby, do no less in their
consequence, mischief to the Church, than the denial of the Mystery of the
Trinity it self; or of Christ's incarnation, however I grant they, in their form
are nothing, so foul. And therefore I presume to conclude them matter of
Excommunication; and so I judge St. Paul does, where he advises, nay commands
in the name of the Lord 2 These. 3. 6.
Jesus Christ (the Thessalonians) to withdraw themselves from every one that
walks disorderly, and not after the tradition he received of us. These
traditions, were (as it is here implied) concerning orders of the Church, and
manners of Worship: which in all probability are most of them lost to us, St.
Paul therefore requiring that whoever did not walk according to those
prescriptions delivered by him, should be separated, does not warrant the like
proceedings now. For it is the very same thing whether the Church withdraws it
self, or whether it expells another. When the Israelites warned by Moses
departed from the tents of the wicked Corah, Dathan, Number. 16. 26
and Abiram (who only walked disorderly not erroneously in the matter of
worship, that we read of) and their accomplices, and touched nothing of theirs,
they Anathematized them no less than if they had set them packing into remoter
parts from the Congregation. Nay, if now-adayes, as lately Sectaries should
prevail so far as to possess themselves of all the Public and Lawful places of
Worship, and eject the true Church, they might stand no less legally and Really
Excommunicate than if they were thrust formally from thence themselves. For'tis
not the place, but the Cause, and the Body from which they are cut, that makes
the Excommunication just and valid. This we are confirmed in by the same
Apostle afterward. And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that
man, 2 These. 3. 14.
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Now St. Paul in this
Epistle, had delivered many things not essential in themselves to salvation:
And where the company of Christians was not great, and their society not
formed, and their outward power little or nothing, as in the beginning of all
Churches, there it sufficed in liew of Formal excommunication, to withdraw
themselves from such troublers of the Church. And this we read further of in
St. Paul to the Romans, saying, Now I beseech Romans 16. 17.
you brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. St. Paul generally in his
Epistles not only insists upon unity of Faith but unity of Charity, and outward
communion: they therefore that were Authors of unnecessary divisions are they
whom he would have noted and avoided, which when it is done with Public
consent, and sentence is the same in effect with Excommunication: and therefore
breeders of separation, and divisions are no less subject to excommunications
than are Heretics, though they hold nothing directly contrary to the Faith.
But if men will say that, What St. Paul did, we may do, and no more, because he
did no more, this is invented only to destroy, but will not hold strong enough:
because the examples of the Governors of the Church our Rules, are not to be
restrained to the very same Cases only, but to them of like general nature. St.
Paul justifyes by his practice the excluding out of the communion of the Church
such as bred causeless contentions and divisions and from hence the succeeding
Governors are justified in doing the like.

For, nothing can be said less to the question in hand than to recite many
places out of St. Paul commanding to bear one another burdens, and that we
should not judge one another; and that the strong should bear with the weak;
and such like. For all these Texts speak either of Churches not Formed or
constituted, but rather breeding; or of single persons amongst themselves
coming to Christian Religion with the strong prepossessions of the Excellency
of certain Rites before Religiously observed; wherein all Reason, Justice, and
Religion require that no man should impose his conceit upon another, without
authority. But do we find in any place of the Holy Scriptures that St. Paul
denied this Right of Judging, censuring, and commanding, to the whole Church?
Nothing less, yea nothing more than the contrary, as may more fully appear when
we are to speak of Rites and Ceremonies.

But it is commonly (and as they think accutely) said, that they are the
Authors of divisions and Schisms, who will not do what they may to prevent
them. And therefore, if Governors impose more then is necessary to salvation,
or Faith, upon others, they must answer for the divisions arising from this.

I may marvel, who before late years, (I may say rather days) ever understood
the Scriptures in this manner? but they will wonder perhaps again, I should
think they are no better interpreters and appliers of Scriptures than are to be
found in times and societies of old. Let that pass; But so must not their
mistake, either of the power of the Church, or the nature of Charity, and
common Justice. The power of the Church being merely ministerial and servile as
to Christ, and the Rule of all Christianity, the Scripture; but Magisterial in
relation to inferior members, extends only to things of Christian Prudence,
and extrinsecal to Faith; and the things uncommanded in Scripture properly (For
in other things it is determined without any power to vary from thence;) this
done, utterly destroys all Right and Authority, as to outward matters: which
they can never themselves approve of, in the practice, nor have done. But this
is not all: for we say, that those Governors are not the cause of Divisions and
Schisms who do not suspend and withdraw all Injunctions extrinsecal to Faith,
or good life, but they rather who do not receive and obey such as are not
contrary to either. This is the state of the controversy then between us;
supposing there is Order and Legitimate authority constituted amongst us,
whether this is more, or so much bound for peace, and unity sake, to gratify
such as are in their rank, subject in the Lord to them in all things possible,
according to the Scripture: or these, on the contrary, are obliged to receive
and observe all such decrees and constitutions which are indeed much accused
and traduced, but cannot be proved to be any ways contrary to the word of God,
or any Analogy of Faith, which is not devised by themselves. And granting there
were somewhat of Charity in reluxing of the rigor of Orders to be observed; is
there not much more of Charity to be expected from them in obeying? How can
they so vehemently urge that upon others, which they are much more bound to
keep and practice themselves, but never reguard it? Does not Charity much more
bind them to obey their Superiors, then their Superiors, them? Nay, can they
lay any claim to a thing upon the account of Charity, who deny the same thing
upon the account of Justice? Justice, and a debt of obedience flowing from
subjection, requires no less than Charity, a compliance of the Wills of the
Inferior with that of the Superior: But only Charity can be pretended, and
that only pretended, where there seems to be an indifference in the thing
commanded. For if they betake themselves to the inward temper and bent of
particular consciences opposing or approving things, they must needs come off
Loosers by such trials. For there will soon be found consciences, on the
contrary, that will be as stiff and resolute for the defense, as theirs are for
the abrogations of such indifferent things. No reason is possible to be given,
why one conscience may not think as well of them, finding them not forbidden;
as another does, evil, finding them not commanded. For the too vulgar doctrine
which teaches, That what is not commanded is forbidden in Scripture, is as
notorious a falsity as any thing can be pretended upon the Scripture. But
farther, we absolutely declare against all such trials of Public Laws and
Customs; as Particular: and especially private consciences; as unjust and
unreasonable and in trut intolerable, in all Churches. This is the Rule we
maintain and hold to, That nothing ought to be ordained or imposed which may
justly offend the conscience, and that is only evil. If therefore, the thing it
self be acknowledged, or may reasonably be proved to contain nothing sinful,
(which only may offend the conscience) it is one of those evils which cannot be
avoided; and such of which Christ speaks in the Gospel of St. Luke 17. ^1.
Luke, It is impossible but that offenses will come. For, either the
dissenting, or Assenting conscience must suffer: and which should in such cases
suffer who should determine, but Authority? Was ever that chosen for a Rule
which is infinite in uncertainties? So are men's consciences in particular. But
still they are Instant and say, We grant such things may be left undone without
prejudice to the Faith. And to the same argument we return the same answer in
effect as before, viz, And they grant, they may be done without prejudice to
the Faith. But their Case is little less than ridiculous, if it be truly
considered what they lay down, and what they crave at our hands. For Peace sake
(say they) we ought to yield what is not unlawful, and all indifferent things:
As if they much more were not so bound to do. But that we now add is, That
there being two Parties diversely constituted, yet, as it is supposed, differing
only in things of a middle nature between Good and Evil. If the one Party
should come unto the other promising to have peace, and be at unity with it, on
condition that it would yield all things that they may possibly, to them; were
this any more than to say, They would be at peace and unity with them when they
became of their mind, did as they would have them, and not differ from them?
But I have transgressed I fear on this subject, here at present; which yet is
not impertinent altogether, it proving that it is Lawful to Excommunicate such
who agree with us in Faith. And the sum of the reason is this, viz. Because
there are, as has been acknowledged on both sides, yea is almost on all sides
granted, two things essential to the Church, Doctrine, and Government, or
Discipline, as it is called; to act any thing to the violation of either of
these, may justly subject a man to this Ecclesiastical Censure. And however at
first sight dissension and opposition to the Rites and practices of a Church
may not appear of a mortal nature of themselves, as being perhaps about things
in nature alterable, yet in the consequence making a breach in the wall of the
City of God, they let in certain ruin and destruction; Thieves and Robers.

And this holds no less to the Justification of the Church in Excommunicating
refractory and disobedient persons to the Church in her citations: though in
truth, the ground of her citation be matter of small moment. It were indeed
much to be wished, that such severe sentences might not be executed but on
occasions of greatest moment, not only for the persons sake so excluded, but
the Churches sake, denouncing: whose authority must needs be much weakened, and
her sentence much contemned, when upon matters appearing merely trivial and
light, it is inflicted: And therefore most useful it seems, That redress of
pecuniary pretensions on persons relating to Ecclesiastical Courts should not
be by Excommunication, but from the Civil Power enabling the Ecclesiastical to
exact their dues. But where this is not in use, and where no other means
appears of obliging men to reverence and submit to Ecclesiastical Powers, but
the punishment Ecclesiastical; I would fain have such persons, who profess not
the utter abolition of such authority and dissolution, propound some other
effectual way of keeping up the power and authority of those Courts, besides
Excommunication, before they declare so smartly against the abuse of it.
Lastly, whosoever does by contempt and disobedience first deny the Churches
power and in very deed sever himself from it, can he, or any man of Christian
reason or modesty contradict the Churches Act in declaring and formally
manifesting what was more closely, but really before done by himself? So far as
a man disobeys and opposes the Church, so far is he really separated from it.
And to be partly on, and partly off, as some men propound to themselves and
please themselves in, thinking it free to choose and leave at their pleasure
what their private judgments shall lead them to, is not at all to clear them
from the guilt or imputation of Schismaticalness; For all proper Schismatics
agree in many things with the Church which they trouble and divide. And every
Schismatic stands divided from the Church. And may not the censure of the
Church by Excommunication most reasonably at least follow a man's own Act; and
declare that to be so which himself has made so; especially not only thereby,
or so much punishing the Offender as securing the innocent and sound by such
notice from the like contagion? Does not St. Paul clearly imply so much, when
Gal. 5. 12.
he says to the Gallatians, I would they were even cut off that trouble you?
How did these intruders and seducers so trouble the Church as to deserve such
Excision or Cutting off? By two things principally, one whereof follows in the
next verse, by a presumption of such Christian Liberty which was never intended
by Christ for his Church. Another was in point Gal. 1. 6, 7.
of doctrine, innovating rather in form than words. For it was not another
doctrine of the Gospel that was offered to these green and unstable Christians,
but another Form, the easier to prevail upon their Consciences, and to alienate
them from their true Pastors. Such as these would the Apostle have Cut off: and
therefore very false and frivolous is that ground of Socinian Extract,
mentioned in the beginning, viz. That nothing which in it self hinders not
salvation, can give just occasion of Excommunication.

I do not here (as many) insist much upon the words of Christ in St. Matthew,
whereby he warrants a man to account him, as Heathen and publican, Math. 18.
15, 16, 17.
who shall refuse to hear the Church arbitrating, and judging within it self;
because I am of their opinion who expound this not of excommunication from the
Church, but of a freedom granted to a man to go to the humane Civil Power, for
justice against such a brother, as if he were no better than a Heathen and
Publican, who will not listen to the voice and judgment of the Church. Yet
surely this intimates a power in the Church to determine, and a duty in the
members of it, to submit unto the Judgment of it: and if a private man may
treat one of his brethren as he would a heathen, in some cases, may not the
Church? This is the least we can honestly make of Christ's Charter given to the
Church by St. Peter, in Mat. 16. 19.
the same Gospel, I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

But consideration and limitation of this grievous censure is not to be
omitted, according to diversity of Persons, Relations, and the Causes given;
from whence I suppose arose the distinction of Major and Minor or Greater and
Lesser Excommunication, of ancient use in the Church. And Anathema and
Excommunication according to the Ancient differ. For, Excommunication is
nothing else but a denunciation of a person alienated from the Communion of the
Church, in the mysteries and worship proper to Christians: And this we may take
to be the Lesser Excommunication: but Anathema, or the Greater Excommunication,
besides excluding from Christian Communion, added a Curse corporal, which the
Scripture calls properly, a Delivering unto Satan, as well for the destruction
of Body as Soul. Thus was that incestuous person excommunicated by St. Paul:
For the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be 1 Cor. 5^. 5.
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ. For though we say, that this
Anathema was to the destruction of the flesh, we mean only Actually, as in that
state: but the end of that was rather the Salvation of it; by such outward
judgments reducing the offender to repentance. This Anathema upon the body by
plaguing it, being miraculously inflicted, has ceased. But yet not all bodily
punishments with it, taking here bodily punishments, not only for bodily pains,
but bodily and outward losses. Of this sort may be those separate men from all
Civil Communion with Christians, denying them all outward conversation, as well
as spiritual, in matters of Religion. Now this seems to be a branch of the Old
Greater Excommunication, and not in all places disus^d. And sometimes is
unlawful, and otherwhile lawful, according to the extent and application of
them. For, to inflict the same to the dissolving of ties of nature, is not
agreeable to the simplicity of the Gospel. And Natural Ties we call such as are
between Subjects and Sovereign, Parents and Children, Husband and Wife, which
by no Ecclesiastical Excommunication can be broken or nulled: The reason
whereof, besides the monstrous effects ensuing upon their evacuation, not here
to be treated of, is this, That Ecclesiastical Power can take away no more than
it gave; nor Christianity destroy what it never builded. But Christianity did
never simply confer such Rights on men, but the Law of Nature; only it
regulated and directed the same, therefore can it not null it: It is therefore
unchristian, for any pretending Ecclesiastical Power, to absolve subjects from
obedience Civil, or Children from natural, and the like. But every Christian in
that he is adopted of God by baptism, and admitted into the Society of
Christians, does receive thereby certain Rights and power to communicate with
it in all things: which power may be forfeited and lost by breach of Covenant,
as well with the Body of the Church, to live and believe according to the
Received Faith and practice thereof, as with the Head Christ. And this being so
judged by those who are over the Church in the Lord, it is very consonant to
Christian Religion, to deny such, of what order or rank soever they be, the
signs of outward communion, Prayer and Communication of the Holy Sacraments of
Christ. The Church has power to declare even sovereign Princes incapable of
such Communion, and deny it them: which we call the Lesser Excommunication. Yet
because (as we said) No natural Right can be extinguished, upon unchristian
misdemeanors, If a Supreme Prince of a Place should disdain to be denied or
opposed in such cases, and would make his entrance into the Church by virtue of
his Civil Right to all places under his Dominion, the most that the Church
could do, justly in such cases, were to diswade him, but by any force to resist
his entrance into any Church, were unlawful; as it would be also to minister in
a Christian manner in his presence: for this cannot be commanded by him: but in
such cases suffering must be put in practice, as for the Faith it self sought
to be destroyed

Some there are yet who call in question the peculiar and incommunicable Right
of decreeing this Censure of Excommunication, to those called the Clergy: which
is very strange, seeing this Power is part of that of the Keys delivered by
Christ himself to such only as he constituted Governors of the Church; and that
in Christ's days their was a distinction between the Members of his Body, as to
Inferiority and Superiority; Obedience, and Command; Teacher, and Learner; and
much more in the Apostles days, after Christ's Assention; and much more yet,
after their days, according as the matter of the Church (Christians increasing
and improving) became more capable of a more convenient form and fashion. For
as it is in the production of natural things, though the Form be certain and
constant, and the very same at the first production, as in its perfection, yet
it does not appear so fully and perfectly as afterward: So was it with the Body
of Christ's Church: It is certain therefore, that from the beginning, this Act
of Excluding from the Communion was never executed but by the Rulers and
Presidents of Congregations, though the people might concur thereto. Now that
these Rulers whom we may call Bishops or Presbyters were not created by the
People, nor by the Prince, we have showed already, and therefore did nothing in
their Right, but in the Power of Christ whose Ministers alone they properly
were: And this being essential to right Administration of the Church, how can
it be supposed either to be separable from the Church in General, or from those
persons who are the proper Administrators of it. For to say with some, It is
needless Seldom de Jure Gentium apud Bibliander apud Erastum.
wholly where Christian Magistrates rule, whose proper office it is to rebuke
and punish vice, and scandalous misdemeanors; which, say they, can only be just
cause of Excommunication; is to destroy the subject of the question, which
supposes it needful, and upon this, enquires after the Persons which should
Execute the same. And spitefully to defeat the Church of all Authority from
Christ; does indeed translate this Power to the Civil Magistrate. And is not
the absurdity the very same which endowes the Christian Governor with Civil
Power, and which endows the Civil Magistrate with Christian? If it be not
absurd for a King to be a Philosopher, it is not absurd for a Philosopher to be
a King. If it be not absurd for a Civil Magistrate to have Priestly power, it
is not absurd for him that has Priestly power to be a Magistrate. There is
certainly no inconsistency on either side: For things of a far different nature
and intention may easily meet in the same person, though the things themselves
can never be the same. Here therefore, the things differing so egregiously, it
is no more than nacessary that a different cause be acknowledged necessary,
which not appearing, the Effect must be denied. Now the Cause of all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as Ecclesiastical, must needs come from him, from
whom the Church it self has its Original and being: And it is a certain Rule
that a man is born to nothing, that comes from Christ as Head of his Church,
but is made and instituted. Which whoever is not, cannot lay any just claim to
any Office under him.

I know it is objected, that Preaching being an Ecclesiastical Act, has
without contradiction been practiced by diverse, and to this day may be, no
ordination preceding. To which I thus answer, by distinguishing first between
doing a thing Ex Charitate and Ex Officio, out of Charity and out of duty
Preaching was ever permittedin the Church (especially taken in the larger sense
wherein it signifies all declaration of the Gospel) out of Charity: But the
office of Preaching was never suffered, but upon antecedent qualifications. And
these two differ yet farther: For he that does a thing out of Office, does it
so that it is not lawful for him absolutely to omit it: but he that does it out
of Charity and only by connivance, not by commission, may cease at his
pleasure, and as he made, may suspend himself when he will. Again, he that
teaches without Authority upon bare permission, nay be silenced without any
other cause renderd, but the will of him that has the Jurisdiction: or if a
reason be given, because, He has no authority, is sufficient. But he that is
orderly instituted to that end, cannot without injustice and Tyranny be denied
the exercise of that which pertains to him.

Now the Key of Knowledge and the Key of Jurisdiction, of which the Power of
the Keys delivered by Christ consists, and into which it is commonly divided,
are very different. For the first does but open the door to the others, and
prepares and qualifies a person for the other, but does no more actually give
power or authority, than the great skill and experience of a Soldier makes him
a Captain, to command others: or knowledge in the law, makes a man a judge
actually. It is therefore the Key of Jurisdiction or a Right given by Christ to
administer the Church, and every member thereof, that is principally to be
acknowledged in this Case: And which not being found to descend orderly from
Christ, no effect of that affected power can be acknowledged. But, as is said,
does not descend naturally, or by birth, but Judicially, from others. In which
manner who ever receives it not, sacrilegiously murps what belongs not to him.

But they who would wring this power out of the hands of the Church, Seldom de
Synedriis. Lib, 1. Cap. 9.
do give us certain Presidents as well from the Jewish Church, wherein there
was (it should seem) a custom that one Person might excommunicate another, when
he pleased. But the same Antiquaries tell us also, that it was in use amongst
them for a man to excommunicate himself. And this I take to imply an answer to
the former. For it is in the power of any man to separate himself from the
Church, or any other Society materially, and Really: but Judicially, and
Formally, he cannot: neither can he separate another, otherwise than by
absenting himself from the Communion of the Church: he may, indeed, as formally
pronounce such a censure against himself, or an other as the most Canonical
Judge in the world; but intrinsique power being wanting, the outward Act turns
to smoke, as to others; but as to himself, has no other effect then he that is
in a boat has upon the earth against which he sets his oar, and thrusts hard,
but puts himself off, not the earth: as our neighboring Ministers did when
with intolerable and incredible presumption, they took upon them to
Excommunicate their own Bishops; and some of the transmarine Churches of the
same Platform, were so wise as to allow their Fact.

And to the Instances of some Princes whom Histories affirm to have
Excommunicated Id. ibid.
certain persons; the Answer is, That the word Excommunication has deceived
the reporters and appliers thereof to this Case: For according to signification
of that word, both in the Latin and Greek language, Excommunication or (...) is
the declaration by Public Herald Suidas in (...) Item (...)
of any guilty Person to be excluded, or banished the Princes Court or Company,
or perhaps Dominions: Thus many have been Excommunicated by Sovereign Princes.
But can any instances be given of such as without any further Act of the
Church, have been thereupon denied Communion with the Church.

And what we say of Excommunicating, holds good likewise in the Power of
Absolution: which the same Persons allow to mere secular Powers, and would
prove from an Act of Constantine the Great his absolving Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia. Constantine (we all know) had but little knowledge in the Rites of
the Church, at that time, and might attempt he knew not what, as soon as any
other man, whose affection to Christianity far exceeded his Judgment: But what
is affirmed of Constantines Act? That he Restored that Excommunicated person to
the Communion of the Church: (which only is properly Absolution) No surely, but
he might restore him to his See, and that is all: Or if more were done, he
might be said to do it, who caused, by the interposition of his Power, some
Bishop of the Church to free him from those Eonds.

But questionless that is none of the least corruptions which the Church of
Rome stands guilty of, and which our Church has but too much connived at, that
the Power of Excommunication should be in the hands of Lay men. To mend this a
little, they of the Roman Law, distinguish that which by no means should be
separated, curing one absurdity by another: Anastafius Germbnius de Sacrorum:
Immunitat.
For they distinguish Episcopal Order, from Episcopal Jurisdiction: and say a
man that has not Episcopal Order, but Episcopal Jurisdiction, may
Excommunicate: a vile and corrupt imagination brought in on purpose to serve
the turns of ambitious, secular, and sacrilegious Drones who would drive two
trades, of secular advantage, and Ecclesiastical Profits. For there is nothing
so Essential unto Episcopacy as Jurisdiction (I mean an Habitude and Right to
Preside and Rule,) and there can be no Episcopal power without that; nor that
without Episcopal Charactar: Officers indeed there may be under him, void of
that Charactar or any Priestly: because though the Court be properly
Ecclesiastical, yet all things are not so which are acted therein. Judicial
Acts, and Acts of Notaries and of Executions are competible to unordain'd
persons, because Gifts of nature and Learning may capacitate a man to them: but
that of Jurisdiction properly so called, is the intrinsique Right of the
Pastor of the Church: and this of Excommunication annexed thereunto, or rather
a part of it. And therefore, he is not a Bishop, that has it not, and he that
has it, is a Bishop. It is not indeed necessary that this should be denounced
by a Bishop, but that this power which is likewise inherent in a Priest as a
Priest, be committed to him, after the decree made by the Bishop. For the
Priest having a Jurisdiction within himself, by virtue of his place and office,
but restrained by the Superior Power to him; the Jurisdiction and Authority of
the Bishop is seen sufficiently in this, that it enables a Priest to do that
which of himself he ought not to do: and this is rather exciting an old power
in the Priest, then infusing a new, giving right to it to exert it self which
before it had not. But Laymen having no Ecclesiastical Charactar inherent in
them, cannot by any such general commission given them from the Bishop, act
effectually to that end for want of the due Principle: this License of the
Bishop being nothing else, but removing of that Obstacle which hinders it to
work where it was. For to deliberate, debate, and Judge of causes and persons
subject to Excommunication, may possibly be better performed by such who have
attained to that science, without any order in the Clergy, but the fact it self
is quite of another nature.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the second branch of Ecclesiastical Power, which is Mystical, or
Sacramental. Hence of the Nature of Sacraments in General. Of the Virtue of the
Sacraments. Of the sign and thing signified. That they are always necessarily
distinct. Intention how necessary to a Sacrament. Sacraments Effectual to
Grace.

HAving thus spoken of the Political Power of the Church, which we so call
because it imitates that which is so more properly called in directing the
visible Body of the Church to its proper end, as the Pilot does the ship to its
proper Haven, and has both Visible Acts and Effects; We are now to treat of
that Power, We, in distinction to that other, do call Mystical: because the End
and Effect thereof is not outward or visible: but inward, spiritual, and
Mysterious: and therefore also call it Sacramental, Sacrament and Mystery being
the same in the Original Phrase of the New Testament. For to the Church, as
they are more peculiarly called, who are Officers in the same, does it, of
Right, appertain to celebrate these Mysteries. Wherefore, first we shall speak
of the Sacraments in General, as the manner is, and then in Particular.

The word Sacrament is rather of Gentile than Christian original, there being
no word in the New Testament proper to it, but the vulgar Translation
Sacramentum est invisibilis gratiae invisibilis forma; ita ut ejus
similitudinemgerat, et causa existat. Gulielmus Antissiodorensis. Sum. Lib. 4.
Cap. 1.
thinking fit to render Mystery, Sacrament, in Latin, the Antienter Latin
Church has made use of it to express certain Mysterious Rites of sacred and
necessary use in the Church of God: about which word so long since received, no
contention ought to be had. The Nature, Number, Minister and Use of them
deserving principal enquiry.

A Sacrament is defined (as is commonly known) by St. Augustine, a Visible sign
of an Invisible Grace, which being taken rigorously, seems not to comprehend
the whole nature of it: therefore Antissiodorensis would have its defect
supplied, thus. A Sacrament is a visible form of an Invisible Grace, whereof it
is also the Cause. But considering the many and sharp disputes upon this
subject, I suppose it may be more fully described to be A visible sign ordained
by God to produce an invisible effect of Grace in the soul of Man. This
definition may be collected from the several parts of it, contained in the word
of God: as first, from St. Paul to the Romans speaking of Circumcision, a prime
Sacrament given by God to Abraham and his seed. And he received the sign of
Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness Romans 4. 11.
of Faith which he had being yet uncircumcised. For there are three special
properties of a Sacrament commonly acknowledged, To Signify, To Seal, To
Effect Grace: but in strickness of speech these make but two Acts. For, either
a Thing does barely signify and declare another, or it concurreth to the being
of another, where things are Related one to another. For seals are no more than
signs binding more firmly to the fulfilling of the contents of an Instrument or
Conveyance. For as in such Cases, the Free good will of the Donour, is the only
cause of an inheritance given; the Instrument of Conveyance consisting of so
many words are the signs of the inward will, the seals are but signs of the
signs of words, that is, an assurance that what was signified in the said
Instrument, should hold good. And the Actual Delivery of this is the immediate
Cause of entering into possession or enjoyment of this Gift. In like manner, The
word of God promising his Graces to us, signifies the will of God to that end:
The Sacraments superadded do likewise sensibly signify unto us the earnest God
is in, when he made promises unto us, as Seals. And the actual exhibiting of
these signs or seals on Gods Part by his Proxy or Ministers, and the due
receiving of them on our Part, do put us into a fruition of those things which
were so signified and promised. First then, They must be a sign, that is, a
Representation of a thing and not the thing it self, and that to add to our
knowledge and Faith: for if there were no agreement between the thing
signifying, and the thing signified, the word of God alone had sufficed to that
end. Secondly, they must be ordained of God, For if no man, in common justice,
can give away another man's estate, but the true owner of it; how should it be
possible, or equal, or credible, that any other besides God himself the Owner
of his graces, should by instruments of his own forging convey such heavenly
benefits to mankind, which properly belong to God; This were supreme folly and
presumption to attempt. Or can any man know Gods mind or methods of working
before he has revealed them? Therefore it is said that God gave Abraham the
Sign and Seal of Circumcision. Thirdly, they must rather be ordained
Arbitrarily of God, and by special Institution, then Naturally; least the Free
Grace of God therein contained should suffer, and the effect be ascribed rather
to natural than supernatural Causes. For though the cutting off of the foreskin
of the flesh, by explication, intimate the cutting off of the filth of the
Soul: yet naturally it could not be so well understood: And God might, if he
had pleased, ordained the cutting off of the tip of the ear, to serve the same
ends. And so in baptism, Water does naturally cleanse bodily filthiness, but
without notice given of Gods will and grace, it could never have been believed
possible to affect the soul, and purify it. Fourthly, as there must be some
agreement between the thing signifying and signified, there must also be a real
difference in their nature. For nothing in nature or reason can signify it
self, because nothing can be clearer than it self: For when a thing is obvious
to our senses or otherwise apparent Sicut Signum et res ipsa aliquando possint
esse diversa, ita saepenumero et in multis eadem esse possunt: Tunstal. 9. de
Eucharistia fol: 16.
we do not say, we have a sign of such a thing; but the thing it self. Yet this
most certain Rule is sought to be bafled, and overthrown by Cavillers; who
would bring in their false doctrine of the Eucharist, and would show from bread
on a Stall or Cloth which signifies bread and Cloth as well as is bread and
Cloth, that the same body of Christ may be a sign of it self. But their
attempts in their Instance fail them because that Bread which is exposed to be
sold, or that Cloth, is not a sign of it self, viz. That it is cloth or
bread; but is so only: but it is only a sign that either it is to be sold,
which is quite another thing from Cloth it self, or it is a sign of other
cloth which does not appear. And so the body of Christ in the Eucharist is not
a sign of that Body which does appear, but of that which does not appear. And
therefore, a Fifth condition of a Sacrament is, That it should visibly signify
something invisible and spiritual. Lastly that Sacraments are to be not only
significant, or (which comes to the same) Sealing; but efficacious in
themselves upon the souls of men: which may deserve further explication.

A thing may be said in its self efficacious, though it does not attain the
proper end of its working; it misses of its effect, because the conditions
required are not kept. For fire it self, as active and operative an Element as
it is, does not work effectually upon any thing but its proper matter, nor upon
that, at too great a distance. So may it be with the Sacraments, which though
indeed they are the power of God, and not of nature, unto salvation, yet
through some defect in the object, or indisposition, may fail of their proper
and wonted Effect: but not from any insufficiency in themselves, or indignity
of the Minister of them.

For, if in this sense that old barbarous Rule be taken, viz. That Sacraments
have their virtue Ex Opere Operato, viz. From the work done i. e. that they are
Efficacious means of Grace in themselves, and their virtue does not depend upon
the Ministers unworthines, or worthiness, provided he does work according to
Christ's institution and intention, it is true: For what St. Paul speaks of the
Ministers of the Gospel, is true of the Ministers of the Sacraments, Not that
we are sufficient of our selves to think 2 Cor. 3. 5.
any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. The Officers of God
in the delivering of these means of salvation not swerving from the Rule and
Prescription given by God, these Instruments themselves have their due and
proper effect. As when a King of his Free Grace sends by a lewd and vain
fellow a Grant of some great Favor to any of his subjects, whom he pleases to
raise out of a poor and base estate to riches and honor, it is not the
unworthiness or wickedness of the bearer, so long as he is true in his Office,
that can void the Grant, so neither can the evil manners of the Ministers of
the word and Sacraments, null the power and promises of God made in them.

But though evil manners and vitiousness of the person do not corrupt or
destroy the nature and end of the Sacrament, yet it is believed that the actual
aversation of the mind of him who consecrates and administers, not only not
intending actually to Consecrate, but actually intending not to consecrate, may
evacuate the whole Action. But this is shown by the former example to be very
false, because still God has inserted his will, and annexed his promises to
the thing it self, and not to the Persons disposition or indisposition either
of understanding, or manners. It is true, some of the Ancients have said that
Intention is necessary to a Sacrament, and this has given occasion to that
gross Error in the Church of Rome; which has mistaken the intention of such
Fathers as have spoken of Intention. For Intention is twofold: The Intention of
Christ or God, and the Intention of Man or the Minister; They may say that
Intention is necessary to a Sacrament taking their Intention for the will and
mind of God: which if it be not observed in all necessary thing, (at least the
Sacrament) is not perfect or valid: but if it be, whatever man's intention be,
it hinders not, the Sacrament is the same. And whereas they would sos^en this
harsh, and moderate this erroneous doctrine, by distinguishing of Intention in
the Priest, into Actual, Habitual, and Vertual: First, we may well except
against this distinction it self, because they are forced in the explication of
it to make Habitual and Vertual Intention the same, in all material things,
only they cause them to differ, in that, Habitual is only a general intention
without any actual consideration at the time of Consecration, of what they are
about. Vertual, that there is at the entrance upon that Action, an actual
purpose to do what Christ and the Church intended should be done, at that time;
but this passes a way suddenly, and all the remaining Action is performed by
virtue of that first good thought. But this cannot serve the turn; For the form
of the Sacrament consisting chiefly in the words of Consecration, according to
their own doctrine, if such an Intention be wanting at that time, there can be
no consecration, and if no consecration, no Sacrament. So that there are two
notorious inconveniences following upon this Error; the one, that the most
sacred and Comfortable Instruments of Gods Grace and our Salvation are left to
the lusts of malicious and vain man to be bafled at his pleasure, and the
Communicant defeated of the blessings God has consigned to him thereby.
Another that upon supposition that the Sacraments were duly administered, and so
by consequence effectual to their proper ends; yet this being not certainly
known to the Partaker thereof, his mind must be in perpetual disturbance and
conflict, fearing that the Priest had an inward intention contrary to the
outward appearance. But they say, there is at least a Moral certainty. And what
is a Moral certainty? Can they tell? They have not yet. And all I suppose they
can say is no more then to make it a good degree of Probability; which will not
serve this Case. But in truth, many Cases fall out so that there is that they
call a Moral Certainty on the contrary: when spite and malice boll high in the
breasts of men, and their happiness consists in doing all the mischief they can
to them they malign, which we know by several Instances, is not seldom found in
those Countries where this doctrine flourishes most: And to what they are wont
here chiefly to oppose; That there can be no probability of an effect where the
cause is not real but jocular, ludicrous, and Histrionical (as it must be where
there is no intention but only a fiction of doing a thing) as if one in
mockery, upon the Stage, should baptize one, in derision of the Faith and
Church of Christ: We answer, That if this Ludicrous Action be so fictitious,
and false that the thing only seems to be done, but is not done; and one seems
to be baptized, but is not: It matters not what his intention may be: For we
now suppose the thing to be done as Christ and the Church intends. For if this
be wanting, surely nothing is really performed: But the question is whether
when the thing is really done, saving the due intention, this defect voids all
the rest. For let an Officer of a King mock what he pleases, and act what he
pleases in scorn and derision of the thing he has in Charge to deliver, and
declare it is contrary to his resolution to deliver it, yet if he really does
deliver it, his contrary purposes and actions cannot hinder the effect, nor the
benefit accruing from thence. For as St. Paul says, Neither he that 1 Cor. 3.
7.
planteth is any thing, nor he that waters is any thing, but God who gives
the increase. We see this in marriage more apparently than in other Sacraments
(if we may call this a sacrament, of which by and by) that, let the Minister
intend what he pleases, nay the Parties Jest with that Sacred Rite never so
lightly, if there be a performance of such things as are outwardly required to
that solemnity, it holds good to all intents and purposes, even against the
resolutions of the persons principally concerned therein. Yet must we
acknowledge a vast difference between those two most properly called
Sacraments: Baptism, and the supper of the Lord. For undoubtedly, where in
either of these there is a repugnancy of the will to them, their effect is
nothing upon the person receiving them: because this is the principal obstacle
of all to the efficacy, yet is the Sacrament never the less valid, and, truly
performed as to the Nature of it.

And concerning the Efficacy of the Sacraments it is worth our enquiry;
especially for their sakes who ascribing very injudiciously and injuriously,
the Grace of Sanctification and Justification absolutely to a special Faith,
thought of but lately amongst Christians; or to the unsearchable Decree of
Almighty God, to justify and save such persons as are ordained to Life and
Salvation, affirm this Decree and good purpose of God to effect all things
necessary to salvation; and that the Sacraments are received only as so many
pledges and seals of the good will of God in our Justification and Salvation,
long before concluded immutably toward us; but are of no efficacy, or virtue
to bring them about. This, though Calvin. Cartwright. Perkins.
plainly and directly asserted by some eminent Reformers, is no better than a
pestilent Error; contrary to all Antiquity of Ecclesiastical and Scriptural
Writers: Of which latter, it suffices to instance in those obvious places which
directly inferra necessity of them, and ascribe a virtue to them, of effecting,
and not only signifying Grace, or sealing it unto us. For Matthew the 3. v. 11.
St. John distinguishing his Baptism Mat. 3. 11.
from the Baptism of Christ, assures, that Christ should Baptize with the Holy
Ghost, and not only with Water. Now if water alone signifies, or seals (for
there is no such great difference between these as commonly is supposed) and
therefore the Baptism that Christ used having more in it than so, it follows
that it must be the efficacy and grace of the Holy Spirit. And they, who take
notice of this argument to answer, that the difference between John's Baptism
and that of Christ here prophesied of, consists in this, That John's was an
outward washing, Christ's an inward, does confirm what I said: For surely this
inward, being invisible, can be no outward sign or seal, whose natures are to
be visible and apparent. And therefore it must be that Baptism of Grace wrought
in the inward man. And does Christ when he says, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes, and is Baptized, Mark. 16. 16.
shall be saved, does he mean no more than, It is a sign he shall be saved? Or
he has his salvation, which came only by believing sealed unto him? Or, are
they not rather equally conjoined to the same effect, Salvation? So that no
more can a man expect to be saved by believing without being Baptized, than he
can by being Baptized without believing. And this is manifest from the Baptism
of Infants, which puts tham into a state of salvation, even before actual faith
in them.

Again, Being born of Water and the Holy Ghost, of which Christ John. 3. 5.
speaks in St. John (meaning thereby Baptism) must needs be more than certain
indications and signs of life. Christ says there expressly, we are born by
Water, and not that we are known to be born by Water only. And where as Calvin
with diverse followers of the Reformation, presume to interpret this Water, as
elsewhere Fire, of the Holy Ghost, and not of the proper Element Water; I make
no scruple to accuse them of extreme insolence for so doing; as well, because
they needlessly, and more immodestly oppose the unanimous consent of the Ancient
Interpreters expounding it of Water Baptism, than I do contradict them, whom I
always set in a lower form to them: as also, because the thing it self
declares the contrary sense to be more agreeable to the mind of the Holy Ghost.
For, Water and the Holy Ghost are put here, not exegetically (as they speak)
but distinctly as two several things concurring to the same end. For, though
John in St. Matthew adds to the Holy Ghost, Fire, as Water is in S. John,
Acts 2. 3.
seeing there is found a real and proper verification of this baptism of fire
which was at the day of Pentecost, when the Apostles and Disciples were visited
with fiery Tongues from above, there is no necessity of fleeing to a mere
metaphor: and if there be none here, there is none in that place where water is
joined with the Holy Ghost: And reading no where, that even the Holy Ghost
appeared in the likeness of water, we are constrained to take this properly, of
external water.

Furthermore, when an effect is ascribed to a thing, why should we make doubt
to ascribe an efficacy or agencie to that reputed Cause? But to Baptism is
ascribed remission of sins, as Acts 2. 38. Repent ye (says St. Peter) Acts 2.
3^.
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, etc. And elsewhere in the Acts, God commands St. Paul,
Arise Acts 22. 16.
and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. Can any thing but a fond partiality
to the new glosses of Modern Divines, incline any man to think otherwise of
Baptism here, than of force to take away sins? Here they demand with a Passion,
What? Ex Opere Operato? From the work of Baptism done? I answer; The work done
of it self is not thus efficacious, as is said; but the Cooperation of the
Holy Spirit, which God has set over that work, and its influence, effects
thus much.

Lastly, The Introducers and Defenders of this opinion of the ineffectualness
of the Sacraments, allowing an efficacy to excite and nourish Faith, (which
with them does all things) why should they be so nice and timorous in granting
another effect of the same nature? For to increase and confirm Faith, being a
spiritual effect, is as much in nature, as washing away sins, or communicating
new Graces? I see no difference, worth the noting, besides that from
themselves; and an illaudable pronity to vary from Tradition expounding holy
Writ, where wit and wantonness of Judgment can find the least footing to stand
out against Antiquity.

But whereas some argue for the efficaciousness of Baptism, and the other
Sacraments out of Reason; and some out of Reason argue against it; it is hard
to see how either side can attain their ends; seeing whatever efficacy the
Sacraments have, they derive from the Institution of God: which Institution can
be no otherwise known to us then from his word, and therefore, as Divine reason
proceeding upon Scripture grounds may inform us, we may conclude, and no
otherwise: Wherefore they argue very profanely, and according to Scripture
grounds, ridiculously, who talk of Aquaquula, a Little water, as if for want of
that God should suffer a soul to perish; or for want of a Little morsel of
bread, and a drop or two of wine, men should perish everlastingly. As if it
were not a mercy of God to save some, and that by the contemptiblest things in
the world, and such as his illuminable power and wisdom should choose, rather
than rigor in binding us to them; or to be authors of our own ruin. But to
protract a disputation to prove that the efficacy of the Sacraments can arise
from the Work it self; thinking thereby that it must follow that they are not
at all efficacious, as some very learned men have done, is rather to be pitied
than persecuted. For no otherwise do we ascribe virtue to them, Ex opere
Operato, but as it is opposite to Opus operantis, meaning that the instrumental
things, the Sacraments, have not their sufficiency or efficiencie from the
Instrumental Persons, the Ministers of them, but that these doing the work
required of them by the Ordainer, the efficacy follows, and yet not absolutely
from the work, but from the will of God.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of the distinction of Sacraments into Legal and Evangelical. Of the Covenants
necessary to Sacraments. The true difference between the Old and New Covenant.
The Agreement between Christ and Moses. The Agreements and differences between
the Law and the Gospel.

MORE contention has afflicted the Church of God in the disquisition of the
number, than nature of the Sacraments. First then, for methods sake, We shall
divide them into Legal and Evangelical. Legal Sacraments were those outward
Signs and Rites which God ordained to Abraham and his Seed, as Instances and
Notices of the Covenant made between him and them. And therefore it will not be
improper nor unseasonable to interrupt a little the immediate prosecution of
the Sacraments, and treat of the Covenants God has made with man, as well New
as Old: seeing all the Sacraments, as well Jewish as Christian, relate to those
Covenants.

A Covenant is nothing else but an Agreement solemnly made between two distinct
Parties, with Conditions mutually to be observed: as in that between Laban and
Jacob, That the one should not pass over, that leap to the Genesis 31. 52.
other for harm. So likewise between God and Man, a Stipulation and
Restipulation is made that the one should perform the part of a Patron and
Lord, and the other of a faithful Servant to him.

This Covenant is but twofold in general, however it be diversified according
to the several occasions of revealing the same. The first was properly a
Covenant of Nature; the second, of Grace. The Covenant of Nature was first made
with Adam at his creation, wherein was bestowed on him, not only such Faculties
and Perfections of Being as necessarily tended to the natural perfection of
man; but super-added certain supernatural Graces which might dispose him with
facility to fulfill the Law and Will of God: Notwithstanding which, he
disobeying God, forfeited those more special aids and accomplishments, and so
dissolved that Covenant.

God proceeded not upon faithless man according to the rigor of his Justice;
but out of his free inscrutable favor inclined to renew a Covenant with him
again, and that was in a third Person, not with false man immediately as
before. And this Person, through whom he thus covenant a second time with man,
was the Man Christ Jesus: and then these three are no more Covenants really.
Yet because this second, of sending his Son as a Mediator between God and Man,
had such different Forms and Faces upon it, according to the several Oeconomies
or Dispensations it pleased God to make to man, it is often in holy Scripture
distinguished into the Old Covenant and the New: As by St. Paul to the
Galatians, saying; These Gal. 4. 24.
two are the two Covenants -- The one from Mount Sinai; the other from Mount
Sion or Jerusalem. And to the Hebrews; If the first Covenant Hebr. 8. 7.
had been faultless, then should no place have been found for the second. Where
he spoke of the Covenant of Moses, and that of the Gospel.

But there was a more early Covenant made with Abraham: when God promised to
him the Land of Canaan, and to his Seed: But both these agree in the same, in
that they are termed Covenants of Works: not that they were so made that they
only required working, and the second part, believing, which was under the
Gospel: For this Covenant made with Abraham and Moses peculiarly to the
Israelites, did suppose the first solemn Covenant of Faith in the promised Seed
of the Woman, which should break the Serpents head: And therefore this was not
another from that, but as a Codicil annexed in order to some special Promises
and Privileges made over to the Seed of Abraham, upon terms not common to all
mankind. Such as were temporal blessings, and particularly the inheritance of
the Land of Canaan. But that which is often called the New Covenant, or the
Covenant of the Gospel, is according to the substance of an ancienter date than
that made either with Abraham or Moses; being the same which was made with Adam
the second time in Paradise. But is called the New Covenant, because it
appeared but newly in respect of its dress and clearer revelation, at Christ's
appearing: And therefore St. John excellently expresses this, when he seems
to speak on both sides, saying, Brethren; I write no new Commandment to you,
but an old Commandment, 1 John 2. 7, 8.
which ye had from the beginning: the old Commandment is the Word which ye have
heard from the beginning. Again, a new Commandment I write unto you, which
thing is true in him and in you: signifying unto us in what sense the Gospel
was new, and in what, Old. It was new in comparison of the more conspicuous
manifestation of it: it was old in respect of its Ordination. For to this end,
the Apostle to the Colossians speaking of the Gospel, calls it the Mystery
which has been hid from ages, and from generations, Coloss. 1. 26.
but now is made manifest to his Saints, etc.

But the nature of this Covenant, and the vulgar confusions made in treating of
the Old and New, will more clearly appear from a short consideration of the
Agreement and Differences between these two Covenants.

And the first Agreement is that we now have insinuated, that the substance of
them both was the same. Secondly, they agree in their Author. For, contrary to
some ancient Heretics, the same God was the Author of the Old, who was Author
of the New Law. Thirdly, they agree in the Principal Minister and Mediator of
both, which was Christ Jesus: who is therefore said to be the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever, because Hebr. 13. 8.
both before the Law, and under the Law, and after the Law of Moses, Christ was
the same Mediator. Fourthly, they were one as to their end, which next to the
ultimate of All, was the glory of God, was the salvation of the observers of
them: obedience unto Gods will being the most immediate. Fifthly, they agree,
In that neither of them was immediately given of God, but both in the hand of a
Mediator between God and Man, as the Apostle witnesses of the Old Law, in his
Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 3. 19, 20.
It was ordained by Angels in the hands of a Mediator: Now this Mediator is
not a Mediator of one: And of the Gospel, the same Apostle speaks to the
Hebrews, that Jesus was the Mediator of a New Covenant: as was Hebr. 12. 24.
prophesied in Deuteronomy by Moses, saying; The Lord thy God will raise Deuteronomy.
18. 15.
up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren like unto me,
unto him ye shall hearken. And Moses and Christ agreed in that, First, Moses
came not of himself, but was sent of God. So also Christ glorified Hebr. 5. 5.
not himself, to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my
Son, etc. 2. Neither Moses nor Christ delivered their own will, or sought their
own glory, before the glory of him that sent them. For Moses was commanded to
make all things according to the pattern showed Exodus 25. 40.
him of God in the Mount. And we find nothing in the Books of Moses more
frequent than, The Lord said unto Moses, etc. In like manner, Christ says of
himself, The Word which ye hear is not mine, but the Fathers that John 14. 24.
John 5. 43.
sent me. And elsewhere, I am come in my Fathers name, etc. Thirdly, they were
both sent immediately of God. Fourthly, Both of them confirmed the Doctrine by
Miracles and mighty Signs, proving to the beholders a Divine Power assisting
them. For Moses wrought such Miracles as none of the expertest Magicians could:
and Christ says of himself, If I John 15. 24.
had not done among them the works that no other man did, they had not had sin.
Thus they may seem to agree.

But their difference is no less: and that, First, if we consider their
immediate Authors in their Persons. For Moses was only Man, but Christ God and
Man: under which one manifold, other differences are comprehended, as to their
conception, birth, life, and death; manner of their office and administration
thereof; which I pass over and come to the Laws or Covenants themselves given
by Moses and Christ. For then the Law and Covenant in the hand of Christ was
more ancient than that given by Moses, as to the substance and foundation,
which was the Law of Nature, and Reason, and Justice toward God and Man, and
perfect Obedience to the will of God. For the Promise of the Messiah to come,
was made to Mankind immediately after Adams transgression, wherein consisted
the sum of the Gospel, many hundred of years before Moses his days, or Laws:
and therefore must be more sacred and necessary. Secondly, The Law as Mosaical
was only a type and shadow of good things to come, and not the very things
themselves: as the Apostle to the Hebrews argues. Hebr. 10. 1.
But as it is commonly seen when a man propounds to himself to cast a fair
Statue, or to build a fair house, he first makes a mold, and prepares
convenient tools; So God, out of his wisdom, (however he could have done
otherwise) first prepared the Law of Moses, as a Model, according to which he
cast the Law of Christ; and made use of the Rites and Ceremonies to prepare the
way for the Gospel. And hence arises a Third difference, because the Form of
Moses his Law was temporary, and to cease, but that of Christ was to have no
end, as was prophesied in the Book of the Psalms, speaking of the Jewish
Polity, Church, and Magistracy, under the Metaphors of Heavens and their host,
as is freouent in Scripture, They shall perisb but thou shall endure, yea all
of them shall wax old like a psalm. 102. 26, 27. hebr. 1. 10. Jer. 32. 40. Hebr.
13. 20. Daniel 4. 3. Psalm. 145. 13.
garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. Of Christ's Kingdom there
shall be no end. Fourthly, The Law and Covenant Mosaical had only temporal
Promises of reward and punishments, relating to this Life and the Land of
Canaan, called for this cause the Land of Promise, unto Abraham and his Seed
upon condition of Obedience unto those Laws delivered to Abraham and Moses: As
upon due examination of particular instances which may be given, does appear.
For they declare to us that so long as they observed Gods commands, and kept to
his worship, they prospered and were happy in secular blessings, but when they
forsook them, God forsook them, and they soon perished in their sins. But both
the promises and threatenings of the Gospel and New Covenant were spiritual and
perpetual, leading unto everlasting Life. For every one, says Christ, that
Matthew. 19. 29.
has for saken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, for any names sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting Life. And so Luke 18. v. 30. Yet to judge more clearly of
the Mosaical Law, and the better to reconcile both Jewish and Christian
interpreters of Moses his Law, some whereof make it merely Ceremonial, and
concerning in its reward, only temporal blessings or curses (as may be gathered
from the blessings and curses ennumerated in the Book of Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 28.
chap. 18.) others affirm it to have contained spiritual blessings, upon
obedience, and the contrary: therefore we are to distinguish in the Law of
Moses, those things which were merely Mosaical and Levetical, from those things
which were Natural and Moral. For the Law or Covenant made by Moses in Gods
behalf, with the Israelites, contained in it many things of morality, and Gods
worship and service, agreeable to the substantial part of the Gospel: but this
it did not, as Mosaical, but rather as Evangelical: For from the beginning of
the World to the Incarnation of Christ, there was always, as a thorow-Base to
several parts in Music, the Covenant of the Gospel in some degree running
along with the various forms of Mosaical Constitutions, and these often
insinuated and pressed in the Old Law: but the Covenant Mosaical, though it was
built upon these grounds, was not fashioned by them, but as the Author to the
Hebrews says, had also Ordinances of Divine Service, and a worldly Hebr. 9. 1.
v. 10.
Sanctuary; that is, for that Age. And again, calls them Carnal Ordinances
imposed on them until the time of Reformation; i. e. of the Gospel it self. Now
in all reason, the end should be proportionable to the means. If therefore the
means be carnal, so ought also the end: and not spiritual, speaking of the
reward. But the Ordinances of the Gospel being not Moral and Natural only, but
Spiritual also, ought to have a spiritual or heavenly end. And as the reward
upon Obedience, does exceed that of the Law, so the severity upon disobedience:
contrary to the too common Error, that the Gospel is more favorable unto
sinners than was the Law. For though indeed the same trivial neglects, or
commissions as against Vide Chrysostom. Tom. 6. Sermon. 94. initio.
the Old Law, are not now punished in a bodily, sensible manner, as were they:
yet the punishments generally of the offenses against the New Covenant were
greater, as St. Paul expressly witnesses to the Hebrews. Hebr. 2. 2, 3.
He that despised Moses's Law dyed without mercy, under two or Hebr. 10, 28. 29.
three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and accounted the blood of
the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing; and has done
despite unto the Spirit of Grace, etc. For we know, etc. Fifthly, the
Administration 30, 31.
of the New Covenant differed from that of the Old: and that 1. In the Extent
comprehending all Nations, without distinction; Jer. 31. 34.
whereas that of Moses was restrained to Abraham's Seed, and that by Isaac, and
that Seed again of Isaac, by Jacob. And secondly, it extends not only to all
Persons, according to the promise made to Abraham, that in his Genesis 22. 18.
Seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, and only his own Seed
blessed: but to all capacities of man, his spiritual as well as carnal: which
the Law of Moses did not, as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews Hebr. 9.
9.
does witness; where he tells us, how those Legal Rites could not make him that
did the service, perfect as pertaining to the conscience. And again, It is not
possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins. Hebr. 10. 4.
But the Soul and Conscience are both purged by the Sacrifice of the New
Testament, once offered for all; which was the Body of Christ. Thirdly, v. 10.
It extends to a greater degree of Liberty from the outward servile part of
Gods worship, and either directs us only to the more inward and spiritual
service, or gives Liberty greater to the Church than anciently was allowed, to
accommodate it self to times, and place, and persons in the worship of God,
which Liberty was not so far granted under the Old Testament.

Sixthly, The Law and Covenant made by Moses were according to the Letter; but
Christ's, according to the Spirit. That was exacted upon outward terrors
propounded, or Mercies: This, was transacted by an inward principle of
Ingenuity and Grace given of God; as St. Paul is to be Romans 6. 14.
understood: where he says, For sin shall not have dominion over you: For ye
are not under the Law, but under Grace: meaning, That now least of all, we
should let sin rule over us, being not under the Law, that is, exempted from
the penalties and terrors outward, which seemed to constrain obedience, or
whose disobedience was remitted upon certain outward Rites, which have no
effect upon them who are under the Law of Grace. But the Grace of God so
revealed outwardly, and so assisting and inclining inwardly, does require more
ingenuous obedience than formerly: as in the next Chapter it is said; But now
we are delivered from the Law, that being Romans 7. 6.
dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in the newness of the Spirit,
and not in the oldness of the Letter.

Now from this adjustment of the Law of Moses and of Christ, it is evident in
what sense St. Paul so often calls one the Law of Works, and the other the Law of
Grace. For he there takes not Law so generally as some would understand him,
for all Rule and Doctrine of Holy Life, whereby they comprehend as well
Evangelical, as Natural, and Mosaical, but in contradistinction to the Law of
the Gospel, published by Christ; viz. the Law, as it was Mosaical, according to
which it could justify no man: it being it self to be done away in Christ. For
(as the Scripture has it) if perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood (for
under it the People received Hebr. 7. 11.
the Law) what farther need that another Priest should arise, after the order
of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?

Secondly, Answer from hence may be made to the difficulty, How far the Law of
Moses, or the Old Law binds under the Gospel? For having showed that the
Gospel, in substance being ancienter than the Law of Moses, as well because of
the moral duties common to all mankind, as the Promises of the Messiah
contained in it; whatever we sind in Moses or the Prophets, or the Sacred
Historians against any injustice, vice, or irreligion is not to be imputed so
much to the Law, as Mosaical, but as Evangelical: And therefore, whatever was
Levitical or Mosaical, in that Law given to the Seed of Abraham, as such,
ceased and had its full completion in Christ. And though many things there
found, were always, and still are of excellent use to all men, both morally
and judicially taken, so that they cannot be said to have no force upon us; Yet
their obliging power, as delivered by Moses, and not partaking of the nature of
the Gospel, ceases, and is extinct; but lives, and is hinding as the same
belonged anciently to Christ's Law, and by it is renewed and confirmed.

Thirdly, The obscurity at least, if not error, of those Notes of distinction
found in many learned men's writings, from hence is discerned: such as are
these. First, That the Law propounds wrath, without Mercy: but the Gospel,
Mercy and Justice. For that the Law thus properly and precisely taken, as
distinct in matter, as well as form from the Gospel propounded Mercies as well
as Judgments, is most apparent from the eighteenth Chapter of Deuteronomy:
though as we have showed, neither the Mercy not the Judgments were of the same
nature as they propounded by the Gospel; but chiefly temporal: For whether the
breach of any of Moses his Laws, as such made men obnoxious to Hell, and not
only to bodily and temporal punishments, I much question; unless we consider
the disobedience formal, and doing presumptuously, which may attend that evil
act. Secondly, They say the Law Perkins.
required internal and perfect Righteousness; the Gospel, imputed. But this is
very dangerous Doctrine: For first, it does not appear that the Law, as such,
and not partaking of the nature of the Gospel, does require such internal and
perfect Righteousness; it being satisfied with the outwardness and formality of
the Letter. Secondly, It must not be granted that Christ's Law does not much
more require internal and perfect Righteousness, than the Law; and that to our
Justification: For it is one thing to require a thing absolutely, and another
necessarily and indispensibly to such an end. The Gospel does require as
absolute Righteous internal and external, as man is able to attain to in this
world; and as the Law required, though nor so as if without it there were no
possibility of Salvation, though for want of it there be a merit of dammation:
but the rigor is qualified and remitted to us upon the intuition of Christ's
merits, who interposeth for us, with God not to exempt us in any kind from any
imaginable part or degree of Holiness competible to us: but to mitigate, and
remove the displeasure of God justly conceived against us, for not being
perfect. For it no ways follows, That because such a small proportion of
Holiness shall be accepted, and such a vast proportion of wickedness shall be
forgiven, and passed over through Gods free Grace in Christ, therefore by the
general tenor of the Gospel, God requires no more of the one, nor less of the
other. For if the Gospel be (as sure it is) a more holy Law than that of Moses,
Is it not so because it requires of those under it greater Holiness? A third
difference I find is, That the Law promises Life, upon condition of Works: but
the Gospel, upon condition of our committing our selves to Christ by Faith:
This is very ambiguously spoken, and inclining to a very bad sense. For what
Life, and what works are we here to understand? It is showed above how
ill-agreed wise Interpreters are, Whether any life besides this present is
promised by the Law, as Mosaical, and not Evangelical? and with this imitation
I profess the Negative Part. Again, What works? Are we not to understand Works
brought in and appointed by Moses? To these works are promised indeed Life,
answerable to thom; i. e. temporal, and no more? But he that says, we attain
Life by committing our selves to Christ by Faith, does certainly mean Life
spiritual and eternal: which vast diversity in the end and reward, quite nulls
the comparison. And besides, how by committing our selves to Christ? by Faith?
So as that works of the Gospel and Faith should be laid aside? Yes, say they,
as to our Justification, though not to the commendation and approbation of our
Faith: But the vanity of this we have already discovered, where we have proved,
that there is no promise made to us under the Gospel, of being justified by
Faith; that the works of Faith may not be as instrumental to our Justification
and Salvation as the Act of Faith, so much presumed upon: and that the one is
as derogatory to the fullness and freeness of Christ's Grace and Gods Mercy, as
the other, and no more. A fourth difference is, That the Law was written in
Tables of Stone: but the Gospel in the Tables of the Heart; Jerem. 31. 33. 2 Corinthians. 3. 3. This has a true sense, and therefore may pass, though liable to
just exceptions, as taking the Scriptures in a sense scarce intended. Fifthly,
They say, The Law was instilled into our Nature at our first Creation: But the
Gospel was above nature, and given after the Fall. But we are not to
distinguish the part from the whole, nor the inchoation of a thing from its
perfection. The Gospel was in more particulars of agreeing with the Law of
Nature, then the Law of Moses; and given in substance before the Law of Moses:
and it is these two whose differences are sought after at present. In the sixth
place, it is rightly said, that Moses was the Mediator of the Old Law, and
Christ of the New: by which they explain themselves, That by Law, they mean,
Moses his Law: For Moses was not the Mediator of the Law natural, but Adam
rather. And truly in the seventh place, it is said, The Law was dedicated by
the blood of Beasts; but the Gospel by the blood of Christ. But the conclusion
to these, viz. That the two Testaments, the Law and the Gospel are two in
nature, substance, and kind, is so far only true, as the Law is taken
precisely, for that introduced by Moses; and not concretely and conjoyntly with
that Covenant made between God and Adam, after his Fall.

CHAP. XXXV.
Considerations on the Sacraments of the Law of Moses. Of Circumcision. Of the
Reason, Nature, and Ends of it. Of the Passover, the Reason why it was
Instituted: Its Use.

WHAT is now said of the nature and distinction of the Covenants made between
God and Man, do serve much to the clearing of the Nature and Number of
Sacraments here to be explained briefly. For all Sacraments properly so called,
are of a Foederal nature, between God and Man. And this covenanting made by God
and Man, is signed, sealed, and confirmed by these Sacraments: And therefore,
according to the variety of these Covenants, is also the variety of the
Sacraments; unless we except that most ancient Covenant of all, between God and
Man, before his Fall. For while man retained those connatural Graces bestowed
on him by God, he needed no such outward helps, as Signs and Sacraments to
contain him in due obedience to him, nor such signs of Gods promises to him;
being able to act more spiritually, freely, and perfectly then now. But upon
the disabling of his inward man by sin once committed, and the hebetation of
his mind, it was no less than necessary, that, by his outward senses, occasion
should be offered to the increase of his knowledge, fear, love, and faith in
God: which is done by the mediation of Sacraments instituted by God: and these
diversified according to the variety of the Oeconomie it pleased God to use to
the World. For under the Law of Nature (before Moses or Abraham) men stood
obliged to serve and worship God: And in this condition the Sacrifices given to
God, and Oblations, were of the nature and force of Sacraments: For whether by
light of nature, or by special precept, men offered Sacrifice to God, it is
apparent that was rather a signal to testify their revering his Majesty, and
duty to him, than any actual absolute worship: and to insinuate an absolute
Dominion and Right God had to our own lives, in that instead of them which were
forfeited to God by sin, we offered Beasts slain to him: and to all things in
the World; in that was exhibited to him, so far as might be, and returned that
which was received from him.

But to these before Abraham, was added that of Circumcision; and afterward
that of the Passover. But we must note, that these two Sacraments, as they were
not originally, or from the beginning, instituted of God; so neither to all
men, nor for all times: And this will appear from the particular occasions
taken, and reasons rendered of their Ordination. For when God commanded Abraham
to circumcise his Son, and himself, and all the Males of his Family, it was no
sign at all of any thing of general concernment to mankind, or of the Messiah
simply, which was before promised; but it was a sign only that the Messiah
should proceed out of his Loins, and Seed: which was an extraordinary honor
and singular privilege conferred on him. It was a sign likewise, that his Seed
were specially chosen to Gods favor, to inherit that promised Land, and many
other temporal blessings; which no ways concerned other Nations. It might have
likewise many other moral purposes which are ingeniously sought out, and
largely prosecuted by others, and especially Postillers.

It Is true, that many Nations observed this Rite of Circumcision, but not by
the appointment of God, nor by their own invention, but as transmitted to them
from such who either descended from Abraham, or received it from him. Neither
was it to such of the Nature of a Sacrament, because not given them of God, and
having no promises annexed to that Act in them, but only as in Abraham. For the
Covenant that God made with mankind, which we have called the Covenant of
Works, in opposition to that of Faith, in Christ, made after the Fall, was made
to Adam and all his, for ever, though all the Posterity of Adam reaped not the
like visible benefit from it. And this second Covenant received several
additions according to the several Revelations, it pleased God to make unto
some part of mankind above others; and that with Abraham and his Seed: The
first eminent Act of God was to Abraham himself, when he gave him the Promise
that the Messiah should descend from him, and gave him the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Romans 4. 11.
Faith which he had being uncircumcised, etc. Now what Faith was that which
Abraham had before he was circumcised? Not that which moved him to offer his
Son Isaac to God, and yet believe that he should inherit the blessings promised
to him: but it was that Faith which he had in the more ancient and general
promise with Adam, concerning the Messiah. For otherwise, the Apostles argument
to prove that we are justified by Faith, and not by works of the Law, would not
hold good; which in effect is this. The same way that the Patriarchs, and
particularly your Father Abraham was justified, the same way must ye be
justifid too: but Abraham was not justified by the works of the Law, but by
Faith in Christ. v. 10, 11, 12, 13.
And this appears plainly. For if Abraham were justified before the Law, and
before Circumcision, then surely Circumcision and the works of the Law could
not avail to his Justification. For how was Faith reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness? In circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but
in uncircumcision. And he received the sign of Circumcision as a seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith he had being yet uncircumcised. From whence it
appears, That what Covenant was made with Abraham by Circumcision, was not
absolutely a new Covenant, but a special Privilege, and Interest given to him
in that long before, made with Adam after his breaking the first Covenant of
Obedience and Works. And thus we see the nature and end of the first Sacrament
given to the Jews before Christ, Circumcision.

And the second Sacrament of Note, was much of the same nature; as not being
given to make an absolute generally new Covenant with Mankind, but only to
signify the peculiar Right that People had to the general Covenants, above
others; that as Gods Firstborn sons of all Nations, they should have a double
portion of that Grace, which was common otherwise to all. And farther, an
addition of Temporal blessings was made sure to them by it; upon the due
observation of those Rites and Laws given them: And this blessing was twofold
hereby signified, First, that passed, in delivering them so eminently and
miraculously from the destroying Angel, who killed the Firstborn of the
Egyptians, and brought them from that tedious and grievous bondage, by which
they were oppressed. And therefore it was called the Passover. The second
consisted in an Assurance of the promised Possessions in the Land of Canaan.
Now besides these litteral significations and ends, there were two other
Spiritually intimated by them relating to the Gospel, and its Services. And
they were, the remission of sins in Baptism; and the right to heaven, and bliss
after death by the participation of the means of Salvation, the Mannah of his
Word, and the Sacraments of his Promises, Baptism and the Holy Eucharist.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Evangelical Sacraments. Of the various application of the name
Sacrament. Two Sacraments Vnivocally so called under the Gospel, only: The
others Equivocally. Five conditions of a Sacrament. Of the reputed Sacraments
of Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction in particular.

AS under the Old Testament, There were some special Sacraments and properly so
called, besides many others, which by men's interpretation, rather than Gods
Institution, were so called; as the Tree of Life in Paradise, Noah's Ark,
Passing through the Red Sea, the Brazen Serpent, and the like; so also, under
the Gospel, as St. Paul says, There are Gods many, and Lords many, but to us
there is but one God; So are there Sacraments many, and many Sacramental
things, but to us there are but two Sacraments properly so called: Baptism, and
the Eucharist, or Supper of the Lord. Therefore purposing to speak of all the
reputed, as well as real Sacraments of the Gospel, (because though not
Sacraments yet very Sacred, and deserving well to be understood) we shall
divide them into equivocal or improper; and univocal or proper Sacraments. Of
the former rank we make Orders sacred. Matrimony, Penitence, or Repentance,
Confirmation, and extreme Unction: Of the latter sort are Baptism, and the
Supper of the Lord.

Now to understand the just reason of this discrimination between Sacraments,
it is necessary that we pitch upon some general Definition of a true Sacrament,
by which as a Light, and Rule, the False are to be examined and judged. And
therefore shall resume our Definition before laid down of a Sacrament. A
Sacrament is a visible sign instituted by God to produce an invisible grace in
the soul of man: which we have already defended.

But if men will religiously contend about words, it cannot be denied, That
many of the Ancient and Holy Fathers, and the perpetual language of the Church
have accustomed themselves to call many more things than Two, or Seven, or
perhaps Seven times seven, Sacraments: because they do contain something sacred
and mysterious in them; but yet amount not to the perfection either of our
received two Sacraments, or perhaps of the other five. And so long as men hold
to the true and real Sacraments, and have the due use of them, it matters not
much, if they give the Name Praelect. de Sacram. Qu. 6. c. 1.
Sacrament unto those things which are not worthy of it; as Whitaker has well
said.

But the Reasons against more than two Sacraments in the proper sense, may be
these. First, That we read not of the institution of any more than two, by God
or Christ, in the New Testament; and of these two clear evidence there is
found, as may more fully be seen, when we come to treat of them. Nay, according
to the judgment of many of the Ancients, it was Christ's intention we should
have but two Sacraments, when he shed from his Divine side, water and blood,
insinuating thereby Baptism, and the Sacrament of his Blood. And another
argument intimating 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
that Christ ordained but two Sacraments in the New Testament, is taken from
the due conformity between the Shadows and Types of the Law, and the Substance
of the Gospel: The Law had but two Sacraments proper, Circumcision and the
Passover; and therefore that these two should prefigure only two in the Gospel,
is most probable. But not only the Fathers of old, but Schoolmen did always
acknowledge a due proportion to be observed between these. And it makes nothing
against this, That the Fathers do often call some at least of the other five,
Sacraments; because then they spoke at large, as we said before.

A second general Reason may be, That as they have no precept, so have they no
promise from Christ, of Grace or favor Spiritual. For Ordination indeed has
an ordinary Gift of Ecclesiastical Power, but no assurance of special Grace
belonging to it. Confirmation has a good and laudable end, but no special
Promise to it. Repentance has a promise, but has no outward visible sign,
upon which the word is built, to make it a Sacrament: for this is a

Third Reason of the equality of Sacraments, Because all true and proper
Sacraments must consist as well of outward signs, to which the word and Grace
are annexed, as of the Grace it self therein given. But all these Sacraments
have not these Signs, and they which have an appearance of visible signs, have
them not by Gods institution.

Fourthly, The Sacraments of the Gospel are of concernment to all true
Christians, according to their Capacities: but all Christians are not, by the
confession of the Patrons of seven Sacraments, bound to marry, or to be in Holy
Orders. Nay, some are absolutely interdicted the use of some of the reputed
Sacraments, as are women from Holy Orders; therefore, whatever may possibly be
said concerning the not circumcising of Women under the Law, under the Gospel
there being neither Male nor Female, as St. Paul affirms, that cannot be a
Sacrament equal in sacredness, or necessity, of which Women are not capable.

Fifthly, The general Nature of Sacraments is such as renders the due Partakers
of them more holy than they are, who receive them not: but no man says that
marriage faithfully observed does make any person more holy then Virginity,
therefore it cannot be a Sacrament: If they here say, That Marriage is not a
Sacrament absolutely, but only as it is Christian, and a representation of
Christ's conjunction with his Church; and as it is blessed by the Priest. I
answer, First to this latter; That blessing does not alter the kind of the
thing, but only sanctifies the thing it self: and therefore Marriage in
Heathens and Christians is the same in nature; but not in the circumstances of
Holiness. And whenas St. Paul says in his Epistle to the Ephesians, having
before treated of solemn Marriage, This Ephesians. 5. 31, 32
is a great mystery: from whence commonly is drawn an argument of a
Sacramentalness in Marriage of Christians; the reply is easy, which quite
nulls the conclusion. First, Because it is as manifest as a thing need be, that
St. Paul does speak rather of Heathens marriage than Christian, as appears from
his citation of the first institution of Marriage, which comprehends all: and
therefore according to themselves, could not intend to make a Sacrament of it,
seeing it is no Sacrament, but as Christian. Secondly, The word being Mystery,
does not properly signify a Sacrament, however the Vulgar Translation might be
allowed to translate it so; but not men, upon that term given at large, to
draw it into the number of Sacraments. St. Paul says to the Corinthians,
Behold I show you a mystery, 1 Cor. 15.
we shall not all dye, but we shall all be changed. Is this a Sacrament also?
But many of the Fathers have so called it. It may be so, in the sense before
spoken of, in which many more things may so be called. But lastly, The Apostle
in that Place to the Ephesians does expressly remove that term Mystery from the
natural or civil conjunction of Man and Woman Ephesians. 5. 27, 29.
in Matrimony, and restrain it to Christ and his Church; and does not so much
as say that Marriage is a mystery. For having drawn an Argument for the due
observation of Wedlock and its Rights; that seeing Christ loved his Church, man
should love his Church; he adds afterward, This is a great mystery: but I
speak of Christ and the Church: which is as 32.
if it had been said, Here is a great Mystery; but this Mystery I mean not. So
much of external Marriage, but internal, between Christ and his Church.

But after all this, seeing we grant with many of the Ancients, That the name
Sacrament is communicable to more than two, it is not much worth the
contending, whether we make more or fewer than seven; while, we reserve a
peculiar sacredness to these two above others. Let us rather touch upon them in
their nature, than name; as best worthy to be rightly understood.

And first of Orders briefly, as having spoken thereof in treating of the
Political Power of the Church, and there shown the necessity of them according
to Christ's intention and institution; which was to make a discrimination
between Persons, and the several Members of that Body, the Church, of which he
is the Head; as is also sufficiently insinuated by St. Paul, to the
Corinthians, saying; But now has God set the Members every one of 1 Cor. 12.
18.
them in the Body as it has pleased him: where he does not speak of moral, but
Political excellency, and order of Inferior and Superior: From whence the
name of the Function is taken. For as St. Augustine defines it, Order is Civ
Dei. Lib. 19. 13.
the disposing or ranking of equal and unequal things in their proper places.
And therefore sometimes the Church is divided by the Ancients into Clergy and
Laity, as two Orders. Again, The Clergy by the Ancienter into three only,
Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, as Optatus. Afterward some made Isidorus
Hispalens. Orig. Lib. 7. c. 12.
six, some seven, some nine, as Hispalensis, who likewise subdivideth the
Bishop into four Orders, Patriarch, Metropolitan, Archbishop, and simple
Bishop. So that it were not worth the labor to strive about words here; and
especially in distinguishing Order from Degree in the Church. For though the
distinction in nature be manifest between the first importing a diversity in
kind, and the other in condition of the same kind, yet the Church cannot be
though to speak so circumspectly at all times, and so precisely, as not to use
them promiscuously diverse times; so that because she sometimes speaks of
Degrees, they should deny the Order of the same thing. Neither are we to mutiny
against the Constitutions of Eastern and Western Churches, which in progress of
time, added some inferior Orders to those most anciently received in the
Church; viz. of Bishop, Priest, and Deacon: For I take it to be no invasion of
Christ's Right, to call to the assistance of such as he had constituted, such as
he did not ordain to that end: but to retrench of the number, to dissolve that
Order which he appointed, that is sacrilegious. What then may we call Orders,
but The Collation of an Ecclesiastical Faculty or Power to serve God and the
Church, by such as are authorized by God, using the necessary Forms of Words
and Rites thereunto required, according to his order of Ministration.

Now we have already showed, That as no man can create himself a secular,
neither can he an Ecclesiastical Officer: and as no man in that Politv can be
created but by one in Authority rightly derived to him, so can none in
Spiritual matters be ordained to Ecclesiastical Ministration, but he that is
thereunto called by some in Lawful, or at least, real Power: And therefore such
who are chosen and appointed by the common people, are but common people after
such vainly affected callings: and they who are of an inferior Order were
never acknowledged to have power to create one of a Superior to them: As it
was never endured in the Church till of late days, that Priests should appoint
Bishops or Priests: because, though Power of the Keys were communicated to
them, in reference to the two Principal and necessary Sacraments; yet never as
to the whole complex notion of the same, which consists of Jurisdiction, as
well as Knowledge and Intercession. And the School argument, which at least,
has given occasion to confound the Order of Bishop and Priest is very false
and frivolous: supposing all Ecclesiastical Orders to be so denominated in or
dine ad consecrandum from their relation to the Power of Consecrating the Body
and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist; because they suppose that to be the
supreme Mystery and End of Priestly Office; but the distinction of Power
Political and Mystical in the Church quite overthrows that: For the Power of
Jurisdiction is greater in its kind, than that of celebrating, and therefore
not so vainly to be taken. Again, the Orders of the Church are so called from
the Relation they have to the Body Ecclesiastical, or outward Form and
Constitution of it; which is made up of all of them by a gradual ascent, from
the lowest to the highest; which make that Hierarchy, without which a Church
has but very little to show that it is a Church, but is forced to shroud it
self under the obscure privileges of being an invisible Church, though not
visible Orders therefore thus duly administered, though they be not a Sacrament
(for then must there be seven Sacraments subordinate to the other famous seven;
because generally seven sorts of Orders are administered in the Church) yet are
they Sacramental things, that is, Sacred, and no less necessary to the
constituting a Visible Body of Christ than are the others to the Invisible: And
though that cannot presently be concluded to be a true Church of Christ which
has them, I do not see how that can be a true Church which has them not.

And for that which is commonly called Extreme Unction, being the Anointing of
the Infirm of Body, or such as are despaired of, as to this Life: I see no
great matter to be objected against it, no more did Luther, nor Bucer, nor some
other eminent Reformers for a good while after they left Rome; provided it be
done with that solemnity and soundness of invocation of God, and Benediction of
the deceasing Party as may comfort and strengthen him in his last Agonies: It
being ancient, though not so old as is pretended, nor ministered in the same
manner, as now. For in the beginning, not one, but many Presbyters of the
Church were called according to the advice of St. James, to pray over the sick,
and to anoint James 1. 14, 15
him with common, not compounded, or artificial Oil, and that not without a
miraculous event. But because the Miracle is now ceased, it is no good reason
the thing it self should be detested. For Primitively a Miracle did accompany
Baptism too, which ceasing, no man will declare the Sacrament it self ought to
cease likewise. The Superstitions of Prayer and some other Rites added of late,
whereby the simplicity of it has been corrupted, is a more reasonable ground
of laying it down: Neither is the want thereof in that formality to be charged
upon a Church, where there is commanded and continued due Ministration to the
Sick, answerable to the necessities of Body and Soul. But though the use hereof
be ancient, yet the name Sacrament has not so anciently been ascribed to it,
in the sense at this day Current. And Innocent the first, who is reported to
have so called it, does permit others besides Priests to minister the same to
the Sick, the Chrism or Oil being made by the Bishop.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Confirmation. What it is. The Reasons of it. The Proper Minister of it. Of
Unction threefold in Confirmation. Of Sacramental Repentance and Penance. The
Effects thereof.

BUT of Confirmation much greater esteem has ever been, and ought still to be
had; though not so much as some of the Ancients, and diverse Modern Schoolmen
would exalt it to: unless a favorable interpretation be made of their
judgments delivered concerning it. For they make it more useful than Baptism it
self: and impute the efficacy of Baptism in great part unto this Sacrament. To
judge the better of which Opinion, it is to be considered what this
Confirmation is. Confirmation may be said to be a solemn Act of Invocation of
God, and Benediction of a Person upon his public Profession of that Christian
Faith into which he was before baptized. First, It was required that the Person
capable of this Ceremony, should have first been baptized: For he was not
hereby made a Christian, but, as the word imports, confirmed in that Faith,
into which he had been baptized. And the Reasons hereof were such then as do to
this day commend exceedingly the use of it; viz. Because some were baptized in
their minority or infancy, when, wanting common judgment, they could not
discern the nature, use, and end of Baptism: and therefore very requisite it
was that they should after due and sober information in the mysteries and
principles of Christian Religion, make in their own person such a public
Profession of the same as they were bound to do at the time of their baptism;
according Catechismus Argentoratensis. p. 36. D. Cum nos pueri instituti sumus
in fide Christiana debemus eam palam and aperte profiteri, etc.
as the Church Catechism of Strasburgh, since the Reformation, well thus
expresses it, by Scholar and Master. Schol. We that are children and instructed
in the Faith of Christ, ought to profess the same in public, and clearly in
the Church, seeing we could not do this, when we were baptized. Mast. How are
ye confirmed? Schol. By public blessing, intercession of the Church, with
imposition of hands. Mast. But how art thou assured of this? Schol. We have
Word of God, when he says, Let little Children come unto me, etc. Thus that
Catechize. Another reason may be the danger from the multitude of Heretics
which possibly might have corrupted such young beginners in the Faith,
therefore, as well for the better securing such persons, as for the
satisfaction of the Church, that they who were once entered into communion with
it, did so persevere inviolate in the same, this excellent Rite was instituted.
And surely, because it notably discriminates Schismatics and Erroneous persons
from sober and faithful Members of Christ, and his Church; it is by vain,
ignorant, and ungodly persons scoffed at, railed at, and contemned. A third
Reason respects the time to come, wherein a man foreseeing the many and great
temptations of the World, Flesh, and Devil, which he had renounced in Baptism,
to increase upon him, as he converses more with the World, does thereby
fortify himself by a renewed profession of his Faith and Obedience to Christ.
Fourthly, to this conduces very much the Benediction of his Ghostly Father,
the Bishop, and the joint prayers of all the Congregation, which ought devoutly
to be put up to God for the descent of his Grace, to preserve the persons so
confirmed in that holy profession: which should be most earnestly desired by
every pious heart that likes his Religion, and fears his own frailties. And it
is to me an infallible argument of desperate unchristian profaneness, or a new
superstition instilled into men, alienating them from the truth of that
Religion in which they were educated, who carp at this so godly Constitution:
their best ground being that which is to all their frivolous reasonings,
Because no express place of Scripture commands it directly: and because it is
possible to be saved without it: It is possible that we may be saved without
many things which we daily use in Religion; and yet they contemptuously and
wilfully omitted, may be a just and certain cause of our condemnation: the
Scriptures having not limited God to those means of saving us, which they have,
if we would be saved: And yet again, they have not so particularized our
duties, that there should be nothing accepted by God from us which they have
not expressed. I find it disputed on both sides, whether this Rite be of Divine
Institution or not: and shall not determine it: but in this both Ancient and
Modern, Eastern and Western Churches are agreed that it is of Divine use, and
therefore I may determine it to be pious and profitable; and them who oppose
it, to speak evil 2 Pet. 2.
of the things they understand not, for which they may utterly perish in their
own corruption,

But I suppose the proper Minister of this Solemnity, who always was the
Bishop of the Church, has much turned the stomach of those who very unhappily
have none; or most wickedly endeavor to have none, against it. For considering
how little is to be said against it, how much for it, the principle ground why
they are bent against it, must be to defend themselves from notorious defects.
To understand this, as likewise the manner of performing this Sacramental Rite,
it is to be noted, there was a threefold use of Unction, called also Chrism, in
the ancient Church; whereof one pertained to the Presbyter or Priest: who in
the time of Baptism was wont to anoint the party baptized on the crown of the
Head. The other two were properly belonging to the Bishop, the one being done
presently Hieremias Patr. Cap 7. Censure O. rie^tal.
after Baptism on the forehead, after the Priest had anointed him on the crown
of the Head: which custom the Greek Church retain to this day, as their
Patriarch Hieremias witnesses: and when this was done, I suppose there
followed no other Confirmation: but after the deferring of Baptism ceased, and
the appointed times of Easter and Pentecost for that Sacrament were laid aside;
and children, and that at all times, and in all places of Divine worship, were
admitted to Baptism; and not always, as most anciently, in the presence of the
Bishop, then it became necessary that a peculiar time, and proper services
should be appointed to this Solemnity; wherein the Party to be confirmed was
signed in the forehead by the Bishop only, as before in substance, but with
variation of circumstances. In Gregory Gregor. M. Epist. Lib 3. 9.
the Great's days, it should seem the breast was anointed by the Priest. What
need we trouble ourselvs in such things aswere alterable, in that unalterable
solemnity: our Churches moderation endeavoring to prevail upon the modesty of
some dissatisfied persons in it, have incurred the censurre of other Churches,
in paring that Ordinance to the Quick from unnecessary excrescencies, without
any effect upon her own undutiful children, but pertinacy and petulancy, in
their private morosities, which at length may teach us, how vain such charms of
Charity are used upon such deaf Adders, and unnatural Vipers: whom nothing will
satisfy but the tearing to pieces the womb that conceived them. And that they
may do with it what they list, they make the Church speak what they list, many
times. And therefore, though it has wisely declared, and plainly, but for two
Sacraments, ordinarily necessary to salvation, they are wont to exclaim against
it; thereby inferring contumeliously that she holds more, though not so
necessary: which had been no slander, if they at the same time had used that
candor which became them in stating the mind of the Church, as they might, and
ought: but to do this here, or in other cases, were to do themselves or Cause
wrong; and to be just to us, were to be cruel to themselves.

A fifth pretended Sacrament is that of Repentance, sometimes also called
Penance with us: For so I read Mr. Bradford in his Sermon on the Fourth of
Matthew and the seventeenth, to speak, saying; Penance is a sorrowing or
forethinking of our sins past: an earnest purpose to amend, or turning to God
with a trust of pardon. Which description may suffice us at present. For the
first thing in Repentance is a sound judgment of the evil of the Facts
committed or omitted; the next is a belief and sense of the evil of punishment
incurred by such enormities: A third degree or act of the mind is a change of
the resolution for the time to come, to act more reasonably and faithfully. A
fourth is an apprehension of the Grace and Mercy of God toward him upon his
humiliation and return. A fifth the real execution and putting in outward
practice the good purposes of heart, in effects proper to Repentance. A sixth
is not to repent of Repentance, or return to the offenses for which he was so
grieved: and which he renounced. A seventh is the fruits on Gods part
signifying his favor toward such truly penitent Persons by the comfortable
testimony of his Spirit of Grace, in their Consciences witnessing the remission
of sins, and reconciliation to God in the face of Jesus Christ.

The Parts of Repentance are commonly made these three: Contrition, Confession,
and Satisfaction: which to speak properly cannot so be called: For of all these
only Contrition is of the very nature of Repentance: but Confession and
Satisfaction, to which we may add Reformation or Renovation, are rather the
Effects than Parts of Repentance: but these two are never the same in proper
language. And therefore in vain do they go about to justify that description
as proper, of Repentance, which both Chrysostom and Ambrose do give us; That
it is such a change which commits not the same things again. And, an act
whereby we lament sins passed, and commit not sins to be lamented. There can be
nothing done more indiscreetly against a man's self, or injuriously against the
Fathers, than to make every true saying of theirs a definition: or to deny them
the liberty of their Rhetorical pen sometimes, when they write what is true,
though not so accurately, as the laws of Logic may require. If we mistake not,
this abuse of the Fathers has done great mischief in the Schoolmens works, and
especially Thomas's, as may appear in his Sums, where a bare and secure
asseveration of some Father, is taken for a very sufficient definition, and
turns the controversy quite another way, then reason according to Scripture
would have it go. We all know that the Fathers, as all other Writers, even the
Scriptures themselves, spoke not always Definitions: and the Definitions they
gave were not always according to the Rules and Practice of Logicians, but
Rhetoricians; with whom it is most frequent to describe a thing from the proper
and most commendable effect. If a man should say he is a Soldier indeed, who
never yields till he has gotten the victory, should speak very true: but
this were no true definition of a Soldier: For a Soldier may loose the
Victory. And so Repentance is that which repeateth not former sins before
sorrowed for, but this does not prove that to be no repentance which ceasing, a
man returns to his former evil course; or that repentance persever'd in which
was broken off, might not have carried him to heaven. For who knows not that
all habits moral, and graces spiritual, (such as are Faith and Repentance) have
their proper seat in the inward man, affect the mind and heart immediately, and
from thence are known primarily and described? Outward acts are but the
effects: and the effects may illustrate, but cannot be of the essence of the
Cause. Therefore Repentance exactly considered is nothing more than a through
change of the mind and heart from things contrary to Gods will, and to the
obedience of the same. This is true repentance; and if it be not effectual, it
is because it is not, that is, perseveres not in that good nature. It were
ridiculous to say, A man never went toward London, it was no real motion,
because he turned back again, and never came at that place. And no less, that a
man never truly repented, because he gave over, and reaped not the fruits of
Repentance. For the nature of Repentance might be the same, though vastly
different as to the end. Once true Grace, and always true Grace, say they: but
what word of God, what judgment of the wisest and holiest Christians have they
to bear witness to their presumptuous assertion? Their own authority is too
inconsiderable, and their argument most vain which is taken from the event; and
begs the question when they thus talk, If it be true Grace it will persevere;
and if it persevere, it is true: So that give the highest instance that ever
was, or any man's mind can imagine possible to be, of Grace, which failed: they
answer very safely, (if as wisely) It was not true, for it faild. But this is
no place to argue this point.

We except not against the things themselves in Repentance, Contrition,
Confession, Satisfaction, but against the order they are set in: though Mr.
Bradford, that holy and learned man, sticks not at that accurateness in his
former Sermon, speaking thus: We say penance has three parts, Contrition, if
you understand it for an hearty sorrow for sin: Confession, if ye understand it
for faith of free pardon, in Gods mercy by Jesus Christ: and Satisfaction, if
you understand it not to Godwards -- but to Manwards, in restitution of things
wrongfully and fraudulently gotten, of name hindered, by our slanders; and in
newness of life. And Perkins makes our consent with the Roman Perk. Reform.
Cath.
Church to consist in this: That Repentance stands, especially for practice, in
Contrition of heart, Confession of mouth, Satisfaction in work or deed. Of
these therefore we shall speak briefly and distinctly.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the Proper affections of Repentance, Compunction, Attrition and Contrition.
Attrition is an Evangelical Grace as well as Contrition. Of Confession: Its
Nature, Grounds, and Uses. How it is abused. The Reasons against it answered.

COmpunction is a general word comprehending Contrition and Attrition, the
proper parts of Repentance: and according to Bernard, is an humiliation of the
mind proceeding from the remembrance of sin, and the fear of Gods Judgment,
etc. But Bernard. de modo been vivendi, Sermon. 10.
if we take Compunction generally, it may be rather described An humiliation of
mind proceeding from an apprehension of the Evil of sin. Now the Evil of sin
being twofold, does divide this Compunction into two kinds, Contrition and
Attrition. Contrition being, according to the most received distinction of it
from Attrition, A sincere and hearty sorrow of mind, upon the sight and sense
of the Evil of sin, in it self, and the offense thereby committed against
Almighty God his goodness chiefly: But there is another mischief in sin, and
that does principally concern the Offender himself, who thereby having violated
Gods most just and holy Laws, and incurred his displeasure, has made him self
obnoxious to the curses denounced against the breakers thereof: and therefore
is a Terror of Conscience conceived upon the apprehension of Gods wrath justly
due to him, and impending over him. These, by some, are made not only different
(as in truth they are) but contrary too: so that Attrition should be rather an
addition to former Guilt, than a method of evading Gods wrath, and being
reconciled unto him: and their reason is, because it is not done in Faith:
Hence they distinguish between Legal and Evangelical humiliation: Perkins.
making the former quite distinct from the latter, and opposite to it. Legal
contrition, say they (which is Attrition) is nothing but a remorse of
Conscience for sin in regard of the wrath and judgment of God, and it is no
grace of God at all, nor any part, or cause of Repentance, but only an occasion
thereof, and that by the mercy of God: for of it self it is the sting of the
Law, and the very entrance into the Pit of Hell. Evangelical Contrition is when
a repentant sinner is grieved for his sin, not so much for fear of Hell, or any
other punishment, as because he has offended and displeased so good and
merciful a God. This Contrition is caused by the Ministry of the Gospel, etc.
In this vulgar account of Attrition and Contrition, or the two Parts of
Contrition, Legal and Evangelical, is a twofold error committed, not to be
passed lightly over. The one is a rude and common misapprehension of the state
of the Gospel, as if it were all made up of Mercy, and consisted not at all of
Justice and Vengeance to be executed upon sinners breaking the Law of the
Gospel: but whatever we can reasonably suppose of mercy, must be owing
altogether to the Gospel: but if any threatening, and severities of Justice be
feared, that must be borrowed from the Law. And what Law I pray do they mean?
The Old Law, I doubt not. But the Law before Christ had its moralities or
perpetual Duties, and its Mosaicalness which was transient, and is now actually
ceased, as all the Obligations and Penalties belonging thereto. It cannot be
that then which moves to this Legal Contrition: but if any thing, the moral and
perpetual part, consisting of Justice and Equity, which are no less an
ingredient into the Gospel than into the Law properly so called. And, because
there is nothing more absurd and ridiculous, than to have a Law consisting of
just and holy Precepts and Rules: which shall not also consist of
proportionable Rewards of the Observers and Breakers thereof; returning as St.
Paul teaches us at large in his Epistle Romans 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
to the Romans, to the Jew and to the Gentile doing well, honor and glory; and
shame and wrath to the evil doer: speaking of the present state of the Gospel.
And we have before showed, That so far is the Gospel from being made up of all
mercy, that the judgments and punishments therein decreed against Sinners, are
more grievous than they in the Law: and therefore, the Gospel is called a Book
of Good tidings or News: not because the Sinner impenitent shall sind any more
favor, or so much as he might under the Old Law; but because the Salvation
here published is of greater extent, comprehending all Nations and states of
men; which the Law did not: And also offering full and free means of
Repentance, and reconciliation to God through Christ, and a treasure of Grace,
as well to assist in the performing of the condition of the Gospel, as to
pardon and remit what is committed against it, upon humiliation and repentance.
So that the Gospel has a Legal part (as the phrase is) and Evangelical: And the
terrors of the Gospel or Legal Part of it have just influence upon the
Consciences of men to humble and affright them, though there should be O Soror,
nulla res sic nos ab omni peccato custodit immunes sicut timor inferni et amor
Dei. Bern. de modo been vivend. Sermon. 4. (...), etc. Chrysostom. Sermon. 7. Antioc^.
page 512. To. 6
no such thing extant as the Old Testament: and therefore the Attrition of a
Sinner under the guilt and sense of his sins, is much more an effect of the
Gospel than of the Law. And therefore is not so the entrance into the Pit of
Hell, as if directly it lead to Hell: For it is security and presumption that
lead thither, rather then the sorrow of Attrition: This is certainly a direct
occasion of going to Heaven, and is an inferior degree of more ingenuous
sorrow and true contrition: For this Legal (as it is called) Contrition is
caused by the ministry of the Gospel too, and is an effect of Evangelical
Faith, whereby a Christian, having thoroughly assented to, and been affected with
the severe and holy Doctrine thereof, becomes humbled under it; and is brought
to the sight and admiration, and affection of the other Part of it, which to
the truly broken and penitent offers Grace and Pardon. That which seems to
have mislead so many into a false notion of the Gospel, is the term Gospel or
Evangel it self, which sounds nothing so much as mercy: though the English or
Saxon word, we know, signifies originally no more than Gods Speech, which is
indifferent Romans 4. 15.
to Mercy and Justice both. And such places as this of St. Paul, The Law
works wrath: as if he had meant to say thereby, that the Gospel did not work
wrath as did the Law: but that was far from his purpose; intending only to show
the difference between the Law and the Gospel (as they stood opposed) to be in
this, That the Law without the Gospel, which St. Paul preached, wrought wrath
without remedy, but the Gospel though it propounds and threatens wrath too,
to the unbelieving and disobedient, yet continued in it also a sufficient and
proper remedy against all those Evils. And thus far of the very intrinsic
nature of Repentance, Attrition, and Contrition; which are the two proper Parts
of it.

The two most noted acts or effects (for Parts they are not) are Confession and
Satisfaction. And first we shall explain this Confession by these degrees.
First, Out of the Abundance of the heart it must necessarily be that the mouth
should speak, whether good or evil, truth or falsehood, joy or sorrow. How then
can it reasonably be supposed that no outward expression should appear of so
great anguish of mind, as is supposed to affect the soul truly humbled and
penitent? No sober man, much less good Christian, can choose but commend such
Acts as this of true Repentance. For, as the comparison of an ancient Father
has it well; As it is with him that has almost surfeited himself with ill
digested or unwholesome meat lying heavy upon his stomach, must cast it forth
before he can well be eased or cured; even so he whose soul is oppressed with
the filth, guilt, and weight of his sins, must vomit them up by due Confession,
before he can reasonably expect remedy and forgiveness. Many and very pressing
are the advises and precepts of Holy Scripture to confess our sins, and many
promises to such as do confess, annexed: which not intending at present, so
much a Paraenetical or hortatory Discourse, as Dogmatical for the settlement
and information of the Judgment and Consciences, I shall pass over, as agreed
to on all hands, in the general. But Confession of sins being so variously
taken; viz. for confession to God, and confession to Man; for confession
private, and confession public; for confession to our brother, whom we have
offended particularly, and confession to the Church, to which we have given
scandal, none ever took the boldness on them to deny absolutely the use of
Confession. Nay I cannot find any seriously and positively denying the
lawfulness or usefulness of private or auricular confession to the Priest or
Minister. Some indeed very ignorant, and no less superstitious persons, are
offended at the word Auricular, from the common use of it amongst them whose
Doctrine and Practice have corrupted it. But the ancient use thereof was quite
otherwise than now adays it is: as it is thus expressed by Bishop Jewel. It is
learnedly noted by Bishop Rhenanus, the Sinner when he began to mislike Jewel
Defense p. 156.
himself, and to be penitent for his wicked life, for that he had offended God
and his Church, came first unto the Bishop and Priest, as unto the mouths of
the Church, and opened unto him the whole burden of his heart. Afterward he was
by them brought into the Congregation, and there made the same confession
openly before his brethren: and farther was appointed to make satisfaction by
open Penance: which being duly and humbly done, he was restored again openly
unto the Church, by laying on of the hands of Priests and Elders.

Perkins on the Galatians speaks thus: -- This must farther admonish Perkins
on Gal. 5. 19, 20.
us, never to hide or excuse our sins, but freely to confess them before God,
and before men also, when need requires. Whether we confess them or not, they
are manifest, and the ingenuous confession of them is the way to cover them,
Psalm* 32. 1, 4.

Luther in his Colloquies delivers his opinion of Confession in these words:
^^ther Coll. Com. p. 257. English.
The chiefest Cause why we hold the Confession, is this, that the Catechism may
be rehearsed, and heard particularly, to the end they may learn and understand
the same: However I, for my part, will never advise Confession to be
intermitted: for it is not a man that absolveth me from my sins, but God
himself. And see page 258. How sins are to be confessed.

Another of our Church speaks thus: No kind of Confession, either public
Archbishop (...) Ans^^^ to the (...)* p. ^^.
or private, is disallowed by us, that is any ways requisite for the due
execution of that ancient power of the Keys, which Christ bestowed on his
Church: the thing that we reject is that new Pick-lock of Sacramental
Confession, obtruded upon men's consciences, as a matter necessary to salvation;
by the Canons of the late Council of Trent. Sess. 14. c. 6. The Canon here
intended I suppose is the Fifth of the Fourth Session, under Julius the Third.

Mr. Perkins again in another place says; In troubles of conscience, it is
Cases of Conscience, lib. 1. cap. 1.
meet and convenient that there should be always used private Consession. For
James says, ch, 5. v. 16. Confess yoou faults one to another, and pray one for
another, etc. For in all reason the Physician must first know the Disease
before he can apply the remedy: and the grief of the heart will not be
discerned, unless it be manifested by the confession of the Party diseased. In
private Consessions these Caveats must be observed. First, It must not be urged
as a thing absolutely necessary, without which there can be no satisfaction.
Again, It is not fit that Confession should be of all sins, but only of the
Scruple it self. [Here Perkins's assertion is merely of his own pleasure, and
against his own rule, which requires that the Spiritual, as well as Corporal
Physician, should understand all Diseases; and are not all sins diseases? and
of all diseases that the greatest which we are not sensible of?] 3. Though yet
it is specially to be made to the Prophets and Ministers of the Gospel. Lastly,
He must be a person of fidelity, able to keep secret things that are revealed.

Many more suffrages for the usefulness of Confession, might be alleged of men
of unquestioned authority in such cases as this: but now I shall come briefly
to declare what is to be received, and what rejected in this Confession: 1. In
speaking of the Original or Institution. 2. The Necessity. 3. The Tradition
concerning it. 4. The due Practice of it. And the Church of Rome (however the
Council of Trent has determined it of Divine institution, to whose servile
Canons we ascribe not so much as to the less servile judgment of some of the
Learned Doctors of that Church) being divided in its opinion concerning the
institution of it; the ancienter of them generally denying any such Divine
Precept; and they who come after the Council being obliged to hold up its
Credit, affirming, we may without great danger or difficulty affirm, that
Christ has not in particular and precisely required any such Sacramental
Confession: but by general Rules of Piety and Prudence inferring so much as a
Council, and holy direction to assure our Salvation; which possibly may be
obtained without, and more possibly be lost for want of it. For the Priest
under the Gospel being the same to the uncleanness of the Soul, as was the
Levitical Priest to the uncleanness and leprosy of the Body; it agrees
exactly with the Analogy between the Old and New Testament, that the like power
be allowed to him in his Sphere, as was to the other, in his; and the like
real, though not formal and express command. Yea, I could show (were it a place
Scholastically to handle this matter here) how according to the opinion of the
Learned ancient Jews, the people under the Law did practice this Confession,
and that upon opinion of a Precept in their Law. But I do not rest upon any
other than what the Gospel affords, either in Letter, or Inclusively under
those duties which it prescribes a Christian. Yet what Solomon has in the
Proverbs, I take not to be so much Legal as Evangelical. He that covers his
sins, shall not prosper, Prove. 28. 13.
but who so confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy. And that of Job,
clearing himself from the concealing of his sins, as a great crime, commends
the revealing them, as a necessary act: If I covered my transgression Job 31.
33.
as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom: seem to be counsel in common
with the Gospe^, as having nothing ceremonial in them. And though that of
Leviticus was truly Legal, as concerning outward absolutions and Levit cap. 13.
and 14.
pollutions, yet I see not how they, who allow any weight in the Type to infer
the thing signified under the Gospel, can deny the like obligation in spiritual
matters upon us, as was on the Jews, in respect of matters carnal. By that Law
the polluted and diseased person was to appear before the (...). Chrysostom. in c.
1. ad Rom v. 26. Levit. 5. v. 6.
Pr^e^t, he was to be examined by him, judged and sentenced, for clean or
unclean; whole, or unsound. Sin is certainly the Leprosy of the soul: and it is
because men are led more by Sense than Faith, or by a monstrous Faith, rather
than truly Evangelical, (which dispatches compendiously, more than safely, all
duties of Religion in a word or single act) that they apprehend not the like
danger or necessity in the case of their Souls, as Bodies; and therefore
neglect the proper means conducing to their everlasting health. And this is yet
more expressly propounded to us in the fifth Chapter of Leviticus: where we read
of many Errors and Offenses to be redressed, and omitted. And that by bringing
a Trepass Offering for the sin that he has committed, a female from the
flock; a Lamb or a Kid of the Goats for a Sinoffering, and the Priest shall
make an atonement for him concerning his sin. Now the manner how, and the
terms upon which, this atonement was to be made, are expressed in the words
before, viz. He shall confess that he has sinned Ego ut efficacibus scripturae
testimonus argumentis irrefutabilibus non p^ssum a (...) vincere hanc
confessionem; hanc (inquam) qualis nune in usu est a Christo aut etiam ab
Apostolis esse institutam: ita piis om^ibus religiose observandam, cens^o;
veluti saltem, ab Ecclesiae proceribus non sine afflatu Spiri^us Divini
inductam. Erasm. in Exomologesi apud Gesnerum, Tom. 5.
in that thing. And to whom, to God privately? or to the Priest also, who was
upon his Confession to make an atonement for him? There can be no doubt of the
latter.

And in the Gospel, though I dare not, nor Erasmus, affirm any particular
direct Procept purposely delivered to enjoin this; yet by consequence and
implication, it seems to be required, especially in some cases of apparent and
grievous errors committed against the Faith and Holiness of the Gospel. For
hither may the words of Christ well be drawn, whereby he commissioned his
Apostles to act in his stead, himself leaving this world. John 20. 23.
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins ye
retain, they are retained. Which words some Modern Interpreters restraining to
the power of preaching the Gospel (though I confess that to be true) must
patiently suffer others to leave them, as they have their Predecessors, in
that gloss: For first the Gospel might be preached by others as well as the
Apostles: And next, whatever Remission of sins attends the publication of the
Gospel, is to be imputed, not simply and barely, either to the Preaching, or
Hearing, or Believing the same; but, to the admitting by an effectual Faith all
the things the Gospel requires to be done by us. And as by the preaching of
the Gospel in general and common, a general remission is also published: So by
a particular application of the same unto the particular and private Case of
some one Person, is confirmed in particular the state of Grace or Impenitency
to particular persons, according to the judgment of the Priest. And to this
also pertains what Christ says in the person of St. Peter, to all bearing
this Office: I will give unto thee the Keys Matthew. 16. 19.
of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest on Earth shall be bound
in Heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.
Implying indeed a Power communicative of persons scandalous to the Faith and
Church of Christ: But of the same power it is a branch, which is in every
single Priest proceeding judiciously in the Court of Conscience to the binding,
that is, declaring bound a sinner; or loosening, declaring him, at least,
absolved from his sins, upon his repentance manifested to him.

Now the Reasons obliging a man to this Confession upon Scripture grounds are
these. First, That the Minister of God being according to his office not only
to preach Christ and Repentance, and Faith, and remission of sins to all in
general, but to apply and accommodate himself to the particular exigencies of
men receiving, and diversely affected with the Gospel: which cannot possibly be
but by a particular revelation made to him either from heaven, or the party to
be judged. So that although it should be a sufficient discharge of the Priests
part and office to make a general promulgation of the Gospel, and so declare
that whosoever believes and repents shall be saved, but whosoever believes
not shall be damned: Yet the hearer or receiver does not thereby fully
discharge his part, unless he understands more satisfactorily than ordinarily
men can of themselves, their condition under the Gospel.

For secondly, By this Confession to another, a man comes better to understand
and judge himself; as to his Faith and Manners. As no man can naturally,
without the help of Art, see his own face, nor those eyes, which see all things
see themselves, but by looking steadfastly in the eye of another, may. So can no
man so well at least, no not by the glass of Gods word, discern those things in
himself which are to be seen by another eye: and therefore it must needs be a
means to bring the presumptuous to repentance, and the distrustful to a
comfortable serenity of mind and consolation.

Thirdly, Confession is not only a sign, or an act of Contrition, but a proper
means thereunto: For some there are who come to confess their sins, and have no
true sense of them: others have a real sense, which is commonly called
Attrition, being well assured and convicted by their own Consciences, they have
done wickedly, and broke Gods sacred Laws, but there wanting the grace of
ingenuous sorrow, and an affection out of Charity or Love to God, this sense
will not avail to obtain pardon at Gods hands: wherefore by the wise Ministry
of the Confessor, as he is called, he is to be wrought to a sorrow of love,
and such as is conceived as well for the evil of sin in it self, as the evil of
punishment it subjects him unto. Whence Chrysostom in a certain place speaks
thus, I would have you have a sense of Chrysostom. Tom. 1. page 139.
your errors by Confession, and show your ingenuity of your selves. For though
it be a foul errror to hold, as many of the Church of Rome do, that the very
coming to Confession, or the customary sentence of the Priest, turns
Attrition into Contrition; i. e. imperfect, and of it self unprofitable sorrow,
into saving; yet the joint exhortations, not to be separated in such cases, do
tend naturally to the more sincere conversion of a sinner unto God, upon the
account of virtue it self, and the love of Good and of God.

Fourthly, Such Confession is a very notable aw and restraint upon the
offender; it being too common with us here, to fear the eyes and ears of men
more than of God: And infinite sins we daily commit, which if we were
thoroughly persuaded should come to the knowledge of Man, we would not dare to
do, though we be assured in general that they must be known to God. And it is an
extreme folly and direct untruth which some have entertained, That we must do
things only upon the most perfect principles, to the most perfect ends. For
it is better a man should abstain from drunkenness to save his purse, than not
at all. And that a child should learn for fear of the Rod, than gain no
knowledge at all.

But this leads to a fifth benefit which is the more perfect; For infinite
there are who, upon necessity and compulsion, have begun a good work, which
they have concluded with delight, and greatest approbation, and with best
circumstances.

Sixthly, Confession of sins to Man substituted ordinarily by God, is an
excellent expedient to the preparing and enabling the Minister of God to
relieve us upon our Deathbed. For how otherwise can he speak with judgment to
us in our greatest Agony, when perhaps we cannot express our selves? but if we
have formerly opened unto him the state of our Souls; he shall be much better
enabled to assist in that our last conflict.

Lastly, According to the doctrine of them who hold it not only possible, but
also a duty incumbent upon us, to get assurance of our Salvation, Confession of
sins to the Spiritual Judge of souls must needs be very much approved: For
setting aside extraordinary Revelations, and granting the little knowledge we
have of the arbitrariness of God in the bestowing free Grace, and continuing
the same which we so often forfeit, and lastly the natural affection every man
has to judge partially for himself, there does not appear any so proper,
outward, and ordinary means of coming to a true knowledge of his state of Grace
and Salvation, as the Ministration of a Priest unto us in Confession; and his
judgment of our state of favor or Qui confiteri vult ut inveniat gratiam,
quaerat Sacerdotem. Aug.
disfavour with God: Neither can any man so safely acquiesce, to the
satisfaction of his doubtful Conscience, in the opinion he has of himself,
with out him, as with him. It is not to be denied, that a man may by the grace
of God and his own repentance, heal his wounded soul of an habitual sin, and be
really reconciled unto God, and find true and well-grounded peace of
Conscience, without the assistance of a Ghostly Physician, as he may cure
himself by Gods blessing, of a Fever or Consumption: Does this therefore make
the use of a Physician superfluous, and his Prescriptions vain? No sure. But it
is not the like case of his soul, as his body: For sense cannot there be so
easily deceived, as his opinion of himself, as to his souls soundness. There is
scarce any thing that is more common in spiritual matters, then that which is
so rarely found in the condition of his body; viz. That a man should be very
ill, and not know, or very well, and not find it manifestly in himself. It is
requisite therefore, even for them who have truly repented before God, to be
informed of their such recovery of Gods favor; or their not being purged from
dead works to serve the living God.

The great impediment is a natural modesty, which peradventure the Devil may
have an hand in: but this is occasioned rather for the rareness of it; as may
be seen from the undauntedness of such as live in the Eastern and Western
Churches, where Confession is so common.

It may be said, That the abuses are so gross, that the use seems inferior to
it, by the easy and familiar absolutions given to notorious Offenders, and the
great confidence these take to sin upon expectation of being acquitted. But to
this it may be first replied, That unless abuses be inseparable from a thing in
it self good and profitable, they are not sufficient to remove the use of it
absolutely. And secondly, in those things that are notorious and to be
discerned by one meanly instructed in the principles of Religion and common
Morality, if the Spiritual Judge delivers a corrupt sentence too favorable
to the Penitent, he is able to judge himself better, and so ought to do. For a
Confessor cannot determine that to be no sin, which the light of nature
teaches to be, for he does not judge of that, but of Religion. Nor can be
determine against the first Principles of Religion, viz. that without
repentance any sinner can be saved: nor, that a man does repent who has no
sorrow for his sins; or who ever at the time of a Formal absolution, nourishes
in his heart a resolution to return to the same sin he confesses: So that in
truth, a man is commonly false first to himself, before he is mislead by
others. And not Historically or Scholastically to dispute this, I shall only
use that for an argument for it, which is often alleged against Confession,
from the abuse and ill event of it; for which Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople is said to have put it down: For had the thing been so evil, or
unnecessary as some would have it, surely being once so judicially condemned
and taken away, it could never so soon after have been restored, and continued
all over those countries to this very day: So that it may seem either out of
too great zeal of that Patriarch to repress scandals, or to satisfy the
incensed multitude at the scandal given, that such a decree passed against it
for a time: Though there is much to be said, that the Confession differed much
from that here pleaded for; for that was by custom published, but this under
most sacred silence: which if any should reveal (being a condition of
confessing so freely, that it should be concealed) I make no doubt but the
perfidious Priest commits as great a sin as likely he can hear from another;
and incurreth no less just censure of the Church, than is ordinarily inflicted
upon persons convicted of scandalous sins. Saving, where (as Constitut. and
Canons, Can. 113.
our Church in her Canons has soberly determined) the concealing of an offense
against the Public safety and peace, may bring a man's life in question. And
whatever else the sin were, it always turned more to the reproach of the
discoverer, than the committer; and so may it do as well before God as Man.

The exception against it as Auricular is ridiculous and childish, not to be
answered seriously. It is no Penance, but a Favor. The Church does require a
man should open his Conscience to his Priest, it does not command it to be done
in so great secrecy, but as a favor to the Penitent; who does no less fulfill
the mind of God, and the Church, if he proclaim his own sins: provided it be
with penitence, and not impudence. Some other corruptions crept into this
useful practice come next to be noted and removed, in speaking of the secnod
Act or Effect of true Repentance, Satisfaction.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Satisfaction an Act of Repentance: Several kinds of Satisfaction. How
Satisfaction upon Repentance agrees with Christ's Satisfaction for Us. How
Satisfaction of injuries, necessary. Against Indulgences and Purgatory.

THE Law and Justice are then said to be satisfied, when either we walk so
exactly and conformably unto them as to fulfill the primary intention of the
Lawgiver, in doing that which is just and equal: or the secondary intention of
the Lawgiver, viz. in suffering due punishment and chastisement upon the
breach of it: And this is a satisfaction of the Law too, but not so perfect a^
the former; as being intended no otherwise than to secure the better the
satisfying of it, in the Observation according to the first sense. Neither does
this, though fully suffered, make any man just or innocent; but acquits him
from farther punishment. The former is wont to be called Active Obedience. The
latter, Passive, but very improperly: For there is no Obedience truly so
called, but what is Active. For all Obedience is an act of the Will: but
passiveness is no act at all. It Is true, a free and willing submission to the
punishment inflicted by the Law, has somewhat of action in is, and so of
obedience; but the suffering it self has nothing of obedience, but is the
effect of disobedience. And therefore much more reasonable is the distinction
of satisfaction active, whereby we act according to the revealed will of the
Legislator; and Passive, whereby we sustain the penalty threatened against the
disobedient. And thus we in some sense satisfy the Law, when we have undergone
all that was imposed upon us by it. This first part and most agreeable to the
will of God, Christ, and no man else, absolutely fulfilled, that we any where
read of. Every Article, and every Particle of the Law of God was fulfilled by
him. And this was yet no more than he ought to do as man. Now what
supererogation can be, what redundancie to us, is hard to be understood, though
confidently and zealously affirmed by many. This we can understand, this the
Scriptures certify us, that Christ being not obnoxious to the Law, and knowing
no sin, was made sin for us; that we might be made 2 Cor. 5. 21.
the righteousness of God in him. And from hence are derived all our comforts
and other benefits by Christ: For whereas they say, that Christ's passive
Obedience (as they call it) did set us free from punishment, but not purchase
life and glory to us, there seems to be a mis-apprehension of Luke 10. 28.
the condition of glory and immortality promised by God. Do this (says Christ)
and ye shall live: i. e. keep the Commandments. Again in the Book of the
Psalms, and St. Peter, God says: The face of the Lord is against them Psalm
34. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 12.
that do evil to root out the remembrance of them from the earth. And I know no
middle state in the Scripture, between life and death; or glory and misery. For
God has promised everlasting happiness, not to them that by their Good works
purchase or earn it, but to those who live according to his Law; and stand
innocent before him from the violation both of affirmative and negative
precepts therein contained. He that has all these things remitted to him, is
before God as if he had done all the duties of them exactly. He that is made
partaker of Christ's passive satisfaction does thus stand acquitted, and by
consequence has a title and claim by virtue of the same to everlasting bliss:
without the consideration of this active satisfaction or obedience.

Now to entertain such an Opinion of a man's private and personal satisfaction
for his sins, as thereby to be able to claim any, either forgiveness of sins
passed, or happiness to come, were to make the Cross of Christ of none effect:
Yet because the Grace of God is not so free, that we should need do nothing
more to be made partakers of the fruits of it, than passively to receive it;
but Christian Religian, and Faith whereby we are justified and saved, is an
active principle in us, leading to all Good works. Therefore it is required
that we should do somewhat to put our selves into a capacity of the benefits of
Christ's Passion and Merits, whereby we are freely justified and saved: For as
has been said, we are not so freely justified by Grace, as to be absolved from
all conditions, but so freely, as that the conditions of coming to, and
receiving Christ, by whom we are saved, have no proportion with the salvation
from him, in justice or common equity. Now I see nothing against such a
satisfaction to be required of every true and faithful Christian, whereby he
satisfies the conditions of the Covenant of free Grace in Christ; and yet never
satisfies the Law it self, or for his sins which is absolutely effected by
Christ: which agrees very well with what I find thus set down by one of our
Church: We believe that Whites way to the Church.. 40. nu. 28.
though Christ has satisfied for the fault and punishment both eternal and
temporal for our sins: yet our selves are bound to satisfy the commands of the
Gospel tying us to repentance and amendment, and patient bearing of the Cross.
Though we do not think that the doing of it, is that answers or expiates the
judgment of God due to our sins: but only serves as a Condition subordinately
required, that we may be partakers of Christ's satisfaction. Thus the Papists
themselves sometimes describe satisfaction out of Augustine, To be the cutting
off the cause of sin, and the stopping of the ways that suggest them: and
stick not to grant there is but one satisfaction only to God, even that of
Christ, and we do not properly satisfy, but only do something in respect
whereof Christ's satisfaction is applied to us. Satisfaction to God thus
described, we confess, etc. And thus far the Fathers went, and generally no
farther; however they are drawn to speak more derogatorily to the absolute
satisfaction of Christ: For thus Isidor. Hispalens. lib. 6. Orig cap. ult.
Satisfactio est causa peccatorum and suggestiones excludere, and ultra peccatum
non iterare.
Isidore of Sevil, following herein St. Austin, expresses the matter:
Satisfaction is to exclude the causes and occasions of sinning; and no more to
reiterate our sins. So that all Acts tending to repentance and amendment of
life being called Satisfactions, we hold Satisfactions to be necessary: And
therefore Fastings, constant Prayers, Alms-deeds, punishing the Body outwardly,
and denying things to it which may any way foment sin: yea, as the Ancients
well said Est quippe ordo necessarius, ut qui commisit illicitu ab usu
licitorum restiingat. In qua restrictione duo sunt considaranda -- Satisfactio
and necessitas Purgationis. Aelred. Abbas Compend: Speculi Charitatis cap. 40.
; Seeing we have offended God in unlawful use of things lawful, to deny our
selves the lawful use of the same: Yea, any punishment laid upon us by our
selves or others in order to the bringing us to repentance, and amending our
lives, are much to be commended; the abuse which is easily separable from them,
being removed: viz. That such things are in themselves satisfactory to God.

But though these and the like, be not satisfactions of the justice, but rather
the mercy of God. Yet there is a satisfaction which is proper and in some sense
adaequate to the offense committed: and this is to our brethren whom we have
wronged and scandalized: And is either public, when we have done any thing
against the Church in general, by unchristian practices, as Murders,
Sacrilege, Uncleanness, and such like. It was constantly required that such
should satisfy the will of the Church, of which they were members; and undergo
penalties or penances judged meet for such offenses, and not be admitted into
brotherly communion until they had suffered for their folly, to the content of
the Church: A laudable necessary practice to be retained still, as well that
the offender being put to public shame for public sins, might amend his life;
and the Church may be preserved from the like contagion of sin. For notorious
offenders being excluded from the Communion, were not restored to it until such
satisfaction as this was made.

Another satisfaction, much of the same nature with this, is that which ought
to be made to the utmost of our power, to them whom we have wronged by unjust
words or deeds against them; which is necessary for the obtaining of Gods mercy
and pardon to us. For if we must forgive the injuries done unto us, if we would
have God forgive us our trespasses, ought we not much more to give every man
his due in point of justice? The first seems to be a Law purely Evangelical;
but the second Natural; supposed to the Gospel, as imperfect, yet most
necessary: The Rule therefore amongst Divines is most certain, The sin is not
pardoned until the thing Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum cum
restitui potest. Aug. Epist. 54
taken away be restored. Now we take away a man's Good name, and we take away
his Estate unjustly; and before we can say we have repented, we must be careful
to our utmost to make this Satisfaction or Restitution. Where we take away a
man's life, we cannot indeed ever satisfy the Party, no, though we should
dedicate our own lives to him: yet so far as we can even outwardly humble our
selves, by afflicting our bodies and purses; and especially endeavoring by
extraordinary acts of bounty and Charity, to preserve the lives of such who
stand in need of our assistance and relief. It was no satisfaction to him whose
eye was put out, or tooth broken, to have the eye, or tooth of his Adversary to
be struck out for it. Yet it showed in the Moral sense thus much, that our
utmost endeavor must not be wanting to make satisfaction to them we have
wilfully spoiled, oppressed, defrauded, or otherwise injured. For otherwise, it
does not appear how a man dying conscious of such apparent injustices as these,
can escape the damnation of hell: A new stupifying notion of Faith freely
justifying, may perhaps be so ministered to him, as to quiet his Conscience, but
save his Soul it cannot; where it is in a man's power to make recompense, and
satisfy injuries and injustices.

But because man is naturally so partial unto himself, as for his ease and
self-love, to make the best construction of Gods mercy inconditionate to him,
and his sins against God: It was never in open notorious scandalous sins,
permitted to the offender to judge for himself, but his actions were subject to
Ecclesiastical censures, and proper punishments imposed upon him, to bring him,
by those outward censures to inward remorse. Which severe censures, when they
were observed to have a great effect upon the Penitent, were diverse times
remitted in part, lightened, and shortened by the favor of the Church, which
were called therefore Indulgences: Following herein the precept and example of
St. Paul in the like case, of the incestuous Corinthian excommunicated out of
the Church: who demonstrating sincere and extraordinary repentance for such his
fact; St. Paul with a 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7.
fatherly affection puts a stop to the utmost process of his Penance; saying,
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was inflicted of many. So
that contrariwise, ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest
perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, etc. Lest the
punishment imposed on grievous offenders, meeting with a tender spirit, should
break the heart rather then humble it; and cast him away, whom they intended to
save thereby, a seasonable relaxation was always at hand to the restoration
of such an one. But as for that sense and gross abuse of Indulgence, whereby it
is turned to remit sins aforehand, without due humiliation passed; and not only
so, but to reach the torments supposed to be inflicted on Christians after this
life in Purgatory, it is so absurd in it self, so unknown to all ancient
Christian ages, so inconsistent with the doctrine of the Gospel, and nature of
Repentance, that as it is impudence in that Church to pretend any of these to
favor it, so is it stupidity in any person to lend any credit to it, or have
any relvance upon it.

It is usually said, That few souls going out of this life so pure and thoroughly
cleansed, as to be fit presently to enter into the holy place of heaven, where
no unclean thing shall come; it is requisite there should remain some place to
perfect the purgation of the Soul begun here. And that the power of the Church
especially the reputed Universal Father of it, extends in like manner to the
mitigating and shortning of those purgative torments, as to the penances
inflicted upon Penitents on earth. Truly, if they could but prove, what they as
yet have not taken the boldness so much as to say: that they, or the Church
inflicted the torments of Purgatory upon sinners there detained, I should be
apt to believe they could take off the Rod they laid on: but never pretending
to that, I marvel they should pretend to this, any more than they dare to the
removal of a Fever by an indulgence only; because they judged the Party so ill
affected to have suffered, and been sick long enough. There being not the least
ground in holy Scripture to enable them so far, nor any argument out of
Scripture to persuade themselves of this power, so great as temporal gain, and
filthy cursed lucre, more like to damn the pretenders to it, then save the
tormented out of misery.

But this is upon supposal made of such a Purgatory; but that it is only
supposed and no real existence, appears from most ancient Tradition retained to
this day in the Church of Greece: which indeed taking occasion from Origen's
singular opinion, does affirm a Purgation, and that by fire, at the last day of
the general Resurrection, when by an unknown manner, God shall cause a
purgation and change of the corruptible body of man into an incorruptible
condition, more fit for heaven and glory. Austin sometimes Aug. Civ. Dei: lib.
21. c. 24.
doubted whether any such place or state after death were, wherein Souls were
detained for their emendation and preparation for Heaven: He grants it
possible, and that it is all: but actually and positively so to be, he no where
affirms; but says expressly, I do not therefore affirm, because I oppose it
not: But the supreme folly of cutting off scores, hundreds, and thousands of
years of torments, by Indulgences upon earth, was such an imposture as could
never enter into the head of any of the sober Ancients; and not to be endured
amongst Christians.

Many are the Suffrages of the Fathers to that of the word of God, Blessed are
the dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth: yea, says the Spirit, Rev. 14.
13.
that they may rest from their Labors, and their works do follow them.
Implying a direct and comfortable passage from this miserable, to that happy
life in heaven. And whereas they say, That they who go to Purgatory may be said
to dye in Christ, because they shall at length be delivered by Christ: How can
that stand with such excessive pains there suffered, to which none on earth are
equal either in degree or continuance? How can these wretched souls be said to
rest from their labors and sorrows? Must they not make God a mocker of his
servants in comforting them against their affections in this world, by telling
them they shall one day be delivered from them, and go to greater in Purgatory?
Besides, What grounds do they find in the Word of God, or the word of the
primitiye Fathers, which makes a a twofold state in Christ: One of them who by
Saintly lives pass immediately to bliss: Another of them who are in a middle
state, and are partly miserable and partly blessed? But to their prime argument
the Answer is easy. We are not generally purged wholly from sin, nor have we
made full satisfaction of punishments for our sins in this Life, unless by
Martyrdom, or some heroical and eminent Sanctity: Both are false which are here
supposed. First, That Martyrdom for Christ, or the most holy and exemplary life
lead here in this world, do so perfectly purge us, that we need not further
cleansing. Again, it is denied that true and sincere repentance acted in this
life, both in forsaking sin, and in true conversion unto God, suffices not to
purge us from all our sins in this life, as to the guilt and penalty of them,
and the odious stain rendering the soul unaccepted to God, though men arive not
to the perfection of Martyrdom, or the eminency of Sanctity attainable here,
as St. John witnesses: But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, 1
John 1. 7.
we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all sin. He does not here intend to speak of the supreamest
sanctity only, but of that general state of grace and holy life, in which
whoever is, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses him from all his sins; and
dying in that state, needs no more cleansing to make him capable of entering
immediately into everlasting bliss, which is far from all torment, though not
so consummate, as to be capable of no addition at the Resurrection, when the
Body shall be reunited to the Soul.

Nor does this take away what of prerogatives is justly due to Martyrdom or
eminent Holiness in this Life; because there remains proper to them, first a
greater measure of comfortable assurance of Gods favor and bliss hereafter;
and a much greater and higher degree of glory when possessed, than inferior
degrees of holiness here can lay claim to. And this is sufficient
encouragement, next to the pure intention of holiness it self, and Gods glory,
to any Christian to abound in good works; knowing that his 1 Cor. 15.
labor is not in vain in the Lord. And thus much of those we call Aequivocal
Sacraments, and improper. For though all true Sacraments are ordinarily
necessary to salvation; yet all things ordinarily necessary to salvation are
not Sacraments; as Repentance, which in its nature consisting of true
Contrition of heart, and conversion unto God, and thereby putting us into
capacity of mercy from God, is not pretended to be a Sacrament until the Priest
acts his part toward the Penitent. And if Contrition thus understood, or
Repentance be no Sacrament, surely neither can Confession or Satisfactions
which are said to be parts of Repentance, be Sacraments: nothing being in the
parts which may not be in the whole But so moderate and sound Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops.
a course has our Church taken as to call them Sacramentals: as being above
the order of general acts and duties of Piety, and not amounting to the dignity
of the two proper ones, Baptism and the Eucharist.

CHAP. XL
Of Baptism. The Author, Form, Matter and Manner of Administration of it. The
General necessity of it. The Efficacy in five things. Of Rebaptization that it
is a profanation but no evacuation of the former. Of the Character in Baptism.

MANY Acceptations are found of the word Baptism in Holy Scripture which I
leave to others who have collected them: and betake my self to the thing it
self commonly understood by it. And thus Baptism is a Sacrament of the New
Testament, instituted by Christ, consisting of the outward signs of Water and
the Word, and the inward Grace of Regeneration and remission of sins, and
outward Communion with the Church of Christ: all which I conceive to be
contained in our Church Catechism, where it is first described by its outward
Sign to be, Water wherein the Party is baptized in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And by its inward Grace to be, A death unto
sin and a new birth unto righteousness; for being by nature born in sin, we are
hereby made the Children of Grace.

This Sacrament then of baptism is said truly to succeed that of Circumcision:
and to have the same Spiritual effect upon the Spiritual and inward man, which
that had over the Outward. The agreement and difference between which two will
sufficiently appear from the comparing of this, as we now shall explain it,
with that, which we shall do by considering the Form, the Matter, The Subject,
The Efficacy, and the Minister of Baptism.

The Form we have propounded to us by Christ, when he first instituted the
same, and commanded his Disciples to go and teach all nations, baptizing Mat.
28. 19.
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
teaching them to observe all things whatever I have commanded you. From whence
it does appear that taking Baptism simply, for the Act, it consists in that
form of words here prescribed by Christ; and the outward Action of baptizing
with Water. But taken more Concretely and complexly for all things concurring
to that Sacrament essentially, It is a Covenant made between God and Man,
whereby is promised on Gods part remission of sins and salvation, and on man's
part, Faith and Observation of the terms of the Gospel: as St. Mark more
expressly has it, He that believes Mar. 16. 16. Ephesians. 2. 12.
and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned.
This Covenant was typified by the Sacrament of Circumcision made between God
and Abraham, with his seed; thus, This is my Covenant Genesis 17. 10.
which ye shall keep between me and you and thy seed after thee: Every Manchild
among you shall be circumcised, etc. And this was yet more clearly prophesied
of, by Ezekiel saying, Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and Ezekiel. 36.
35
ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you. And as with men, that is no sure Covenant which does not consist
of proper matter mutually passed from one Party to another: and of due form of
words thereunto required; So neither is that proper Baptism which makes no
express or implicit stipulation between God and man, and that with that form
of words and Action by Christ enjoined.

And the Matter of this Sacrament is expressed already to be water, by many
places of Scripture: as Mat. 3. 6, 11. Joh. 1. 26. Joh. 3. 23. Act. 8. 36, etc.
And having none other mentioned by Christ, we are not so much to argue
presumptuously of insufficiency of that Element to effect so great matters,
upon the soul, and thence conclude; That it is unlikely God should be so
rigorous to exact indispensably a little water, or cause the party to perish in
his sins: for 1. This way of reasoning holds no less against Gods severe
imposition of Circumcision which was the cutting off of a small pitiful piece
of Flesh: and yet that omitted, God threatens positively to cut off the soul
of the child from his people. Exodus 17. 14.
2. This takes away the Liberty and power of God to dispose of his Graces upon
what terms he pleases: for the manner of conveying whereof, he may choose what
means he pleases, though never so improbable to sense, to attain such ends;
that it may appear the virtue is not in the thing so much as God. 3. God in
such Cases does not so much tie himself, as tie us. He does indeed oblige
himself to those means himself has ordained: but not confine so himself to
them that he cannot or may not work the same effect without them: Yet as he so
restrains that, he threatens wrath, and makes no promise at all, but upon our
dutiful observation of such his Prescriptions. But as when a man, not by any
wilful neglect, or disesteem of the usefulness of this Sacrament, shall, by
invincible necessity, be detained from it, with a fervent desire to be
partakers of it, God by his abundant Grace may supply the want of it. In like
manner, where there is no proper natural water to be had, rather then the
solemnity should wholly be omitted, and denied to one earnestly craving the
same, Use may be made of that which comes nearest to it, so of a nature
cleansing. But this needs farther determination to put out of doubt, than any
private Doctor can give. For we read in Scripture of no other element (though
in Ecclesiastical History we do) than water. And there appears no greater
inconvenience Pallad. Lausic. Historia.
or ill consequence for men to be brought to that extremity for want of natural
water, than to want the general means of Christianity itself: or Children to
die unbaptized.

But the manner of applying this water to the party baptized by Immersion or
dipping into the water, or by Aspersion or Sprinkling, and that thrice, or once
only, is not much to be insisted upon. For though it is undeniable, that it was
a general Ablution by sinking the Baptized into the water as St. Paul
intimates when he speaks of being buried with Christ in Romans 6. 4. Col. 2.
12. Math. 3. 16. Act. 8. 38.
Baptism, that as Christ was laid under the earth, after his death, so
Christians under the water, and were buried unto sin: And other phrases of
Scripture which speak of ascending out of the waters, and descending into the
waters. Yet that any washing by aspersion or sprinkling sufficed, appears from
the Analogy between the Sacramental Purgations of the Old Law and the New: For
as infinite places certify us, the blood of the Sacrifices, and waters of
Purification were to be sprinkled on the Persons therein concerned: And so the
end of the Sacrament of Baptism is to signify, and conferr Grace on the
baptized by such outward Elements: to Exodus 29. 2. Levit. 14. 7.
which, the virtue of the Sacrament, not consisting in the nature of the thing,
but in the Institution of God, greater quantity can conduce no more then less,
provided so small quantity be not taken, which should hide and hinder the
significancy of the Elements. And besides, Gods rule being, I will have mercy
and not Sacrifice, and never intending to save the Soul by such means as in
common probability may destroy the Body, the condition of some persons being so
frail and weak: and of some Climates so hard and hurtful, he is pleased to
accept the most safe way, the substance of the duty being entirely observed.
And such persons are not only Infants, but the Sick and very Aged too, who were
baptized with water: and that upon a necessity of entering into the Kingdom.
For could scarce any thing betray Calvine with his Followers such as Perkins
and Cartwright more to suspicion of insolence and singularity than his seeking
to elude the plain precept of Christ concerning Elemental, not Spiritual water
Job. 3. 5. 6.
and washing only, contrary to the universal consent of all Catholics, and
Heretics before him: as if he had taken the rise of his Fancy from these two
famous Anabaptists Balthazar and Satelare in Germany: who Cassand. Praefar. ad
Anabaptist. Mat. 19. 13. 14.
reading in the Scripture one Ground of Paedobaptism to be Christ's saying,
Suffer little Children to come unto me, for of them is the Kingdom of heaven;
interpreted the same of Children in Spirit, and not in Age: with the like
probability both.

And of the subject of Baptism or the persons to be baptized, and capable of
that Sacrament, this in sum may be said out of the Scripture, as the foundation
of all, as even now out of St. John, Unless a man be born Tit. 3. 5.
of water and the Holy Ghost he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. And
St. Paul to Titus says, that According to his mercy he saved us by the washing
of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And to the Corinthians: 1 Cor.
12. 13
Cap. 12. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, etc. And the
like is comprehended in that General Law of Christ given to his Disciples to be
Executed, Matthew 28. 29. Now from these general Rules laid down by Christ in
his word, a just and particular inference may be made to the entitling Children
to a Right in this Sacrament: it being a Rule which holds no less in Divine,
than Humane Laws, That where the Law does not distinguish there men ought not
to distinguish, or limit. For if it be alleged that Instruction and Faith
ought to go before this Sacrament, according to Christ's Intention and
institution in St. Matthew. It is sufficiently answered; that, seeing the Law
General by which baptism is made necessary to Salvation, has no exception or
condition annexed to it, which may concern Infants, Infants are therein
contained. And this implies an exemption from that naturally impossible
preparation of Instruction, and Faith properly so called: And as Calvin well
notes, Believing Calvin Institut.
to Infant Baptism is no more requisite than working to their eating and
drinking, by virtue of the Apostles precept, If any will not work, neither 2
These. 3. 10.
should he eat. Faith and repentance both are required necessarily of such who
are capable of them, or able to oppose them: but of them who are not capable;
and have no actual sin to be repented of, the Act of them who have the Care of
them and Tuition, joined with the passiveness or non-remitency of the Infants,
found a capacity in them. But where a Personal power of Willing is found, there
is exacted a personal knowledge and consent to that Sacrament. This will appear
from those several reasons built upon the Scriptures.

First, That the Primest antiquity ever so understood the Scripture and
practiced accordingly. Not that Baptism was presently as now administered to
Children at their coming into the world: seeing Antiquity gives us many
instances of such who were not baptized till they came to years of discretion,
though they were born of Christian Parents: For some continued Catecheumenes
together with them who were young, and Converted from Heathenism unto
Christianity. Others, of purpose and design protracted the time of their
baptism, upon an opinion that all their Actual as well as Original sins were
washed away in Baptism; and concluded they had the less to answer for, if they
were baptized toward the latter end of their days. Yet though this abuse of
Baptism prevailed not upon that opinion only, but upon the occasion which was
taken of educating and instructing Infidels in the Faith, for some good time
before they were baptized, which custom diverse born of Christian Parents
imitated; yet we find none that the Church wilfully suffered to die without
Baptism, who were descended of true believers, or had been competently
instructed in the Faith of Christ: which was always, according to Christ's
words, intended toward them who had None to resign them up to God, and
compromise for their due perseverance in the Faith. So that there is not the
least evidence of Authority ancient in the Church rejecting the baptism of
children or denying them to be subjects capable of it. And none opposed the
same until the year 1030 when Guimund Bishop of Aversa in Campania accused
Berengarius Deacon of Anjou, for denying Infant Baptism; though that opinion
was not found directly to be Berengarius's. But about the year 1130 this
Heresy began to discover it self in France and Germany and was Headed by Peter
Bruis and Henricus his Scholar. From whom that Faction was called Petrobrusians
and Henricians; denying withal a Capacity of Childrens entering into the Kingdom
of Heaven; affirming, That only they who were baptized and believed could enter
into Heaven. But the Waldenses, who succeeded them in many of their opinions,
rejected this their Dogme; and so the controversy ceased, until the year 1522.
when one Nicolas Stork and Thomas Muncer (two desperately Phanatical men)
stirred Sleiden Comment.
up this opinion, and other wicked fancies concerning Civil Government: wherein
this Latter perished miserably. Yet this error was not so soon or easily
suppressed, but spread farther and continued by the great industry and zeal of
Melchior Rinck and Balthazar Hebmaier; until about the year 1532 it received
its complement from the tongue and hand of Melchior Hofman, a Leather-dresser
of Germany; and so has been propagated to other places, and to this day. But
not only did none of the ancients oppose Pedobaptism, but have declared and
proved the use of it: As did Irenaus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Augustine,
and others downward, were this a proper place to show so much. We shall rather
proceed to those Scriptural reasons inferring this. (...). Athan. cont. Arium.
page 147. Tom. ^.


Secondly, either all Children must be damned dying unbaptized, or they must
have baptism: The consequent is plain from that Principle in Christian
Religion, which Anabaptists have been constreined to deny, to uphold their
other, That all sin not washed away or expiated, exposes to damnation: and the
Principle in Christian Religion, is, That Children come into the world infected
with Original^sm: and therefore if there be no remedy against that provided by
God, all Children of Christian Parents, which St. Paul says are Holy, are
liable to eternal death, without remedy. Now there is no remedy but Christ; and
his death, and Passion are not communicated unto any but by outward Signs and
Sacraments: And no other do we read of but this of Water in Baptism. And the
invitation of Christ of infants, in St. Matthew does imply a capacity in them of
Grace. For Mat. 19.
when Christ says, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them
Mar. 13. 14.
not, for of such is the Kingdom of God: he does not mock, meaning literally
that Infants who are not able to go, or stand, should come unto him, on their
own legs: So neither does he mean in the spiritual sense, that Children who
have neither reason nor Faith, should come unto him by Faith, before they be
baptized; but be brought to him by the Faith of others, which may profit them
who resist not, though they seek not that Grace.

Thirdly, They that are of the Covenant, and of the Body of the Church really,
ought also to be formal partakers of that Body; and this they only can obtain
by being admitted solemnly into the congregation of Christ's Faithful and Elect
Church: As the children of the Israelites were of necessity to be admitted into
the number of that Church, by circumcision, Genesis 17. 14.
or be cut off in wrath, from them. For St. Paul tells us, how the children
of the Believers, are sanctified by their Parents. And how are they 1 Cor. ^7.
14.
holy but by being separated from unbelievers, and solemnly dedicated to God by
the Laver of Regeneration? And as in the same place the Apostle says to the
Romans, If the first fruit be holy, the Lump is holy: and if the root be holy,
so are the branches; drawing this Literal to an Evangelical sense; and meaning
thereby, that the Parent being of the Election, the Child is so: and being so,
ought to receive the sign of Evangelical circumcision.

Fourthly, The Analogy and apt correspondence between the Sacrament of the Law
called Circumcision, and that of the Gospel, warranteth this. For that is not
true which they say against this, That the Precepts of the New Testament
necessary to Salvation, are as clear as those under the Old: But this is not so
clear as Circumcision: To which we answer, That this is as true, taking in the
whole manifestation of Gods will: For the clearness of the Sacraments enjoined
in the Old Testament do conduce to the clearness of them signified by them. And
there needs nothing more be said for the clearing of the necessity of these,
than to admit them to have succeeded those two in the Old Testament: And we
find not such necessity particularly imposed upon us of receiving the
Eucharist, as was upon the Israelites of receiving the Paschal Lamb, but
general necessity, without determination of time or place, the Gospel
expresses unto us, upon the hope of salvation; which is sufficient.

The virtue and Efficacy of this Sacrament above-touched proves this farther:
but it needs it self be proved according to those extravagant opinions brought
by Modern Divines into the Church, that it is only a seal of our Faith, and
eternal Favor of God in Predestinating us to Glory. As if, First, all
(according to their judgments) that were baptized were ordained to Glory, and
this were assured them by that Seal. Or Secondly, that God had Predestined
any to Life without the necessary means to it: Or that remission of sins
Actual, and the expiation of Original, were not necessary to the entering into
Life, or that God had so simply and absolutely ordained us to heaven, that he
had not ordained these two as Means to obtain Perkins on Gal. 2. v. 15. (...).
Theod. Haret. Fabul. 5. c. 2.
this. For what can be a more horrible profanation of this Sacrament, then to
say with one upon the Galatians? We are born Christians if our Parents believe,
and not made so in Baptism. Which is contrary to the Doctrine of our Catechism
and the whole stream of Primitive Doctors of the Church, from whom we may
Gather this threefold Effect of Baptism. First, it is not only a sign as the
same Persons say, of our Covenant, but it is the Covenant it self made between
God and Man. For God indeed does make a Promise, but he makes no Covenant
otherwise than by Baptism. God made a Promise to Abraham that his seed should
be blessed before Circumcision, but he made no Covenant with him, but by
Circumcision; nor is any actually in the Covenant of Faith, but by being
baptized. Does not the Scripture expressly say, that God gave Abraham the
Covenant of Act. 7. 8.
Circumcision. Circumcision then, was not only a Sign of that Covenant, (though
that it were) but an Essential part of it. Circumcision therefore was a sign in
a twofold sense; First, in respect of the Covenant under the Law; as words
whereof the Covenant consists, are signs of the Will of the Covenanters, to the
ear: and works outward are in like manner signs of the same to the Eye: which
sort of signs are not distinct from the thing it signifies. For God Covenanted
with Abraham that he should use those Ceremonies. Now this outward visible
Covenant was a sign of an inward and invisible, relating to the righteousness
of Faith, as St. Paul says of Abraham: And he received the Sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness Rom 4. 11.
of Faith. So that is the Second way in which Circumcision may be said to be a
sign, viz. As the whole Sacramental Covenant of which it was a part, signified
the Covenant of Faith: into which we are entered by Baptism, as the Jews into
the other by Circumcision.

A Second effect of Baptism is, to wash away all sins, as well Original, as
Actual: of which that Prophecy of Zachary is generally understood. In that
day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and Zechar. 13. 1.
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; For sin and for uncleanness. To which St.
Paul agrees, in his Epistle to the Ephesians speaking of the Church: That Ephesians.
5. 26.
he might sanctify it and cleanse it by the washing of water, by the word.
Where the Word sanctifies the Water, and the water sanctifies the Person:
which it can no otherwise do then by washing off the sins of the Soul. As St.
Peter has it, Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer 1
Pet. 3. 21.
of a good Conscience toward God: That is, at the time of baptism, whereby the
filth of the Spirit necessarily implied to make up the correspondence, is put
away. And St. Paul tells the Corinthians; They were washed, 1 Cor. 6.
they were Sanctified, viz. By Baptism.

But whether Original sin be so far extinguished in the baptized, as no more
remains should be found, is much doubted: to which we briefly and clearly
answer from the distinction of Sins. For sometimes the Cause of sin is termed
sin: Sometime the Effect of Sin is called Sin: whereas Sin is properly the Evil
Act it self, or the omission of an act due from us. Original Sin in us is not
so properly called Sin, as it was in Adam who actually sinned, and that with a
consent of his own will. But it is rather the Effect of his Actual
transgression which does originally adhere to us, and is called sin upon this
threefold account. First, because it is the necessary effect or consequence of
Adams Sin: as we find Moses to speak in Deuteronomy. And I took your sin the
Calfe which ye made: The Calfe was the fruit of their Sin, and Deuteronomy. 9. 21.
not their sin it self. So is that evil Effect, the Sin Original, because it is
the evil consequence of it. Secondly, It is Sin, because it does partake of the
nature of sin in one of the principal parts making up sin. They are two, The
Obliquity of the Act, or Deformity and disagreement to the accurate Law of God,
and the disobedience of the will, and pravity thereof: This latter, original
sin as it was actual in Adam, had as well as the former; but so is it not with
us. There can be no such disobedience in the Will, where there is no Will.
There is no will in Infants besides the remote faculty it self; and therefore,
all sin, yea all humane acts requiring consent of the Will, original sin cannot
be sin in this sense: But taking sin for a dissonancy from 1 John 3. 4.
the Law and Rule, as St. John does; and that conformity as is justly required
by the Law; certainly that Original depravation and corruption found generally
in our natures at our first entrance into the World, may truly be called sin,
because it makes us to differ so much from that God made us, and intended us to
be. Thirdly, Original sin has this likewise denominating it sin, that it is
the cause of sin; that original inclination to sin being that which moves us
all unto the actual commission of sin; which St. Paul surely aims at, where
he says, Now then it is no more I that do Romans 7. 17.
it, but sin that dwells in me: meaning by that, sin dwelling in him, the
pronity natural which impelled him to sin, with such particular dissent and
reluctance of judgment, that he could scarce be accounted the principal author
of it. To these we may add a fourth general event of this original pravity,
Viz. An hatred and indignation conceived in God against the person so depraved,
contrary to his institution and mind. Now Baptisms efficacy may have relation
to all those, but not in like manner. For it washes away the filthiness of the
soul, original and actual. Secondly, It reconciles to God, and obtains
remission of sin. Thirdly, It does not remove or wholly redress the depravation
of the soul, and the evil tendencies and disposition of it to sin; which is the
effect of Adams sin, and cause of our own actual transgressions. This is not
destroyed by Baptism, but lurks in the soul; and like fuel is apt to take fire
upon the least spark of temptations, which shall be cast into it from outward
objects and occasions. And though it be so far done away that until such new
risings and agitations of the mind, it be not imputed; yet upon such kindlings
it puts on a new guilt.

Another effect it has in reference to actual sins. For first, by weakening
though not destroying absolutely the principle of sin in us, a stop and curb is
put to sin in its future progressions: And not only so, but proper means of
which by and by are provided in Baptism for the resisting and putting away all
actual sins too. For repentance being, according to the Doctrine of the
Ancients, a second Plank to save such as are shipwrackt, after Baptism, either
in their holy Faith, or holy Life, does effect this no otherwise than by virtue
of that principle of life remaining in the soul, infused at first by Baptism.
For, as Baptism has no power to procure mercy at the hands of God toward them
that sin after they are so washed and sprinkled, without repentance: So neither
has repentance sufficient virtue to restore us to innocence, and Gods favor,
unless Baptism goes before; because all remission of sins depends upon the
Covenant made in Baptism; which on our part is either to absolute holiness
without sinning after Baptism, or to true Repentance for the same.

A third Effect of Baptism is our Regeneration and new birth, or being born
again by this Water and the Holy Ghost. For as St. Paul says, According Joh.
3. Tit. 3. 5.
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

A fourth Effect is an incorporating into the body of Christ, as well visible
as invisible, which together with the former is declared in the form of baptism
contained in our Liturgy, where it is said, Seeing now, dearly Beloved, that
this Child is regenerate and grafted into the body of Christ's Church, let us
give thanks, etc. Which the Apostle intimates when he says, For as many of you
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Gal. 3. 27.
Christ.

And upon both these follows a Fifth Effect, which is, an intitling the
Baptized unto an inheritance in heaven. For as St. Paul says, If Children,
Romans 8. 17.
then heirs: heirs of God, and joint heirs of Christ.

Lastly, As we in baptism are all baptized into one body of Christ, so are we
into one Spirit. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body -- says
St. Paul. And again, There is one body, and one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4.
4. 5.
even as ye are called in one body of your calling: One Lord, One Faith, One
Babtism. For the Baptism of our Savior Christ being the Pattern of ours; what
in a more glorious, and visible manner followed upon his Baptism, in an
inferior manner attends our Baptism. It is said by St. Mark, And straitway
coming up out of the water, he saw the Heavens opened, and the Spirit like a
dove descending upon him: Which Spirit does likewise upon the moving of those
waters of New Life, descend and inspire the person Baptized. In which sense is
St. Paul to be understood when he says, If any Romans 8. 9.
man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his: That is, if he be not
partaker of the Spirit given in common to all Christians, at the time of their
Baptism.

From the foresaid necessity of Baptism, is inferred the opinion of the
Minister of Baptism, making it a work in it self common to all Christians. For
all things most necessary, as in Nature, so in Grace, are most easy and
common. As therefore Water is the most necessary thing in the world, next to
air, (without which no man can live so long as without water) to man's natural
substance, (and therefore is made by God most common to all persons, and
cheapest of all things to man's Life,) so does it agree well with Gods divine
Goodness in Religion, to make that most common, and freest to be attained,
which he has made so necessary to Life and Salvation.

The first thing that is necessary to our Salvation is the breath of Gods mouth
(as the Scripture teaches us to speak) the word of God: which Psalm. 33. 6.
sanctifies both the person, and the Element of Baptism, Water; which is the
Second. Therefore I make no great question but as it was free at the very first
Publication of the Gospel, and so at this day is still, in some Cases, and in
some manner, for those called Laymen, to declare the word of God and instruct
Unbelievers in the truth of the Gospel, (which afterward, it was restrained to
the Sacerdotal Office;) So upon the foundation of Faith before laid, by
preaching, in all capable persons; and incapable, by others in whose power they
are, that it is lawful for them who are no Priests to baptize. And the answer
to this does rather explain and confirm than deny it. For the Opposers of
Laymens baptizing, say, That Preaching is twofold, Private, and Ministerial:
and that a man may in Private, as Master of a Family, instruct others, but not
Ministerially. The distinction it self is ill set together; for surely both are
Ministerial Acts, and more especially, that which is denied to be so; Private
Baptism: as having less of Visible power so to do; or authority: and therefore
of an inferior Ministration. But this is just the Case of Baptism. For we say
not that Laymen may baptize as Public and Legal Ministers out of Office, but
as Private ministers, and in extraordinary Cases. We bring the example of
Zipporah circumcising Moses his son, justifying the like power Exodus 4. 28.
of Baptizing under the Gospel: And they reply nothing hereunto, but what makes
more against themselves. For if she did it (as they say,) in the presence of
her husband, when there was no need, she did it in haste, that she might
prevent her husband; she did it in anger. And yet this Circumcision held good
and was accepted: How much more might it have been accepted, if done by her
more soberly, and seriously, as it ought by all whether Minister or otherwise?
And that this Act of Zipporah was not so exorbitant in the manner of doing as
vulgarly supposed, more learned Men have showed at large.

And secondly, That is was not so extraordinary, does appear from the practice
of the Jews, who, as P. Fagius has observed upon Deuteronomy Fagius in
Deuteron. C. 10. 16.
Cap 10. v. 16. do believe, if a Man be wanting, to whom it belongs; one
Uncircumcised, as a Servant, a Woman (so not an Heathen or Infidel,) a Youth
may circumcise an Infant. Neither was Circumcision to be repeated made by what
man soever, though an Heathen or Infidel. And in brief, We find no person
excluded by the Catholic Church from doing this office, for one desiring it or
capable otherwise of it, but a Man's self. And yet we are told by searchers into
the ancient practice of the Jews, that a man might circumcise himself. And thus
much of the First Proper and Generally necessary Sacrament to Salvation,
Baptism; adding only one thing more for a conclusion, and that is, about the
Repetition of Baptism, or Anabaptism. Of which profanation of that solemn
Sacrament, I find many really guilty; but not so much, nor upon those grounds
they are Generally charged. For, I have not met with any that directly affirm
it to be requisite or lawful to reiterate Baptism, though in fact they do so.
For the Novatians, the Donatists, the Arrians, and they of Late years, who are
called from the Renewing of their Baptism, Anabaptists, have none of them (that
we find) declared it reasonable that Baptism once truly performed should be
acted over again: but all these suppose it not done, and therefore they do it.
It was always the opinion of the Catholic, as well as Heretical, and
Schismatical Churches, That all outward words or washings sufficed not to the
due effect of baptism. There were three several incapacities which rendered
pretended baptism void, so far, that the Person so baptized was held obliged to
be again baptized. The incapacity of the Minister or Baptizer: The incapacity
of the Person or subject to be baptized: Thirdly, the incapacity of the Form
used in Baptism. If the Minister had any time fallen from, or denied the
Christian Faith, or was of impure and Scandalous manners, he was reputed by the
Novatians and Donatists incapable of such a sacred Office; and consequently in
that (though a Priest) did not effectually administer that Holy Sacrament,
imagining that he who was so defiled himself could not by his Ministration
cleanse another; and therefore he was baptized not as repeating former baptism,
but as not being baptized at all. The Arrians being enemies to the second
Person in the Trinity, and judging the Catholics to be so too, in ascribing
too much unto Christ's divine nature, looked on the form of baptizing as corrupt
and insufficient to such an end; and therefore thought another, necessary. And
our modern Anabaptists as they are called, not thinking Infants capable of that
Sacrament, for want of Faith and Repentance, (which they hold absolutely
necessary to Salvation, and that in the properest sense) deny any effect to
follow upon those Actions used. So that we see there are no proper Anabaptists;
such I mean, who hold it so much as needful to baptize any persons above once.
Though in Fact they stand guilty of this profanation, upon the grounds of
others not hard to be made Good against them, as we have against these last,
showing the Capacity children are in of receiving Baptism, as also that the
unworthiness of the Person ministering Sacraments does not impede the effect of
those Sacraments, while he has a proper subject to work upon; and observes the
proper form required. Now this form, according as the Arrians excepted against
at, does depend upon the disputation of the Divine Nature of Christ, proper to
another place.

It may here be doubted, whether the zeal of some of the Ancients, but of most
of the Schoolmen has not too far transported them, who damn all such as repeat
Baptism once rightly administered; it being impossible in their opinion, that
Baptism should be twice acted, but the Former must be renounced: and truly, if
Baptism once truly performed be renounced, that which follows is also renounced
being in it self good: For there is but One Baptism, as St. Paul says. But
this can never be proved, as necessarily Ephesians. 4.
and perpetually true. They indeed, of whom now we have spoken; who were so
engaged in heretical opinions and societies as to believe the imperfection and
insufficiency of that Baptism they received, could not admit of another, but
they must reject the first. But then, whether absolutely they rejected true
Catholic Baptism, may be a doubt: For he only renounces his Baptism properly,
who rejects the Form it self, and the Faith therein implied. And this is the
One Baptism of which St. Paul is certainly to be understood: that is,
necessarily One in nature, but that it should be also so One in number, as
multiplied both should be made void, no reason is given. And surely St. Paul
intended no such thing: though he may be said much less to have intended the
multiplication of it. The more probable opinion therefore of the two is, That
the Second Baptism is void rather than the first: As if two married persons
being joined together in Lawful Matrimony once, should presume a Second time to
go, through the same Ceremony, it may be, only to confirm them in that state;
this were to baffle and profane such Ordinances, but it were not to make the
former Vows and Rites void.

And for the reasons given against Iteration of Baptism, though I yield the
Conclusion, that it ought not so to be, I do not hold them convincing, used to
this purpose: Not that taken from the indelibleness of that Character supposed
to be imprinted in the soul, by that Sacrament. It Is true, Circumcision had a
visible character made in the body, which could scarce be altered or removed:
But that therefore, to answer this, there must be a proportionable impres^^on
the soul, which is invisible, follows not. St. Paul calls Circumcision a sign,
and a seal; and it is Baptism in a Metaphorical sense: And the Fathers, who
many times mention such things, intended nothing more than an immutable
Obligation on our part to God, and an infallible communication of Gods grace to
them who duly are partakers of his Sacraments. It is also true, a Man can be
born but once spiritually, as naturally; and therefore supersluous and profane
are all attempts to a Regeneration a second time; the principles of spiritual
life being preserved entire in themselves, though in a way to be extinguished
upon pertinacy in sin, and dying in impenitency. And for those places of
Scipture where St. Paul tells us, we are sealed by Gods spirit, alleged, 2
Cor. 1. 21, 22. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Ephesians. 4. 30.
to prove that we have a Character made in Baptism upon us; it is evident, that
they are to be understood not of the ordinary Baptism, by Water, but the
extraordinary, of the Holy Ghost, sometimes preventing Baptism; as appears in
the Acts more than once: Other reasons out of Scripture Act. 10. 41.
brought to this purpose do prove only that to repeat Baptism is needless, but
not damnable. For the Ethiopians, who are reported to Baptize Breerwoods
Enquirit.
themselves once a year, on the same day that Christ was Baptized, do it as the
History of them tells, not so much implying an invalidity in one Baptism, as a
convenience to bring to mind the Baptism of Christ, on Epiphany; perhaps
reckoning the precept of Christ given to Communicate in Remembrance of him,
might hold to the obliging them to repeat Baptism in remembrance of his Baptism.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the second Principal Sacrament of the Gospel, the Eucharist. Its names. Its
parts Internal and External. Its matter, Bread and Wine: And the necessity of
them. Of Leavened and Unleavened Bread. Of Breaking the Bread in the Sacrament.

WE now come to the Second most proper and necessary Sacrament, known by
several names, as that of The Supper of the Lord, in our Church Catechisms; not
because our Lord Christ made his Supper of it, or ever intended we should, but
because at his Last Supper upon the Paschal Lamb, and the conclusion of it, he
instituted this, for his Apostles, and all Faithful peoples spiritual benefit,
as a Spiritual Repast or Supper, nourishing them to eternal Life. In answer to
which, we read of the Promise of Christ in the Revelations, Behold Rev. 3. 20.
I stand at the door and Knock: if any man hear my voice and open the door, I
will come into him and will Sup with him and he with me. And St. Paul more
expressly, to the Corinthians: When ye come together therefore 1 Cor. 11. 20.
into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper; distinguishing hereby
this Sacred Supper from the more ordinary communion which those first
Christians had in their Charitable meetings to eat and drink together to their
mutual edification and comfort. From whence their Cavils seem to be groundless,
who with some scorn reject this name in use much amongst the Reformed, fearing
somewhat derogatory to those Sacred Mysteries.

And upon the same grounds likewise, do they shun the name of the Lords Table,
lest the word Altar, which seems to them more sacred, should be less accounted
of. And yet without reason; For surely where St. Paul calls those holy
Mysteries, The Table of the Lord, he speaks not properly but Metonymically; 1
Cor. 10. 21.
not of the Material Table, on which they were placed, but of the Adjuncts
which were the Sacramental Elements. Though it be plain that from this Supper
of the Lord, the Table furnished with it, took its denomination of the Lords.
And that not only in Scriptures, but amongst Primitive writers too. And, Altar
of the Lord it was called, only Metaphorically, not properly, by both: no
otherwise than the Lords day was called by way of Analogy, The Sabbath day.

From the Form used at the celebration of those Mysteries, it was called
Eucharist, which was Thanksgiving, as Matthew 26. 26, 27. From the Effect, which
was double, Communion with Christ, and with the Members of Christ's Body, the
Faithful, it was termed Communion, 1 Cor: 10. 16. From the Matter of which it
consisted, The Body, and Blood of Christ. Corin: ibid. And many more less
considerable appellations have been received in the Church, to be passed over
in this short view: wherein we are rather to enquire into the Nature of it in
these Particulars, viz: 1. The Author. 2. The Matter. 3. The Form. 4. The Ends
and Effects.

For the Author, It is, without controversy, Christ himself; the histories of
the Gospels plainly so affirming, Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. Luc. 22. 19. And
St. Paul to the Corinthians. 1 Epist. 11. 23. It having nothing herein peculiar
to it: it being necessary to all Sacraments, so properly called, that they be
Instituted of God, or Christ: as is above proved.

The Greatest contention of all, is concerning the Subject Matter of this
Blessed Sacrament, not in a few words to be opened, or composed. The clearest
way to proceed in this disquisition is, First, to consider the External Part,
and then the Internal. The External are the Signs or Elements appointed by
Christ, to insinuate and represent unto us his Passion; or as his own express
words are, to bring to remembrance his death and Passion. This do in
remembrance of me. And what is here only recorded by the Evangelists Luke 22.
19.
to have been said of the Bread; St. Paul affirms to have been likewise
spoken of the Cup, Do this as often as ye drink it in remembrance 1 Cor. 11-25.
of me: declaring unto us the use, and end of the Institution of these Signs.
But before we go any further, it will be necessary in our way to distinguish
the twofold most principal and common acceptance of the word Sacrament, here:
For sometimes it is taken Complexly, for the whole ministration of the Lords
Supper: and at other times, only for the Material Part of it: which again is
sometimes taken for the External or signifying Part, the Elements; and
sometimes for the Internal, or things by them signified, which are the Body and
Blood of Christ, and that not simply and absolutely, but as under the
consideration of his Bitter death and Passion, and that for our sakes.

The Elemental and External parts of this Sacrament are to be considered two
ways: First, before the celebration, or consecration of the same; and then
after. First then it is generally agreed to, on all sides, that our Savior
Christ took natural Bread, and natural Wine, most commonly in use in those
Countries; and therefore in all reason, this ought to be a constant, binding
prescription to all that minister, and use that Sacrament; and not to vary from
the very kind used by him when ever it can with any tolerable care and cost be
obtained. But seeing that Christ in all probability, without any scrupulous
choice of Wheat or Rye, or Barley or any one single Grain, made use of that
which was in ordinary use at Meals amongst them, and there being no express
word, which of these he took, there appears no reason why any one, of which
Bread may be made, for the service and life of Man, may not be taken to this
purpose: And especially, considering that the end of the Institution, which is
said to be the representing of Christ's death and Passion, and the affecting us
thereby, may no less be performed by the one sort than the other. Yet where the
constant practice of the Church, confirmed by positive Injunctions, has
determined the kind, it can be no ways free or safe for any unnecessarily to
vary from that. It is of much greater difficulty to determine, What is to be
done in the cases of such, both extreme Northern, as well as Southern Scaliger
exercit. 292. 4.
people, who have no such Grain amongst them as we have mentioned. For, it is
very hard to acknowledge an ordinary necessity of this blessed Sacrament
Plerosque nos vidimus frumenti usum et vini penitus ignorantes. Ammian:
Marcellinus Lib: 14. Cap. 12.
to the having life spiritual in us, to the comfort of our souls, to the
strengthening of our Faith, to the resisting the temptations of the Devil; and,
in fine, to the salvation of our souls, and yet supposing what St. Paul
testifies, that God would have all men to be saved, there should be a natural
incapacity of the means of the ordinary means of Salvation. And considering
withal, that Bread may be easily taken, not for that only which is made of our
common Corn, but for that also which supplies the 1 Timothy 2. 4.
use, and fulfils the natural ends of Bread, and bears sufficient proportion to
the agreements between the Natural and Spiritual Bread, as St. Paul has stated
it, We being many, are one bread: for we are all partakers of that 1 Cor. 10.
17.
onebread. In the first, he compares the conjunction of Christians in this
communion, with the union of the many several grains into one bread: And so
though the parts constituting one Loaf, be more distinct than they which may
concur to the compounding one body of this Supplemental bread; yet are the
Parts distinguishable so far as to truly denominate that body a Compound. In
the latter Analogy of St. Paul's, saying, We are all Ejusmodi esse debet
Eucharistiae, ut multa in unum redigantur. Aug. Tract. 26. in Joann.
partakers of that one Bread, that is, as we all in the Communion partake of
one Loaf outwardly, so we inwardly all partake of that one Bread of God, that
came down from heaven, Christ Jesus; no less in some other one body, than in
proper bread; I say, (not absolutely determining that so actually it is, but)
that the Representation makes no such difference, but so it may be.

And this, methinks, they should be most inclinable to, who religiously observe
the mixing of water in the other Element, Wine: which otherwise must needs
infinitely and inextricably perplex the minds of the Consecrater, and
Communicant both. For it being not at all determined in nature, what the
Schools in general determine, viz: that so much water may be mixed with wine,
till it cease to be truly wine, and yet the Element capable of effectual
consecration; I say, it being not determinable in nature by the acutest
judgment, precisely, what quantity of water destroys a quantity of wine; it
may so fall out, that by the undue mixture of water, the wine ceases to be
wine: and then, what becomes of that Sacrament which they say essentially, and
indispensably requires wine? It is very hard and presumptious to affirm that
none but natural (no artificial water drawn from distillations) have any
efficacy in baptism, especially if they have a cleansing nature with them; as
all, or most in some degree have: seeing they may signify the same for which
Natural water was ordained. For otherwise, we may say, that Hot water, being in
some sense artificial, was not in any case to be used to such ends. And
distilled waters are certainly not absolutely made, for then there might be
more reason to exclude it, but is that Elemental water of which the natural
Body does consist; though not distilling naturally but praeternaturally from
the body, out of which it is forced; and retaining more mixture than the common
sort does. And so may we affirm much more of Bread, that the commonly known
Bread is that which should be preferred without all doubt, yea not without
greatest scruple should be neglected; but when that which is in place, and
common use amongst some Nations, seems to them more natural, and ours more
unnatural and artificial, does there not appear great reason to admit that? Or
can we imagine that Christ whom we find the least superstitions or scrupulous
of all men of his age, in things not directly limited by a Law, but of
themselves indifferent, would not have followed the customs and opinions of men
in such Regions, had he conversed with them? Is it not a reason rendered by the
Ancients, and that a very sufficient too, against the Perpetuity and
Universality of the Jews worship; Eusebius Demonst. Evang. 1.
that all Nations could not possibly be concerned in it, or obliged by it,
because of an incapacity they were in by the extreme distance from Jerusalem,
the place of principal worship, to fulfill the Laws and Precepts of it? And will
not it, or at least may it not be alleged as strongly against the proper
Catholickness of Christian Religion, that the Laws thereof, and that one of the
most solemnand necessary, cannot be observed by all Nations? It will be said,
That such things as are so necessarly required, may be imported from other
places. Very true. And surely where it may, it ought. But to make any Country,
which Gods Providence extends it self to, of it self incapable of receiving
as good Christians, as any place in the World; or to make the Religion of
Christians to depend on Merchandising necessarily, is more than in modesty can
be said, or by reason maintained.

Neither does the condemnation of the Heresy of the Aquarii of old, or such as
solemnized this Sacrament with water alone, condemn absolutely the use of all
other Liquors besides Wine in it; because they condemned the use of all besides
Water in that Sacrament, contrary to Christ's Institution. Christ, without
doubt, celebrated with proper wholesome Wine, of the fruit of the Vine: And
this argues sufficiently that the like is to be used, and none other, where it
is attainable. And the argument of the Schoolmen which say, That neither Sider
nor Perry, nor liquor pressed out of Raisins, nor Vinegar, nor such like are
apt matter for consecration, because they are not proper Wine, may be allowed,
taking apt for proper and convenient; but scarce if taken for Possible; as if
they were not susceptible of Sacramental consecration, where they are in common
use. And though Vinegar seems to draw nearest to the nature of Wine, and in
that respect more apt than other Liquors, yet in this it is more unapt, because
it is the drink of no people. And yet Alexander Alensis grants that in some
Regions they consecrate altogether of Vinegar, because to them Wine in its pure
nature cannot be brought. This they understand rather of Wine degenerated of it
self, into such an acidity or sowrness, than of that which is studiously made
so. But if nothing which art has counterfeited and adulterated can be received
as the matter of this Sacrament, how many Sacraments in Christendom would be
absolutely void, and Communicants deluded of their expectations? And seeing in
the corruptions of Wine by other ingredients, as well as Water, the Casuists
determine that it ceases then only to be capable of this sacred use when it
retains its nature, not otherwise; but cannot determine possibly when the
nature first begins to change to a destruction: What infinite and grievous
suspicions and scruples must evermore afflict the minds of Communicants upon
conceit that the matter they so receive may have suffered such strange kind and
degrees of composition that the nature of Wine is really lost, and an
artificial liquor not much to the eye or vulgar taste discernible, taken in its
stead; to the nulling of the effects of the Sacrament, and much worse, where
such a specifical Conversion of the Elements into Christ's Body and Blood is
maintained, and received with answerable Faith and worship. The distinction of
Material and Formal Idolatry (of which we may hereafter speak) little
redressing that monstrous evil.

And if we are not so indispensably and absolutely tied to the natures of
things in this Action, much less ought there to be such warm and uncharitable
contentions about the condition, form, or qualities of those Elements which in
no manner change the nature of them: as Leavening, or Unleavening; or forming
the bread after the common use, or in such manner as may be thought least
subject to profanation in making the Bread into several Cakes or Wafers, which
though it nulleth not the Sacrament, yet it corrupts the Institution and End
both, in some measure. For First, it is certain Christ celebrated on solid,
usual bread; and why should we upon private imaginations, next to vain
Superstition, introduce another order than Christ pitched on, and amend by fine
contrivances what he but rudely laid down, as we irreverently must suppose?
Again, It does seem more than an indifferent Ceremony, which, according to St.
Paul, and after him the Fathers, signified the Unity of Christ, and his
Members, and of his members one with another by that one Sacramental Body
visibly representing, and exhibiting invisibly Christ in that One Bread. And
lastly, That Ceremony of breaking Bread, so much practiced by Primitive
Christians even in this Sacrament, and thereby expressing Christ's own proper
Body broken for our sins, a very Fruitful, Reasonable, and significant Action,
is altogether laid aside; to the great injury of Christ's institution and
Christians edification. Surely, if any thing, this is to make our selves wiser
than Christ, and to be subtiller and more zealous for his Majesty than he would
have us: which cannot be wiped off by that common refuge and reserve at
pinching objections, viz: The Power of the Church. For the Church has no Right
(what ever Power it may have) to make alterations at pleasure, upon no better
grounds than were at the first known and neglected, in Sacramental things;
though the nature of the Sacrament may remain inviolate. For seeing the
Sacramental Signs were ordained by Christ to call to remembrance the
particulars as well as general of Christ's Passion, and the manner, as well as
the thing it self; to the intent that the more deep and lively impression might
be made thereof in our Souls, to pare off, (out of presumption of the Churches
Power, and more reverent ministration and participation thereof,) the
Ceremonies so immediately and significantly expressing the End of it, and used
by Christ himself, and for ought does appear, for several Ages after, is to
invade the Rights, and call in question the Wisdom of Christ himself. And
surely then, The Breaking of Bread signifying the violence offered to Christ's
Body, and the Pouring out the Wine intimating the shedding of his Blood for us,
nothing can be more useful; and therefore to abrogate these, and invent and
impose others upon pretenses not unknown, but rejected at the first
Institution, argues more superstitious presumption than sober Devotion.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the things signified in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Body and Blood
of Christ. How they are present in the Eucharist. Sacrament ally Present, a
vain invention. All Presence either Corporal or Spiritual. Of the Real Presence
of the Signs' and things signified. The Real Presence of the Signs necessarily
infer the Presence of the Substance of Bread and Wine. Signs and thing
signified always distinct.

BUT thus far of the Signs: The things internal and signified are yet of
greater importance to our Faith and worship, viz. the Body and Blood of Christ:
The several Disputes about which we shall reduce to these two General Heads
briefly to be explained. First, the manner of Existence of them in the
Eucharist: And next the manner of Participation: which two do mutually
illustrate one another. For as to the Real Presence it self, I find no such
real difference which may deserve discussion. For surely, If Christ or his Body
and Blood be at all Present in this Sacrament, they are really present; For
imaginary fictitious presence is no better than a Mockery unworthy of any
Philosopher to admit, and much more Divine. Whatsoever is, Really is, or not
all; according to this account: And therefore to say, We All agree in the
thing, though we differ in the Manner of Christ's Presence, is to say no more,
and to draw no nearer at all to the composing of this difference, than we may
have any common Philosopher to join with us, upon this granted that Christ is
Present there, for that must needs be really. So that no Christian can deny the
Real Presence absolutely, but must presently interpret himself in some peculiar
sense to himself. And they that do so, are wont to begin with a distinction of
Sacramental, and Corporal, or as some, Natural Presence. For Sacramental
Presence, (it being not at all heard of or known in Logic, or Nature, nor to
be explained by any thing parallel to it, out of this Mystery it self,) who can
be the better for it? Who can understand what is meant by it, before he be
resolved of the thing most of all questioned, viz: What is Sacramental
Presence? For unless we be cut off here, and must not at all enquire, What it
is to be Sacramentally Present, but take the notion at a venture, and presume
we know what in truth we do not, we shall be as hard put to it as before. For
Sacramentally to be present does not at all express the manner, unless, as some
seem to mean by it such a Mystical presence that we know not what to make of,
(and in this acceptance every unknown thing should create a new kind of being)
but imply all senses possible to a Sacrament. So that if a man holds Christ's
body to be in the Sacrament Bodily and naturally, this is certainly a
Sacramentally, and, If he holds it to be there Spiritually, it is likewise
Sacramentally, and so whatever other way we can reasonably conceive to be in
the Sacrament it must be Sacramentally: Sacramental Presence being (as is said)
no one kind of Presence, but common to all possible to the Eucharist, if not to
nature it self,

It will be more needful to distinguish between Christ's Corporal Presence and
Christ Corporally Present; and there is good ground for to do so. For if
Presence be as Thomas defines it, 1. Qu. 8. Ar. 1. 2. The communication of one
thing with another; so many ways as a Body imparts it self to another, so many
may it be said to be Present to it. And these ways are commonly resolved to be
two. First by immediate contact and conjunction. Secondly by a Virtual or
Effectual communication with it, the Substance it self continuing remote. So
that though Christ's body should be determined to one certain place in Heaven;
yet may it by its virtue communicate it self to us in the Sacrament, and be
said to be Present really, though not Corporally, after the manner of bodies in
their natural state, by contiguity.

And what we now say of the Subject of this Sacrament will hold no less in the
Case of Participation of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist. For as
Christ's Body may be said to be really though not Corporally Present and
immediately: So may it be said to be received Really, and not Phantastically
only, though not Corporally after the manner that other bodies are received.
For they that affirm that Christ's body is Corporally, Sacramentally, received,
do say, if not what they know not themselves, yet what no body but themselves
can apprehend: For either these terms are really distinct, or Not. If they be
not, then are they either superfluous, or at most explicatory one of another:
but this latter cannot be said, because Sacramentally is more obscure than
Corporally; and Corporally signifies a much grosser degree of Presence than the
Framers of this distinction will admit to agree with these Divine Mysteries. If
they be distinct, whence shall we fetch the nature of this Sacramental
Presence? whenas there is nothing to be found in Nature to resemble or explain
it; but it must be described by it self: And Sacramentally Present is no more
than to be present in the Sacrament: But what it is to be present in the
Sacrament, or how a thing may be said to be present in the Sacrament otherwise
than in other Cases, we shall ever be to seek, and consequently never learn.
Therefore we must be constrained at length to reduce this large and
unintelligible Presence Sacramental to one of the two old sorts of the Presence
of Influence only, or Presence of Substance it self [or Suppositum.] So that
either the Influence only of Christ's Body and Blood should be found in the
Eucharist, and the virtue of them be therein communicated unto us: or the very
natural Substance also.

We have hitherto spoken of the Presence it self precisely taken from its
Causes and manner external: For according to Philosophers there is a Modus
Essentialis, and a Modus Accidentalis. The Essential manner is simply to be,
after the intrinsique natureof a thing: as the intrinsique nature and manner of
a Body is to be Corporally and of a Spirit to be Spiritually: that is, As a
Body, and as a Spirit. But as a Body ordinarily and naturally palpable and
visible may remain a true real Body and yet not be seen, or felt; so may a
Spirit remain a Spirit in substance, and yet appear as a Body. So that it is
possible, Christ's Body may be present corporally in the essentials and formal
nature of a Body, and yet not appear in the accidental or separable formalities
of a Body; which are actually to be seen and felt at a competent distance.
These I call accidental, because they may be wanting, as well by reason of the
defect of the senses which should perceive them, as of the sensiblenes, of such
objects: For a Divine power may take away the one, as well as the other, by
impeding the sense: though seeing the very nature and essence of a Body
consists in being extended, and quantitative, it cannot be conceived how a
Divine Power can divide them which mutually constitute one another; though it
may render them imperceptible to outward sense. And so Christ's Body may be in
the Eucharist, so far corporally as to have all real and essential
modifications of a Body: but not so Corporally as to appear in the proper forms
of a Body. But granting, or supposing rather, that Christ's Body were in this
Latter sense present in the Sacrament, there appears no great reason, why this
should be called a Sacramental Presence more than that presence when he was
with his Disciples at Supper; and as the Scripture says, Vanished out of their
sight: Luke 24. 31.
that is as the word and sense import, not translating his Body suddenly to
another place but disappearing in that place, or ceasing to be seen by them:
answerable to the contrary power shown in his sudden appearing without any
previous Act, and standing in the midst of them, before they V. 36.
could be aware of it, or suppose any such thing: which was occasion of their
great Affrightment and amazement, supposing him to be a Spirit. 37.


But it is one thing to be Possibly and another Actually so to be. And yet
farther, Actually for Christ's Body and Blood so to be present; and to be so
Present as there should remain nothing substantial or material besides them;
and the Signs to be changed into the things signified by them, absolutely and
totally, the show or Accident only excepted. So that the Question is double,
First, Whether those Substances of Bread and Wine remain after consecration
really the same they were before, or be totally abolished? Secondly, It is
inquired, not so much whether Christ's Body and Blood be really present in the
Sacrament, but whether it be really the Sacrament it self, as it must
necessarily be, if so be that they be in such manner really present, as there
remains no other substance besides them.

For the former of these, the knowledge of the Real Presence of Signs, Bread
and Wine, do exceedingly conduce to the understanding of the Real Presence of
the Body and Blood of Christ under, or through those Signs. And it should seem
that the Roman Advocates of the New sense of a Real Presence of Christ's Body
and Blood, proceed not in the proper and natural method, rightly to found their
Doctrine. For, as according to them, there must be in order of nature, though
not of time, a Desition or abolition of the Elemental substances, before there
can succeed those Divine substances; so should they have first by sound and
sufficient arguments, proved the destruction of the preceding Bodies, and then
have inferred the succeeding. But on the contrary, They first presume on the
Second (upon what grounds we shall hereafter see) viz: That Christ's Body is so
really subsisting there; and then conclude, that the Elements are not there
subsistent. For he that holds that the Sacramental Signs do not exclude the
Body and Blood of Christ, does likewise hold that the Body and Blood of Christ
are not inconsistent with the Real Presence of the Elements. It must not be
denied that those texts of Scripture which are commonly alleged to Parallel
Christ's words, and consequently to give a more favorable sense than that of
Transubstantiation; do not exactly fit the Case. For when the Scripture says,
Christ is a Door, or Christ is a Vine, or a Lamb, it is not the same formally,
as to say, that a Lamb is Christ, or a Door, or a Vine is Christ. Yet if that
rigor must be observed in Scripture Propositions to have them true, that
without a Trope or Figure, they must be understood, otherwise, we must be
reproached to deny Scripture; the foresaid speeches must as necessarily infer
a Transubstantiation of Christ into the Nature of a Door, or Vine, or Lamb; as
his bare words at the Celebration, do infer a Transubstantiation of the
Elements into his Nature. And no appearance of disparity can be here shown; if
so be Christ's Literal meaning must be here urged as they do.

Now, That the Signs which were before, are Really Present in the Sacrament
after Consecration, does appear from the most-Essential thing to a Sacrament. A
Sacrament we have defined to be a Visible Sign, with Austin and infinite
others: I say, a Visible and Real Sign, and not Visibly, Apparently or
Seemingly a Sign: or a Sign of a Sign, as the deluding Specieses remaining
after supposed Transubstantiation, are said to be. And it is an Impossible
thing, as is before showed in the general treating of Sacraments, that the Sign
should be the thing signified. For if some Sign could be the thing signified;
then, something signified should be a Sign: and so both ways the Relate and
Cor-relate should be the same too; and two should be one, and one should be
two: and if this may be, what may not be? or at least, said to be? For as to
the instances given, That in some Cases a thing may be a Sign, and the thing
signified, it has been showed how defective they are, in that they are a Sign
of the same nature perhaps, or rather some qualification of it, and not of the
same thing numerically, as the individual Sign in the Lords Supper is believed
to be of that it is. Therefore from hence they are put to their choice, Whether
of the two they will suffer: the loss of the Sacrament, or the absence of
Christ's Body in their sense. For not only the nature of the thing now
expressed, require Sacramental Signs as well as the thing signified, but the
manifold Autorities of the Ancientest of the Greek and Latin Fathers have for
this reason, called the Sacramental Elements, Signs, Figures, Representations,
Types, Antitypes of Christ's Body and Blood: as might at large be showed, our
Adversaries not denying it. But what answer do they make to them? The Modern
Greeks as Cardinal Bessario (who is herein followed by some more modern than
himself) Latinizing; answer, confessing that the Fathers Bessario Do Eucharist.
Sacramento.
often so speak, but (say they) they speak only of the Bread and Wine before
Consecration, and not after. Here is some wit in this shuffle and evasion, but
no truth at all. For before Dedication and Consecration, they are not Signs, or
Figures, or Antitypes at all: They have no more relation to the Body and Blood
of Christ, than the like Elements at our Common tables: and therefore they must
be understood to speak of them after Consecration. But the Answer of the
Scholastical managers of this controversy in the Latin Church, shows less
modesty and no more truth. For Au^g. in Psalm. 3.
they say, St. Austin who calls the consecrated Elements, a Figure of Christ's
Body: spoke not of every empty Figure, but of a Figure of a thing really
present. All this we grant willingly, viz: that the Signs Sacramental are not
Signs of things future, or Absent: This is nothing at all to the purpose. And
the Second answer is notoriously and boldly false, saying, That St. Austin
might there speak as Manichee, who denied the Real Body Contra Adamant. C. 12.
of Christ: For it was in confutation of Manicheans. And of Tertullians words,
who likewise calls the consecrate Elements, Signs, they make nonsense; joining
head and tail together, that they may really signify nothing, least they
should signify that for which we alleadg them. Tertullian says, Hoc est Corpus
meum: Id est, Figura Corporis mei. Figura Corporis mei, says one (after his
greater Doctors) is referred not unto Corpus meum, as an Fisher Jes.
explication thereof, but unto Hoc in this manner: Hoc; id est, Figura Corporis
mei, est Corpus meum. i. e. This; that is, the Figure of my Body, is my Body.
If it be not sufficient conviction of their Error, and confusion, that they
are driven to such unnatural tossing of men's words against common sense and
Grammar, and having so done, to affect nothing but what is directly false or
unintelligible, (as this Scholie is making the Figure and the Body the very
same thing,) I confess I have nothing to say.

For this is the subject we have at present in hand, That the Sign and thing
signified must by eternal necessity, be distinct: but this opinion of
Transubstantiation destroys this: and destroying this, destroys the Sacrament.
For whereas they say, That the remaining Species supply the place of the
Substance abolished, and are Signs: This cannot consist with the impossibility
of such Accidents without a subject; in that, contrary to their definition,
they should stick, and not stick to a thing; in that they are Accidents, their
nature requires that they should have a subject; and the nature of this
mutation requires they should have none. And where as they argue, That what any
Creature can do, the Creator can much more do; and therefore, if the Creature
can sustain Accidents, the Creator God Almighty can. I answer, If the Creature
could sustain Accidents without a subject, then doubtless could God the
Creator; but does it follow that because the Creature can be a subject to
them, therefore the Creator can also? All that a Creature can Do, the Creator
can do: but all that the Creature can Suffer, I trow the Creator cannot: But
to be the subject to Accidents, is a Passion, and imperfection, and no Action:
and therefore nothing can be concluded from hence. Therefore they proceed one
strain higher, not doubting to say, That, what the Creature can do by its
Passive Capacity, the Creator can do by his Active, which if it did not imply
a contradiction in nature itself, I should easily grant: but this it does. For
first, it is to make an Accident, a Substance: For it is the nature of a
Substance, to subsist of it self without the aid or support of any other thing,
distinct from it. Not that the Secondary being can subsist without the First,
God himself, but without any thing Created. And therefore seeing that Substance
it self cannot continue in its Being without Gods omnipotent hand supporting
it; this does equalize the nature of Accidents to that of Substance, in that it
supposes that Accidents, by a divine power, may subsist of themselves, as well
as Substance. For substance cannot subsist at all without a Divine power: and
thus Accidents by a Divine power should be of the nature of Substance: but such
confusion and havoc in nature, to bring in an unnatural Dogm, is no ways to be
admitted, not out of any defect in the Divine Power, but an incapacity of the
Creature to be so ordered, against its nature.

And as this Condition of Species subsisting or existing separately of
themselves, is contrary to their nature: So the significativeness of these
Species is contrary to Christ's Intention, and Institution; which were to make a
representation of his death and passion, by Bread and Wine, and not by the
Similitudes of Bread and Wine. And this is to be noted, That when the Ancient
Fathers both Greek and Latin do affirm that Christ's Body or Blood are present
under the Species and Forms of Bread and Wine, they do not mean such Species as
the Schools of Aristotle have introduced, (for I find not that they took any
notice of them,) distinct from the subject to which they relate: but they took
them in a more plain sense, for the thing it self so affected and formed: and
Under the Species, signified with them as much as Under the Kinds of Bread and
Wine, Christ's Body was present. And they never destroyed the Sacrament it self,
to give an extraordinary Being to the Body of Christ therein.

CHAP. XLIII.
The principal Reasons for Transubstantiation, answered.

AND If this be once made good, That there is a Proper Sacrament remaining
after Consecration, it will be much less difficulty to agree upon the manner of
Christ's presence in the Sacrament. For the doubt will not be so much about the
Concomitance, and co-existence of it with the Sacramental Signs; as, Whether
that which we See with our eyes, and touch, and taste, be properly, and not
denominatively and Figuratively only, the Body of Christ. And in effect,
Whether it be the very Sacrament it self, or whether only in the Sacrament. The
Doctrine of the Church of Rome determines not only that There it is; but
directly and expressly, This it is: and this we deny, as that which indeed must
include such a Transubstantiation as is by them affirmed, and the chiefest
grounds whereof we are now to examine.

And First from Scripture, they are wont to argue, and that from the Old
Bellarm: Lib. 1. Cap. 3. De Sacram. Eucharist.
Testament: where are recorded many Types and Figures of Christ, and
particularly, his Passion: which were no less, if not much more clear than the
representations in the Eucharist; if Christ himself be not there otherwise than
Figuratively. For the Paschal Lamb slain, seems to represent Christ's Passion
more Lively and expressly than the Sacramental Elements: Therefore, if that the
Sacraments of the Gospel might exceed them of the Law, it is necessary that
what was done there Figuratively only, should be properly and really performed
in our Sacraments. Answ. But first, supposing Transubstantiation, is Christ
more clearly in the Sacrament, than if there were no such thing? Or can the
Sacrament of the Gospel be said to be more clear for this, when in truth it is
more Mystical and abstrufe? But though it be not more clear to the sense or
Reason, yet it is in it self more really present: For otherwise the Legal
Sacrament must have been only a Figure of this Figure of Christ's Body, and not
of the Bertramus.
Body it self. But the answer of Bertram to this about eight hundred years ago,
is sufficient to this purpose; that both the Paschal Lamb, and the Sacramental
Elements both Figured and represented Christ's body: The former Christ's Body
future, and its Passion; and the other Instant, (as at the Institution) or
Part, and completed. So that in truth, a great pre-eminence there is in the
Sacraments of the New Testament, above them of the Old: which is the thing
contended for. But Christ was really received in both.

The next Argument taken from Christ's words in the sixth of John: where he
says amongst many other things, I am the Bread of Life. And again, Verily,
Joh. 6. 48. 53. 54.
Verily, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye
have no life in you. For my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed:
Is answered two ways. First, from a consent on both sides by some of the
Learnedest, That Christ spoke not of a Sacramental Eating and Drinking of him;
but Ordinary, in receiving him by Faith, preached: But because, as many on both
sides affirm that he pointed at the Eucharist, in these words, therefore I
think it most reasonable, and equal to take in both senses: and that Christ
intended the receiving of him by Faith in the word preached, and in the
Eucharist too. And though Christ's Flesh be meat indeed, and his Blood drink
indeed, it does not follow at all, that it is properly so: For things
Metaphorically such, are really, though not Properly. And Christ does not say,
Caro mea est verus cibus, or Sanguis meus verus est potus. i. e. My Flesh is
true meat, or Proper: My Blood is true Drink: but My Flesh is Meat indeed, and
my Blood is drink indeed: that is, verily and really. And besides the
difference before intimated between these expressions and that at the
Celebration of the Eucharist when he calls the Bread his Body, is very great,
especially with the precise stickers to the Letter: For according to these,
Christ Transubstantiated Bread into his Body: but here, according to the same
Rule of interpretation, he should convert his Body into Bread: the words being
alike operative: But if Christ did at no time make a Transubstantiation of his
Flesh, or body into bread, though he affirmed his Body to be bread: What reason
is there we should believe upon no better grounds, than he affirming bread to
be his Body, should thereby change it into his proper Body?

A Third principal Argument is taken from the words of Christ at the
Celebration, viz: This is my Body, and This is my Blood. And upon the proper
acceptance of these words, they make no doubt to put to silence all seeming
oppositions, and contradictions, and impossibilities in nature. For be it (say
they) how it will, Christ saying it, who is truth it self, no doubt is to be
made of it: For as they teach the vulgar to speak, If Christ should say that
this stone were his Body, we ought to believe it. All which is granted. But we
must distinguish, as all sober men do, between Loquela and Sermo. He that
rehearses a certain number of Articulate words does Loqui or (...) but he only
who does deliver the word conceived in his mind (which is his meaning) at his
mouth, does Sermocinari or (...) Now if it can be proved by any certain
Circumstance, that Christ meant these words in a proper sense, and not
improper, in which he delivered no small part of his doctrine in the Gospel, we
have done; the Controversy is at an end; we are to lay our hands on our mouths
and freely to conclude with them. But until this be better evinced what make
they with so many zealous professions of their believing of Christ, or
protestations against others that herein they believe not Christ?

It becomes then the principal doubt of all, not what were Christ's words but
what was the drift and purpose of them. And surely they must needs grant this
to be worthily doubted of, when they consider how sundry of their eminent
Doctors do yield such an Indifferency in the words as that they are capable of
both senses: as might easily be made apparent: But saying that We ought to take
the Scriptures always literally where it will consist with the analogy of
Faith, they say no more than we: But if it happens (as here it does) that our
Analogy of Faith differs from theirs, what are we the nearer? For our Faith
tells us, Christ's words were spiritual as well here as in St. John; where he
expressly testifies so much saying, Joh. 6. 63.
The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life: that is,
spiritually and not properly to be understood: And Literal sense we understand
two ways, First, as being the same as the prime signification of the words
according to common use: And this Literal sense we deny of these words. But
affirm them literally to be taken, taking Literal, for that which by the same
words was immediately and primarily intended by the speaker, in which way all
Metaphorical speeches are Literally to be taken. For he that says of a vicious
man, He is a Beast, does literally mean that he is of beastly qualities, and
not the very nature of a Beast. So that Metaphorical and Literal are not
opposite, but Metaphorical and Natural, and Natural and Spiritual.

We say then, That this Proposition as in the Eucharist, is Metaphorical, and
yet Literal. But it is a weak and spiteful slander to say, That because we say
this, therefore we hold that Christ's Body is only Metaphorically and
Figuratively in the Eucharist: For we profess it to be really and properly, and
really and properly received in the Sacrament; and not as they would fain
persuade the World of us, imaginarily only: But the figurativeness is not so
much in the Presence of Christ, as the Predication of Christ, of the visible
Elements: We say plainly, the Elements are Christ only Figuratively, and
improperly: and as St. Ambrose has Ambros. de Sacrament. Lib. 4. C. 4.
it (or rather had it before a false Cause here, as elsewhere, constrained men
to foul practices.) After Consecration that which was, remains, and yet is
changed into another. It retains its nature, it is changed to its name, to its
use, and ends, and effects; and these are sufficient.

The Fathers who are alleged to prove Christ spoke here properly, do speak of
many changes made in the Elements; but then they do as often deny the substance
to be changed; sometimes they say, The Nature is changed: but we know Nature is
sometimes used more largely than to imply the very Being and Essence it self. We
say commonly, Such a man is quite of another nature from what he was. We do not
mean his very Essence or Being is changed; but his condition. It is said in the
first Book of Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. v. 9.
that after his anointing to the Kingdom, God gave Saul another heart. I hope
not in substance but in disposition. But it is nearer to our Case what St. Paul
says of Christ and us, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, We Ephesians. 5. 30.
are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Can any thing be more
expressly affirmed than this, to signify a corporeal unity and identity with
Christ, if the Verb Copulative Are, must here be taken Substantively, as they
say Is must in these words, This Is my Body? As they profess with much ardour
and zeal they will believe Christ, say he what he please, and be the thing
never so contrary to our common sense and reason, so do we: And no less do we
believe St. Paul speaking by the same spirit: This he has said, and therefore
we must not dispute, but believe. He has said as plainly as words can make it,
that we are the very flesh of Christ, and the bones of Christ: and that he
cannot be understood of the same in Kind, but number is manifest from his
argument when he says, No man ever hated his own flesh; but as his flesh is
another in nature, we know there is nothing more common. Now the like, if not
same interpretation will satisfy the Scripture in one place and other.

And not only so, but the Fathers who are urged for the literal signification
of the words rather than Literal sense of the Author of them, speak diverse
times of a Real change of the foresaid Elements; but saying the same in other
cases as in the holy Chrysm after Benediction; and specially the water of
Baptism, we would have one give meaning to the other. And the Modern Greeks who
are arrived at higher expressions and sense than their forefathers, yet when
occasion serves can affirm the substance of Bread and wine to remain; and would
never fully receive the term [(...)] Transubstantiation, as the Latins do:
which declare how much they suspect an Evil sense in the Roman Church. Again,
as they are defective in their characterizing this change to that degree, so
are they excessive, according to the Latins opinions, in ascribing too great a
change upon Consecration. For they make no such distinction, as the other
between Nature or substance, and the Accidents. And they deny as much, there
remains any Accidents, as any substance of Bread: wherein they seem to take
Christ more Literally than the Papists. For if (as they give out) we must take
Christ at his word, and hold him hard to the Letter, we must and ought to do it
no less in reference to the Accidents than the Substance: For Christ made no
distinction, and then why should we? By virtue therefore of his words the
Accidents must be changed as well as the Substance. And so in truth we believe:
and to make our meaning clear will allow no effect of Christ's words upon the
one, which we will not upon the other. And if they oppose sense to discriminate
the Cases, saying, that we see and feel that the Specieses and Accidents are
the same: We must tell them in their own words and that without fraud or
dissimulation, that we believe Christ rather than our own senses: And were it
not so, yet we cannot teil that they are the same individual Accidents which
were before consecration, though like them; and appearing so to be. And I could
never as yet meet their reason worth the noting (...) remembering, which should
move them to be lead by their senses to interpret Christ's words, when he says
Positively and with the same Verb Su^^^an ^^ve, This Cup IS the New Testament
in my blood; and commands them to drink the Cup; and to deny Luke 22. 20. V. 17.
their senses when he says, This is my Body.

And as reasonles and frivolous are their Answers to St. Augustine who 1 Cor.
11. 27.
affirms it to be a Profane and blasphemous sense to understand Christ, of
Aug. de Doctrina Christ.
his proper Body, and to eat it: For can any thing be more Elusorie and
ridiculous than to Scholie on him with a That is, As meat is bought and sold in
the Shambles? Nam Sacramentum Al^ptionis suscipere dignatus est Christus et
quando circumeisus est et quando baptizatus est: et potest Sacramentum
adoptionis: Adoptio ^uncupari, sicut Sacramentum co^poris et sanguints jus quod
est in pane and poculo consecrate, Corpus jus and sanguinem dici^us. Non quod
proprie corpus ejus sit panis, and poculum sanguinis: Sed quod in se Mysterium
co^poris ejus et sanguinis ejus contineant. Hinc and ipse Dominus Benedictum
pan^m and Calicem quem Discipulis tradidit, corpuaae: sanguinem ejus vo^^vit.
Quocirea, sicut Christi fideles sacramentum Corporis and sanguinis ejus
accipientes Corpus et sanguinem ejus recte dicuntur accipere, etc. Facundus
H^rmianensts Pro. 3. Capitulis Lib. 10. Cap. 5.


But if it be possible to express any thing more clearly, Facundus
Hermianensis, and that as set forth by Syrmondus, does both expound St. Austins
meaning and our Savior Christ's, yet more irrefragably; writing against the
Eutichians in these words, For Christ vouchsafed to take on him the Sacrament
of Adoption, both at his Circumcision and at his Baptism: and the Sacrament of
Adoption may he called Adoption, as the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ, which is the Bread and Cup Consecrated, we call his Body and Blood: not
that properly his body is Bread, or his Blood the Cup, but that they contain in
then the Mystery of the Body and Blood of him. Whence our Lord himself called
the Blessed Bread and Cup which he delivered to his Disciples, his Body and his
Blood. Wherefore as Christian believers taking the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of him, are said truly to take the Body and Blood of Christ: So Christ
when he took the Sacrament of Adoption of Children, might truly he said to take
the Adoption of Children. Thus he, and Syrmondus in his notes upon this place
does confess these to be very harsh expressions like unto some of St. Austins
there mentioned.

And to our urging the name fruit of the Vine given to the Consecrated
substance; and thence concluding that the real nature of Wine remains; they
answer that it is not unusual to give the name to a thing as a little before it
was, or seems to be: Which we deny not: And by the parity of reason, return
upon them to their loss: For we know it is not unusual for a thing to be called
by the name, not which is proper to its nature, but which it represents. And to
the eye of Faith, the consecrated Elements Heb. 5.
are the Body and Blood of Christ: and so may not unaptly be so called by those
whose senses are exercised (as the Apostle speaks) to discern both good and
evil though in nature they be far otherwise.

Some indeed (as I conceive) have been but too free of the Figures in this
question, supposing that the very word Est, or Is must not be taken in its
proper sense, but stand for as much as Significat, Signifies: but this is
without ground in Grammar or Divinity. For he that says, as St. Paul 2 Timothy 4.
17.
is interpreted to speak, Nero is a Lion, does not lay the agreement upon Est
or Is, but upon the subject, Nero: For the Verb Substantive is equally
indifferent to Comparative, and Proper Speeches: and continues so, applied to
any thing. The Signification or Similitude lies in the two Terms, Nero and a
Lion; and Bread and Wine, and the Body and Blood of Christ. Now there being no
difference between a Similitude and a Metaphor, but that the one is at large,
and in many words, what the other is in one: To say Christ is a Lamb or This
(which is bread) is Christ, is no more than to say, Christ is as a Lamb: and
Bread is as Christ's Body: For the many agreements between the natural and
Spiritual senses. The one, and that principal, is that of Sacrifice which ought
here to be briefly explained.

CHAP. XLIV.
Of the Sacrifice of the Altar. What is a Sacrifice. Conditions necessary to a
Sacrament. How, and in what sense there is a Sacrifice in the Eucharist.

GREAT contentions have been about the Sacrifice of the Altar; and perhaps,
though with just Cause, yet not so great as is generally believed. For these
two Terms do much illustrate one the other. For neither is the Altar upon which
Christians offer, properly an Altar, any more then (as is said before) the
Lord's Day now observed is properly a Sabbath, nor is the Sacrifice thereon
performed properly a Sacrifice. Some will have that only truly called a
Sacrifice which consisted of living Creaturs slain and offered to God, Dixerunt
aliqui, quia Sacrificium non est nisi de Animalibus: et erraverunt in hoc, etc.
Guliel. Parisien. de Legib. Cap. 3.
and to this sense do I most incline. For there must be in all things some one
thing which is as a Rule and Law and gives denomination to others, according as
they agree with it. Now if all offerings to God, as fine Flower, and fruits of
the Earth, be called a Sacrifice in an equal sense to the most proper, then
have we no Rule to go by in Judging of Sacrifices. And therefore Gulielmus
Parisiensis who rejects the former acceptance because we Read in Leviticus
20. of a Sacrifice of fine Flower: and Exodus 31. Sweet Smell, seems himself
to err, as he says others do in the Notion of a Sacrifice. For either these
things and suchlike were more properly called Oblations than Sacrifices, or
when they were called Sacrifices they were so called because of the Proper
bloody Sacrifice as the principal thing, to which they were adjuncts.

Five things are said to be required to constitute a Sacrifice. 1 A Proper
Lessius de Ju. and Just it.
Minister, who is the Priest. Heb. 5. Secondly, the Matter must be sensible. 3.
The form of that matter must be changed, and that after the nature of it.
Thirdly, It must be directed and devoted to a Good end, God. And fifthly, It
must be offered in a proper place. But not all these are certain, and
constantly true. For Cain and Abel, and Noah and Abraham, and the rest under
the Law offered proper Sacrifices; but that they had peculiar Temples, or
Altars, is not true. For until that injuction of God in Deuteronomie, Take heed
to thy self that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in Deuteronomy. 12. 13. 14.
every place that thou see: But in the place which the Lord shall choose,
etc. it was free for the servants of God, to offer their Sacrifice upon any
place they Jacobus Bolduc. de Ecclesia ante Legem Lib. 11.
should think fit: and make Altars at their pleasures. though I am not ignorant
that mystical Bolducius is of another mind without solid grounds. But
afterward, the Altar (as Christ intimates in the Gospel) Sanctified the Gift,
so far, that it was not accepted but upon that which Mat. 23. 19.
God had ordained for Sacrifices, or offerings to him. The case is not
altogether so now under the Gospel, that Christians should be absolutely
confined to the Public Altars (as they may be called) appointed to the
Eucharist: For we do not read that ever the Apostles so Celebrated, but have
great presumptions to the Contrary. Nor does it in like manner appear in the
Gospel, that those places, on which they did Celebrate, were preserved from all
Secular uses; as we do in the Law, that Altars there were. Yet so much ought
all, who are good Christans, condescend to the immemoriall practice of the
Church separating all such sacred things from common and vulgar uses, and
requiring to celebrate upon the Reputed and appointed Altar, that I make
question, whether any Sacrifice, not so offered, through contempt or
sullenness, can be either so acceptable to God or profitable to our selves as
in the other received way.

And there want not as learned men who deny that Consumption is necessary to a
true Sacrifice: And I am sure the Roman Cause so requires: unless in this
state, they will make Christ passible, and Corruptible; though I know they have
many a Sorry shift to evade this too.

Now for brevity sake, to omit many things incident to this dispute, and to
apply the Notion of Sacrifice to the Actions in the Eucharist; If we take
Sacrifice in Melancthons sense, from which Calvin does not much vary, Melanct.
Loc. Com: Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. C. 73.
For every act and thing devoted to God, whereby we give him honor, there are
Sacrifices enough to be found in the Eucharist: And there are many known senses
of Sacrifice given to God, admitted by Protestants. But passing all them over,
the Question here must be stated concerning this Sacrifice, as it was
concerning the Body of Christ: Not whether there Really it is, but whether it
really and properly be Predicated of the matter of the Sacrament; and that in
as proper a sense, as Christ's Body was offered upon the Cross: This we deny,
acknowledging only these three things, which fully satisfy the expressions of
the Ancient, calling the Host an Incruent Sacrifice. First, because here we
call to remembrance Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross, according as he
Instituted and required that at our hands, saying, Do this in remembrance of
me. Secondly, as it is a Sacrifice Luke 22. 19.
Rememorative, so is it a Sacrifice Representative, Insinuating and signifying
unto as the death and Passion of Christ: and not as common signs and
advertences only to bring to mind: or as Gulielmus Parisiensis has it, like a
String tied about the singer to put a man in remembrance, and no more; but also
to inform the Judgment, and confirm and increase the Faith of the Receiver.
Thirdly, it is a Sacrifice Representative to God as well as to Man: For though
nothing can lie hid from him, or be forgotten by him, yet taking things as he
has been pleased to express them unto us, after the manner of Men; he, by the
offering of this Sacrifice and the devout worship there performed to God, is
moved to behold, consider, and accept the true Sacrifice which Christ made for
us in offering himself for us: As it was by Gods own appointment in the
Rainbow put for a sign between him and Man of the Covenant for not drowning
the earth. And the Genesis 4. 16.
bow (says the Scripture) shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that
I may remember the everlasting Covenant between God and every living creature,
of all flesh that is upon the earth. In like manner and much more effectually,
may we say that the Action of the Eucharist presents to God the Sacrifice of
Christ's death, and mediation made by him for mankind, especially those that are
immediately concerned in that Sacrament: from which Metonymical Sacrifice, what
Great and rich benefits may we not expect? Thus is the Host a Sacrifice, but
not essentially as the sacrifices of the Law, or Christ's offering himself; but
Analogically, and Metonymically, by virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ; and
through whose virtue the benefits of Christ's death, and Passion are made over
unto the worthy Communicats agreably to Christ's Institution; and the Title
given it by the Ancient and Holy Fathers.

CHAP. XLV.
Of the form of Consecrating the Elements, wherein it consists. Whether only
Recitative or Supplicative.

AND to this duly communicating, is necessarily required the proper Form of
this Sacrament: Which Form consists in two things principally, The Proper
Actions of the Minister of it: and the Receiver of it. The Action of the
Minister or Priest consists in the due consecration and Dedication of those
Elements designed for that end: For as Augustine the father has it, The word
coming to the Creature makes it a Sacrament, it gives being to it, as such;
which before was but common bread and wine. And that this is done by the
Recitation of the history of Christ's Celebration and Institution of them all
at first; and Invocation of God upon the Elements, is certain: but it is not so
certain, what special form of words is only and absolutely required to this
purpose: nor, whether they are only Recitative, pronouncing the words of Christ
at the Institution of this Sacrament, as, This is my Body; Christoph. de Cap.
Fontium de Theolog. Scholast. Reformat.
and so over the Cup, This is my Blood: or, whether they must be also
Supplicative. The Greek Church and some of the Learnedest of the Roman hold the
Latter to be necessary, and the Former insufficient: The most common Opinion
of the Western Church is, That the Consecration by way of decency and
solemnity, ought to consist of Benedictions and Invocations of God; but that
essentially is required nothing more than the recitation of Christ's words over
the Elements, for the real Consecration of them. And each side does rather well
prove their own practice, than answer the difficulties opposed to each other.
For, as the Greeks well say, There is no great probability that an historical
narration of what was done by Christ, should of it self be effectual to the
Conversion of the Elements from their Common use and nature, to the divine. For
it is only expected from him that rehearses what another said or did, that he
be a faithful reporter; and not that he should effectually thereby make a thing
true. But on the otherside, Prayer is not so much Indicative, as Imperative and
Impetrative. We read indeed in St Paul to Timothy, of things that are
Sanctified by the word and ^ Tim. 4. 5.
Prayer. But the word and Sanctification there, are no preaching or
consecration, but only signify that God by the Gospel, which is his word
proper, removed the sentence of uncleanness from things so judged to be, under
the Law, and set them as free, as other reputed Clean: But prayer's proper Act
and Office it is to bring down a special Benediction upon Sacramental and
Familiar food. On the other side, the difference being so vast and Sacred
between Common Creatures of bread and Wine, and the Sacramental, it was looked
upon as a thing of greatest use and concernment to all believers to know,
whether such consecration was performed or not. But where the form was so loose
and indetermined as it must needs be, consisting in the various and Prolix
office, belonging thereunto, how could it possible be diserned when the Host
was consecrated, and whether; seeing neither the whole Canon could be said
thereunto absolutely necessary; nor could it be assigned what part thereof
essentially and essectually performed he Consecration. Hereupon the Latin
Church has taken upon them to define the Conversion of the Elements into
Christ, (for that they make Consecration) to a very few precise words used by
Christ at the First Institution of his Holy Supper* viz: This is my Body, and
This is my Blood. And I have not found how the Arguments on either side can be
well answered; while the Opinion of trans-elementation, or such supposed
conversion, stands Good; and is accepted: but otherwise it is no hard matter to
answer Both. For (supposing not a change of the proper natures and substances
of the Elements into the Body of Christ natural, What inconvenience would it
be, to be undetermined by a certain number of words, when the mystical change
was wrought, granting that this change Relative is made by the word and Prayer,
as the change of water in baptism is made not by any special number or form of
words, but by the Office, whether longer or shorter? And therefore the
necessity of putting the whole virtue in those few words recited, was received
presently upon the doctrine of Transubstantiation, which is an argument that
the Greek Church never admitted it, in the Latin sense; however, I know, they
would not in their Councels, contend with them about that; but kept themselves
to the tradition of their Predecessors, who restrained not the Consecration to
such number of words; but must have with the like prudence, and necessity have
done so, had they so apparently and expressly received such a simple conversion
as being true, all Christians ought to be so punctually assured of, and
venerate, that nothing in their Creed could be more necessary; and not
contented themselves with the Relative change only of the things themselves:
which precisely to know, stood them not so much in hand; seeing the Reverence
given to the Visible objects could not exceed that communicable to Creatures.
It may be granted therefore that the words of Christ are so necessary that
Consecration cannot rightly be performed without them; but yet denied to be so
operative, that upon the plain recitation of them, they should presently effect
that great alteration of them: as the Story (I make no doubt) feigned to beget
belief of this new opinion implies, telling us, That certain Shepherds while
it was the custom to pronounce the Canon of the Mass openly, having learned it,
Henorius in Gemma Animae. 1. 103.
and recited it over their bread and wine which they had before them in the
field as they were at their ordinary Meal, the bread was turned visibly into
Christ's body, and the Wine into his Blood; and that the Shepherds were struck
dead from heaven: Whereupon it was decreed in a Synod that from thence forward,
no man should rehearse the said Canon Audibly, or out of Sacred Places, or
without Book, or without Holy Vestments, or without an Altar. A tale as likely
to be true as the thing they would prove by it: And so let them pass together,
while we proceed to the

CHAP. XLVI.
Of the Participation of this Sacrament in both Kinds. The vanity of Papists
allegations to the Contrary. No Sacramental Receiving of Christ in One kind
only. How Antiquity is to be understood mentioning the receiving of one Element
only. The pretended inconveniences of partaking in both kinds insufficient. Of
Adoration of the Eucharist.

SECOND Thing formally necessary to this Sacrament; which is Celebration in
both Kinds; or Bread and Wine. In treating whereof we must do so much Justice
to the Cause, as to acknowledge a reasonable distinction between the Sacrament
it self, and the Communicants in it. To the former, I suppose, it is agreed
that indispensably both Elements are necessary, and Essential: and that there
can be no Sacrament without them both, whatever solemnity may be acted to the
eye, or ear. For the Sacrament no^ being a thing of natural force or virtue,
but instituted, the very formality of the Institution consisting in the joint
concurrence of both Elements, the Removing of One is the Adulteration of the
Whole, and destruction: neither can that be said to be a Sacrament of Christ's
Institution; but, if at all, of man's devising. Neither do I see how the
argument should not hold in the Participation of that Sacrament, as well as
Consecration, viz: that, as consecration in one Kind only makes not a
Sacrament; so communication in one Kind, where both are in being, should be
receiving the Sacrament. For the natures of things, as Aristotle has it, are
like numbers, which with the addition or Substraction of one, change their
kind. We do not make Bread of the Nature of Wine; or on the contrary: but we
make them both equally of the nature of that Sacrament, which by Christ's own
Institution was an Aggregate thing constituted of both: and therefore to
withdraw, or deny one is in effect to deny both. And the Evasion to salve this
is both ridiculous and profane, which says, The blood is contained in the
Body of Christ; and therefore in taking one, both are received. But it is
nothing so. For the Blood of Christ in the Sacrament is no more contained in
the Body, than the Body in the blood. And besides, we say, that he who not at
all receives the Cup, cannot at all receive the signified body of Christ, but
only the signifying. Again, How can this assertion consist with the opinion of
an Incruent Sacrifice? For either the Sacramental Body of Christ has Blood in
it, or it has not. If it has, then is it a Bloody, and not Incruent
Sacrifice. (For I think there is no ground for a man to say a Sacrifice was
called Bloody or Cruent, because only Blood was shed before it was Sacrificed,
and not because, even at that time it contained blood in it: For Cruent and
Incruent are the same in the Law, from whence the Gospel borrows this Phrase,
as Animate and Inanimate Sacrifices:) If it has not, how can it be said to
have the blood of Christ also? Must not they be necessitated here to slay to an
unknown Concomitance the one of the other, and not a coexistence? And if thus:
the blood has the flesh of Christ concomitantly, as well as the ^lesh the
blood: and so for this reason might the Cup be received without the Bread. But
we positively deny both such Carnal, Capernaitical Coexistence as is here
presumed, and such necessary Concomitance too, that with the receiving of one
alone, the other should be necessarily taken also: but hold rather, where both
are not Present, both are absent; and no Sacramental Receiving of Christ can
possibly be hoped for. And though I have been long of this opinion before I
found any authority express to this purpose, besides the very intrinsique
nature of the Sacrament it self, now touched; Yet am I not alone. For thus
speaks a Reverent and Learned Father of our Church. In all compounded things,
the moiety of the matter is the moiety of substance: Bishop Whites Reply to,
etc. page 483.
And whatsoever Jesuited Romanists teach, I see not how their Laics can truly
say, that they have at any time in all their Lives been partakers of this
Sacrament: for if half a man be not a man, then likewise, half a Communion is
not a Communion.

But were there more color, (for nothing of reality do we find in their Offers
to vindicate themselves) in what is said for the possibility of a Sacrament in
one Kind received: What can be said for their gross abuse of their and our
Lords Institution, and their Relinquishing the unanimous practice of the
Catholic Church for so many Ages together? Did not Christ equally institute
both? Did he not equally communicate both to his Disciples? Or supposing that
they were then all Priests (which may be well doubted of, seeing they were not
completely consecrated, then by the descent of the Holy Ghost, nor commissioned
to Go teach, and Baptize all nations until after this) does this give any
likelihood that therefore it is the sole Right for Priests to receive in both
Kinds? Did Christ any where make two Institutions, One For Priests, and another
for Laics? If but one, Who should presume to alte^ or adulterate his
Prescriptions? He said, Drink ye all of Mat. 26. 27.
this: which is more than we find he said of the Bread. And the shift is sad,
and pitiful which some who have nothing better to say, yet must say something*
add, that Christ said This do as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of 1 Cor.
11. 25. Fisher against White.
me: As if he excepted sometimes from drinking, when he commanded to eat?
Ridiculous! The meaning of Christ being as plain as any thing need be, that
there should so often be had a devout remembrance of him, as we communicate,
and not imply, as is most boldly insinuated, that sometimes we may not
communicate in the Sacramental blood of Christ. For it follows, As Often as
ye eat this bread and drink this cupp ye do show the Lords death 1 Cor. 11. 26.
till he come. Never are they separated in the Scripture. No ground at all for
the omitting of one rather than the other. The Church has power to deny one
as much as the other. The Church has no power to deny either: or any thing
else of such divine Institution. The Church of God for above 1200 years did
constantly and universally practice both. And until the Council of Constance
about the year 1415 many in the Roman Church so received: but then it was
violently taken away. But to this very day all Churches not subdued to the
Roman, continue the Ancient form. And do a company of paltry reasons drawn
from possible inconveniences in Laymens taking the Cup countervail so great a
cloud of witnesses, and so strong arguments to the contrary? What if sometimes
the Ancients did permit the exportation of the one without the other to such
as were sick or unable to receive in Public? Does this come home to the Case
which requires that the Public Ministration should be changed also? And how
does it appear (I am sure not by their demonstrations) that such Persons so
receiving in half, were ever reputed to have Sacramentally received Christ?
Nay, not half of the Autorities, or Instances common^y given of such
Communications do concern this subject: for most are to be understood of the
Panis Benedictus, or the Bread blessed by the ^ri^^^, upon (...) offering of it
by the People: which was not all consecrated Sacramentally and so given unto
Christians to be imparted to such as were of the same Communion, in token that
they were in Communion with them, though absent. This, I grant, was sometimes
performed by the sending to such, the Consecrated Element of Bread in the
Eucharist: Not with an opinion of the Fathers of the Church, however possibly
same vulgar and ignorant Christians might have too high a conceit of it; that
such receiving was tantamount to the receiving in both Kinds Sacramentally. But
to their inconveniences, which are many of them more fit to make sport, than to
sway in so grave a Controversy, we shall only reply that all they can alleadg
was no news to their, and our Predecessors; and yet never could it enter into
their hearts to attempt so monst^ous a change upon such frivolous pretenses.
But the truth is, the Error of transubstantiation being thoroughly received,
occasioned this, by way of common prudence, as well as Christian devotion. For
it being firmly and clearly believed, the Consecrated Elements became Christ's
Body and Blood, forsaking wholely their own Nature; Common Reason required
that all possible respect and Care should be taken, as far as the wit of man
could reach, that no detriment or indignity should be done to them: and that
then became indecent and profane which before was not. To have the Least Crum
fall aside, must be accounted a grand profanation, though in voluntary and
therefore humane wit invented Wafers and preferred them before bread, according
as Christ used it. In breaking of the Host some possible waste might happen
therefore though Christ, and following Christians communicated of 1 Cor. 10. 17.
one Bread, according to St Paul, For we are one Bread and one body: and we
are all partakers of one Bread; undoubtedly literally meaning the participation
by many, of the same Loaf in the Sacrament; now superstition has better
instructed us than the holy Spirit St Paul: and there must be no more breaking
of bread amongst Christians, of which the Scripture speaks so often (though I
confess not always meaning the Eucharist but yet that too, many times) and
which is so lively and proper a Ceremony and signification of Christ's passion
lest somewhat should fall out amiss toward the supposed Body of Christ in their
sense. To give Respect, to use reverence to it; to take all convenient and
devout Care about it, is very reasonable and pious, for the Relation it has
to Christ and his Proper Body, and the Virtue to us, but nothing could suffice
to lay aside the proper ceremonies used at the Institution, or form of it, but
such an opinion as that of Transubstantiation: ^ellarmin.
It now sufficing, according to moderner Judgments, that the several Wafers now
in use, were all one when they came first from mill, and are broken by the
Teeth in actually receiving them: whereas Christ represented the unity of his
mystical Members, and Fraction of his Natural Body by the Forms set before his
Disciples, the better to affect our hearts and quicken our devotion. To the
same end in Ancienter, though not first days of Christianity, there was an
Elevation of the Mysteries made by the Priest, to show only how Christ was
Lifted up on the Cross, for our sins: but upon the doctrine and persuasion of
transubstantiation, this was corrupted and perverted to the drawing people to a
direct Adoration terminated in the Visible objects; and not, as was anciently
used from that Action, to take an occasion of worshipping Christ himself, with
a seqestration of their mind from their senses. To this likewise pertains the
Grosser devotion for many hundred years impractised, and unknown to Christians,
that not only Adoration to God and Christ should be made by all who approached,
as Communicants, to these Holy Mysteries; but that the Host should be on
purpose publicly exposed to the view of all enterers into the Church, where it
is, with an injunction to exhibit all devout and divine worship to it: which
invention the Fathers and all Christian Churches were holy ignorant of, for
many hundred years; and never was there so much as a Feast of Corpus Cristi
till Urbane the Fourth instituted one, about the year 1263. And the Adoration
of the Host, as Christ himself, much later. But if such an opinion had been of
any tolerable Antiquity in the Church, how could it be avoided but such direct
and open Adora^ion should have been given, much more early: it being a most
ancient Principle of Christian Faith, that Christ was God: and of common humane
reason, that God is to be worshipped. And yet no mention made of such
Adorations as are of late introduced and required: which is an argument they
never believed, as now the Romanists do* for had they, they must have
necessarily done as they do. But a stop must be put to this luxuriant Subject,
to keep our selves in the Limits presribed to our selves; and here let it be.
Only having hitherto spoken of the Preparatories to Christian Faith, the
nature, Kinds, Acts, effects, and Lastly subject, which is the Church; and of
this again in its Political, and Mystical Capacity and Power, which consists in
the due Administration of the Sacraments, as well Properly as Improperly and
Equivocally so called; It remains now to conclude and Crown the present
doctrine of the Church, with that which is most contrary of all things, to the
Nature of a Visible Church; and that is Schism: For by this unnatural state,
the true Nature of the Church is more illustrated; and the Unity of it by the
explication of this Separation and Disunion, called Schism.

CHAP. XLVII.
The Conclusion of the Treatise of the subject of Christian Faith, the Church;
by the treating of Schism contrary to the Visible Church, Departure from the
Faith real Schism; not formal as to the outward form. Of the state of
Separation or Schism. Of separation of Persons Coordinate and Subordinate. Of
Formal and Vertual Schism. All Heresy vertually Schism, not formally.
Separation from an Heretical Society, no Schism: From Societies not Heretical,
Schism Heretical Doctrine or Discipline justify ^eparation. How separation
from a true Church is Schism, and how not. In what sense we call the Roman
Church a true Church. Some instances of Heretical Errors in the Roman Church.
Of the Guilt of Schism. Of the notorious guilt of English Sectaries. The folly
of their Vindications. That the Case of them and us is altogether different
from that of us and the Church of Rome. Not lawful to separate from the
Universal Church.

While we treat of the Church, it must be always remembered that we intend not
to speak of the Invisible Church, as it is taken for a select number supposed
to belong intimately and inseparably to Christ's invisible Body, of which no
knowledge, or account can be had, but by sensible outward things: but we
altogether enquire of the Visible Church which though it be not always
Actually seen, or discerned from other Societies (especially pretending to be
Churches of Christ) yet must always be Visible; though not conspicious. And it
would be a gross mistake in any, so to judge of the Church Visible and
Invisible as of distinct Churches, or necessarily distinct parts of the same
Church: because the same persons may at the same time be of the Visible, and
Invisible Church. This distinction then is to be allowed no farther than as it
insinuates to us the Several States of the Members of the same Church: the
Church in nature being but One; according to several testimonies of Holy-Writt;
and the very nature of all Communities, and much more of the Church, which is
to be an Aggregate Body consisting of many parts, by no natural Bond or
influence united together, but by divine Falsae Professionis Imagine utimur si
cujus nomine gloriamur ejus instituta non sequimur. Leo. Mag. Sermon. 5. de
Jejun. 7. Mensis.
and Spiritual. Which is manifested by certain outward Acts, which renders and
denominates such a society of Men, Visible, as a Church of Christ. These Acts
are principally two The profession and declaration in word or writing of the
true Faith, and the Exercise of those Graces and works which that Faith
requires in Religious worship and Obedience. That, and in what degree of
necessity this Church must be One as well as Visible, is before declared; and
here only repeated to give light to the nature of Schism, now to be explained.
For to omit the Criticismes, and various acceptations of the word Schism, as
not necessary; we shall proceed by degrees to show these two things concerning
it, The Nature, and Guilt of it.

For the Nature of Schism; it does appear from the Unity and conjunction of
Christ's Body, of the Church, consisting in two things; Communion with Christ
the Head, and mutual Communion of the members one with another: the contrary to
this must needs be Discommunion and Separation. But there being two parts in
Communion, a Material, or the things in which men communicate, as faith it
self, and the substantial Part of Christian worship: And a Formal, the Actual
outward exercise of this: The First of these, though it be really, yet is not
formally Schism, as may appear more fully by and by: because all Schism does
suppose some agreement with, and Relation to that One Body, the Church: but
where the foundation of such Relation is destroyed, there the whole perishes.
And therefore a division from the Faith of Christ's body, the Church, being
either Total, and that again either Negatively, when a man never was inserted
into that Stock, is more properly called Atheism, or Heathenism, or Privative,
and then is called Apostasy, which is a professed renunciation of the Faith
once received. Or this Division is Partial, and so it takes the name of Heresy
upon it. Schism then must needs be an outward Separation from the Communion of
the Church. But when we say Schism is a Separation, we do not mean so strictly,
as if it consisted in the Act of Separating, so much as the State: For we do
not call any man a Schismatique, who sometimes refuses to communicate with the
Church in its outward worship, though that done wilfully is a direct way to it,
(as all frequented Actions do at length terminate in habits of the same Nature)
but it is rather a State of separation; and of Dissolution of the continuitie
of Church; in a moral or divine sense, not natural, which we seek into at
present.

This Separate State then being a Relation of Opposition, as the other was of
Conjunction; the Term denominating and signallizing both, is to be enquired
unto: And that is insinuated already, and must needs be, the Church; and that
as that is united unto Christ; or the true Church. For there is no separation
from that which really is not, though it may seem to be. It must therefore be a
true Church from whence Schismatical separation is made. So far do they confute
and confound themselves who excuse their Schismaticalness from that which
principally constitutes Schism, and Schismatics, viz. an acknowledgement of
that to be a true Church from which they divide themselves, and separate.

Again, We are to note that Separation is either of Persons and Churches in
Co-ordination, or subordination: according to that excellent and ancient
distinction of Optatus, saying, It is one thing for a Bishop to communicate
Optatus Milevi^^^. Cont. Parmen. Lib. 3. Ald^.
with a Bishop: and another for a Lay man (or the Inferior Clergy) to
communicate with the Bishop. And this, because what may perhaps justify a
Non-communion with Coordinate Persons or Churches, which have no authority one
over another, will not excuse Subordinate Persons or Churches, owing obedience
to their Superiors, from Schism. From whence it is manifest, that though all
Schism be a Separation yet all Separation is not a Schism. And though there may
be many and just causes for a Separation, there can be no cause to justify a
Schism: For Schism is in its nature A studious Separation (or State Separate)
against Christian Charity, upon no sufficient Cause or grounds. It must be
affected or Studious, because if upon necessity, or involuntary, the
Di^junction of Churches is rather a punishment than a sin: and an Infelicity
rather than Iniquity: as in the days of Anastatius the Emperor, as Evagrius
relates it, Who so violently persecuted the Catholic Church, in behalf of the
Eutychian Evagrius Hist. Eccl. L. C. 30.
Heresy, that it was crumbled, as it were, into several parcels; And the
Governors could not communicate one with another, but the Eastern, and
Western, and African Churches were broke asunder. Which farther shows that all
Criminal Separation, which we make Synonimous with Schism, must likewise be an
Act proceeding from the persons to separated, and not the Act of another. For
no man can make another a Schismatic, any more than he can make him a Liar or
a drunkard, without his consent. For if the Governors of one Church expe^ out
of Communion another, upon no just grounds; the Church thus separated is not
the Schismatic, but the other: as appears from the words of Firmilianus Bishop
of Cappadocia, in St Cyprian concerning Pope Stephen, advising him he should
no^ be too busy or presumptious in separating others, lest he thereby
separated himself: so that if the Schism had broke out, upon no good grounds,
he, who was the Architect of it, Separated himself; as all others do: and it is
impossible any man should make (though he may declare) another a Schismatique,
any more than he can make him err without his consent, or be uncharitable. Yet
do they err also, that from hence conclude that the Formal reason of Schism
consists in Separating a man's self; for it is rather the material Cause than
formal. The formal Cause being (as in all other things) the very Constitution
it self* with unreasonableness and uncharitableness. No man can make another
involuntarily an Heretic And therefore no man can make another a Schismatic.
All the Guilt redounding to the Agent, no^ Patient in such cases. So that it is
scarce worth the Enquiring, Who began the breach of unity, as it outwardly
appears, but who is actually and Really First divided from Christ's Church: For
they surely are the proper Schismatics, though the name may stick closer to
others.

To understand this, we may consider that there is a Vertual Schism and a
Formal Schism. A Vertual Schism I call real division from Christ's Church;
though it comes not to an open opposition to it, or Defiance of it: so that
where ever is any heresy or considerable Error nourished, or maintained in a
Church, there is to be found a Schismatic also in reality, though not in
formality: the reason hereof is well expressed by, and may best come from, the
hand of an Adversary to u, thus judiciously enquiring, It is demanded first
(says he) Whether Schismatics be Heretics? Answer, The Common opinion
Az^rius Inst, Moral. Tom. 1. Lib. 3. C. 20.
of the Interpreters of the Canon Law, and of the Summists is that the Heretic
differs from the Schismatic, in that, Every Heretic is a Schismatic, but not
on the contrary: Which they prove because the term Shismatick, signifies
Division. But every Heretic turns away separates, divides himself from the
Church. This is very plain and reasonable: and so is the consequence from
hence: That where the Body is so corrupt, as to be really infected with
notorious errors, there it is really (so far as it is erroneous) separated from
the true Church; and where it is so far separated from the true Church, so far
it is Schismatical. And when a Church is thus far really Schismatical, little
or no Scruple is to be made of an outward Separation: neither can a guilt be
affixed unto it. And on the other side, if no such real separation, and
antecedent Guilt can be found in a Church, in vain do diverse betake themselves
to that specious Shift and evasion, that they were cast out, and went not out
willingly from a Church: and that they are willing to return, but are not
suffered. For undoubtedly the very supposition is insincere and faulty; that
they forsook not the Church, before they were ejected; And the expulsion
followed separation and dissension from it; and was not rather the Effect than
Cause of them; as are all excommunications rightly used. For to those that
pretend they were turned out, do not the doors stand open to receive them, and
that with thanks, if they please to re-enter, and reunite, themselves. What do
they here allege in there excuse and Defense? They are ready to return, but
they cannot be admitted but upon unreasonable Terms and conditions. How does
this appear if it should be denied, as without all peradventure it will? Must
not the Defendents be here forced to take their grounds of Apology and
Justification from the very things themselves, under debate, and put in their
exceptions against the terms upon which they are to be received, or condemn
themselves? Neither will it suffice to say, We shall be hardly used, or beaten,
if we return to such severe Masters, and therefore we will keep out. For they
may deserve it: and though nature teaches a man, as it did Hagar, to flee from
her Mistress Sarahs Tents, for fear of blows, yet God and Justice, and Christian
Charity advise us to return to our Duty. It must then be necessarily alleged
and made good, That we deserve not to be so ill used; or rather that it is ill
usage which we foresee: shall befall us and that, the case so standing, it is
not our duty to return: and all this can no ways possible be made good, but by
examination of the matter it self And that which will Justify us from not
returning will also warrant our free Separation at first. It Is the cause then
that makes the Separation, Schism, or not. An Instance whereof we have in the
famous Schism of the Donatists: which almost all Christians now adays confess
to have been notorious Schismatics, because they could not make good their
Reasons which induced them: for could they, they had not been Schismatics; as
a sober Author notes upon Optatus thus; If those things were true which
Albaspinus Observat. In Optat. page 3.
the Donatists laid to Caecilianus, and Mensurius and Caecilianus had polluted
themselves with Idolatry, The Donatists had offended nothing against the
Discipline and Canons of the Church, refusing to communicate with Caecilianus
and his Companions. That is, they had not been Schismatics, if so be they
could have made good their Principal Charges against the Church.

And this we may bring home to our selves, as now we stand divided from other
Churches, and particularly that of Rome. For if the Corruptions in doctrine and
Practice be not sufficient to justify our present posture of opposition: if
they had not before we left them, departed from the true faith; if they were
not really and materially Schismatiques before we were divided from them; then
surely we were, at our separation, and so continue. For to say, We have a
willing mind to unity, we have Charity so great that we earnestly desire
Reconciliation with them, is to deceive the world, and our selves and encourage
and justify Schism in others, who no doubt will all pretend to so much charity
as to declare themselves willing to embrace unity upon their own terms. But in
such cases we cannot be said to go to them, though in outward appearance we may
seem so to do, as they come to us. The question therefore is to be put under
the circumstances as now they are, and as the Case is now with them. And in
that it ought, and may be roundly and resolutely answered, We neither can, nor
ought, nor will reunite; and yet well enough free our selves from Schism, upon
the account of the Justness of the occasions and Causes there found, and given
us, to divide from them.

Then ought it to be enquired (for this they passionately call for) what are
those errors which that Church is subject to, for which a Separation may be
Legitimated, and not participate of the nature of Schism. It is commonly and
with general consent averted, (and that even by leaving Schismatics amongst
us,) That Corruption in Act or manners is not sufficient to warrant a
Separation from a Church subject to them, and so infected; no not perhaps
though Idolatry it self should be too common amongst them, in it; when no
necessity lies upon the particular Members, to be obnoxious to the same; the
doctrine of Christ bearing up its head above it, and obeyed truly by others.
But when Evil actions, and notorious errors in Fact shall come to that height
as to be reduced to doctrine, and formed into an heretical or Idolatrous
proposition, as in time it must of necessity be, (it being natural, as well to
all Churches, as persons to defend by argument what they choose to practice,)
and be taught publicly, then does that Church become truly Heretical and
Idolatrous, and from that Church which has so far departed from the Faith, any
Church or person may lawfully depart without Scruple of Schism, though such
separation be not absolutely necessary: because, though the infection be
common, it is not necessarily so general, that all should be obliged to espouse
it, and be corrupted by it; but when to this degree of doctrine, shall be added
a third, which is of Precept, and such unsound and pernicious opinions shall be
imposed on others, and exacted of all, there it is not only lawful but
necessary to salvation, to divide from such a pretended Church of Christ: I
mean a necessity of Precept, though not of Means: as if it were not possible
that a man should be saved who lives in an Heretical or Idolatrous Church,
though with those many circumstances of a general Right Intention, humble
walking with God, and invincible ignorance of the more pure and Christian Faith
and worship.

For there is undoubtedly a Mean between these two, Necessity to Salvation, and
Necessity of Damnation. Well might Athanasius say, Whosoever will be saved it
is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith: and add yet farther; Which Faith
except a man do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish
everlastingly; and so give us the particulars of that Faith, so necessary. For
he means no more than, that such Errors are in themselves damnable: But
heresies do not work after the manner of such natural Causes, which have such
effects infallibly, but may be said notwithstanding naturally to tend to such
events, which yet may be prevented by various Allayes of Circumstances both
inward and outward, impeding such Effects. The Consideration of which
possibility of escaping the ordinary danger, can no ways excuse a man or
confirm him in such errors, but the common; and, as you may say, natural
tendence, of them to ruin and perdition, strongly oblige him to relinquish
that Church wherein it is only possible, by virtue of some extraordinary
indulgence of God, to come to salvation; and whose errors are of themselves
damnable. So if the Question be put (as generally it is) Whether (for example)
a man may not be saved in the Roman Church? The answer is abundantly sufficient
within Religion and Divinity; though perhaps not so formal in Logic, That
they certainly may be damned, and that for holding the Faith and worship there
commanded, and received with full approbation. And this is sufficient to call
any sober Christian off from that communion; though there may occur so many
mitigating Circumstances, as to a Person of that communion, which may detain
any man of Christian modesty and Charity from pronouncing such an one to be
infallibly damned, or out of possibility to salvation.

And if it be hereupon demanded, What difference we put between Infidels, and
such corrupt Christians, seeing diverse have undertaken to assert a Possibility
of salvation to them also, living exactly to the Light and Rule of Nature in
them; I answer, not absolutely at present dashing the argument a-pieces by
denying the supposition, and their colorable proofs thereof, but demonstrating
a vast discrimination between the one, and other condition. For commonly, where
Heresies which are so properly called, and not Gentilism (as they are which
destroy the first Principles of Christianity) are taught, and maintained, there
are to be found all truths necessary to salvation, in a Christian sense. For
the Holy Scriptures (we suppose) are there received, and submitted unto ( which
are able to make a 2 Timothy: 3. 16, 17.
man wise unto salvation, and thoroughly to furnish him unto all good works:) And
the Records of the Church, and ancienter practice; good guides against the
rocks way-laying a man in his course to Heaven. And the want of actual
communion with a Church does then only expose our souls to Perdition, when it
is wilfully and causelessly slighted and contemned: And then only does
Separation visible, (...) less Visible alienation of mind and affection put on
the nature of Schism.

And there are two general defects in a Church which justify Separation,
according to those two things we have showed do constitute a Church: Doctrine
of Faith, and Divine Regiment, called commonly, Discipline. If a Church errs
notoriously in the former, no Separation can be called Schism; o^ if defective
not in Government absolutely (for without some Government it could not be so
much as a Society) but in the Government o^dained for it, because then it
should not be a Christian Society. For the faith of Christians held, do not
make a Christian Society, but the Christian Regiment: Christian Regiment also I
call that, not whereby Christians are Governed (for Civil Governments are
common to Heathens and Christians) but that which is Proper to Christians as
Christians, and was instituted by Christ, for Christians; and not invented out
of men's wise brains, and accommodated to the Church, and perhaps called Divine,
to give it greater credit, and place amongst Christians. Of which we have
already spoken. It being a common rule amongst the Ancients, Clemens Alexand.
Stromal.
immutable with me, There can be no true Flock without true Pastors. And there
can be no true Pastors where they are not set over the Flock according to
Christ's known and received will, but some presumed, tacit and extraordinary
Vocation (as they term it) when there is an entrance by the Window, and not by
the Door.

From hence it does appear, how uncertain and confused their notion and
position is, who without any more ado, conclude all those to be Schismatics
(and that upon their own Principles and Concessions) who separate from a
Christian Society which they acknowledge to be a true Church. For very great
is the ambiguity both of Separation and True Church. First, Separation is (as
we have before noted) either of Subordinates, or Co-ordinates. And of
Subordinates, either simply, or with Restriction. Simply subordinate I call
them not comparitively with Christ's Imperial Power, but with all External
power, who by divine Right of Providence, owe direct obedience to their
Pastors in all things, not inhibited by the Law of God, to which all Spiritual
Pastors are to be no ^ess subject than the sheep themselves. And thus every
Bishop is true Head and Governor of that Flock which, under Christ, is
committed to his Care and Custody: But in like manner is not that Bishop
subject to the Metropolitan, and much less, that Metropolitan to his
Patriarch. For these are but Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and of no distinct
Order, though Degree. According to which obligations of obeying, the refusing
to obey, and dis-uniting ones self from the Governors of the Church, does
aggravate or extenuate the Division; and the guilt thereof. And without all
peradventure may one Church divide from another, upon less grounds then the
Members of one Church separate from the more immediate Head of the same. How
thick do instances stand in Ecclesiastical History of Churches, who by virtue
of their Respective Governors, have been divided, and yet both remain true
Churches. Again, a True Church is said so to be more than one way: viz. As to
Being absolutely; and Being perfectly. We know that every Error in Doctrine,
though great, nay though heretical, does not presently destroy the nature of a
Church absolutely, though it takes away from the perfection of a Church. How
that opinion was delivered by the Fathers, viz. That Heresy destroys the
Church, we have Cyprianus Epistola 52. ^. gat Novatianos e^^e Christianos^
showed in part, speaking of Heresy: and now may add farther; that the the
same persons of old, or their Co-equals, denied an Heretic to be a Christian
also: and therefore they are to be understood of the such foul and unchristian
Heresies which rased the foundation of faith it self: as did the Valentinians,
the Gnostics, the Marcionites and such like: For it is now agreed to, That
unless a man be a Christian, he cannot be an Heretic; Or if at any time they
spoke of more tolerable Heresies, not wholly inconsistent with Christianity it
self; then they laid the burden of Damnation upon that accessorie, but
separable Aggravation, Uncharitableness: which alone, and especially conjoined
with such errors, exposed to damnation. But as it is with the Natural Man, it
is with the Spiritual: There are some parts Essential, and Vital, which cannot
be wanting or corrupted, but the Whole must loose its nature and denomination:
and there are others not absolutely Essential, which are called Integral,
without which the Body may possible subsist, but not be perfect in its material
Parts. And so it is with the Body of Faith consisting of so many Articles, or
members, as Parts; some Vital and essential; some necessary to its
perfections; but not its Being absolutely. And a Church may be called a true
Church which is defective or Excessive in these, though not in them. And yet we
need not betake our selves to that explication by some used, of a True-man and
a Thief, to express how a Church may be a True Church and an erroneous one, at
the same time. For the nature of this truth we ascribe unto the Church
consisting only in Morality; If the Church fails in that, the Nature of it
fails, as it does not in a man when he is corrupted with falsness and vice:
But this we say, That although all Truths are equally true, as to the nature of
Truth it self, they are not of equal importance and use to us, or to a Church.
Therefore such a Latitude being in the notion of a True Church, how can any man
so confidently say that, No Church can separate from the Church of Rome but
they must make themselves thereby Schismatiques before God, though before the
Church they cannot be condemned for such, qualifying this hard saying with this
Supposition only, That the Church of Rome always had and has Salvation in it,
as a true Church, though corrupted. For that we may, and do call a True Church,
wherein the principles of Christianity are kept entire, as to the most
fundamental of them: but withal, this hinders not, but diverse things at the
same time, and by the same Church which are damnable, may be found in it. For
in the same house says St Paul, there are Vessels to honor and dishonor:
which we may as well interpret of Tenets of faith, as of the Professors of the
Faith. And in the same Dispensatorie, are both Poisons and Cordials: yea, in
the same dish may be found Food sufficient to nourish and destroy; shall we
therefore not be careful to avoid the whole, because we do acknowledge the
wholesomness of so many in it. Who knows not that there are monstrousnesses in
Excess as well as defect? And that it suffices not to keep a man in communion
with a Church; that all things necessary are therein contained; when withal
many things not only unnecessary, but pernicious are shuffled together with
them. If we can therefore show, (as we suppose we have and can) that the Roman
Church allows and propounds many heretical dogmes, many Idololatrical
practices; what will it avail them to have it granted them that all truths are
extant there in the Monuments of their Church? It will here infallibly be
replied by them, That it cannot be that a Church at the same time can hold all
things needful in Faith, and worship, and yet maintain such errors as are
charged upon them. To which I say, and grant, That it is not possible they
should hold the same things as contrary, or appearing so unto them: But really
they may, and actually do. First, as Philosophers should of contraries In
gradu remisso, not Intenso, In the remisser and lower degrees, not the
extremest. Secondly, They may hold contraries really, though not formally, and
as contrary. For instance, They may hold this fundamental opinion, That God
alone is to be worshipped with that divine worship which is the supreamest of
all: And they may hold that such a thing (for example) the Host is very God,
which verily is not God; and consequently may teach the worship of such a
reputed God. Their Churches faith if it teaches strictly that only the true God
is to be worshipped, is inviolate, and sound in Thesis: But their Persuasion
that such this is, is an error in fact, rather than in Faith; which
contradicts the former opinion really. But we hold, That it is necessary to
salvation that we err not in such gross facts, though we abominate, detest,
and renounce the sin never so solemnly. And the like may we say in many points
of difference between us and them: when they hold the proposition in General,
sound, and good; but by help of infinite and unintelligible distinctions, word
it out, and ware off the imputation, but not the Guilt of Error. Of the number
of which things hard to be understood, is that consideration of Schism before
God, and Schism before the Church, with an implication that Separation from a
true Church makes men Schismatics before God, though not before men: because
(for example,) The Church of Rome cannot oblige any body to stand to the
Authority, which it so abaseth; namely, by breaking the Canons of the Church. It
is true, A Church or Man may be a Schismatic before God, and not before the
Church. But it cannot possibly be imagined how a man can be a Schismatique
before men and from men, and not before God. But if it could be, were we not in
a very fair way to hell, if we had no more to answer for than our Schism before
God? Were not our whole Church Schismatical, and as good as lost, though men
took no notice of it. It does not follow therefore, neither is it confessed,
that all are Schismatics who separate from a true Church, unless the
separation be from it, As it is true. For we have shown, that a Church true in
essentials, may fail in Integrals: And it is no hard matter to show that a
Church Erring in doctrines constituting the body of Faith, may be separated
from, without Schism. And the reason proving this is, because that such
Churches are already really Schismatical, through the said errors: and it is
not only lawful, but a duty to separate from Schismatics. For so says St.
Paul, We command you brethern in the name of the 2 These. 3. 6.
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that
walks disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us. And
what Traditions, do we think St Paul intends there. Only Ecclesiastical
Canons, and decrees of Councils for the better Government of the Catholic
Church. That this he may mean I deny not; but that no more, I deny. For he
that offends against the Faith, offends against the Traditions To the Church;
but he that breaks the Constitutions, offends against the Traditions Of the
Church only, which are of far inferior nature. It may well be doubted, whether
breaking of the Canons of the Church only can justify a Separation from a
Church: because they are not so much the Traditions delivered To the Church by
Christ and his Apostles, as the Traditions Of the Church, which in their nature
are mutable. But yet if any coordinate Church shall refuse to innovate, but
stick resolutely and firmly to the received Discipline and Laws of the Church,
while others shall violate them and choose new Forms, and impose new Conditions
of communion with it, not agreeable to the old, upon which a schism follows;
surely the guilt of Schism is to fall only upon that Church which thus
innovates. For though I am apt to believe that such alterations may not be
sufficient to justify a renunciation of Communion with such an Innovating
Church, (and much less in single persons and private members of the same
Church) yet doubtless it fully excuses from the guilt of Schism, if it
patiently and passively persists in the more ancient and conformable way to the
Churches of Christ in past ages, even with apparent peril of Schism: provided
that the said Traditional Laws and practices shall not by the more judicious
and conspicious part of the Church assembled freely, and Lawfully in Council be
judged inconvenient, and so according to the Right it has to reverse or
establish things in nature alterable declared void; and introduce new. For in
such cases, disowning of the Power and Authority of the Church, and refusing the
decrees thereof tending to the General unity of it, is of it self a
Schismatical Act. But in notorious errors in Doctrine or Faith, it is free for
any particular Church to divide from another: because such corruption is of
self damnable: And in such cases we need not say to extenuate, I know not what
unkindness, or perhaps incivility, we were driven out from such communion, and
went not out of our selves; but may declare Franckly, We voluntarily chose to
relinquish such communion, so conditioned. Now such errors we may well charge
the Church of Rome with, even while we hold it to be a true Church, in the
sense above expressed, viz. Essentially true, but not Integrally. For so a
Monstrous man may beget a truly natural son; and out of the Loins of the
Corrupt Church of Rome may proceed a Perfect Church. And he that holds that a
man may, even now when it is much more definitive and express in its errors
then itwas about sevenscore years ago, when it met first with that Opposition
which it could never master as yet, be saved in the Church of Rome, may hold
there are many damnable errors in it, which in their nature do damn, yet do
not always actually damn, as is said. And this does altogether vindicate such
Churches as directly leave them, provided they leave such their errors only;
and not extravagantly hurry themselves into contrary errors, out of
detestation to theirs. And this does lay a necessity upon such as communicate
with them to desert them, and a much greater upon such as are at present,
alienated from them, to preserve themselves from such imminent dangers, though
not infallibly destroying the soul.

Now if it be here demanded, as I know necessarily it must and will be, that,
to make this high charge probable, we give some instances of such their errors
and Schismaticalness, though I might well decline that so great and
Schismaticalness, though I might well decline that so great and copious a
subject, in this transient and compendious discourse, referring them to what
has been sufficiently written (though some have, I confess, Est s^lus in Orle
(...) Cha^act^^^s Episc^^us: suique ^^dimis p^incipium and ^^nis. Anasiatius
Germonius D: Indultis Apesiolicis Praefat.. Episeopus, and Vide etiam ^etrum
Gregorium Syntagm. L. 15. C. 3. quid tribuitur Pop^ supra Conciliis and
^rincipilus.
weakly and inconsiderately over-acted) to this purpose, yet I shall not
absolutely, without this general touch, leave the matter so: reducing their
Errors to these two Heads, Schismatical Doctrines, and Heretical. And this
alone I look on as a most Schismatical dogm, next to heresy, and which alone
suffices to justify the separation of all other Churches from that of Rome,
viz. That they maintain, if not in express terms, which somedo (who perhaps
will not be acknowledged when they are pinched hard to speak the sense of the
Church) in reallity, That the Pope or See of Rome has arbitrary power, of
himself, to Judge and Censure all Churches, and to institute, or Cassate Laws
for the universal Church: and that he cannot be a Schismatic. There is nothing
more fundamental in the Laws and Traditions of the Catholic Church, than that
no one of the Patriarchs should presume to form, or oblige the Catholic Church
by their single and private Canons and Decrees, without the consent and
concurrence of his Brethren; neither can any meeting deserve the name of a
General Council wherein their sentence is not heard or received: But there is
nothing more notorious than the Bishop of Rome's invasion of a sole Right to
Govern the whole Church: of which he has been often soundly charged by the
eminentest of the Later of the Greek Bishops, Nilus Thessalo. nicensis.
though their complaint has generally been received no otherwise than with a
deafear, or an insolent stomach; and contempt of the Sacred Canons of the
Church, as might be made appear by several instances; were this a proper
opportunity so to do: Neither do I know how they of Rome can exempt themselves
from apparent Schism, upon the account which Balsome urges against them, viz.
That the Popes have separated and are divided Balsam. Resp. 1. Jurts Graeco.
Romans L. 6. page 370.
from the Four other Patriarchs. Will they say, they are Schismatics and
Heretics? It is no more then they will pay them with again. And it is no harder
matter to prove one than the other. But if Four of the Patriarchs of the Church
may be Heretics and Schismatics and so continue for many hundred years
together, What becomes of that argument for the true Church taken from the
Universality of its Profession. For putting the Case, that those of the Roman
Communion were equal, yea Superior in extent of Ground and number of professers
(which is hardly to be granted) yet being apparently inferior in the number of
Patriarchs, they cannot pretend universality; unless they beg the question, as
too often and importunately they do, that the Roman See is the only Standard to
weigh and Conclude all Ecclesiastical controversies and quarrels. This is, as
we said, such a fundamental Error in the outward Polity and Discipline of the
Church, that it alone might justify a Separation from such a Monster.

I shall give but one instance, and that of one Man expressing the sense of
Vid. Aus. Barbossam de Officio and Potestate Episc. Par. 3. Allegat. 57. number.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
the Church of Rome, though some will have it called The Court of Rome only,
concerning the Popes Power. He [the Pope] is the Universal Bishop of the
Church. He has the whole World for his Diocese. He is the Bishop of Bishops.
The Ordinary of Ordinaries. In things concerning Benesices he has free and
absolute power. All Benesices in respect of this Holy Prelate are manual, and
he may use absolute power in them.

But to this adding such, to us, manifest errors and corruptions in Faith and
practice as have been introduced into that Church, there can be no just Scruple
made of Separating, and to profess so much, without mincing the matter by
certain fine evasions which strictly enquired into will no more satisfy than
downright dealing; which charge them with such heretical-Dogmes, which
contrary to Charity as well as Verity require Separation. Of the many of which
that of Transubstantiation may claim the first place together with its long
Train of Gross abuses, and Errors following upon, and flowing from it. For
though I know diverse Learned men of our Church do look upon it as a very
absurd falsity in matter of Fact, rather then of Faith: yet if it be considered
as reduced to Propositions invented and strenuously asserted to maintain that
Error in fact, it puts on the nature of Heresy too. To say that Christ had
but one hand, is not an Heresy of it self: but a notorious non-truth in matter
of Fact: But so to defend this opinion as thereby to deny Christ to have been
of the same nature with us, amounts to Heresy. Granting likewise, that not
only Christ's Natural Body is in that Sacrament, but it is that very thing which
after Consecration appears (though not as it appears) to our senses is but a
fowl absurdity, and error in point of Fact. Yet when it is so defended, as to
call in question the truth of Christ's divine nature, and to commend and command
the direct worship of those objects so mistaken; then certainly it is Heresy,
and somewhat more. And so their doctrine of Communicating in one Kind, contrary
to all the mention we have of celebrating the Eucharist in the Scriptures, and
those deserving the name of Fathers in the Church; may rightly be termed
Heretical, when it shall be drawn into such a Proposition as this (as of
necessity it must,) viz. That it is of equal virtue and use to receive the
Sacrament in one kind alone, as both Kinds: whereas only to deny the use of it,
is no more than an unjust and sacrilegious piece of Tyranny over the Laics. To
these it were easy to add more of like natures as sufficient Grounds to leave
such a Church as maintains them.

But for those who are not in Episcopal, nor yet so much as Metropolitan
subordination and subjection to that Church, but only Patriarchal (which
obliges chiefly, if not only, to a recognition of a Remote Right of Order, and
Principle of unity, when the Church is united, in bringing them to Councels and
keeping them to those Laws which are prescribed by General Consent of the
Church) and this not originally, by first planting and forming a Christian
Church in a Nation, but restoring and augmenting it, the case is yet more
plain, that it is free for such Churches to relinquish communion of any Church
subject to less Errors than are properly called Heresies. But for persons
educated in a Church and thereby subject to it, and owing Canonical obedience
not only (as they most weakly and wickedly imagine) to the Rule of Faith
therein asserted, and maintained but to the Rule of Unity and Communion
outward, for such; I say, to divide from that Church which has not by falling
into notorious Heresies or Idolatrous practices, first fallen from Christian
Faith, is to profess Schism. For to alledg that they would incorporate with the
Church, if certain things which may possibly be parted with without destroying
the Faith, at least immediately were granted to them, is to demand that their
Superiors should bow to them, rather than they to their Superiors, and in
effect to make the condition of their obedience and uniting with the Church, to
be this, That first the Church should be of their Religion; the difference
between them consisting in things in their own nature mutable. For though Faith
consists in those things which are judged necessary in themselves to be
received: Yet Religion is made up as well of the manner of serving God, as the
material grounds of it. And therefore it is according to the manner of their
treaties of peace in other Cases, to require the thing in debate to be granted
them, before they will bear of a commodation or reconciliation. This senseless
Charity is that of most Desperate Schismatics.

Yet not absolutely to despair of reducing some few of them, and much less of
preventing the like ruin of souls in others, we shall now conclude with a few
words concerning the Second thing in the beginning of this Point, viz. The
guilt of Schism. Supposing then, what is above said, that Schism is a Causeless
Separation from the Church of Christ, meaning by Causeless, not want of all
reasons, or causes, but Sufficient, as are errors now mentioned in Faith; we
farther understand by Separation, not that of the inward and hidden man, but
outward and Visible; answerable to that we have called, and acknowledged to be
properly called a Church, i. e. Visible. For possible we grant it is, what we
do scarce believe to be actually true, (though we hear such things sometimes
spoken) that dissenters may have a tolerable good opinion of a Church, as that
it is a true Church in their private senses; they may pretend some general
kindness and Charity to the Members of it: Nay they may hold it no grievous sin
to communicate with it, for some persons especially: and yet for all this be
rank Schismatics. For Schismatizing in its remoter Cause may spring from evil
opinions and dispositions of the inward man; but its formality is altogether in
outward profession of averseness, separation, and opposition to a Church. This
is it which has raised so much just clamor of the Ancient, and even of those
very modern Persons who stomach nothing more than to be reduced to their own
general Rules; and have worthily brandished their swords and pens to bring
people to the unity of that Cause, which never was the true Faith, and to that
Visible Company which never was a Church; and yet cannot understand their own
language nor receive their own reasons and arguments in Cases infinitely more
capable of such vindications, than the Party they created and asserted. Herein
surely they have exceeded all other Factions in immodesty and undauntedness,
that whereas those have been very scrupulous and sparing in delivering
doctrines of coercion and constraint to unity, and therefore may (though with
no reason, with some little color) stand out against Unity, and oppose all
Coaction thereunto: They of the Presbyterian Sect have preached, spoken, and
written so much, and expressly against Schism, and the Liberty which tends
necessarily to it, that it is beyond not only reason, but admiration, they
should neither be affected with what other men have said against them, nor what
they have unanswerably said against themselves, but proceed no otherwise than
brutishly to hold their Conclusion, and stick to their invet era^e errors, as
if they could find no Church to unite to, or had no souls to save, or did not
even according to their own principles run the apparent hazard of loosing them,
by that sin which they confess is one of the Greatest Size, viz: unnecessary
division. And unnecessary division themselves call, what is not for to avoid
Idolatrous practices, or Heretical errors; and yet in their Apologies for
themselves allege none but frivolous instances tending, as they judge, to
Superstition, wherein they prove themselves much more superstitious, by such
religious opposition as they make against them; and deeply concerning their
best Consciences, than they possibly can be, who for order sake, solemness of
worship, and conformity to the ancient Customs of Christ's Church, and to avoid
offense unto other Churches sticking inseparably unto them, retain rather than
invent such adjuncts to Divine Religion.

It is hard to search out any new Topic from whence to draw out reasons
against this heinous sin of Schismatizing, wherein I am not prevented by them
disputing upon the false suppositions, that they at any time were a Church: and
if they had been, that they who opposed them could be said to Divide
Schismatically from them, of whose communion they never were, nor ever were
obliged to be. They are therefore with others to consider, How solemn and
severe a command of Christ they slight and contemn, who divide from a Church
without more weighty exceptions than hitherto, have been offered by them, or
heard by us. For passing by that which we now believe they could wish
themselves unsaid, and are well content to lay aside, Antichristianism, Popery,
Baalism, Idolatry, and what not of most foul, bitter, and false slanders and
reproaches unbecoming the mouth of any sober Christian (with which
notwithstanding they thrived so exceedingly at first into Power and estimation)
there remains nothing now but such starved allegations and pitiful exceptions
as may call in question their discretion, as well as conscience, to urge them.
Will all the Prophecies and Prefigurations, and descriptions of the Old
Testament concerning the unity of Christ's Church under the Gospel; all the
Predictions, Injunctions, Obtestations of Christ and his Apostles: All the
solemn and Sacred Acts and Endeavors of Apostolical Postours to keep up unity
in the Church: All the detestations of Discord and Disuniting: All the
Denunciations of the most severe Judgments of God against causeless breakers
of the Churches peace, be put off, and made void upon such sorry grounds as are
of late found out to countenance separation. They are so well and generally
known by frequent use, that, aiming at brevity here, I hold it not necessary to
enlarge upon them, especially after so many who out of the Ancients have
dissected this Monster, to the horror of any truly conscientious. Yet one or
two I shall instance in Dyonisius Bishop of Alexandria, as Nicephorur Nicephor
Calixt. Lib. 6. Cap. 4.
Calixtus relates, affirms it to be no less glory, yea greater in his
Judgment not to divide the Church, than not to sacr^fice to Idols. Which in
plain terms is to say, It is as great a sin to be a Schismatic as to be an
Idolater, or yet more home to our Case, to be a Papist St. Augustine tells us
that it is manifest that he who is not a member of Christ, cannot have the
DeVnitate Eccles. C. 2.
salvation of a Christian. But the Members of Christ (he goes on) are conjoined
together by the love or Charity of Unity, and by the same do stick to their
Head, which Head is Christ Jesus. Now if it be impossible that any man should
be a member of Christ the Head, who is not a member of his Body the Church
also; and that it is impossible a man should be a member of the Body from which
he is divided; and that Schism does so divide a man from the Body: How can a
man that is a Schismatic be saved? Will they say by being of the Mystical Body
of Christ, though not Visible? In this excuse they fall into many dangerous
absurdities: First, in conceiving of Christ's Visible Church as not the Mystical
Body of Christ. For it is called Mystical not because it is internal and
invisible, but because it is not a Natural, but a Spiritual Body: It is not a
Political, as Political signifies Civil or Humane Society, but a Divine Body.
It is not administerd so much by Laws of humane and common Invention as
Spiritual. Secondly, In that it is supposed here, what we have before disproved
that they are two distinct Bodies, the Invisible and Mystical, as they speak,
from the Visible: So that a man may be of the one and not of the other: which
cannot be understood: For though a man may not be Visibly of the outward
Church, yet he must be and may be of the Visible Church. They are not Visibly
of the Visible Church; who by far distance of Place and time are involuntarily
separated from the Communion of the Church: but they who live within the
communion of the Church and uncharitably divide from its communion are not of
the Visible Church at all; nor yet, for ought can be made appear, of that they
call Invisible, any more than an Heretic: For as the same St, Austin says in
another place, Neither the Heretic pertains to the Lib. De side and Symb. C. 3.
Catholic Church, because he loves not God, neither the Schismatic because
he loves not his neighbor. And Luther, in his Colloqules tells us, that
Colloquia Mensalia.
The Heathen sins against God the Father, The Heretic against God the Son, And
the Schismatic against God the Holy Ghost. Therefore if there be such
notorious guilt on the part of him that sins against the Holy Ghost, above
that of him who sins against the Son, what mercy can they expect who thus
wilfully offend? For who (says Austin) sighteth with such evidence Aug.
Exposit. in Romans inch^ata. To. 4.
against the Holy Ghost, as he does who rages against the Church with such
proud contentions. Sectaries and Schismatics have made way to their divisions,
and alienations of men's minds and affections from the Church by reproaching it
with Antichristianism, which if they could have many sober or tolerable manner
have made good, they needed nothing more to excuse them: but alas, they have
the good Nature now to blush at such gross follies, and give over such foul
slanders, though not the Grace to repent, which they can never do without a
recognition of their error. But now they have almost done with that wicked
lie, they must expect we should begin to tell them a manifest truth, That the
Antichristianism is on their sides, upon many accounts: of which this of
Schismatizing is a principal proof: as we and they both are taught by Cyril of
Jerusalem thus, Hatred of our Cyrril. Hieron. Cat^c. pa. 161.
brethren does open a Gap to Antichrist: For the Devil does preapre Schisms of
the people (or Laity) that be who is to come may be more readily received.
These, and such like intolerable, if not unpardonable Evils of Schism made St.
Hierome say plainly, that Schism was worse than Heresy. And so Hieron. contra
Luciferanos.
indeed it is, in this respect: that Heresy of itself, and own nature, ruineth
only the person so infected: but Schism sweepeth away many from the truth, and
Charity of the Church: As therefore it is better for a City that one man in it
should die of the plague, than that through the infection of any one, the whole
City should be troubled with the Itch, or some such disease which should make
them all keep their beds, though possibly they may at length recover: so an
Heretic in a Church not so divulging his error as to infect the Church in
general, and thereby divide it from it self and others shall undoubtedly find
an easier Judgment at Gods hands, than the Schismatic who dissolves the
members of it from the Head, and one another, and does far less mischief.

And whereas two things are popularly alleged in their Vindication, The one,
that they would have lived in peace might those things have been granted which
might have been yielded them, certain indifferent things, acknowledged to be
so: And that they have done no otherwise than was done by the Church against
the Church of Rome to reform against, their consent. The First of these is in
part very ridiculous, as we have showed, and in part very false: Ridiculous it
is, because it implies as much as to say, Give us but our demands and then we
will be quiet: by which Rule no man should defend his own right in lesser
matters, which to part with, perhaps would not utterly undo him; but he must be
looked on as accessory to, and guilty of his own destruction, if the Invader
shall have power enough to bring it upon him, because he will not peaceably
satisfy his unjust desires. A man may be (and our Savior in the Gospel says
expressly, Luke 16. 10. is,) unjust in the least, as well as in much. And so
undoubtedly are they, who, having no Authority but what they frame to
themselves, shall by violence and aggressions attempt to extort the least thing
belonging of right to another, though happily better spared than kept; For it is
a Case of Justice, rather than Christianity. In justice and common equity, the
inferior members of a Church and state, owe obedience to their Superiors, in
all things not contrary to the Law of God, the Church, or the Nation: but at
most, they can claim such things that are (as they say) indifferent to be
granted them, out of Courtesy or Charity only. And whoever was so wilfully
stupid as not to perceive that Injustice, is much more a sin than
Uncharitableness; and so, whatever mischief or guilt shall fall out in such
contentions, must necessarily light upon the heads of the unjust Aggressour,
and not indiscreet Resister, were it indiscretion to withstand, to deny such
bold and insolent demanders; or uncharitableness: both which are denied in the
present Case. For there can be nothing more unjust on the one side, and unwise
on the other, than so rudely and unrighteously to require of another all that
may be granted; or to grant all such things as are so demanded. And if they
urge still The peace of the Church to require such concessions: I shall answer,
Let them first (as all good Christians ought to do) observe the Peace of
Nature, and the Peace of Nations, which is not to offer violence, nor to be
unjust, nor to go out of their Rank and Order, but with good Authority, and then
take care for the Peace of the Church. But what can be more absurd, than that
men should break the Peace of Nations and Nature it self, yea the Law of God
and Scriptures, which require to obey all that are in authority over us, as well
Ecclesiastically as Civilly, and then so much as to mention the Peace of the
Church? especially calling that only the Peace of the Church which puts them
into quiet possession of their desires. But to this we add, that it is also
very false which is here supposed to be true. For there is nothing more
manifest than that with diverse things of indifferent nature they mix many
things of indispensable use to a Church: and such is that so much reproached
and derided Hierarchy; which all the earth sees they have made it their
business to Destroy utterly. And when we plainly see, as we do, that those
things in nature indifferent are demanded chiefly as an introduction to a
farther abolition of things we hold necessary, we hold them no longer
indifferent; nor can we in common prudence or Christianity part with them to
such person; any more than we can in a neighbourly manner lend away an Ax or
Hammer, when we are assured, they will be made use of to break open our houses
and spoil us, though we know they may possibly be made use of to other purposes.

The Second Obstacle, rather than Objection cast in our way is the parity of
their Case with the Church of England, with that of the Church of England with
the Roman: wherein whether they show more Spite or Policy, may be a question:
Their Policy imitates them, who finding the war to lie heavy upon them at their
own doors, contrive by all means possible to translate it into another Country:
as was particularly seen in Hindersons Letter to his late Sacred Majesty, who
finding the ability of his pen and weight of his discourses, advised him rather
to turn himself against the common enemy, the Papist: And thus these men would
needs oblige us to make our quarrel good against the Romanists, that they may
be the les, molested in the pursuance of their most Schismatical designs
against the Church in which they were educated. And this being discovered, we
might well excuse ourselves from such a task as they would set us. But this we
have before resolved in good part: and had we not, might, and shall in a very
few words dispatch, as somewhat out of its proper place. We grant then, there
is a Schism between us and the Romanists. And we grant that there can be no
cause to be Schismatics, though for a Separation there may: and that they are
truly Schismatics who have ministered just Cause of Separation. Some we know,
out of an ancient Father, have urged against us, That there can be no cause to
divide the Church: which is true in two senses only: First, when that Church is
not before really divided from other Churches of unquestioned integrity; Realy
I say, by deserting some considerable point of Faith, or introducing some
unchristian manner of worship, though not Openly and Formally, as has been
said. Again, it is true only in such junctures as the Father spoke those words
in, which was an apt and orthodox agreement within itself, both in Faith and
manners: in such Cases there can be no cause to divide the Church, as did the
Novatians and Donatists. But it was never his purpose to say that no case could
happen in which it was not lawful for one Church to leave the Communion of
another; when it was so often done. So still the point is wholly, whether cause
was given or not, and not whether such outward, and wilful Separation was made.
For undoubtedly, however some would mince the matter, Separate we did, and that
wilfully from the Church of Rome; and chose, rather than were forced to go out.
And upon those very grounds we still stand out and refuse to return, The gross
corruptions there maintained and not lurking: and the fear of the loss of our
souls in there continuing, and much more thither returning. What those are,
has been even now touched; and we here add, that notwithstanding it is
confessed such senses are found of their doctrine and superstitious worship in
some private authors amongst them, which they offer at first to them they would
seduce, which may put persons into a possibility of their continuing, without
incurring damnation; yet the Public authority of that Church (which I suppose
they will call their Church) having evermore of late years, censured, purged,
and expunged such more tolerable constructions; and appeared for the most
harsh, and uncatholick, there can be no great regard had to the fairer
opinions. Again, it is not sufficient that a Church has a true sense of
Christian Faith, if it allows and commends a false and a wicked sense. It Is
little to the purpose, or to their advantage, to say (for instance sake) as the
more sober, especially when they would gain upon the good opinion of men, That
Images may be worshipped relatively and as instruments to devotion and helps,
but when there are found, and generally known to be such doctrines as teach a
veneration of Images for their own sakes, and directly, and that with the same
sort of worship that the things they represent are capable of; (though perhaps
they upon a pinch can insert a distinction which neither can be understood nor
profit) such a doctrine as this known to be delivered by the Principal Doctors
of their Churches and maintained, not being condemned by that Church (however
not generally embraced) may subject a Church to a censure of Heresy and
Idolatry of both: and so in other things, whereof tolerable senses are given in
the Church of Rome; or else they could not be said so much as to be a Church at
all; but intolerable and Heretical are also uncondemned, and so are no true
Church: and so may be separated from, without Schism, but not without peril of
damnation united to. And do not our brethren (for such they were before they
professed Schism, and I hope may be after they have renounced it) see now
plainly enough the vani^y and spitefulness of their Evasion? Are not the Cases
infinitely different, and that in their own eyes? Hear they what Perkins says
to our, and their purpose; So long as a Church Perkins on Gal. C. 5. V. 20.
or people do not Separate from Christ, we may not separate from them. 2 Pro.
24. 21. Fear the King and meddle not with them that vary, i. e make alterations
against the Laws of God, and the King. Indeed Subjects may signify what is
good for the State, and what is amiss; but to make any alteration in the State
either Civil, or Ecclesiastical, belongs to the Supreme Magistrate. And ^n
another place the same Author has these words, Great therefore is the rashness
Id. Galat 1. V. 2.
and want of moderation in many that have been of us, that condemn our Church
for no Church, without sufficient conviction going before. If they say, we have
been admonished by books published, I say again, these be grosser faults in
some of those books, than any of the faults that they reprove in the Church of
England, and therefore the books are not ^it to convince especially a Church.

Thus we see how the cases in the matter difier. And no less may we see the
difference in the manner. For it is apparent that Schismatics against the
Church of England never had any Legal authority to warrant their vile and
Scandalous practices: but were forced to give names to things incapable of
them, to excuse themselves; or else by an unnatural course to entitle the
People to a Power Supreme, who have none at all, but what is given them from
another fountain: neither did the people concur with such misdemeaners, as was
pretended they did. But thirdly, another difference is to be noted from the
Rights of a Patriarchal Power over a Provincial Church, not properly of its
Diocese, and that of a Metropolitan with his Suffragans over the members of the
Church which they altogether make. For, according to the constitutions of the
Church, though a Patriarchs Power was Intensively equal to Episcopal, over his
proper and immediate Diocese, and Extensively much greater than the
Metropolitans or Bishops in relation to other Diocesses: yet was it never so
Intensive i. e. so particular and great in those Bishops Diocesses over which
he had only an Order of Unity rather than Intrinsic power to dispose matters
therein, though in process of time this also was invaded much by him, and might
be recovered to the proper Bishop by the Laws of the Church. But the Bishops of
this Church had the sole and immediate disposing of the affairs of it, and
nothing could be concluded without obligation of obedience out of Conscience,
without their Concurrence, as desparately as Schismatics then did and still do
rage at this truth. But then, as Hinderson says with others, They would never
reform themselves. It is very likely so, meaning, as they would have them; but
that, not to the better Rule of the Ancient Churches, and the Scriptures, is
more than they knew, or would acknowledge when they saw; because still they
would have done otherwise, and invented a new Rule of their own.

But seeing the grounds and Cause of separation are they upon which the Guilt
of Schism is avoided or contracted according to the nature of them, and obscure
and difficult, and tedious is the method leading to the trial of the
sufficiency of them, to justify a Separation; therefore it were well
contrived, if, as in the search of a true Church, they may, being very long and
uncertain and grievous to most, proceeding upon the points of Faith and Parts
of worship themselves, certain infa^lible obvious and plain Characters could be
produced to convince the Schism, and distinguish it from simple and innocent
Separation. A Fair attempt to which has been made by Austin, who dispu^ing
against the Donatists denies that any man can separate from the Universal
Church, innocently. So that although it should be doubtful as most things are
managed by Learned Partisans) whether, considering the grounds of Separation in
themselves, the Separation be Schismatical, or lawful and laudable; yet by such
an outward Characteristick, it might be competently discerned. And so farmust I
needs comply with that Judicious and Holy Father, and such as urge this out of
him against us, as to yield it a most probable outward Note of Schism, for any
man, or number of men, not a Church, but in Fieri (as they speak) only, and in
breeding, to divide from the Universal Church: not only as comprehending all
Ages, but of any one Age: the weight and evidence of which Concession will
appear from the esteem of the Church Catholic, and the wrath and extent of
Christ's promises to preserve it in All truth. For this is certain, That Christ
directed his promises and restrained them to no one time or Age. And it is not
probable there should be such an Intercession or intermission of Faith or
Christianity, that the universal Church should mortally err in any one thing
necessary to salvation; nay, though we take it not in such a large sense as
sometimes it is wont to be used, for all individual persons in it, as well as
Churches of which the whole is constituted. And therefore to desert the
communion of all Churches, not of persons (for this is scarce to be supposed to
happen at any time) does argue shrewdly, That the separation has much of
Schism in it; without examination of particular grounds which are pretended
sufficient. For it will be said That it ought not to be supposed that Christ
should deliver over his whole Church to such heretical errors, which only can
exempt a Separation from Schism. From such notorious suspicions as these we may
clear our selves thus. First, by putting a difference between the Church so
united as is here supposed to rightly denominate it the Catholic or Universal
Church, and the Church disunited and divided long before any Reformation came
to be so much as called for in these western Parts, with attempts to put such
desires into practice. The division or Schism between the Western and Eastern
Churches happened about the years 860 and 870, under Nicholas the first of
Constantinople, and Adrian the Second, Bishop of Rome. Where the guilt was, is
of another subject. But the Schism rested not here, but infested the Greek
Church also, subdividing the Armenian from the Constantinopolitan. Now in such
Case as this, which is as much different from that of the Donatists who divided
from all these entirely united together, as may be, who can conclude a Division
from the Church so divided long before, a Schism ipso facto, because a Division
was made from one Part of it calling itself indeed the Catholic Church? Had
therefore Reformers so divided from the Catholic Church united, as did the
Donatists, it were more than probable that their division might from thence be
known to be Schism without any more ado: but it is certain it was quite
otherwise. And therefore some other Conviction must be expected, besides that
Characteristick.

And what must that be? The Infallibility of any one Eminent Church, which like
a City on a Mountain, a Beacon on a Hill, a Pharus or Lighttower to such as are
like to shipwreck their Faith, may certainly direct them to a safe Station and
Haven? And all this to be the Church or See of Rome? But alas, though this were
as desirable as admirable, yet we have nothing to induce us to receive it for
such, but certain prudent inferences that such there is, because such there
ought to be for the ascertaining dubious minds in the truth; and therefore so
(say they) actually it is: and lest humane reason should seem too malapert to
teach what divine Authority ought to do, therefore must the Scripture be
canvas'd and brought against the best Presidents in Antiquity, to the Contrary;
to Patronize such necessary Dogms. The matter then returns to what we at first
propounded: viz. the Judging of Schism from the Causes, and of the Causes, from
the Scriptures, and the more Genuine and ancient Traditions of Christ's Church,
before such Schism distracted the same. These two things therefore we leave to
be made Good by Romanists, in which they are very defective: First, that there
is any One Notorious infallible Judge actually constituted, whereby we may
certainly discern the Schismaticalness, or Hereticalness of any one Church
varying from the truth: and this because, It were to be wished a Judge were
somewhere extant. Secondly, that what ever Security or Safety of Communion is
to be found in the Visible Church, properly and inseparably belongs to the
Roman Church; because some of the Ancients tell, the time when it did not
actually err. But if our proofs be much more strong and apparent, which declare
that actually it does err, and wherein it does err, what an empty and bootless
presumption must it needs be, to invite to its communion upon her immunity from
Erring? or to condemn men of Schism for this only, That they communicate not
with it? which is the bold method of Roman Champions.

THE Second BOOK OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
Of the Formal Object of Christian Faith, Christ. An Entrance to the treating
of the Objects of Faith in Particular.

AND Thus far have we treated of Religion in General: and specially of
Christian Religion or Faith in its Rule, the Scriptures; Its Causes, its
Effects, its Contraries, its Subject, the Church, in its several Capacities:
Now we are briefly to treat of the Particular Object, Christian Faith.

That as God is the true and proper Author of Christian Faith, he is also the
principal Object, is most certain and apparent; and is therefore, by the
Schools called the Formal Object, that is, either that which it immediately and
most properly treats of, or for whose sake, other things spoken of, besides
God, and Christ, are there treated of. For other Religions as well as
Christian, treat of God, and the works of God; but none treat of God or his
works, as considered in Christ his Son, but the Christian. For the two Greatest
Acts which have any knowledge of, of God, being Creation and Redemption, both
these are described unto us in Holy Writ to be wrought by God through Christ
Jesus: as the Book of Proverbs and of Wisdom intimate to us, when they show how
God in Wisdom made the Worlds: Christ being the true Wisdom of the Father. And
more expressly in the entrance into the Gospel of St. John, Joh. 1. 2, ^
the Word of God, being Christ, is said to be in the beginning with God, and
All things were made by him and without him was not any thing made that was
made. And St. Paul to the Ephesians affirms, All things to be created by God,
Ephesians. 3. 9. Col. 1. 15, 16.
by Jesus Christ. And to the Colossians speaking of Christ the Image of the
Invisible God, adds, For by him were all things created that are in Heaven,
and that are in the Earth Visible and Invisible, etc. This therefore
discriminates the treating of things natural in Christian Theology from all
other Sciences and Theologies, that all is spoken of in relation to Christ
Jesus.

Therefore having in the beginning of this Tract spoken of God in General, as
supposed rather than to be proved in Divinity, viz. of his absolute Being: his
Unity, being but one; His Infiniteness, being all things in Perfection and
Power; we are here to resume that matter, and continue it by a more particular
enquiry into the Nature, Attributes, Acts, and Works of God: here supposing
what before we have spoken of the First notion of Gods Being, and those
immediately joined with them, His Unity, and Infiniteness: which Infiniteness
necessarily infers all other Attributes proper to him, as of Power, Prefence
in all places, and all times, and Omniscience: and therefore here we shall
speak only of the Nature, or Being of God in the more peculiar sense to
Christians, that is, being distinct in Persons, as well as One in Nature.

CHAP. II.
Of the special consideration of God as the object of Christian Faith, in the
Unity of the Divine Nature, and Trinity of Person.

FROM the Unity or singularity of Gods nature as to number, does flow an Unity
and Simplicity of that one Individual Nature in it self. For as the Nature of
God cannot be found in several and separate Persons subsisting by themselves,
as may the nature of man: so neither ought we to imagine that there is
multiplicity of natures constituting the same God. For as there are not many
Gods differing Generically, as there are Bodies Celestial, and Podies
Terrestial; and again, of Terrestial, some Bodies Elemental and uncompounded
naturally; Other Mixed and compounded: and such are Fish, Foul, and Beasts;
neither can there many as different in kind, as Man and Beast are distinct; nor
in number, as men differ one from another, so neither can there be One
differing as it were from it self, in Parts, or other like composition of
nature, as man does. For seeing (as Boethius has observed) God Boethius
Conso^^^* Lib. 3. ^^os. 10.
is that which is most absolute and perfect; and than which nothing more
excellent can be conceived by the mind of man: If more than one could be in
nature, or number, there could not be one most absolute: but One more absolute
and simple might by the Understanding of Man, be conceived, which necessarily
must be thought to be God rather than those diverse ones. And if we should
suppose the Nature Individual of God to be made up of several sorts of things,
and naturesas the Body of man, then did we not pitch upon the true Notion of
God: which we must always suppose to be most perfect: But we have more than
conjectural knowledge that some things in the world are not compounded, at
least as we are; but of a more pure and simple substance: such as we call
Spirit. And we man well believe that all of that nature are not of equal
perfection: or if possibly they should, that still there is a possibility of a
more transcendent purity of subsisting than they are of, until we come to the
most absolute, pure, and perfect Being, than which nothing can be, or conceived
to be more Pure, and Perfect: and that must of necessity be God. Again, such a
composition would destroy the nature of God, because such it must be that
nothing either in act or Cogitation, can possibly precede it: but where there
are distinct parts, or humors concurring to make one Entire thing, there a real
priority at least of nature, must needs be: because it cannot be supposed but
the Cause must in some manner go before the Effect, and such supposed
compositions have of the nature of a material Cause to such a thing, as they so
constitute. Thirdly, all things of a differing nature concurring to make One,
cannot move themselves, nor of themselves meet with such concord as to make one
thing without the power and wisdom of some third Superior Agent bringing them
so together. So that to suppose such a God, is to suppose one Above, and before
him; who should Effect all this which is repugnant to the nature of God.
Lastly, nothing can be so well set together but it may be supposed to be undone
and dissolved again, either by the nature of things themselves tending to
separation, or by the same power, or, if they will, fortune (as some have
called it) which brought them together.

This is yet further confirmed unto us from the Holy Scriptures: which were
best able to reveal the nature of God unto us so far as was expedient, or
perhaps, for us in this life, possible to understand: where God most admirably
describes himself thus, I am that I am: which is his name for Exodus 3. 14, 15.
ever, which no created thing can claim to it. The like to which is that name
Jehovah, whereby he calls himself, signifying an absolute essential Being. For
nothing besides God can define God. Every thing but he, is defined by another
thing, which differs in some manner from it: but God is defined by himself,
because nothing can be Higher than he, and nothing in him is really distinct
from him, as in other things. And therefore truly may it be said of God, The
Lord thy* God is one Lord, i. e. One in number, nature, Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
and Simplicity of Being. And therefore, such definitions of God as Joh. 4. 24.
1 Timothy 1. 25. Psalm. 90. 2. Jer. 23. 23. 34. Psalm. 130. v. 7. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
this, God is a Spirit or Substance, Spiritual, Uncreated, Most Pure, Eternal,
Infinite, Incomprehensible, Immutable, Everliving, etc. Are rather to be
understood Negatively than Positively: that is, that God is so a Spirit that he
is infinitely above the nature of Corporeal Beings: though he be not so a
Spirit as to be of the Nature of Angels or such like Spirits, but much more
transcends them in excellency, than they do the most gross and earthly Bodies:
And said to be Infinite because no limitation of his Being, or Power, or
Presence can be supposed: which is commonly called the Negative way of
attaining knowledge of Gods nature, viz, by removing, or excluding all
imperfections of the Creature from God the Creator. And Positively ascribing
all things to him, which appear to humane understanding most Perfect, and
Excellent.

CHAP. III.
Of the Unity of the Divine Nature as to the Simplicity of it. And how the
Attributes of God are consistent with that Simplicity.

BUT against the fore said Simplicity seem to make several things ascribed unto
God and believed of him: as First, Attributes of God, as Most Holy, Most Wise,
most Just, Most Merciful, and such like. Secondly, the descriptions made of God
in Holy Scripture. Thirdly, The Existence of God in a triplicity of Persons. Of
the first we shall here speak most briefly, as no difficulty. For we are to
understand them, not as really distinct things from the Nature of God himself;
which is most simple, but only Relatively, and after the manner of man's
conception: who being able no otherwise than from sensible and natural
occasions, to understand God, must of necessity frame to himself such
affections; and severally distinguish them, for to exercise the several Acts of
Service due to God: For if Man considered God altogether under one manner of
Being: then could he not sometimes humble himself under his wrath, and
displeasure conceived for his sins: Then could he not, at other times, rejoice
in his mercy, and express his thankfulness for his grace and Goodness received.
Then could he not implore his aid against unjust dealings and injuries suffered
in the world. Then could he not Pray unto him, to relieve him in his
necessities, and straits: none could crave supply from his bounty and fullness
in his wants. These distinct conceptions therefore of God are requisite, though
God be absolutely the same. And God having vouchsafed to express himself in
such manner in his Word, does thereby give warrant for us to be affected:
always provided that we proceed not to any gross imagination of him as really
so affected and compounded; but according to a Metaphorical or Metonymical
sense, familiarly used in all authors as well as in the Scriptures. For it is
to be noted, the Scriptures do choose to speak (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 15. in
Joann.
in compliance with man's capacity, not according to the dignity of the subject,
of which it treats, nor according to the Splendor and illuminated state of the
Understandings receiving divine Revelations, but according to the proportion of
men's ordinary apprehensions, to which they are directed; as Philosophy has
observed that All Agents do work agreeable to the condition of the Patient or
thing that suffers, not according to the full force and virtue which it has
in it self. For fire does not equally prey upon stone and wood: nor does the
Physician give the same strong Physic to a weak body as he does to a strong,
nor are Men informed of God, after the manner of Angels, who behold much more
purely and clearly the Nature of God. But man's knowledge is generally taken
from the Effects. And so comparing those works of God, and Acts of God, which
have some similitude with those of men. For as all works of note do imply some
care and pains to produce them by men; So is God said to labor when he created
all things in this world: and to rest, when he had finished and ended all:
because this is the manner of men: And to be Angry when either just cause is
offered by offending him, in breaking of his holy Laws, or the effects of wrath
commonly seen, when men are so affected appear by the severe punishments
inflicted upon offenders.

And what is said of the inward affections ascribed unto God, may be easily
applied to those outward descriptions made of God in Scripture, under the form
of Man, as of Hands, Arms, Head, Heart, Eyes, and such like; which the ancient
Fathers against the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites, who (as Epicurus in
Tully) took God to be of the same fashion and (...), often mentioned by St.
Chrysostom. Suidas.
form with Man, do affirm to be by Condescension to Man; which Condescension is
thus described by one [(...)] Condescension is when God does seem to be what he
is not, but so declares himself to be, as he that is to conceive of him, is
best able to behold him, proportioning the revelation of himself to the
imbecility of the contemplator.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Unity of the Divine Nature as to number, and how the Trinity of Persons
may consist with the Unity and simplicity of the Deity. Of the proper Notions
pertaining to the Mystery of the Trinity, viz. Essence, Substance, Nature,
Person. The Distinction of the Persons in the Trinity. Four Enquiries moved.
How far the Gentiles and Jews understood the Trinity. The Proof of the Doctrine
of the Trinity from the New Testament, and the Explication of it.

BUT to the exception taken from the Mystery of the Holy Trininity, greater
regard ought to be had, as well for the explication and confirmation of that
Doctrine, as for the satisfaction of humble enquirers into the same. And for
more clear and gradual proceeding herein, it will be requisite first to explain
such terms as this Doctrine much depends on, as Essence, Substance, Nature,
Person and Trinity it self.

Essence is of somewhat larger extent than Substance, because Substance
signifies properly only that which is opposite to Accident, or that which
adheres or inheres to Substance: but Essence signifies all kinds of Beings, as
well of Accidents, as Substances. Nature is the restraint of Essence and
Substance both, in their general Being, to some more special kind of thing; as
there is the Nature of Man, and the Nature of Beast, the Nature of Accidents,
and the Nature of Substances, the Nature of Colors, and the Nature of
Quantities: so that Nature is not that whereby a thing simply and absolutely
is, but whereby it is what it is. Hence we say also, the Nature of God or the
Creator, and the Nature of the Creature; Nature being that by which, as is
said, a thing is what it is, and distinct from others. And as for the word
Trinity, it is true what has been objected by some of old, that it is not in
terms t^ be found in Scripture; for the word does not import any one or more
things absolutely, but rather the manner of such things being, the better to
settle the mind in the apprehension of that great Mystery. Now the Holy
Scriptures does very often only propound the Article of Faith to be believed by
us, but leaves the manner of expressing and conceiving the same to the holy
prudence of Men, whom he has for the instruction of inferior persons ordained
in his Church, which have agreed so to term that threefold personal Relation,
in the Deity. A Person is defined to be an entire and absolute Being, of
reasonable nature. Man in general is not a Person, because he subsisteth not by
himself. A Beast in particular is not a Person, because void of knowledge and
reason. The soul of Man, though endowed with reason, is not a Person, because
not of it self entire and perfect, being part of another thing, i e. Man. But
Peter and John are Persons, because single Substances, absolute in themselves,
and rational.

To collect therefore, and conclude from what is thus briefly premised, we say,
that these Notions of Essence, Substance and Nature, are sometimes taken more
strictly and properly; according to which we must always hold it as a most
fundamental Truth in Christian Religion, as it is in the Religion of all
civilized People, that God is but one in Essence, Substance, or Nature, i. e.
the Being and Nature of God, as God, are but one. But if we take the said
Notions more largely, for that which expresses the manner of Being, as well as
Being it self, then may we speak of the nature of a Person; as when we say,
that the nature of a Person is different from the nature of things simply
taken. And if Nature be taken, as sometimes, for the condition of a thing or
Person, we may truly say, that in the Trinity, the Three Persons, as Persons,
are of a different nature, though they differ not in the nature of the Deity:
For, that they really, and not imaginarily, or by man's fancy and conception
different from one another, is a received Truth by all, reputed true Believers;
but nothing can be distinct from another, but by somewhat peculiar to it, and
whatever is peculiar to a thing, and ingredient into its Being, may be, and is
commonly called the nature of it; in which sense we may say, Three Persons are
of a different nature, because the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the
Father, nor the Holy Ghost Father or Son; for the nature of the Father, as
Father, is to beget; the nature of the Son, as Son, to be begotten; the nature
of the Holy Ghost, as Holy Ghost, to proceed. But all this hinders not in the
Nature of God they should be one and the same, and so but one distinct God; and
this makes the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity: For were not the
Persons distinct by somewhat real, and not so notional as to be fictitious,
there could not be said to be a Triplicity or Trinity of Persons. And again, if
in nature they were not the same, there could be no Identity worthy of that
Mystery: For other Creatures differing one from another in subsisting
distinctly, agree in the unity of a general nature, as three men agree in the
common nature of man. But it is otherwise in the sacred Mystery of the Persons
and Nature of God; for the Nature of God is numerically the same, and yet is
without inequality or division, communicated totally and entirely to every
Person. Again, other Persons are of a distinct subsistence, that is, subsist
apart; but the Vide Ruffin^^ Histor. Eccles. l. 1. c. 29.
Persons in the Trinity subsist not distinctly, because all equally have their
subsistence in that Divine Nature; but they may be said to exist distinctly, or
have a diversity of existence, as they are so many Persons.

From the Point thus briefly opened and stated, these four things are to be
asserted and believed: First, That God is but one in Nature. Secondly, That
there is a threefold Personality in that Divine Nature. Thirdly, That these
three are distinct, and how. Fourthly, That they are the same in subsisting. Of
the first it has in the beginning been sufficiently spoken, and may well here
be taken for granted. The second is now to be explained, and that in these
following Enquiries: First, By the Grounds of Natural Reason. Secondly, The
Grounds of the Old Testament for the same. Thirdly, The Opinion of the Church
of the Jews concerning the Trinity. Fourthly, The Grounds of the Gospel
founding this Doctrine.

The reason why the first is called in question, is because God is generally
affirmed both by the Histories of all Ages and People, to be known to the
Gentiles naturally, i. e. by a connatural Instinct; and that many of them did
worship the true God, according to that Law and State of Nature in which they
lived. But if God essentially and immutably consists of three Persons in one
Nature Divine, they that worshipped God otherwise than in the Holy Trinity,
worshipped him not as he is, and they that worship him not as he is, worship a
false God, and they that worship a false God, worship an Idol. And hence it is
that diverse learned men have said, They who worship God out of the Trinity,
worship an Idol, and not the true God; which severe Argument concludes as well
against the Jews, as Gentiles; if, as some believe, they understood not God in
the Trinity, but worshipped him in the simplicity of a Deity only according to
the way of Nature. But if this only men were taught by nature, (for that men
were by a light of nature led to worship not only God, but one God, Reason and
the Scriptures inform us) that they should worship a God, and him alone, and
did not intimate withal so much of the true Nature of God, as was absolutely
necessary to be known, to the worshipping the true; what benefit could it be to
man, to have such an imperfect knowledge of him, whenas still he must worship
an Idol, God being the same under the Law of Nature, as he is under the Gospel
of Grace? For as that man who acknowledges but one God, should commit
Idolatry, who should strongly imagine and firmly persuade himself that God was
of the fashion and fo^m of Man, and worship him as such a one, sitting in a
fair and glorious room in Heaven: So no less in reason does it seem, that he
should in like manner offend, who does believe no distinction of the Deity into
the Trinity of Persons, but acknowledges but one Person in the Divine Nature.
The reason of both is, because he worships him neither way as he is, and that
not in relative Attributes in order to us, but absolute, essential manner of
Being. Now no man that thinks of another otherwise than he is in Essence,
thinks really of that, but some other thing.

To vindicate then both Jew and Gentile from such gross error, even in the
Object of Worship, and not only them, but Nature it self from misinforming
them; it is said, that the Gentile had some light apprehension of the Deity
under this notion: And that first from Tradition of the most ancient
Patriarchs, who undoubtedly were sufficiently instructed in that Deity. And
that this Tradition was so conveyed to the ears of some prime Philosophers, or
exposed to their view in the monuments of ancient days, that they have
committed the same to writing, as diverse of their Books still extant intimate
unto us, though obscurely. Secondly, The many footsteps of this great Mystery
found in the course of Nature, do (according to many wise men) suggest to an
attentive mind the Nature of God, as now received, which others have at large
pursued; imitating herein St. Augustine in his Book of the Trinity, wherein he
endeavors to describe Lib. 10. and 11.
the manner of this Mystery from the internal senses of Understanding, Will and
Memory; and external, of Apprehension, Imagination and common Sensation, all
which agree in one, and proceed from one. But in this method no sure footing
can be found, for more serious and solid certification of a man, though we
should yield some glimpses of that divine light to shine from thence; for the
Book of the Creature wherein God is to be read, does not deliver all things
equally clear to us: But first, having plainly made known the thing it self,
leaves us to seek from what we know imperfectly of God, to procure by due
worship and Petition a farther insight into that mystery, which being in some
measure better instructed in from above, things below may confirm us in the
same.

Thirdly, It seems to me that naturally (not taking Nature strictly for a
necessary and full assurance, but tacit, at least, intimation) there is implied
somewhat of the Trinity of Persons, from the too common error of acknowledging
more Gods than one. For (as we have said) it being a Doctrine of Nature no less
apparent that God is one, than that he is simply, it could scarce become so
general an error, that men should contrary to such natural light, worship a
plurality or variety of Gods, but that there was somewhat received together
with that Principle, which might incline and expose them to error; and that was
a general Notion, whether by Tradition or Nature, that the Divine Nature was
diversified: But how this could consist with the other Principle, not being
capable to understand, they easily fell from their first, and more sound Notion
of the Unity of the Divine Nature, and took up the opinion of many Gods
distinct, as well in Nature it self, as Persons. And do we wonder that they
should forsake the truest notion of a Deity in this abstruseness, when in those
things that are confessedly clear to ordinary Reasons by nature, they
degenerated to a little less than brutish stupidity, being, as the Scriptures
tell us, of some things willingly ignorant. 2 Pet. 3. 5.


But it were much more absurd, that the peculiar people of God, the Jews,
should be ignorant of this so necessary a Point; and yet we find that now-ada^s
they declare against it expressly, denying withal this to have been any branch
of the Faith professed by their Progenitors. But we need not be very anxious
about their Authority now adays, it being most easy to be made apparent, in
how many and great things they have degenerated in their Doctrine and Worship,
since it pleased God to withdraw his holy Spirit from that Church, upon their
rejecting of the true Messiah sent them, and to translate it to the Church of
the Gentiles. And no wonder that they who observe not that now, should argue
against it, as a thing not to be done; and moreover deny that ever it was
believed or practiced by their Forefathers, for there remains no other way to
excuse themselves in their present error, but to maintain that it was never
otherwise held. This is a common evasion of all Heretics and Sectaries: But
that the Scriptures of the Old Testament contained this Doctrine in substance,
though the more perspicuous and glorious manifestation of the same was reserved
for the New, is not to be denied; especially if we consider how that many of
their own Doctors and Rabbis have so interpreted the same. And some have
admired the Hebrew Language as the holy Tongue, not so much (as some of
moderner standing amongst them have given out) because of the neat and modest
expression of things of impure and obscene nature; for it is very plain, that
the most obscene things are there as broadly and manifestly expressed as
elsewhere, but from the matter which it treats of generally, very divine; and
particularly from the nature of that Tongue, in every word of which being a
Radix or original, the Mystery of the Trinity is implied, in that it consists
but of three principal Letters, which Letters make but one word. But there are
more sure words of Prophecy than they, and such are these, together with the
Comment and approbation of the Chaldee Paraphrast, Genesis 3. v. 8. it is said,
They heard the voice of the Gen 3. 8.
Lord God walking in the Garden; which words Onkelos renders thus, And they
heard the voice of the Word of the Lord God; where we see that Voice and Word
are distinguished, the one being taken for the Word spoken, the other for the
Word subsisting, or personal. And again, v. 22. where the Hebrew has, And the
Lord God said, etc. Jonathans, or as some more properly, the Jerusalem Targum
has, The Word of the Lord said. And the same Jerusalem Targum on Deuteronomy
the 33. 7. has, The Word of the voice of the Lord heard Judah, where the
Original and other Translations have, Hear Lord, or receive Lord, the voice of
Judah. And so in other places; which does argue a Personality ascribed unto the
Word of God: Which does farther appear, for that the action of Creation,
extending the Heavens, and Repenting, is attributed unto the Word of God.

But I leave the asserting of the Mystery of the Trinity from the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, interpreted by the learned and most renowned of the Jewish
Doctors, to such who have made it their design to convince them from
testimonies of their own Authors, as Petrus Galatinus, and more exactly,
Josephus de Voisin, in his Comments on Prigro Christianae Fidei, and
especially, de Trinitate. I shall only add here that memorable passage in
Bibliander, out of the Jewish Rabbis, upon that place in Bibliander de
Paschate Israel. Genesis 28. 11.
Genesis 28. And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night,
because the Sun was set, and he took of the stones of the place, and put them
for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep. Where some Rabbis (says
Bibliander) do understand, that he took two stones; but others, as Rabbi
Nechemias, that he took three, and in this manner prayed to God; If God shall
write his Name upon me, as he did his Name upon mine Ancestors, let all these
become one, and he found them all one: By which type of the stone they give to
understand, God to be the Original of all things; for the word [(...)] which in
Hebrew is a stone, implies in a mystery, the Trinity; for in Aben Ab intimates
the Father; Ben signifies the Son; and ^ or N. Neshanna or Spirit: Thus they.
Which their interpretation, whether it has not more of wit than solid
Argument, I am not here to determine, it sufficing our present purpose, to show
that the Doctrine of the Trinity is no invention of Christians, as moderner
Jews vainly give out; for if their forefathers mention the same, though their
grounds may not be of the soundest, it argues they knew and received it.

Other Texts from the Old Testament implying this Mystery, are chiefly these; 2 Samuel 23. 2. Isa 48. 16, 17. and chap. 61. 1. and chap. 63. 9. Psalm. 33. 6.
compared with Joh. 11. 1, 2, 3. Haggai 2. 5. compared with Genesis 1. 26. Isa. 6
3, etc. Concerning all which it is to be observed; First, That it is not to be
expected the testimonies of the Old Testament, whose design it was to deliver
all things more covertly and obscurely, should be altogether so literally and
expressly taken, as that none other may be found as proper as that sense given
by Christians; but it may suffice, that an apt accommodation may be made to the
confirmation of our Faith, and that by the chief enemies to it. Secondly, That
the Tradition of the Jewish Church differed from the historical or literal
sense. Hence our Savior Christ proves the Messiah to be God, out of Psalm 110.
v. 1. The Lord said Psalm. 110. Matthew. 22. 42.
unto, etc. arguing to this effect, He who was greater than David himself, from
whom the Messiah should come, must needs be God, David calling him, in Spirit,
Lord; but David, in Spirit, calls the Messiah his Lord, whereas David being
himself absolute Sovereign, had no mortal greater than he, therefore he must be
God. This was then generally received amongst the wisest of them, That the
Messiah was there intended, though the words might be capable of a more literal
sense. And the like may we judge of the Arguments of St. Paul, drawn out of the
Old Testament, to confirm the Doctrine of the New, and particularly this; for
it is confessed that he brings many proofs, as do also the other sacred
Penmen out of the Books of the Old Testament, which have a literal sense much
differing from that purpose to which they are alleged. But it is certain that
the ancient Jews did maintain two senses, a Literal, and a Mystical; and that
St. Paul being educated in the prime Traditions and Mysteries of their
Divinity, used them according to the known sense of the learned: For otherwise
it had been as easy then for the Jews to have put in their exceptions against
his Doctrine, as now it is for Jews to cavil at them.

But besides the Authority of the Old Testament, principally to be used against
Jews, the Authority of the New must be enforced against the Heresies of
Christians against this great Mystery. Go ye, says Christ, in St. Matthew, and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Matthew. 28. 19.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which plainly distinguishes three
Persons. And, Take heed (says St. Paul in the Acts) therefore unto your Acts
20. 28.
selves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. Here we have two persons distinct, expressed, The Holy Ghost, whose act
of making Overseers does infer an Agent, and that Agent a Person. And in that
it is said, God purchased the Church with his blood, there is an express
Character of Christ in his Passion, to whom is expressly given the title of God,
for that God the Father died, nor Christ as God, though Christ, God, is
manifest: Now of God the Father no Christian can make doubt, after so many
manifest. Texts expressing the same. And Romans 9. v. 5. Whose Romans 9. 5.
are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over
all, God blessed for ever. The Scholie of Socinus and his followers being
merely cavillous, and forced contrary to common reading. The Confession
likewise of Thomas upon the Miracle wrought by Christ, proves the Deity of
Christ, crying out, My God and my Lord. And in the Epistle to the Colossians,
Jo^. 20. v. 28. Col. 2. 9.
the Godhead is said to dwell in Christ bodily, i. e. in opposition to
figuratively or improperly. To these bare Testimonies add we these rational
proofs from the Attributes proper to God, given to Christ: 1. Eternity, Micah
5. 2. His goings-out are from everlasting. 2. Omnipotence, Micah. Joh. 3. 31.
Joh. 3. 31. He that comes from above is above all; but only God is above all.
An instance likewise of Christ's Omnipotency is given us by St. Paul to the
Philippians, where speaking of Christ, he says, Who shall change our vile
Phil. 3. 21.
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. 3. Immensity,
another property of God, is given to Christ, Mat. 18. 20. Where he promises,
Where two or three shall be gathered together in his Name, he will be in the
midst of them; which is not possible for him that is not God, Christ's Church
being in all places diffused. 4 Divine worship given to Christ implies a divine
nature in him, but both Old and New Testaments agree herein, that Christ the
Messiah is to be worshipped. In the Psalms thus it Psalm. 72.
is written of him, Yea all Kings shall fall down before him, and all Nations
shall worship him. And in the second Psalm, David advises to kiss the Son,
Psalm. 2.
(that is) worship him, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the right way;
when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. Now we know the same Psalmist says, Put not your trust in
Princes, Psalm. 146. 3.
nor in any Son of man, in whom there is no help. And believing in Christ is a
special part of worship; but this is required by Christ of his Disciples,
saying, Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Prayer likewise is made to Joh.
14. 1. Acts 7.
Christ by St. Stephen; for in the Acts it is written how Stephen was stoned,
cal^ing upon Christ and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

The third Person in the holy Trinity is the holy Ghost, which we have showed
in part, that the learnedest of the ancient Jews were not ignorant of, though
more obscurely delivered in the Old Testament than in the New. The first thing
then we are to prove is, That the holy Ghost is a Person; for that it is, there
needs no other proof than the words themselves so often used in Scripture: And
that it subsists personally, and not only as an Act or Grace, will appear from
these two general heads, The Acts of it, an the Attributes given to it. And
first, In what sense the Scriptures use evil Spirit, in the same sense may it
be said to use the good Spirit; but evil Spirit is frequently used for a
Person, who is the author of mischief to mankind, and therefore the good Spirit
must be a Person, the author of 1 John 4. 6. Romans 11. 8. Ephesians. 2. 2. 1 Samuel 16.
14. 2 Chronicles. 18. 20, 21.
good to man. We read in Scripture of a Spirit of error, and the Spirit of
slumber, and the Spirit of disobedience, and of an evil Spirit that possessed
Saul, and of a lying Spirit that entered into, and moved the false Prophets; and
in the New Testament as well as humane Authors, of diverse who have been
infested with evil Spirits. Now all these were real and personal Subsistences,
and therefore in parity of reason so should the good Spirit, of which we so
often read both in the Old and New Testament, under the appellation of the
Spirit of the Lord; as the Spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters at the
beginning, and the Spirit of the Lord fell upon such persons. And if it be here
replied, That we are to understand the good Spirits after the same manner we
understand the evil; and that the evil Spirits being evil Angels, the good
Spirit should be good Angels only: We answer, not denying, That Spirit may be
so used in Scripture diverse times; and that by the same parity of reason that
it is insinuated unto us, that the evil Spirit has one Prince and chief
amongst them called Lucifer, so the good Spirits have one supreme over them,
that good Spirit of God. Secondly, That where Scripture speaks of Spirit
absolutely, there the divine Spirit is constantly to be understood, as St.
Hierome has observed.

Again, We read from the Acts of the Spirit as interceding for us, being Rom 8.
26. Ephesians. 4. 30. Mat. 3. 16.
grieved; and descending upon Christ in a bodily shape at his Baptism; and
Christ's speech to his Disciples, saying in St. John, I will ask the Father, and
he shall give you another Comforter. Christ was the one Comforter, not only by
his Graces, but personal presence among his Disciples; and answerable to this,
must the holy Spirit be also, here promised.

And that this divine Person is distinct from the other, appears from the
general Doctrine of the Trinity above, and specially out of St. Matthew, where
Christ says, -- Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Mat. 28.
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; which must imply a distinction. And St.
John, Chap. 1. He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto Joh.
1. 33.
me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the
same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. And so Joh. 14. 16. Joh. 15. 26.

From the same place of St. Matthew appears the equality of all these three
Persons; and especially from the immediate operation the Spirit had upon
Christ, who was God and Man; for of it, Isaiah thus prophesies, Isa. 61.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for that he has anointed me to, etc.
which Christ himself applied to himself. Luke 4. 18.


Secondly, The Attributes of the same Spirit infer a Deity, as Omniscience, 1
Cor. 2. The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God. 1 Cor. 2.
10, 11.
And lest this should be understood of a search without success or full
knowledge, it follows, For what man knows the things of man, save the
spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man but
the Spirit of God. Creation: The Spirit of God has made me, and the Job 33. 4.
breath of the Almighty has given me life, says holy Job. And Christ casting
out Devils by the Spirit of God; and the Apostles miraculous acts,
demonstrating Mat. 12. 28. 1 Cor. 2. 4.
the Spirit of God in them; the preaching of St. Paul being in the
demonstration of the Spirit and of power, i. e. being so powerful in outward
acts and miracles, that it was sufficient conviction that he spoke and wrought
by the Spirit; but miracles cannot be wrought by any thing less than a divine
Power. And by St. Peter it is called, The Spirit of Glory 1 Pet. 4. 14. 1 Cor.
3. 16, 17
and of God. By St. Paul it is called God himself, where he says, Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If
any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God
is holy, which Temple are ye. Here we plainly see, how the Temple of God and
the Temple of the holy Ghost, are the same thing.

And thus we see confirmed, what St. John very plainly and positively 1 John 5.
7.
asserteth of this Mystery, That there are three that bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. And this may
suffice to have spoken (according to our purpose) compendiously, as well of the
Unity as Trinity of these Persons in the Godhead; only adding, without any
long or curious enquiry, the several Notions and Idioms, whereby they are
distinct in our Faith. The Property of the first Person is to be the Fountain,
and after the manner of first Principle of the other, to whom therefore some
ascribe a dignity of order, above the other two, though not of time or
duration, being all coeternal, and the one not to be conceived anterior to the
other: Nor of Nature, as if the divine Nature were unequally communicated to
them, but that they are coequal in Being and in Power, or Acting externally.
Another Property of the first Person is to be a Father in respect of the Son,
the second Person; and together with the Son, to bear such a relation to the
third, the holy Spirit, for which no proper name has been yet found out, and
whether it be possible to express the same aptly in one word, I much question.
It is commonly called Procession, on the part of the holy Ghost; and in
general, on the parts of the other two Persons* Production, which yet is
^imited to the excluding of such a Production as answers Generation, and much
more of Creation, besides which, natural Reason can comprehend no other: But
Christian Faith obliges us to contain our selves modestly in the general Notion
of Proceeding. Some have indeed presumed to distinguish the production of the
Son by the Father, from the production of the holy Ghost by the Father and the
Son, in that the Son proceeds from the Father Intellectually, as a word is
conceived in the mind; but the holy Spirit as act of the joint will of Father
and Son, by way of Love: Of which explication I shall suspend all sentence,
leaving others to judge.

CHAP. V.
Of the proper Acts of God, Creation and Preservation, or Providence. What is
Creation. That God created all things, and how. Of the Ministers of Gods
Providence toward inferior Creatures, the Angels of God. Their Nature and
Office toward Man especially.

THAT God is the proper Object of Christian Faith or Divinity, not only as
principal, but as all other things therein treated, relate to him, is before
showed. Now therefore we proceed from the Creator to the Creature, to which the
two hands of God are more visibly and eminently extended or stretched out: The
first, In the Creation it self; The other, In the Providence of God over the
works of his hands, as the Scriptures phrase is. And first, Of Creation; we
understanding it to be after the nature of an Act, must find out the proper
term or object of it, which is contained in that received definition thereof:
Creation is the production of a thing out of nothing; or more plainly, a making
something of nothing. In which we are not so grossly to conceive of Gods Act, as
if he made the world so of nothing, as a man makes a Statue of something; but
of nothing, or out of nothing, is as much as from nothing, or nothing
concurring by way of pre-existent matter, to produce such an effect: For if any
thing had been, which had not its first Being from the first Cause of all, God,
that must have been God also, or there could not be said to have been any God
at all, because there could be no order, where was no first and second; and
where matter is supposed to have been eternal, there no priority of time can be
admitted: So that either such thing must have been God, as we have seen in the
Relations in the Trinity, or no God at all; because that is not God, to which
an equal in any respect, distinct in nature from him, may be found; for Gods
Nature is to be above all.

Neither can any reason be possibly alleged, whereby it should appear, that,
if simple matter (as some call it) might have subsisted, before it was made
simply by God, the Sun and Moon, and other compound bodies in Nature, might not
have pre-existed and prevented Gods workmanship; or why an imperfect Being
should have the dignity denied to a more perfect, but at the pleasure and will
of the supreme Agent disposing all things? For that which was not at all
produced by another, must necessarily (...) Athanasius d^ Incarnat.
spring out of nothing, or of it self: And why might not a Man, or Horse, or
any other thing do so, as well as infamous Matter?

Furthermore, Unless there were a productive Power in God, of something out of
nothing, the Power of God would not answer the Nature of God. The Nature of God
is infinite, so therefore must his Power be; but the Power of God could not be
known to be infinite, if such an infinite effect were not producible by him.

Lastly, This denial of Gods Power to produce even the first imaginable matter,
would also destroy his Power in creating any thing not consisting of such
matter; and so should the production of Spirits utterly be denied him, as
having no pre-existent matter, out of which they can be said to be framed.

It must be consessed, the word Create and Creation in Scripture, is not so
strictly used as in Philosophers Books, but imports any notable production, as
well as that simple one without pre-existence: Yet the thing it self is
affirmed; as where it is said, All things were made by God; for there nothing
is excepted or exempted from his Power; as Heb. 11. Heb. 11. 13.
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God, so
that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear; and he
only can preserve all things, who makes all things: But God in Christ, or
Christ through God upholdeth all things by the word of his Power. Heb. 1. 3.
Rev. 4. 11.
And in the Revelations it is said, Thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure Chap. 10. 6.
they were and are created. And in the tenth Chapter, the Angel swears by him
that lives for ever and ever, who created Heaven, and the things that are
therein, and the Earth, and the things that therein are, and the Sea, and the
things that are therein. And aptly do the words of the Psalmist answer the
History of the Creation, who speaking of the particulars Psalm. 148. 5.
of this natural world, says of God, He commanded, and they were created; this
being the only means and method, that we read all things to have been produced,
viz. the word of his Power, Let there be Light, Let there be the Firmament,
etc. which being a demonstration of his immediate will, most wisely implies
(as some eminent Philosophers have with great admiration observed) the proper
Power of God Almighty, to whom nothing is difficult that he wills should come
to pass. Now where there is no limitation upon an agent, but what proceeds from
its own will, there nothing is impossible, and if it be possible for God to
will (as must be, seeing man may desire) to produce somewhat from nothing, it
must be possible to come to pass what so is willed by him; otherwise God should
be disappointed and frustrated in his intentions, than which nothing can be
thought more absurd, or repugnant to the Nature of God.

And thus at the same time it appears, as well what God made, as how, viz. That
there is nothing extant, whether visible or invisible, but what was framed by
him, and that absolutely, as the Apostle more expressly testifies to the
Colossians, By him were all things created that are in heaven and that are in
Col. 1. 16.
earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities or powers, all things were created by him, and for him. By which
we understand, that all the Angels and several orders of those invisible
Spirits in Heaven, were the effect of his Power, no less than were inferior and
visible Creatures. And though there be no particular mention of the time,
order, place, or manner of the Creation of Angels, yet that they were so
created, general assurance we have from the Word of God; the holy Ghost
advisedly omitting (and men's wits only conjecturing at the) other things, to
prevent pride and curiosity in man, to whom it was sufficient to make a
description of those things, which related to this visible world, and concerned
him to know: So that the Heavens themselves, with the glorious and numerous
Lights thereof, are no farther explained unto us, than as their influences
concern the nature and actions of Man. It is a true Axiom, that all things were
made for man, but it is not true, that they had no other end why God created
them, namely, Heavens, heavenly Bodies, and heavenly Spirits, but for to serve
the uses of man, next to the ultimate end of all, his own Glory. For though it
be said of Angels, (and we take the word in the properest sense, and not as it
may be for the several Messengers and Dispensers of Gods will and Word, to the
several Ages of men) Are they not all ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14.
sent forth to them who shall be heirs of salvation? Yet we look on their
attendance in such cases, as an honorary command and tuition over us, and
secondary end to their first Institution, rather than any thing of subjection
or servility. For when the Shepherd looks to his Flock, and when the King is
said to be for the People, we are not in reason or sobriety to imagine a worth
in the governed above the governor, as some have sondly, wretchedly, and
dangerously concluded: For that Rule, The end is more excellent than the means,
or thing ordained to that end, holds true only, when the thing is so ordained,
that its own end and good is not equally, or more eminently included in the
same; or when the end is the principal agent in instituting such a thing to
such an end. But the Sheep never appointed the Shepherd to serve, to rule, and
protect them, nor did men oblige Angels to wait upon them; nor, as is above
demonstrated, the People first erect, or constitute Governors or Governments
over themselves, these were done by a superior Power over them; neither at this
day can they, that is, ought, by any imaginary (...) Theodoretus Haeret.
Fabular. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Charter alter the Archetype of Gods Institution. And they that do attempt, and
have pretended to confer Power sometimes on Governors, can at all do it
directly and validly: But they seem and are interpreted by many so to do, when
they unwarrantably and unreasonably deny it to others, and submit to their own
favorites; though how lamely and improperly these acts of strength, and not of
right, are carried on, is also elsewhere showed. For no question, but if the
common sort of men could extend their presumptuous Power to Spirits, as they do
to Princes, they would take such offense against their tutelary Angels, as to
put them out of office, when they find themselves crossed in their inclinations
or designs by them, or persuading themselves they are neglected by them,
choosing others in their places, and justify such their acts from a dignity
supposed in themselves, from being the end of their care and ministration. If
indeed we appointed Spirits or Princes over us, as men do choose servants to do
their work for them, and serve them, then surely we might as justly turn them
off again, when ever they became unserviceable and prejudicial to us; but
seeing both are appointed by God, we are to know our distance, notwithstanding
the good offices they do for us: And that considering, secondly, That their own
ends are no less principally and primarily served in such ministrations, than
the ends of others.

And yet I make no doubt, but many persons to whom God has given holy and
righteous Spirits to protect and preserve them, being ungoverned and
refractory, lewd and licentious, contrary to the mind and motions of them
presiding over them, do in effect dismiss them, the holy Guardian refusing such
an unprofitable and servile office, and at the same time in effect invite evil
Spirits to join with them in their dissolute courses, and to manage them
therein. To the confirmation of which, I shall only translate the words of St.
Hierom upon Habbacuck: As Christ is the Head of his Church Hieron. in c. 3
Habbac.
and every man, so is Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, the head of all such
Devils as rage in this world, and every company of them has their Heads and
Princes. For example, Spirits of Fornication and Uncleanness have their Head;
the Spirits of Covetousness have their Prince; the Spirits of Vainglory; the
Spirits of Lying, the Spirits of Infidelity have their Presidents of mischief.
This I say, supposing the great opinion which asserteth the Ministration of
good and evil Angels, as is here intimated from the grounds given in Scripture,
and such a cloud of ancient and modern witnesses, against Calvin in Act. 15 and
Psalm. 90. and Mat. 18. 10.
whom it pleased Calvin to interpret Scripture in this point, with addition of
scoffs and derisions, which I here leave to them that like them well, and
proceed to this visible and inferior World.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Works of God in this visible World. Of the Six days Work of God. All
things are good which were made by God.

IT is plainly affirmed in the entrance of the History of the Creation, that,
In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. By Genesis 1. 1.
which two general Bodies, we understand all particular, reducible to either of
them; and that there is nothing so pure, perfect, or noble, above which we call
heavenly Bodies, but God first gave it a Being; neither is there any earthly
Substance so imperfect, base, or impure, but his hand descended to the framing
of it: For first, Nothing is ab^olutely evil, but only as there are some more
excellentand divine things made by God, which eclipse their glory, which
otherwise would be seen and noted in the most vile thing of all. And secondly,
Nothing is so base, but that an infinite Power is requisite to the first
production of it; neither did the divine hand labor more in produ^^ng an
Angel, than the first deformed Matter, out of which other things were made. So
that the error of such Heretics as the Marcionites and Manichees, who
constituted two Gods, from the diversity of things appearing to them, good and
evil, was no less sottish than blasphemous, and derogatory to Almighty Gods
Nature and Providence. For as the Scripture tells us, after a particular view
made by God of every days work, he pronounced all things to be good; so at the
consummation of all things, he passes this sentence upon all his works
together, And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was Genesis 1.
31.
very good.

And to the general Objection against this, taken from the contrariety and Vide
Petrum Comestorem in Genesim. (...) Chrysostom. in Genesis Sermon. 7.
enormities one thing has to another in the world, and especially the great
evil that many things bring unto man, for whose good they seem principally to
be intended, such as are ravenous wild Beasts, venomous Serpents, and deadly
poisons lurking in Plants: The answer is ready and fair, viz. That God made not
any thing absolutely for another, no not for man's good, but for his own Glory,
and the manifestation of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, to all. And therefore,
though by nature some things are repugnant to one another, nothing is contrary
unto God: all the contrariety to God found in the Creature, is merely
accessory, and not natural, and that only in such Creatures as were at first
endued with so much freedom of will, that they might persevere in that natural
perfection given (...). Aeneas Gazaeus in Theophrasto.
them, or fall from it. Again, After the chief of Gods ways, as the principal
order of Angels and Man, were degenerated into evil, the Universe continued
notwithstanding, perfect, and God provided for the evil it self crept into it.
For as in a Dispensatory, all things are not sweet, but some sharp and bitter;
all things are not lenitives, but some corrosive and cutting, and there are
poisons and counter-poysons: So is it in this great World; God has disposed
every thing in its proper place, and to its proper end, and one contrary to
counterwork another; to the benefit of the whole, and constituting of all, a
most excellent harmony. As in a welltuned Lute or Harp, the strings stand many
times of themselves in discord, but being touched by the skilful hand of the
Artist, do render to the ear excellent harmony: In like manner, the discord of
the Elements, and other compounded Bodies, being most wisely ordained and moved
by the hand of the all-ruling Providence, do make an excellent consort, to the
praise and glory of God. Lastly, As it is no less necessary, to the preserving
of the common peace and tranquillity of a Nation, that there should be Prisons
(...). and Chrysoft. To. 6. Sermon. 102. p. 895. Psalm. 8. 1. 3. Psalm. 19. 1.
as well as Palaces, and whips and halters, as well as honors and riches: So
is it in the world, the Commonwealth over which God alone presides, necessary,
that for the deterring of evilly-inclined persons, for the repressing of
seditiously and rebelliously-disposed persons, and malefactors against God
their Sovereign, there should always be at hand, Gods Instruments to ch^stise
and punish them; and this is done, by commissioning and arming the Creature to
seize upon them, by afflicting the body, or estate of the contumacious, or
meliorating them to an higher degree of perfection: So that though some things
to man in some one capacity, may be found to be evil, yet is it not in all
respects, and in it self, not at all. And thus is resolved, as well the evil
aspects and influences of the Heavens, as the violences of inferior bodies
against man, nay, the reason of Hell it self, as Chrysostom says.

For that the Heavens are the work of Gods hands, has been showed before in
the general Discourse, and may yet farther, from the Authority of the Psalmist,
which says of God, He has set his Glory above the Heavens. And, The Heavens
are the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained.
And, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handywork.

1. That God therefore made the Heavens, and all the Hosts thereof, is most
plain, and as most plain, so most necessary to be believed; but concerning the
nature and number of them, it is rather a Philosophical curiosity, than
Christian duty, to enquire. And that little which we may draw from Scripture,
has more of reason in it, than all the presumptuous imaginations of men; for
such I call their defining them to be solid, o^bicular bodies, moving like
wheels about the earth, and consisting of eight Spears, with a Primum Mobile,
or First Mover, and an Empyreal Heaven, and a special Court, as it were, where
God sets more especially enthroned, arched over with the roof of another
Heaven; for all which there is no more solid reason than Scripture to be found,
though some for want of soberness and better proofs (as the Jewish Rabbi) have
presumed to determine the number of the Spears, from the expression in the
eighth Psalm, where it is said, The Heavens are the work of thy fingers; ten
fingers, Psalm. 8. 3.
ten Heavens; but the Scriptures speak of no more than three, 2 Cor. 12. 2. And
that they are rather to be understood, as so many Regions distinguishable in
the air, than such superior bodies, appears from the synonymous use of the
Fowls of the air, and the Fowls of Heaven, as in Psalm. 79. 2. and Psalm. 104.
12. Jer. 7. 33. Ezekiel. 31. 6. Genesis 1. 26, 28.

Yet as no man can, out of Philosophy or Scripture, determine the nature or
number of Heavens, is it not to be peremptorily denied, that there are
distinctions of places of Bliss? And though it be little otherwise than
blasphemous to confine God to the highest, largest, fairest room, called 2 Chronicles. 2. 6.
an Heaven, as that there should be any ^imits set to his Court or Throne of
Glory, yet may we well believe God is somewhere more gloriously revealed, than
commonly he is in all places, though he be in all places: and where he displays
his Glory, and beatifies his more immediate servants, there is Heaven; as we
say, There is the Court, where the King is.

It is true, we gather reasonably from the position and motion of celestial
Lights, a distinction in distance and motion of them, and that a peculiar tract
there is for most of them; but that this space should be roof'd over round with
a pellucide, solid, aetherial substance, is an absurd collection of
Philosophers, no ways favored by Scripture, which, as it has touched things
of this nature with greater simplicity, so with much more probability; inviting
us rather to an admiration of the divine Power, and adoration of its
Providence, in ordaining so admirably those bodies, as for his Glory, so for
our instruction and edification in his service. The same reason doubtless there
is of Time and Place, as we^l ^n respect of the Creator as the Creature: It is
impossible but the Creature should be limitable by time and space both, and it
is impossible God should by either be so; and therefore no less derogatory to
his Being is it, to imagine God terminated by space, than by time.

The other part of this visible World, is that which we call Earth, with the
several bodies pertaining unto the same, as Water, Fire and Air; all which,
though of very different nature or use to us, are properly earthly. The solid
part and grosser, which we signally call Earth, and that liquid, fluid and
purer substance, we ca^l Water, being the two most principal parts and elements
out of which all things here proceed: Fire and Air being no distinct bodies of
themselves, but subsisting upon their grounds; and especially, Air being
nothing else, but a purer composition of the substance of Earth and Water
flying about the earth, and ministering continual refreshment to all earthly,
living things. Fire indeed is of a wonderful subtle nature, and operation most
active, but whether any thing in substance, distinct from the other, and not
only in quality, is scarce to be understood. And though Philosophy busies it
self to the losing of its way, in the search after these things, and presumes
to determine and impose upon others its uncertain Conclusions; yet the modesty
of Religion contents it self to keep a mannerly distance, where God, by the
Mysteries of Nature, and much more of Theology, seems to say, Stand off; which
we shall, contenting our selves at present, with that brief narration of the
manner and order of the Creation of all things, found in the first Chapter of
Genesis: where we note, the way of Gods working to be most like himself,
without any pains or trouble, but by the simple and absolute word of his
command given, Let there be Light.

It is said indeed, that God in six days made all things in Heaven and Earth,
as if the Creation took him up both time and pains to complete it; whence some
fearing to make the matter too gross on Gods part, have (as Austin) introduced
an Evening and Morning, relating rather to the Angels, than Men, making that
the Morning, when those holy Spirits beheld things to be Created in the divine
Nature and Vision; and that Vespertine, when they were actually seen in
themselves existing; which interpretation has not been received in the Church
as solid: But rather this Morning and Evening, which could not be natural until
the Sun was created, (which it was not at the first) is understood of a
competent distance of time, which it might please God, not out of necessity,
but free choice, to work in, to declare his order, and give us a more distinct
knowledge of things, and especially to prevent that error to which man was too
inclinable, in conceiving all things were eternal, which we now see. For if
they were so, then could there be no distinction or distance of time between
one thing and another; but where there is such a diversity of time, there of
necessity must be posteriority and priority, and so no eternity.

For that which some bring out of Ecclesiasticus, to prove the production
Eccles. 18. 1*
of all things in one moment, viz. He that lives for ever, created all things
together, is a mistake in the Latin Translation only, which renders (...) in
the Greek so, which is better translated as we do, In general; intimating, that
nothing subsisted but by him. Or it may be said, All things were created
together, or at once, meaning, that what God did produce, he did it not after
the manner of men, who bring their work to perfection by degrees and many acts,
but every thing that was made by him, was made at once in an instant.

And this general consideration of the six days Work of God, may suffice here,
not descending to each, particularly; only we shall speak of the Creation of
Man in particular, as the chief of Gods ways, and the Rule and end of other
Creatures.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Creation of Man in particular, according to the Image of God. Of the
Constitution of him, and of the Original of his Soul, contrary to Philosophers,
and the errors of Origin, concerning it. The Image wherein it consists
principally.

CREATION (we have showed) is the production of a thing from nothing, and so
the first man was not created immediately; for it is said, God formed man of
the dust of the ground, and Genesis 2. 7.
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. And St. Paul likewise to the
Corinthians, says, The first man was of the earth, 1 Cor. 15. 47.
earthy. And the like may be said of other Creatures, which yet together with
man may be said to be created, because they were produced of that which was
immediately created by God, the first matter: Where likewise we are not to
understand the word Earth so strictly, as not to imply water also, for the word
Earth does comprehend all things of, and pertaining to this Globe, called
Earthly, from the principal part of it, Earth.

And as Adam was made out of the Earth immediately, we read Eve to be made
immediately out of Adam, God causing a deep sleep upon Adam, Genesis 2. 22, 23.
and then taking one of his ribs, and closing up the ^lesh instead thereof, of
which rib he made the woman. And there is no such difficulty as Scholastical
wits would frame, when from hence they would infer, That, if God took one rib
from Adam, he had either more at first than were natural to man, or fewer
afterward, and so must have something of monstrousness; a strange argument to
persuade such a man as Cajetan, That God did not this really, but that the
Scripture here speaks Metaphorically, when as this is a direct History which is
given us here of the Creation. For suppose we that God had made man at first
otherwise than now he is by himself altered, might it not be well said, that
both the one and the other were natural to him? It is impossible that God
should do any thing monstrous, or unnatural, through an whole species: and
therefore no scruple ought to be made of allowing God, who is the Nature of
Nature, to dispose his works as he pleases, and change nature; so that if it
should seem good to him now to take away one of man's legs, and cause him
generally to go upon one only, this would be no more monstrons than his going
now upon two is.

And in like manner, is it very frivolous, that is given as a reason by the
Schools, of Gods causing such a deep sleep upon Adam, lest he should be
sensible of too much pain, at that act of taking out his Rib; when as the same
miracle that cast him into a sleep, and preserved him from waking, under such
supposed pain, might as well have preserved him from pain, waking, as sleeping.
It may be rather to teach us, that he would not have us privy to his mysterious
Chrysostom. de Fide, Lege, Naturae, and S. S.
acts, nor pryers too nearly into them. And therefore a reason is given by
Chrysostom both acutely and soberly, why God first made Adams Body before he
created his Soul, or breathed into him (...). Chrysostom. To. 5. page 649.
the breath of Life: Least he should see how himself was made, which might be a
reason, why at the framing of Eve he was cast into a sleep, which is the very
reason the same Author, or, as it is thought, some other under his name, does
give in another place: whose words, because I judge to deliver the manner of
man's Creation more aptly, plainly, and sincerely than the Schools, (who are
very busy and curious here) I shall thus translate. God (says he) first
framing Man, made the Instrument of his Body, and then put into it the Soul.
Why so? To the end he might thereby declare the Excellency of Man. For seeing,
other Animals, and Beasts being dissolved by death their soul and Body perish
together, he speaks of the production of them, as of those things which were to
perish absolutely. God therefore, about to fashion man, takes his Body out of
the earth, and then breaths in his Soul. Stay but a little, that I may show to
you the manner of this breathing into man, so far as I am able. For from what
went before, and from hence he describes, as it were, the hope of
Resurrection. He makes the Body first: and Man first received a dead Image, and
then the quickening virtue of the soul. He was first shown dead, then living.
First he made a dead Body, into which he was again to return: and thus when he
had finished that, he added the Character or form: and did not make his soul
first, that he might not be a Spectatour of what was made. He would not suffer
the soul to be present when he made man, lest it should glory as an assistant
to God in that work: and not only that it might not boast, but might not so
much as behold the manner how it was done. And thus does God still. For he
frames every one of us in the womb: But how he so frames us, he has granted
no man to see. We are sown, and we are fashioned, nature perfecting the course,
but the manner no man comprehends. O, the wonder! A Temple is made in a Temple;
an House in an House is framed: and the outward house perceives it not. First
then, he makes man according to a dead Image: and then he says, God breathed
into the face of Adam the breath of Life, and man became a living soul. Some
have been of opinion that this Breath was his very soul: and that it was given
him of the very Essence of God: But that saying is not only very mild, but
absurd also. For if the soul were the very substance of God; It could not be,
that in this man it should be wise, in another it should be foolish, and
ignorant; and in this man a just soul, in that man an unjust. For the Essence
of God is neither divided nor changed, but immutable -- Nay, not only are the
souls of men mutable, but liable to condemnation. For so says the Gospel, Mat.
10. 28.
Fear not them that can kill the body, but cannot kill the soul, but fear ye
him rather who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. If therefore the
soul be of God, then should God condemn himself. Therefore it is necessary we
should see what this is. The Breathing. This breathing is the Power of the Holy
Spirit. For as our Savior breathed on the faces of his Apostles, and said,
Receive Joh. 20. 22.
ye the Holy Ghost: so this divine breath heard after the manner of men, is
that Venerable and Holy Spirit. And this Holy Spirit too present, was not the
soul it self, but made the soul: it was not it self changed into the Soul, but
framed it. For the Holy Spirit was the Author: it was concerned in the making
both of the body and Soul. For the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost made
this work: And do not imagine that the Father contributed one part, the Son
another, and the Holy Ghost a third. But this I say, that though the Father
made it, it is the work of the Son, and the Fabric of the Holy Spirit. etc.
Thus far that Elegant and Learned Author: However some inconsiderable
difference is found amongst ancient and Modern Doctors, some saying that the
Angels were created: but when that was, there is nothing besides conjecture,
only they say, upon such a supposal, that it affords a good argument against
the opinion that holds the So^l of man to be educated out of the matter of the
Body, as are Brutes Souls. But that is not here nor there: because certain it
is that the way of producing the Soul at first differed much from what it does
in the course of Natural generation. For then were there no natural Causes
concurring with God in the production of the Soul, but now there are; God now
not so absolutely creating humane souls, but that there should be some
pre-disposing and preparatory acts on man's part conducing thereunto: For it
seems not to be inconsistent with proper Creation, that such Acts are
required thereunto, so that the Soul of man is never now created, but by them
preceding (according to the order of Nature, though not of time, because in so
concurring, the Natural Agent does not concur with God in the very act of
Creating, but to the occasion rather, which God has by a Law made freely to
himself decreed to work by in this matter: But at the first of all God purely
made the occasion it self, and simply and solely acted of himself.

There are therefore these three errors to be avoided in the doctrine of the
Soul: The first is that of Epicures and Infidels, that the Soul of man was no
otherwise produced than the souls of Brutes: but that they are in Substance the
same with brutes, differing only from them in the finer temperament of the
body; and the nobler aspect which it informs. But this cannot stand good:
because, though we grant that the evil disposition of the humors of the Body,
and incommodious frame of the Parts thereof, may impede the due exercise of
such Acts which are proper to that Kind, yet such perfection cannot at all give
ability to act so: and therefore another Principle must be found out, whose
nature it is so to act; and to which such things are only Organical and
subservient. For, it being acknowledged that the Soul is of an Active, and more
noble nature than the Body, as Spirit is than flesh; it cannot be imagined that
the Soul should follow the fashion or nature of the Body, but that the matter
or the Body should be accommodated and suited to the nature of the soul: as no
man can say, that the hand should be fitted to the Instrument by which it
works, but the Instrument to the Hand: And no man can with reason affirm that
an house being to be built, the Inhabitant or owner is to be brought to that;
but that surely is to be modelled and framed according to the mind and Rank of
the Owner: So no reason is there to suppose the body should give Law to the
soul, in the nature (I mean) of it, and its actions: though it may have some
force upon the manner of its actions: As the Hand makes the Pen to write, and
not the Pen the hand, absolutely: but a good and wellmade Pen may be an
occasion to the Hand to write well or ill. And therefore it is not the body of
Brutes which makes the Soul brutish, nor the Body of man which makes the Soul
humane: but on the contrary so, that as their natures are different, should
their original likewise differ; And this difference cannot be taken from the
matter, because the diversity of the matrer arises from the Form. And besides,
the Scripture telling us that God breathed into man the breath of Life,
declares withal that the Soul of man (as the Philosopher himself speaks) came
from without doors and not from within. But this is said of no other Creature.

A Second mortal Error is that imputed to Origin, viz. That Human souls were
created, but not singly and separately, according to the conception of
particular persons, but all at once, and that together with the Angels. That
the Angels; as all other things (God excepted) were created, is to be received
as an Article of Faith, but there is neither any thing revealed unto us by the
Scripture or discovered by reason when they were so created: How then can any
man positively say, that the souls of men were then created? this being then a
groundless supposition, light and vain must needs be the inference from thence.
Nay, not only is the Scripture silent in that Case: but expresses on the
contrary the time when the Soul of man was made and that it was at his first
Constitution according to the order of the History, which first describes the
manner how Man was made, and then adds, how God not put the soul into it which
he had before made, but breathed into it the breath of Life. So that as the
breath, is not at all until it be actually breathed, no more was the Soul
before it was thus infused by way of breathing. Again, the absolute ignorance
of the Soul of any such pre-existence: which it is not possible, if we may
suppose it in one or two, that all Souls shouls be subject to. And I call this
ignorance and stupidity rather than oblivion, as some Philosophers the Authors
of this opinion would have it. For though a man may forget what he did at such
a time, and that once he was in such a place, and such, and such things befell
him: yet who did ever forget that he had a Being? A man may through the strong
invasion of some sickness or distemper, cease to understand any thing, as also
in a profound sleep: yet he is not properly said to forget these. Some have
forgot their own names, but never any that they were simply. And therefore some
ancient defenders of this opinion seeing the incredibleness of this
Forgetfulness, have with infinite impudence introduced persons professing they
remembered what they were, and did some hundreds of years before they were in
those bodies they spoke of these things in. Lastly, How is it credible that
that soul which is the fountain of Life, Sense, and Knowledge to the person
where it is, should so inform a thing distinct from it self, and yet be
ignorant of it self? Surely it must be because there was nothing to be known of
it before it inhabited the Body.

A Third Error depending upon this last, is that of Origin likewise, who
affirmed that Souls being Spirits before they were committed to the body, were
put into them as to so many prisons for their former disobedience and
wickedness, for their punishment. But against this (amongst other reasons)
Isidore of Pelusium argues well, thus, How vain and absurd Isidor. Pelusior.
Ep. ^. 4. Ep. 163.
would it be to suppose Providence to Chastise any sinful person or Spirit, by
offering greater and more occasions of Sinning than before? Prisons are made
chiefly for restraint: but the body of man rather disposes the soul to sin,
and ministers many more occasions and temptations than it could have before,
to dishonor God and break his Laws. Again, as Parisiensis has it, That cannot
be said to be a punishment to man of which he is no ways sensible. Guli. l.
^eris. (...) Vniverso.
How can any man be said to be afflicted for his loss of a great empire, or
riches, unless he knew that he once was possessed of them, or they were at
least his by Right? How can any pain trouble a man which he feels not? And if
he feels it not, how can it be a punishment to him? And to this I add, the
Scripture saying, God made man according to his own Image, in Genesis: Genesis 1.
26. Jam. 3. 9.
and in St. James's Epistle, After the similitude of God: How is it less than
blasphemous, that a sinful guilty creature, such as man must needs be, having a
wicked Spirit put into him, should be said to be according to Gods Image or
likeness? And how can it consist with the Scripture elsewhere saying, God made
man upright; but they have found out many inventions? Eccles. 7. 29.
For though the Evil Spirit, supposed to be put into man, were the Author of
its own wickedness, yet when once that was so wicked, for to put it into man is
to make man wicked.

Now this Image of God, so much spoken of in Scripture, and treated of by
Divines, to the great honor of Man, we may understand to consist in these five
things Principally. 1. Wisdom and Knowledge 2. Liberty of Will. 3. Justice and
Holiness. 4. Immortality, 5. Dominion. For when we speak of the Image of God in
Man, we must be sure not to confound it with that proper to Christ, the Image
of God. For first, that of man was made as we have heard, that of God, Christ,
was neither made nor created, but begotten; and that not by way of Carnal
Generation, but purely divine and Spiritual. Secondly, That was as well Eternal
in respect of what is past, as what was to come: But the Image of God in Man,
only everlasting, as to the future time. Thirdly, That of Christ was immediate:
but that of Man mediate: So that he is not the Image of God, but as he is the
Image of his more express and Natural Image, Christ: and that first, as is said
in Wisdom. Christ being primarily called the Wisdom of his Father, and deriving
of the same to us: For as St. John says, Of John. 1. 16
his fullness have all received, and Grace for Grace. And God creating all
things through his Natural Word, his Son, signified by that Metaphorical word
expressed in the Book of Genesis, did in particular through him communicate
that Wisdom unto Adam, which he excelled in, at his first Institution: whereby
it was natural to him to understand the natures of all Creatures Earthly; as
well from their Causes, from whence they proceeded, as from their effects
proceeding from them: which latter is the principal means of attaining that
remainder, and as it were ruins of a more perfect Body of knowledge in Adam,
which we are capable of in the state we now are. And not only Natural things
but Supernatural also, as God, and the Holy Spirits, were much more perfectly
known to him than to us. So that the knowledge of the First man exceeded all
after him (Christ the Second Adam only excepted) in these three things. First,
in the manner of enjoying that knowledge which he had: it being not acquired by
tedious and experimental discursiveness, observations, or reasoning within
himself, but by a divine illumination: which was not given him after the manner
of Revelations given by God to some of his eminent Servants, transiently; not
to continue, or to descend to others, but it was by way of a connatural habit;
which should have passed to his posterity. Secondly, the object of this
knowledge or extent of it transcended that of Man now adays, stretching it self
to heavenly, as well as Earthly things, and the minuter things lying hid from
us. Thirdly, It differed in the manner, and perfection as being more accurate,
and less Fallible than ours.

The Second thing shining eminently in Adam was Liberty of will, whereby he
resembled his Creator, who is the only absolute and Free Agent: For there was
no natural inclination nor temptation in him to err or offend in choosing the
Evil, and refusing Good: according to that of Syracides God himself made man
from the beginning and left him in the hand of his Council, etc. Leaving it
equally in his power and choice to turn to the Eccles. 15. 14.
Right hand, or to the Left, to stand or fall. And not only freely to do what
he did, though propelled thereunto; but freely to Act or not to act: which is
the perfectest and most proper freedom of all.

From this twofold perfection of the Understanding and Will arose a Third,
which was perfect Innocence and Holiness: which by some is called Original
Justice: and by others Original Grace; both aiming at the same thing: For
Original Justice or Righteousness it may be called because it was not acquired,
but connatural and simultaneous to the Being of Man: Again, It was Grace,
because though it pleased God to create man with it, yet he might also have
created him without it, and it was separable from him, and so not intrinsic to
his very nature. Which is yet thus further to be understood, that it were most
absurd and blasphemous to believe that God could make a man a sinner without
any precedent or concurrent act of his own will, or without this original
innocence and Justice; for as nothing but God can proceed immediately and
directly from Gods hand; so neither could man, as he was the effect of God, be
any otherwise than Good. This then may be called his natural and Original
Justice, and Goodness, and Original Grace also in some sense, because though
all the works of God must needs be good, as his: yet man (for example) might
not have been so perfect either in his understanding and will, and yet have
retained innocence. And this was the Grace of God: Besides which may probably
be asserted another Grace, which to the bare stock of Nature thus put together
by God, superadded a more special and Free Grace called (though not very
properly) the Grace of Sanctification, not as it is in us, purifying and
restoring us in some competent manner to what has been decayed or depraved by
the fraud and power of the Devil in us, or our own vile hearts and affections;
but by way of Preservation, preventing the evils and dangers unto which we were
subject. Now this, as it is called Grace because it was not necessarily due to
nature; So was it called Natural or Original, because God conserred the same at
our first being, and would so have continued it, had we not abused and
forfeited the same.

And from hence sprang a Fourth beam of the bright Image of God in man, viz.
Immortality, as an appendage to the said Natural Justice, and a reward of the
perseverence in it. For God saying, In the day thou eatest Genesis 2. 17.
thereof [the tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil] Thou shall surely die, did
imply that so long as he persevered in due subjection and obedience to his
will, he should not dye. So that Adam was not simply and in his own nature
immortal, as were Angels, and immaterial Spirits, but by this Supernatural
Privilege, and Grace of Justice given of God: whereby he was well able to
persevere in that state of Holiness, and secure himself from falling into sin;
And a sufficient argument of the former is, that Man before his fall, did, or
was to eat and drink, as appears from the indulgence of God to him, saying,
Of every tree of the Garden Genesis 2. 16.
thou may eat. Now eating and drinking do necessarily of themselves infer
such an alteration both in the body eating, and eaten, as tends to
corruption, and therefore a more immediate hand and power of God was required
to obviate that propensity. And the manner of propagation being contrary to the
imagination of some of the Ancients by that natural way that now it is, though
much purer, prove the same inclination to dissolution, and the necessity of a
Divine Grace to secure man from Corruption. And thirdly, it is proved from the
manner of the Fall, which spoiled us not of any thing natural, in a proper
sense to us: but lost to us the Supernatural Aids, which otherwise should never
have forsaken us.

Lastly, a Fifth Beam of the Image of God in man was* and is the Dominion he
has over the inferior Creatures, and the subserviency of them to him: For
this an express Charter is given to him as Gods Vicegerent on Earth, in Genesis
in this manner, And God blessed them, and God said unto Genesis 1. 28:
them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth and subdue it, and
have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of the air, and over
every living thing, that moves upon the Earth. Which Right of Rule was not
altogether extinguished after the Fall, but as experience shows that man
partly by strength, and partly by wit and understanding brings all things
under him; so the Scripture affi^meth, Every Jam. 3. 7.
kind of Beasts and of Birds and things in the sea is tamed, and has been
tamed of Mankind. And after the Flood, God in especial manner reenstated man in
his right of dominion, saying, The fear of you, and the dread of you shall be
upon every Beast of the Earth, and upon every Foul Genesis 3. 2.
of the Air, upon all that moves upon the Earth, and upon all the Fishes of
the Sea, into your hand are they delivered.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Second General act of God toward the Creature, especially Man, his
Providence* Aristotle's opinion and Epicurus's rejected. What is Providence.
Three things propounded of Providence. And First the Ground of it, the
Knowledge of God. How God knows all things future, as present. Of Necessity
and Contingencies, how they may consist with Gods Omniscience.

THUS far of the Power of God exemplified chiefly in man: It follows now that
we speak of the Second General Act of God toward the Creature, and specially
Man, known to be his Providence. The Providence of God is one of those things,
Clem. Alex. Strom. 5. page 547. Vid Theodor. Haereticar. Fabul. L. 5. C. 10.
says Clemens Alexandrinus, of which to desire a demonstration or proof is
most absurd, it so manifestly displaying itself over the whole Universe. And
therefore next to that opinion of Epicurus denying God to take any Care of
things in the world (lest it should trouble him too much) is that of Aristotle
in absurdity and impiety that his Care and providence extended no farther than
the Heavens; committing, as it were, the management of this inferior world to
inferior Officers: both so unworthy of wise men to affirm, that we shall
bestow no other confutation of them, than what obliquely may be inferred from
the positive assertion of this divine Attribute of God. For God being in Being
and Power infinite, and as the Apostle says, upholding all things by the word
of his Power: that is, mere will Heb. 4. 3.
and pleasure declared, it were ridiculous to conceive any toil or labor in
Gods conservation and administration of all the things in the world. As it were
most absurd to say, that the glorious body of the Sun and the influences
thereof should be be disparaged in giving virtue unto Gnats and Nits, and
pitiful weeds growing out of the earth, and not confining it self to more high
and excellent Offices. But Providence is (as Boethius defines it) that Boethius
de Consolat. Lib. 4. Pros. 6.
Highest Reason residing in that Supreme Prince of all things, which disposes
all things. And surely, if God did not foul his fingers or degrade himself in
making man as well as Angels, and Beasts as well as Man; and Earth, and Water,
and Air, as well as Beasts; (and that to us there may be such things which we
call clean and unclean, but to God there is no such distinctions in the natures
of things) then truly could it be no blemish to him to regard them being made.
And if to make them was no labor properly so called (though it is so termed by
the Scripture for our instruction) to preserve them can be nothing of
molestation to God: My Father works Joh. 5. 17*
hitherto and I work says Christ of God and himself, in St. John; meaning
nothing more than a continued Creation; as Conservation is well called by
Philosophers, or an Act of Providence proportionable to the Act of Creation
infinitely ^asie to God, as well as Effectual toward the Creature.

The thing then being thus declared and supposed, we shall consider it in this
threefold manner. First, in the foundation and Ground, or Prepararation of his
Divine Providence. Secondly, in the Execution of it. Thirdly, in the Object of
it.

And concerning the First, Providence being an Act of infinite Supreme wisdom,
as Boethius says; does suppose knowledge in God. And the exercise or Execution
hereof implies a Will in God so inclined. And the Object; the Effect of both.
For, as the Apostle says, Who has resisted his will? Romans 9. 19.


And as to the Knowledge of God, it has been before showed, how it must be
commensurate unto God himself, and that is Infinite. He must be and is
Omniscient. And therefore well has Lactantius said, If there be Lactan. de I^a
Cap. 9.
a God, certainly he is Providential as God: neither can Deity be otherwise
ascribed to him, but as he retains things past, knows things present, and
foresees things future, or to come. And truly, I cannot but here insert,
besides my General purpose, the most excellent saying of the Heathen Salust; It
Salust ad C^sar de Repub. Ordinan.
appears to one as a certain truth that the Divine Nature inspects the life of
all Mortals: and that neither the Good, nor Evil Acts of men go for nothing,
but naturally there follows different rewards for Good and Evil men. This
Reward is that outward ground inferring Providence: but the Inward taken from
God himself, is his Knowledge or Omniscience: which the better to judge of, we
may distinguish according to the Object of it, into knowledge of it, into
knowledge of things within himself, or of himself, which is more Internal; and
things without himself, external.

For if we should speak more Properly, God knows nothing by an ababsolute
direct knowledge, but himself; and all other things, Relatively, rather;
according as they bare relation to him in being or not being; in being ^ike him
as that which is Good, or dislike him, by which manner he understands Evil.
And nothing but God himself can perfectly know God, no not the highest and most
divine Spirits attending him more immediately in the state of Glory: because
perfect knowledge does not consist in an Apprehension that God is, or that he is
infinitely glorious and Perfect: but in comprehension to know him as he is.
True: St. John says, 1 John 3. 2.
We shall know him as he is: meaning that in the state of glory we should have
a much nearer and clearer access unto his divine nature, than we can have here
by the Organ of our Faith: And that so we shall see him, that there will be no
more use of Faith, or outward information from revealed doctrines, but Inward
Revelations and illuminations shall immediately flow into us from God, to the
fuller apprehension of him, and satisfaction of the restless mind of man. But
to know him, as he is, is the Property of himself incommunicable to any
Creature. For to comprehend a thing, says Austin, is nothing else but so to
know it, that nothing of it should be unknown to the Knower. As a Vessel is
said to contain such a quantity of liquor, that nothing should be left out. And
thus God only, and no Created being conceives God comprehensively.

The Relative knowledge of God in order to things external, is to be estimated
according to the Variety of things so known by him: yea not only the knowledge,
but even the very Being of God is described unto us; according to the manner of
outward things: All things of reality, and not merely imaginary, are by general
consent divided into three sorts, according to the three distinctions of time:
Into things Past, Future, and Present. And therefore God is said to be, He
which is, and which was, and Rev. 1. 4. 8.
which is to come. Therefore surely the distinction of Gods knowledge most
agreably to the nature of God and things known too, is, into that of things
Past, Present, and to Come.

And there being no great difficulty or difference among Christians concerning
the two former; viz. Knowledge of things past and present, all concurring that
the knowledge of things passed, never passes with God, nor of things present,
nor of future, but the Knowledge of all these being immediately and immoveably
present with God, so that many more warily, will have all understanding in God
to be rather Science, than Prae-science; and Knowledge, rather than
foreknowledge: It were needless, as well as endless, to enlarge thereupon.

The third, about things to come, deserves more accurate enquiry. For, as to
the distinction of Gods knowledge into that of Vision, whereby he beholds all
really existent things; whether in themselves past, present, or future: And
that of Intelligence, it may be questioned, as common as it is. For we speak
not of possible, but actual knowledge: but that which may possibly be, but
never shall be (the object of the supposed Intelligence of God) is only a
possible knowledge, and not a real: and therefore, not to be matched with real
knowledge. For to say, God knows the possibilities, is no more than to say, not
that he knows the things, but himself, in whom, and to whom all things are
possible.

Therefore confining our Discourse only to things future, we are to observe
such to be, either necessary or contingent; there being no mean between these
two. And here first, What is that which denominates a thing necessary? and what
contingent, or accidental? and then, in what respect they are so called and
distinguished? And here, first, we are to distinguish of necessity it self,
with the Schools. For there is a simple and absolute Necessity; the contrary to
which is altogether impossible, and so nothing but God is of Necessity. For God
being absolute and supreme over all things, as nothing can, by way of
anticipation, lay a necessity upon him; so neither can any thing afterward
obstruct or necessarily impede his will: For as St. Paul says, Who has
resisted his will? It neither has been at any time, nor can possibly be, That
Gods resolute Will should be opposed so as not to obtain its designed end. But
there is a conditional Necessity which they call Hypothetical, which has no
such simple and original certainty, but dependent upon somewhat else. And this
Dependence or Conditionalness is either upon The first Cause, which is God; or
some second Cause, the Creature. For there was no such absolute Necessity that
this visible world should have a Being, but this Being depended upon the Will
and Pleasure of God. And this world being, there was no necessity that it
should consist of so many parts, or several kinds of things, but this depended
upon the wisdom and pleasure of God also. The other Hypothetical Necessity was
founded by the First Cause, God, in the Creature; upon supposition that it had
a Being, that such should be the nature of it: As that, supposing the Sun, it
necessarily followed it should give light; and supposing there be such a thing
as Fire in the world, there is a necessity it should heat and burn: Of all
which there can no other reason be rendered but that which Scotus gives,
Because this is this, and that is that: And because the Creator of them and
all things else has imposed such a Law unalterable upon the very natures of
things themselves; that upon supposal they have a Being, such, and such it
should be. And this I take to be that Necessity which Philosophers call a
Necessity of Consequent: viz. that which is immediately consequent to the being
of a Thing: that of Consequence (as they call it) being nothing else but a
rational Inference following upon some Particular supposed: As the Genus is
always supposed to the Species, and not on the contrary. For example; He that
runs, must of necessity move: and he that moves, must of necessity be: but not
on the contrary. And the ground of these and all such things, Necessity, is
taken from the immutable decree of God, who has so determined that things
should be: And not only is this true in things apparent and visible to us, but
must necessary be no less true in things invisible, and to us obscure and
uncertain: viz. That upon supposal Nihil est ad^o contingens quin in se aliquid
necessarium habe it. Thom. 1. Q. 86. art. 3. co.
of such a peremptory Decree and Cause from God, that which seems to us most
contingent and casual must have a most certain and inevitable event; even not
inferior to any of those necessities we have touched: and the reason is plain,
because here is supposed the same will, and same power to effect this, as them:
and the variety and uncertainty of the means, whereby a thing is brought about,
makes nothing at all against this; because this proceeds only form the relation
such means have to our understanding, and apprehension: which not being able to
descern any connection natural between the Cause and the Effect, do look upon
the effect as mere chance. For instance, that a fly should kill a man by
choking him is as contingent a thing as can ordinarily happen: And who could
believe it, that should be told that such a fly moving lightly and wildly it
knows not whether it self, perhaps a mile off from the place where this falls
out, and many days before the fact, should certainly be the death of such a
man: yet no man of reason and conscience can deny, but Gods providence and
decree may impose an inevitable necessity upon this creature so opportunely and
fitly to move as that it should certainly kill him, and that at such a time,
and in such a place. And if any should hereof doubt, the express asseveration
of our Savior Christ in the Gospel may satisfy him herein, saying; One
Sparrow shall not fall on the ground without your Father. If any should so
Matthew. 10. 29.
contrive our Saviors words as to understand without Gods will, to be contrary
only to Gods will, and not of Gods will concurring and his knowledge noting the
same, St. Luke will instruct him otherwise, who renders Luke 12. 6.
the same speech, Not one is forgotten: which implies Observation, and
Providence.

That therefore those things which seem to us most free, irregular, and
contingent, may have a tacit and unknown determination from God, which should
fix and infallibly limit them to some special ends, I may presume no man can
piously doubt: and especially after that great Opposer of Gods Providence over
humane actions, has been constrained to acknowledge so much, I mean Socinus:
who grants God the liberty and power so to determine Prael^ct. car. 6.
the Salvation, as well as the acceptance and improvement of Grace offered to
Peter and to Paul, that the effect should inevitably follow: which being
allowed, all the arguments usually brought by him and others (not of his rank)
of the inconsistency of such inevitable decrees with the freedom of Man's will,
will lie as heavy upon him to solve, or answer in his cases, as on any other,
who should extend the same to many more than he pleases to do. For can we any
more conceive that Gods good will to them should first make them brutes, before
it made them Saints in limiting their choice and determining the same to one
side, rather than others? or that he should extinguish a natural humane
principle in them, to bring them to salvation; but secure it to others? I hope
not. Therefore if a necessity destroyed not their humane Liberty, how can it be
concluded that it does it in others? O^ that there is no possible concord
between Necessity and Contingencie. Indeed in the same respect, it must
necessarily be true; whether we regard God or Man: For neither to God, nor to
Man, can the same thing be allowed to be necessary and contingent at the same
time: but there appears no reason, why the same thing, which is necessarily to
follow on the part of God, may not be said, on the part of man, to be
fortuitous, free, and chance, as it is called. For we indeed vulgarly call that
only necessary, where there appears a necessary connection in nature, between
cause and effect: and according to the degree of evidence and assurance to us,
we hold a thing necessary or contingent; in which sense we hold it necessary,
that an heavy body, out of its natural place, should (left to it self) descend
to it and possess it. And we hold it not so necessary, that the Sun going down
in a clear red evening toward the West, should portend the day following to be
fair and clear: Our Savior, when he affirmed this, spoke after the
observations and opinion of men, which generally herein fail not. So that the
being of a thing rea^y, and the appearing of it so to be, being so far
different in nature, it follows not at all, that so it is intrinsecally, and of
it self; because we can make no other judgment of it than in such a manner: and
that because we perceive no natural connection between the cause and effect
necessitating it, therefore, there neither is, nor can be any. Some things God
has ordained so openly, inseparable one from the other, that we easily and
readily infer the one from or by the other: and this is all we call necessity,
in nature. But if God more covertly and subtilty has likewise ordained the
like connection, not by a Law of constant Nature, but his singular will (for
which we can find out no reason) this we presently call Contingent; though it
be as certain as the other. And names being given to things by man, according
as they are apprehended, the distinction of things into Necessary and
Contingent is very reasonable, and serviceable to man; as signifying to him
such a diversity of Effects in the world, that some have apparent natural
necessary cause to produce them: and these things we call Necessary; and some
things have no such natural causes, but more immediately are ordered by God
bringing causes by his special Providence together, besides their nature, to
produce such an Effect; and that certainly, though not naturally; and this we
call Contingent.

That this manner of proceeding of the Providence of God, is possible; is
impossible to be desired. And in many things seeming to us as casual as may be,
that actually they are all granted. For to us, considering all circumstances,
it was a thing merely indifferent and undetermined, whether Peter should
believe unto Salvation or not? but considering the resolute Providence of God
disposing certainly outward causes, it was certain and infallible. The great
question must then be about the General; viz. Whether God has two immutable
Laws whereby a necessity does attend all effects, as well such as we term free
and contingent, as such as are necessary; with this difference only, that on
some things he has laid a Law natural which ordinarily and necessarily moves
to one certain effect and end, as are seen in natural generations and
corruptions, as that, as St. Paul says, Every seed should have its own body;
i. e. produce it. And 1 Cor. 15.
that whatever is so generated should, by a Law of Nature also incline to
dissolution again. And that by a private invisible Law which reserves to him,
or particular decree he certainly brings to pass even those things of which
we can give no reason, and there appears to us no connection or order of causes;
but causes are by his special hand brought to effect such things, as in their
general nature they had no tendencie unto? The distinction common amongst
Philosophers of Fortuna and Casus; i. e. Fortune and Casualty; and calling that
Fortune which contingently falls out to free Intelligent Agents acting: and
that Casualty, which besides natural intention, happens to fall out, may seem
to clear this. For if we should affirm that in natural things there were no
such indifferency really, but all things were precisely and particularly
determined by God in his private counsel, however a wide latitude seems to us
to be left them, to move, and act; or not to act; or to move and act thus; or
not thus, but contrariwise; no great absurdity or inconvenience would follow.
For what absurdity could be inferred, if a man should say, That the Eagle
letting fall a Tortoise upon the bald head of the Philosopher of Syracuse
walking in the field, and so beating out his brains, was determined necessarily
so to do of God: or that the tree that fell down in a wind and killed him that
walked out to preserve himself from the fall of his house, which he feared, was
inevitably appointed so to do? These effects did not proceed from the nature of
these causes themselves, but a Superior hand: and yet might be no less
necessary than such effects, of which the common reason of man can give an
ordinary and easy account. And if this be granted in some things, it does lie
upon them who deny it in all, to render a reason of the difference, and not on
them who affirm a paritie, by infinite instances to prove: it being sufficient
to say, There can nothing be shown to the contrary. But in things rational, and
endowed with a power of Election and Rejection, it must be confessed, that the
difficulty is much greater, because there seems to be a repugnancie to free
will, in such tacit necessity, and God should seem to take away with one hand,
what he had given with the other. And therefore, of this in a more convenient
place; after we have spoken somewhat preparatory thereunto, concerning the
Decrees of God; which are internal acts of the Providence of God.

CHAP. IX.
The method of enquiring into the Nature and Attributes of God: Vorstius his
grounds of distinguishing the Attributes of God from his Nature, examined. Of
the Decrees of God depending on his Understanding and Will. Of knowledge of
Intelligence. Vision, and the supposed Middle knowledge: The Impertinencie of
this Middle knowledge invented in God. How Free Agents can be known by God in
their uncertain choice. Indifferent Actions in respect of Man not so in respect
of God. All Vision in God supposes certainly in the thing known.

IF the Holy Scriptures leaving us many precedents, have thereby warranted, or
at least permitted us to speak of God after the manner of Man's body, ascribing
unto him head, eyes, mouth, hands and feet; and, the better to perceive the
things of God, much more may we be allowed (if at all to search into Gods
nature) to regulate our enquiry of God from the nature of man's mind, and the
more supreme acts of his soul. The first Act of which is his apprehension and
knowledge; with judgment following thereupon. The next in order is the Act of
his will; and this Order we may best follow in the enquiry into Gods
Providence, which is constituted (according as we can judge) of knowledge and
will, whose proper act it is, to decree.

And here first, It is requisite that we take notice of the folly and gross
impiety of Vorstius, a late Pragmatick in Divine Mysteries: who would needs
distinguish God from himself, and taking him at his word, wherein, speaking
after the manner of men, such diversity is mentioned, concludes that God and
his Attributes, are really distinct in nature, one from another. And why did he
not, by the same rule, conclude that Gods very Being, his Essence was distinct
really from it self, as well as from the supposed Accidents he (Epicurean-like)
feigns to God. For God is no less affirmed to have heart, hands, and feet, than
to have Understanding and Will? And if it be granted, there is a figurative and
no proper sense in the one case, why may it not be in the other? And that God
is all these things Eminently, but not after the formality of mankind.

The matter will be cleared better by examining his prime arguments taken from
the Decrees of God, our present subject. First, says he, The decrees of God
are various and many: but the Essence of God is but one: therefore they must be
really distinct. To which the answer is as obvious, as the argument
presumptuous: That if the Decrees were really many, they must of necessity be
really distinct as well from themselves, as God. But their plurality is rather
Relative than Absolute. All the Acts of God being but one pure simple Act, as
in him; but denominated diverse from the event, or relation they bear to the
Creature. This is one of the first principles in his Christian Catechize; and
why did he (pretending to reason) leap over this, and not first disprove it;
and then proceed to his arguments? It was a great piece of folly therefore in
him to prove a real distinction of Gods Attributes before he had proved that
the Nature of God was compounded, or would admit of any such opposition. For
they who deny this, will certainly deny that.

Another of his reasons is, The decrees of God are free; because they might
have not been, as well as have been. But Gods nature is not so. Answ. There is
a twofold freedom in the Decrees of God. The one in respect of the Nature of
God, as God is precisely considered, which, abstracting from all Acts, was
indifferent to others, as well as those Decrees made: And the other in respect
of the Creature or object, which was capable of other Decrees; and therefore
were Gods Decrees said to be free* but we all know that distinction of Instants
in Order and Nature, do not infer a necessary distinction in duration: but that
both Nature and Decrees might be coequal in eternity. Now all things that are
eternal are in some case necessary. And the Schools have such a distinction of
Decrees, as they have of nature; viz. Decretum Decretans, and Decretum
Decretatum, meaning that the Decrees of God are sometimes used for the Act of
God decreeing, and sometimes for the thing decreed: And of this latter it may
be said, That the Decree of God is produced and made (which is a third special
argument of Vorstius:) but of the other, it cannot so be affirmed: but it may
flow from him by an eternal Law, or Volition within himself, and not at all
occasioned by the Creature. And it is therefore said to be free, because it was
not imposed upon him, and therefore necessary, because not accessory to him or
contingent; but proceeding from him, as a natural and necessary, yet voluntary
Agent. For we must not look upon God as subject to the condition of the
Creature, in whom natural necessity is not compatible with voluntary freedom;
but with God it may: because no Creatures natures and wills are the same
really, or formally; but the Nature of the Creator and his will are formally
distinct, and admit deservedly of a diverse conception, but really are the
same: so that notwithstanding it is harsh to the apprehension to conceive, yet
the thing it self may be, and really is so. Which ground laid does resolve that
doubt also, concerning the generation of Christ, which is said to be both
voluntary and natural, and necessary: Voluntary and free, because not
constrained; and again necessary, because not indifferent, or possible to be
otherwise: for as much as it is not possible that God should not have been, and
Christ is God. Yet must we here put a wide difference between the Decrees of
God in reference to the Creature; and the Paternal Act in reference to God the
Son. For in this latter, we cannot so much as suppose an antecedent Decree; but
only a natural Volition: In the former, we may conceive both a Decree going
before, and a Prescience anticedent to that Decree.

Now as to the nature of Gods Decrees themselves, we are to consider that a
Decree being an Act principally of the Will, and the Act of the Will in order
of Nature posteriour to the Acts of the Understanding; it ought first be
enquired what Relation the Knowledge and Decrees of God bear one toward
another. And here we must resume the received distinction of Knowledge of
Simple Intelligence, as they call it, or pure Understanding; and the Knowledge
of Vision in God: By the first is meant the understanding of all things
possible to come to pass by the Divine Power, to which nothing is impossible:
By the Second, the understanding of all things future. And because things
future are so various as we have shown, that some are future necessarily, and
some unnecessarily; therefore has there been invented, and with much applause
offered to the world, a Third kind of Knowledge of God, termed [ Media
Scientia] the Mean Knowledge; as coming between both the former; and having
for its object, neither that which by a simple necessity shall come to pass,
nor that which is simply uncertain and contingent; but though in nature of
outward causes contingent, upon supposition made, certain and infallible to
God. To all which, I offer these exceptions, first that this last distinction
seems altogether superfluous, or gives occasion altogether as just to
introduce innumerable other, no less reasonable than that. For if from such
small variety in the object, as we shall show this to be founded on, new
distinctions are to be coined, there will never be any end of distinguishing
Gods Knowledge. For if for conditionate things, a conditionate knowledge ought
to be invented and acknowledged, then likewise according to the discrimination
of conditions found in the Object, a different knowledge is to be imagined and
distinguished in God: which were confusion and not distinction. Secondly, this
mean or conditionate Knowledge cannot be entertained by sober men as a distinct
Species from the other two more ancient, but as a Part of that called the
Science of Vision, whereby all future things are known to God: as being it
self, about future things though with a condition. For all things are either
future, or not future: If they be not future, but only possible to come to
pass, then are they the objects of that Simple Intelligence, though very
improperly, as is said: If they be future, then are they* the object of Vision
in God. Again, if of future things, some being absolutely necessary, and some
conditional only; ought we not rather to conform the Act of Vision to the
Object; and distinguish Vision into that of things certain and absolute* and of
things certain only upon a supposed condition, then to frame a new nothing to
explicate something, which was clearer without it? The thing we oppose not, nor
forty such more, as might be no less reasonably imposed on the world; but the
impertinencie, vanity, fraud of the terms, occasioning greater obscurity and
contention than the world was acquainted with before. Thirdly, the very
supposition here made to found this distinction will not hold the trial; that
is, that there is any thing so absolutely future, that it should come to pass
without a Condition: or that there were any knowledge in God not conditional,
in reference to created things, unless we should peradventure except the first
matter of all, made of nothing, and to which no outward or natural Cause did
concur, but the immediate will and decree of God produced it: but to all other
effects from the beginning of the world to the end of it, somewhat of the
nature of a condition was required to bring them to pass; even to man was
required earth. And God did not so absolutely, by his Prescience or Vision see
man future, but a Condition was taken into that knowledge; viz. matter
preceding: however he might have produced him without it. And not to multiply
Instances to this purpose, God does not foresee, or see that any natural or
necessary Cause should take effect, but upon the condition of the due
application of Actives and Passives. Therefore the sum of all, and the best end
we can make here seems to me to be this: That we distinguish Conditional
Knowledge in God, into that of Natural Agents, and Free Agents. For as God sees
some things future upon supposition of a capacity nature is put into, to Act,
as that a Stone should move downward upon supposition that it be first removed
from the Center, and then that Impediments be withdrawn (for otherwise he sees
only that it is moveable down-ward,) so does he see some things future, upon
supposition that Free Agents be put into a capacity to exert themselves: As
that, at St. Paul's preaching at Athens, Dionysius the Areopagite, and Damaris
should cleave to him, but the far greater number of Auditors should forsake
him, at his preaching of Christ.

The main doubt here to be resolved will be this, What certainty there can be
in Free Agents to found an infallible knowledge in God, seeing if they be not
certainly known determined, they cannot be certainly known as determined? for
this were to know them a-miss, and would be an error. And to be determinable,
is quite another thing from knowing them actually determined. Again, If they be
determined, and that certainly; (For uncertain determination is no
determination, in truth) how can they be said to be free, and have the power of
Election? To this it was wont to be replied by virtue of Media scientia, or
middle kind of knowledge in God: That God does not see effects infallibly to
flow from such Free Agents, because of any antecedent influence inclining
certainly the will to one way; but by virtue of that general stock of liberty
with which he has endowed Rational Agents to act freely, he sees, upon such
and such circumstances and proposals, the Will of it self to move one way;
which such self-determination being known to God renders him truly Prescient
and Omniscient, and that without error.

But this will not stand the encounter. For Gods knowledge about the Creature,
being wholly conditional, as we have showed (supposing the application of
natural Causes in natural Effects, and free Causes, to free Effects) there will
be no Cause to be found, or imagined in nature, why two equally by nature Free,
shall extremely differ in their choice of the same object: How can that be
known which neither has a being in it self, nor its Causes? But the Case in
hand is such. For the Object being the same to both, and the Subject being the
same in both, Freedom of Will to chose: it is not intelligible how it should be
foreseen, that one will certainly tend this way, and the other, the Contrary.
And if there be a difference in the Wills, St. Augustines question so often and
pressingly urged against the Pelagians, out of St. Paul, will put them hard to
it to answer; viz. Who made thee to differ? and, what have thou that thou have
not received? Comes it from a man's self, as free? If so, then it should come
from all alike, where all are alike free: and if all be not alike free, then
there is difference made to their hand, and not by themselves. Again, the
common Argument will be of no ordinary force upon them, which lays this
undeniable and unshaken foundation, That God is the Cause of all Causes, and
the First mover in all natural actions and motions: but here (as some of the
Schoolmen, and amongst others Suarez by name has it) God should stand still,
look on, Suarez in 1. 2d^ Thom. Disput. 6. Tract. 4.
and await for a time* the first self-motion of the Creature, without any
prae-moving virtue effectual to the end; and see whether he will turn to the
right hand, or to the left, before he knows any thing of certainty concerning
that.

But they proceed farther, and say, That God having endued the Free Agent with
sufficient abilities to Act, the original cause of Acting must be himself, and
so his universasity of Cause ^a^ved to him. But to this we reply, That three
things are to be considered in indifferent Actions; The Power to Act, which is
indifferent: The Determination of this power to one, which takes off the
indifferency; and the Action it self, which in the execution, is necessary:
because as the Ax^ome has it, Every thing when it is, necessarily is. Now the
latter indeed may be ascribed to God, as likewise the first; as the true
Author, upon general concessions of power; but the second cannot: because (what
I think has not been considered) there is a distinction to be made between the
power of Acting, or not Acting, and Acting this or the contrary to it; and the
power of determining it self to one, rather than the other. For if, as in an
equal balance, the two Scales of man's Free Will are so evenly posited, that
they are no more propense to one, than the other side, the Affirmative, or
Negative; does it not necessarily follow there must be the help of a finger, or
such thing, to make a difference, though the least touch will do it? So that
the power of moving up or down is plainly one thing, and the power of
determining the same, quite another here, and so likewise in man's Free Will
made free, and thus indifferent by Grace; which they call sufficient: though
this will not be allowed by such as require a particular and immediate converse
of God to all Actions; as did likewise the most Philosophical Heathens, as I
could show. From whence we may collect that God seeing nothing but what has a
real being, in it self or Causes; and the Power of Acting being not sufficient
to give a being to an effect, but the Execution of that Power: if this
Execution has no cause, it cannot be known; and it has no immediate cause
until man has actual being, according to that opinion that makes man the
absolute cause of determining his actions, and not God: For surely man cannot
determine before he has existence, and therefore it cannot be, and therefore
neither known to be, so much as future: For man before he is, can give no
causality to this determination; and they say God does give none; Therefore it
is not at all, and cannot at all be known of God. Neither can it be said, That
things future are Real Beings, though not Actual and Present, and so may be
known of God: because that which is future cannot be actually known but as it
is actual, and not simply future; and therefore is the knowledge of God by more
accurate speakers truly called Vision, rather than Praevision. And those things
that are future as to their proper Existence, are present as to their Causes in
Gods counsels, but if there be no such to be found with God, then can there be
no such Causes at all: For that cannot be said to be the Cause of a thing which
at the same time is the Cause equally of the contrary, or contradiction to that
thing: but the undetermined will of Man is indifferent to both sitting still or
walking, at the same time; no cause inclining to one, more than other: which
should found a certain knowledge of one, and not of the other.

CHAP. X.
Four doubts cleared concerning the Knowledge and Decrees of God; and Free
Agents, and Contingent Effects. How man that infallibly acts is responsable for
his Actions. The frivolous Evasion of the said difficulties by them of Dort.

TO the vindicating the former Discourse from just reprehension, it will here
be expected that we explain our selves in answer to these following Quaeries.
First, Whether the knowledge of God be the Cause of things future; or things
future the Cause of his knowledge? or otherwise, Whether God knows a thing
because it shall come to pass; or, It shall come to pass, because God knows it?

In answer to which, we must distinguish a twofold knowledge in God. An Ideal
knowledge and a Real knowledge (as we may be allowed to speak after the manner
of Men, reserving still to God his absolute simplicity.) The Ideal knowledge of
God is that, whereby he perfectly knows all things in their proper forms, which
are possible, and intelligible: And this does not depend at all upon his
Decrees, which we make the Cause of all Existence in the Creature; but the
Decrees of God depend upon this: God decreeing nothing to be future, which he
first by simple intuition beholds not in its proper Nature and Circumstances;
as men of Contemplation first weigh the nature, means, and ends of things,
before they resolve upon them. But the Real knowledge, which we signally so
call because it relates to the Real Existence of the thing so known, does
certainly depend upon the antecedent Decree of God: no possible reason being to
be rendered, why God should know a thing to be, but because it is certainly, and
not fallibly to him, to be: And no possible reason being to be found, why a
thing should so infallibly be to him, but because he has resolved and decreed
that so it shall be. From whence may be reconciled the frequent sayings of the
Ancient, and some Modern Divines, who have said, That God fore-sees a thing
because it is to be: and not that it is, because God sees it. For the seeing of
a thing absolutely and the seeing it to be, are vastly distinct notions. And
most true is that observation to be found (as I remember) amongst Philosophers
concerning the difference between the Understanding of God, and its Object; and
the Understanding of Man, or Angel, and its object. For in the Intellectual
Part (for I use the word Understanding now, and not for the Act, as even now)
of the Creature, Understanding is caused from, and by the Object, to the
faculty represented; and the Object makes the knowledge, and not the knowledge
the Object: But on the contrary, the Understanding of God is many times
operative, and makes its object.

A Second capital Doubt will be, How such a perpetual and infallible Causation
in the Creator, upon the very Understanding and Will of the Creature Rational,
can consist with the native Prerogative of Liberty of Will, given by the same
hand to it?

The Answer to this has cost many a Volume, with no great satisfaction: and
therefore how little may be expected from this Compendium, every equal Judge
will easily see. I shall forbear Citations of other men's opinions and
autorities, for brevity sake: And endeavor first by a description of Liberty
of Will; and next by a Distinction of Necessity (which is commonly looked on as
the cutthroat of Liberty) to contribute something to the easing this
difficulty.

And first, we are to distinguish of Free Will, as in Mankind, in General, from
that which may be found in any one Individual man. For when the noted place of
Ecclesiasticus (which I will not quarrel at because it is only Ecclesiasticus)
tells us, God made man from the beginning, and Eccles. 15. 14.
left him in the hand of his Counsel. What does it more say, Then that God
dealt not so straightly with mankind as with other kinds of Creatures inferior
to him? He left it undetermined in the nature of man, to do this or that. And
humane nature had such a measure of Wisdom, Understanding, Reas^n, and Counsel
put into it, of God, that there was such a power of choosing and refusing, as
no other Creature could claim; and there was not the like natural restraint
upon Man's will, as upon Beasts will, considered still in the general Notion.
And surely, this is no small difference, whereof man may glory above beasts:
which is not wholly lost to man, though in particular there should be found a
determination of Man's will to one. Secondly, Liberty is made up of two things
necessarily, the Acts of Reason, and the Acts of Will. If any such
determination were made of Man's actions in the Individual, that Reason were
locked up, and could not stir, or move in man; or when reason out of its native
power, remaining, did argue and debate things variously, there were no power
left in the Will to follow the Dictates of it, but was driven like an horse in
a Cart, by the fierce voice and whip of the stander-by, then indeed all
pretense to true Liberty must needs perish, because here were a Co-action of
the Agent moving him to one thing. Co-action, as has been granted by the
strictest defenders of Grace, is against Liberty, and they show by most
numerous Autorities, and sufficient Reas^ns that this is the only enemy to
Freedom. For as St. Austin has it, This a man is said to have in his Power,
which if he wills he may do; Aug. de Spiritu and Litera, cap: 31.
If he wills not, he may not do. And Hugo de Victore does yet more expressly
define Liberty to be, An Ability of the Rational Will, whereby, through the
Cooperation of Grace, it chooses Good; and it deserting it, Evil. By which it
should appear that there is no inconsistencie with the Cooperation of God
though infallibly moving to one, and the Election of the Will: as will yet be
more clear in the second thing here principally to be distinguished; viz,
Necessity, which I make either in Coordinate or Subordinate Causes: and
directly deny, That Necessity in Causes subordinate one to another, does quite
destroy Liberty or Free Will: especially if we subdivide Necessity of things in
subordination, into subordination to the first Cause of all, and of second
Causes. I grant that in Causes coordinate, as Man and Beast; or Man and Man
acting upon distinct principles, and ends, Necessitation from the One, quite
ruins the Freedom of the other; and is unnatural and violent, being purely an
external cause, giving no power to the Will to move, but exciting and impelling
it against the judgment and more rational conclusion of the understanding, to
accept the terms given. But Necessity proceeding from the First and Supreme
Cause, God himself, to whom all inferior Causes are subordinate, does not take
away the native Freedom of Man. The Reason whereof is, because the concurse of
the First Cause is not extrinsecal to the Natural Agent, but really intrinsecal
to it, and essential. And therefore the division of Causes by Logicians, into
Internal, as Matter and Form: and External, Efficient and end; holds good only
in secondary Efficients, and not in the first, and universal Agent. For though
it be most true that the Absolute nature and Being of God is quite distinct
from created being, and extrinsecal: yet it is not so, as he is a Cause. The
reason of this will make it undeniable: because, as is agreed by Christian
Philosophers, the act of Creation in God is essential to the Creature, so
produced; and the act of Conservation is a perpetuation of that act creative in
God; and therefore, also must needs be intrinsecal to the Creature; and the act
of Gods concurse moving the Creature and so determining it, is no other but a
branch of that conservative act in God, and so is intrinsecal to the Creature,
that what the Creature does, by virtue of such influence, it may no less be
said to do, of it self (there being a Coalition of both acts, created and
increated in one) than it may be said to subsist of it self, by its matter and
form, of which it consists. And this St. Paul's doctrine declares to us, where
he puts no difference between our living, moving, and having our being in God,
all alike depending on him, Acts 17. 28.
and be equally intrinsecal to all. And therefore Gods action terminated in
man, becomes his, as much as those which we conceive to proceed from his own
being: and notwithstanding to this act of God primarily may be ascribed the
turning, as it were, of the Scales of the Will, yet may man also be said herein
to determine himself: the reason whereof is, That both the first Cause and the
second are here total Causes. But here I call to mind a Maxim amongst
Logicians, and others teaching of Natural Causes: That it is not possible that
Two total Causes should be subordinate, as principal and instrumental Cause,
one to the other; but must always be Coordinate: as two horses moving a
Chariot, no otherwise than one might well do alone; and two Candles giving but
one light to the same place. I might question this Axiom, and the Instances
both, because in the first, though both Horses are the Causes equally of such a
motion, and so total: yet the immediate causes are not total: For it is
certain, that the same force which is used by one, not rising to that of both,
would not in like manner move the Chariot, that both actually do; though there
be nothing more easy then for one so to move it. Neither are two Candles total
Causes of that degree of light which is in the Room, though of light they may
be: But whethen these mine exceptions against the presumed Rule be rational or
not, it matters not at present; it being to me certain that it holds only in
secondary Causes jovntly working, and not in the concurrent motions of first
and secondary Causes; because of the essential dependence the second Cause has
upon the first. So that St. Basil says highly and truly, The (...) Bas. in
Hexaen. Hom. 8.
Divine word (and that is here as much to say as the Divine virtue) is the
nature of things produced.

There remains yet one more difficulty to be here touched, to which many may be
reduced, and that is, That Man being thus determined and lying under this
necessity of Acting, he cannot in justice be responsable for his Actions,
whether good or evil. He cannot be the subject of praise or dispraise. All
preaching by Exhortation and Dehortation; All reward of Punishment and
Benefits; Lastly, All Prayers, and the use of it, must needs cease.

To these in order briefly; And first in general, denying the reasonableness or
validity of such consequences, upon this common ground. That if indeed this
were a necessity from a Coordinate Cause, not natural to the Agent moved by
it, then it were to be looked on as no act proper, and free in the Creature, but
strange to it, and violent, and by consequence refunding all praise and
dispraise upon the unresistible impulse of that external Cause: but this is
internal, natural, and one act really, of the first and second Mover: and so
properly, principally (as any Creature can be said to be principal Agent under
the Creature) and totally is the act of the second Cause; which in external
motions, otherwise than from God, it is not. And if it be said, that from hence
would follow, The Creature acting evilly, that this Evil might be equally
imputable, unto God, and to the Creature; It may be replayed, that two things
are to be considered in Actions the nature of the Action it self; and the
morality of it. And that all things being good in nature, the act it self is
good and may be imputed to God, though the morality of the act be otherwise.
But it may be demanded yet further: Have not this morality it self a Nature,
and consequently upon the grounds laid imputable to God, as well when the act
offends against justice and honesty, as when it agrees with both? To this.
Nature indeed (as has upon another occasion been showed) is sometimes taken
very largely for any thing that has a being, but here we take it only in the
physical sense, whereby things are said to have a proper being But Good and
Evil are rather modi reales (as they speak in Metaphysics) then res; Manners
of Being rather than proper Beings of themselves. Again we must, and do hold
with Austine that, Evil morally taken has not such a real being as Good has:
but is only the absence or privation of Good; being no real Entity; and we
pity, rather than fear such an argument as we have found against this, that if
Evil be nothing, then God should be angry for nothing, when he is offended at
sin. For surely there is a great difference between Gods being angry for
nothing, and Gods being angry with nothing. What would they say, I marveil,
when the Father in the Gospel commanded his Son to go work in his vineyard, and
he would not go? might he not be angry, even because there was nothing done?
And must this be called, being angry for nothing? So surely, God may be angry
with man's doing nothing. Here in order to a more full account may be given of
the objection, we leave in pawn this distinction, of the Act of Sin; and the
Sin of the Act: And that God may concur to the former constantly, and never
have a singer in the latter, which is properly the sinfulness.

Now to the matter of praise or dispraise: of which they are only said to be
capable, who act freely and upon election, and not upon necessity; I make no
seruple directly to deny the truth of it, as famous as it is amongst the
Fathers and Philosophers, absolutely taken. Nothing is more plain than the
contrary, every day: For we praise handsome Horses, and handsome Men, and
infinite other things when there was not the least concurrence of the will, but
God and Nature did all, to such a laudable state; much less any act conducing
thereunto. And do we not in our Judgments discommend the disproportions of
natural monsters and creeples, though we out of affection and pity, declare not
so much to their reproach? And this seems to have deceived Aristotle in his
Ethics (who laid it down for a current Rule) that he distinguished not these
two. For certainly, Commendation and Discommendation rightly used, are the
effects of our Judgment, and Will, and Affections. But more nearly to the case,
we answer, That such Praise and Dispraise are only vacated by such a necessity
as is extrinsecal to, and contrary to the will. but where the Act is affectedly
done, there a supposed necessity does not exempt from such Rewards of Praise
and Dispraise, or Punishment or Benefits. But it is certain a man may strongly
affect that which he cannot choose but do.

And the like may be answered to that of Instruction, Exhortation, and
Dehortation; all which, they say, ought to cease, and would become unnecessary
if man's will were so immoveably determined to one thing. Yea all Prayers and
Deprecations were to no purpose. And why so? because it is not in man's power to
relieve himself: and whatever he says, believes, or does, nothing can do any
good, if the Decree be so against him: and nothing of all these omitted, or the
contrary committed, hurt or endanger him; such a Decree being for him. And what
grounds of comfort to a troubled mind may be laid, the Case thus standing? This
is the sum of all we are (here at least) bound to take notice of. And this were
much more than it seems to be, were it so, that they, who hold the contrary
opinions, were not obliged as really (I say not in the same respects) to answer
these difficulties. For who is there that does not held an Intuitive knowledge
of God of all things future? but they deny what the other, affirm, That such
knowledge is operative or decretory upon the will of man, to infallibly
determine ti; but will have Man be the Author of such his resolution only, and
God to look on, and see it done, but not to do it. Well, be it so for once: yet
still the Will is certainly and irrevocably determined, or God could have no
knowledge of it, but what is conjectural, and as unworthy of God, as the
Creature is unworthy of Omniscience. And if such unalterable state of the Will
and Actions be allowed in man; it is not material, at present, to enquire from
whence this Determination proceeded; from God, or from Man: we granting here,
That if God had no hand in it, but Man, exclusively to God, was the cause of
it, then the account would seem more grievous, and case more foul on man's part.
This I say, is not much to our present purpose, which is to enquire of the
Fact, whether so it be, or not determined: and that so it is, appears, that God
sees it is so. And if it be so, do not all those forementioned inconveniences
come strongly upon them? Man's destiny is certain by his own Act: he is
unalterably now determined, he cannot go back: God sees it is to be so with
him, and therefore so it shall certainly be: And therefore what do we trouble
our selves, or such an one with instructing him, exhorting, threatening,
promising him. It is too late, now: This should have been done many thousands
of years before he was born, and before it was known by God for certain, that
he will go this way: For God now by the virtue of his conditionate middle
knowledge does infallibly know it shall be thus and not thus. And as the
servant in the Gospel said of Jairus his daughter, Thy daughter is Luke 8.
dead, trouble not the Master. Thy lot is read, trouble not God with your
Prayers and impertinent services, nor your self with unprofitable cares. I
would gladly learn (for as yet I profess I know nothing of) what they would
answer to these things, to which with such considence, and courage, and
importunity, and a great deal more, they demand satisfaction from others, as if
they were not at all concerned to unriddle this Mystery, or could do it with
the turning of an hand; both which I deny, unless they recurr to what we have
insinuated here, that man is by their grounds made more the Author of his own
ruin, and God more cleared and vindicated in his Justice. But this I may
grant; and yet still have no satisfaction in that under question, How, without,
vanity and idleness, a man may take any pains about such an one, or minister
any comfort to him? accuse him, and confound him he may a great deal more, by
upbraiding him with his own ruin. Socinus indeed, that great wild Boar in
Christ's vineyard, who has to his power rooted up the first Principles of
Christianity, and sometimes (as in this case) of some natural Reason and
Philosophy, to plant his bastard slips, comes off very roundly and easily, by
denying any certain knowledge in God, whether conditionate or inconditionate,
of things contingently future, as especially those of the Free Will: and thus
to set man up-right upon his legs, he brings God upon his knees.

Now because it is not so much my drift to show what cannot be said, as what
may; I shall attempt to give some answer to the Objection upon the grounds I
rest on, and here choose; desiring and expecting more clear and full
satisfaction to them, when they shall have removed the obstructions they are
obliged to clear this point of, who are of another judgment. And first we must
remember, That according to our Grounds, man does determine himself to Good or
Evil, notwithstanding God does it too. Secondly, we hold that there is no such
absolute determination of Man by God or Man, which takes not so in with it,
the proper conditions and means conducing thereunto. God nor Man do not resolve
upon good or evil withour the proposal of the allurements of both, and the
means conducing unto both. And it is generally agreed, That the Will of man
cannot tend toward God (since his Fall) without the first Grace freely and
irrespectively given, and that it is of the same nature and order to the
restitution or recreation of his soul; as was the first Matter to the framing
of his Body. And therefore, as that first matter was such that man could not be
made in Gods order, without it; and yet was not so necessarily made by it, but
that he might never have been; or any thing else might have been made of it,
had God so pleased: So the first Grace to Regeneration is absolutely necessary,
but it is not absolutely necessary that where this first Grace is, Regeneration
should follow; or the will of Man certainly incline to embrace it: For to
embrace it, is an act of Spiritual life, and no Vital act can be exercised, but
by a Vital Principle. And the first Grace is not so much a Principle of Actual
Life, as a necessary Preparation to it. And therefore is required by all, that
second Grace, which gives life: and a power of acting answerable to that life.
Which power is actuated by the sweet concurrence of God, and the Will of man
determining to one. Now, as where many things may equally come to pass, yet one
thing eventually does necessarily happen, and not the other: So is it in this
self-determination of Man: Inevitable it is, that one way be chosen, and there
is an Eventual necessity that one takes effect, but this is not from the Nature
of the will of Man, necessary. And being from the nature of the thing
unnecessary; it must needs be unknown to man. And being unknown to man, can
never oblige him to adhere to one part more than the other: and consequently,
being thus free, common reason will direct, and almost constrain him to act and
carry himself, as undetermined and free. For it is as certain and true a Rule in
Divinity as other Faculties. Not to appear, and not to be, is in effect the
same thing to a man. Now it is impossible, without supernatural Revelation
(above the Scripture) which we never read, was ever heard of, and have no
grounds it shall ever befall any man, that any man should know that he has
conspired so irreversibly with the Justice of God, as never to move to Good and
be saved. For when the Scripture has laid down this as a fundamental Rule: The
Son of man is come to save Luke 18. 11. John 12. 47. Acts 2. 38,
that which was lost. And again, Christ came not to judge the world, but to
save the world. And St. Peter in the Acts says, not only to them present but
to all men indifferently, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift 39.
of the Holy Ghost: For the promise is unto you and your Children, and to all
that are far off, even as many as the Lord your God shall call. And St. Paul to
the Romans, Now the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, Romans 3.
21, 22.
being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Even the Righteousness of God,
which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe;
for there is no difference. And to these many other like places of Scripture
may be added, declaring no man destined to incredulity or impenitency
aforehand, until such time as he has declared against both, and that to the
end of his Life. But on the other side rather, that God puts no difference. Now
if St. Paul's argument held good (as certainly it did) that a wife should not
put away her husband who was an Infidel, nor the believing husband his wife,
upon the grounds of ignorance of a good event: Should a man put away his Soul?
For what know thou, O wife, Romans 7. 16.
whether thou shall save thy husband? Or how know thou, O man, whether thou
shall save thy wife? So, what know thou, O man (who doubtest of Gods
Decrees) whether thou shall save thy soul? Whence we may conclude, That it is
no ground of discomfort that the event is determined: for it is equal on our
side, as much as against us: but it is the ground of all reasonable
satisfaction from the General Law requiring obedience Evangelical, and from the
Promises made without any discrimination: which a man cannot apply to his
disadvantage or discouragement, without being first guilty of unreasonableness
and unnaturalness to himself. Now Religion, and the designs thereof, do suppose
a man a true natural man to himself, before it attempts to draw him to an
higher good, or nobler ends. So that if a man will deny his own natural reason,
and self-love due to himself, such a man is indeed no fit person to be treated
with, any more than a direct mad man: but this natural reason suggests to him,
that where he knows it not to be an invincible Evil which he is to contend
with, and knows not but that the way is as easy, the door as open, the means
as effectual to him as any man living, to attain happiness, he is to take heart
and courage, and resolution to effect his desires. For to omit a certain duty
of Faith and Hope, upon an obscure and uncertain ground is monstrous and
ridiculous. I conclude therefore, that, as almost all the actions of man's life,
yea and his life it self, which are no less determined with God, then the state
of Grace or Wickedness, Glory, or Misery, do not cause him to suspend
endeavors leading to the end propounded to himself; so neither in the
Concernments of his soul, keeping his natural Reason to himself entire, can he
obstinately refuse to act according to the ends of Religion. Yet I might add
this also, which is most true; that if it were revealed to a man that he should
never escape damnation, do he what he can, or what he will; yet that desperate
carelessness and loseness could not be but greatest stupidity, because God does
certainly proportion salvation and damnation, as to the degrees of them, to the
degrees of Holiness and Sins in this Life; and therefore it were more than
worth a man's time and diligence, by a more restrained and Christian
conversation, to obtain a mitigation of the evil he so fears. And yet that part
of the argument commonly used, which says, That it is in vain for a man who is
so determined to strive to free himself, and to abound in religious acts; is
directly false, and to be denied. For no good works shall go unrewarded: And
this is no less infallibly true, That to him that has, shall Matthew. 13. 20.
Romans 2. 8, 10.
more be given, and to him that does righteousness: and to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and honor and immortality; eternal
life. And that the external acts and means are effectual to these great ends,
Christ tells us saying, To you that hear shall more be given, than Mark 4. 24.
that Gods Grace is necessarily required to all true Conversion and Holiness.

I know those of Dort following Calvine and Peter Martyr, and such of eminency
in Reforming, answer otherwise; But in truth their Reply is no Answer. For
granting an invincible state of unregenerateness, and a total insufficiency in
Man to free himself, without the effectual Grace of God, yea, and an
irreversibleness in Gods Decrees, so that all endeavors and acts should be
frustrated to the obtaining the blessed end generally promised, and the terror
of those under this Necessity; they oppose only good counsel to this, and much
more; and reprove them lightly at least that meditate too much on the severer
part of Gods Decrees, the abstruser Counsels of him, and determinations to the
taking them off from those good duties, which God without exception requires of
all. But all this and the like to this, is very little or nothing to the
purpose: For they certainly hereby betray their Cause, and grant the whole
argument to be good, and duly to infer all that is intended by it: only they
oppose barely the Conclusion, and would not have it take place, though they can
find no fault with that it is grounded on: What a miserable shift is it for
any, who are not able to deny that, upon their own reason, such a thing
follows; to say, Yea, but this ought not to be, and to persuade contrary to
conviction of themselves, as well as others: But occasion will be given of
these matters more fully, in what follows.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Execution of Gods Providence in the Predestination and Reprobation of
Man. How the Decrees and Providence of God are distinguished. The Reason and
Method of Gods Decrees. Righteousness is the Effect and not Cause of
Predestination to Life. Predestination diversely taken in Scripture, as also
Election and Vocation. God praedestinates no man simply to Death without
consideration of Evil foregoing, as Calvin and some others would have it.

GOD having in his secret, mysterious Counsels, ordained all things according
to his Divine will and pleasure, without being liable to that saucie
expostulation of any Creature, Why have thou made me thus? or, What do thou?
(For it is as certain, Romans 9. 20. Job 9. 12.
as there is a God, that God neither does nor can do any injury to the
Creature, though man may, and often does injure him, and himself too, in
mis-representing him) he proceeds next to the execution of his Decrees and
Counsels, which are so many acts of his Providence: And because it would be
much too long and extravagant, to turn to the more (...). Protagoras apud
Laertium in Vita.
diffused acts thereof, considerable in all his Creatures, we shall confine our
selves to those specially concerning Man, the measure of all other Creatures,
as the Philosopher said; and, as Christian doctrine tell us, the Head and Crown
of all; and these, as to the religious capacity of Man, chiefly. In which are
eminent, Predestination, Election, Vocation, Salvation. And Reprobation and
Damnation, on the other side.

Predestination and the Decree of God, if in any thing they differ, it may seem
to be chiefly in this, that use has made Decree of a more large signification,
containing the act of Gods supreme Providence over all his Creatures; but
Predestination is more properly appertaining to Man. Some have thought good yet
farther to proceed in limiting the term Predestination, to the Elect only, and
such as shall be saved; but St. Austine, and others that follow him, make it
common to both the Saved and Damned. And Augustine speaking of the two Cities
in the world, that of God, and that of Aug. in Civ. Dei, lib. ^5. c. 1.
the Devil, says, One is predestined to* reign for ever with God: the other
to endure eternal punishment with the Devil. And so in several other places,
which here I omit. Calvine is famous for the like freedom of speech in the
Predestination of men to Damnation, and to Beza, and Martyr, and Aretius, and
almost who not, that were of that Reformation? but the opinion of these must
not pass for Austins opinion, without this remarkable distinction. Austine, and
such Fathers as followed him (and it was some hundred of years before any
Father of repute in the Church presumed to confront him in his known doctrines,
in this point) affirmed an infallible Predestination to Life and Death: but he
did not so affirm it, that this should be done absolutely, without any
consideration of the way and means leading thereunto: this those Divines now
named held, and those of Dort generally, called the Supralapsarian way, very
irrationally and impiously. Their main reason is this, That God could not be
subject to so much inconsiderateness, and imprudence, as no man of ordinary
reason could be guilty of: viz. To make a thing before he knows what to do with
it. First therefore they conclude, That God must propound to himself a certain
end, and that not common and general, which is his Glory: but special, to each
man in the last state of all: and thence infer, That he must (as men call for
several tools, or instruments for several works, and ends) predestinate the
means thereunto. This argument was used long before Calvine, by Scotus, and in
effect the same, though minced a little by him: who declares plainly that God
must first propound to himself an end, and then order the means agreeable to
that end. Yet is Scotus suffered to pass, and little said to him: But Calvine
bears all the blame. And surely blameworthy he is. As on the other side, that
later, rank, and careless Pen which would, by no means suffer that there should
inevitable destruction attend any man of Gods making, because, forsooth, this
were to make God like to a foolish workman, who should make a curious work,
only to destroy it, and break it to pieces. But setting aside the odiousness of
the comparison, the thing it self supposed is false, and that many ways:
First, that it would be such a piece of impardonable folly in a man to make a
thing which he resolved to destroy again, when he had done his will with it. It
is indeed hard to conceive that any man should be so stupid as to have no end
of a thing, but that it might not be, so soon as it has a beginning: for
surely, either profit or delight intermediate was the principal, and rational
Motives thereunto; and therefore secondarily he might ordain the very
dissolution of his work: as a man does, who having made a curious mould, breaks
it to pieces, and so at first intended, before it was made; so soon as he had
perfected his more principal intention. But were it so that this could not be
done without extreme folly on man's part; yet the same might be done without the
least just suspicion of mistake on Gods part. For man is certainly a fool who
studieth or labors about a thing which brings him no real advantage, or
destroys a thing which does. But God receiving no such advantage from the
saved, or such disadvantage from the damned; where is the imprudence? But last
of all, Damnation is indeed destruction in the vulgar, but not proper sense.
The Person of the damned is as entire as to his Si enim de nihilo creavit omnia
non idcirco fecit, ut perderet quae creavit: sed ut illius miserecordid quae
creata sunt salvarentur. Hieronymus in cap. 12. Zachariae.
state of natural being as is that of the saved. And God may have his ends of
glory, and certainly has, from the misery of the Creature. But both this
opinion and that of Calvine seem to make the ultimate term of Man the ultimate
end of God, though it be but for this arguments sake, and cannot do it
generally or really. But the contrary is plainly the truer: that God
propounds no other ultimate end than himself in his acts of Creation and
Providence. And therefore, though God has revealed himself (an act of his free
Grace) in his holy Word, that he wills not the death of a sinner: and much
less of a person that is innocent before him; and it were most blasphemous to
Gods truth and mercy to affirm, That, as the case stands between him and man,
he will, or may condemn to everlasting pains, Man not justly deserving them,
yet there appears not any reason, considering the absolute dominion of the
Creature belonging to him, that of himself he might not so have disposed of
him. They may say, That God in justice can take away no more than he gave to
his Creature: be it so. The capacity of the beatifical Vision God gave man: and
therefore may take it away: And what is that but extreme misery? Chrysostom
makes the loss of Gods glorious presence to be greater than the pains of sense
suffered by the damned. And do we not see thus much before our eyes frequently,
That God causes many to come into this world, who wear-out a miserable life
without any good day, in continual languishings and sicknesses? Surely this is
not without cause going before: But yet no more cause then is common to others,
living in prosperity and ease.

This may be disputed, and perhaps, better omitted; but not so that opinion
which makes irrespective Predestination to glory and misery, because God must
first propound his end: making no great difference between the Predestination
to the means of a good end, and the means toward a bad one: but that God, to
bring about this, as well as that, does with like concurse, and will, design
evil means to evil ends, as he does good to good ends; or that he is the direct
Author of sin to prepare men to damnation as he is of good acts leading to
life and glory. These contain two great errors to be liked of no good
Christian, for any man's great name, in Religion or Reformation. For it is
first, certain, that though sometimes in Scripture, the same name may be
ascribed to Gods Providence in both, yet it is in a far different sense: as the
Relation that Gods hand and power Quia universa ista Massa merito damnata est,
con^umeliam debitam reddit justitia, honorem indebitum reddit gratia. Aug. in
sixto Epist. 105.
has toward things of a Positive, and real Nature, differs much from that, it
has toward things of nature Negative and Privative. Supposing then at
present, the Fall of Man into sin and his liableness to the due wages or reward
of sin, which necessarily follows thereupon, and the Mass (as they call it) of
mankind to be corrupted, throughout; (whatever is excepted to the contrary)
there appears no reason why God out of his absolute Right and Liberty might not
have neglected the whole, and suffered it to perish rather, than designed it to
ruin. Here then comes in the discriminating will and hand of God: Some part of
this he leaves, and some he chooses. Some part he ordains especially and
directly to Life and Grace; and others suffering to fall into deserved ruin, he
is said to destine or predestinate to perish; and sometimes not only upon the
stock of original pravity, odious sufficiently unto God, to provoke to that:
but by actual and personal impieties and errors, naturally tending to such
ends. So that as it is necessary there should be an hand to lift a man up, who
is fallen down and maimed, but no necessity that any hand should keep him down,
or cast him lower: in like manner, to the raising of any part of that depraved
Lump, it was absolutely necessary Gods Divine assistance should put to its
saving hand; and these are said to be ordained, especially to Grace and Life:
but suspending only, and denying the like grace and favor to others, he is
said sometimes to ordain to death and sin, such; though speaking strictly it be
no more than not ordaining to the contrary. For it is much the like case, as to
form of speech, which we use in Humane and Divine matters. He (says Christ)
that is not with me is against me, Matthew. 12. 30.
and he that gathers not with me, scatters. And our Savior Christ rebuking
the superstitious and morose Jews preferring their Sabbath before the life of a
man, says, I will ask you one thing. Is it lawful Luke 6. 9.
on the Sabbath days to do good, or to do Evil? to save life or to destroy
it? implying hereby, that it had been to destroy this impotent Creature, not to
deliver him from the evil he was in: So likewise, speaking after the phrase and
opinion of men (which the Scriptures do no less than humane Authors) God is
said to be against a man, when he is not for him, and to destroy him, when he
saves not his life, as Lactantius in a certain Qui succurrere perituro potest
si non succurrerit occidit. Lactan.
place writes thus. He that may help one that is ready to perish, and does not
help him, he slayes him. And if God may be said actually to destroy such, by
withdrawing, or withholding his saving Grace, denying his favor; may he not
be said reasonably and soberly to ordain such to destruction, when only he does
not ordain him to Salvation?

There are two things which may seem to cross this: One that an imputation may
seem to fall on God, that he does not that himself (being much more pitiful and
good by nature, to his Creatures, than they are to one another) which he
requires, under pain of his displeasure, that men should do to one another;
viz. relieve in necessity. This is no hard matter to answer, seeing the case is
quite different; and we know no such law that is or can be upon God to do all
the good he can, unto the Creature; as there is upon man to do so to his
brother. But Man himself is not tied by God to do a favor to other, whereby
damage should ensue unto himself: And much less, God obliged to show mercy in
such manner, that he might suffer in his Justice, or dominion over his
creature; which are more conspicuous; yea and his Mercy too, as to the Degree,
though not extent of it, in adjudging some to their demerits, while he rescues
others from the like misery.

The other objection, which is principally Calvines above touched, is, That by
this God should act unreasonably, not propounding a certain end to himself, if
he did not directly design the punishment of his Creature; but, as we have
said, indirectly and obliquely: as if God had in some Actions no direct and
peremptory intention* but this does not follow. For no doubt but God had a
direct and positive end in creating every particular thing, and especially man:
And that intention was agreeable altogether to his own Nature, and his own
Works, which were all good, good to both one, and other. And to glorify man,
and be glorified by him, in giving him immortality and life, and that without
exception; but yet not without condition: which condition being on man's part
violated; What hinders but Gods secondary end and intention should be to return
the fruits of man's doings upon himself, and that without exception? For as St.
Paul says, Romans 3. 23.
All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. And all were in a state
of Desertion and Reprobation. But what if God pleases, seeing his Creature
fallen to decay, to make it over again in Christ Jesus, and propound 2 Cor. 5.
17.
to himself a new, and another end? A man has a fair, handsome, and well-going
horse: he chooses him to himself to ride on: but he falls lame, and is turned
off. He recovers him and puts him to his former use and ends: Is here any
lightness or inconstancy in the owner? Are not all these things very
reasonable? Could there be any such unreasonableness as to make one general and
positive decree, that, come what will, his horse shall serve him to ride on? So
undoubtedly, the general Decree, and first in nature and order, next to Gods
glory, was in the creation of man, that he should serve him to his glory, and
to the benefit of himself. But Man mutilating himself and becoming
unserviceable to God, his Owner, and Master, was not the Decree of God very
wise and just ordaining him to be a cast-a-way, so long as he continued in that
state? And then recovering him by the Mediation of Christ, to ordain as many as
took their cure, to life everlasting, and glory: and those who were incurable,
or not cured, to everlasting death: this latter is plainly attributed to God by
St. Jude, telling us of some, who were before ordained to condemnation: that
is, in the sense even now Jude 4.
explained, given over to condemnation by God: If we may make humane methods of
any use to us in arriving at the knowledge of Gods proceedings (as has been
generally received) why may we not judge thus of Gods order of Causes?
Especially having the consent of the Scripture, which thus speaks frequently,
according to the several occasions given? And if it be said to be absurd, thus
to judge of God, as unsettled in his knowledge and judgment, and being regulated
by emergencies, We can well answer, as in other points of Anthropapathie, or
Gods compliance with Man's capacity in speaking after humane manner. And if God
condescends, on purpose, that we should understand something of him to our
edification, shall we transcend unnecessarily the limits of modesty, and
content our selves with no other order, or less knowledge than God himself has
of himself and ways? Gods acts, several in respect of us, may be simple in
respect of himself, and one: but denominated and discriminated variously from
the diverse habitude of the Object. The simple eternal Will and Law of God is
this, that the Righteous shall be saved, and the Unrighteous damned: This is
his Predestination in general of all mankind: subordinate to this, are the
several intermediate changes, the first being immutable. And it concerns not
to enquire, What kind of Righteousness this is, or whence, or how man comes by
it? Whether he has it as original Justice given him immediately of God at his
first institution? or whether he has it superadded and derived from Christ?
This is certain which St. John says: He that does righteousness is righteous,
even as he is ^ John 3. 7.
righteous: whether this Righteousness comes by Nature, or Grace. And this is
another infallible Rule which St. Peter delivers in his Sermon to Acts 10.
34, 35
Cornelius, That God is no respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he that
fears him and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. Which is his most
immutable Counsel and Decree of saving men: and the consideration whereof we
should firmly and immoveably stick to and put in practice.

But because it is one principal part of our Righteousness, to agnize the
Author and ground of it, that famous doubt ought here to be touched. Whether
Righteousness be an effect of Predestination and Election, or the Cause
thereof, with God.

The answer to this does require that we be first satisfied in these three
things, Predestination, Election, and Vocation, and the importance of them: and
principally to note in order hereunto, that however later Authors (especially
from St. Austins time downward) have invented, and that usefully and reasonably
enough, several significations and importances of them, which are not to be
neglected; yet the Scriptures use them promiscuously: as may be seen from these
instances; amongst many, Ephesians the first, the fourth and fifth, the Apostle
says, According as he has chosen, i. e. Elected us in him, before the
foundation Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.
Having predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. Where Beza himself in his
Annotations will allow Election in the fourth verse, to signify the same as
does Predestination in the fifth. And that Vocation is taken for both 1 Pet. 1.
10.
may be gathered from St. Peter's words, saying: Who has called us unto his
eternal glory. And it is as certain that St. Austine also so confounds them,
diverse times: nevertheless they have their distinct conceptions, which may be
these. For first, Predestination or Fore-ordination, according to Scripture it
self, will admit of a contrary object; And there is a Predestination to Evil as
well as to Good, but in a different sense. For as we have shown, when God is
said to ordain to Evil, it must be rather understood in the Negative sense,
when he ordains not to Good, but delivers over men to the commission of sin.
But Election is always in a good sense, as is also Vocation: and are but so
many progressions of Divine Providence in the salvation of the Faithful: and
not specifically distinct Species, or kinds of acts: as does appear from St.
Paul's accurate use, and Romans 8. 25, 30
placing of them in his Epistle to the Romans. Whom he did foreknow, he also
did predestinate to be conformed to -- Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them
he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them be also glorified. Where the Apostle explaining the order of
Gods proceeding in the saving of man, makes a commutation of terms expressing
it. For here Foreknowledge is not that simple Intuition whereby he knows all
things, but that effectual knowledge, founded on a precedent Decree; which is
the same with Predestination, as now commonly used. And that Predestination
here is the same with Election, is probable from that it is added to be
conformed to the image of his Son: and Calling is actuating of that Election
and Predestination. So that Predestination is always understood as an act of
Gods counsel; and Election (when taken properly as distinct from that) is an
act outward, whereby it pleases God to take to his special favor, certain
persons, and pass over others: And Vocation seems to be nothing else strictly
taken, than that outward means, or ministry whereby such are chosen to God: As
a man first propounds several objects to himself, next he pitches upon one, and
determines to take it; thirdly he actually makes choice of the same, by some
special signal of his will. And this God commonly doing by word of mouth,
calling him to him, has given ground to that form of speech in Scripture of
being called, and calling: the publication and ministration of the Gospel of
Grace being that word of Gods mouth, by which a man is selected from the rout
and refuse of the World, to the means of Grace, Justification, and Glory. This
I take to be the simplest and soberest state of this perplexed mystery: In
which I suppose it necessary to be advised how we stick too religiously to the
terms Predestination, Election, and Vocation, because of their mutable
signification in Scripture: which must needs confound an immutable adherer to
any one sense precisely: and that such words must be understood rather from the
relation they have one to another, and the matter treated of, as also the
occasions, than according to any simple sound of them.

And therefore to return to the Question moved concerning Righteousness as an
effect, or cause of Predestination, Election, and Vocation, it must be answered
from the distinct consideration of these terms. For when all these (as
sometimes) are Synonymous, and the same with that Pre-determination of Almighty
God to Grace (For there is a Predestination and Election and Vocation to Grace,
as the means, as well as to Glory, the End,) then it can be, in no tolerable
sense, said, That grace is the cause of such special acts of God. Neither does
any prevision in God of acceptance of grace, of compliance with, and obedience
to Gods will, move to Elect, or Call any man: and that upon that sure ground of
Thomas: because, Thom. 3. Q. 2. 11. c.
there can be no possible way of meriting without Grace, for Grace is the first
Principle or beginning of all merit: and nothing can be a cause, or so much as
conduce to its own being: But the inclining of God to such a thing must come
under the notion of meriting, or to speak more agreeably to our ears, doing
well before God. And therefore they much more truly may be said to be the
direct cause of Grace. And this not as some Pelagian Heretics supposed, at
last by constraint of argument; for the more ready and easy operation of man's
will; but simply to will that which is good. Nay St. Austine says, and that
truly, the same of man's Understanding, De Spir. and Litera. ca. 7.
as Will. For he holds forth his mercy not because they do know, but to the end
they may know: Neither because they are of a right heart, but that they may be
right of heart, does he hold forth his Righteousness whereby he justifies the
ungodly. So that provision of good Works, or Faith, as the reason inclining God
to confer Grace, simply, is altogether inconsistent with the Holy Scriptures,
and the freeness of Gods grace asserted plentifully therein.

But there is another and farther term of Gods Predestination, Election, and
Vocation, which is to his Kingdom of Glory, and the Reward not of the merit,
but work of Faith and Holiness. And to these no doubt, but we are ordained and
elected, and called as the end, by those means. This is that St. Paul intended
in that place to the Romans above quoted: and in the second chapter; telling
us, God will render to every man according Romans 2. v. 6. 10.
to his deeds. -- and glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good,
to the Jew first, and also to the Gentiles. Christ tells us in the twentieth
chapter of St. Matthew, that to set on his right hand and on his left in Matthew.
20. 23. Matthew. 25. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
his Kingdom, shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared: and in the 25th,
who they are for whom it is so prepared, from the foundation of the world; viz.
the Righteous; and moreover, who are the Righteous: namely, such who abounded
in good works there particularly mentioned. And to this may be referred most of
those speeches at large, falling from the most eminent Fathers of the Church,
before the time of Austine; wherein they affirm, that God elected some and not
others, upon the foresight of good works in them, and obedience; others
rejecting for their disobedience. Thus spoke Origin, thus Chrysostom,
Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Hierome too, who wrote as expressly as Austine, against
such a freedom of the will which should give any occasion to God to confer his
first Grace on man; all meaning no more than the election of man to glory, upon
the intuition of Grace. Now if this opinion should be strained to the highest,
it would not rise to this, that God did choose any man simply and primarily for
his works sake, or his faith foreseen; for, as is showed, God elected simply
to that, and not for that: but the most may be wrung out of it, is too great a
propinquity to Merit: But neither does this follow; seeing they, who say, God
in such an order, i. e. after grace, and upon such an occasion, as those good
works of which God is no less a principle cause than Man, does choose to confer
glory on a man, or ordain him to life, do not say, that such foreseen works
bear a proportion to such glory or reward. The Scriptures, which plainly
affirms the former, exclude the latter, making it a matter of free promise in
the original, and the gift of God, together with man's work; as especially to
the Romans St. Paul does; Now being made free from sin, and become Romans 6. 22,
23.
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ. There is nothing therefore more consonant to reason,
nothing better reconciles the seeming jarrs of the ancient Fathers before, and
about the time of Austin, with that more wary and exact state and defense of
the Question concerning Gods election of man, upon pre-vision of Faith and
Obedience, (always including Christ's obedience and merits) and the freeness of
his Grace in electing. And nothing reconciles the Scriptures more clearly, than
the opinion which allows God to be the sole reason of his own will, and the
author of his Grace of Sanctification and Salvation also; and yet holds such
an order between these, that God does not choose any man to his free and
immerited Grace of Salvation, but through and upon consideration (I do not say,
valuable and proportionable in weight and worth, but in nature) of the state of
Sanctification, going before. Does not St. Paul render it as a reason, why God
was to be glorified in his Saints, when he came to take vengeance of his
adversaries; Because our testimony among you was believed? And did not the
Master of 2 These. 1. 10. Mat. 20. 2.
the Vineyard, who is Christ, fore-ordain a penny to the Laborers, in
consideration of their labor foregoing? Does not St. James say the very Jam.
1. 12.
same, in these words? Blessed is the man that endures temptations, for when
he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised
to them that love him. Surely, that which man promises upon a condition, he
does not ordinarily bestow, before that condition be performed, but ordains it
to follow upon it. And to the same purpose speaks St. John too in the
Apocalypse, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will Rev. 2. 10.
give thee a Crown of life.

But perhaps they think, there remains some force in Calvin's argument, still,
against this; and that God must be obnoxious to that imprudence, that ordinary
men are not, if he did not first propound the end, and then make all means to
conform, and conduce to it; so that man should first be ordian'd to his end of
glory or misery, before he is. All this I grant, and yet grant them nothing;
and this is all they are like to get, from confounding the inward and secret
acts of God, with his outward, or the Decrees of God, with the execution of
them; as Twiss notoriously does, in Twissius Animadvers. in Collat. Arm. cum
Jun. p. 1, 2.
his entrance to the Animadversions, on the Conference between Arminius and
Junius. It is certain, that God does decree a man to his end, before he is; but
does he ordain him to such an end, before he ordains him to be at all? or does
God give him possession of Glory, before he gives him capacity?

The sum of what I am to say, is this, That, First, Gods Providence ordains
that man shall be, and then ordains that he shall be of such a condition, and
to such an end; and then he gives him an actual Being; and then according to
the state he is found in, brings him to his proper end; and not in that
unnatural, preposterous, and irrational method, determines him absolutely to an
end, before he determines his Being at all. And those places of Scripture
alleged to defend this presumption, do rather overthrow it; as that amongst
others, The children being not yet born, Romans 9. 11, 12.
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls; It was said unto
her, The elder shall serve the younger. I readily here grant a parity between
Gods electing to spiritual and temporal ends, which this argument supposes;
but I do not grant, That it was Gods purpose, that the elder should serve the
younger, before it was his purpose that they both should be; or that the
execution of this Decree did not depend upon the execution of means leading
unto it. So that, when it is said, God first, as man, ordains the end, and then
the means conducing unto it; it is true only, when it relates to the end of the
Ordainer, not of the thing ordained, which has its end really distinct from
that general one. Man propounds to himself profit, and then ordains some
proper means tending to it: He purposes to make a Statue, and then purposes to
make him a Tool proper to that piece of work. He purposes indeed first that
such work shall be done by a Tool, but he does not purpose that this individual
Tool shall do it, before it has a Being: So God first purposes his Glory, as
the ultimate end; next, he decrees that man shall contribute to that end, in
the several methods of accomplishing it; but he does not purpose, that any
individual man, as Jacob and Esau, shall proceed this way, or that way, before
he has conceived a purpose to give them a Being. And thus far of the first
part of Gods Providence, in ordaining acts of Grace and Mercy.

CHAP. XII.
Of Gods Providence in the reprobation and damnation of Man. Preterition is
without any cause personal, but the corruption of the Mass of humane Nature.
Damnation always supposes Sin.

AS the former proceedings of God with mankind declared his Mercy, so do these
here celebrate his Dominion and Justice, in order to the Creature. And as St.
Chrysostom well observes in a certain Homily: As in a well-ordered City, it is
as necessary there should be Prisons, and places of Execution, as places of
honor, and bountiful rewards, propounded; so is it in the world: Gods wisdom,
nay ( Chrysostom in another place says) his (...) etc. Chrysostom. Homil. 7.
Antioch.
mercy is as truly seen in ordaining Hell as Heaven, in that upon the thoughts
of its torments many are reduced to sober and good life, whom virtue or
promises of happiness would not reclaim. But here we are to consider the manner
and reason of Gods severity toward his Creature, in these two formidable acts
of his just Providence.

Before we can make any tolerable description of which, it will be very
necessary to distinguish them. For the total neglect hereof, (as with the
author of Gods Love to Mankind, in the very entrance of his Book, confounding
miserably these two) or the mistake in the due division, which error Petavius
falls into, where he tells us, Divines are commonly wont Petavius Dogmat.
Theolog. l. 9. c. 9. To. 1.
to make a two fold Reprobation; One, negative, as they call it, (which is as
much as Praeterition) or, not electing -- The other, Reprobation, is Positive,
whereby he not only passes by those persons, and relinquishes them, but also
adjudges them to eternal punishment. And this displeases him so far, as to the
ground of it, that he strains hard by the help of Tertullian, to make this a
branch of Marcions Heresy, but in vain; for the things are in themselves
really and worthily by many learned Divines, distinguished; but who are they
that bungle so in the framing of such a distinction, I believe he no more can,
than he does tell. Reprobation we do indeed make Positive and Negative, but we
make Damnation none of them; for we may distinguish a twofold act in God and
in Man, the one opposed to good, wanting in the object to be chosen, and that
may be called, Reprobation, or refusal Negative, which refuses the object
either upon mere absolute pleasure, or some such absence or want of good, which
might make it eligible. The other is more Positive, when there is found
somewhat in the object, which adds unto the want of good, the presence of
evil opposite and odious unto the chooser. Now taking Reprobation, as it is
opposed to Predestination (as some do) then, as they say, Predestination
supposes nothing in the object to move God to ordain a thing simply, or
respectively* to such an end. So may it be said of Reprobation, that it
necessarily supposes nothing in the object, causing God to turn from it;
whereupon Picus Mirandola determines thus, according to Thomas: A reason may be
Joan. Picus Mirandol. Co^^lus. 6. secund. Thom.
given from the divine goodness, of the Predestination of some, and the
Reprobation of others; and the divine will is the only reason, that those he
rejects, and chooses others unto glory. This may well be allowed, from the
supreme and absolute dominion of G d over all things, so far especially as may
amount to a denial of beatitude to the Creature capable of it, and a
withdrawing of not only the Grace, but common influence of God from the
Creature, upon which it should return, from whence it came to nothing. But it
grates hard upon the natural goodness of God, to affirm, that the divine will
should indulge so much to its absolute Sovereignty, as, no cause preceding, to
conceive an hatred or indignation against the work of its own hands, as to
sentence it directly to everlasting, or indeed momentany pains; seeing God
cannot be unjust, or properly cruel one moment, any more than he can be
eternally. Neither can he unreasonably afflict the body, or damnifie a man in
his estate, any more than he can punish the soul in Hell. Of all these
therefore, the Question is but one, What ground can be assigned of Gods
pleasure, or rather displeasure herein?

To this therefore according to the distinction mentioned, answer may be: That
of the negative will of God, seen in Preterition, or not electing some to some
high ends, (which we also call here negative Reprobation) no reason can be
given, or ought to be sought, out of Gods divine will, as Picus has rightly
determined. But as commonly it is seen, when the Master of the Family is gone
out, the house falls into disorder, and so finding it, he sentences his
servants to their several punishments, or may turn them out of doors: So God
having the liberty to depart from his Creature, at his pleasure, in this way of
Preterition, whether Supralapsarian, or Sublapsarian, there does, upon that,
spring up from it, evil, and disorder in the soul, contrary to Gods will
revealed, which he reflecting upon, may safely and justly decree to entertain
it in his favor no longer, but reprobating it, adjudge it to the punishment
deserved. God does not therefore primarily (as some have boldly delivered)
propound to himself the positive pains and ruin of any Creature, no
inducement, no grounds going before, but he may very well in a negative sense,
be said to reprobate it, not affording those preservatives needful to its
security.

This does sufficiently appear, in the first act of his Reprobation of men and
Angels, whom, without all doubt, he could have preserved in their original
state; but he freely refused, and they both freely chose to leave him, and
expose themselves to his severest judgment, which was by this positive
Reprobation, to bring them under the effects of their sins, damnation. So that
they who deny any cause out of God, of his first Reprobation, do not deny a
cause sufficient of his second, and positive; but the Devils, and those men as
are signalized Reprobates, are undoubtedly the free and full authors of Gods
reprobating them, and condemning them in this manner. Of the Angels, St. Peter
and Jude speak expressly, rendering 2 Pet. 2. 4.
their offenses, a reason why God proceeded so against them, and not the simple
will of him. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell,
and delivered them to chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment. And the
same is repeated by St. Jude. And when God says Jude 6. Genesis 2. 17.
in hie Covenant with Adam, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye: he implies the reason of his Decree to punishment, to be sin. And when
the Wise man exhorts saying, Seek not death in the error of your life, Wisd.
1. 12.
and pull not upon your selves destruction with your own hands: he does
necessarily imply a direct cause in Man of his own ruin. And the words 13.
following exempt God from any hand in such things, as the Author. For God
(says he) made not death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
living. And here come in that, in its due place, though it were not intended of
a spiritual or eternal destruction, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. For
though without any supposition taken from the Creature, God may pass him over,
and deny him grace and glory, yet does he not design any man directly to
damnation, but upon supposition of sin going before.

And from this state of things, may competent reconciliation be made to the
seeming oppositions of Scripture, and to St. Austin himself. The Scriptures
say, Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee. And Hos. 4.
6. Mat. 23. 37. Luke 8. 18.
by St. Matthew, How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? And Whosoever
has not, from him shall be taken, even that which he seems to have. And St.
John, Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. And in the Joh. 5. 40.
Act. 13. 46.
Acts, Paul and Barnahas, It was necessary that the Word of God should first
have been spoken unto you, but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life. And St. Peter, God -- is not willing that any 2
pet. 3. 9. Isa. 5. 3, 4.
should perish, etc. And amongst others, that of the Prophet Esaias must not be
forgot, And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my Vineyard: What could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I
have not done in it? All which places, and diverse more, do charge man
altogether with his own misery. On the other side, in that Genesis 1. 26.
the Scriptures tell us, how God made man according to his own image, whereof
freedom of will was no small portion. And in Deuteronomy, Ye Deuteronomy. 29. 2.
have seen all that the Lord aid before your eyes in the land of Egypt, unto
Pharaoh and unto all his servants, and to all Land. -- Yet the Lord has not 4.
given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this
day. And in Jeremy; Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be turned. And Ezekiel,
Jer. 31. 18. Lam. 5. 41. Ezekiel. 36. 26.
I will give you a new heart also, and a new spirit will I put into you, and
will take away the stony heart of your flesh, and will give you an heart of
flesh. And St. Matthew, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom
it Mat. 19. 11. Joh. 6. 44. Joh. 12. 39, 40.
is given. And Christ in St. John, says, No man can come unto me, except the
Father, who has sent me, draw him. And elsewhere, Therefore they could not
believe, because Esaias said again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their hearts. And the whole ninth Chapter to the Romans mightily Romans 9. 16.
favors this side, of which the substance seems to be contained in this one
Verse, So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy. And to the Philippians, To will and to do is of Phil.
2. 13.
God. These with others seem to deny liberty of will to man, and to ascribe the
reason of good and evil, to which man is subject, to God, as the author, making
man rather passive under both.

To that of Free Will, we may speak by and by. To the present case, taking in
also what St. Austin says, God does not forsake but where he is forsaken;
which may ill consist, with what he so largely and often delivers on the other
side; we answer, by the help of the former distinction of simple Preterition,
and direct Reprobation, and the effect of it, damnation, viz. That the foresaid
places suppose an evil affection in the parties so rejected by God, and are to
be interpreted of his just determination to punish sin, and hard-heartedness in
them. But the incapacity of Grace and Conversion, and Salvation, are meant by
the latter Texts, proceeding from the sole Preterition of God, refusing to
prevent the evil and malignity of men's wills, which for want of that preventing
Grace do certainly tend to evil, and are incurable of themselves.

But upon this I see diverse shrewd Objections to arise; as, First, That by this
withholding of Gods Grace, his Preterition, there is brought a necessity upon
man's will to evil, and his indifferency to life and death quite taken away, as
all use of the means of Grace.

To this we have in good degree answered before, and there showed, how that the
foreknowledge in God of man's fixed estate, whether by his own will electing,
as they say, freely, or Gods will determining, (which foreknowledge is yielded
to God by these Objectors) does oblige them, as well as me, to show what profit
it would be to man, to move or endeavor toward Grace and Life, when he is
already determined; only this is the difference between them: The one seems to
hold, That God by an antecedent act drives the nail, whereby man is immoveably
fastened to one thing; and the other holds, That by a subsequent act of
knowledge, he clincheth it, which man himself drove, so that it can never stir.
St. Augustine Aug. Civ. Dei, l. 5. c. 5.
confuting Tullies opinion of Fate impending over all things, does
notwithstanding confess, and affirm plainly, They are much more to be
tolerated, who hold a Sydereal Fate, than he that takes from God the
praescience of things future; for, says he, it is most apparent madness for to
grant there is a God, and to deny he foresees things future. And they that put
the cuestion to this issue, have mended the matter very little, or relieved
themselves, all necessity and certainty being a direct enemy to their design of
setting man free to do what he list, and change his fortune (as we say) at his
pleasure.

I find in a very grave and learned Author, a distinction which I find no where
else, designed to ease this doubt, between Inevitable and Infallible, which in
truth are not distinct; and therefore he is constrained contrary to the agreed
way of speech, to make Infallible the same with Necessary, whereas the
distinction is between Necessity and Infallibility, or Inevitability, which is
the very same: For what is infallible, but that whose act or object shall have
a certain event; and this event not to be avoided or declined, is called,
Inevitable. But whether the Necessity of Causes be such, that this event must
in nature succeed, is the question; and that notwithstanding the Inevitableness
or Infallibility of the event, there may not be free motions in the Cause,
tending to that event. So that, for instance, a man may freely choose and will
to do that which he certainly shall choose; and consequently be properly and
truly said to be author of the same, be it his damnation or salvation.

But you will say, If Gods Preterition be such, that a man is unable to move
himself to saving good without it, then must he infallibly fall into sin, and
necessarily, and after this, all counsels and comm^nations, and exhortations,
come to nothing, and are in vain. Nay, unless there be unrighteousness with
God, man cannot be judged for not doing that which he cannot do, is not in his
power.

To this St. Augustines Answer is this, Because the whole Mass was Aug. Epist.
105 sixte.
damned deservedly [in Adam] God repays its deserved reproach, and bestows an
undeserved honor, by Grace, not by any prerogative of merit, not by necessity
of Fate, not by the unsteadiness of fortune, but by the depth of the riches of
the wisdom and knowledge of God, which the Aposile does not open, but admires
concealed, crying out, O the depth of the wisdom! etc. But if this yet does not
absolutely satisfy, as I know, it does not some, because, say they, it is to
delude man to offer that and exhort to that, which it is impossible to attain
to; (so that though God by his absolute and divine Prerogative, might have
deserted man, yet it stands not with his natural equity or simplicity toward
his Creature, to exhort and threaten, when there is such inevitable necessity
upon him, and condemn him for not doing that, which he knows he cannot do
without him, refusing effectually to assist him.) I answer, It might very well
call in question, the fair dealing of God toward his Creature, if so be he
should make an act for him, after he was disabled to observe and perform the
same, not assisting him to the performance of his will. But God does not so;
for though the Command stands in force against him, yet it was not prepared for
him in his destitute condition; and no reason, that Gods right of ruling should
change with the vanity of the Creature. It suffices, that once it was
proportionable to him, and that the impotency now pleaded is owing to himself,
and that Gods Laws now are rather recited and propounded to him, than made for
him, in the condition he is in. But secondly, Gods Commands indeed though but
urged anew, should be ludicrous and in vain, did they totally miss of their
ends, in being thus repeated and inculcated, if they had no success. But so it
is not, as though the Word of God had taken no effect. For they are Romans 9. 6.
not all Israel wh are of Israel, as St. Paul has it; that is, the case is not
the same with all men. For as St. Paul afterward, What then? Israel Romans 11. 7.
has not obtained that which he seeks for, but the election has obtained
it, and the rest were blinded. It sufficiently answers the purpose of God, in
giving his Law, and admonishing, and threatening, and promising thereupon, that
it obtains its ends upon the election. For how many things else might we
accuse God and Nature for sending*us, when they do no good at all, that we can
perceive, but rather mischiefs? As deluges of waters in a wet time; and in
droughts, great showers of rain, emptying themselves into the Sea, or sandy
deserts, from whence nothing springs answerable to such divine bounty? But we
are taught, that God and Nature made things and ordained them in their kind,
useful for the Universe, and never by a particular purpose, that every single
act or part should have the same visible and proportionable effect, that the
whole has. And so in the dispensations of his spiritual Graces, it suffices to
acquit and justify divine providence, that they have their due ends, though
not the same that man may expect, who certainly would never have it rain (might
he order matters and choose) but at such times, and in such places, as he
thinks fit, and then, always. Again, It would go harder against this opinion,
if so be that the only end why God published his Word, and gave his Laws, we^e
to convert men, that they might be saved. This is indeed a principal, but not
the only intent God has, but the publication of Gods holiness, and justice,
and righteousness, and mercy, and the like glorious attributes, in which
publication God is much more known, admired, and glorified by wicked men, and
reprobates, than otherwise, though they oppose and dislike the same, even
against their own wills, giving such like glory to God on earth, as they shall
in Hell hereafter: And we know, that no accession of real good being possible
to be made to God, the outward manifestation is of principal concernment. Last
of all, Could there be an infallible discriminating note, made between the
incorrigible reprobates destined to destruction, and the corrigible offender
ordained to life, then indeed much more color would appear, to justify the
refusal of dispensing the means of salvation to such, and the denial in the
reprobate, to give ear to such offers; but flesh and blood cannot reveal this
to us, and the Spirit of God has not. Does not God send his Prophet Ezekiel,
with Ezekiel. 3. 4. 7.
express commission to warn the house of Israel, though he expressly assures
him, They will not hearken unto thee, for they will not hearken unto me. If the
child in the womb, being certainly determined to one sex long before it is
brought forth, yet this certainty being hid from our eyes, (though but for such
a small time) is thought by Parents a matter of prayer many times, that it may
be a Son: How should not we much rather, take the just occasion of applying our
selves to acts of Religion, though possibly the event with God is determined?
The sum then of this Chapter comes to this; That God by his sovereign
dominion, and by his inscrutable counsels, does, out of the corrupted and
forlorn mass of fallen man, elect whom he pleases, to effectual Grace, and from
thence brings them to infallible Glory, but never without their own acts of
embracing his offers, and persevering faithfully in his service. So that though
he purely chooses them to the means of Grace, without consideration of their
worth or fruitfulness, yet he never ordains any, or elects them to Glory, but
upon an intuition of faith, and obedience to his will. And on the other side,
he passes by others, leaving them in great part as he found them, from whence
spring works of wickedness, freely invented and acted, and tending infallibly
unto damnation. So that God does not in like manner influence the wicked, as he
does the righteous, that is, for no other cause but his own will, taking
occasion justly from that common deformity, wherein he finds them, but never
simply destinates any man to damnation, but upon beholding the deserts of their
sins. But how it can come to pass, that God thus ordaining the end, damnation,
should not also appoint the means, sin, without which he condemns no man, shall
be answered in a more proper place. Here only I add, for their sakes, who
measure opinions by famous Patrons, to which they are addicted, that as I have
said nothing to comply with, or spitefully to oppose Calvin and his followers,
so neither to cross Arminius: But this I must say, that though I look upon
Arminius as a much more modest man, and more judicious Disputant than Calvin,
in these deep points; yet in their followers, we shall easily see a great
disparity, to the disadvantage of the Remonstrants: For very many of Calvin's
followers have mitigated, and fairly interpreted his too harsh and scandalous
expressions and opinions, and I think, none have gone beyond him. But on the
other side, what Arminius with much modesty and gravity delivered erroneously,
his abettors and followers have pursued and improved, many of them, to such an
intolerable height, that they fall often into direct Pelagianism, and from
thence, which is much worse, into Socinianisin, as experience plainly shows.

And to that Dutch Physician, Emperick in this part of Divinity, who
Beverovicius.
protested against all ministration of Physic to sick persons, unless he could
be assured of a mutability in the term of his Patients life, (for I must openly
profess the same reason of Gods Providence, and pre-determination to temporal
life and death, as spiritual and eternal, and they are equally fixed, and
moveable both of them) it suffices to answer, Then he may let it alone; and no
absurdity follows. But because a very learned and grave Divine of ours, seems
to have given some weight to the argument, by citiug him to our present
purpose, I answer further, That no such thing is said to be so precisely and
simply ^ecreed, ^ut it is as necessary the means should be determined as the
end: God has determined no effect, but he has determined the proper cause
thereto conducing. And it is as false that God has determined that such a man
should recover his health, as that he shall do it without such proper means.
The means coming under the decree as well as the end. It will be said, that
this takes away all liberty from man, as well in the way, as to the end: And
probably, Beverovicius if he had thought on this, though he had been assured
that the term of man's life was moveable, but the means-thereto unmovable,
would never have read book about physic, nor stirred off his seat to any
patient: because whatever he did; or not did, the means should have been
applied, and succeeded to the sick party. But because we are sure we cannot go
out of our Island on foot, shall we not stir out of doors at all? Because we
cannot do what we would, and go as far as we would, shall we not do any thing
at all? Because our Liberties do not reach beyond Gods Manor, and privilege
the second cause from the authority and influence of the first, shall we be
sulle in and dogged, and refuse that which we Certainly, whatever plausible
suggestions may of late have been instilled into the common peoples minds of a
free subjection; it can never be rightly and honestly understood of a freedom
from the Supreme Power and Justice: And so, whatever liberty of will may be
claimed to man in his actions, must be interpreted rather in relation to his
fellow creatures, and subjects, and outward causes, which cannot impose upon
his will; but the first cause may, in that cannatural way we before mentioned:
and in the next place shall have occasion offered, farther to explain.

CHAP. XIII.
The Occasion of treating of Sin here. What sin is. What Evil. Monstrousness in
things natural, and Evil in Moral things illustrate each other. Sin no positive
or real Thing. God the direct Cause of Evil. St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans makes nothing for the contra -- Remonstrants literally and primarily
taken.

THE near respect that Sin has to what is passed, and the aspect it has to
what is before us, concerning the Providence of God in the Fall of Man from his
native Righteousness, oblige us here to enquire farther into the nature of it.
And slightly passing over that doubt of some Philosophers and Ancient
Heretics, How, if there were a God, who is supreamly and infinitely good, and
no more but one, Evil should find any being amongst the beautiful works of God,
its nature being so foul, monstrous, and contrary to God? because it is touched
above, and in truth do add rather a greater beauty and luster to God works
than if no such thing were to be found, and because as the glory, so the power
of God is much more manifested thereby, in that he curbs and checks its excess
and exorbitancie, at his pleasure, and forces it by his providence to a good
event in general, if not particular; we are now to satisfy our selves, What
that we call Evil and Sin, is: And what relation God has to it?

First then we are to note that Evil and Sin differ only as Genus and Species,
so that all Sin is Evil, but all Evil is not Sin. Evil is that which is
contrary to nature or natural Good. Sin is that which is contrary to grace and
moral good. And that which is contrary to the order, rule, and form of Nature
is called Monstrous; that which is contrary to the Rule of Justice and
Holiness, is called Sin. And as monstrosity in nature is divided into defects
and excesses: So Sin in morality is divided into Omissions and Commissions. And
of neither of these can God be said to be the Author; or Nature under him: For
if Nature, according to Philosophers, which is but Gods Instrument, does not
intend monstrous effects, much less may God be said so to do, whose acts are
always more constant and steady, the higher they are, and nearer to himself.
For (to give an instance) when we see a want of a limb in a monstrous birth, it
may so far be imputed to Divine Providence, that it could not so happen without
the knowledge and consent of the Supreme Cause in whose power it was to have
disposed outward and second causes to the effecting of a regular and perfect
work: yet directly, and with a positive purpose to have assisted in the
production of such a Monster, we cannot safely nor wisely say, seeing the
denial of that ordinary and more necessary concurrence to such an end is
altogether sufficient to it: and such defects arise not from Gods positive Will
to have them so, but from his not willing to have them otherwise.

There may seem somewhat more difficulty in Monsters in excess, when any
Creatures have more parts than are naturally proper to them, as four hands, or
three legs, and the like: But this proves not any direct intention to this,
but only an intention not to keep things in their proper limits, and to their
Rule. A Master or Father when he holds not a severe hand over his child or
servant, cannot but by inference and consequence, be said to be the cause of
the exorbitant carriages of them; because though he wills not to prevent such
mischiefs, he does not will they should be. God in like manner wills
redundance of matter, as a thing real and positive, but that it should meet
together as to constitute such an unnatural effect, is rather the suspense and
withholding his Providence then the exercising of the same.

This I premise as leading to the due apprehension of Moral Evil: which to hold
as such to have a positive Existence in the world, is inevitably to become
Manichean, and to make God the Author of sin: as St. Austin in these words
declares. Here we are to be careful that we fall not into the Herisee of the
Manichees, who said there was a certain Nature of Evil, and a certain people of
darkness with their Princes: And afterward; So they err, so they are blinded,
so they make themselves the people [Gentem Tenebrarum] of darkness, by
believing that which is false, against him who created them, for every Creature
is good, but it is corrupted by the depraved will of Man. Thus he: and were it
so that Evil had a positive being, from whom could it proceed but from God? And
it is repugnant to the Nature of the good God to be the Author of any thing
simply Evil, so far the Manicheans were in the right: therefore they that hold
this, must with the Manichees invent and introduce another God. I know the
modern defenders of the positive nature of sin allege several Schoolmen and
some Fathers, for the same: but I know there are more express testimonies of
the Ancient against it, and the Modern of any account had either another sense
than we now state the doubt in, or must be rejected with their Relater: It is
not a place here to examine and encounter all: nor to allege the Reasons or
Authorities to the contrary, which might easily be done. Only that Argument
taken from the distinction of Sins of Omission and Commission, deserves to be
considered. For, say they, if Sins of Omission consist only in defect of duty,
and are thereby distinguished from of Commission (which are such as not only
fall short of what is due, but act the quite contrary, as when a man instead of
praying, and praising God contumeliously abuses his Name and Worship) this has
more in it than a mere negation or privation of good. Thus indeed it seems, but
thus it is not. For both these are evil upon the account of privation and the
absence of good: the difference only is in this, that in sins of Omission, the
privativeness or negation is immediately seated in the Subject owing such an
Act, and in such a manner; and here, in no Action at all, but the absence of
it, which renders a man and denominates him immediately evil, or defective. But
in sins of Commission, the case is far otherwise, for here privation or defect
relates not immediately to the Subject, as the Man himself, but to the Action
it self; and by that is the Man made guilty, and evil: because though the act
be in its nature positive, yet is defective as to its circumstances; according
to which it ought to be performed. For when God has appointed, and Justice and
Reason directs that a man should observe in his action such a time and
season, and such a place, and have respect to such a person, such a manner, and
measure; and he neglects all, or any of these, does he not plainly offend in
the negative, though the act it self be in nature positive? But in the case we
are about, the Nature (as we said) of things is not to be valued, but the
Morality: and the Morality may be evil, when the Nature is good: and the
Morality may be privative, when the Act is positive. Hatred of God is an act of
Man, than which none can be instanced in, to contain more evil or malice.
Therefore as this is an act Natural and Vital, it is good, and has God for its
direct and first cause; but as this act is directed to God, and so relates to a
wrong object, so it is evil, and has neither countenance nor concurrence from
him. For as is above-touched, we are to distinguish Omne bonum viva substantia
est, and vita est. Vita autem Christus. Omne autem malum sine substantia est,
and nihil est -- and tamen perdere protest. Opus Imperf. in Matthew. Hom. 41.
(...). Chrysostom. Homil. 2. in Act. Apost. Anselmus de Casu Diaboli. Tom. 3.
the Act of Sin, from the Sin of the Act: and that upon the received Maxim
amongst the Philosophers, That all Evil is in somewhat that is Good: for having
no subsistence of it self, it must rest upon some other thing that has a real
being; as a ruinous and crased house rests upon a sound foundation. And it is
distinguished from it, as the matter from the form: for though evil has no
such proper matter as other real Beings have (for if it had, it should it self
also be real in nature, and of it self,) yet has it somewhat proportionable
and answerable thereunto, in that it affects such a Person immediately, as
sins of omission or such an act as proceeds from him: whereupon Aristotle
says well in a certain place, Privation is a certain habit, though taken
properly nothing is more contrary to habit than Privation, whose nature it is
to be the absence and want of Habit: and nothing by that Philosopher opposed
more to habit than Privation.

I might here set down the opinions and testimonies of diverse Philosophers and
Fathers expressly declaring against the positive nature of sin: but I shall
rather compose the disputation, by giving Anselmes judgment of the case, than
whom none have disputed the matter more acutely, of his Age. In his eleventh
Chapter of his Dialogue concerning the fall of the Devil, he asks, How Nothing
and Evil should signify any thing; whereas Evil is altogether Privative: and
there he answers, Although Evil and Nihil signifies something; yet that which
is signified, is not Evil or Nothing; but some other manner whereby they
signify something. And that which is signified is somewhat, but yet not really
somewhat, but, as it were somewhat. Many things are spoken after a certain
form, which are not in very deed. And to fear, according to the form of the
word, does signify somewhat Active, when as it is Passive according to the
thing it self. And so Blindness, etc. And afterward in the 26th Chapter of that
Treatise he speaks thus; Evil which is called unrighteousness is always,
Nothing: But Evil which is Incommodiousness, sometimes without doubt, is
Nothing, as Blindness. Aliquando est aliquid, Sometimes is something, as
Sadness and Pain. And Chapter the 27th; He gives the general reason why Evil
cannot be Any thing, viz. Because if it were any thing, it must be of God. Thus
he: who we see distinguishes Evil, first into that of sin, and that of
punishment, or Incommoditas, as he calls it. And that of punishment he again
distinguishes into merely Privative, as blindness: and Positive, which is in
suffering P^^na Damni, and paena Sensus.
pains: which is the same with the common distinction of Punishment of damage
or loss, and punishment of sense so well known in the Schools: And we may
easily yield that all Evil of Punishment is positive, though it be not, and yet
retain our opinion, which runs only upon the Evil of Sin. I know Augustine,
than whom it is well known no man speaks more expressly for the privative nature
of all Sin, and Thomas and Cajetane, and others are alleged to have asserted a
real Being of Concupiscence in man, which undoubtedly is Sin. But they may be
interpreted, according to our former ground, where we allowed all sins to have
a subject in which they are, and when this subject is somewhat active and
positive, as such acts of Original Concupiscence are, and of our other Passions
and Affections, then is the Evil of them taking its denominations from its
matter to which it relates, said to be positive, for distinction sake, from
those sins we call Sins of Omission.

From these grounds laid we may now adventure farther into the causality God
may be said to have in reference to the Evil of Sin, for as to that of
Punishment, the difficulty is not great. There are two Parties in the Roman
Church which go contrary ways, making two several Propositions which joined
together do make God directly the Author of Sin. So that a man may with better
Reason make it a reason against communion with the Roman Church, than Companion
against the Reformed, one of whose ten Reasons against the Reformed, that they
made God the Author of sin: For this, by the confession of some of the
Romanists must follow. For the Dominicans do directly profess, That God does
concur to the act of Evil, and with the Will not only determined by it self,
but determining it self to an evil. On the contrary, The Jesuits affirm that
God awaiting and expecting the inclination and self-determination of the will,
does not concur to the very act of sin, but follows that motion which is evil:
adding, and professing as in particular does Suarez, That if God should first,
according Suarez in Thom. 22d^^. Disputat. 6. Tract. 4.
to nature, move and apply the will to an act which is sin, before it had
determined it self, He should then in very deed be the Author of sin: This we
make the major Proposition. The Assumption is made by the Dominicans, who
constantly affirm, That God does concur to a sinful act: as does Medina.
Medina in Thom. Quaest. 79. Art. 2.
Therefore by these two joined together, God should be the Author of Sin. Nay
Medina goes farther, and of himself will do the work before he is aware. He
denies, I grant, that God is the Author of Sin: and so will Calvine, and Beza,
and Zuinglius, and such others, who are so warmly charged by their Enemies with
that pernicious Error: But he by consequence (and they do no more) does thus
plainly infer so much, in the place cited, saying, When God is the cause of
any act, he is also the Cause of the Privation which naturally follows upon
that Act. But yet (says he) concurreth not to the deformity of sin. Here is a
mystery, if any man could find it out. The deformity of Sin consists only in
the privation of the act, or, which is the very same, want of conformity to the
Rule of Actions, and the will of God: And yet it is here said, That God may be
the Author of the Act, and the Author of the Privation that is found in that
act, which Privation is nothing else but a want of due conformity, and yet not
the Author of the deformity of that Act. This is a contradiction.

The true and simple account then of this matter may be this, That God is never
any direct cause of Privations or Deformity of any Act, though he be the true
Cause of the Act it self. And his not willing to prevent by his effectual
concurse, such an Evil in the Act, is all can be imputed unto him, and that is
far from being the Cause of sin: unless it could be proved that there lay an
obligation any time upon God, as many times there does upon man, That he should
exert his Divine power to the utmost, for the preventing all the mischiefs he
can; and hindering sin.

And here if querulous man (as it is often seen) does repiningly reply upon God
for hard dealing toward him, in that he punishes him for that sin which he
foresees cannot be avoided by him, Gods grace withdrawing it self from him: St.
Paul commands him silence, whether he understands the reason Romans 9. 20, 21.
or equity of it or not: saying, Nay, but O man, What art thou that replyest
against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make
one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? No man that acknowledges
(and every Christian must acknowledge) the like, and greater power and
prerogative in God over Man, than the Potter has of his clay; can deny that
God may order the work of his hands, as he pleases: neither can he deny but the
drift of the Apostle in this comparison was to show the absolute power and
dominion of God over all Creatures: and therefore let them see how they
aggravate matters of this nature, and multiply fond ratiocinations, which they
cannot but know agree not with St. Paul's stating and decision of this Question.

I do freely grant the adverse Party, that St. Paul does not at all concern
himself with that kind of Predestination, Election, or Vocation, as very many
confidently presume he does, in his Eighth and Ninth Chapters to the Romans: I
mean, not particular or personal Prae-determination, and the like: the whole
letter and the occasion of his discourse there, being concerning the Election
of the Gentile Church, and the uncessant protection thereof, against all
threatenings and Oppositions, and disputing the equity of Gods deserting the
Jewish Church: yet thus far his argument, being general, holds good in
particular persons; that if it be free to God, without any just exceptions, to
choose and leave a Church or Nation at his pleasure, and according to the
counsel of his own will, it is also reasonable and just for him, to favor, or
show disfavour to any single person in like acts of his Providence; without
being called in question for what he does, or not does.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Sin more particularly. And first of the Fall of Adam. Of Original sin
wherein it consists: and how it is traduced from Father to children. The
Proofs of it. The Nature and Evils of it: And that it is cured in baptism. That
Natural Concupiscence has not the Nature of Sin after baptism.

BY what is said, competent satisfaction may be had in that mystery of Gods
Providence, in the fall, and sin of the first Man created (as we have showed)
in such perfection of natural Faculties, and divine Grace: the reason absolute
and demonstrative whereof, cannot be rendered by the wit^ of Man; viz. Why God
should make such a fine and exquisite piece, and deliver it over presently to
ruin and loss. It may suffice, that God was not the direct cause of such his
Fall, by impelling him, though his Free Will embracing the Temptation, he was
privy to his error. As it was in that memorable case of the death of Benhadad
King of Syria, in the second of the Kings, when Hazael was sent to enquire,
Whether he should recover 2 Kings 8. 10.
of that Sickness; The Prophet Elisha answered, Go say unto him, thou may
certainly recover: how be it, the Lord has showed me, that he shall surely
dye: And this was the true case of Adam; whom God knew to have full power
certainly to stand, and yet he knew he would surely fall. As therefore God in
that case, spoke after the method and manner of man's apprehension, so he here
acted. In that he first said the King might surely recover, and this was
according to the common order of natural Causes, which then were upon him in
his sickness: which were such as were easily resisted, and like to have no such
effect: But then God withal beholding that which was not seen of man (perhaps
not thought on by the Actour himself, at that time) he saw withal a necessary
dependencie and connection between another cause, and that effect which
followed; and so declared surely, the contrary to the other. In like manner,
God beholding Adam in that integrity and vigor of gifts and Graces with which
he had furnished him, saw him in a certain condition to persevere in that
state; but seeing withal the future outward cause of Temptation, he might well
see the effect, what it would be infallibly. So that, when we say, a thing is
contingent, we cannot say so in respect of all causes, but in respect of some
special cause, to which, in our opinion and observation, such an effect may
seem properly to belong. For it is a true Axiom amongst Logicians, All causes
accidental, are reducible to proper and direct causes. So that there was no
necessity, by Gods appointment, of Adams Fall, as he was framed of God, but
somewhat might occurr outwardly, which by Gods permission, might have as
certain effect upon the will of Man, though Free of it self and indifferent, as
had the wet cloth laid by Hazael 2 Kings 8. 15.
upon the face of Benhadad, this only excepted, That what natures simple Act
did in this, the will of man combining freely against himself, with those
outward causes, suffered in that.

The thing therefore principally to be here enquired after, is rather about the
Nature of this Sin in Adam, and the Effects thereof. And as to the former, it
is to be observed, That what was in him an Actual sin, became in us an
Original; and what was free to him to be subject to it, or void of it, becomes
necessary to us, and inevitable. It might be called in some sense an Original
sin in him; as it was the first in nature and time, he stood guilty of; but not
as if his Nature was from the beginning so corrupt, as to dispose him unto it.
Again, in him, it was of it self purely sinful, and a transgression of Gods
Law, upon which followed evil effects; but in us, it seems to partake
originally of both sin and punishment: but chiefly of this latter. For though
they speak truly, in the larger sense, who make three things proper and
inseparable from Sin, Guilt, Stain, and Punishment, yet restraining our selves
to the true Nation of it; there are these two things only essential to it. The
matter it self which is the evil act committed against the Law of God; or which
comes to the same, omitted contrary to the same: And the manner, or formality
of it, which consists in the perverseness and pravity of the will, which is so
essential to it, that it both distinguishes the errors of rational men from
them of beasts and madmen, and them of the same Man, from one another: so that
what was done voluntarily and freely, differs wholly from that done with
incogitancie, so not affected (for then the will concurs with it and infects
it) and without any intention so to do, as to point of moral Goodness or Evil.
And according to the bent or averseness of the will to evil, commonly are
estimated the degrees of evil. But though in Adam all these things concurred to
the heightening of his Actual sin, yet in those that inherit that evil from
him, the sin must needs be much less in Nature, and lighter; because of no
personal concurrence to such deformity. Yet not so neither, but that it justly
is denominated Sin, from the very nature and effects of it. For seeing whatever
is in the Will, must be good or evil, and if the Will be found crooked,
perverse, or averse to that it ought to incline to, this is contrary to Gods
institution and Law, and whence ever this proceeds, from an immediate act of
our own, or by traduction from others, seeing it is found in the Will, it must
needs be contrary and consequently odious to God, and in conclusion sinful.

Again, as the fountain poisons and corrupts all streams flowing from thence,
so the Will being thus corrupt, and naturally thus ill inclined, all the other
defects, even in his body as well as soul, contracted by this fall, are as so
many deformities in man, which render him deservedly hated of God; seeing such
disparity and unlikeness to the worse, to that which he first framed. Thirdly,
Original sin in Man has this more of disorder in it, that it not only is a
corruption of the will, and thereby a deformity and vitiosity in the inferior
parts and faculties, but it is of ill consequence. For if this depravation went
no farther than that evil born with us, if it stand there, and wrought no more
evil, the nature of it had been less sinful, and more tolerable; but being of
an active nature, and having taken up the chiefest room in the soul of Man, it
disposes and impelleth to more mischief, in actual transgressions. As a
Garrison held by a Rebel does not only offend Sacred Majesty by standing out
against him it self, but when it finds it self strong enough, and has
opportunity, sallies out and makes invasion upon its proper Sovereign, and
offers actual and active violence against him: So by this Original Evil first
possessing the Soul, does Concupiscence stir, and act by outward practices,
contrary to the Law and Will of God. And therefore when St. Austin says,
alleged by the corrupters of this Doctrine of Original Corruption, They are
born not properly but originally evil; he no ways contradicts his own
Doctrine, whereby he most of all farther explained and maintained this Original
sin, being the first that gave the name Original to that Pravity in man. For
true it is, that that only is called properly Original Sin, which Adam and Eve
in person committed, and were not subject to by nature, as their Posterity are:
because it was the first, in respect of mankind, as well in order of time, as
nature and causality. Again, though this be traduced unto us his Offspring,
and be the cause and fountain of all other sins actually committed afterward,
and for the same causes may rightly be called Original: yet considering that
this Evil thus vitiating our nature, had no consent of our personal will, we
neither understood it,. nor any ways affected it, it cannot be so properly
called sin, as others which we act knowingly and willingly our selves: For
nothing is in strict way a sin which we do not consent unto in some manner,
either immediately, or in its remoter causes. And this does yet farther appear,
because no man is bound to repent properly of Original sin: Proper Repentance
being an Act contrarying and reversing, so far as in us lies, some evil by us
done, and not suffered involuntarily: But Original sin is rather suffered than
acted by the children of Adam. Yet though in the severst sense, we cannot be
said to repent of Original sin, we are bound to exercise some Act of Repentance
for the same: As grief, and sorrow of mind and heart for the evil we lie under,
Confession and Recognition of our sad state before God, Imploration of his
mercy and favor, to remove the same from us, and restore us to our pristine
innocence and integrity. For this, those many places of Scripture describing
this Evil, do seem to require at our hand.

And no where does the Scripture more fully declare this unto us, than in the
Fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans; which because Socinus, and such as
plough with his Heifer, and are tickled with his pretty phansies in eluding the
Apostles meaning, and the constant interpretation of the most Ancient and
Modern Expositours, we shall more particularly consider. It is undeniable, that
St. Paul Romans 5.
amplifying the grace of God and benefits unto mankind, even the Gentiles, by
Christ Jesus, does there make a comparision from the Twelfth verse to the end
of the Chapter, of the first and second Adam: and of the Evil we sustained by
the first Man, Adam; and the benefits we receive by the second Man, Christ. To
this he supposes the ground of his Comparison; which is this, that By one v. 12.
man Sin entered into the world, and death by Sin; and so death passed upon all
men, for that all have sinned. This is made no more of than that Adam being the
first Man in the world, and sinning, Sin must needs enter first into the world
by him, if he sinned first; and that death followed upon that sin of Adam: But
if this be all, how come the effects to exceed the cause, and death to extend
farther than sin? For it is not only said, that death entered into the world, in
seizing upon that single Malefactor, Adam: but So death passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned: where two things are to be noted. First, the note of
dependence and consequence, So. For if St. Paul had meant that Adam, by himself
and only for himself, introduced death, wherefore serves the term So, which is
a certain indication of the manner how death came into the world, upon all
persons: and as much as if it had been said, Adam first sinning, and bringing
death into the world, so it was, that this death fell upon all men, for that
all have sinned. Now, it is certain that all that dye have not sinned
personally: and therefore Secondly, the Note So must also ralate to the Cause
of that death, which was sin: and is as much as, Adam sinning his Posterity
also sinned, and became obnoxious to death. For to say as some eminently
learned, and useful otherwise in their Doctrine of Repentance, Death passed
upon all, i. e. say they, Upon all the whole world, who were drowned in the
flood of Divine vengeance: and who did sin after the similitude of Adam: is as
much as if another Scholia^t like him had said, That is, upon all Senacheribs
Armies before Jerusalem in the days of Hezekiah, or, Upon all the Romans in
the battle of Canna with Hannibal. For it is certain that all men dye, and it
is no less certain that all men without exception died not in the flood. And
therefore what is added upon these words, In as much as all have sinned, that
by them is meant, All have sinned upon their own account: we have already
shown, that it is not absolutely true, and therefore cannot be St. Paul's
meaning: For all that dye have not, as did Adam, or following Adams example,
sinned: Infants dying prove the contrary. Yet I cannot deny but (...) may have
another signification, than is given by some, who would have it as much as
(...), in whom, and not as our Translation has it faithfully, In as much. This
the Apostles doctrine is confirmed by what follows. For until the Law, sin was
in the world; but sin is not imputed when there is no v. 13. 14.
Law. Nevertheless, sin reigning from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression. These words, as by very
many, and in diverse manners, so by the same hand are thus haled to this
erroneous construction. St. Paul does not speak of all mankind, as if the Evil
occasioned by Adams sin did descend for ever upon that account, but it had a
limited effect, and reached only to those who were in the interval between Adam
and Moses. But the more exact and literal enquiry into the Apostles meaning,
will quite overthrow this presumptuous conjecture, which is occasioned from a
mis-translation or misunderstanding of the words (...) and (...); both which
signifying the same thing, i. e. Until, are thought to be intended exclusively
of the time to come, when they, as the like, do but intend such a term
signally, as a most considerable Period, and not as the ultimate they drive at.
As it is commonly understood of Joseph's not Matthew. 1. ult.
knowing Mary until she had brought forth her firstborn. And this will be
evident to him that compares the use of those words in the thirteenth and
fourteenth verses, and the drift of the Apostle: which plainly to discover,
will satisfy any doubter, and answer all objections, and other glosses. It is
this, here (as generally) to lay before the Jews (to whom St. Paul principally
designs his discourse) the imperfection of that Law, which was by Moses
delivered unto them, and upon which they so confidently rest, that neither the
Law of God written in men's hearts before Moses, nor the Law then lately
delivered by Christ was of any account with them; but Moses his Law must carry
it from all: Justification must be by that, and the Virtue of the Messiah
himself depended on that. So that, in effect, they thought nothing sin but what
transgressed the Law of Moses. St. Paul argues against this, saying, For until
the Law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no Law:
which is as much as to have said, Ye ought not so much to stand upon your
Mosaical Law: For that is not the only judge, or trial of sin; seeing sin was
in the world until the Law, that is, all the time from Adam to your Law; but
sin is not imputed when there is no Law: but sin was imputed, and punished too.
For (v. 14.) death reigned from Adam to Moses. Now if there was such punishment
as death, then surely there must be a Transgression, and if there be such a
Transgression, there must be also a Law, which is so transgressed: And
therefore if such a Law, then surely Moses his Law was not that only Law, nor
most ancient. Now (to draw nearer to our present Case) on whom fell this
punishment of death? the Apostle answers, On all, without exception, Even on
them (which could only be doubted of) that had not sinned after the similitude
of Adams transgression. What is meant by this? That is, says our Author, Who
sinned not so capitally. For to sin like Adam is used as a tragical and high
expression, Hos. 6. 7. They like men have sinned, in the Hebrew it is, Like
Adam. Of this I grant thus much, That Adams sin was the greatest that ever was
committed since, all things duly weighed, and therefore it may well stand for a
most heinous sin: and therefore Job likewise says, by way of abhorrence and
purgation, If I covered my sin as Adam: Job 31 33.
One main circumstance aggravating Adams sin was, that he would have hid it, as
himself, out of Gods eyes, and defended himself, when he was convinced; but how
he repented the Scripture is silent. But that the degree of sin cannot be the
ground of comparison, but the very nature of sin, and kind, is plain from the
subject thus punished by death. For had they been only men of years, who could
choose the good, and refuse the evil, then indeed less might have been objected
against that interpretation: but it being manifest that death reigned over
Infants also who committed no sin, as did Adam, therefore another sense must be
found, which answers the full intent of the Apostles argument, and it can be no
other than this, That by similitude here he means, the like in nature, and not
only in degree: For Infants, who are punished with death, have not sinned as
did Adam: Adams sin was a sin properly so called, and Actual: but Children, who
dye, sin not so, but are subject to that we call Original sin: which being such
a corruption as defaceth the Image of God, and as it were clips his Royal Coin,
and allayes it with baser metal than he ordained man to consist of, may cause
him justly to be rejected. Nay, which is much more, and granted (surely
unadvisedly, as inconsistently with the principles of this Author) the guilt
of Adams Actual sin, as in himself, was such, that it descended to the sons of
him before the Flood: For says he, They indeed in rigor did themselves
deserve it, but if it had not been for that provocation by Adam, they who
sinned not so bad, and had not been so severely and expressly threatened, had
not suffered so severely. This is more than what the strictest defenders of
Original sin dare affirm: viz. That God should take an occasion of punishing
one man for another fault, when he did in no manner partake of the sin.
Surely, if nothing of the Offense had descended to the Posterity of Adam,
nothing of the punishment should have touched them.

Next to the comparison here made by the Apostle between acts of Adam, and the
acts of Christ, and the effects and events of one and the other, is the
comparison between the persons to whom these on both sides extended: and
shows that the remedy by Christ was proportionable altogether to the mischief
occasioned by Adam. For, says the Apostle, As by the offense of One, judgment
came upon All men to condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of One, the
free gift came upon All men unto justification Romans 5. 18, 19.
of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous. There seems in these two verses
to be some contrariety, in that, first it is said that Judgment came upon all,
and the Free gift upon all: and yet afterward, there is a restriction unto
many, and not all concerned in the sin. Therefore it is to be observed, That,
in the first place the Apostle speaks of the state of Evil or Condemnation: in
the next, of the state of Restitution and Justification: For as all persons
were included in the Condemnation of Adam, so were all included in the
Justification of Christ: But as of all them, only some, many were, through his
disobedience, made Sinners: that is, became such sinners as not to return to
actual Righteousness and Salvation, so by the obedience of Christ, not all who
were called and chosen came to Life and Holiness, but many only were made
Righteous actually, and not all. Or if we take the word Sin as he, of whom we
speak, does, not so much for the real inward vitiousness of the soul, but for
any outward defect; and, which is yet more, for the Punishment of Sin (in which
sense the Sacrifice for sin was called Sin in the Old Law: and Christ in the
New Testament is said to be made Sin for us; that is, a Sacrifice for Sin) so
that to be made sinners, should import as much as to be made liable to the
punishment of sin, the matter is the same.

But because this Author not only inclines to the Opinion of Pelagius, and of
Socinus after him, making the corruption of nature nothing, and therefore
exempting Infants from any such natural infection as we here suppose, but uses
the same evasion of Imitation of Adams sin, and not propagation, as the
original of all Evil to us; therefore let us hear what St. Austins argument was
against that Opinion. If (says he) the Apostle spoke Aug. Epist. 87.
of Sin by imitation, and not propagation, entering into the world, he could not
have said that by one Man Sin entered into the world, but rather by the Devil:
for he sinned before man: and as the Wiseman says, Through envy Wisd. 2. 24.
of the Devil, came death into the world. And Christ tells us, how aptly the
Devil may be said to propagate sin by imitation, as well as Adam, thus
reprehending the Jews. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of John
8. 44.
your Father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth; because there is no truth in him: when he speaks a lie, he
speaks it of his own, for he is a liar, and the Father of it.

And when St. Paul says, We were by nature the children of wrath as well
Ephesians. 2. 3. Psalm 51. 5.
as others: And the Psalmist, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in Sin did
my mother conceive me; that these places must be accounted hyperbolical, and
not to have a proper sense, is the special evasion of Modern Wits, not
comparable to Ancienter Judgments, more simply understanding them. I know a
more colorable interpretation is made by others, who interpret Conceiving in
sin as relating to the Parents, and not to the Children. But this is less
probable than the ordinary and obvious sense, applying it to David. For though
it may be probable enough that Parents may offend in acts of Procreation, and
so the child may be said to be conceived by them in sin: yet David being at the
speaking of these words in deepest repentance for his own sins, cannot be said
to leave off that subject, and to confess the sins of others, and charge his
parents with that which concerned him not. Again, when he says He was shapen in
iniquity, nothing could he say more intimately to signify his proper state, at
the time of his first conception.

But the Scriptures do not only barely say, we are originally thus infected and
sinful, but, by the effects and certain other indications, declare the same.
The first and chiefest of which may be Death, and punishments sticking close to
infants at their birth, and even before they come into the world: Now the Law
of God being unalterable, that punishment should follow, and not go before sin;
it must be that somewhat of the nature of sin must prepare the way for such
sufferings.

Secondly, That all men come to years of discretion are effected with Actual
sin, few of the opposers of Original sin, deny; But according to Reason and
Scripture both, the fountain being so infected and corrupted, whatever flows
from it must, of necessity, partake of the same evil. For Job 14. 4. Jam. 3,
11, 12. (...), etc. An^ae Gazaei Th^^^hrastus Biblioth. P P. page 392. To. 8.
Non eni^ es ex ^^lis qui modo nova quaedam gannire c^perunt, dicentes nullum
reatum esse ex Adam tractum, qui per baptis^um in infant s^lvatur. Aug. Epist.
28. Hieronymo. Ad neminem ante bona men's ^enit, quam mala. Omnes pr^^ccupati
sumus. Sen. Ep. 50. Nemo difficulter ad naturam reducitur nisi qui ab ^a
defecit. ibid.
who (says Job) can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. And St.
James: Does a fountain send forth at the same place, sweet water and bitter?
Can a fig tree, my brethren, bear olive-berries? either a vine, figs? so can no
fountain yield both salt water and fresh. From whence it follows, by way of
just Analogy, That the Fountain being corrupt, there must be derived to the
Rivolets the like unsoundness.

And thirdly, we see this by experience, that both bodily and mental
infirmities and disorders, are traduced from Father to Son in actual Evils: as
the Gout, Stone, and Leprosy are transinitted to posterity from the Father;
and Anger, and other passions in like manner. It may as well be said That the
Son has the Gout, and halts by imitation, and not by propagation, as that such
other affections, which are common to Father and Son, so proceed.

Fourthly, The Argument which St. Augustine could never, by the Pelagians, be
answered, taken from Baptism. For this they could not deny, but the Church
universally practiced Paeda-baptism (that is held an opinion manifested in
practice that Children were capable of that Sacrament, and received the benefit
of it, however some particular persons deferred the same) and held it of use
unto them, for the entering into the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore surely there
must be some impediment, and that impediment could be nothing but what has the
nature of sin in it; therefore they bring sin with them into the World.
Pelagius had a good mind indeed (as Austin observed) to have denied the use of
Baptism, but as bold as he and his great second Julian of Capua was, the
general Judgment of the Church declared in the practice of it, put a stop to
his inclinations: but Socinus, bolder than any Heretic before him, sticks at
no such thing, but flatly denies the use of it to all but such as are converted
newly to the Christian Faith, as in the times of the Apostles. This was freely
and roundly invented and uttered; and which suffices alone to convince us of
the former error, denying Original Sin, which was always held a principal
cause of Baptism.

Lastly, Thus much may be observed by natural Reason to the confirmation of
Original Sin, which Seneca noted, but could give no reason of. No man (says
he) is of a good mind, before he is of a bad one: we are all prevented. And in
the same place he says, No body is with difficulty reduced to Nature, but he
that has made a defection from it. Now, supposing that God made all things
perfect, and instituted the nature of man more inclinable to acts agreeable to
that perfection, than to the contrary, whence can it come that contrariwise,
Man naturally inclines to that which is base, and unworthy, and is hardly
taken off that corrupt way of acting contrary to reason and virtue, and reduced
to a perfection becoming his Institution and End, but that the very principle
of his nature is hurt, and the root corrupt? And because nothing can be Author
of its own Principles, by which it subsists, no man can be said by his own act,
to have corrupted them. Indeed we say, a Man is of corrupt Principles, when he
has contracted some evil habits disposing to wickedness, but that is
accessorie, and not innate to him.

And if it be farther urged, That no man can be guilty by another fault, nor
corrupted by another principle; it is answered as before, so long as it is
only that others, and not his own in some degree: For as Thomas has
distinguished, There is a Principle of Nature, and a Principle of a Person: and
a Sin of Nature, and a Sin of a Person. Adam had not only principles whereby he
himself subsisted, but also was the principle of all his Successors. So that
Original sin was as well the sin of the one as the other. So that from the
depraved will of Adam as the first principle of all, came the corruption of the
Will of all: Whereupon speaking strictly (as we have said) this Original sin is
not properly sin in the Infant; but, a want of Original Justice seizing him,
and exposing him to destruction: as Thomas and Catharinus also have taught:
which two are the effects of the sin of Adam, upon himself and children: but
the very formal Reason of sin in his Posterity.

For where, as some say, It is natural Concupiscence moving to Evil: and
others, That it is the absence of Divine Justice and Grace, they differ rather
in the niceties of speech, than in the matter it self. For to me it seems that
the loss of Divine Perfection and Grace, superadded to the nature of Man,
whereby he was abundantly able to secure himself and glorify God in that state
of happiness, most nearly expresses the nature of it, as in the sons of Adam.
(For in Adam himself it was actual disobedience) but Concupiscence inordinate
does rather express the consequence of it: For upon that desolation in the soul
of Man, quickly arose a disorder of the inferior Affections, which by a
general name is called Concupiscence or Lust by the Apostle, in his Seventh
Chapter to the Romans. And Natural it is called, because, as out of the cursed
ground sprang up briers, thorns, weeds and thistles, where more useful fruit of
the earth was intended, so upon this curse of man's soul, Evil motions arose to
the hurrying him to Actual sin, being themselves really sinful.

Again, it is observable, for the true resolution of the Question, That there
is commonly an ambiguity in this term, Concupiscence; it being sometimes taken
for the act, and exercise of that vicious principle in man fallen; and
sometimes for the Pravitie, and degenerate temper of the soul, making it prone
to actual sins. This latter is that which is properly called Original Sin;
though more properly Original unholiness, or want of that instituted Integrity,
with which man was at first endowed: and in it three things are to be
considered; First, the privation of Supernatural Good. Secondly, Proneness to
unnatural Evil, against God. Thirdly, Odiousness and Culpableness before God,
who must needs be offended at the sight of so much deformity in his Creature,
contrary to his first Institution of it and Intention; though this evil
habitude should never break out into actual Rebellion against him, by the
exercise, or putting it in execution, by actual Concupiscence, against the Law
of God: St. James seems Jam. 1. 14.
to justify this distinction, where he says; Every man is tempted when he is
drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed: This gives us the original Lust or
Concupiscence, which inclines and moves to sin, and to this is it to be
imputed, that a man so easily is withdrawn from truth and righteousness, and
noble acts becoming his high nature. He goes on: Then when Lust has
conceived, it brings forth Sin, etc. that is, when the Radical Concupiscence,
or Concupiscibleness in man becomes impregnated and matured by outward
opportunities and occasions of sinning, it brings forth into outward act,
sin: and the event and consequence of this sin, is death. So that the innate
Lust lurking in the Soul, and not actuated by outward occasions either inwardly
to effect and desire, or outwardly to act sin, is not properly sin, but
metonymically only; either as it is the effect of Adams sin, or the cause of
our sins, but it is properly odious to God, and exposing us to his heavy wrath,
so far at least as is seen in the deprivation of that be atitude, to which man
was at first designed. And this exactly agrees with the nature of that sin: For
as that which was in Adam was actual disobedience, in his Posterity is only
want of that perfection which was due to their nature: So Adam not only
incurred the loss of that bliss he was capable of, and in the ready way to
enjoy, but likewise the punishment of Sense, answerable to his Sin of
Commission: and his Posterity was made subject to the punishment and loss of
Gods favor, and that bliss they were, in Adam, once ordained unto. But when
their Sins become Actual, they are subject to punishment of Pain, and torment
for the same.

And by this, the way is well prepared to make answer to that common doubt
concerning the effect of Baptism, and the state of the Regenerate, in reference
to Original sin, and Concupiscence; viz. whether Concupiscence remaining after
Baptism in the Regenerate be sin or not. Scriptures are alleged with great
color on both sides. It is observed by Bishop Davenant, that St. Paul calls
Original Concupiscence, sin in fourteen Davenant. De^^rm. ^.
several places, in his sixth, seventh, and eighth Chapter to the Romans* which
if so* Original sin it self must needs be oftener mentioned in Scripture than
will be granted by many: For mine own particular, I see none of those places so
expressed in the description of it, that the law of Sin, the Body Lex Peccati est
violenti^ consuctudinis qua trabit, and tenetur etiam invitus animus ^^ merito
quo in came volens illabitur. Aug. in Confess. Lib 3 c. 5.
of Sin, the Law of the Members, the Lust of the Mind and Flesh, and some other
expressions to the same effect, may not be understood as well of an evil habit,
and inveterate custom acquired of sinning, which is wont to give Law to the
Reason and Mind of Man, as of Original sin we now speak of, contra-distinct to
it, were it not that the stream of Ancient and Modern Interpreters has given
another sense, not with modesty to be opposed. Therefore, yielding those many
places to be meant of Concupiscence natural, we are to distinguish, answerable
to what is abovesaid, with the Bishop, between Inhabiting Concupiscence and
Actual Concupiscence: And herein a little vary from him, if he does mean that
those places are to be applied to Concupiscence resident only, and not
actuated: But of this latter he seems to speak; and no doubt so is St. Paul to
be understood, and not of the other. And without all doubt, Concupiscence
coming to act inwardly in the mind, by coveting only inordinately, or
outwardly, by executing the evil purposes of the mind, are sin, even in the
most Regenerate. And when this becomes a habit, then it is called by St. Paul
to the Romans, The Old Man, and the Body of Sin. But when the Romans 6 6.
remains of that inhabiting Concupiscence, which only can be properly called
Original, never come (after the death and burial with Christ in baptism, as the
Apostle speaks often) to recover new life and motions, by Romans 6. 3, 4. Colos.
2. 12. Gal. 3. 27.
conceiving new warmth from outward temptations (as in Infants dying before
they come to be actual sinners, and in those of riper years immediately after
their baptism) it cannot properly be said to be sin, or to expose to damnation,
as all sin properly so called, does. St. Austin quoted by that learned Bishop,
plainly affirms thus much; saying, Tale and Aug. lib. 6. c. 5. In Julian.
tantum malum, and such and-so great Evil [as that Original] only because it is
in a man, would oblige us to death, and drag us to the last death, but that its
chain was broken in baptism. All this we subscribe to, and do profess that the
hold Original sin had over us, is loosed by Baptism. Yet we profess with Thomas
also quoted, that when ever such Concupiscence comes into the Will, be it of
Regenerate or Unregenerate, it puts on the nature of sin. But we suppose the
remains of that Original Evil to contain themselves, where Baptism left them;
and not to proceed farther. For this God certainly hates, (I mean progress of
Concupiscence) and as it is well argued, God cannot hate any thing but sin. But
after Regeneration by Baptism, or restoration to the virtue and power of
Baptism, and the benefit thereof, by Repentance; the Sin in kind, as Lust,
Envy, Murder, Malice is odious unto God, but as it relates to the Person once
guilty of it, it is no longer odious unto God: why? because it is covered, it
is pardoned, it is not imputed, it is as if it had not been. For otherwise, it
could not be said, Blessed is the man whose transgression Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. But St. Paul to
the Corinthians having recited those notorious sins unto which unmortified and
unregenerate men were subject and guilty of, adds; And such were some 1 Cor. 6.
11.
of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sactified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of his Grace. Meaning, that upon
their conversion unto Christ, their washing in Baptism, their having received
the Holy Ghost, they were acquitted from their former sins, and judged innocent
and pure before him. And the Author to the Hebrews tells us Hebr. 9. 26.
how Christ, as an High Priest, once in the end of the world has appeared to
put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself. And to what end should any man
multiply Texts to prove this, to them, who will affirm that all sin is
damnable, and grant that the Regenerate are not in a state of Damnation? then
surely they are not properly sinners or guilty. I speak of the state of
Remission and Absolution, and as such, as all Infants baptized are: And the
grown Christian, because he may, and is most prone to incur new sins, after
such absolution and purgation, is not therefore to be said, not to have been
truly absolution and purgation, is not therefore to be said, not to have been
truly freed from the guilt of sin passed before his baptism, and through
repentance. For that this may happen, experience and the testimony of St Peter
witnesses, For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world 2. Pet.
2. 20.
through the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

And what do they but in effect come off from their opinion of sinfulness in
that Concupiscibleness, rather than Concupiscence in the Regenerate, who after
all, plainly grant that there is no guilt remaining in it, of it self, and thus
answer the argument, which proves that it is no such sin as they hold,
because, Original sin is the death of the soul, and makes a man an enemy to
God: but Concupiscence in the Regenerate does not this; thus: Original sin does
not cause spiritual death, but only as it is linked with guilt; but pardon
being obtained in Baptism, the guilt is taken away, and makes not any man
liable to wrath, but as he is found in the old Adam: so soon as a man is of the
number of the Regenerate, he is found in the new Adam, i. e. in Christ. Now
would it be known, how any thing of the true nature of sin, may be separated
from guilt: which is too hard for me to apprehend; they being so intimately
coupled together, and convertible; that, as there cannot be conceived any guilt
without sin, so neither any sin without guilt. And if they say, the guilt is
done away in Baptism or Repentance, I will say, the sin is done away too, and
maintain it. If they had distinguished between the effects and fruits of
Original sin, and the sin it self, the matter had been much plainer and easier*
and by their manner of proceeding in this Question, it should seem they only
drive at this. For I grant what they allow, that Baptism does not free from all
corruption of Original sin, such as are blindness of the Mind, and debility of
the Will, to embrace good entirely, and infirmities of the body, which by a
Metonymie are called sin sometimes: but the guilt, it must necessarily, or do
nothing at all; but what Calvine and Perkins and Cartwright, and many dancing
after their Pipe (to the scandal of the Sacraments and the Reformation) admit
us into the outward communion of the Church, and signify the pardon of our
sins from all eternity, without including Baptism or Repentance, which is made
no more then a sign too. I conclude this point with that sentence of St.
Augustine against Neque enim ea nobis volumus, quae dimissa non dubitamus in
baptismo, sed illa utique quae human^ fragilitate: quamvis pa^va tamen, crebra
subrepunt. Aug. Ep. 108.
them; who, by their own confession does expressly affirm, That that clause in
the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses or doubts, used by the Regenerate
in Baptism, does not concern the inhabiting Concupiscence, but the sins
committed after Baptism. Which agrees with what we delivered before, that,
though we may give, and lament for the misery of damnified nature in us, by our
fall in Adam; yet we are not bound to pray for the remission of it, after our
regeneration. It may be inserted into our confession, as a part of our misery,
thereby to move God to a more full restitution of the loss sustained, but not
as to the obtaining of forgiveness of the guilt. It may serve for our
humiliation and aspiration to a fuller delivery from the infelicity we are
under, by the remains of it, not from the guilt of it, which is the sinfulness,
wholly extinguished by those waters.

For as it is with a son to whom his father has committed a greater measure of
wealth, of money and rich clothing than he could well expect, during his
minority, which money and raiment he has in riotous living and wretched
company, lost and imbezelled; though he returns so far into the favor of his
father, as to have his offense pardoned, and is taken into his family, and has
the promise of being heir of his Estate, notwithstanding his former
miscarriages, yet has not at present the like affluence and ornaments restored
to him as he was once possessed of: So God deals ordinarily with his
children, made such by Baptism, the crime is remitted to them, which they were
guilty of, they are accepted into his favor, and become part of his holy
family, the Church; they are assured of the future inheritance in Heaven. Yet
does not God thereby presently restore all that in Adam was prodigally lost by
them, and misspent; but ordains that they should, by their future good and
dutiful behavior, and his ordinary allowance of Grace given them, Occupy
until he comes, and by daily improvement in Grace, arrive at last, by little
and little, to the perfect consummation in Glory. After Baptism, therefore,
there is that Lucrum cessans, as they call it, that want of benefit which was
once enjoyed fully and freely, and continues of the nature of punishment, after
pardon sealed to us: But the Damnum emergens, or positive damage or evil does
cease; God forbearing further to vindicate himself than what naturally springs
from the foresaid defects remaining in the Regenerate: and this too, not so
much with an evil eye, as a good intention to his children, to reduce them
nearer and nearer to him, by such exercises. And hereby I suppose is
competently answered also that Scholastical doubt moved chiefly in reference to
Actual sins, viz. Whether God does properly punish his children for those sins
which he has pardoned unto them before. The Scripture, which is not wont to
speak Logically, precisely, or Scholastically but popularly and familiarly,
does many times call that punishment from God (because nothing can happen
without his order and dispensation) which is rather to be imputed to the
imperfect state of Regeneration in this life, and the unrestored integrity in
man, than the unpardonedness of offenses. And again, it declares so full
satisfaction made by Christ for the sins of the Penitent, and freeness of Gods
Grace, that without calling in question the justification of a sinner, and the
justice of God, no more can be exacted of the pardoned than what is paid. But,
as is said, a son reconciled to his father may be fully forgiven and assured of
the inheritance expected, yet through want of that plenty denied him, not good
affection, may fall into many wants and troubles, which should not have touched
him, had he at first persevered in his duty and felicity.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Restitution of Man after sin. The Means and Motives thereunto. In what
manner Christ's Mediation was necessary to the reconciling of Man to God.
Socinus his Opinion of Christ's Mediation refuted. That Christ truly and
properly satisfied by his Death and Passion for us.

AND thus have we passed one great Period of Gods Divine Providence, in
relation to the fall of Man: For (as has been said) the Providence of God
consisting of his Power, Justice, Wisdom and Goodness, is seen no less
conspicuously in the due disposing of Evil to the general good of the Universe,
as likewise to his Glory, than in dispensing of Good to his Creatures; though
this latter affects us most. Now therefore we are to proceed to that Second
most eminent Act of Gods more than Paternal Providence to Mankind, in his
Restoration. And here we are to consider, first the Motives inducing God to
such a benign acceptance of him to favor: Then the Means whereby this was
accomplished.

And the former we may soon dispatch from what we before noted out of
Chrysostom: that the first Original of Gods great design, and fountain of
favor toward lost Man, did, and must needs spring from his own good will and
inclination to Mercy, immediately; without any consideration whatever. For
neither Man's misery, nor any of those many attempts of Schoolmen, Fathers, or
Postillers to render a reason why God should be more inclined to favor Man
than the lapsed Angels, can be of any tolerable account to incite or invite God
to Mercy in this case; no, nor the consideration of Christ: For Christ was not
the first reason which prevailed with God to have mercy, but his own natural
Grace (as I may so speak) disposed him first in general, to the end: And the
end, Man's restitution, being thus propounded and determined by himself, Christ
was in order of causes, elected as a Mediator and Means designed to bring to
pass that end. And this the holy Scriptures affirm. St. Peter in his Sermon
recorded in the Acts, thus speaks of him: And he commanded us Acts 10. 42, 43
to preach unto the People, and to testify, that it is he which was ordained
of God, to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him should receive
remission of sins.

Christ then is not the first Motive of Gods favorable Decree to Man; but
Christ is the first Means whereby that Decree was executed and brought to
effect. And this being granted and premised, the doubt concerning the absolute
or hypothetical necessity of Christ's becoming incarnate, and negotiating Man's
salvation; that is, more plainly, Whether so necessary it was that Christ
should appear a Mediator between God and Man, as there were no possible
salvation without it, or that only upon, or because God had so decreed it, that
none should be saved but by Christ; may seem half ended. For it is out of
question, that as the case now stands (as they speak, in Acts 4. 12.
sensu composito) God having determined that no other name under heaven be
given whereby men must be saved, that there is no salvation in any other, but
in Christ Jesus. But secluding that Decree, it does not appear why God out of
the Abyss of his Counsels, and Immensness of his Wisdom, and absoluteness of
his Free Grace, might not have compassed Man's salvation some other way. My
Reason, besides those I find used by others, is that now intimated. If God
could entertain such favorable thoughts toward Man as to decree his Salvation
without intuition of Christ: surely, he might have effected it without Christ.
For it is neither just nor reasonable to imagine that God could decree any thing
absolutely, and not absolutely bring it to pass, for we cannot so judge of Gods
Counsels, as we do of Man's; who always determines with supposition of means,
and ability to bring to pass what he determined: but all causes out of himself,
being, without exception, subject to his will, nay his will needing no outward
means to attain its purpose or resolution, it is sufficient argument that such
a thing may be, that God without consideration of any means decrees it, and at
his liberty chooses those means he pleases.

Neither upon this supposition is the advantage such as the Socinian Heretic
expects to his cause. It is one of his pernicious heresies, That Christ
satisfied not by his Passion, he expiated not the offense of Man thereby, but
left him many a good lesson to direct and instruct him in the way to heaven;
set him an excellent and fair example to follow: Makes now at last, being in
heaven, (not before) intercession, and mediates for man: but his death was no
satisfaction for the wrath of God conceived against the sinner. And to make way
to this opinion, he says, that God might without any satisfaction, have freely
remitted man's offense: and therefore it was not absolutely and indispensably
requisite, that Christ should dye. If we should yield all this which is here
taken for granted, which yet if it be not granted, is not so easy to be
demonstrated; there appears no great advantage to their cause. For if it be
assured unto us out of holy Writ, that God has determined that no salvation
should be attained, no recovery had without the mediation of Christ, and his
satisfaction, what avails it them that possibly it might have been otherwise?
I confess the advantage to the other side would have been much greater, if it
could be proved that Gods justice of absolute necessity, must have been
satisfied by fulfilling the penal part of the Law: but however, there remains
evidence enough from the conditional will of God, which, according to
Scriptures, admits of no other way now. For so says St. Paul to the
Colossians, It pleased the Father that in Col. 1. 19, 20.
him should all fullness dwell: And (having made peace through the blood of his
Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him I say, whether they
be things in heaven or things on earth. And Christ himself in St. Luke says,
Luke 24 46.
Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the
dead the third day: And that repentance and remission of sin should be preached
in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And St. Peter; 2 Pet. 2.
24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead
unto sin, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes we were healed. And
what can be more plain than that of the Epistle to the Hebrews; Without Heb. 9.
22, 23.
shedding of blood is no remission. And lest some may presume to restrain the
Apostles words to the state of the Old Law, it is added, It was therefore
necessary that the paterns of things in the heavens should be purified with
these, but the heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifices than these.
And what does the Apostle mean by the better Sacrifices, but the Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross? St. John declares so much exprefly, where he says, If
we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, 1 John 1. 7.
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. And in the
forecited place of the Hebrews, more fully and expressly making a comparison
Hebr. 9. 14.
between the expiations of the Law and Gospel, says thus: For if the blood of
Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies
to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? If therefore God under the
Mosaical Law might have passed over the errors and uncleanness of his people
Israel, but never would remit them without expiations and sacrifices to that
end ordained; how can it be imagined, that the moral errors and impurities of
the soul of Man by sin should be expiated or passed over without that Sacrifice
and shedding of the blood of Christ appointed to that purpose? Surely
therefore, a sense there is wherein it is impossible God should remit sins
without due punishment for the same inflicted; and the least and lowest is that
which we call conditional, supposing that God has so decreed that no sin
should be expiated but that way. A way, which, besides the excellent agreement
it has with the Justice of God, and Mercy also, is full of pregnant advices
and instructions to the Offender, partly informing of the foul and mortal
nature of sin, which cannot otherwise be pardoned than by such satisfaction of
blood: partly by humbling him, and moving him to cry God mercy bitterly and
heartily; and lastly, by possesing his mind with a dread and terror of the
nature of sin, so as to avoid the same for the time future.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Nature and Person of the Mediator between God and Man. In the
beginning was the Word, proved to be spoken of Christ: and that he had a Being
before he was Incarnate. The Union of two Natures in Christ explained. Christ a
Mediator by his Person, and by his Office, and this by his Sacrificing
himself. The Scriptures proving this.

THUS far of the necessity and use of Mediation between God and Man, for the
reconciling them at this great distance: Now it remains to speak more
particularly of the Person or Mediator himself, whom Christian Faith
acknowledges to be Christ Jesus: who, as the Scripture tells us, came unto the
world to save sinners, and to save them by his Mediation: 1 Timothy 1. 15.
And that this is a faithful saying, that is, a truth to be embraced by true
Faith, without which there is no Salvation.

But of the Condition of this Mediator we find no small differences amongst
such who are called Christians. They are of three sorts. Some profess him to be
God, but deny him to be true and real Man: Others believe him to be Man, but
deny him to be God: But the Faith truly Christian professes both; viz. That
Christ was God and Man. We shall remit (for brevities sake) the Reader to what
has been said before, proving the mystery of the Trinity out of the
Scriptures, and that Christ the second Person in the Trinity is the Son of God
by natural Generation, supernatural to us. And to prove the second out of the
word, now there is scarce one such Heretic who denies it, may seem
superfluous. That which is to be demonstrated, is, That there was time of union
of that second Person in the Trinity with Man, and that this union was such
that it constituted not two Persons, but one; as St. Paul plainly writes to
Timothy: There is one God and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ
1 Timothy 2. 5.
Jesus. And therefore, whatever doctrine so speaks of this Mystery, as to
divide the Natures into two Persons, as if there were two Mediators, two
Saviors, two Christ's between God and Man, destroys the Faith of a Christian,
no less than that does which denies these two Natures to concur in one Person:
the Eternal and Divine Nature and Person assuming, in the fullness of time,
humane Nature inconfusedly into the Divine.

To the proving this, we take that as a sure ground and founadtion which St.
John has laid to build his Gospel on: That there was an Eternal Divine Nature,
in, and from the beginning, and that this Divine Nature was diversified by
three distinct Persons: that one of these Persons is called the Word: For he
says, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with John 1. 1.
God, and the Word was God. Ridiculous are the violences offered to these words
by Heretics, who first take here Beginning, not for that highest (and higher
than the Creatures comprehension can mount to) of all durations, which none is
before, and none come properly after, but for a term of time properly fixed; and
for want of more remarkable, do pitch upon the first publication of the Gospel
as that beginning; answerable (forsooth) unto that speech of Moses, In the
beginning God created the heaven and the Genesis 1. 1.
earth: but the agreement is too little to make such interpretation: because it
is plain that heaven and earth not only had a beginning, but gave beginning to
time it self, measured and observed by them. And it is plain, that the Gospel
did not begin so soon by almost thirty years as Christ began, according to his
humane nature. And if it be taken of the Person of Christ, What can be more
absurd than to say, In the beginning was the Word? that is, Christ began when
he began. Therefore the word here, can neither be taken for the Gospel, or Word
preached, but it must be meant of a word superior and anteriour to both: as
does yet more plainly appear from the phrase used, The Word was with God, and
the Word was God: For the heavens and earth which are said in Genesis to be
made in the beginning, cannot be said either to have been with God, or to have
been God: nor can the humane nature of Christ, not extant till some thousands
of years after the first Creation be said to have been in the beginning with
God: and much less to have been God: And the like may be said of the Word
spoken by Christ and his Apostles: which the Scriptures do not reckon to have
begun at Christ's birth, nor many years after. For thus says St. Peter in his
Sermon to Cornelius, That Word ye know which was published throughout all Acts
10. 37.
Judea, and began from Galilee, after the Baptism which John preached. The Word
therefore, according to this account, was not at the beginning, but after John's
Baptism. But this is not all, this is nothing in comparison of what is added,
The Word was God: The humane nature of Christ precisely taken was not God:
therefore another Word must be allowed to be God: And that must be the Word
Eternal and Personal. And if this be doubted of, I thus argue from the words
following. In that sense, that Christ is said to be Light, is he said to be the
Word, but Christ is said to be Light, and the Light is said to be Christ, and
St. John Baptist disavows that Light, John 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and ascribes it to Christ. And therefore, as the Person of Christ is signified
by the Light, so is it by Word.

And how can we possibly make sense of Christ's words in St. John, if Christ
prae-existed not, before he came into the World, in the flesh? And now glorify
thou me, O Father, with that glory which I had with thee, before John 18. 5.
the foundation of the World. It may be said, that before the foundation of the
World, such decree of glory might be given to one future; but thus it cannot be
said of him who is described to be actually possessed of it, before the
foundation of the World: and that a man is said to be possessed of, which he is
said to have had, as here. And how could Christ say truly, Before Abraham was,
I am? when he was not Fifty years old, according John 8. 57, 58.
to the Jews account? And that he puts a distinction between his coming from
the Father, and his seeing the Father otherwise than any before him, or of his
time, proves a prae-existence and presence singular with God. Not any man has
seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the John 6. 46, 62.
Father. And to this, add what follows: What and if ye shall see the Son of
Man ascend up where he was before? Does not this plainly imply, that as Christ
did really ascend after his Resurrection, and sat at the right hand of God in
his humane nature; so he was there before, some way or other; and no way can be
thought of but his Divine nature: as St. Paul intimated to the Ephesians, He
that descended is the same also that ascended up far above Ephesians. 4. 10.
all heavens --. Now if any will be so captious as to except against this,
because the Divine Nature cannot properly be said to descend, because it
fills all things; it is true in rigor of speech, what they say, but not
according to the form of speech frequent in Scripture: which then affirms God
to descend, when, as in the case of Sodom and Gomorrha, he appears Genesis 18.
21.
and reveals himself more sensibly, as Christ did, taking humane nature on
him.

And this prae-existent Nature of Christ to his humane being proved, that these
were so united together, must be also shown. And to this, the single express
testimony of St. John may suffice an equal mind. The Word John 1. 14.
was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us: And we beheld his glory, the glory as of
the only begotten of the Father. And when St. Paul says, that God sent Romans 8.
3.
his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
Flesh: he implies that there were two terms considered in Christ, as in all
other things sent. First, there is the Person by whom, or from whom the Party
is sent; and that here was God: Secondly, there was the Party, or term to
whom, and that was either to the World in general, or to that individual
substance of Flesh so assumed by him, and which is here intended. Now it cannot
be that the Act of sending should be the same with making: but first a Thing
is, before it is sent, and the rearm to which, must be distinct from that which
is sent. Therefore Christ, according to the Phrase of holy Scriptures, being
sent to take Flesh, must have, of necessity, a subsistence before; which
subsistence must be of a Divine Nature: as is also witnessed in the Epistle to
the Hebrews. For as much then as children Hebr. 2. 14.
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same. That
is, the person of Christ took part of the mass of humane Flesh and Nature, when
he was formed of the substance of his Mother in her womb. And in that it
follows, Verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham. v. 16.
What can be more necessarily employed than a Person prae-existing, to whom
(according to the nature of the thing) it was indifferent to have taken the
nature of Angels, or the Flesh of man: and that it pleased God to send his Son
to man; and it also pleased his Son to elect humane nature to dwell in: so that
the manner of Christ thus consisting of two Natures, is matter of difficulty,
rather than the thing it self; i. e. how two Natures can be, and how they were,
and are actually united in Christ.

Suidas observes ten sorts of unions to be found in the World, of which Suidas
in (...) 3. Qu. 2. 1.
we cannot stay here to speak. Thomas reduces all unto three. One union is of
things that are absolute and perfect in themselves, as many stones make one
heap. Another is, when things in nature perfect, are so united that they cease
thereby to be perfect of themselves; as when the Elements concur to make one
perfect mixed body. Thirdly, when diverse things being in nature imperfect not
absolutely, but in that they are naturally capable of greater perfection, and
tend thereunto: as the soul and body, and the several members of the body
constitute one man. But after none of these, exactly, can Christ be said to
consist of two natures united. Not the first way, because such things are
rather relatively and denominatively one, than really. Not the second; because
it were to suppose that the Divine Nature could be alterable and mutable: and
because, if such a composition were made, both the Divine and Humane nature
must loose their natural being and kind, and so neither of both remain, but a
third thing. Not the last, because both Divine and humane nature are perfect of
themselves in their kind. So that in truth, speaking strictly, no precedent in
Nature can be found answering this Union, called Hypostatical, or Pers^nal:
because it is the union of two entire Natures into one Person; and that, the
Second person of the Trinity, God blessed for evermore. But of the former, the
last represents this Mystery most clearly, and is often used by the ancient
Fathers to express the same; and especially by Athanasius in his Creed, who
thus declares this mystery sufficiently to the sober and modest, and not
curious mind. [ Christ is] God of the substance of the Father, begotten before
the worlds, and man of the substance of his mother born in the world. Perfect
God, and perfect man; of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh subsisting. Equal
to God, as touching his Godhead; and inferior to his Father as touching his
Manhood: Who although he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ.
One, not by conversion of the Godhead into Flesh, but by taking of the manhood
into God: One altogether, not by confusion of substance, but by unity of
person. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man; so God and Man is one
Christ. Now the ground of this great mystery, is taken partly from the
testimonies and descriptions of Christ the Mediator made in the Scripture:
where, besides those already given, diverse proper to God are ascribed to him;
and many which are proper to humane nature are attributed to him: and because
there can be nothing more absurd in nature or Christian Religion, than to
imagine that Christ is more than one Person, one Son, one Mediator; therefore
it follows necessarily that this one Person must consist of more than one
nature: and partly because the end of Christ being Incarnate, seemed to require
this most necessarily. As First, there was all reason that the nature which
sinned and offended should suffer, and satisfy; but none but humane nature had
so sinned. Secondly, that he should be a Prophet to instruct and teach his
Church. Thirdly, that he should be a King to rule and direct his Church,
according to the Prophesies of old concerning him. For Moses truly said unto
the Fathers, a Prophet shall Acts 3. 22.
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; which must
be of humane condition.

Now according to this union of the Divine and Humane nature in one Person, may
Christ in some sense be said to be a Mediator Essential, being a Mean Person,
not simply God, nor simply Man: but this is not the proper Mediation of Christ
between God and Man; but this rather consists in Acts performed, and Offices
of Christ. And these acts of Christ may be distinguished into two sorts,
Preparatory and Consummatory. The former I call preparatory, because they were
ordained as useful expediencies, not as essential to Reconciliation between the
parties at distance. And the first act of this nature was after the manner of
Civil Arbitrements, to take the Case into serious consideration, and to
deliberate with himself about the most proper means of attaining an amicable
composure of differences on foot. And (as the Scripture Heb. 2. 14.
says) forasmuch then as the children (of God to be redeemed) are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through
death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the Devil. It
appearing unto him that there was no such proper or convenient means to
Arbitrate between God and Man, as the taking upon him humane nature. For by
this means, as Moses is said to be the Intercessour ( medius et sequester)
between God and the People of Israel (and therefore the Law is said to have
been given in the hand of a Mediator, Deuteronomy. 5. 5. Gal. 3. Hebr. 9. 15. 12. 24
who was Moses) in like manner, Christ is called the Mediator of a New
Covenant, in the Epistle to the Hebrews: because the terms of that Covenant
were obtained of God by Christ; and that Covenant was delivered unto him to
manage and transact. Another Act of Christ's mediation was by Prayers and
Supplications, as it is in the Epistle to the Hebrews: Who in the days of his
Flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with Hebr. 5. 7.
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, was
heard in that he feared. And in this respect he is called our Advocate by St.
John, saying, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 1 John
2. 1.
Christ the Righteous. A third Act of Christ in his mediation related to Man,
by offering to him the terms and means of Reconciliation in knowledge and
sanctification, and moving him to accept of so favorable, free, and gracious
terms of Reconciliation, as the doctrine of the Gospel presented to him; thus
fully expressed by St. Paul. All things are of God, who has 2 Cor. 5. 18.
reconciled us unto himself in Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the
ministry of reconciliation: To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God.

But the second way of Mediation and Reconciliation is that which is most
proper to Christ, the former being communicable to man in some sense; namely,
as the received power and authority from Christ, as is even now showed, to
minister in Christ's stead, as inferior Instruments under him: And this is by
making himself a Sacrifice and Satisfaction for sin: according to that of St.
Paul to Timothy, There is one God, and one Mediator between 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time. And to the Ephesians he says; And walk Ephesians. 5. 2.
in love as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an Offering
and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. And when he says, For he
has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin: it is manifest that sin, in the
2 Cor. 5. 21.
first place, is used according to the Hebrew word, for a Sacrifice for sin.
Now nothing can be more frivolous in the ears of rational men, or more
sacrilegious in Gods ears, than to draw this to such a kind of figurative
speech as Socinus and his Fellows do, as should imply an occasionalness and
exemplariness only in Christ's death to take away sin, and not to satisfy Gods
Justice for them: And so to satisfy, as a Doctor showing us the way, and as a
President leading us the way toward peace with God. This, I say can, in no
propriety of speech, be the meaning of holy Writ, assuring us first, That
Christ was a Propitiation for us, as Romans 3. Whom God has Romans 3. 25. 1 John
2. 2. Ephesians. 2. 16.
set forth as a Propitiation, through Faith in his blood. And St. John, He is
the Propitiation for our sins. And St. Paul to the Ephesians tells us, how he
became such a propitiation for us. That he might reconcile both unto God, in
one Body, by the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby: Is Reconciliation of
God and Man, and that by delivering up his body to death upon the Cross, no
more than to give us good instructions how to serve God, so as to reconcile our
selves to him? Is slaying the enmity, or extinguishing the enemy to us, the
Devil; or the Enmity which was between God and us, no more than by good example
to direct us how so to do? Saint Paul likewise to the Romans plainly affirms
that he reconciled us to God Romans 5. 10.
by his death. Secondly, Who by purging us, or any man else, could understand,
before these days, no more than good words and counsels? But St. Paul says he
By himself purged our sins. And that we may see that St. Hebr. 1. 3.
Paul was far from any such intention and forced sense as is modernly imposed
on him, he writes thus also, It was therefore necessary that the paterns of
Heb. 9. 22, 23.
things in the heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things
themselves with better Sacrifices than these. For Christ, etc. The meaning of
which words must necessarily be this, that, whereas the errors and sins under
the Law which were paterns or types of the Gospel were expiated by blood and
sacrifices: But the heavenly things were purged by better things, i. e. The
Sacrifice of Christ. Therefore if it cannot be said that such things were
purified only by good precepts and documents given, but real blood was shed for
that purpose: Real, though much better and more precious blood was shed for the
expiation and purification the sins of the Gospel: which blood was Christ's. And
thirdly, how most abusively must the terms Redeeming and Redemption and
Redeemer be used by the Scripture, beyond all other writings or speeches, if it
signifies not a real recovery or purchase of somewhat lost, or necessary to
one? Now such expressions applied to Christ's mediation, are so plain and
frequent, that it may seem superfluous to recite them. St. Matthew says, The
Son of Man came to give his life a Matthew. 20. 28. Titus 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
ransom for many. St. Paul says, He gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity. St. Peter by his comparison used, shows what manner of
purchase it was, saying; Ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition
from your Fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish, without spot. But redemption with silver and gold is proper, and
expiation by the blood of Lambs was proper and real: therefore also must the
redemption by the blood of Christ be so too. And in the Epistle Heb. 9. 12. 13,
14
to the Hebrews is the like comparison used most aptly, and at large. Fourthly,
the terms Offering and Sacrifice so often ascribe unto Christ, must needs
import more then verbal, or exemplary mediation: diverse of which places we have
noted before: to which we may add what in the Hebrews is directly Hebr. 7. 27.
spoken of Christ. Who needed not daily, as their High Priests, to offer up
Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for this he did
once when he offered up himself. And St. Paul to the Corinthians, Christ our
Passover 1 Cor. 5. 7. John 1. 29.
is offered for us. And St. John? The Lamb of God that takes away the sin of
the World. And elsewhere to this effect.

CHAP. XVII.
How Christ was Mediator according to both Natures: Calvin's Opinion and
others stated. Of the effect of Christ's Mediation, and the extent thereof. Of
the Designation and Application of Christ's death. Of the Sufficiency and
Efficacy of Christ's death. How Christ's death becomes effectual to all: The
Necessity of Gods Grace to incline the will of man to embrace Christ: Of the
Efficacy as well as Sufficiency of Gods Grace on the Will of Man. Several
Gradations observed in the Grace of God.

BUT from the Evidence of the evidence of the Fact, that so it was, that Christ
suffered to satisfy for our sins, let us pass to the Manner, how it was; and
the Effects and Extent for whom he so suffered and satisfied; because no small
stir and contention has been touching both; but briefly. For there seems not
to me to be such great cause, as is apprehended for such differences.

For first, surely Christ's mediation was an Act of his Person, and not of his
Natures, either of them separately considered: So that there seems the same
reason for this, as for all other Acts and Attributes given to him: some
whereof are naturally proper to the Divine Nature, and some to the Humane: and
yet both these, predicable of Christ personally considered, by that received
rule amongst Divines, which maintains a communication of Idioms; or the
ascribing the property of one nature to the entire Person, and so
denominatively to the other. In which sense Christ is said to dye, to suffer,
to hunger, to thirst, to be weary: and Christ is said to be Omniscient,
Omnipotent, Omnipresent: yet not according to both Natures, but as they are
united into one Person. So that all Acts and Offices of Christ as Mediator,
have a twofold consideration, Formal and Real, or Vertual and Interpretative,
as they speak. Some Acts are so formally Divine in him, that they pertain to
the Humane Nature only Vertually; and some Acts are so formally and properly
Humane that they pertain to the Divine Nature, only by way of imputation or
interpretation; and not immediately or properly. So that the Word Incarnate,
Christ, is the immediate cause of his Mediation, and our Reconciliation, but
all the Acts in particular tending tending to Christ's mediation, as his
preaching, and traveling, and Passion, did not proceed equally, or alike from
both Natures. For two things are to be distinguished in the Actions or Passion
of Christ mediating for mankind. The Act it self, and the value and virtue of
that Action, in order to the reconciling of man to God. That the Acts conducing
hereunto are only proper to the Humane Nature, is true according to Stancarus
his opinion, See Melancthon. Epist. ad Mathesium.
though called Heretic, for the same; and opposed by Calvine and many of his
Equals, who held that Christ was Mediator according to his Divine and Humane
Nature: And that Calvine and his Company must needs err, is proved because
they reject Lombard and those that follow him, who are the Romanists. Lombards
Opinion was, That Christ was Mediator as the Word Incarnate, but not according
to both Natures. For they distinguish Principium Quod, and Principium Quo, That
Principle or Cause of mediation from that Whereby he mediated. The first they
confess to be the Person of Christ, consisting of Divine and Humane Nature. The
second they make the Humane Nature alone. And that Calvine and the rest meant
any more, it is past the power of their Adversaries to make good; however,
according to their wont, they strain all they can, and more than honestly they
can, to make their Opinions foul and odious: For in substance, they speak the
same thing with Lombard, though not altogether after the same manner: but the
Deformer suspected him as justly for restraining Christ's mediation and the
value thereof to his Humanity, as the Romanists do them, for comprehending the
Divinity in it. And rightly do they distinguish between the Thing, and the
Efficacy of the thing: and that according to Lombard himself, whom they
dislike, because he restrained (to their apprehension) the whole business of
mediation to the Humane Nature: whereas though the Divine Nature did not
formally act, or suffer to that end, yet it was by virtue of the Hypostatical
Union with the Divine Nature, that the Humane Nature was in a capacity to
mediate and merit for man: as St. Austin has taught us in these words. It was
requisite that the Mediator between Mediator autem inter Deum and homines
oportebat ut haberet, and Aug. Confess. 10. c. 42. Nec tamen ob hoc Mediator
est, quia Verbum maxim quippe immortate. Id. Civitat. Dei lib. 9. cap. 15. 1 Timothy 2.
God and Man should have somewhat like unto God, and somewhat like unto Men:
lest being like God in all things, he should be too far from men; or being like
unto Man in all things, he should be too far from God. And yet indeed in
another place he does determine the mediation more properly to the Humanity of
Christ, than to the Word, thus speaking: Yet he is not for this a Mediator,
because he is the Word, and that especially, because he is immortal: and the
most blessed Word is far from miserable Mortals: But he is Mediator, in that
he is Man; showing thereby, that we ought not to seek any other Mediators to
that, not only blessed, but beatifical Good, by whom we should have access,
etc. And to this agrees that of St. Paul to Timothy, There is one God and one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. And this is the chiefest
place founding this Opinion, yet not simply, seeing it is an easy matter by a
distinction to avoid the same, if one would be contentious: but if Charity, nay
if Justice were done to each side, the ground of contention might fairly be
removed, in this.

But with much more difficulty do we meet in the effect and extent of the
mediation of Christ by his Death and Passion, viz. Whether it concerns all
Mankind in general, or Whether all those who are called to the knowledge,
faith, and profession of Christ and Christian Religion: or lastly, Whether it
was properly and specially so designed and intended for such as were to be
infallibly saved, that others were capable of no benefit of the same; but
rather were determined to hardness and impenitencie, and persistance in
unbelief.

Concerning the last and harshest part of this doubt, we have heretofore
answered, that though the Holy Scriptures (which cannot be denied) do ascribe
Exodus 4 21. and 14. 17. Romans 9. 18. Isa. 6. 10. Deuteronomy. 2. 30. Isa. 63. 17.
unto God in positive terms, hardening of some, yet the meaning can be no more
than that from certain persons, he so withdraws his mollifying and maturing
Grace to Repentance and Faith, that an effect of Obduration does thereupon, in
such manner follow, as if God himself were the proper and direct Author of it.
For all egregious things are, according to the phrase of Scripture, often
ascribed unto God. As where we read a Sleep from the Lord was fallen upon the
servants of Saul: that is, a prosound, or as it 1 Samuel 26. 12.
is there said, a deep sleep: though I deny not, but this might be literally
verified. And we read according to the original, of Oaks of God, and Hills of
God, which import no more than exceeding high and stately ones. And I make no
doubt but when it is said, The sons of God saw the daughters of Genes. 6. 2.
men, that they were fair, etc. Angels are not thereby intended; and doubt,
whether, as is commonly conjectured, The children of God, or holy Seed, be
there aimed at. For no reason can be given why Giants should be rather born of
them than wicked men; but rather that they were a race of Men of extraordinary
stature, called therefore the Sons of God, because of their excessive
greatness, as all other mighty things are said to be of God: in which sense
egregious hardness is imputed unto God.

But to the main difficulty we must answer from the various manifestations of
Gods love to Mankind. And where can we better begin to judge hereof, than from
the first and second state of Man, his Institution and Restoration? It is here
taken for granted, That whole Mankind fell at once in Adam, from its pristine
perfection. And it is no less apparent, that God purposing to restore Man
again, and recover him, treated as it were, and concluded with the same person
Adam, and in the same capacity that he fell in. He fell, as is said, equally to
all men future, without any discrimination of worse, or better: higher or
lower: and God treated and covenanted with him, without any clause of
distinction, or exception of any one single person: For in truth, though all
actions relate immediately to persons, yet the substance of the Treaty
concerned principally the nature in general of Man; the promises of God being
made with the Seed of the Woman, and Man, without any restriction or
limitation: as St. Paul teaches, thus saying; God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself: by which 2 Cor. 5. 19.
is signified a general and indistinct gift of God toward the lapsed mass of
Mankind: which gift likewise is expressed in the same latitude by St. John. For
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever Joh.
3. 16.
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. But if there
were in the first intention of God, any disparity in exhibiting his son to the
world, of that nature, that thereby certain persons should be excluded
remedilesly from the number, for whom Christ dyed, then could it no more be
said that Christ became incarnate for them, then for the Devils, whose nature
Christ took not. But surely there was a distinction made between reprobate Men,
and reprobate Spirits. But this is not answered by the distinction in general,
of Sufficiency and Efficiencie, or efficacy of Christ's death, used by
Perkins, saying; That Christ's death was sufficient for all, but became not
effectual to all. This is notoriously true, and undeniable; and that, as he
says, it was sufficient for the redemption of many worlds if case required.
For so it might be said, It was sufficient for the redemption of Devils too,
for ought we know. And what of this? But Perkins seems to make a little bolder
and farther step, where he grants a kind of efficacy too: but somewhat of the
harshest sense: For distinguishing between Potential and Actual Efficacy, he
adds, Christ dyed potentially effectually for all men, but not actually
effectually. But this potential efficacy rightly understood, amounts to no
more than a simple Sufficiency; in regard that this Virtue, according to him,
was never intended by God to be actuated in the behalf of the unpredestinated
to life and glory.

A second prejudice against that interpretation is, That the Scripture speaking
of the death of Christ and his Passion, does not speak of it as of a sufficient
rate and price in general, but a payment also actually made for all: for such
is the importance of the words (...), (...), (...): Which signify an actual
payment, in relation to an obligation of Debt or Bondage; which places of
Scripture we have before given. Thirdly, the Decree of exhibiting Christ
actually and effectually in special manner to some elect persons, who receive
him by Faith, being thereunto moved and enabled by Gods inspirations, is
altogether posteriour to the exhibition of Christ to Mankind in general; and
therefore can be no real cause of Gods distinct intention then: or that God
should at his first propounding, put a difference in the manner of exhibiting
Christ's Persons. For all this while we must allow two distinct Periods of Gods
favorable Providence toward Man, in restoring him: the one, in his general
Ordination of his Son to redeem him: the other, in the special collation and
application of that benefit to man. God gave his Son; and in him, his Obedience
both in life and death to All men: But the effect and benefit of these
redounded actually only to some select persons: This latter is undeniable by
all sides. For who did ever say that all men were actually saved by Christ? I
know the former, i. e. That Christ was (...), a Payment made for all, is
rejected by Perkins and his Assertour and Apologist Twisse. And true it is,
that in very terms abovementioned, it is scarce to be found that Christ gave
himself without a note of Restitution and Limitation, such as Many, or To them
that receive him, and believe in him. But then as the Scripture says not in
express terms, that Christ was a Ransom or Payment made for all; so neither
does it say, Only for the Elect, exclusively. And when it says, Christ was the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. And that God John 1. 29.
John 3. 16. 1 John 4. 14.
so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son. And elsewhere, That the
Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World. We shall not need to show
how the Scripture does frequently use the word World in opposition to true
Believers: as where St. John has these words, The World knew him John 1. John
17. 9.
not. And again, I pray for them, I pray not for the World, etc. and so in
other places; which do imply a Right the very Wicked and Reprobates have in
Christ.

And whereas a principal argument is drawn from the words in St. John, last
cited, to prove an inequality of interest in Christ's death and mediation, thus:
Christ only dyed for them he prayed for, but Christ prayed not for the World,
i. e. the Wicked; Therefore he dyed not for them. If this were true, that
Christ never prayed for the wicked; or for those that were not then given
actually to him, as were his Disciples, for whom he there particularly prays,
the argument would be of the greater force; but it is not so, any more then it
is true in all respects, what Christ says of himself in St. Matthew, I am not
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. So Matthew. 15. 24.
that as Christ before his resurrection showed himself very nice, how he dealt
the Word of Life to the Gentiles, so might he, at the same time, declare a more
special desire of the salvation of his elected Servants, than of others. For we
know (which is another answer) how the Scripture frequently, by a note of
Denial, does not intend an absolute exclusion of a thing, but comparative only:
as where God says, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Christ prayed not for
the world, so intensly and particularly, or at that time: Therefore he prayed
not at all, is no good consequence. And no more is that which is made from an
adequateness of the Death of Christ to the actual application of the merits of
the same death, by such intercession as Prayer. So that though Christ did not
actually pray for all, yet he might dye for all: according to the distinction
of a twofold Quantum in Medico est, s^nare merit aegrotum. Ipse se interimit
qui p^aecepta Medici ^^servare non vult. Aug. in Joan. cap. 3. 17.
Exhibition of Christ abovesaid. For Christ was exhibited as an efficacious
Means of Salvation: and as an efficacious Cure. A precious Antidote or Salve
is, in its own nature, and the intention of the Compounder, equally operative
and effectual to all Persons in like manner affected. All men naturally were
involved in the same evil, alike affected and infected: And Christ's Death and
Passion alike sovereign to all persons, and ordained for all: And the
difference in the first Case and the second, is only in the actual Application
thereof: For as many as receive that, are certainly cured. And the Scripture
tells us, As many as receive him (Christ) to them gave John 1. 12.
he power to become the Sons of God: to them that believe in his name.
Therefore the main enquiry is much more about the difference and variety
outward, then in the means it self: And how, and whence it comes to pass, that
the Death and Passion of Christ are so applied to one above another, that to
one they become actually efficacious, and to another in aptitude and general
institution only.

If in answer to this doubt we shall say, That by Faith and Repentance we are
made partakers of Christ, we shall answer most truly, but not sufficiently;
because the same difficulty returns upon us, How some believe, and embrace
Christ, and are made partakers of his benefits, and not others; seeing so great
salvation is tendered to all?

Here it is absolutely necessary to take in the Grace of God, and his free love
toward Mankind, in some sense at least, by all that will be accounted
Christians; and not by wisdom make void the Cross of Christ. For supposing
that God has made a free and general Covenant with Mankind, which Covenant
neither is, nor can (as it is a Covenant) be simple and inconditionate, so far,
as nothing should be required thereby of Man, to the being capable of the
benefit of it; it will of necessity follow, that the knowledge of this Covenant
of Grace, must be had by such as receive any benefit thereby: For else, how is
it possible that they should fulfill, in any manner, the Condition required;
were it no more than some will make it, to receive it by Faith, without any
more ado, then to believe themselves into Gods Grace and Favor by a tacit
internal act.

And this, and no more being supposed, that such love and gracious purpose (for
which no natural Cause can be found out to certify or satisfy any man in the
truth thereof) were ordained for any specially, it must be known by Revelation
and not Ratiocination: And all extraordinary Revelations, besides and above
what Nature can discover, are purely Acts of Grace, and not of Work, And
therefore, why God does reveal his Gospel to one people or person, and not to
another, can have no other original Cause then the [ Beneplacitum] Good
pleasure of God; as is plainly Matthew. 11. 27.
affirmed by Christ himself. Neither knows any man the Father but the Son*
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him: And before; I thank v. 25.
thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid those things
from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes. And in St. Peter's
Matthew. 16. 11* 1 Cor. 2 14.
case; Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee. And St. Paul says,
The Natural man cannot know the things of God, because they are spiritually
discerned. From whence it is manifest that though God has decreed the
Salvation of a man by Christ, yet this general intention cannot possibly take
effect without a super-added Act of Free Grace, whereby this Reparation is made
known. Again, it follows, That there is no obligation upon God antecedent to
his own will and inclination, moving him to reveal the same; and that only, out
of Congruity, not of Justice or Necessity; as supposing a decree given to Man,
which would be wholly unprofitable and vain, without such revelation. But why
one Man or Nation should be blessed with this gift rather than another, there
is not so much as congruity to be fairly alleged, or reasonably offered.

And as this is the first act of God on the understanding of Man, toward his
restitution; so is the second act of Man flowing mixtly from his Will and
Understanding both, altogether owing to Gods Grace; and that is believing what
before he knew. For that this is necessary, no doubt can be made, or that this
is the true cause of being profited, or not, by Christ; St. Paul thus writing:
For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them: Hebr. 4. 2.
but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them
that heard it. This diversity is very great, but what is the cause of it, is
not agreed upon. For if any shall say, It comes from the difference found in
Christ as Mediator, he is known to be mistaken by what is said. If any one
shall say, It proceeds from the will and free Election of Man, he falls into a
worse absurdity, for the will of man, as free, acts or works nothing at all,
but as determined either by its self, or by some other: And if by it self,
either simply and absolutely, or jointly with another cause. And this cause
must be either taken from somewhat outward, as the object duly propounded, or
inward, by way of efficiencie. But it cannot be any outward object presenting
it self, only as a final cause, which has only a moral and not natural
influence: For if it be demanded to what end such an inward act of the will is
exercised, it may very properly and truly be said, because of the good
discerned, and affected in the object: But if it should be asked, How the Will
is moved, and by virtue of what ability it so moves to that object? there could
be no greater incongruity than to affirm, That the object was the cause of it:
For here the efficient cause is sought after. As when a man goes to Church, if
doubt should be made why he goes to Church, it were easily answered, because he
apprehends a spiritual good in that act; this is the final cause: but does this
give his legs strength, and his nerves and sinews power to walk? Sure no man
will say so. This then is that we enquire concerning the wills inclination to
and election of spiritual things, not why? or to what end (for the end is the
same to all men's wills) but, by what means it is fitted and enabled to move
thitherward, rather than the contrary ways. The answer to this must (if a man
will speak appositely) be taken from the efficient cause.

Now this sufficiency or efficacy in the will, is either natural and common
to all, which all modest Divines explode, or adventitious, and of free,
undeserved, and undesired Grace and Gift of God. Hence another ascent is made
toward the Question, of the manner of acceptance of grace and mercy,
objectively taken. For as it is plain, that God puts a difference, and not
Man, between the understanding of one man and another, revealing that to one,
which he does not to another: And of those that know the truth, putting a
difference between the wills of men, in that some, that have known the saving
truth, have rejected it; and others embraced it: as is yet farther manifest
from St. Paul to the Romans. What Romans 11. 7.
then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for: but the Election
has obtained. To some then, who know the truth, God gives Grace, to some he
does not, or scarce discernable.

A third step to this then, must be about the degree and essicacie of this
first Grace of God preventing and preparing the will to such noble ends; which
it could never of it self affect or desire: And whether God does give the like
Grace, at least in proportion, to all he has so far called, illuminated and
affected as to have spiritual principles of Life and Motion, or not? It were
too curious to enquire here about the Arithmetical proportion or quantity;
because that all men's constitutions and dispositions are not alike: and
therefore, like more even timber or plyant clay, may be wrought into due form
by less forcible means: but Whether, considering all disparities and
disproportion in the matter, the influence fashioning the same, be of it self
sufficient to any one called and outwardly elected to the truth: Or whether
there be any sufficient Grace which is not efficacious and consummative of the
end? which is the thing denied by Jansenius against a stream of Adversaries.
But Thomas, who next to Augustine ruled these Disputes most of all, and that
upon Austin's doctrine and grounds, says no less; and so do such as stick
close to him; notwithstanding the strong opposition made by a Modern Order, who
think to change the world, and make it take all doctrines from them to the
contempt of their Predecessors, and the recalling the exiled Tenets of
Pelagians, and such as serve, though at a distance, under him. They profess
against him, and hold for him: They deny his Conclusions, but approve and
justify his Principles and Premises, from which they certainly follow.
Neither can they give St. Augustine a good word, whom none openly, before them,
ever presumed to confront in that manner. Or, if they do speak kindly of him,
yet they take their own course, and speak their own upstart sense. For do they
not place God as an idle Spectatour, yea a servile Attender of the wills
self-determination first, and then bring him in as Auxiliarie to its Actions?
This is rancide Divinity, yea and Philosophy too. Do they not fall directly
into that Opinion of Origin confuted by Thomas, against the Gentiles, thus.
Certain men not understanding Thomas cent. Gent. l. 3. c. 89.
how God causes the motion of the will in us, without prejudice to the liberty
of the will in us; have endeavored to expound these Autorities [abovementioned
in his former Chapters] amiss; as to say God causes in us To will and to do,
in that he gives us power to will, but not so, as to cause us to do this, or
that, as Origin expounds it in his Third Periarchon, defending Free will
against the foresaid Autorities. And from hence the Opinion of some seems to
have proceeded, who said, Providence was not concerned in those things which
related to Free will, that is, Elections; but external matters only -- who are
confuted by that one place of Esaias, Thou Isaiah 26. 12.
also has wrought all our works in us. Whether these words of the Prophet may
not be eluded, I will not dispute, but they plainly declare that, according to
Thomas his mind, All our inward motions as well as outward acts and effects,
are governed by God. For the immediate concurse of God being generally granted
by Philosophical Divines, necessary to the Act of limited and necessary causes,
whose principle is more certain and operative then Free Agents are; What honest
or sober doubt can be made of the immediate hand of God in moving the will
free, and void of such natural Laws and Propentions, as irrational Agents are
compelled by? There seems much less use of it here, than there. It may be, they
fear Gods hand should light so heavy upon the will of Man, as to hurt the
Freedom of it. Which were to be feared indeed, if God so concurred with Free
Agents, as with Natural; and proportioned not his Influences agreeable to the
subject; but surely God works not so rudely: Or if the Act of God, being as
natural to the Creature, as its own, yea unseparable from that of the Creature,
were not a Total cause together with the Creatures, of such Elections. But, as
Thomas says, It is apparent that not in the like (...) l. 3. c. 70.
manner an effect is ascribed to the Natural Cause, and to the Divine Power, as
if it proceeded partly from God, and partly from the Natural Agent: but it is
wholly from both, in a diverse respect: as the whole effect is attributed as
well to the Principal Agent, as the Instrument. Thus he. From whence we
conclude, the Grace of God is not given in a common manner, or competently, to
leave the will still separately, without particular excitations and
prae-motions, effectually and immutably (as Thomas speaks) inclining it to
embrace Christ exhibited in the Means of Grace: And that no man originally
causes himself to differ from another in electing good: But supposing the like
proportion of Grace given to two persons equally, otherwise qualified, the
reason why one refuses the Good and chooses the Evil, is not to be taken from
the mere use of the Freedom of Will, by one better than another, of himself;
and improving that stock of Grace given of God, by his own strength better than
his Fellow, but because the Grace of God, besides the common stock, moves one
more particularly than it does the other.

How the will of Man is salved, we have before shown in part; in that we put an
immense difference of influences between outward and intrinsic motions; and
between the impressions made upon it by a created and increated Agent: Neither
have we passed over that other common and obvious objection against such
absolute necessity of Gods concurse, taken from the Commands, Exhortations, and
Communications which should (they say) Exi^it and p^si^lat a nobis (...) ut
hab^at occasion^m d^^andi* ut ipsi t^^buat quad ^ro^^vi^. Origin. Hom. 35. in
Lucam.
be all to no purpose and illusorie, if there remained no power in man to do as
he is commanded, or not to do what he is forbidden: For surely, Gods commands
and dehortations are binding most of them, where he gives no such general aids
of Grace, as he does to many persons who are unfruitful under it. Therefore it
becomes them who object this no less then us, to answer the difficulty. Again,
there is nothing more plain in Scripture than that God requires that of the
Creature which it is impossible for it to do without his immediate power. When
God said at the beginning, Let there Genesis 1.
be Light; when it wholly lay upon him to produce Light: When Christ said to
the Creeple in the Gospel, Take up thy bed and walk. When he said Mark 2. 9.
Matthew. 12. 13. John 11.
to the man with the withered hand, Stretch out thy hand: Yea when he said unto
Lazarus dead and buried, Lazarus arise, did he suppose an ability antecedent
and prae-existing to his Commands or Exhortations? No man surely ever phansied
so much. How then comes it to pass, that those were not absurd and irrational,
but these, whereby man is brought to spiritual life, must be condemned for
such? But to this purpose we have spoken before.

But to excuse God from double dealing with Man, in that he exacts that of
reprobated persons who cannot act obediently to it as they are required, for
want of his necessary assistance, there is brought into great use, and not
lately neither, the distinction of [ Voluntas Beneplaciti and Signi] a will of
Good-pleasure, and a will of Sign; or a will Signified, and a will Concealed: a
secret will, and revealed: which indeed are very untowardly and improperly
devised. For if they would speak intelligibly, they should rather have called
that revealed Will Signum Voluntatis, than Voluntas Signi: because it can be no
other then an intimation of Gods Will. And if sincerely they would speak, they
should not have made the manifestation of Gods Will by signs or otherwise, a
distinct will from his secret Will, of which it is an Indication. Dr. Twisse
therefore perhaps supecting this inconveniencie distinguishes to the same
effect, but more artificially, between Voluntas Praecepti, and Voluntas
Propositi, a Will of Precept, and a Will of Purpose in God answering the
contradictions contained in the Objection above made by the help of it: For,
says he to Arminius against Perkins, the opposition were plain and real if God
had decreed and purposed with himself one thing, and decreed another thing to
Man; but this we find not. But it is no contradiction for God to decree one
thing, as that Peter should deny his Master, and to give out a command to the
contrary, that he should not deny him. By this means indeed he answers the
Logical contradiction of terms and proposition, very sufficiently, and no more:
but he does not take off the moral opposition and inconsistencie of the things
themselves. For may not a man be said to cross and contrary himself, who shall
resolve to revenge himself on his Adversary, and in the mean time gives him
good words, and perhaps advise to beware of him? As when a man says to him he
owes and intends a mischief, Take heed, look to your self, I shall meet with
you, I will be even with you. These words spoken seriously would be very
ridiculous, viz. That a man at the same time, should kindly admonish contrary
to his resolution and purpose: and taken otherwise, agreeable to the false
nature of Man who may dissemble, but not to the Majesty and Simplicity of God:
who needs no such arts to fetch in his enemies. Certainly therefore God does
seriously intend not to punish when he threatens, as Chrysostom has observed,
and intend seriously to save when he warns. But whom? All those that are in the
noise of such Precepts or Communications? If indeed Gods Word were preached,
and his Will revealed as directly to impenitent and incorrigible men to whom he
has no such real purpose as to save them, then might he be subject to like
accusations, as men are, who particularly apply themselves to their enemies:
but so God deals not with the wicked, whom he rejects, or denies
efficacious Grace to. For (as has been said) the Promises of God, and
Precepts, and Exhortations were not in the secret or express Will of God
ordained for the reprobate primarily, but indirectly only, and as mixed and
indiscernible to the Messengers of God, from the Righteous. And however the
success in ministering to the wicked answers not the intention of the
Instrument, Man; yet such zealous endeavors by Man, never go unrewarded by
God: and so it is not in vain in the Lord. For as St. Paul speaks appositely,
What if some Romans 3. 3.
did not believe, shall their unbelief make the Faith of God of none effect?
The means of Faith are not in vain, though the Non-elect profit not: Seeing as
St. Paul says again, The Election has obtained, and the rest were blinded.
Romans 11. 7.


To recollect therefore what has passed on this subject: the several
Gradations of Gods favor to lost Man may be said to be these. First, by an
absolute irrespective Act of Grace, he determined to re-enter into Covenant
with Man for his Restoration. Secondly, he ordained this Covenant to be in the
hands of his Son, as Mediator. Thirdly, that his Son by taking humane Nature,
should accomplish in Man's behalf, whatever was required by Gods Justice of him.
Fourthly, that the effect and benefits of Christ's Death and Passion should not
inconditionately and immediately be made over unto all, but by the means and
conveyance of Faith working by Love and Obedience. Fifthly, that this Obedience
of Faith should not necessarily follow upon the propounding of Christ crucified
to the Ear, but by the inspiration of Grace into the soul, opening the door of
the heart as it did Lyddia's, to let in Christ as well with his sanctifying as
satisfying Graces. For as Jansenius has well observed our of Austin, there is
a Jansen. Au^^ To. 3. lib. 2. ^ ^
twofold Grace of God in Christ Jesus, necessary to a Christian, Sanative
Grace, and Operative; or Healing and Helping Grace. The soul of Man being
maimed and disabled by his Fall, must have a Grace to cure and restore the
broken state thereof, before outward means can avail to the enabling it to be
obedient, and to perform acts of a new and spiritual Life: adding, That it
would be all one for to offer Grace to the soul of man so diseased, as it would
be to offer a pair of Spectacles to a blind man, or a staff to him whose legs
be broken. And I wonder much to find him charged by a very learned Author of
late, that he has not given us the true efficient cause of the wills of
obedience, wherein (as he well observes) consists the principal difficulty of
all, but only the Formal, and wherein the efficacy of Grace consists. For he
that shall consult his Fourth Book De Gratia Christi, cap. 1. and so on, will
easily perceive, he Id. Tom. 3. lib. 3. c. 1.
makes it to be, The Grace of God sweetly and unutterably delighting, by which
the Will is prevented, and bowed to will and do whatever God has ordained it
should do and will. Surely this is much more than a formal Cause, whereby a
thing actually is whatever it is. And in this manner is the true Believer made
partaker of the benefits of Christ's Death and Passion, to his Sanctification
and Justification.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the effect and benefit of Christ's Mediation in suffering and rising again,
seen in the Resurrection of Man. The necessity of believing a Resurrection. The
Reasons and Scriptural Testimonies proving a Resurrection. Objections against
the same answered.

OF the Justification and Sanctification of a man by Christ, we have heretofore
spoken: it remains now, for the Conclusion of this First Part, that we here
speak of the most perfect, and noble effect of Christ's mediation seen in the
salvation of Man, or his state of perfect Restitution in bliss; to which, Grace
here in this life is but a Prelude and an Introduction. And to this end, the
immediate way hereunto, the Resurrection, is to be explained, as a principle
Article of Christian Faith. For this also is an effect of Christ our Mediator,
as St. Austin witnesses in these words; The Resurrection Aug. Tract. 23. in
Joann. John 6 54.
of souls is effected by the eternal and immutable substance of Father and Son,
but the Resurrection of the Body is by the temporal, and not co-aeternal
Dispensation of the humanity of the Son. And St. Ambrose speaks well to this
Ambros de Fide Resurrect. Illi quidam qui dicunt animas, etc.
purpose: They who think that souls are immortal, do not sufficiently pacify
me; while they redeem me but in part: For what great favor can it be to me,
when I am not wholly delivered? What life can that be, if the work of God in me
must perish? Where is Gods justice, if the same natural end be to the just and
wicked in common?

They that would therefore make sure work against infidelity, bring their
grounds for this point, from the Gentiles themselves; whom they would convert
to this opinion. But both the artificial and inartificial arguments, reason and
testimony of the most famous Philosophers, not taken from, and grounded upon
Divine Revelations, will certainly be found insufficient. For surely it may be
said of the profession of this Article of Faith, what Christ says of Peter's
confession of him, Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee. For what the
Heathen invented of their own heads, concerning the Immortality of the Soul (if
that they invented, and not rather received from others, better informed) they
soon corrup^ed into an opinion of Transmigration, and shifting of Possessions,
as men do Farms, when their Lease is expired; or as Liquor is transfused from
vessel to vessel: For so much one of their principal words imports, used to
signify (...).
their meaning. And of the Bodies Resurrection, little or nothing do we read
amongst them. But this is the chief point in our Christian Faith: and this is
that which the ancient Fathers contend for; proving there is no proper
resurrection but this; as particularly the Constitutions of the Apostles.
(...), etc. Cons. Apost. Lib. 5. c. 6. Epiphan. Lib. 2. Haeres. 64. (...), etc.
Theodoret. Haeretic. Fabular. lib. 5. cap. 19. (...). Athanas. de Incarnatione.
2 Macch. 7. 9. Heb. 11. 35. 2 Kings 4. Wisd. 3.
Resurrection say they is of things that were fallen. Which solid argument is
also used by Epiphanius; showing that because the Body only properly falls to
earth, therefore it is the body chiefly we are to believe shall be raised
again: And therefore the Athanasian and Nicene Creeds as supplements to the
Apostolical, express the body in particular, and the flesh to be restored.

And however fair and laudable attempts are made by the Ancients to persuade
rather then prove a Resurrection, from the several pretty Analogies found in
nature of things perishing, and after a while returning again to their pristine
beauty and perfection; yet not to except against them particularly, How can we
suppose they, who knew little of the true God, should understand so much as
Gods people, who had not this revealed in direct terms, but in types and
shadows, and resemblances; which have a more litteral and historical sense than
this would be? And it has exercised the Pens of learned men both ways, to
enquire, Whether the Jews generally believe any more than Pythagoras, or Plato
might have learnt of them, a life after the dissolution of the body, and a
state of bliss, after a just and miserable life and death in this world: all
which, as they prove not the Resurrection of the body, which is the chief point
of Christian Faith. The expressions in the Book of Maccabees, of the Mother
expecting to have her children raised again; especially taking the Comment of
St. Paul upon that Text (as is generally believed) along with it (though it may
well be understood of those more Canonical Histories relating how the
Shunamites son was restored to Life again by Elisha). And the many divine
sayings in the Book of Wisdom do declare a great and glorious prerogative
belonging to the Just and Righteous above the wicked in the world to come; but
what is said may be restrained to the Immortality of the Spirit of men; little
or no mention being made of the Resurrection of the Body. Yet in Esdras we have
these words expressly; Wheresoever thou find the 2 Esdr. 2. 23.
dead, take them and bury them, and I will give thee the first place in my
Resurrection. But this Book is not received by the Romanists themselves, and in
all probality was much later then the rest: however it may be said to deliver
the current opinion of that Church then. And in Maccabees there 2 Macc. 7. 14.
is mention made of being raised again, and of a Resurrection, which (as is
said) must relate to the Body fallen. And in the same Book, He that offered
Chap. 12. 43.
for the dead is commended, in that he was mindful of the Resurrection. But
none convince us more of a Catholic opinion amongst the Jews, received
doubtless as a Tradition from their Fathers, and supposed to their more express
prescriptions in Gods worship, then that of Martha to Christ, I know that he
shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last day. And now-adayes John 11.
24.
the Jews are so well settled in the Doctrine of the Resurrection, that they
envy the faith of it to any but themselves, saying, as Buxtorf has it; Buxt.
Synag. cap. 3.
There are four things which the Isralites have from God in especial manner,
above other Nations: The Land of Canaaenan; The Law; Prophecy, and The
Resurrection of the Dead. But in my judgment, St. Paul puts it out of all
question that the Jews believed of old a Resurrection, and that of the Body; of
which we now speak. For thus in the Acts of the Apostles he Acts 24. 15.
speaks; And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow that there
shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.

And this Doctrine seemed so essential to St. Paul, that without it all
Christian Faith were lost: as appears out of that most sublime and eloquent
Chapter concerning it to the Corinthians: where, first he lays down his 1 Cor.
15.
ground of Christian Faith, Christ's Death and Resurrection, as that, upon which
all other Articles are founded, and without which all preaching and v. 2.
all Faith would be in vain. And from hence he infers at least a possibility
that our bodies being of flesh and blood, of the same nature, shall also rise
again: And that Christ's Resurrection was but as the first fruits to the harvest
20.
or vintage; which in order must necessarily follow. And having asserted and
confirmed the truth, he answers the objections which may seem to disprove it;
which method we here choose briefly to imitate and follow. 35, etc. Tertul.
Adver. Marc. l. 5. c. 9.


And first, we argue from the term Resurrection which must needs imply somewhat
fallen or dossolved, as is said: as Tertullian against Marcion does affirm.

Secondly, From the Example of Christ, the exemplary cause of our Resurrection.
For according to St. Paul's disputation at large, there is the v. 12, 13.
same reason for the Resurrection of us, as of Christ. But Christ's body was
raised up in that individual substance that was laid in the Grave, and
therefore must ours likewise: And this is it which is affirmed and promised by
the Apostle to the Thessalonians. For if we believe that Jesus dyed 1 Thessalonians. 4.
14.
and rose again, even us also, which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.
And no doubt can be made but Christ had flesh and blood, after his
Resurrection, the signs and marks showed to that purpose, convincing not only
incredulous Thomas, but all of like difficulty of Faith. Luke 24. 19. John 20.
27.


Thirdly, It appears from the comparison made by St. Paul to the Corinthians,
As in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But 1 Cor. 15.
22, 23.
every one in his own order, etc. But in Adam all men died corporally,
therefore in Christ shall all be raised corporally, or in their own bodies: as
Tertullian. Tertull. ubi supra.


Fourthly, If immortality be promised to this body, then must this body arise,
and not another: But to this mortal body is promised immortality; therefore, it
must rise, because there is no imaginable way to have that verified, but by a
Resurrection. And St. Paul says, This corruptible must put on ib. v. 53.
incorruption; and this mortal must put on immortality. And what can we suppose
the Apostle aimed at in those words, but his own flesh and others? And how
shall they that are in the Graves hear Christ's voice, as he says in St. John,
unless they be raised by him? John 5. 28.


Sixthly, An argument may be drawn from the truth and justice of God, copiously
prosecuted by the ancient Fathers and their Followers, grounding themselves
upon the word of God, which says, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, that every man may receive the things done in his 2 Cor. 5. 10.
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. But without
Iniquu^ enim Deus si non per id punitur quis, aut juvatur, per quod operatus
est. Id. Tert. cap. 12.
the Resurrection of the body, this distribution of Justice cannot be made. And
so, what will become of those new and bold Philosophers, and their Dogmes
unchristian, who liberally grant (and this is more than we have reason to
expect from them) that there shall be a special time of Restitution of all
things (and so the soul shall enter again into a body) but not that individual
substance, which before was united to it; but yet one, making the same
individual Person which was before: And how so? Why, the Form, according to
Aristotle is, all and all, as to the constituting the same thing: and
therefore, it alone can denominate a man the same, though the matter be
various. But how then can it be said with any truth, that every man shall give
an account for what he has done in such a body, when, according to this
sacrilegious fancy, it is not the same, but another body?

Lastly, Such as was the Resurrection of men miraculously wrought in the Old
and New Testament, is to be the Resurrection, in substance, the last day. But
the child raised by Elisah; and that other by Elisha: And the 1 Kings 17. 23 2
Kings 4. 34. cap. 13. 21. Matthew. 27. 52.
man rising to life, who was cast upon the bones of Elisha; and all those
raised by Christ, in his life time, and at his death: When the dead bodies of
the Saints arose out of their graves, arose all in their bodies in which they
dyed. Therefore surely such is our Resurrection to be.

Now because there remain some sore objections to be cleared before Faith can
have its perfect work on Christian minds, I shall not expatiate, contrary to my
general purpose to answer all; but only that which is all; and that out of St.
Chrysostomes words thus rendered: But there are some Christ. in 1 Thessalonians. Sern.
7. Eth.
(says he) that disbelieve this thing, because they are ignorant of God. For
pray tell me, which is the easier of the two, to bring a thing out of nothing,
or to restore again things that have been dissolved? But what say they? They
say, such a man has suffered shipwreck and is drowned, and so fallen, many
fishes have devoured him, and every one has eat some part of those fishes.
Afterward, of those very fishes some were taken in one haven, and some in
another, and eaten of others. And again, these men that have eaten these fishes
which devoured the man happen to dye in other Countries, and that perhaps
devoured by wild beasts. Such a confusion and dissipation being made, how shall
that man rise again? Who is he that reduces the dust again? But why, O man,
do thou thus speak? and patches a long train of tales together, and offerest
it as insoluble? For answer me: What if that man does not go to Sea, and be not
drowned? If no fish eat him? nor the fish be afterward eaten of infinite men,
but that he be laid decently in his Coffin, and neither worms nor any thing
else molest him: How shall that dust and ashes be compacted together again?
Whence shall that body flourish again? Is not this unanswerable? If they be
Greeks [Heathens] who doubt of these things, We can answer a thousand things.
But what? Because there are some amongst them who put souls into Plants, and
Fruit Trees, and Dogs. Tell me which is easier for a soul to recover its own
body, or another? Again, there are others who says that fire shall catch them,
that their garments shall arise, and their shoes; and no body laughs at them.
And some introduce Atoms. But we have nothing to say to them. But to
Believers, if we may call them believers who thus doubt, we shall say with the
Apostle, All life is subject to corruption, all plants, all seeds. See thou
not, etc. Here that eloquent Father expatiates in the mysteries and subtilties
of nature, showing how little we understand of them, and concludes this point
thus: But these things humane reason is to seek in. But when God works all
things yield to him. In another place he doubts, whether he be an Infidel or
Christian, who calls in question the Resurrection: and the reason hereof is,
because, as the power of God is infinite, so infinite ways there are for his
infinite wisdom to bring to pass his own pleasure, and to make good his words,
in which he has caused his servants to trust.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the most perfect effect of Christ's Mediation, in the Salvation of Man.
Several senses of Salvation noted. That Salvation is immediately after death to
them that truly dye in Christ. And that there is no grounds in Antiquities or
Scripture, for that midde state called Purgatory: the Proofs answered. Of the
Consequent of Roman Purgatory, Indulgences: the novelty, groundlesness, and
gross abuse of them. The Conclusion of the first Part of this Introduction.

SAint Paul, where he disputes the manner of Gods free Election of his people
to the grace of the Gospel, does also declare unto us the end of such Election
to be another Election, and that to glory, as in these words, That he might
make known the riches of his glory Romans 9. 23.
[of Grace] on the vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory.
This is yet more fully expressed by St. Peter in this order: Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again to a lively hope, by the Resurrection 1 Pet. 1. 3.
of Jesus Christ from the dead: To an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by the power
of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. But
before we engage far in this subject of Salvation, it is requisite we observe a
twofold Salvation frequently mentioned and promised in Scripture: A Temporal
and Eternal. For herein common mistakes have surprised many, who willing to
amplify and extend all the promises of Gods deliverance, equally to us of this
last Age of the Church, and to them of the former, and Apostolical, do
willingly interpret many places of Scripture peculiar to them, as concerning us
to: which cannot be literally done; though figuratively it may. For the Church
of Christ being in those first Ages in continual conflicts with her enemies,
Jewish and Gentile; and most violent persecntions harrassing and wasting the
tender body of the Infant-Church, many weak Christians were of desponding
minds, and looked upon the same as Job upon natural man, as having a short time
to live, and full of sorrows: Which moved the Apostolical Writers to confirm
the Hope and Faith of them by the assurances of deliverances and salvation. And
none can deny this to be the literal meaning of St. Paul in his eighth Chapter
to the Romans; from whence so many draw an Argument to prove the innumerable
purpose of God toward particular persons, in predestinating and electing and
glorifying them; when, upon faithful examination, nothing more was primarily
intended then assurance of Gods temporal preservation of the Church, and making
it outwardly glorious in despite of all its adversaries: so that none should
separate the flook of Christ so far from the love of Christ, by persecution,
tribulation, distress, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword; but that,
at length, it should be more than conqueror, through him that loved it. And
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things
present, nor things to come, etc. should cause God to forsake it. And no other
is the meaning of the same Apostle in his thirteenth Chapter to the Romans,
where he says: And that knowing the time, that now it is high Romans 13. 11.
time for us to awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation nearer than when
we believed; i. e. having continued thus long in the faith, the time now
draws near, we should be secured and saved from our enemies. And the
Salvation to be revealed in the last times spoken of by St. Peter, was the
Deliverance, which, at last, should be manifested to the Church; in constant
expectation of which they were kept by Faith and confidence of Gods mercy. And
if we shall consult the Apocalypse, we shall scarce find the word Salvation
used in any other sense then that of temporal deliverance Rev. 7. 10. 12, 10.
19, 1.
of Gods Church. But withal, most certain it is, that by Salvation, is very
often indended by Gods word, the deliverance from the miseries of sin, and
suffering in this world, into a state of such perfect bliss, as man is capable
of: in which sense St. Paul says, The Gospel is the power of God unto Romans 1.
16.
salvation. And that, with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation; which
salvation was, in those days, the destruction of them that confessed Christ.
For St. Paul, to animate the weak Believers to a stout and resolute profession
of Christ, against the terrors of death, threatening those that were known to be
Christians, tells them; that if they so boldly confessed Christ with their
mouth as to dye in that profession, they should be saved. And when St. Paul
advises the Philippians to work out their salvation Phil. 2. 12.
with fear and trembling, he means, without doubt, Eternal Life. And that
Eternal Life which, to the Romans, he calls the Gift of God. Romans 6. ult. 1
John 5. 11. Col. 3. 3, 4.
Of which Life St. John speaks thus, This is the record that God has given
unto us eternal life; and this life is in his Son. And St. Paul more expressly
to the Colossians: For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ: When
Christ who is our life shall appear, shall ye also appear with him in glory. So
that nothing is more frequent in Scripture then that Christ is the Author of
Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him: as it is in the Epistle to the
Hebrews; and that he is the Author and finisher of our Faith; Hebr. 5. 9. 12.
2.
The Author of it, in Grace; and Finisher of it, in Glory; the perfection and
consummation of Grace. Of the thing therefore, no dispute can be justly raised,
but of the manner, some differences there are; and they principally about the
possession of that bliss, or the fruition of it; or, the time when it first
entered into, and, when it is in its full perfection.

And as touching the latter, it is with greatest probability affirmed, That,
although there be such a free and full participation of the Divine Vision,
whereby the Spirits of the deceased and truly and abundantly happy, yet there
remains somewhat to be added thereunto, from the conjunction of the body, once
companion to the soul, in all good and evil, of the passed Life. For as at the
general Resurrection the souls of the damned shall have their torments
augmented upon the reunion of the body, once combining with the soul in sin;
so at the same time, there being a conjunction of the soul and body of the
just, there shall likewise be an increase of felicity and glory. St. Paul
intimates thus much where he says, Knowing that whatever good Ephesians. 6. 8.
thing a man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or
free. And yet more particularly to the Corinthians: For we must all appear 2
Cor. 5. 10.
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. So that
the body, as well as the soul, shall have the like proportion of reward or
retribution, as they had in sinning, or doing well together. Of which we
forbear here to enlarge, as not at all questioning the virtue and sufficiency
of Christ's merits, as the sonner seems to do.

For if the Grace of Gods Spirit, the course of righteousness duly run, by the
servant of God, the Merits of Christ's Death and Passion be not efficacious to
the thoroughly purging of the soul and conscience of the faithful in this life,
somewhat derogatory, not to the person only of man, but performance of Gods
Spirits, and Christ's merit applied certainly to the soul, seems to be
reflected. The sufficiency of Christ's salvation is such, that, by confession
of all, it may avail to the acquitting from all the affections and
circumstances of sin, such as pollution, guilt, and punishment; but it will not
be granted that this actually is done in this life, or were ordained to such an
end generally: For I suppose that they who have raised and maintained such an
opinion, do not deny the sufficiency of Christ's merits, and Gods mercy to
sanctify every faithful person, to the putting him into a capacity of heaven,
and that immediately after this life; for they directly affirm, that some
eminent Saints, and particularly Martyrs for Christ, do forthwith pass from
hence to absolute bliss; but they deny that all that are in a state of Grace,
and are predestined by God unto everlasting life, are so fully cleansed from
the contagion and impurities, which even Venial sins taint them with, that they
need not another expurgation before they can be admitted into the presence of
God.

The faith of the ancient Churches (as in few words we shall show) and of all,
but such as profess subjection unto the Roman, hold that though no man
ordinarily lives without sin, nor at the instant of his death is so absolutely
pure, as to be fit to behold the face of God, who can endure no iniquity, and
with whom no unclean thing shall dwell; yet by passing from this life into
another, so far is the evil remitted by Gods mercy in Christ, so far accepted
in Christ, is that person that dies in a state of Grace, and reconciled to God,
that he passes immediately from this mortal and miserable state here, to an
immortal and less miserable, yea blessed, though not to the height, yet far
exceeding all happiness competible to the children of God, during this life.

The demonstration of this our opinion, though very true, we must confess to be
difficult, by reason of an evasion and shift always at hand, to elude our
proofs. For when we bring testimonies direct out of Scripture of the happiness
of Gods servants after this life; they answer presently, that they are to be
understood either of eminent Saints, which are presently accepted into Gods
presence; or of their designation to bliss, though they be not presently
possessed of it; which must be acknowledged to be a kind of happiness, compared
at least, with the wickeds condition, which after death is irreparable. But
these notwithstanding, and certain others, we shall take notice of by and by,
we declare positively, that for this doctrine of Purgatory, there is not any
ground of Scriptures, Reason, or Antiquity: but on the contrary, all these are
sufficient evidences to the contrary. For if the thing be so material a point
in our Religion, as it is said to be, we hold the Scripture to be so entire a
Rule of our belief, as that it must of necessity have been contained in it: but
there is no foundation in it for that, as we shall see by and by. And on the
other side, there are these arguments in it, against it.

First, says Solomon, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
Eccles. 9. 16.
might, for there is no word or devise, nor wisdom nor knowledge in the grave,
whether thou go. Does not this place plainly speak of the fixed and
immovable estate of the life to come? And can that be connted less than
ridiculous which is answered at the best rate, That there is nothing that a man
can better himself in; but others, by their piety, may better them? Or that
though in Purgatory they cannot help themselves, yet by the good works done
before they came there, they may be benefitted? Who denies but the Faith and
Good works of men in this life, have singular influence upon men's future life,
to the increase of happiness?. But all this, we say, takes effect immediately
upon the change of this mortal into immortal state. For who told them, that, to
the application of the work to the wages are required the suffrages of the
living, or passions of the dead?

Secondly, St. John in the Revelations clears this, saying, Write, blessed Rev.
14. 13.
are the dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth, for they rest from their
labor, and their works follow them. Their works follow them, without the least
mention or insinuation of being vegetated and enabled so to do with the prayers
of the living. And they rest from their labors, without being toyled, wasted,
and tormented with worse miseries than ever they suffered upon earth. The
evasion which is here borrowed from Anselme, upon the words (which yet in truth
are no more Anselm's than the Comments under his name upon the Epistles, but
Herveus Natalis his, living above two hundred years after Anselme) that here we
are to understand the time of the Resurrection, might be accepted (for true it
is, then shall the due reward be rendered to every man's works) if this excluded
the other: For let our adversaries say whether all consideration of good works
be deferred until the Resurrection? Is it not in reference to them that some
men are committed to Purgatory only, while others immediately go to hell? That
some men's pains in Purgatory are gentle and light, others more grievous? and
some men's shorter, and some longer, even of themselves without the help of
their friends upon earth? Why then must we needs understand this following of
good works to be at the day of Judgment only, and not in just proportion, the
whole time going before? And therefore is that elusion we touched, of being
meant of perfect Men and Martyrs, only rested on as the surer of the two, and
that from De Victore and Haymon. It is true he does speak of such: but it can
only be said, and not proved, that he speaks of such only. Dying in the Lord
being of far greater extent, and not upon men's pleasures, and the exigencie of
a corrupt cause limited. But distrust that these devises will not satisfy,
has driven a great Champion of this Purgatory into another plainer, but much
more absurd answer of his own; viz. That some men dye absolutely in the Lord,
as Martyrs, etc. and some men partly in the Lord, and partly not in the Lord:
This is congruous indeed to the opinion resolved to be maintained; and belike,
St. Augustine gives ground hereunto: who in a certain Epistle says that some
men in this life are partly the Sons of Christ, and partly the Sons of this
world. This Augustine might speak, in reference to the imperfection of the
state of Grace and Sonship here, which will admit of some mixture of
worldliness and weakness, with Grace and Sanctification; but does St. Austine
any where say, that, upon this any man is partly the child of God, and partly
the child of the Devil, at the same time? or that at the same time he is in a
state of Grace and a state of Sin? or reconciled to God, and not reconciled?
This is a new invention; but very suitable to the third state after this life,
Purgatory, and both of equal truth.

The place of Ecclesiastes -- Where the tree falls there it shall be, brought
against a middle state, I confess has besides the most natural sense, a sense
which may be aimed at, besides the denial of any middle state, but that by
indifferent interpreters it has been applied to the immutableness of man's
state, at his death, is certain. For in truth Purgatory, as commended to us, is
a quite different state from that of bliss: as a state of torment must be from
a state of bliss.

Fourthly, The Holy Scriptures teach us that; The blood of Jesus Christ 1 John
1. 7. John 5. 24.
cleanses us from all our sins: and that He that hears Christ's word, and
believes on him that sent him, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
death, but is passed from death unto life. And we may note, that Life simply
taken, is never used for any other state but that of happiness, in holy
Scripture: and therefore these two states only being mentioned in Scripture, it
is sufficient to conclude that no more are to be added. For were it so, that
nothing in Scripture were directly spoken against this opinion, it would no
more avail the defenders of it, then it would any other Heretical Invention,
which might be yet framed without any direct opposition from thence.

Now the Scriptural reasons against this we make to be these, in brief. First,
that as well Scripture, as Philosophy, to which they assent who introduced
these Purgative Flames, truly hold that all spiritual purgation and
sanctification must have the consent and cooperation of the will, to produce
any spiritual effect in the soul: but the Will after death elects not, merits
not, nor demerits, i. e. deserves neither good nor evil, but is fixed to the
state in which it is. But if sin be remaining in the separate soul, it must
necessarily have its seat principally in the will; which is the formal
principle of all good and evil. And there can be no change in the will of the
deceased, as to the choice of good or evil simply; but only as to the more full
and absolute captivating of the same, in the admiration of good or pertinacie
in evil. Therefore the Prayers of the living not having, any influence upon the
will or affections, at that time, to change them for the best, or correct the
pravity of them, cannot avail to the meliorating of the soul in reference to
its sanctity or impurity.

Again, No corporeal cause can be effectual upon the spirit of Man immediately,
while it is disjoined from the body, to the cleansing of spiritual stains: But
the relicts of sin are spiritual and not corporal pollutions; and therefore no
flames of Purgatory can mundifie the soul, so as to render it more innocent and
fit for heaven. But the flames of Purgatory are sensible and properly material.
And it is not said that the suffrage of the living obtain remission of sins for
the afflicted in Purgatory, but only deliver them from punishments there
suffered.

Thirdly, All sins being committed in the person of a Man consisting of body
and soul, must be accounted for as they were acted in the Person, and not only
in the one Part of him: neither can any sin be said to be forgiven the soul,
without the body, which was committed in soul and body together: nor can the
soul be purged, and not the person, nor the person and not the body; but the
body lies unconcerned and untouched all this while, by such tormenting
remedies; and therefore there is no probability of any such semi-purgation of
the soul, which should avail to the benefit and salvation of the whole. And
therefore the souls of the damned suffering the pains of Hell fire, immediately
after their departure from the body, are not awhit the better for what they
suffer. Neither can this be alleged to invalidate the other, because, that in
God punishing the souls of the Reprobates without their bodies, is no
unjustice, but rather a favor, deferring the punishment of it (who might have
inflicted it upon both presently) until his own appointed time. But it can
neither be understood nor believed, how that pravity, shot, or guilt, which
equally infflicted both parts of man, should be removed and cleared upon the
suffering of one, or applications made to it only.

Fourthly, All satisfactions must be proportionable to the wrong and offense in
the subject, at least, if not manner of them. But Offenses are committed in the
body as well as soul: Therefore must the satisfaction likewise be answerable,
if at all made; and there is no ground to suppose that God should assign any
such remedy of personal error, which concern one part of man only.

Fifthly, Either a man dies in Repentance or Impenitencie: If in Impenitencie,
then he has no benefit of Purgatory, according to Romanists: If in true
Repentance, then are all his sins so far cleansed and remitted, that there is
no need at all of Purgatory: which is apparent from the very nature of
Repentance: which is generally agreed to be a Second Baptism: Now, as Baptism
washes away all sin originally, so that the person dying instantly upon it,
directly passes to Heaven; in like manner must it be in the Baptism of
Repentance; all actual sins must be forgiven, and none remain to be punished or
purged.

This is granted with this exception, provided we take Repentance entirely, in
all its parts; whereof satisfaction (they say) is one; which being not
thoroughly made on earth, must be completed in Purgatory. But to this (passing
by the dispute of satisfaction which is corrupted notoriously by the same
persons) we answer as before, that all satisfaction In Purgaterio non posse
animas mereri aut peccare. Bellarm. de Purgat. lib. 2. c. 2.
which can be accepted, must be attended with the change of the Will of the
person, and be an act of the person; and therefore this called Satisfaction, in
Purgatory being no act, and having no concurrence of the Will of the Person,
the body being separate from the soul, can no ways supply the defects of
satisfaction in this world: and therefore if there be any, it must be before
the divorce of body and soul. Whereupon St. Augustine, Aug. Epist. 54.
(who is confidently, but vainly alleged as a Patron of this Purgatory fire)
says thus: Furthermore there is no place of amending manners but in this life:
for hereafter every man shall have what he in this life procured to himself.

And now in brief to take notice of the grounds maintaining the Affirmative, we
answer first to the Scriptures, which Valentia makes but four, of any
cousiderableness; though others, by Metaphors and Allegories, multiply them to
no purpose. First we must note, that however the Old Testament is made use of
to confirm this; yet the more sincere and sober wholly wave all autorities and
examples from thence: and so shall we. Nay, there are some who altogether
decline as well the New as Old Testament: as does Petrus Soto, not finding any
thing to the purpose; but would not have us much wonder that nothing appears
solid for it there, seeing many things are of Tradition without Scripture. Yet
the most principal and colorable we shall try: which are these.

First Matthew the Twelfth, v. 32. -- Whosoever speaks against Matthew. 12. 32.
the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the
world to come. Some sins are not forgiven in the world to come; therefore some
are: And that must be in Purgatory. This is the sum of the Argument.

But the consequence is not so good as it is taken to be. For it is frequent,
by way of emphatical speech and aggravation, to put more into an argument than
is really and strictly intended for true: as may by and by appear from such
another Instance. But not to deny the validity of diverse answers given to it,
I hold it best to make short work with it, and taking the word World, as
meaning no more than to insinuate unto us, what in many other places the New
Testament does, a twofold Age of the Church of God; one under the Law of Moses,
and the other under the Law of Christ. And plainly tells the spiteful and
malicious Jews, that they whosoever reproachfully and incredulously spoke of the
Spirit of Grace manifesting it self to the world in miracles, could not expect
to be forgiven such a notorious sin, either by virtue of the Law or Gospel;
which then began to be published. And this state of the Gospel, the Apostle
calls the Ages to come, in his Epistle to the Ephesians. And the like
discrimination Ephesians. 2. 7.
does he make in that place to the Hebrews, if we compare his words in the
sixth Chapter with them in the tenth, where he declares against a Heb. 6. 4,
5, 6. 10. 26.
possibility of salvation to such, who, when they have once been illuminated
and tasted the good things of heaven, if they shall fall away [from their
Baptism and profession of the Faith, in which they were once initiated and
baptised] to restore them again by repentance. For to them remains no more
Sacrifice for sins. By which he means not, as some have thought, that one has
apostatised from the Christian Faith, could never be restored again to
Repentance, and become a good Christian, and in a possibility of salvation; but
as Eulogius Alexandrinus in Photius has it very literally Phot. Bibl.
and well. Such an one returning unto the Law of Moses, after he was
enlightened or baptized, could not possibly hope for any Sacrifice there which
should cleanse him from his sins. For though there was a possibility of
salvation in the Law before Christ, to such as never were enlightened to the
embracing of the Gospel, yet after Christ, such as became Christians and
relapsed into Judaism, could not have any benefit from it: because they do in
effect deny Christ, by whom they should be saved only.

A second Text from whence Valentia would fetch Purgatory, and Bellarmine too
(whom we here principally examine) is that of St. Paul to the Corinthians.
Every man's work shall be made manifest: For the day shall 1 Cor. 3. 13.
declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every
man's work, of what sort it is, etc. Which words being, to Bellarmin's
confession, of the hardest of all the Scripture, what great confidence can he
or his fellows have in them? And why does he call Erasmus Heretic, because he
gives such an exposition of them as do make void the presumptions supposed to
be very strong for Purgatory and Venial sins, when he acknowledges such
obscurity in them? Indeed Erasmus his Notes do plainly overthrow both those
imaginary Doctrines, supposed to be founded hereon: and I might spare any
farther trouble, but yet shall put in my opinion of them; which I take to be
grounded upon these two things; first, the most apt connection between it and
the context before and following these words. For it is most certain that the
Apostles aim was to discover and oppose false teachers, start up to the
prejudice of the true Apostles of Christ, and laying at least in show another
foundation of faith v. 10, 11.
than Christ had laid; or building otherwise upon St. Paul's foundation than
became them. Now what think we? does St. Paul abruptly leave the subject he was
treating of, and the persons he was confuting of, and warning the Corinthians
against, and pass to the Doctrine nothing at all depending upon what went
before or after, of Purgatory? Or if he did not altogether desert his subject,
but (as may be granted by them) declare what would be the end of such Doctors
or Doctrines after they were all dead and gone, would this satisfy the
expectation of such who stood in need of present advice and directions to
secure themselves from such Impostures? Surely no. St. Paul therefore does
certainly in this Metaphorical or Allegorical manner apply himself to the
present state of the Corinthians, whom he advises to beware of such dangerous
teachers. And how does he this? First, under the Metaphor of a Workman,
insinuating the teacher himself. Secondly, under the Metaphor of a piece of
Work, figuring the Doctrines taught and instilled into men. Thirdly, by Fire,
certifying the manner of discerning the true Doctrine from the false: and that
fire is afflictions and persecutions, which then were actually on the Church,
but were soon after like to fall more heavily on it. Fourthly, by hay, stubble,
wood, he means corrupt and erroneous Doctrines; by gold, silver, precious
stones, sincere and sound Doctrine. Now collect we all into one, and can any
man desire any plainer and more current consonancie between the figurative
speech (as most infallibly this is) and the proper intention of the Apostle. I
have begun amongst you, O v. 10.
Corinthians, to preach Christ, I have lald the foundation of saving Faith,
like a wise Master Builder: yet there are some who building partly upon my
Doctrine, and partly laying another foundation of their 11.
own heads; when in very truth there can be no other foundation laid by any man
than that is already laid by me, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build
upon this foundation thus laid, gold, silver, 12.
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; that is, sound or unsound; ye shall know
which Doctrine is as gold, silver, and precious stones, sound and valuable; and
which as wood, hay, and stubble; that is, refuse and corrupt. For the day shall
declare it. What day? The day of trial. What trial? the trial by fire: for the
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. But what fire? The fire of
Persecution, 1 Pet. 4. 12.
or fiery trial, as St. Peter speaks. And this is the second ground of this
interpretation, taken from the frequencie of this phrase, Fire, signifying in
Scripture no more than afflictions or persecutions; which may convince us of
the true acceptance here. Christ in the Gospel of St. Luke says, I am come to
send fire on the earth, and what Luke 12. 49.
will I, if it be already kindled? And that this fire was no other than
persecutions and troubles, with which the followers of Christ were to contend
and struggle, is manifest from the following words. And Tertullian taking
occasion to speak of those words, says, Ipse melius interpretabitur ignis
illius qualitatem, etc. He [Christ] himself explains better the condition of
that fire, Do ye think that I came to send peace on v. 51.
the earth? St. Peter comes much nearer to our present case, where he says:
That the trial of your faith being much more precious than of gold 1 Pet. 1. 7.
that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearance of Jesus Christ. The Psalmist saying, Thou
have caused men to ride over our head: we went through fire and Psalm 66. 12.
through water, etc. what can we understand but afflictions? And no need of any
more instances to the purpose; i. e. either to show in general, that Fire in
holy Scripture imports afflictions, or that so it is here with St. Paul used.
Yet the words immediately following agree so exactly with it, that it is yet
farther put out of question, what should be the meaning of the former; viz. If
any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.
If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be
saved, yet so as by fire. That is; if any man has so built upon the
foundation, Christ Jesus, as his work abides the trial, and so be found good
and laudable, then he shall have his due reward for his pains: But if
otherwise, his work shall be burnt: that is, upon trial not be found as gold
and silver which comes out of the fire better and purer: but Persecutions and
Examinations shall reveal or manifest it to be dross, vain, and corrupt; then
shall such an one suffer loss, he shall have lost his labor, and his
reputation, yet may we not despair of him: For however he be found defective in
his Doctrines, yet himself may be saved upon his repentance, so as by fire: i.
e. by having passed himself through such persecutions as may bring him to the
sincere profession of the Faith, though his erroneous Doctrines perish, and
come to naught. And to this sense of the Apostle do I stick, though I am not
ignorant how diversely he is interpreted by as well Ancient as Modern Divines:
to whom to be tied, when they are so dissonant, were too hard measure:
especially when the simplicity of a literal sense offers it self so fairly as
here: and the greatest part of the expositions agree hereunto.

Thirdly, It is not very strange that the words of St. Paul elsewhere to the
Corinthians, should be drawn this way too? viz. What shall they do 1 Cor. 15.
29. Hic locus aperte convincit quod volumus si been intelligatur. Bellar. de
Purg. l. 1. c. 6.
that are baptized for the dead? and that (as he that alleges them, says)
manifestly making for what they would have them, when as immediately he brings
six several senses given of them? Can they then be so very plain? He well
therefore adds, If they be rightly understood. And when are they rightly
understood according to him? Not until they make for Purgatory. It were too
tedious and polemical to refute all brought for the vindicating these words to
the use of Purgatory, or to contend about the sense of them, farther then what
Epiphanius long since has, with great judgment and simplicity, lead us too:
which I profess to adhear to, and with which most imaginary senses are
answered. For, says he, there were a certain sort of Heretics crept into the
Church in St. Paul's days, which maintained such a necessity of Baptism to be
saved, that they would baptize their friends after their death; supposing that
by proxy a man might receive the benefit of Baptism. And yet some of these
denied the Resurrection. Now St. Paul argues thus, If there be no Resurrection
of the dead, to what end do they baptize the living instead of the dead? what
can it avail them, according to their own judgments and opinions? And thus what
becomes of Purgatory?

But lastly, The words of Christ in St. Matthew and St. Luke agree Matthew. 5.
25, 26. Luke 1258.
with, etc. Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence
till thou have paid the uttermost farthing? are thought of no mean force to
infer a Purgatory. But alas, such havoc do men make, who would so have it, of
the words, such hooks and tenters do they apply to wring and draw them to their
purpose, so do they play fast and loose with Antiquity about them, that a man
had need be well settled in a persuasion of the thing it self before he can
brook such a reason as this affords. The plain and simple sense therefore shall
suffice to ward off all force against it, viz. That Christ meant no more than
they who made not their peace and reconciliation with God before they go out of
this world, shall be cast into Hell, from whence they shall never return until
they have paid all the punishment they ow to God for their sins, to a farthing,
that is, absolutely satisfied, which by a Periphrasis, or in many words as much
as to say in one Never. Besides, they that are such stout defenders of the
Virgin Mary's perpetual Virginity against the ill sense given by Helvidius and
his followers of those words in St. Matthew, Until she had brought forth her
Firstborn; know very well how to give another sense to Until, then a certain
inference of somewhat to ensue that Period so fixed: and that it implies not
necessarily that ever such payment of the utmost Farthing shall be made: but
upon supposition that it be paid, such event as is there mentioned should
follow.

But Antiquity, and that of both Eastern and Western Churches are, is alleged
in confirmation of the present Roman Purgatory. To which we oppose this
assertion, That Purgatory, as now defended, was never heard of in the Latin
Church for four hundred years together after Christ, nor received into it with
common approbation until six hundred years after Christ: Austin began to doubt
of it, and is scarce constant to himself in it. Gregory the Great set it up
upon its legs and advanced it far, if so be that the Dialogues bearing his
name were truly his, as it is most probable they are not, or that they are
corrupted. For how could Gregory who flourished about the year of our Lord 590.
and was succeeded by Boniface Greg. M. Dial. l. 3. c. 2.
the third about the year 606. take notice of Justinian the elder, as elder,
unless he had known Justinian the younger, who was Emperor about the year 685.
long after the true Gregory was dead. But from about that time this erroneous
opinion got footing, and began to spread, but was never thoroughly settled in
the Church of Rome it self until the time of John the Seventeenth, or as others
compute it, the Nineteenth, about the year 1003, when he instituted the Feast
of All Souls, in which men were enjoined to pray for the deliverance of Souls
out of Purgatory. But the Council of Florence, in the year 1439. put it out of
all future dispute, when it decreed it so to be. But the Greeks, who were there
present, refused that sense, however they gave way to the Name Purgatory.
Neither do they admit it unto this day, so vain and bold a task does Bellarmine
undertake, with other Pontificians to bring (and that of old) the Greek Church
to consent with the Latin herein: upon whose attempts we find modern Assertours
of the Roman Cause to call them to witness too, and when diligent search proves
prejudicial to them, to bring Osiander (a man of small judgment, and no command
of his passions in his free censures of Antiquity, wherever his History leads
him to observe any thing there which he likes not, and many times understands
not) and Sir Edwin Sands, a Gentleman of excellent abilities as an Historian:
but finding the word Purgatory among Grecian Authors of modern times,
concluded that it was the same with the Roman; but was much mistaken. For it is
well known some modern Greeks, as Nilus Thessaloniensis, have writ purposely
against the Roman Purgatory.

And this will farther appear from the two general defects running through
almost all the Arguments brought by Romanists to prove Purgatory from the
ancient Fathers and Councils of both Churches: which being noted may suffice
for Answers to them in this point, especially in this place. For first, they
argue from the word Purgatory, wherever they find it in Greek and Latin
Fathers. But Purgatory fire with them was quite another thing from that now in
credit amongst us. Origin (and he the first that we meet with) invented a
Purgative fire, and diverse Fathers catching at that, discoursed dubiously upon
that subject: but with this Fivefold difference from Roman Flames. First, They
exempted no man from this Purgation, not Saints or Martyrs, but supposed all
should be purged before they entered entirely into Heaven: the moderner
Purgatory frees eminent Saints from that fiery trial. Secondly, They held this
purgation principally useful to the purification of the gross matter of the
body to a finer substance, before it could be meet to enter into heaven,
together with the soul: but these make it to seize principally, if not only, on
the soul separate from the body, and to cleanse that. Thirdly, They never
intended theirs to purge off the stain of sins, or satisfy for what souls were
behind in, going out of this world; but the Romanists affirm and defend it in
this sense. Fourthly, They never maintained any immediate purgation or torments
from the departure of the soul from the body: but affirmed only a general and
momentaneous transmutation by Fire, at the Day of Judgment, to be fitted the
better for Heaven. Fifthly, They never imagined that the Prayers of Living did
relieve the miseries of the afflicted in Purgatory, as do these: or that there
was any such passing from that state to Heaven before the Day of Judgment. And
what need we travel on this subject, when we have the testimony of chief men
against them herein? Roffensis Artic. 18. against Luther, says directly,
Amongst the Ancient there is little or no mention made of Purgatory: and that
the Greek to this day hold it not. The very same says Alphonsus de Castro
contr. Haeret. lib. 8. tit. De Indulgentia.

But the second Argument of Romanists will clear this, drawn out of many
Fathers to prove they held Purgatory because they held Prayer for the dead, of
which Prayer none (they suppose) can be capable, but such as are in this middle
state, between Heaven and Hell. But we deny not that the Ancients prayed for
the Dead, nor do we dissent much from them in that pious act our selves
(however there are quarrellers amongst us, well known by their other affected
and morose follies, who oppose it, because they have no express Scripture for
it) but we deny they ever prayed for the pardon of their sins, or ease of
torments, so anciently; but for an happy rest and restoration in a
Resurrection. So that we peremptorily deny (and well may notwithstanding all
proofs brought to the contrary) that Prayer for the Dead necessarily infers
Roman Purgatory.

And for the Consequence of this Opinion of Roman Purgatory, Indulgences, it is
so rank a Corruption, such a novel and impudent invention, as the Church of
Rome under that defection it now is, never did so great a miracle as to get it
any place in sober and knowing men's minds; both thing it self, and the abuse of
it being such as alone may suffice to disgrace the Authors of it, and make
their pretenses to infallibility, always false, very ridiculous. We know
indeed that scarce any thing was of ancienter use in the Church then some
Indulgences, but no more like these, than Earth is like Purgatory. Indulgences
were made by such who were in authority in the Church toward Penitents, who had
their Penances allotted them, for scandalous Crimes committed against the Faith
and Church: which Penances were often relaxed and mittigated by the favor and
indulgences of the Fathers of the Church, good cause appearing for to do so.
But that ever it was in the power of the Church to give ease to such as were
punished in that other Life to come; was never heard of for above a thousand
years after Christ. Alphonsus de Castro is worth the Alphonsus de Castro lib.
8. Adv. Haer. de Indulg.
reading upon this, who is positive for Indulgences, but going about to prove
them, prepares his Reader with a long Preface for such a short Discourse,
telling him that, He ought not to expect for all points of Faith, Antiquity, or
express Scripture. For many things are known to the moderner, which those
ancient Writers were altogether ignorant of. For seldom any mention is made in
ancient Writers of the transubstantiation of the Bread into Christ's Body: of
the Spirits proceeding from the Son, much rarer: of Purgatory, almost none at
all, especially among Greek Writers, for which reason Purgatory is not believed
of the Greek to this day, etc. -- The ancient Church caused men to satisfy in
this life, and would leave nothing to be punished in the Life to come, and
therefore there is no mention of Indulgences. Thus he: But adds, Amongst the
Romans, the use of them is said to be very ancient; as may in some manner be
collected from their stations. And it is reported of Gregory the First [of whom
we even now spake] that he granted some in his days. It is said and reported:
by where, and by whom, he could not tell us. But he tells us indeed how
Innocent the Third, that great Innovator and Corrupter of the Church,
constituted it in the Latherane Council, and the Council of Constance after
that, much; which was not before the Year 1200. Judge we from hence, what great
account is to be made of the many sayings of the Fathers pretended to approve
this devise. And judge we farther, what great Reason or Scripture there is for
the Popish faction to derogate so far as they do, from the efficacy of Gods
Holy Spirit of Grace, in the repenting sinner, though straitened of time in the
exercise and demonstration of his true Conversion; and from the fullness of
Christ's mediation and merits; which are ordained for the remission of all sins,
upon true Repentance. For the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, says St.
John: and so say they, understood as in this Life and the Life to come: but St.
John, nor any other holy Writer of Scripture, gives us the least intimation of
any other season of pardon, then that of this Life.

Therefore here to end this First Part, with the end of Man in this world,
seeing Gods Promises are so liberally revealed unto penitent sinners in this
Life, without exceptions of matter, time, or place, of venial or mortal sins.
Seeing Christ's merits are absolutely sufficient to acquit the sinner, and no
limitation is to be found, upon Faith and Repentance, in Scripture; Seeing
lastly, that Gods Spirit of Grace is of virtue sufficient to sanctify, to the
washing away of all filthiness both of flesh and spirit; and this life is only
mentioned in Scripture for the exerting of this work, and perfecting this cure
of the soul; Let us rather thankfully embrace so great salvation, and work it
out (for St. Paul supposes we may) with fear and trembling in this life: that
so, as St. Peter has 2 Pet. 1. 11.
it, An entrance may be ministered abundantly unto us, into the everlasting
Kingdem of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The End of the First Part.
THE Second Part OF THE INTRODUCTION To the Knowledge of the True Catholic
Religion.
CHAP. I.
Of the worship of God, wherein the Second Part of Christian Religion consists.
Of the Necessity of worshipping God. It is natural to worship God: Socinus
holding the contrary, confuted. Of the Name of Religion; the Nature of
religious worship, wherein it consists.

REligion we have defined to be, A due Recognition and Retribution made by the
Creature to God the Fountain of all Being, communicating himself freely to
inferior Beings: And this description we have in substance given us by David,
in his last and most serious charge to Solomon his Son, saying; And thou,
Solomon my Son, know thou the God of 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, etc.
From whence we take the ground of our distinction of Religion into two Parts.
The true knowledge of God, which is attained by the Doctrine of Faith revealed
in Gods holy Word; and the worship of him there in likewise contained. Of the
former having already spoken; we now proceed more briefly to treat of the
second, The worship of God.

And that God is to be worshipped, is such an inseparable notion from the
acknowledgment of God, as nothing can follow more necessarily then that does
from this. And it were more reasonable (though that be brutish) for to deny God
absolutely, then to deny him worship and service. And therefore Seneca says
well, The first worshipping of God is to believe there is a God: The next, to
yield to him his Majesty; to yield him Sen. Epist. 95.
his Goodness: to understand that he [or they] governs the world. And
afterward, He sufficiently worships God who imitates him. And Tully: The Cicero
de Natura Deor. lib. 2.
worship of God ought to be most excellent, and pure, and holy, and full of
piety, so that we may constantly worship him, with a pure, entire, and
incorrupt mind and voice. And it is very wonderful (if any thing can be
strange, which we find coming from that monstrous wit) that Socinus should
profess Christianity, and yet deny that which common humanity taught others, as
great wits as himself. For denying that Religion or Worship of God is natural
to man, as in diverse places he does; what account can he give of many Heathen,
who never heard of, or received any such revelations, as he holds necessary to
make God known in the world? And why? because there are certain people in the
Indies (says he) which have no reverence of a Deity. But does he think that
nature teaches us just so much as we actually know, and no more? It should
seem so indeed, by his reasonings and conclusions. But that was his folly and
mistake; as much as it would be to hold an opinion, that the Preacher of the
Gospel does not instruct or advise men in Religion, the knowledge and service
of God, because they profit not by him; but live profanely and vitiously. For
that we say is natural to us, and that we have by the Law and light of Nature,
which we have so within us, as that by the help of them, we may arrive to the
knowledge of the truth, not that, whether we will or no, we shall necessarily
attain it. And surely it is but as the opening of the eyes of the body in a
drowfie person, to discern the light of the day, for a man to perceive such
notices as these, by virtue of that natural light in him, and those legible
Characters writ by Gods finger in the heart of man. He is franck enough to man,
and more than enough, more then any good Christian, in magnifying man's natural
reason, and natural freedom of will, and his power in choosing good and
refusing evil, and living regularly without those Divine aids, judged necessary
by all good Christians. But how can this be done without the acknowledgment of
a Deity, and the worship of it? But it seems he must give place to Tully in
Christianity, Cicero pro Plancio.
whose words are these, In my judgment Piety is the Foundation of all Virtues:
which if true, as true it is, how can he hold that a man can have any one moral
virtue, without devotion toward God? And can devotion to God be separated from
the knowledge of God? There are, it may be, some Nations which are so inhumane
and barbarous, as to regard neither truth nor justice. Does it therefore follow
they have no such seeds of both these sown in their hearts, as are naturally
apt, if not violently choked, to increase to virtuous and laudable actions and
habits? Many men, we see, lay violent hands on themselves, and take away their
own lives: should any wise man then conclude from hence, Nature never taught
him to preserve it?

It may further be argued for a naturalness in man to be Religious, and to
agnize and worship a Deity, from the absolute necessity of it to the
subsistence of humane society. Man is naturally sociable, says the
Philosopher: but without Religion, no Civil society can long or well hold
together: and therefore, if Nature has disposed man to the one, and this
cannot be attained without the other, it will follow that the necessary means
must in some manner be provided to that end, by the author of that first
design: unless we will grant that too (as commonly one absurdity tumbles in
upon the neck of another, as Aristotle observes) that nature designs things in
vain.

Of this natural necessity of Religion, diverse have treated; whom I might
imitate but that I study compendiousness and upon that reason instance no more
than in the Original of the Roman Monarchy begun rudely and barbarously by
Romulus; and so in all likelihood to have suddenly vanished and expired; had
not Numa stayed and secured it by Religion, and the fear of the Gods, as is
observed by Florus: He brought a fierce people Florus Lib. 1. C. 2. Id. C. 8.
to that pass, that what they had by force and injustice possessed themselves
of, they should manage by Justice, and Religion. And afterward, What was more
Religious than Numa? So the case required, that a fierce people should be
softened by the fear of the God?

We shall therefore take it for granted that Religion is, and ought to be in
all persons: and amongst all people; and leaving the common Criticisms about
the name Religion whether it proceeds from Religando as Hierome Hier. in Am^s
C. ult.
thinks, which implies a double obligation upon man toward God, natural and
Moral or of Election, very commodiously: Or whether, as St. Augustine, it comes
from Religendo Recognizing a Deity, not unfitly; Aug. Civit. de Lib. 10. 4.
Enchirid. c. 38. (...). Salvian. ad Cath. Eccl. lib. 2. (...). Pan. c. 3. Paris
C. 3.
we pass in a word to the Nature and proper Offices of Religion, as taken here
for the worship of God. For so necessary and natural are these two general
Parts of Religion we have laid down; Knowledge of God, and Worship of God; that
some both Heathen as well as Christian Philosophers define it by each of them,
Epictetus declares it the primest thing in Religion, to have a Right Judgment
of the Gods. And Mercurius that it is [(...)] the knowledge which Salvian
literally translates and uses as his definition. On the other side the
Scholiast on Aristophenes says, He that is religious does those things that
are pleasing unto God. And Tully, where we above quoted him, describes it to be
The worship of God. And Guilielmus Parisiensis describes it thus, The sum of
Religion is to persevere immoveably against all the provocatious of
temptations, and to ascend upward toward God, and inseparably to cleave to him.

And surely that Question moved in the Schools, Whether Theology, or Religion
be a speculative or Practical virtue, is never like to be decided until the
different Parties agree to compound the matter by taking in both, and making it
both Speculative and Practical, as we do. For undoubtedly, as it delivers rules
and Articles of Faith, it is speculative; as it delivers Rules and preceps of
Holy and divine Life, it is Practical, and both these it does; as we have
showed. But it is the practical part of it or worship we are at present
concerned in; and of which no small doubt may be made, whether it consists more
in the Fear or Love of God? but I suppose it may be, as be before disided. It
being an Affection of the Inward man consisting of Reverence and love of God,
and demonstrating the same in Acts proper and proportionable thereunto. And
this is all the definition needful to be given of Serving God, so essential
that the word of God does nothing more frequently than put the fear of God
simply, for the Service of God: Abraham says in Genesis, The Fear of God is
not in this Genesis 20. 11. Psalm. 36. 6. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Ephesians. 5. 21.
place. The Psalmist says, They have no fear of God before their eyes. St,
Paul says, Perfecting holiness in the fear of God: and elsewhere, Submitting
yourselves one to another in the fear of God. All which, with many more places,
import as much as Religious worship of God? And so does the Love of God also:
as in St. Luke our Savior says to the Pharisees, Woe to you Pharisees for ye
tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs and pass over Judgment and the Love
of God: where Love of God stands for the Luke 11. 42.
true Service of God, and duly to him: as Judgment insinuates our duty toward
our neighbor. And so St. Paul to the Thessalonians. The Lord direct your
hearts into the Love of God. And St. John most frequently in 2 These. 3. 5.
all his writings. Leaving therefore this general consideration let us in this
order inquire farther into, 1. The Parts. 2. The proper States of serving. 3.
The special Kinds of Divine Worship.

CHAP. II.
Of the two parts of Divine Worship, Inward and Outward. The Proof of outward
worship as due to God: and that it is both due, and acceptable to God. Several
Reasons proving bodily worship of God agreeable to him. Wherein this Bodily
worship chiefly consists. Certain Directions for Bodily worship. Exceptions
against it answered.

BY what is expressed in our General description of Worship, it may appear that
there are two Principal Parts of it: The one consisting in inward affection;
and the other in the outward Actions. The inward disposition of the mind or
soul of man is that on all hands is agreed upon as most justly due and proper
to God alone in the supreamest manner: God calls for the heart so often in
his holy word as his proper portion; and the Spirit as that which draws
nearer to the nature of God, as purely spiritual and incorporeal. For God
(says Christ) is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth: Though if we should take these words according to the
prime intention, they would be found not to aim so much, if at all, at diverse
manners of worship under the same kind: but at several kinds such as were the
Judaical and Christian: the meaning of Christ being this, that the hour or time
was coming when there should be no longer use of those corporal services and
Sacrifices under the Law, but in lieu of them the spiritual and true worship of
the Gospel should succeed. But no question can be made of the excellency of
that true spiritual inward devotion of the heart and mind to God, as the most
absolute, most required, most accepted: and in comparison of that, all outward
worship being no better without it than gross Hypocrisy, rather incurrs the
displeasure of Almighty God than pleases him. Therefore, leaving that which all
Christians are in their judgments sufficiently satisfied in, and hold
themselves obliged unto; we shall take up the defense of the outward worship,
in great manner opposed by too many.

And truly, They that argue so contemptuously and wildly, as the vulgar custom
does, against outward worship of God; shall not need to go far to see their own
folly. For to say, God is a Spirit, and It Is the heart that God calls for, and,
It Is the zeal of the Soul, and such like loose sayings, what do they but cut
the throat as much of vocal prayer, and Preaching, as of any thing else? For if
God will accept the heart, and looks no farther than the purity and good
dispositi^n of the mind, Audible Prayer, and Preaching must together with the
rest be excluded, as impertinent in Gods service. We know that the prayer of
the heart (as in the Case of Hannah) is accepted of God at some times, and in
some places, as the true Love and Charity to our Neighbor inclining us to do
him good and relieve him when it lies not in our power: but St. James looks on
them and censures them as mere uncharitable mockers, and not relievers of their
neighbors, who shall only pretend they mean them well inwardly, and say unto
them, Depart Jam. 2. 16.
in peace, be ye warmed, and filled: notwithstanding ye give them not those
things which are needful to the body: Even so Faith, and so the will, and the
heart, and the Spiritual worship without works are all dead, and are a mere
mockery of the divine Majesty; a corrupting and perverting of his holy word,
and a bitter Sarcasm, turning it against himself: and as much as if it should
be said, Seeing you will needs have the heart you shall have it: that is so, as
to have nothing more. It were superfluous and shameful to cite the many
misunderstood and misapplied texts of Scripture to delude the most ignorant,
and, at the same time, most presumptuous of Scripture. None speak more after
the phrase which has deceived so many, than that not long since quoted, Woe be
to you Pharisees, for ye tithe Mint and Rue, and Luk* 11 42.
all manner of Herbs, and pass over Judgment and the Love of God. Does not the
Scripture here seem to condemn, and that under a curse, such little services as
are there expressed? It seems so indeed, and really does, as much as any
outward worship of God: But it does but seem so. For undoubtedly, it was most
agreeable to it, that such minuter services should be performed, but that so
performed as studiously and superstitiously to neglect the other more weighty,
was it which incensed God against them.

And here comes in that general argument also, above touched. Fast from sin
(say they) and for outward fasts it matters not: Wisely and profoundly said,
like able Divines indeed. And so, fast or abstain from sin, and ye shall never
need to pray, nor hear Sermons, nor to feed the Hungry, nor cloth the Naked;
no, nor to believe in God: which is all such persons have left them of Religion
starved into an unactiveness; Would it not make a man's Hair stand upright to
see, and hear what precipices of Heathenism and follies Men dispute themselves
into? And so they may (as they suppose) enjoy their lust of contradiction and
contempt of others, strike through the loins of all Reason and Religion, at the
same time: Reason, which they set, by such sophistry as this, to fight against
it self. For Serving of God in Spirit and in truth, and abstinence from all
sins, as well of Omission as Commission, is the very perfection and end of all
Religion. And if there were no more required but a simple command to do it, on
Gods part, not directing us to the way: and no more on our part, but presently
and immediately to become holy and perfect, without the proper means conducing
to such high and not easy ends; then forsooth, these Disputants were the best
Counselors: but if there be outward means ordained in general by God, and
applicable many times by humane prudence, to the effecting such ends, and that
outward acts of worship are of this nature; I only blush at the perverseness
and folly of these men and so leave them. Yet out of pity toward some, who,
like the Israelites after Absolome, are carried away from the truth in the
innocence of their souls; I shall endeavor to stay them by advising them to
consider what Perkins wri eth well in these words; Indeed all the worship of
God is Spiritual, even Perkins Cases of Conscience. L. 2. C. 5.
that which we call outward, yet not of it self, but by virtue of the inward,
from which it proceeds.

But were it not so, yet the worship of the Body it self is a real, and in some
degree, an acceptable service unto God, even distinctly considered from that of
the Mind; as the same Author also confesses, upon this solid ground: God is the
Creator not only of the soul of man, but also of the body, and we bless God
not only with the heart, but also with the tongue. Therefore the whole man must
pray in public. And who is it that grants what the Psalmist says, All thy
works praise thee, O Lord: and denies not the body Psalm. 145. 10
to be the workmanship of God, but must grant that the body is obliged to the
worship of God, as really as the soul? Does not St. Paul say, Glorify 1. Cor.
6. 20.
God in your body, and in your spirit which are Gods? The Body and the Soul are
both said to be Gods: and therefore are both to be rendered unto God, according
to their ability and capacity: And it is no less ridiculous for men to deny
bodily service to God, as unprofitable and unacceptable unto him, because God
calls so earnestly for the spiritual and inward service of the mind, than it
would be to deny God the inward worship of the Soul joined to the Body; because
it is said, Worship him all ye Saints, and let the Angels of God worship him.
Whatsoever the idle and unprofitable servant says in the Gospel of God that he
was an hard man reaping where he had not sown, and gathering where he strawed
not, yet it is nothing so. For God Mat. 25. 24.
does not require more than he has given; and therefore having given less to
the Body than to the Soul, do we think he will accept of no less from the Body,
than he does from the soul? The Parable now touched proves the quite contrary:
God there, well rewarding less increase and return, though not in the
Arithmetical proportion, yet Geometrical. Put the Case, that the body has
received but as five talents, and the soul ten; nay, that it has received but
one: yet the condemnation for not improving that one according to the cause and
ground given, sufficiently evidence, that the improvement according to that
ground, would be an occasion of praise and reward.

And this Thirdly appears from the peaceableness of man in bodily Acts. For if
the mind being well disposed to God, the Bodily outward acts are sometimes
sinful as in the simulation of worshipping an Idol with outward acts when
inwardly a man detests and abhorrs the same; as certainly they are: then
surely, though the mind be not so well devoted to God as it ought (provided it
be not bent to the contrary) the outward acts may be acceptable in some degree
to God. And therefore Origin has these words. It is one thing to worship, and
another to adore. A man may sometimes Adore Origin Hom. 8. in Excd.
unwillingly as they that flatter Kings, when they perceive they are addicted
to that sort of Idolatry, do seem to adore [or fall down to] Idols. Whereas in
their hearts they are well assured that an Idol is nothing. But to worship is
with entire affection and addiction to be subservient. if then a Man may offend
God with his body, why may he not please him? Is it because God will according
to his due have all, or none? This makes as much against the simplicity and
singularity of the Souls worship as the bodies, and no more.

Fourthly, the Scripture giving us precepts of outward worship, and presidents
of Gods rewarding bodily ceremonies of worship; does abundantly commend the
same unto us. St. Paul says to the Corinthians, Providing for 2 Cor. 8. 21.
honest things not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
Christ says, Let your works so shine before men that they may glorify your
Father Mat. 5. 1 These. 5. 22. Romans 12. 17.
which is in heaven. And again St. Paul to the Thessalonians says, Abstain
from all appearance of Evil. And to the Romans, Provide things honest in the
sight of all men. All which words may be interpreted of moral works, but not so
as to exclude the outward bodily Acts of Reverence and worship of God, which
are apt to affect or disaffect men. And the reason here of is because of all
the worship and glory we exhibit to Almighty God, nothing more accreweth really
unto him than external esteem. For it is as true of the Glory of God, as Man,
with the change of persons, It is the Aug. Civit. Dei L. 5. Gul. ^^aris. de
Fide, C. 3.
Judgment of Men thinking well of men (and so of God) says Austin: or as
Gulielmus Parisiensis, Glory is nothing else, but an excellent, high, and far
spread fame. By which it appears, that all Glory is a thing rather Relative,
than absolute, and depending on the opinion of men. It Is confessed, there is an
absolute Glory, and essential of God with himself: but we give not that to him,
but only publish, and celebrate the same: and this we do chiefly by outward
acts or bodily. And do we not read in Joshuah how Achan is said to give glory
unto God, in open confession of his sins? And does not the Scripture plainly
affirm that Ahah was accepted of God, Jos. 7. 19.
so far as to the mitigating of the sentence pronounced against him, by God;
Because he Humbled himself before God. And what was his humiliation, but 1
King. 21. 27. 29.
the outward ceremonious acts of Repentance; as Renting his clothes, putting
sackcloth upon his Flesh, fasting, lying in sackcloth, going softly. Which will
be of greater force if it be true what some modern interpreters say of these
things, That they were all hypocritically done.

Fifthly, External worship and reverence are not only so many indications and
Effects of the more noble, and divine worship of the Soul, and fruits which are
as acceptable as the tree that bears them: but which is much more, they are
very often causes of the devotion of the mind, and great inflamers of the
affections, as well of him that so demeans himself in humility and reverence,
as of the beholder: Of this latter St. Paul speaks, in his epistle to the
Corinthians, where he treats of the external decency, and order, to be observed
in the worship and House of God; upon which he that comes in falling down on
his face (which is one of those outward Acts we here mean) I will worship God,
and report that God is in you of a truth. 1 Cor. 14. 25. 2 Cor. 9. 12.
And in his Second Epistle he says, Your zeal has provoked very many, Which
zeal was manifested in external works. And who may not observe, not only an
Influence of the inward affections moving the outward parts: but a Refluence
(as one may say) of such outward acts upon the inward faculties, to the
exciting them. And that speaking cholericly does not only proceed from a
principle of Angriness, but augments the passion inward; and so in love and
zeal, in matters as well divine, as profane, acting humility and devotion
outwardly, does wonderfully excite those graces in the inward man.

I shall add but one more argument to beget a better opinion of external and
bodily services in Gods worship, than vulgarly prevails: And that is, The
general practice of the ancientest and best Christians, I say, best Christians
and purest and perfectest worship of God, in open defiance of them of late
times, who insolently magnify themselves and modern inventions, to the
contempt of their much superiors in piety and years. They had many outward
rites and ceremonies adorning the worship of God; which I prefer infinitely
before the sour and severe nakedness of Gods service amongst them. It Is not to
be denied, that in process of time, Ceremonies multiplied to the prejudice of
Religion; but I think scarce at any so much, as the affected profaneness has
on the other side, damnified it. And they that argue from the great opinion
some have of Ceremonies, to the total abolition of them, put an argument into
the mouths of others to renounce communion with them that hate them, and detest
them to that superstitious excess, as to have none at all: and by the same
rule, to love them, because they detest them who have been so scandalous in
their opposition to them.

Now this external Worship we here plead for, is an Adoration of God: An
humiliation of the Body by external Acts, and gestures, upon the consideration
and reverent esteem of the Divine Presence; and the small and low esteem we
have of our selves: which is so necessary and natural that it is to be admired
how the contrary carriage could ever be received as pleasing to God or man;
were it not that the Tempter to irreligion knows no shame: nor they who are
abused by him, and his Instruments, no mean in flying Extremes. What is more
frequent in Scripture than examples of such as thus humbled themselves before
God? Falling down in Scripture (which necessarily is bodily Adoration) has
been always such an inseparable concomitant of Divine inward worship, such an
excellent part of it, that by a current Synecdoche it is put for the worship of
God entirely and absolutely. For what else may we understand by that
Prophetical speech of Christ. All Kings shall fall down before him, all nations
shall worship. And so in the Prophet Esaias, Shall I fall down to the stock of a
tree? That is, Psalm. 77. 11. Esaias 44. 19.
And so in the Prophet Esaias, Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? That is,
worship it in this bodily manner. And so in the next Chapter: and the 46.
Chapter. They fall down yea they worship: by which words the Prophet Es. 45.
14. Es. 46. 6.
condemns the Idolatrous practice then in use. And, as has been said, if there
were nothing good in such outward adoration which might be pleasing to God; it
could not displease him to have it given unto Idols, or false Gods; as every
where in Scripture it does. What a piece of matter had it been for the three
Children of God to have fallen down before Nebuchadnezar's Dan. 3. ^.
Image, in Daniel, if there were no account to be made of such outward Acts?
not so much surely as of disobedience to the Kings command. Nay, what hurt
would there be to fall down to the Devil (as Christ was tempted to do by that
Evil and ambitious Spirit) if it did not at all belong to Mat. 4. 9.
God. Or what good do they, what glory do we understand given by the 24 Elders
to God, in the Revelation, when they fall down before the throne Rev. 4. 10.
of God, if so be there is nothing in it.

Surely therefore, it is a part of our duty and service, thus to adore the
Divine Majesty, thus to humble our bodies in his presence. And it is seen
commonly, in Bowing or inclining any part of the body; and sometimes of the
whole, by casting it upon the earth as unworthy to stand before God, and to
beget the deeper sense of our own vileness, and to move God to pity our
prostrated body and dejected mind. Sometimes it may suffice to Luke 18. 33.
incline the head, as it were blushing to lift it up with any confidence
toward God, and heaven: Sometimes incurvation of the Body, sometimes bending
of the knee, and sometimes constant and devout kneeling: according as occasion
and opportunity shall be offered, and the spring of inward devotion move the
outward parts of the body.

For all this while we urge not so necessarily any, much less all these outward
acts, so as to require them simply to divine worship, as if a Man could not be
accepted without them. Yet so far again we do, that where just authority,
competent opportunity, and means, expect any of these from us, wilfully and
contemptuously to neglect them, does make me really believe that God will not
hear or accept the pretended real devotion of the inward man, as being
corrupted with disobedience and irreverence, and exclusive of part of his Right.

And an other rule for directing this manner of worship is this, that we are
not singly and of our own head, in public, to put in use, or act any such
ceremonious devotion to the offense of the more general custom, and warranted
practice of the Churches, of which we are Members. For all Acts of Reverence
are to be estimated, not by private opinions, but by public and general
approbation. For seeing scarce any ceremony is natural, but all by institution
and reputation of men judged proper, or indecent: this Decency, the Custom of
places and Sentence of Superiors must determine, lest the Church falls into
that unhappy state of which Austin complains, and be subjected to more
burdensome and contrary Rites than the Jewish Church suffered; while it is
thought lawful under the Gospel, which was not tolerated under the Law, for
every single man either to devise a form of worshipping God, out of his own
head, or to bring those Rites into that Church in which he lives by his own
will, which he had observed to be in use in others, whereof perhaps he has
read, or which in his Travels he has seen, which the farther they have been
and more strange always pass for the most commendable: a thing which St. Austin
in that Epistle condemns, and that worthily and gravely: and not all Rites
introduced ordinarily, and orderly into the Church by good Councels and
authority: as many vainly have imagined and drawn his words with wonted
ignorance, or spite, against the use of Ceremonies. But what we were saying is
this: that all Reverence, and gravity, and decency are wholly such by humane
agreement and opinion; and that of the Region wherein they are used. For if any
posture, or gesture, or Habit were naturally good or Evil, decent or indecent,
it would be so to all countries and people: the contrary to which is most
certain. viz. That what one people judges grave and decent, another esteems
ridiculous, and uncomely. To bare the Head in the Western parts of the world,
is a token and Act of Reverence, to whom it is done: but absurd and grievous to
the Eastern Parts. Again, in the Western Parts, for Men to move their hats, and
to bend the Knee to one, is Reverence; but for women to do so, is foolish and
ungrateful to any. Black clothes and habit in the European Parts and amongst
Christians are generally looked on as comely, grave, and decent for persons of
the soberest rank, but odious to the Turks: and so might instances be given in
many things of like nature. Which are not for any intrinsic worth in them or
natural, received into the service of God, but for that they are partly by
consent of men where we live, acknowledged for proper notes of Reverence, or
else are by express constitution declared to be such which are designed by the
Church to signify, and express veneration, and esteem of what we do: and upon
that become such. For neither do words themselves naturally signify what we
mean by them; nor do letters naturally give such a sound to a word compounded
of them, but altogether by human agreement and appointment, no more do these
signs and ceremonies of themselves, but by consent and institution, imply
reverence and devotion.

Where then do these frivolous and quarrelsome fellows appear, who resolving to
undo something done before them, and do somewhat that better suits with their
own humors, and unchristian tempers, devise monstrous things in such rites
maliciously apply them, zealous enforce the contrary, upon such absurd errors:
And will take no denial, when they are pleased to utter such slanders, as
these: That we urge them as of absolute necessity, We prefer them before the
more material service of God: We make them conditions of Communion with us. The
first and second of which are directly false, and never can be made good: The
Third is indirectly true. For by consequence indeed they become conditions of
Communion in all Churches; and their mouths are opened directly and expressly,
according to their manner, only against our Church, yet all are no less
concerned than ours, yea their own Conventicles are in as much danger of this
argument, as our Churches. For I appeal unto themselves whether they would not
thrust out from among them such as should dare against their Orders, to do what
they list amongst them? Would they suffer one amongst, that should constantly
take the Communion kneeling, while the rest sat, or stood? Would they not
severely censure and being obstinate eject such an one as should bow at the
name of Jesus, against their will, and perhaps him that should own he makes a
conscience of being covered in the house of God? Must they not here interpret
themselves better in their famous modern Maxim, Of making outward Rites
conditions of Communion, and so, that their adversaries shall come off as well
as they? Or they suffer as much mischief by their own weapon as any else. But
what they will say, we regard not, no more than what they have said in that
Rule it self, frivolous and fallacious. That which we say to it, is the quite
contrary, That we do not make such Orders or customs conditions of our
communion, so much as they make them causes of non-communion, and Separation.
Let the matter then be brought fairly before all equal Judges, who are to be
blamed, they, who have no authority either to appoint, or put down any
Ceremony, and yet, upon that which they can never prove to be forbidden, or
unlawful, but as it likes them not (by which they argue us out of all but their
own inventions) refuse communion with that Church, to which they have all
general obligations to join themselves: Or they, who being over them in the
Lord (whether they will or not) do form outwardly by such Ceremonies and Rites,
the more intrinsic parts of Gods Worship requiring under the sin of
disobedience, and pain of Ecclesiastical censures following thereupon,
submission unto them. In fine, We accuse them (and believe we are much better
able, as we are always ready to prove it) of making innocent (I do not say
inoffensive, for where shall we find that thing that offends not some body)
rites and orders the only ground of Schism; rather than we make them conditions
of Communion: And so what they will get by this justification of themselves,
they may, and hope will at length, put in their eyes, and cause tears of
repentance to fall from them, for their many groundless prevarications, and
slanders of both Powers, God had set over them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Second thing considerable in Divine Worship; viz. The state wherein we
serve God. What is a State. The formal cause of a State Divine, Vows. What is a
Vow. The proper matter of Vows, Evangelical Councils: That it is lawful and
useful to make Vows under the Gospel, contrary to Peter Martyr. The nature of
Vows explained.

THE Second thing wherein religious worship does consist in general, is the
special state which a true Believer chooses to serve God in. The state of any
thing does import in it, Inde est quod etiam in actionibus humanis dicitur
negotium habere aliquem statum; Secundum ordinem propriae dispositionis cum
quadam immobilitate seu quiet. Thomas 2 dae. Qu. 183. c. 1.
constancy and subtilty, as Thomas has not amiss described it in general,
saying, In humane actions a matter is said to have a state, according to its
particular constitution, with a certain immutability and rest. Whatever
therefore is by nature uncertain and mutable, and becomes determined and fixed,
may be said to be in such a state, in which it is so fixed. And though, by the
vanity and natural wantonness of Man's will, he is too often unresolved and
fickle in his due Obligations toward God; yet by Reason, and much more
Religion, every man is bound to God, and his liberty is to serve God, in the
common state of Religion; which restrains his irregular motions, and confines
him to the will of God. And under this due subjection is every man especially
brought, by being baptized, and therein vowing faith and Christian obedience
unto God. But as Religion in general is the stating and establishing a man
toward God, and as Christian Religion is yet an higher, stricter, and holyer
obligation and state than Religion in common, so yet, in Christian Religion it
self, are there more large and free, and more strait and determined ways of
serving God: which when they are not moveable or mutable in themselves, may be
aptly called states of Religion, subordinate to the general Profession. We are
therefore first to consider the formal cause of this stating a man's self in
Religion, and then the principal matters wherein this state does consist: which
may be reduced to these three, Holy Orders, Celebacy or Singleness of Life,
Monastic Life, with its appendages of Poverty and Obedience.

That which gives the formality to all these, and makes them a proper state, is
the bond of a Vow, under which a man binds himself duly to observe the same.
And a Vow is a solemn and sacred promise made to God by a Person free to that
thing, of performing somewhat above his ordinary obligation. For by the common
covenant and obligation, every Christian has upon him, as a Christian, and
baptized, he has bound himself to observe all things directly commanded by
God; and which are necessary to salvation. But because these things necessary
to salvation, are not so easily determinable by every man, but varying
according to the talents of Grace and Nature; according to outward means, and
according to opportunities put into the hands of Man by God, it has been ever
both prudently and piously practiced by devout and faithful persons, to secure
the necessary duties, by taking upon them some things that are not of
themselves, or generally necessary to the pleasing God, and saving themselves.
These extraordinary Services are commonly known by Counsels Evangelical or
Perfections, because they tend to a more perfect and devout walking with God in
Mortifications, Self-denyals of the pleasures, and unnecessary Comforts of this
world, and more pure, immediate, and spiritual communion with God, in the
exercise of acts of Religion.

There are many amongst the eminent Reformers who oppose such Evangelical
Counsels (it is to be feared) because they would carry away the credit from
others of being Religious, and cannot endure to have any thing more eminent in
that Religion condemned by them, than is to be found in their Reformation; and
therefore they say, there is no such thing to be allowed or received as
Evangelical; that is, in plain terms, Christian Perfection: but all states of
Christianity are alike. For surely had it not been self-defense and self-love,
not to venture flesh and blood farther than is absolutely necessary, but that
they might enjoy the world in all its benefits and accommodations not
inconsistent with future bliss; they would never have dared to have
contradicted the common voice of all Christians, one or two perhaps excepted:
who were manifestly reprehended by the general sentence of the age wherein they
lived; and not only Christians, but Jews, and not only Jews, but Heathens too,
pretending to Religion. And for my part, as I reverence that as a Law of
Nature, in which all men generally conspire and concur: so do I esteem that as
a Law of Religion, which all Religious People have, in some manner, used: But
all People, as well Christian as Unchristian, have ever allowed, as very
laudable, the use of Vows in Chastity, and secludedness from the common course
of the world. And this is of greater force to me than any arguments by the
adversaries brought to the contrary.

They want not indeed certain pretty colors to persuade, rather than prove
their modern singularities: Some of which, and the principal, are these. First,
that we are commanded to love and serve God with all our hearts, with all our
souls, with all our strength, and therefore there can be no place for such
perfection, seeing it is no more than we are bound to do.

To which I answer, That to love and serve God with all our might, is, in the
general, a direct Precept; and not barely an advice or counsel given to us. But
the special duties wherein this universal and absolute service of God consist,
are not so determined. For we may love God with all our hearts, according to
the intent of the Command, in any one state of life, that is, so far as to
prefer God and his service before, and above all; and this may suffice to carry
us to Heaven. But this All may be taken Intensively or Extensively: Extensively
when we subject all things really to our esteem of God, not idolizing any
worldly thing, or equalling it to him. But still Intensively, a man, so long as
he continues in this world, may proceed to higher degrees of the Love of God.
And these more perfect degrees are acquired by more constant attendance on Gods
worship; and this attendance is caused by sequestring our selves from those
many worldly cumbrances incident to us in this world: which though not
absolutely unlawful (for were it that Marriage or Monastic life were simply
and generally necessary, no question but they would have been commanded or
forbidden directly) yet upon common consent, more hazardous than the severer
part of Christian life may be. And neither wedded life, or a political life are
of themselves evil, but expose a man to more temptations, and leave him less at
liberty to attend on the Lord without distraction. Yet all this will admit of
exceptions, some men undoubtedly (whether Laical or Clerical) living much
chaster in wedlock, than others do in Celebacy, and singleness of life: and
some men living more divinely and holily in the midst of much business, and
tumultuous Cities, than others in Cloisters, or Deserts remote from the worlds
contagion and vanity. For might not this be, Precepts would certainly have been
delivered in Scripture to bind us to one way. But no judgment or conclusion of
a Case is wont to be made by wise men, from the variety and uncertainty of
particular persons, but in reference to the thing it self, whether such ways of
serving God, which are vulgarly called Evangelical Counsels, are not in
themselves, with the like concurrence of Gods Grace, and other due
circumstances which may be supposed common to other states, more probable and
apt means to attain heaven, and serve God more devoutly than the other: and
whether this state of separation and dedication of our time and actions unto
God, are not more susceptible of the Grace of God than common conversations.
The Affirmative we maintain, and see not how the foresaid reason opposes it, to
any purpose.

A second main reason is, That, though it is lawful, and may be expedient to
choose such a kind of life, yet it is not so fit to bind our selves to it by a
Vow. For we must vow to do nothing which is not in our power to perform. But
such kind of Chastity, suck kind of Separation and Sequestration of our selves
from the World and civil Society, is not in our power to fulfill. And that
because they are the special Gifts of God; as the Scripture tells us, when it
says, Every man has his proper gift of God, 1 Cor. 7. 7.
etc. and these are such.

But to this I demand, first, What they mean by a thing being in our power? Do
they mean in our natural power, without Gods blessing and grace, above our
natural ability? then indeed this, and many more Christian duties are beyond
our power and strength to do of our selves. Our whole Vow of Baptism consists
of such particulars as the Catechize tells us truly, We are not able to do of
our selves. Shall the Vow therefore in Baptism be judged rash, unreasonable,
and unlawful, because we have vowed more than we can make good of our selves?
Oh, but (say they) this Vow is necessary and commanded by God, but the other
are unnecessary and uncommanded. But this is but little to the purpose,
supposing all were true that is in the exception supposed: For we are now
enquiring abstractly, and in general, after the nature of a vow; whether a Vow
may not be made of those things that are not naturally in our power. For the
necessity, or the command of God himself, cannot make that reasonable for us to
do, or vow to do, which we are wholly unable to do. And by consequence, this
sort of vowing would be much worse than the other, as bringing Gods Providence
and Justice into question, as well as man's Wisdom and Piety; that he should
command us to do that which we are not able to do, and to vow what we are not
able to perform. But if they take Gods Grace, his Promise, and Goodness in to
the assistance of man's natural or reasonable abilities, as they ought to do,
how can they say directly, that the matter of such Vows are not in our power?
St. Paul could do all things through him Phil. 4 13. 1 Cor. 12. 31.
that strengthened him. And so surely may other good Christians do, so far as
he requires. And we know the Scripture requires, Covet earnestly the best
gifts. The question then will return again upon us with no less force than
before; whether these states be not more perfect, and better than others. For
if so, they may be coveted and aspired after; though they be not absolutely in
our Power. I confess, according to the Doctrine of St. Paul, all men have not
the same gifts, either of Nature or Grace. Every man has his proper gift of
God, etc. And withal, that such may be 1 Cor. 7. 7.
the natural tempers and inclination of some persons toward Conjugal and
Political Society, that they may wholly distrust themselves in the due
execution of such Vows. And therefore such Vows may be unlawful in those
circumstances and junctures. But when a man considers, first, the Grace and
Promise of God; when he considers again, the virtue of ordinary means to attain
these graces, in withdrawing a man's self from the outward Incentives to
transgress, and denying himself the common occasions disposing to such things,
against which he vows; and lastly, the efficacy of a Vow duly made; which upon
reflection may quench all sparks falling into the heart or mind of man; he can
scarce affirm positively, that such a thing is not in his power, but because it
is not in his will. And does not St. Paul plainly suppose as a certain truth,
that a man may have power over his own will, even in such things as these,
where he says, Nevertheless, he that 1 Cor. 7. 37.
stands steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his
own will, and has decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin, does
well? And does it not in like manner from hence follow, that this power that a
man has over his own will, may be lawdably exerted and exercised in decreeing
steadfastly such a state of Life, as we now speak of, and that this is well done?

This evidence of truth against the frivolous exceptions of some, has
occasioned another more favorable, and moderate, and most reasonable of all
the Objections I can call to mind on this subject. They dare not determine
against the matter of such Evangelical perfections: and waving their opposition
to Vows of this nature, they persist to deny, that, if such perfect state there
be, it is free to accept or refuse it; if we have such a measure of Divine
Grace, whereby we are enabled to walk so perfectly: And that in such cases,
there is the obligation of a Precept upon us to live so, rather then the nature
of a Counsel: (and it is the distinction of Counsel and Command which is so
much stomached by them;) The reason hereof is, because God in justice does
exact answerable service to his Talents lent unto his servants. And so having
given them grace and power to do an acceptable piece of worship to him, does
rather command, than advise that it should be performed.

To the solution of this may be useful that distinction of Gerson, rarely
Monitio d^citu^ quod plus liga^ quam Concilium, and minus quam praeceptum.
Gerson de Vita Spirituali, Lect. 5. Praeceptum est imperium obligans ad
observationem rei vel actus Imperati. Gerson de December praeceptis, To. 1. Par.
2. Praeceptum est hoc cui non obedire peccatum est. Concilium quo si uti
nolucris minus boni adipiscaris, nomen mali aliquid perpetrabis. Aug. de Sta.
Virginit. cap. 15. and 17.
to be found in others. For he finds another thing between Precept and Counsel,
and that is, Monition or Admonition, which, says he, binds more than Counsels,
and less than Precepts. And so I conceive it true, that in the Case above put
of Gods grace more enabling a man, a disposing him to greater perfections, then
are common to Christians, that there does thereupon follow a tacit admonition,
and particular injunction to improve the same to the best effects and ends: but
this cannot properly be called a Precept, or a Command, according to the
received manner of speech, which to alter for no other reason but to gratify
squamish minds and stomachs, is no reason. For a Precept according to Gerson in
another Treatise, is A Command obliging to observation of a thing, or act
commanded: which description I suppose he borrowed from St. Austin, who says,
A Precept is such a thing that it is sin not to obey it. A Counsel is that,
which if you refuse to make use of, you obtain less good, but commit no evil.
So that as Ambrose and Prosper, and innumerable other Fathers, as well Greek as
Latin, speak in this case, A Precept is that which keeps the Law. Counsel that
which transcends the Law. Now to apply this more particularly, Commands and
Counsels are general, and extend to all, but with this difference: that a
Precept or Command is general and absolute, binding all without exception under
the penalties of sin and punishment: Counsels bind all, but not absolutely, but
conditionally upon such considerations of aiming at more then ordinary
perfection of virtue and reward. Admonition can be nothing else but a personal
advice and exhortation, upon certain supposals made of having (for instance
greater measure of Grace from God:) But such as this last cannot prejudice the
two former, because we are not now speaking of Particulars, which are infinite,
according to emergent occasions, and so can be no rule to direct men by: but of
those things which may be reduced to general Rules, nothing personal is
considered in them. And thus the former Opinion holds good, which
distinguishes two Classes of Christians, from the two several methods and ways
before them: And that though Martha may certainly attain heaven: Yet Mary may
set above her there, and that by reason that she had on earth chosen the better
part. For the better concluding this point, I shall transcribe Gersons modest
and moderate sense of it, as that which I hold very fair and reasonable; in a
Treatise on purpose of these things. Though it be acknowledged that Counsels
conduce to the perfection of Christian life, Si Concilia ad vitae Christianae
perfectionem facere dinoscantur, non tamen essentialiter hominem perficiunt,
etc. Gerson de Consiliis Egelic.
yet they are not essentially requisite to Christian perfection. The first of
these is clear from the discourse of the Gospel: For the second, it is thus
argued, Because many have been perfect in a spiritual life without the
observation of Evangelical Counsels, as appears from Abraham -- and from Job.
From whence it is manifest, that Evangelical Counsels so far pertain to
perfection of Spiritual Life and conduce to it; because they are as so many
Instruments exceedingly expediting and furthering perfection of Spiritual Life
to be obtained; and preserves it being once had: Thus he: and no more, nor less
do I mean or intend to say at present, concerning the use of them: which being
rightly understood and fairly considered, is sufficient to plead for it self.
But could this be only said for it, that no man has dared directly to condemn
it, it might suffice an equal mind. For though there were more than a good many
that deny the Institution of them in Scriptures, they cannot deny the things so
commended to be lawful, and consonant to Christian Religion and the Scriptures:
nor that those methods duly observed, make not toward the high ends of
Christianity: only sundry Cases they are able to put, and I make no doubt, but
might give many Instances of the not only vain, but evil success of such means.
But so may they of many more things which they hold requisite to edification,
and increase of Grace. Was not Judas much worse after the Eucharist received
(for that he did receive it, contrary to some men's opinion, I here suppose)
than he was before? And we can instance in many who by zealous preaching and
prayer have exposed themselves and others to greater damnation, than if they
had never taken on them that holy function, or these had not so devoutly
thronged them. Dr. Humphrey therefore against Campian speaks as much,
Humphredus contra 2 Ration. Campiani.
as I think the Church of Rome it self demands in this, though he shows an
aversness to agreement therein, as suspecting what is no ways to be feared, as
being a contradiction to the state of the Question it self: which supposes
that those perfections are rather voluntary than necessary; free, and not
constrained; and the very terms of the question declare they are Counsels, and
not Commands, and yet he pleases to write thus. They call them Evangelical
Counsels, which are not commanded in the Gospel. And what Christ speaks of
Eunuchs (for the Kingdom of Heavens sake) in the Gospel, and what Saint Paul
speaks of Virginity, we oppose not greatly. Let it be a Counsel to whom it is
given [but we have already showed that Counsels no less than Precepts are given
to all, though all do not, and none are bound to take them simply] so they
consent that it is not commanded; Let it be free, so it be not constrained. Let
it be voluntary, so it be not necessary; not by a vowing Law, not obtruded upon
men. It were a manifest contradiction to hold that such Counsels should be so
necessary or forced. None does, none can hold them so. There are not wanting
indeed too many Instances of these states imposed upon persons, without any
consent of theirs: and this is a notorious and unsufferable abuse of them, not
in a sober mode defended by the practisers of it. In such Cases, until at least
there shall be a free consent postnate to that state, it can neither be called
Counsel nor Perfection: but on the one hand extreme and barbarous tyranny and
villainy; and on the other unprofitable misery and compulsion.

But that which troubles many is the Vow annexed to, and confirming such like
righteous resolutions. For a Vow, say they, makes it necessary and destroys
liberty. Indeed, if this liberty were taken away by any man, besides ones self,
no small invasion of both natural and Christian liberty, to the reproach of
such bonds: But when a man freely binds himself, he is more afraid than hurt in
his precious jewel, Liberty. And is there not a Vow in marriage, as well as in
single life? Should therefore a man refuse to marry because he thereby does
apparently take away his liberty? as St. Paul expressly teaches, where he tells
us A man [that is married] has not power over his own body, 1 Cor. 7. 4.
nor a woman power of her body. Indeed this he may do out of prudence humane,
if he pleases. But if he pleases to marry, and not pleases to vow Chastity and
Constancy in marriage, he would be a profaner of that sacred Order. If they
say, that this is necessary, but the other is not necessary: and therefore this
may be lawful and useful, but not the other; I answer, first, this begs the
thing in question, which is, that we are not to vow but in things in themselves
good or evil, which contradicts all examples of commendable vows in Scripture.
Secondly, That it is equally necessary a man should live in Chastity, whether
in single or wedded life; and it is certain, there is no invincible necessity
of seeking remedy against the temptations of a single life, by marriage. And it
is certain likewise, that marriage does not infallibly prevent the mischiefs of
incontinence of an higher nature. And seldom is it found but the same person,
if he used the like care and conscience over himself before his marriage, that
he does, and has bound himself to do, after his marriage, but he might live
continently out of marriage, as well as in marriage. For very many accidents do
occur, and some constantly, in wedlock, which renders that remedy useless to
men. Now, if it be argued that a man ought not to vow Virginal or Vidual
Chastity, because many times (which is true) the Devil takes an occasion from
thence to tempt him worse; the same will be said against the Vow of Fidelity to
God and Man, in the state of Matrimony. For the fall is much worse, and the
danger not much less, as has been showed. And the Devil most busily and
eagerly seeks to impel to those sins which are most notorious. How many have
with little wit and great impudence, professed they could love their own Wives
above all women, were it not for the reason that God and Nature requires they
should prefer them so, that they are their wives, and that they are tied to
them, their liberty is destroyed thereby? And may not as good an argument be
made from hence against all Votal Ties in marriage, as from marriage? And
whereas it is said, a Vow casts a man diverse times into a greater temptation:
it is merely accidental and personal, according to the particular humor of
some men, who knowing their disease of contradiction and renitencie to what is
imposed on them, may with prudence avoid such a snare, as they call it. But we
all know, things are not to be estimated or concluded from such contingencies
and personal irregularities, but from the nature of the things themselves. And
none can deny but the nature of a Vow is to bind, and not to loose; and to
prevent, and not to lead into temptations or snares: and withal, he that Vows
the thing, or the effect, does implicitly vow the means conducing thereunto,
and against the occasions and temptations tending to the contrary.

It is farther objected against a Vow, that it is taken to be part of the
worship of God: And this, Being made part of the worship of God, is a general
Battering Ram, whereby most ill Reforming Divines endeavor to beat down all
things they like not. For first, they religiously hold that nothing must be
part of Gods worship which he has not commanded in his word: which is not
altogether true, nor false, no more then the contrary; That every thing
commanded in his Word is part of his worship. And again, they hold that every
thing that is done in the worship of God, is part of the worship of God; and
from hence set themselves with great animosity against all forms, and actions,
and Ceremonies in order to the service of God, as so many parts of the worship
of God, of humane invention, and therefore to be utterly rejected: And such,
say they, are Vows. Bellarm. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 16. To. 2.


The Popish writers do grant, and go about to prove that they are Acts of Gods
worship, but very unluckily to themselves, holding that they are Counsels and
not Precepts; The Puritan Writers, that they are so far from that, that they
are unlawful, but in those things that are commanded of God; and therefore, in
the Instances before given of single and separate life, unlawful. But Peter
Martyr (it should seem) goes by himself, denying the use of all Vows under the
New Testament, but approving of them under the Old, as commanded many times,
and being uncommanded worship under the New Testament: And that with men of
such principles, is bad enough.

But I suppose a mean way is best in this case; which holds Vows lawful, even
in uncommanded worship: and Secondly, that of themselves they are no part, nor
so much as act of Gods service, but the manner only of his service. And
Thirdly, that it is no less lawful and expedient to Vow under the state of the
Gospel than under the Law.

And to begin with the last; That which deceived Peter Martyr and diverse
others, seems to be an erroneous supposition made by them, that Vows were under
precept and command under the Law, in certain cases; but it is not so. For
though many Rules and Precepts are found in Moses his Law about governing and
regulating them that had freely made Vows, there is no precept given that men
should vow, but that was left free. Secondly, those Precepts of paying Vows
found in Scriptures, do not at all concern the taking of Vows simply. So David:
Vow and pay unto the Lord, Psalm 76. 11.
means no more than Vowing, pay unto the Lord: which is the meaning of the
Prophet Esaias also, saying: The Egyptians shall vow a vow unto the Lord, Esaiah
19. 21.
and perform it. And in no place of Scripture is there any injunction simply to
vow. And therefore the case being alike as to the Vow it self, though different
as to the matter, if it were lawful for the Jews to do this uncommanded act, as
they call it, it is also lawful for Christians, whom they acknowledge to be no
more, but rather less bound up from uncommanded worship than the Jews.

And from hence are easily and better answered Peter Martyrs arguments against
Vows of Christians, then by Bellarmine. For we deny that Vows were instituted
Ceremonies under the Law, which Martyr supposes; for they were not instituted
at all. And that he says, That we have no mention of Vows in the New Testament
as there is in the Old, is not altogether true, as shall be seen afterward: but
if it were true; as has been said, those things which we know by the light and
law of nature, the Scriptures are not so solicitous simply to institute, as to
prescribe Rules concerning the due execution of them. But common reason has
instructed Gentile, Jew, and Christian, upon occasion, to vow to God; and
therefore, whatever is peculiar to Christians is provided for by the New
Testament, in determining the matter consistent with Christian Faith and common
equity, and the manner, First, that it be made by a Person who has power over
himself: For no man can make a lawful Vow to do any thing to the prejudice of
the right of another. And therefore children under the power of their Parents,
cannot bind themselves firmly in any such Vow which tends to the disobliging
them from their known duty to their Parents: neither can Subjects vow any thing
to the disservice of their Sovereign or Country: Nor can Clergymen vow any
thing contrary to the subjection and obedience of their Superiors, or
detriment of the Church in general, unless it be ratified by them: but all is
void, or may be made void by them in lawful power over them. And the Arguments
of Peter Martyr taken from Christian Liberty have been answered already.

Now to return to the first, That Vows are lawful to Christians is showed
already from the natural reason of Vows. And that it was not an invention of
Moses, or introduced by God, first under him, appears from the general consent
of all religious persons who never knew any thing of the Law of Moses, or if,
as in later times, some nations did, yet regarded it not: And from the practice
of Jacob long before Moses, who we read vowed unto the Lord a vow. It appears
likewise from the many moral precepts in Genes. 28. 20.
the Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, which concern themselves very little in
the Law of Moses. And the Predictions in the Prophets of Vows to be made at the
time of the Gospel, are not well put off by saying the Prophets spoke
figuratively. But it may be here noted, as a wonderful dangerous abuse of the
Old Testaments Authority, not to be content to admit an invalidity of proofs
drawn from thence to confirm Evangelical Duties; but to make it no small
presumption against the Evangelicalness of any duty, that it is first found in
the Old Testament; which is a gross abuse of Scripture; especially by them who
would be held enemies to Antimonians. They ought therefore, first of all, to
show that such things are purely Legal, that is, as the Law it self is
Mosaical, and Typical, and Ceremonial, before they can damn them there, for no
better reason but, there they find them.

Add to this, when we challenge them to the most ancient and manifold
Presedents of the Christian Church, who constantly made Vows of various natures
to God, they presently betake themselves to their common subterfuge, pretense
of appeal to the Word of God as a Rule, and that without any respect to any not
truly divine, Guides otherwise directing: And this they do, as confidently, as
if it had been concluded out of Scripture, to the contrary. For in such cases
indeed their appeal would be most just and reasonable: but until that, little
better then ridiculous; especially Scripture being before advised about, and
appearing not definitive in the case; Antiquity and Holy precedents consulted
with, the better to know the mind of Scripture. For instance, that text of St.
Paul to Timothy, says of young Widows, They have damnation in themselves
because 1 Timothy 5. 12.
they have cast off their first Faith. Many of late days interpret the Apostle
to mean only the Faith of Christ, in general: Others understand him to speak of
a Faith particularly made to Christ, by the Order of Widows vowing singleness
of life; and in all reason this seems to be most favored by the context. But
besides this, appeal is made by the one party to the judgment of the ancient
and holy Christians interpreting this both by their writings and practice, as
relating specially to the dedication of Widowhood to God. After this fair
dealing, for men to declare they will be tried by none but that which they know
is the main thing in question, is very vain, and somewhat more. They having no
special text so interdicting such Vows, as this is to commend them. But the
worst of it is this, that if there were any way more perfect then that they
have pitched on, they should be sufferers in the good opinion of the world, but
that must by no means be endured. And this, at the end of all, is the great
absurdity they bring us to: but surely not so great, but both the Cause and
Defenders of it may well show their face after all this granted and owned.

The second thing, now in the third place to be touched, is concerning the
Nature of a Vow in it self, viz. That so it is no proper act, nor any proper
part of Gods Service, but the manner of it. For to vow to God is an indifferent
thing to Good or Evil. A man may as well vow to Gods dishonor, as his glory:
It is therefore good or evil in relation to the matter, about which the Vow is
made. For to vow Sacrifices under the Law, and to vow Alms under the Gospel, or
Virginity, or such like, is no farther part of the Service of God then the
thing it self tends to the worship of God: and its nature and office is to bind
to the true and due performance of a thing, but not absolutely a duty in its
self.

The principle doubt on the contrary may be that which is taken from that which
a man devotes to God, as an ingredient to all vows. For when a man vows, he of
a free man makes himself servile, and limited to one of those things, to which
formerly he was free. And this we have showed is an argument of some against
vowing; because it takes away the liberty God had given. On the other side, the
contrary party may in my judgment, turn it against them, and make it an
argument of worth and excellency, because it gives to God that which is to us
most precious. For when St. Paul says, If you may be free, use it rather, and
stand fast in the liberty where with Christ has made you free; he undoubtedly
means only in reference to man; and then only, when we really have, and not
presume only that we have, such a liberty: and when this liberty is that which
pertains to the substance of the Gospel, as most of those places alleged to
found a liberty, do aim at. But do they think (as it should seem) that either
Natural, Civil, or Evangelical Liberty is such a thing, and so given unto us of
God, that we may not render it to him, nor part with it again to him? Is it too
good or sacred to give him it, from whom we received it? Nay, the more dear and
precious it is to us, the more acceptable it should be to him. When we deny our
selves the liberty he has given us, the better to serve him: surely it is no
less pleasing to God than to part with meat, drink, money, and the time which
he has given us, dedicating the same to him. It is strange therefore, next to
monstrous, that Christians should stumble so at the Scriptures (and they
especially, who will scarce allow any man to be cunning in the Scriptures
besides themselves, or to be governed by them as they pretend to be) as to make
such fond conclusions from them, the contrary to which is much the truer. To
give away our liberty to God, is an excellent Sacrifice to him; and they would
prove out of Scripture, we ought not to give it him at all. For if they prove
not this, they prove nothing; when they say, we ought not to make vows to him,
because it takes away our liberty. And therefore, to the argument, viz. that by
this it should follow that vowing is in it self an act, or part of Gods
worship; I answer, That if any thing here be an act of worshipping God, it is
the giving up it self of our liberty, and not the vowing to give it up: for
this is but the means and manner so to serve and worship God, and not the
worship it self. And thus much Perkins Perkins Cases of Conscience. Chap. 14.
Lib. 2.
acknowledges in vows about bodily exercises, such as Fasting, Prayers, and
Alms; but likes not it so to be in other matters. Indeed, as he confusedly and
crudely touches the point, passing from the nature of a Vow in it self, which
was his question unto the matter, he might very well write against some vows,
and prove them unlawful, when the thing it self is unlawful to be done, whether
with, or without a vow, such as are ceremonial acts of the Law of Moses, and
moral evils against truth, justice, or piety it self. And thus much of the form
of vowing, the lawfulness and uses in general.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Matter of Vows in particular. And first, of the Virginal state, that it
is both possible and laudable. And that it is lawful to vow Celibacie or
Widowhood. No Presidents in the Old Testament favoring Virginity. The Virgin
Mary vowed not Virginity, no Votary before the Annunciation.

WE now come to speak more particularly of Vows, as to their matter. And
because the matter of Vows may be infinite, as good and evil, to which they
extend themselves; to Good affirmatively, and Evil negatively; I shall confine
my Discourse at present to the three most noted things in Vows, in which, we
have said, the states of serving God principally consists: A Clerical state,
a state Virginal or Vidual, and a state Monastical: all which ordinarily do, or
may relate to the worship of God in a more eminent manner; yet not with such
inseparable virtues to that end, that it may not, and does not often happen
that they expose to greater mischiefs. But it must always be remembered, that
we, nor any man else, do not compare the vices of a single life with the
virtues of a married life; nor compare the vices of a separate and claustral
life, with the sobriety of a political life. For who is so fond and blind a
Patron of them, as to commend them, before these? And yet we find most of the
Adversaries of the said states to argue from this most unequal supposition,
that the one lives contrary to his Rule and Order; and the other agreably to
his: and then having thus disadvantageously stated the Case, triumph in a vain
and silly victory, they presume to have obtained. But put the Case, as in all
justice and reason it ought to be, between a person that keeps to the rules and
ends of separate and single life; and him that keeps to the rules and ends of a
conjugal life, or political, and then let the matter be fairly debated and
determined; which is to be preferred before other.

Now that such a supposition may be made, and that a separate state from women,
and on the other side of women from men, may be laudably made good (which too
many are so hard of belief as to judge next to impossible) will appear from
these three heads: From the Scripture: From Examples: And from the favorable
sense to be made of such estates.

First, our Savior supposes it done, and implicitly recommends the doing of it
to others, which he would never have done, had there been no moral possibility
of observing the same: For saying in St. Matthew, There be Matthew. 19. 12.
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake. He that is able to receive it, let
him receive it: Is there any Expositour of account in the Church, who can deny
that Christ spoke here of marriage? Can they deny that Christ gives his
approbation of that Eunuchism voluntary, or denial to a man's self, the ordinary
use of women? Can they deny that he advises to it upon supposition that a man
is able? How then can they deny the moral possibility of Virginal Chastity? And
does not St. Paul, wishing that All men were as he 1 Cor. 7. 7.
was, wish that they lived in single estate at least, if not Virginity? And
does he not in the forecited place to Timothy, condemn those persons who have 1 Timothy 5.
violated their troth given to Christ, to live sequestered from men? I know
late Interpreters have drawn the Apostles words to another sense, but contrary
to the received; and therefore easily not received by any man. These and many
other places of Scripture, especially in the Seventh Chapter of the First
Epistle to the Corinthians, which do prefer and exhort to single life, do much
more advise us of the possibility of duly persevering in that state, and at the
same time, of the Eligibleness of that state above the contrary.

Secondly, The examples of the pure and holy life of unwedded persons, are
innumerable, and so glorious, as it puts me to the blush for them, who cannot
blush, to oppose such a cloud of witnesses of Fathers, and Councils, and Canons
Special concerning the tuition and value of such Livers, rather than
Injunctions to that state, and eminent lights of Examples as all Ecclesiastical
Histories abound with. They are confessedly many, great, and certain, and
therefore I shall spare the labor of instancing in any of them: as likewise of
the many and rich ornaments of Rhetoric wherewith the ancient Fathers have
decked and commended that state; even to that degree, that they may be thought
sometimes to have overdone in the point: And do often put in seasonable and
serious Cautions that the eminence of Aug de Sanct. Virginitar. c. 1. and cap.
8. cap. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 35. Ecclesia Christi gratid ejus qui pro se crucifixus
est roberata, etc. Origin. Hom. 3. in Genes. (...), etc Chrysostom. Hom. 61. Tom. 6.
(...) Chrysostom. Hom. 77. in Matthaeum.
that condition should not give them the temptation of high-mindedness and
pride. As Augustine saying, Virginitas is not only to be magnified that it
might be loved, but admonished that it be not puffed up. And afterward: For
even that it self is not honorable so much, because it is Virginity, but
because it is dedicated to God. So that in another place he says: I speak not
rashly, a Woman that is married, is better then a Virgin to be married: for she
has what the other desires. It is not therefore simply good, but only as it
renders a person more apt to serve God, with better attention, less
distraction, as St. Paul intimates, and more devotion: and is a great victory
over the natural will, and a self denial of the lawful use of the world, as
Origin upon Genesis notes. For, says he, the Church of Christ being fortified
by the Grace of him that was crucified for her, not only abstaineth from
unlawful and abominable beds, but also from lawful, etc. St. Chrysostom
commends the state of Religion under the Gospel from this, that under the Law
Virginity is not so much as mentioned, any farther then by way of Prophecy, as
to be in the New Law of Christ: and that particularly in Psalm 45. v. 14, 15.
And in another Homily he gives us the reason, why Virginity was not commanded
in the New Testament; viz. because of its Excellency, which all good
Christians could not attain to.

And perhaps (which is a third thing to be noted in devoting single life to
God) the severities and fears are too much aggravated by some) and the
difficulties of preserving the soul and mind chaste and pure, wherein true
Virginity consists, rather than in corporal Integrity, as the Fathers, and
particularly St. Austin, grants, and proves at large. For when Chastity is
vowed, certainly all evil motions and inward lustings, Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib.
1. cap. 17, and 18.
are declared against, as well as outward impurities; but always with a
supposal of humane frailties, and allowances for sudden, unadvised, and
unapproved evil cogitations. Nay perhaps, though a person fails so far as to
entertain with assent and consent morose thoughts (as they call lasting and
delighting cogitations of sin) he may not be said to break the form of his Vow,
though he in some measure violates the end of his Vow. And as to sin, which is
contained in the Vow of Virginity, men's hands and minds were tied from that,
before they vowed, as really, though not so strongly as afterward. The precise
object therefore of such Vows is properly an unwedded life, together with
Chastity. Which, that it is not so unsuperable a difficulty as to exceed the
ordinary power of man, by the Grace of God enabling him, appears from the
ordinary course of life of the opposers of that state. For do not they
themselves pass through the difficult and fiery trials of such temptations
frequently in the prime of their days, the strength of corrupt nature, and
weakness of reason, faith, and prudence to bridle irregular inclinations, and
yet would take it very ill men should condemn them for violaters of Gods Laws,
and impure offenders in that kind? Can civil prudence or policy secure them in
the most dangerous time of all, till they are freed from that place which makes
them incapable of being married; or they are put into a fair and hopeful
condition to live handsomely in the world, according to their judgment and
design; and may not the higher and nobler ends of Religion propounded to a man's
self, and studiously improved, have the same effect, and give them the same or
greater safety? Do they, many of them, live chastely for thirty years, it may be
more or less, unmarried, and yet would be loath to be censured for unchaste
persons, and that upon the grounds of humane and carnal prudence, and dare they
to decree them to naughtiness out of necessity, who shall choose that life
perpetually out of the grounds of Religion? This hangs very ill together: They
will say out of St. Paul, It is better to marry than to burn. Very good. But
when? and how? and on whom does this Rule take place? so soon as he begins to
burn? Or though he burns, not till he be rich enough, and is outwardly
accommodated to his likeing? Can a man preserve himself for the worlds sake,
when he may less expect the assistance of Gods Grace, and can he not for Gods
sake, when he may more hope for it? But Theodoret does in great part relieve
(...) Theod. Haeretic. Fabularum, l. 5. c. 26.
both one, and other: where he interprets St. Paul, not so rigorously, that all
infestation of lustful motions should oblige any person to marriage, but only
such an evil which should wholly master a man. Yet is not any person, from the
remission of the severest Law of Chastity by the favor of God, to indulge to
himself a latitude in the custody he ought to have over his person: for then it
becomes not a venial or light Infirmity, but a presumptuous breach of his Vow
and Gods Law.

But yet there remains the old known exception against what issaid, which not
absolutely denying the possibility of such a life, denis that any such state of
life is to be chosen under the bonds of a Vow. To which we may yield Vide eriam
Chrysostom. (...). To. 6. page 251. Bellarm. de Monachis, l. 2. c. 22.
thus much, that at the first publishing of the Gospel, and practice of single
life, such Vows of Virginity or chaste Widowhood were in less use than
afterward. That there was not any such life in ordinary use, nay so much as
mentioned in the Church of the Jews, we have heard Chrysostom positively
oppose, and thereby refel the bold argument of Bellarmine, proving the Virgin
Mary had made a vow of perpetual Virginity, before the Salutation of the Angel
toward her; which, as he and Baronius, with many of the same metal, was the
cause she wondered so at the manner of speech to her. But there were other
causes sufficient to cause wonder in the Blessed Virgin, besides a Vow of
Virginity: though some Fathers prone to imagine the highest, it may be, of the
Holy Virgin, have in the height of their Rhetoric let fall somewhat to that
purpose. Yet it is manifest from the Sea Seldom de Jure Gen ium, and apud
He^rae^^, lib. 5. cap. 3.
Records of the Jewish Church, there was nothing of that nature in use amongst
them; and if not, It is not to be believed that the Virgin Mary took up such a
strange and illaudable resolution, as that was amongst them, who esteemed want
of offspring no small disparagement to them. I wonder here most at Perkins,
how his fervor and judgment should so far fail him herein, as to give such an
unnecessary advantage to his Enemies, to affirm that Jeptha's daughter was the
first that vowed Virginity. When it is most certain that if that sense be
granted, that she was not sacrificed properly, but only devoted to God; this
was no free act, chosen by her self, but a sad sentence of her Father,
condemning her to that unhappy state of life.

But that it is lawful, not only to do this, but also Vow the performance
thereof, needs no other arguments than may be easily drawn from the general
grounds of the lawfulness and usefulness of Vows, in the former Chapter. And
the constant practice of the most Saints of God, in the Church of God; whom,
upon such account as this, for men to pelt with vain censures, is the very next
way to ruin their own esteem and reputation; which they may aim to raise by
such unfortunate attempts, unless perhaps with such, who can judge of nothing
but from their mouths. For what a man may do lawfully without a Vow, he may do
much more with a Vow; but such things as these may be done without a Vow,
therefore also with one.

CHAP. V.
Of the second state of special serving God, the Clerical state or Ministerial.
Of the necessity and liberty of singleness of life in a Clergyman. The Opinion
and custom of Antiquity concerning it. That it is in the power of the Church at
this day to restrain or permit the marriage of Priests. The Conveniences and
Inconveniences of wedded life in Priests. Chrysostom's Judgment of Marriage
and Virginity recited.

IN the next place, we are to look into the state of serving God in
Ecclesiastical Ministration: and here first apply what is above spoken
concerning Celebacie to the Clergy. There are not wanting amongst the Romanists
who annex Celebacie to a Clerical Life, by a Divine Precept; but with so little
probability of truth, and modesty of writing that, the learnedest of their own
Party are ashamed of them, and confute them: and so we leave them.

The most current opinion is, That by perpetual Tradition and Precept of the
Church, marriage of the Clergy has been restrained. But this will by no means
hold, First against the very first institution of Ecclesiastical Persons by
Christ himself; who, as it were to sanctify marriage in general, concerned
himself in the marriage of others: And to declare how that state was not at all
inconsistent with a state Clerical of twelve Disciples John 2. 1, 2.
which Christ chose to minister for him, Eleven are supposed to be married
persons; or at least to have been married formerly. To answer which by saying,
that after they were chosen they forsook their wives, is to evade and not
really to answer. First, because it had been as easy for Christ surely, to
have picked out a dozen persons free from the knowledge of women, as to make
choice of such as were wedded, had he judged any incapacity in these to the
Evangelical Ministry. But secondly, do we find any thing in special prescribed
by Christ for such separation from wives, more than for other Christians, who
were not Ministers of the Gospel. For of all faithful Christians it is spoken,
in certain junctures, that whoever forsakes not Father, and Mother, and
Brethren, and Sisters, and Wise, and Children for Christ's sake, cannot be his
Disciple. And there is no rule but common necessity and prudence (not Divine
prescription) which requires any man for the Gospels sake to forsake his Wife,
rather than his Father and Mother. Yet that the Apostles did actually absent,
rather than separate themselves from their Wives, and that others who entered
into the ministration to the Church under the Apostles, foreseeing what St.
Paul expresses, the present distress of the Church, as well in regard of the 1
Cor. 7. 26.
persecutions of the Church, as the paucity of Preachers, the greatness of the
Harvest, and the small number of Laborers, did decline the state of marriage,
is very probable: because they were required by Christ's Injunction to Go and
teach all Nations: which traveling life ill could consist with cohabitation
with Wives. And therefore, it must be given them Gratis, and not by the merits
of any reason o^ grounds they can show, that that such relinquishing of their
Wives was either total, or upon conscience made of the thing it self. Does not
St. Paul say expressly in the words before those now touched, Concerning
Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord? If such as served at the Altar were
to be excepted, surely he 1 Cor. 7. 25.
would not have left the Rule so general as we find; speaking only according to
humane prudence. And though they search with their best eyes, they shall not be
able to find in any other writings of the Apostles, one Text o Scripture
obliging Bishops or Priests to singleness of life, more than those of the
Laity: unless they argue from reason, That Virginal Chastity is more severe,
more pure, more spiritual than conjugal, which is yielded, and therefore more
obliging the Clergy, who should be more spiritual persons then others: all
which I deny not; but say, that this binds them no more from marriage than it
does from wine and strong drink, which if none of the Clergy ever used, they
were the more to be commended, unless in such cases as St. Paul advises
Timothy, For their stomachs sake, and often infirmities. And thus is
Bellarmin's first proof laid. Bellarm. de Clericis, l. 1. c. 19.


The sole grounds then of unmarried state of Priests must be fetched from
Tradition and Reason: of both which we shall presume to speak a word or two.
Apostolical Tradition is pretended, but not trusting much to that, recourse is
had to the Old Testament, from certain allegorical interpretations made of some
Rites in Moses's Law, which may do well in the Church, where they used them to
persuade, but ill in the Schools, to prove the same as a necessary duty. The
argument taken from the custom of the Priest abstaining from their Wives during
the time of their ministration, I do really 1 Chronicles. 24.
believe to have had an influence upon Primitive Christians Judaizing in many
other things of like nature, to restrain them from the use of their Wives upon
solemn ministrations. But this was without Law or Canon, freely undertaken, and
embraced as was Celebacie it self, at first, until about the year 385. Siricius
Bishop of Rome made a constitution that it should, and ought to be; and that on
that ground. And that the inferior Orders, such as Ostiaries, Readers,
Exorcists, and Acolythites should only be permitted to marry. But Alexander the
third about the year 1160 proceeded, according to the method of that Church, to
shut them also out the doors of Orders, that should presume to marry. But all,
that was done against those in greater or sacred Orders in the Church for more
than three hundred years after Christ, was to deny such as were married access
to the Altar by way of ministration, who from that time abstained not from
their Wives, as did the Council of Arles, and some in Spain. Only a custom
prevailed very generally and anciently, to suffer none who were in those called
Sacred Orders, such as were Bishops, and Priests, and Deacons, to marry after
they were so ordained; for if they did, they were dismissed of their Office or
their Wives. The Eastern Church ever accepted of married persons into the
Clergy, and at length, understanding the Apostle, Let the Bishops be the
husbands of one wife, as a Precept rather than a Caution, that they should be
husbands of no more then one, which in all likelihood the truest sense; in the
Sixth Council In Trullo, decreed they only should be received into Priestly
Orders, who were married. And therefore all antiquity for twelve hundred years
together fails them in this, that it was otherwise then voluntary, that married
Priests lived from their Wives who had before orders: or that married Men might
not be made Priests: though it is confessed they preferred unmarried Persons
before them, until that Sixth Council, which for that reason amongst others,
Bellarmine calls a Profane Synod, and Baronius impious: such a great veneration
have they for the Authority of the Church, when it speaks not their sense.

Yet as we are far from giving an exact and full account of this long
controversy here; so are we (so far as I can Divine at the judgment of our
Church) willing to accommodate the matter with others, that can digest any
thing but their own stout devises, to acknowledge a Power in the Church to
bind, or loose her sons of the Clergy, to an unmarried state, or to leave them
free. For to aggravate matters to that height as to make it absolute tyranny or
Antichristian, and to be against the word of God, which says Marriage is
honorable in all things, and the like, implies more of the weakness of the
Arguer, than strength in the Argument; more of spite and passion, than
ingenuity or soberness. For it is answered very sufficiently, marriage is not
condemned, but virginity commended before it. Marriage is not at all declared
to be evil, when Celebacie is said to be much better. Marriage is not
condemned, when certain persons are condemned for marrying. Does a Father that
should cast off his Son for marrying without his liking and approbation, fall
into the guilt of those Heretics, against which the Scripture and Antiquity
both make, who simply condemn Marriage in it self as unclean, and evil? No more
surely does that Church which prohibits it conditionally to her children. We
hear of many husbands dying who leave their wives such an additional Estate as
they could not by any Law challenge, so long as they continue unmarried, or
upon condition of continuing in the state of widowhood. And so may a Father
gratify and oblige his children if he pleases, without incurring the suspicion
of holding marriages unlawful, whatever other censure may pass upon them. And
when the Church says, she will not admit any to minister in her Family, more
immediately before God; what does she say more, than that Master of a Family,
who will not have a married servant in his house about him, but likes it very
well to use his service in other matters. And does this deserve such noise and
outcries as are made against it? Undoubtedly, it is as free for the Church to
judge of persons fit and unfit for her use, as for any Lord or Master whatever:
And to make a Law, not absolute that such a thing should not be done; but that
none that do such things should beimplyed in such offices. And what reason is
there that Civil Policy shall directly deny this, but Ecclesiastical prudence
may not? Are there not many other Societies, as well as Ecclesiastical, which
without reproach do the very same thing? Men have a Freedom to do the thing, or
not to do it, and more the Scripture has not left us; but to do it without
observing any condition from Superior, neither the Law of God or Man has left
free. Can there be therefore any more moderate or equal course than so to leave
the matter, that the one, singleness of life, shall be commended above the
other, and peradventure countenanced and encouraged; but the other, accepted
too? Yet neither extreme will be content with this. But one will have a Law to
abstract, and the other, as it should seem by their reasons out of Scripture,
have it enjoined, though they put a stop to the conclusion, and will not have
it contain what, if their Premises be good, it must. For if every Bishop must
be the husband of one wife, and every Priest be a Bishop, surely every Priest
must marry. And if innocence and purity can be no otherwise maintained, surely
the Scripture requiring these, requires that too.

But now we come to the conveniences and incommodities of the state Virginal
and Vidual, in reference to the Clergy. For now, waving the supposition of any
Divine injunction, several Divine and Political reasons have been invented
sufficient to determine against Priests, some of which being ridiculous, some
profane, and some heretical, we shall mention only such as have somewhat of
sobriety. The first whereof may be, That it becomes such as attend on so
sacred a thing as Gods Altar, to be pure of body and mind too: And theref^re to
abstain from all fleshly acts. We know how that Flesh, in Gods word, goes under
suspicion generally of somewhat impure and contrary to spiritualness and true
purity: and so, indeed, all fleshliness must be avoided: But in it self, it
implies no more than a state of imperfection not inconsistent with, though much
inferior to spiritual acts. In the first sense, Covetousness, Ambition, Pride,
and such like are Fleshly lusts, no less than Venery. In the second, Conjugal
acts and state are in the sense of the Gospel no more Fleshly, than eating and
drinking. But whereas, we find many to have been willing to be mistaken in so
colorable a piece of Religion, as to declare even against the natural
pollutions (as they may be called) as prejudicial in themselves to spiritual
perfection, whether the will concurs thereunto or not, and though proper
circumstances be duly observed, I cannot excuse them from Munichaean error
wholly; or at least Judaical. And Zonaras has in a learned and sober Tractate
on purpose declared Zonaras apud Leunclavium. Jur. Graeco Lat. Tom. 1. p. 351.
Chrysostom. (...). Tom. 6. Sermon. 19.
the contrary, showing it no more a pollution of the Flesh than a foul nose
may: to which I refer the learned; as also to a peculiar Treatise Chrysostom
has of Virginity: where he satisfies both the superstitious and brutish
Christian: him; who though he declares against ancient Heresies concerning
lawful marriage, yet advances such arguments to commend and prefer Virginity,
which Heretics were condemned for using: this man, in that he at large
disputes against Marcion, Valentinus, and Manes by name for their excessive
magnifying Virginity, to the absolute condemnation of marriage, and yet withal
abounds in the praise and prelation of Virginity; and shows, that it is
necessary to hold marriage lawful, and of God, before any man can please God in
virginity. He shows first, that no such Heretic as condemns Marriage
absolutely shall be rewarded for their pretended purity: He proves next, They
shall be damned rather for it: while the Catholics shall be promoted to the
Societies of Angels, become bright Lamps in Heaven, and which is above all,
abide with the Bride. He shows they are worse than the Heathen Greeks, who so
judge of Virginity and Marriage. The Gentiles (says he) shall surely go to
Hell, but yet with this advantage, that they enjoy the pleasures of Marriage,
Riches, and other worldly comforts for a time. But Heretics shall be punished
both here and hereafter. Here they they are punished by voluntary abstinences;
there, by involuntary Plagues. The Gentiles shall neither be the better nor
worse for their Fastings and Chastities, but Heretics shall suffer extreme
punishment for the things they expected ten thousand thanks. For Fasting and
Virginity, are neither good nor evil in themselves, but only according to
(...). Chrysostom. ib.
the choice of them that use them, they may be either. Nay, says he afterward,
the sobriety of Heretics is much worse then the riotousness of any Heathens.
For this only opposes Man, but that fights against God. And afterward;
Heretics professing Chastity, not only pollute their souls but bodies also.
And again: He that condemns marriage injureth Virginity also. And much more
to this purpose. Now if after all this, he abounds in the extolling of
Virginity above Marriage, making it an Angelical life, at which Puritans are
wont to mock and scoff: (which have stood them in more stead then Scripture it
self, to make way for their opinions) with what pretense of antiquity can the
Levellers, of all orders and states of Christianity, object against Virginal or
Vidual Chastity, either as not possible, or not lawful, or not more commendable
than a wedded state. And with what hazard of incurring the censure upon ancient
Heretics, do modern Patrons of Chastity raise their building upon their rotten
foundations, as too many, who are ashamed of it, do, notwithstanding. Surely
this may suffice equal minds, to grant: That as there is a praeemimence in the
state of Virginity, upon true Christian and sober principles, above that of
marriage, upon Christian principles likewise; so the state of the Clergy being
designed for more high and spiritual acts and ends than others, may be more fit
and proper subjects of such Evangelical virtues.

Another reason to induce them (for it cannot bind them) to it, is commonly
taken from Covetousness, which they say, generally attends the marriage of the
Clergy. But does it more constantly follow upon Priests marriage, than
Laymens? this would be well known. But Clergymen must do good with that they
have, above other men. It is very true, in all moral and Christian virtues,
they ought to exceed others. But we are now enquiring, what evil is in Priests
marriage, not what good may be supposed to be done out of that state: And we
should farther inform our selves, whether to do more good in the state of
Matrimony than others, not Priests; may not competently answer men's reasonable
expectations from them. Thirdly, it would be considered, whether singleness of
life be such a general cure against Covetousness, as is taken for granted, and
whether rather the inward vice does not incline a man to it, than outward
occasions. I know those who have challenged the magnifiers of Clergy-mens
single life, being themselves such, to give so many instances of married
Priests that were covetous, as they could of unmarried. And in truth there
appears to me little difference in the studiousness of Priests (or Laymen) for
their Nephews or near Kindred, and for their own Children: yet should I not
deny, but commonly the solicitude may be greater in behalf of a man's own, then
other men's children. A third reason against Priests marriage is the
encumbrances of the world, and the cares of a family. But others affirm with
great probability, that a wife takes off more cares then she brings to a man;
especially him that is of the Clergy, and must keep a Family, as it often
happens; and would mind other employments. And it is very rarely found, that
men of that function, who keep house; and consequently are necessitated to keep
a woman servant in their house, do void the scandal, if the sin it self of an
unchaste life. And now I appeal to the judgments and consciences of the
Romanists themselves, upon the impartial weighing of both Cases, that of the
secular Priests absolut interdiction of marriage, and that of liberty granted
to marry: whether they really and faithfully believe there is more chastity in
that Church where it is prohibited, or in that where it is permitted? I
willingly grant that many, according to their Vows, keep their Vessels in
sanctification and honor. But must withal crave leave to presume that so many
more walk quite contrary: that it may be feared, God is much more dishonored by
imposed Celebacie, than permitted Matrimony: And if so, how can the Church in
reason exact an oath of Virginity from all Priests, which tends to the
violation of the ends of single life, Chastity? This consideration, viz. that
the ends and most general event of such laws are quite besides the forms
propounded, has prevailed so far, with the soberer and more judicious of the
Roman Church it self, such as Gerson, Panormitanus, Cassander and others, who
dare not speak their minds so freely, That what was at first wisely Cassand.
Consult. c. 23.
and devoutly constituted by the Church, may with no less reason and religion
be now reversed. And to this Cassander does add a second reason, the great
diversity of the Churches frame now, from what it was when such constitutions
or customs rather, at first, prevailed. And to this he adds a third reason for
the relaxation of such laws; viz. From the detriment of the Church, where such
Chastity is commanded and rigorously exacted, without such gross connivances as
are undeniable: That many sober and eminent persons for learning, and other
worths, would be constrained to seek some other course of life than the
Priestly; to take that liberty which otherwise they may. But I shall not need
to prosecute this subject any farther than that grave Author has done, to whom
I commend the Reader: concluding, that though it seems very unsafe for men,
unserviceable for the Church, unrighteous in the Governers, and not at all to
the glory of God, or honor of Religion, to deny entrance to all that refuse a
vow of Chastity into the Church; yet, at the worst, it is neither Heretical nor
Antichristian, so to do; but tyrannical simply. And it is little better than
heretical for any to deny the excellency of true Virginity, above true
Chastity in marriage; or that it is unlawful for any man, upon good advice, to
take a vow to persevere in that estate.

Lastly, in answer to such (for too many now adays of such are to be found) who
may well be thought to deliver their opinions against the marriage of the
Clergy, out of Policy rather than Piety; and out of spite and envy, that they
should enjoy any thing of the world which pleases them so well; rather than out
of any sincere wishes to Religion or the Church, saying, It is not sit
Ministers should marry. What should they do with Wives? and a great deal of
high and boisterous stuff, to this purpose; I shall refer them that argue out
of conscience and sincerity, for satisfaction to what is spolem already about
this: But to the pretended Statesman I shall offer this consideration, That
all politickly given (as almost who is not that has been at a Coffee-house?)
do lay it down as a Rule of their Polities, the increase of People in the
Nation: Now a general complaint being made of want of People in his Majesty's
Dominions, can they look on it as nothing, or no prejudice to the Civil State,
that twenty thousand persons (for so many, and more I may well number of the
Clergy in all his Majesty's Dominions) should be restrained from lawful
marriage, and adding of people to the Nations under him? For my part, I use not
this argument but to show the vanity and madness of certain loose tongued
persons, who regard little what they say against Religion, and those related
more immediately to it, so that sometimes you shall hear from them somewhat
religiously (as it were) spoken, when they intend thereby to mischive and abuse
it. But I hope it will not be displeasing to them, if we acknowledge that Holy
Orders do bring a man into such a peculiar state of serving God, and obliging
of self-denial, and dedication of himself to God, in not only sober, but severe
living, and not only severe, but spiritual; that what either of Precept is
required of other Christians or of Counsel obliges them, do much more firmly
bind a Priest. And of this, the ancient and holy Fathers have written so much,
that to add were hard at any time, and to allege unreasonable at present. Yet
shall I crave leave to end with this disputation of St. Chrysostom thus
rendered. Thou thy self, says the Heretic (against whom he had before argued)
forbiddest marriage. By no means. Far be it, I should be as mad as you: How
then do thou exhort me to marry? Because I am persuaded that Virginity is
much Chrysostom. ^^^ supra.
better than marriage, I do not therefore place marriage amongst evil things,
but I commend it highly. For it is the haven of Continence, to such as will use
it aright, not permitting nature to be outrageous. For prefixing, as bounds,
lawful mixture, and hereby receiving the waves of Lust, it secures and
preserves us in great calmness. But some there are, who not wanting this
safeguard, instead of this, do tame the madness of Nature by fastings and
watchings, lodging on the ground, and such like hard usage: These I exhort not
to marry, not forbidding them to marry. But there is a vast distance between
these two, even as great as there is between necessity and choice. For he that
advises, suffers his hearer to be master of the choice of his own matters,
concerning which he gives counsel: but he that forbids, takes away from him
this power. Moreover, I do not, in exhorting, do wrong to the [other] thing:
nor do I condemn him that is not persuaded by me. But you speaking evil, and
calling it wicked, and taking upon you the person of a Lawgiver, and not of a
Counselor, in all likelihood do hate those that will not be persuaded by you.
But I nothing so; but admire such as list themselves for this combat; but I
accuse not them who continue out of this conflict. For then only does
accusation take place, when a man tends to that which is naught. But he that
attains to the less good, not arriving at the greater, deprives himself of the
praise and admiration, which the other has, but deserves not to be blamed. How
then do I forbid marriage, not blaming them that marry? I forbid fornication. I
forbid Adultery, but not at all, marriage. These indeed that practice such
things I punish, and drive them from the Body of the Church: But those that do
this, if they contain, commending I advance. For thus two benefits arise: One,
that Gods Institution is not slandered: Another, that the dignity of Virginity
is not taken away; but rather appears much more honorable. Thus far he, and
much more in the following discourse, against both the condemners of Marriage,
and contemners of Virginity.

CHAP. VI.
Of the third state of serving God, a Life Monastical. That it is not only
lawful, but may be profitable also. The Exceptions of Mr. Perkins against it,
examined. The Abuses of Monastical Life touched. That it is lawful to Vow such
a kind of Life, duly regulated.

THE last state of worshipping God, which we mentioned, is that of Separation
from the world, and devoting a man's self more entirely to the fulfilling the
high ends of Christian Religion, under the wise, sober, and strict Discipline
drawn out of the Word of God, and completed from the wise and holy Rules and
Observations of Gods most faithful, holy, and renowned Servants. This state of
life is by a current Antinomasie signally and peculiarly called Religion: which
name may seem to imply much of Arrogance and Pride, if it be so given to that
State, as to undervalue the secular state of serving God, as not worthy the
name of Religion, compared with that, commonly called Regular. But if no more
be thereby intended than a certain degree of living holily to God and his
service, that presumption may be passed over. For according to its first
Institution and Intention, no question can fairly and reasonably be made of the
excellent use and ends thereof; it being no other than Thomas describes it to
be, viz. Status Thomas 22. Qu. 187. 6. co.
Poenitentiae and contemptus mundi: A state of repenting and contempt of the
world. And as we may so speak, that though men of one profession may sometimes
do the work as well, and sometimes better, of another trade, than he whose
proper calling it is; yet this is no rule to deny it needful to be bound to
such a Trade; so in Religion, no doubt is to be made, but many living in the
world (as they speak) may exceed in holiness and devotion diverse who live
secluded, as to outward profession, from the world; yet this is no good
argument to conclude therefore such a life is vain and needless, much less that
it is superstitious, and worse then I will say after some light heads and loose
tongues. For in truth it is the trade to which Monastical persons are bound all
their lives; the more constant and spiritual service of God: And if they do not
profit more therein then other persons conversing in the world more busily,
they are worthily to be condemned as well by Man as God. But as before, against
the Clergy, against vowed Celebacie, so here against Monastic life, for men to
rake in the Canals for dirt and filth taken from single persons, to cast in the
face of the Orders themselves; and to cry not only them down, but all the most
eminent servants of Christ from the most primitive Ages and downwards for many
Ages, who have either been so Ascetical themselves, or unanimously approved and
magnified the same, is extreme folly and insolence, as St. Augustine in like
case calls it.

Many things objected against this state are in common with Vows and Virginity:
of which we have spoken, and therefore now pass over. And do moreover grant
such to have been the corruptions and abuses of that Deus merit o contemptun
effadit in Monachos propter viti^. Vide Schasnaburgenside Rebus German. Ann.
1071. Ambros. 10. Epist. 82. Quid enim aliud fuere Monasteria quam efficinae
virtutum. Et August. Epist. 137. Simpliciter eutem fa^^r charitati ves^^ae ^^am
D^mino Dec, etc. Aug. Ep. 16.
holy state of late years, yea, for some Generations past, that the hand of God
was justly against them, but not so the hand of Man: And were it so that the
like depravations of the ends were inseparable from them, the Church might be
as holy without them. But God forbid any man should think men may not live at
least as civilly and soberly in Monasteries as in private Families, or Kings
Courts; which, I hope, ought not to be ruined and destroyed for abuses their
reigning. St. Ambrose in an Epistle calls Monasteries The shops of Virtue,
Abstinence, Fasting, Patience, and Labors, etc. Yet St. Austin speaks thus
clearly and ingenuously of them, in an Epistle likewise: I speak unfeignedly to
your Goodness, before our Lord God, whom I call to record upon my soul; since
the time I began to serve God, that as I could scarce find any better than such
as have profited in Monasteries, so have I no where found any worse than they
who in Monasteries have fallen. Yet, though this were granted, they never took
up an opinion against Monastic life, absolutely. A few years since (says
Austin in another Epistle) there arose at Rome one Jovinian, who is said to
have persuaded certain holy Nuns, even grown into years, to marry, not enticing
them so far as to take any of them to wife; but by arguing that Virgins devoted
to holiness, found no greater reward from God than faithful married persons.
For such his opinion Jovinian fared never the better amongst the primest
Fathers of the Church: and still we hold to this Rule not easily to lend an ear
to modern Reformers, how eminent soever, against the torrent of more eminent
Fathers of the Church.

There are three things specially to be observed in Monastic Life, according
to which we may judge of the reasonableness and piety of the same: 1. The
Original. 2. The Form or Manner of Living. 3. The End and Effects of it. Surely
the Original was very ancient, though not to be fetched so far backward as
Elias or John the Baptist; though Sozomen Sozomenus Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap.
12.
would from thence derive it. And no wonder, if others of laters years, have
been of that mind. It is generally agreed amongst Writers, that the Hermites or
Anachorets of Egypt, first professed such separations from men: partly out of
pure Devotion; and partly (not wholly, as some suppose) upon the violent
persecutions raised in those parts in those early days. But afterward those
dispersed persons began to gather together in companies and societies. St.
Chrysostom in a certain Homily assures us, (...). Chrysostom. Serin. 25 in Hebraeos
Polyd. Virg de Invent. lib. 7. c. 2. Schafnaburg. de Rebus Germ. Ann^ 1025.
that in St. Paul's days not the least foot-step of a Monk was to be found.
Before St. Basil's time (says Polydore Virgil) Monks were left to their own
liberty, and so were Nuns too, to continue in, or relinquish that state, as
they pleased; as appears from many instances might be given. But such as had
once professed or pretended such a state, and after deserted it, were judged by
all most infamous, and fear of shame had the force of a Vow upon them:
nevertheless, St. Basil brought them into a Society, propounded Rules unto
them, and brought them under that threefold Vow of Chastity, Obedience, and
Poverty, which has continued unto this day. Yet there are not wanting some, as
Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, who complaining of the new Orders of Monks brought
in by Dominick and Francis, have thought it safer to be free from such bonds as
have been cast upon men, beyond their ability to endure.

But what should I add to what, upon this subject, has been so largely and
learnedly treated of by others? Only the Popery of this state of Life is it
which has brought an ill name upon the thing it self. But the exception is too
general, trivial, and trite, to move knowing and sober Christians, though it
may go far with such as have nothing from their Lecturer, with whom the
Scripture it self is of no other use, than such shall please to apply it unto.
Who can deny but Popish corruptions have tainted the purity and simplicity of
former Ages, in the regiment of Monks? But those most of them which Perkins
instances in, are too light to bring the thing into disgrace and utter dislike.
And such are Copes, and Cowles, and other Monkish Habits; as also
Quire-singing, Vowed Fasts, and choice Meats. Against which, Mr. Perkins his
pains had been better spared than spent. For Perkins Denonstration of the
Probiem, p. 594, 595.
as it is necessary that all orders in the Commonwealth should be
distinguished accordingly, and their Habits are proper cognizances for that
purpose; and none but Artisans, and such persons that are neither Gentlemen,
nor in any place of Honor or Power, malign such a distinction. So should the
several orders and professions be preserved, and appear distinct by their
outward garb, to advertise them of their duty and profession; and a we them,
before the eyes of all men, to a walking conformable to their profession,
others to be subject to just censures and reprehension of men, and none but low
and ignoble Christians do malign and oppose them. And that it should be
indecent, or as they would fain, but in vain quarrel with such outward Habits,
unlawful, is ridiculous to affirm, and a greater argument of more superstition
lurking in the souls of these scandalized persons, than can be found in the
thing accused. But to except against Quire-singing, is not only frivolous, but
impious, without limitation. And choice of meats, and especially Fastings vowed
are as far out of their power to disprove soberly, as it is out of their will
to pretend to, or imitate.

But there are some things here called fundamental, differencing ancient
Perkins, ibid.
Monks from the present. First, They lived solitarily of necessity to be safer
from persecution. This is not true in all. Secondly, They were not constrained
to give all that they had to the poor. But where lies the accusation here? In
constraining, or being constrained? We now speak of the Monastic person, and I
hope it is no sin in him to suffer such, or greater violence: as to the
Injurer, let him look to it. And in truth I do not determine any thing in this
case. To the Fourth, that Monks were not then bound to any certain Rules; it is
answered in part already; that while they lived separate, and were not formed
into a Society, it was not so requisite. But St. Basil does show how much
better it is to live in caenobio, in company with Basilius M. Regul. Fus.
Disput. 7.
others, than Hermite-like to skulk in holes, or wander up and down in deserts.
And that first, because there is an (...) (as he calls it) a self-pleasingness
in such free solitariness: and, Secondly, such keep shut up without exercise,
that ability they have, being ignorant as well of their own defects, as of
others proficiencie. There are causes enough besides such pitiful exceptions
above mentioned, to condemn the most irregular constitutions of such Regulars
as are thick sown in the Roman Church. I might begin with the excessive number
of them, to the prejudice of such states where they are planted. I might
proceed to the nature of them, and horrible looseness tolerated in them, of
which so many Authors have too justly complained; and continue to declare the
intolerable strictness of some, either requiring a gross Dispensation to the
voiding of the express will of their Founder, or to the shortning the days of
many persevering in the rigorous observation of them. The very rules likewise
themselves are, many times, most superstitious. And above all, the foul
usurpation the Pope of Rome has over them, to the disobliging them from their
proper Bishops, and thereby making them Schismatics, and himself a Tyrant, it
being certain, that of old, both by course, consequence, custom, and Canons of
the Church, all Monasteries and Religious Societies were, and still ought to be
subject to the Bishop of that Place where their Site was. And to this purpose
is there express provision made by a Council of Ments in the middle age of the
Church, under Charles the Great, in the ninth Chapter, that the Monks of
Religious Houses should be subject to their proper Bishop, and do nothing
without his approbation. But it is one thing to plead in general for the
lawfulness and expediencie of Monastic Life, and that of both sexes; and
another to deliver laws and due prescriptions for the well disciplining of
them: which is the work of the wisest heads and sincerest hearts to Religion,
to be here passed over.

There may yet seem somewhat due to an objection against the said state taken
from the vow exacted from such as enter themselves into it: which no wonder
that they who oppose so blindly the thing it self, should much more oppose. But
they who approve of it, can find little reason to quarrel at that bond. And
that first, because such Monastic Life is not always in Society, which they
call Convents, but may be undertaken at a man's own pleasure, both for time and
place and other circumstances: every Christian having power to dispose of
himself (not prejudicing the general right and inte^^^t of his Governors over
him) to what life he pleases, and with what ^^^cumstances. But if a man
resolves to become a member of some special Society, already formed by certain
Rules and Laws; to desire to be matriculated into that Body, and not to be
willing to conform to the constitutions of it, is unjust and unreasonable. And
so Pikewise, not to give that outword and common assurance of faithful
submission unto the same, by an Oath of Vow. For do men think it reasonable,
that Prentises should be bound to be true, faithful, and keep their Masters
secrets, even before they know them, and when they know them to be none of the
justest or honestest; or shall men that enter but into civil Companies, be it
but of Merchant-Taylers or Barber-Surgeons, be constrained by Oath to be true
and faithful to them, but they who are admitted into Religious Societies, be
left to do and live as the please? What were this but to seek an occasion,
under color of friendliness and good affection, to divide and destroy it? as
is apparent in the seemingly modest pretenses of dissenters and disaffected
persons to our Church: who upon condition that they may give and reverse
certain orders and laws, offer themselves to become one with it: Thus the
Vulgar take it, but in truth, it is for the Church to be one with them. And is
not this a notable piece of modesty, condescension, and compliance? But here
let that rest; as also what we have to say of the second thing generally to be
considered in the Worship of God, viz. The state of serving God.

CHAP. VII.
Of Religious Worship, the third thing considerable in it, viz. The Exercise of
it, in the several kinds of it: And first of Prayer the chiefest Act of Gods
Worship: contrary to Sectaries who are Enemies to it in three respects. And
first by their vain conceit of Preaching, wherein consists not the proper
Worship of God, as in Prayer.

THE third thing wherein the worship of God may be said yet more properly to
consist, is the Kinds of Worship: And these we shall reduce to three; Prayer,
Preaching, and Obedience in the due exercise of all Christian Graces and
Virtues, wherein the Life of Faith properly consists. And first we shall
begin with prayer, as that wherein was ever thought the worship of God
principally to consist, be that Religion Christian or Unchristian; unless we be
forced to except some modern and immodest pretenders to Reformation. For though
they keep within such bounds, as a grave and judicious defender of our Church
says, none ever exceeded, not to deny prayer absolutely, yet have they brought
it to that pass, so humbled and diluted it, that there is little place found
for it, and less value. And surely, were they but true to their own principles
and arguments, no use at all would they acknowledge of prayer, more then
certain Heathens and Heretics whose arguments must needs be accepted by them,
if they will believe conformable to themselves.

St. Hierome upon Matthew tells us, There is sprung up here a certain
Hieronymus in Matthew. cap. 6. 8.
Heresy and Dogme of Philosophers, who say, If God knows what we pray for, and
that we have need of such things as we desire before we ask, in vain we speak
to him, who knows all before. To whom (says he) we answer, That we do not so
much tell God what we would have, as beg of him. Clemens Alexandrinus likewise
tells us, that one Prodius was Clemens Alexa. Strom. 7
Author of that Opinion. Thus far profane Sectaries amongst us have not
generally proceeded, though we have been credibly informed that some have.
However, they unanimously conspire to debase prayer, and corrupt Christian
worship it self in these three Respects. First, in advancing preaching much
inferior to it, in a Church become Christian, infinitely before it. Secondly,
by opposing Set, or Prescribed Forms of Prayer. And thirdly, in expunging the
Lords Prayer out of their uncertain and wild Liturgies. Which the Presbyterian
Sect, the Sire of all others, was not a little guilty of; and so seldom used
it, that being demanded why they left it out in their prayers, thought good to
give such a modest reason as this, They feared they should be out in the
recitation of it: so had they accustomed their tongues to liberty, and variety
of words. But they had other reasons which they were ashamed to utter, but to
their trusty friends.

But let us first see how preaching transcends prayer, and has insulted and
trampled over it. For such have been the extremes of late, that whereas
formerly the Proverb was, No Penny no Pater Noster: now, No Preaching no Pater
Noster: No Sermon, no Prayer in Gods House. And whereas it was said by our
Savior Christ of old, and by the Prophet before him, My House shall be called
(which almost every ordinary man knows accordto Matthew. 21. 3.
the Hebrew Idiom, is the very same with shall be) the House of Prayer unto all
Nations; and never was it called or accounted a preaching house, but by them
that called it a Steeple-house, and little otherwise judged of it; now have
things been so reformed with a witness, ot rather a vengeance, that Sermoning
carries all before it, bears all down to little or nothing.

But what if all this while preaching be not the worshipping of God at all?
Will they continue so obstinate as to make it almost the only thing in Gods
house? That they, who with strange boldness profess, and in constant practice
declare they will have nothing to do with Gods house, as Gods house, but only
as a Vestry-house, when they are to take the Parish Accounts, unless there be a
Sermon, do hold that Sermoning active and passive, preached and heard, is the
main matter of Religion, and worship of God, is apparent and undeniable; and
that it is only for the Sermons sake, that ever they meet as Christians in the
Church. Now, if it does appear that this sort of Religion is no worship of God
at all, and that God is not served at all by that, by which they imagine they
serve him entirely, what becomes of these men's Christianity it self? For
Christian Religion, as this whole work proves, consists of Doctrine and
Worship: and if they have not both of them, they cannot be Christians. And if
they have no prayer, they have no worship; and if they rest on preaching, as
that which contains all, they loose all. For in making, or hearing a Sermon, we
serve not God at all, in propriety of speech, but rather he serves us.

I confess we have propounded preaching, as one of the kinds of worship; but
intended not so to do as equalling it with that of prayer: but only reductively
and remotely so calling it: as that whose end it is that God should be
worshipped, and no other at all: And that which ministers good matter, and
prescribes excellent manners and rules of worship, may by a figure, not
unusual, be called the thing which it so promotes, but in strictness of speech,
it is not; nor in its own nature: the reasons whereof may be these.

First, Because all true worship of God consists necessarily in somewhat of
action, and not in mere passiveness. But hearing of Sermons, and so reading of
Scriptures, or other good Books, have nothing of Divine action in them; but the
person therein concerned is merely passive, and suffers somewhat, it may be,
with patience and content to be done unto him, but himself does nothing. There
is indeed somewhat of a natural act in writing Sermons, and reading Books, but
this action is not, nor can properly be directed to God, but to a man's own
self, that he may make himself more capable of that benefit which he seeks
thereby to himself: but this is to give nothing to God, but still to be of the
taking hand from him: But in all proper worship we are to exercise some act
toward God: For hearing is not doing.

And secondly, All worship of God requires somewhat exhibited unto God as our
service due naturally to him, but in hearing of Sermons, we render nothing at
all to him: therefore we serve him not at all; but rather we receiving those
blessed means of serving him and attaining grace here, and glory hereafter, He,
at whose appointment and charge this is done to us, does serve us, and do us
honor, and not we him: though as (he that scornfully turns his bach and stops
his ear against the words of his betters) we may be said to dishonou and sin
against him, if we refuse to hear his Law: according to that of Solomon, He
that turns away his ear from hearing the Prove. 28. 9.
Law, even his prayer shall be an abomination: though I take the true intent of
these words to be of obeying, and living according to the Law of God, and as
much as if it had been said, He that lives wickedly, and breaks Gods
commands (which is not to hear it) his prayers shall not be accepted of Vis
scire quam praetiosa sit Oration? Nulla justitia Thymiamati assimilitur nisi
Orati^. Opus Imperfectum in Matthaeum, Hom. 13. Exodus 23. 15.
God. But still the true service of God consists in offering something to him:
there being no difference in the nature of the Service or Sacrifice given to
God under the Gospel, from that under the Law, but only in the matter. This was
material and corporal; that is to be spiritual; but yet an offering. God laid a
charge upon his people of old, Thou shall not appear before the Lord empty:
Meaning surely, that none should believe they had done their duty in any
competent manner, when they came to the Temple, and there saw what was done,
liked it well enough, heard what was said, but offered nothing themselves: God
would have no such service. But such like service do they give to God, who come
to Church and only hear a Sermon: for they come empty to him, and perhaps to be
filled with good things, but what, think we, will that stand for, when he
requires that we should be offerers, as well as receivers, and doers as well as
sufferers? And whereas in the true spiritual Sacrifice, we pray to God; In
preaching, according to the language of the Scriptures, God prays to us. For
says the Apostle to the Corinthians, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God. And truly, God often complains of the empty and superficial
service of the lip without the heart; but yet even that, as dilute a thing as
it is, has much more of worship of God, than has hearing of Sermons. For that
is an outward part, but this is neither outward nor inward.

Thirdly, The means only of serving of God is not the service of God it self,
no more than the means is the end. They whose religion lies in preaching and
hearing, do very aptly and currently call Sermons the Means, in a signal sense.
I suppose they intend thereby the Means to Salvation, and Means of Grace: and
so indead, Teaching and Instruction are, according to that special place upon
which all their good opinion of Sermons above prayer is grounded: viz. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word Romans 10. 17.
of God. It Is most certain: but must that which is first in order, be likewise
first in honor too? Or that which is most necessary, be most excellent? Yea,
that which is excellent only as a way and means, carry it from the end which it
serves, and is designed to? This is supposed, or nothing is concluded: but this
is weakly taken for granted, and therefore the conclusion from thence must
needs be weak and pitiful. The Grace of Nature, which I call Reason, is much
more necessary in the ordinary way of Gods saving us, then the Grace of the
Gospel, Faith: because without that humane apprehension of what is delivered,
no man can believe what is said: and so the hearing of the Ear, than Reason,
because Reason depends upon it: and so does Faith on preaching, and the worship
of God on preaching going before and directing to do it aright, is it therefore
any more then they, the worthier? or is it at all the very service of God? The
quite contrary is easily proved from this very reason: seeing it must
necessarily be, that the End is much more desirable than the Means: and
preaching is accounted rightly but as the Means to the means of Grace and
Salvation, believing and doing the will of God; as St. Augustine has in a
certain place rightly observed.

But before we can appropriate the worship of God to prayer in
contradistinction to preaching, an Objection must be here noted, which calls in
question prayer it self, as incapable of that little. For they may say that in
prayer we offer not so much to God, as we receive from him. For prayer is a
begging of favor and benefits of God. To which our Answer is, that taking
prayer strictly and precisely for that one part of prayer, which consists in
craving a supply of our wants, or deprecation only, then indeed this is (...)
etc. Cremens Alexand. (...). Asterius apud Phoetum.
not so properly a Sacrifice. But we are to take prayer in its usual latitude,
for all the parts of it: such as Confession, Deprecation of Evil, Petition of
Good, Agnition, and Profession of Mercies received, Thanksgiving and Praise for
all Gods hand of Grace toward us, and thus prayer is the offering up of a
spiritual Sacrifice to God. An offering of our heart, and an assent of the soul
to God, as some devout men and learned have defined it: And not so only, but in
effect and intention, it, by acknowledging of the free mercy of God in outward
or inward blessings received from him, is the rendering of them all to him
again, and a Sacrifice of that back again, which once he conferred on us.
Thirdly, prayer, and worship so properly called, bear the name of Sacrifices,
from the ground of all prayers, though some parts of prayer be not so expressly
such. For he that acknowledges the Omnipotence of God, the Omniscience,
Omnipresence, the Alsufficiencie, does thereby render unto God his due, but he
that prays unto God, supposes, and confesses, and implicitly offers all
these, as his duty to God. But whoever heard of Offering up the Sacrifice of a
Sermon unto God? For,

Lastly, If there be any thing of worship or the nature of a Sacrifice in
Sermons; certainly great Idolatry is committed by them; it being most manifest
that preaching is offered to Man, and not to God: and if it be a Divine
worship, what can it be less? For what is more true and common then this, That
in prayer men speak to God, but in preaching they speak to man. So that from
hence we may safely conclude that, that Religion which has nothing to commend
it but preaching, or nothing so much as preaching, is quite contrary to the
Apostle, Whose praise is not of God but of Men: and in truth deserves not so
much the Name of Religion as of Superstition, unheard of, unthought of, until
of late years, and coming nearest to that grossest part of truly Popish
Superstition, or as some call it Sacrilege, communicating in one kind.

But here it will be warmly interposed and replied; God forbid they should
oppose praying: it is a manifest slander. For these good people have prayers in
private, and prayers in public too. It is no proper place now, by and by it
will be, to examine what manner of prayers and worship these they mean, are;
insufficient (God knows) to the constituting of a Church in true Christian
communion: But here we tell them, that we have not disputed against them as
having no worship of God at all; But first, that at all they make preaching and
hearing Sermons, a proper part of Gods service: Secondly, that they make it the
most eminent and chief: against both which our reasons stand good still: And
that they so do, is demonstrated from their practice, no less than Doctrines:
in that they never (amongst us) pray in public, never enjoy Christian
communion, but by virtue of a Sermon. And though being pressed hard, they
confess with much ado (as Cartwright against Bishop Whitgift) that it is
possible and valid to celebrate the Sacraments of Baptism and Eucharist,
without a Sermon; yet it seems so notoriously inconvenient and incongruous, as
it ought never to be done, where the Sermon is possible to be had. A foul and
ungodly mistake. So that we have done them no wrong as yet.

CHAP. VIII.
A second Corruption of the worship of God, not, espicially in Prayer: by
opposing Set-forms of Public Worship. Reasons against Extemporary Prayers in
Public: The Places of Scripture, and Reasons and Antiquity for Extemporary
Prayers, answered.

A Second thing whereby they have abused both the holy duty of prayer, and
well-meaning Christians, is in their traducing and profanation of all
prescribed forms of prayer, wherein they forget not to show themselves in their
arts and colors. For when the power is in their hands, and their Faction can
domineer, then do they condemn directly in word, by preaching, printing, and
covenanting solemnly against Set-forms in public: and there has been nothing
under heaven acted by them more industriously than the utter abolition of all
such Divine Offices. And when they can go no farther, their Chariots wheels are
taken off, and they begin to find themselves to sink: that they bethink
themselves how possibly they may stand in need of that moderation that they
contemned, and that indulgence they condemned, their study is, not how to
repent and retract absolutely their former ungodly counsels and practices (as
all good Christians that meant seriously to be saved, ought to do) but with
what artifices, they may, at the same time, hold to their old principles of
mischief to others, and save themselves from harm from others. For we must not
say now, they did any thing so disorderly (good people that they are, and
innocent) against Set-forms: Province of London.
but the Parliament (as they are obstimately bent to grace their cause, without
any ground for such a title) say they, called them to it: when of the two,
they, if we may distinguish them from their pretended Parliament (for which
there is no ground) rather called their Parliament to such counsels and pranks,
as they after played; as appears by their early Smectymnuus, and their
incessant instances with them to pursue those Schismatical Dogms, to the
subverting of all received Discipline, and forms of Worship. And that they have
disowned their principles, upon which they then proceeded, we find not; though
we have more than enough of tricks and turnings, and windings, and straining
them to the fairest sense they can possibly bear, and sometimes farther too.
For instance, they say now, their Covenant was not against Episcopal
Government; but an Hierarchy. They say, They are not against Set forms; for
they suffer them in private. Nay, they say, they are no enemies to public
Forms, nor many other Rites; but they would not have them imposed upon any. But
we shall presume to tell them, we neither believe the one nor other; until they
as publicly retract what they have done in deposing all Set forms, and taught
and writ, and imposing Unset forms upon all that would live by them. And in
that they would not have them now imposed, they imply more strongly they are
against them wholly, than they express they any ways favor them; when, God be
thanked, as ill as at present it is, it is not in their power to oppose and
damn them, as formerly. Can there be any thing more ridiculous than for men to
do as much mischief as possibly they can, and then to say, They are not for
doing any more, or going any farther. Which yet we might without censure of
stupidity believe, but that they stand to their Arms still, though it be no
time to use them, yet: and their reasons, which in brief are these, they hold
not yet unreasonable.

They say, First, it was always permitted to the Minister to modifie (their
own word) the worship of God. And therefore they ought not to be prescribed;
now, any such Forms as are propounded and enjoined.

Will they stand to their principle, viz. That nothing is now to be altered,
which has prevailed much more generally and anciently, than this pretended
Liberty of the Minister? Alas, it will not be endured by themselves, it will
prove too hot for them, it will make too much havoc amongst their best
Innovations. But we pardon, and pass by their incogitancies in that, and the
like grounds; in ordering which, they are seldom so sollicitous how to secure
themselves, as intent how to wound their Enemies. But we more openly profess
the contrary to that they take here for granted: and say, It was never
permitted Ministers to make any private Chrysostom. in Romans 8.
Prayers of their own, in the public Assemblies of Christians, since there was
a cessation of those miraculous gifts, which St. Chrysostom affirms, upon this
occasion, to have been extinct, so long before his days, that St. Paul's words
to the Romans, from whence some would fetch extemporary prayers were very
obscure; it being unknown what was the practice of the Church then. (...),
Gifts, he grants there were, at the first; but knew nothing of such in his
days: nor well understood, as himself professes, what manner of ones they were
when they were in use. In the next place we shall enquire farther after them.
Here we stick to this unshaken foundation, That there is no footstep of Record
or Monument in the Church of God, whereby they can make it probable, that in
the solemn and set Assemblies of Christians constantly observed (for as for
inferior, and voluntary, and undetermined meetings, they can be no rule to us
at all; though something more than we can find, should be alleged against us)
it was never allowed the Priest (whom I suppose they mean by Minister, though
this word before they were pleased to reform the language, as well as manners
of the Church signified properly the Deacon) to utter any thing of his own, or
indeed others composing, whether premeditated or extemporary, without the
approbation of his Bishop first had; I mean in the matter of Prayer, which we
now speak of. So that I wonder much, how any such bold and untrue Axiom could
ever enter into their minds, as that Ministers might of themselves modifie the
worship of God.

But the second argument of theirs, taken from Scripture, may perhaps a little
relieve them: where we read in St. Paul to the Romans, That the Spirit Romans 6.
helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered. And the same Apostle to the Corinthians says, I will pray with the
1 Cor. 14. 15.
Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the
Spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. To both which, we answer,
wondering with what presumption they take for granted, that, where ever the
Spirit of prayer is mentioned, is intended conceived prayer, and not that
formed to our hands. We grant, not only that there is a Spirit of prayer, but
that this Spirit is necessary to have our prayers well ordered and accepted.
But we are far from granting, that the Spirits office must be so pitiful as to
suggest words, and eloquent affecting phrases. No such matter. The Spirit
assisteth and enableth us to pray, in sanctifying our minds and hearts: in
giving us the grace of prayer, and causing us to put up fervent and spiritual
cries to God, even in such words as we may have prayed over a thousand times,
without spiritual affections, which alone can render a prayer accepted. And
when the Spirit thus enables us to pray, it self is said to make intercession
for us, as being the principal Agent. But it is said also, We know not what we
ought to pray for: and therefore surely there must Romans 8.
be more in the work of the Spirit than giving the due manner and grace of
prayer. I may well say that St. Paul speaks not at all of public prayer (as I
confess he does in his words to the Corinthians) but of private, single, and
occasional Ejaculations, which I shall grant, as much as they modestly can
demand, may be the gift of the Spirit, as well as the Grace (as they are wont,
not very warrantably to distinguish, as we may see by and by:) but we are now
speaking, and the Controversy is wholly, about set, and constant, and public
occasions, and common to the whole body of the Church assembled together, and
concerning this, we deny utterly, that either St. Paul ever intended we should
depend upon the motions of Gods Spirit to frame a Prayer for that use: or that
a prayer unformed and unknown is so much as to be endured in the Church, where
Christian communion is to be enjoyed. But secondly, we answer, That the Spirit
does sufficiently teach them to pray, who never pretend to pray extemporary;
yea, perhaps that never pray at all. We know not what we should pray for as we
ought. Therefore the Spirit which has given us the Word of God, and thereby
revealed unto us the hidden things of God, and what his will is, has withal
sufficiently assisted in that particular, our Ignorances and Infirmities, and
taught us, what we should pray for? What more can we expect reasonably from
these words? I am sure not Extemporariness.

And to the praying with the understanding, and praying with the Spirit also,
and singing with the Spirit, and singing with the understanding also; whence
they infer there is a praying by the Spirit, above the ordinary reason, and
apprehension of men; we answer, First, It is certain the words are not well
rendered according to the drift of the Apostle, which was, to argue, that both
in preaching and praying in public, men should not abuse the gift of tongues
granted them by the Spirit, as to sing, pray, or preach before the assembly of
Christians, in such tongues, as were not by them understood. And therefore (as
the Original will warrant it) (...), should be translated To the understanding:
not of himself that spoke, but of them that heard. For amongst the Spiritual
persons of the Gospel were not to be found such, as amongst the heathens were
inspired to speak they knew not what, they understood not: but undoubtedly all
knew what they said, who spoke by the Spirit of Tongues; but others often did
not: and therefore St. Paul exhorts there, that whoever were so gifted as to
speak in unknowntongues, they should either be altogether silent, or speak by
one or two Interpreters: and this is all they can make of these words, as the
words going before and after plainly demonstrate.

But to Ecclesiastical antiquity they have recourse next; and from Justin
Martyr they argue a Liberty to Priests to model the worship of God: because he
says (the place is known well enough) that the President of the Assemblies
(...), according as he is able, prays. But that this public Officer was a
Presbyter or Priest, and not the Bishop himself, is more than they can prove,
though it lies upon them. For I make no scruple to grant but it was free for
the Bishop, who is the highest power in the Church, to alter several things in
the form of worship, and to make forms of Prayer, according to the exigence of
that Church he presided over, but never was any such thing allowed to the
Presbyter; and no longer to the Bishop, than a form of public Worship was
agreed to, and received: which we confess was not until the Gifts of Miracles
were ceased, and then, not all at an instant, but by degrees, and by orderly
consultation, and good authority, as occasion offered. There might also be some
Liberty, even after such provision made for the solemn service of God, by some
presumptuous Priests taken to deviate from such Prescriptions, but that ever it
was left free to them to use, or not to use the same; or to add, or detract
from them, no where appears. The Council of Milevis in Africa, provideth by
a Canon against such perhaps growing presumption, but not then first made it
absolutely unlawful; as it is cited to that purpose, by Sectaries.

And as for Tertullian, who affirms it to have been the custom in Christian
Apolog. ^. 39.
assemblies, for certain persons to come forth, and sing Hymns to God, out of
the Holy Scriptures, or their own Wits: I understand him rather of the Actions
in the Agape or Love Feasts, which were wont to be distinct from, and kept
after the more solemn and proper Ecclesiastical service: And in such cases
(spending the time religiously also) it might be lawful for private men,
whether Ecclesiastical persons, or otherwise (for his words make no more for
Priests than Laymen; and upon that very ground can avail them but little, that
draw them to their Ministers only) to show their Poetical Gifts (whether
extempore or premeditate, no matter or mention is made) in the praising God.
But finding in Philo Judaeus, Philo Judaeus de Vita Contemplat.
a description of the Ascetical Jews, which were mostly of the Sect of the
Essens, to have such practices amongst them also; I make no doubt but such
things might be first drawn from them, as many ancient Ceremonies of the
Christians were, and that by the countenance of the Apostles themselves
(however simpler Zealots will scarce endure to hear so much:) and continued
without prejudice to the more solemn and public worship. For scarce do the
leading Sectaries pretend to such Gifts of the Spirit, as should enable their
wits to make Hymns extemporary; or so much as bring in a new Psalm or Hymn into
their Assemblies, unknown or unheard of to the commoner sort. Surely their
modesty herein, that they have not dared as yet to offer any new Sonnet, though
of praise and prayer to God, to their people (as they call them) by virtue of
this gift of the Spirit, does condemn their boldness in offering every day, new
prayers; whereas there is the very same ground for the one, as the other; both
in Antiquity and the Scriptures. Tertullian speaks only of singing out of their
own heads. St. Paul speaks as expressly of singing, as praying by the Spirit:
yet we hear nothing they have done to declare their spirituality in public by
way of singing, or causing any thing of their own devising to be sung. But
surely singing is no less a duty then praying: And if they find it difficult
and inconvenient for the people to take the ditty so set by them, from their
mouths or hands; and from thence infer that it is not necessary. We reply: That
is as necessary, and accordingly was ever practiced in Churches, that people
should concur with the Priest in prayer too: and therefore such ill-form'd
forms as are made and used at the same time, are not fit for solemn service,
because though they may be tacitly followed, yet are they so ordered and
invented, that the common sort should have no more to do with them than they
may with musical prayers and praises, which in heart they may consent to, but
in act, can only say, Amen to, as is permitted to the people in their
extravagant prayers. Would the one be scandalous to those of their Party? so is
the other actually offensive to us: and therefore we desire to hear no more of
such matters: nor should they expect to find relaxation of Duties from those
they are bound in Justice to obey, before they remove such obstacles of
communion with them, to those that owe them nothing but charity; and this
principally, in reducing them from such a fond admiration of themselves, and
gross infatuation of others, by the color of such false gifts.

It would be too long and tedious to take notice here of all their reasons
against Set forms; which are of two sorts: the one General against All enjoined
forms; the other, against the English Liturgy in Particular. Of this latter we
shall speak least, and not much of the former: because we will take them at
their word, when they say, they are not absolutely against Liturgies
prescribed; though we know they contradict themselves sufficiently. Bishop
Whitgift has of old told them home of this their double dealing. For in the
Puritans Admonition they directly oppose all forms. Cartwright Cartwrights
Reply p. 105. Whitgifts Defens p 488
in his Reply to Whitgift, endeavoring to bring them off, says, they explain
themselves afterward: But they are truly told, that such their Explication is a
mere retractation and contradiction, all their arguments formerly being levelled
directly against forms in General. And to this day, they are always at that
game still, until they be beaten off; and then, forsooth, it is only the
Liturgies as ill-framed, they complain of: as Cartwright has taught them to
dissemble upon occasion, and shuffle. Nevertheless I hold it not amiss to
transcribe here a Case of Conscience out of Mr. Perkins thus doubting, Perkins
Cases of Conscience, l. 2. c. 6.
Whether it be lawful when we pray, to read a Set form of prayer? Answer. It is
no sin. [This is better then nothing.] But a man may lawfully, and with good
conscience do it. Reasons. First the Psalms of David were delivered to the
Church to be used and read in a Set form of words, and yet the most of them are
prayers: Secondly, To conceive a form of prayer, requires gift of memory and
knowledge, utterance and the gifts of grace. Now every child of God, though he
has an honest heart, has not these gifts. And therefore in want of them, may
lawfully use a Set form of prayers; as a man that has a weak back or a lame
leg may lean upon a Crutch. This is the meaning and very expression of the
modern Puritan; when he is in the best humor, and would be more generous than
ordinary in his concessions. For which we requite him, saying, That it was
never lawful, nor is lawful at this day, for any Minister in public service,
to bring in his own conceived prayers, besides the intention of the Church:
And, that Thomas Cartwright, who, at Hartford was the first that dared to do so
to the offense of both the Queen and Church then, did very wickedly; and none
that imitated him (though men no enemies otherwise to the Church) did well;
unless upon a persuasion of an implicit consent of the Church, through tract of
time. But if memory, utterance, knowledge, to which some (that have
ridiculously written upon the subject of conceiving prayers, as if they would
teach the Spirit how to speak) do add Fancy and Industry, be required, how
comes this gift to be owing to the Spirit, more than Demosthenes his Orations,
of whom Plutarch writes, what great pains he took with himself to pronounce
well, and to compose aright.

But let us hear Perkins a little farther, answering an Objection; It is
alleged, that Set forms of Prayer do limit and bind the Holy Ghost. Answer: If
Perkins ubi supra.
we had a perfect measure of Grace, it were somewhat, but the Graces of God are
weak and small in us. This is no binding of the Holy Ghost, but an helping of
the Spirit, which is weak in us, by a Crutch to lean on: It had been much more
reverently spoken if it had been said, An helping us in whom the Spirit is,
than, the weak and lame Spirit in us. It had been much more soundly answered,
to deny the supposition both of the Spirit, and the gift thereof, in men
praying extempore; and by consequence cleared all fears and suspicions of
injuring the Spirit at all. Why do they so weakly and lamely take that for
granted that the Spirit informs men generally to such ends, and nothing wants a
Crutch or Staff to support it more than that? We deny it; we deny it: And
wonder how they will go about the making it credible. But we deny the fact,
that so it is; and not the possibility, that so it may be: or that the Spirit
is able to do such wonderful things. Nay we deny, they are such wonderful
things as are pretended; or any more than for a very simple man to become an
excellent workman in a curious craft, by applying his wits and labors to the
mysteries of it. And seeing they talk so often at this day of Crutches and
Stilts, making all creeples and lame in Christianity, who cannot, or out of
humility and obedience to the Discipline which justly interdicts such pretended
abilities, will not vaunt what they can do; they should do well to procure
Stilts and Crutches for such halting and weak reasons as these are, to make men
insolent.

Here they are wont to come forth with their ill applied distinction of Gifts
and Graces of prayer: and tell us that the gift of prayer is to be sought
after, whereby we edify the Church, as well as the Grace, whereby we edify
our selves. To which I answer by denying still what they take for granted, viz.
that such presumed gifts are necessary to the edification of a Church. I grant
indeed that the Church was at first settled by gifts, or I should rather have
said, founded: but continued and edified to this day so, I deny. I deny as a
notorious and pernicious untruth, that such is to be the constitution of
Churches, that they should be managed and maintained by the gifts of men, above
what by the ordinary industry with Gods blessing may be common to all men. Yet
more expressly, I deny that any Society ought to depend upon any thing
extraordinary in men, as this gift is cried up for: For that which carries on
the mysteries and majesty of Gods worship, must be grave, sober, regular, safe,
and easy; even such, as, they in indignation report, children, women, and
Turks may perform; and not such as are high, staggering, uncertain, deceitful,
as are these extraordinary gifts. For this barbarous argument is ill grounded,
supposing that it is more the natural, or supernatural parts that qualify the
Ministry, than the power of the Keys given: which if we may suppose given to
such persons, we shall declare to be more fit persons to minister in the
public worship of God, than such gisted persons. I say in the worship of God,
because there may be much more skill and ability required to the service of
God: For though preaching and traveling in the conversion of souls to God, be
to serve God, as an act of obedience unto his will; it is not (as we have often
said) the proper worship of God, as is prayer: And to serve God in this manner
being an address unto men, who must be informed with great skill and industry,
and then reformed in their lives and conversations, by sedulity of Exhortation,
more is necessary than a commission so to act. Moreover, to their distinction
of gift of prayer and grace, we add, That we acknowledge no gift of prayer
besides the grace of prayer. There may be a gift of speaking, and that notably,
with fluencie and readiness, and this is vulgarly mistaken, and admired for a
gift of prayer, but it is no such matter. For all the gift of prayer, as of
prayer, is nothing but the grace of prayer, coming from the truly devout and
spiritual heart, and not from the operation of the brain, as Elocution does.
And besides, those that have spoken most soberly and truly of gifts, have
determined the use of them particularly to the Church, and its edification; and
not to have God for their proper object: but God is the object of prayer, and
therefore it is fully completed in the grace of it, which in a larger sense is
Gods gift too; and is as conspicuous in Set forms, as Extemporary.

But they argue farther in behalf of this manner of prayer, That it is a great
edification of the people; much greater than Set forms, which custom has made
ineffectual. To which I answer, That there is a great deal of truth in what
they speak, First because, not out of Grace, or the Spirit, but corrupt nature,
man is much more apt to be affected with variety, that is inferior both in
kind and use, to constant fare, as with a strange monster, rather than with a
well proportioned creature, to which he has been accustomed: And he that shall
pass by in a fools-coat party-colored, shall have more eyes after him, a great
many, than he that walks in a much more comely, costly, and grave habit. Men
therefore should rather correct their judgments, and mend their hearts, and
bring them to conform to sound forms of words, than to please them, in their
carnal appetites, after novelties, no new occasions requiring. But this is not
all. We except much more against the matter and manner of their prayers, in
that they have quite lost and depraved the nature of prayer: For that they give
such loose rains unto their tongues generally, that instead of Confession,
Petition, and Thanksgiving, of which prayer ought principally to consist, they
fly out into preaching; and jumble and confound those duties so together, that
many times in preaching, they mourn and pray: and this is, with the wondering
multitude, accounted the best Sermon. They likewise in their prayers fall on
preaching, and this is the powerful praying: But they are to consider, that to
convert men, is not the office of prayer, but of preaching.

I shall add but one of their Objections more, the rest being easily solved out
of the premises. They say, If a prescribed Form or Liturgy had been good or
profitable for the Church, Christ, without question, would have delivered one
for his Church. To which, on the contrary, I return, If extemporary conceived
prayer had been so necessary, as is pretended, surely Christ would some where
or other have ordained that we should use extemporary prayers; and conceive
that Sacrifice, just as we offer it: But the misery of these Arguers is, that
whereas the Scripture commends and commands nothing so much as prayer, not one,
the least precept have they been able to find through the whole Scripture
requiring prayer extemporary: And then is not this an humane invention? Is it
not Will Worship? But that Christ has prescribed a form, and matter of prayer
too, we hold it proved out of the two Evangelists. I know well they hold the
contrary? What more equal and just way to find out the truth, than to hear both
ancient and modern Interpreters upon that doubt, to their days. Do they find
any that say, the Lords Prayer is so a Rule or Form, that it is not to be the
very matter of our prayer too in terms? If not: Is not this another humane
invention, hammered out of the Crowns of perverse and unskilful men? What would
they say if this very Lords Prayer, as we call it, was by Christ himself drawn
from some received forms amongst the Jews, before Christ's time? This is
affirmed by diverse very learned men in Judaical Antiquities. They were set
against it enough, and more than enough before, this surely would turn their
stomachs worse.

Yet shall we take leave here to recite that sober and most probable Judgment
of the Magdeburgenses concerning the use of the Lords Prayer. Without
Magdeburgens. Centur. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4.
doubt the Apostles propounded the form of prayer delivered by Christ to the
Churches, and required all to pray after that manner, although they themselves
used other forms of prayers.

Much may be said in the defense and confirmation of the received forms of
communicating in public. But what more than what answers the vain cavils
against it, which is done? Or the general concurrence of Heathen, Jewish, and
Christian practice? all which, where it can be showed they had any common
service, show that it was constantly determined, and of one form; and never
changed, but by advice of Authority. Which to prove, because the Affirmative is
insinite, we here put in a challenge to give any one instance to the contrary,
viz. of any one Church, Jewish or Christian, where the public Service was
arbitrary, and left to the private Priest or Minister to form or model as he
pleased? He that shall advise with Gennadius Massiliensis, shall find, that one
solemn point in his Gennad. Massil. Eccles. Dog. cap. 30.
days for the administration of the public Worship, was this, to keep to the
solemnities of Sacerdotal Prayers, which from the Apostles were delivered to
the whole world, and were celebrated in all the Catholic Church uniformly,
that there might be an agreement between the Law or Rule of believing and
praying. And where there is a liberty to pray what men list in public manner,
there will soon spring up a liberty to preach what men list, and upon that, for
the common sort, to believe what they list; unless that Law of Arms, which
themselves have exclaimed against in Religion, keep them in awe.

For if we should speak truly and properly, they who have no public, known,
received form of Worship amongst them, can have no Christian Communion one with
another; and therefore they desire they know not what, and we should do we know
not what, if we should join with them. I prove it thus: All Communion properly
so called, is in prayer and administration of Sacraments, therefore signally
called the Communion; and not at all, or least of all, in Faith or Sermons;
because a man may believe as much as any Church or Preacher requires of him,
and yet be a cursed Schismatic and Alien from the Church. But he that
communicates in Prayers and the Sacraments, has full conjunction with that
Body, with which he so communicates. Now farther, to the intent that men may
agree in one, they certainly must first know that one thing: For what is
Communion, but a common union in One thing, which is a bond so to unite them?
But where this is uncertain, moveable, and new as the day and hour in which it
is produced, how is it possible men should know it, or agree to it? And if not,
How can they be said to enjoy communion in it? Communion is much mistaken if it
be looked on as a thing transient, or consisting only in the act, and passing
away with it, and ending, and coming again at the returning of the like act:
but it is a thing habitual and permanent. So that if we should suppose a man
has heard and approved (for no man, but he that means to be guilty of worse
than Popish implicit Faith, can approve a thing merely future, as extemporary
prayers are) such prayers, and thereupon freely assented to them: How can this
last longer than the very instant of having passed such a sentence? for before
he heard them, he could by no means yield rational assent, and after he has
heard them, it can last little longer than the sound does in his head, for at
the next meeting he is as far behind, and to seek as before, and suspends
communion. But in forms once heard, judged, and compared with the Rule of Faith
and Worship, a man holds constant, real, though not actual Communion exercised,
with that Body of which he is a member. And upon common humane probability, may
with general devotion join with, and in such service of God, though he be out
of hearing: especially (which is most easy) being acquainted with the method
of the Liturgy and the purport of the several Actions, Postures, and Gestures
relating to the several parts thereof. And can these men in consciscience
require, that we should join with them who are so ill set together amongst
themselves, as to have nothing more than a blind presumption and credulity that
all is, or will be well.

But what should we protract an argument of this nature, any longer against
them, who are arrived to such an unnatural height of admiring fresh phrases and
inverted numbers of words, when the matter is much the same, that their own
uttered conceptions to day, affecting themselves and others wonderfully, and
looked on as spiritual and divine; tomorrow, nay on the afternoon, nay next
hour, shall be sentenced by themselves and auditors, as an humane invention,
and injurious to God and Man? Nay, which is yet more, The form which Christ
gave his Disciples, and left to all to be practiced, who would be his
Disciples, has met with such hard entertainment amongst these illuminated
ones, that it is well it escapes a reproach, when it is rehearsed. Tell them
here how the ancient and eminent Saints and Servants of Christ did use it in
terms, and that daily, and that frequently every day, and that often in the
service of the Church in public, you make the matter worse for them. Tell them
how diverse of our own holy Martyrs blessed God for what they saw that day,
wherein they were redeemed not only from blind obedience, but worship, and had
the comfortable opportunity of worshipping God according to this manner so
contemned; they stick a little, and premise some small respect to such good men
as would dye against Popery; but for such devout and constant adherence to the
Liturgy of the Church, they have no good words for them. But it must be either
their unhappiness, that they knew no better, their weakness, they were so fond
of that, their want of zeal for a through reformation, and of light to see what
they did, so clearly as they at this day: And many such pieces of tattle have
they in readiness, having neither truth, nor judgment, nor charity in them, but
declare plainly they who thus discourse and practice to the contrary, are not
of the same Religion with them: as to speak what I hold my self bound to
profess, I am not of theirs, who refuse such public communion with our Church;
and hold it utterly unlawful to give so much as ear to them in their
will worship, and especially such as use that way in dislike of and opposition
to the established. And so let this end.

CHAP. IX.
A third abuse of the Worship of God by Sectaries in neglecting public Prayers
without Sermons, censured. That Prayer in a public Place appointed for Gods
Worship ought at all times to be offered to God. Scripture and Universal
Tradition require it above that in private Places. The frivolousness of such
Reasons as are used against it. The Reasons for it.

WE come now to take notice of another instance of their injuriousness to the
Glory of God, in their vile and low opinion of public Prayer in Gods House.
Whither it should seem they would scarce ever invite Christian people, but for
the Sermons sake. And this they may do for their own sakes, because they love
to be encouraged (as who does not) by a full appearance of Auditors. For
whoever saw a Sectary at prayers alone in the Church, as was the manner, and
ought to be the practice at this day of devout Christians, even upon all
occasions to visit Gods house of Prayer, to pour out their hearts before him,
to put up the private requests of their soul to God there, as the properest
place? I am ashamed to hear, and much more to utter what they have to say
against this excellent practice: It Is out of one of their Commonplaces which
fights against most of what they approve not amongst us: and there is an end of
it. It makes, I am sure, ten times more for the reputation of them whom they
bitterly enough hate, then they are aware of. Shall all Jews be not only
permitted, but excited to frequent Gods house even at those hours of Prayer in
which the public Sacrifice was not offered? Shall the Apostles of Christ after
the Resurrection, as did Peter and John Acts 3. 1.
in express manner, and without all peradventure the rest, who are not
expressed, observe the public place, as well as common time of prayer: Shall
our Savior Christ himself often resort to the Temple, and that of the corrupt
Jews, to pray? Nay, shall this end be especially mentioned as to which the
Temple was ordained by Solomon, that men in private may offer 1 Kings 8. 38,
39, etc.
up their Prayers to God? And shall it not become Christians much more? We know
not of any public prayers the Jews had in their Temple at all: but he that
shall prove they had any, even at their offering Sacrifice (which I neither
positively deny, nor know of, but should gladly learn from others) must, I am
confident, prove it a Set form. But every man likely prayed for himself, as his
own heart and occasions moved him, but commonly in a Set form. For when I
doubted of prayer in the Temple, it was of any which was common, public, or
general, as with Christians. So that the principal end of Gods house then, next
to sacrificing, was that particular men might come and worship God and pray to
him. And to this end the Temple doors were not then only opened, when the
Sacrifice was made, and that ended, clapped to again presently, to shut men out
from praying there, at any time of the day. Nay, the doors of the Gentile
Temples were not shut up against comers in to worship. And much less they of
the ancient Christians, when a public and peculiar place was appointed for
their worship, whatever they were before. If it were so, that in the infant and
extremely persecuted state of the Church, before Christian Religion dared to
show its face abroad, the doors of places appointed for Gods worship, were shut
from the time the service was over, nay, and at the very time of assembling,
will John 20. 19.
they bring us back to that again? We find it indeed to be their Negative use
of Antiquity and Prescriptions. That if it cannot be proved that such a thing
was in use from the first beginning of Christians, they hold themselves
sufficiently exempted from the same: but if it can, they will not hold
themselves bound to do it: One of their fair dealings. But we think it
altogether sufficient, in unquestionable Presidents, to allege them as
imitable and binding, that such were so early and general as could well consist
with the safety and advantage of Christianity it self, and its Professors. And
this we have, beyond all doubt, to favor and commend to us an open Church,
even when there were no public prayers (though that was daily) and much less a
Sermon, which was rarely: and yet God served (I speak modestly) as well, as any
where since the Reformation: and free, and frequent access was had to the House
of God to pray in. This was continued in all Ages, and all Christian Countries,
till some extraordinary Pastors (as they called themselves) made the
alteration much for the worse, God knows; and would have no man enter the
proper place of worship, unless it were to hear the Word, that is, their word.
This custom (God be thanked) was never quite laid down in our English Church,
and I trust in God never will, but gain strength, countenance, and
encouragement, knowing that the Mother Churches or Cathedrals, being Precedents
to all inferior Churches pertaining to them, do by their example of daily
prayers, and a free access at all convenient times of the day granted for men
to pray to God, their private particular prayers, not only approve, but commend
to and invite her daughter Churches to the like most godly practice: All
Eastern, as well as Western Churches, out of the Precincts of the Reformation
(herein very unhappy) set us the like example. And all Churches at first, by
great prudence and piety of the founders and promoters were there placed, where
they might be most convenient for the Parish to resort to at all times: and
also to the best advantage of Roads, that so travelers passing by might have
an opportunity to enter them, and do the devotions to God. But now (a thing to
be lamented) such a godly custom would be censured for superstition; as the
Devil, and the Enemies of God never want words to traduce, where they want
reason to disprove what is good and commendable. And being born to an error,
have a certain horror of leaving it, though no reason can possibly be picked
up to retain it. Besides, Popish and Superstitious, what have any man (I would
fain hear) to say against private prayers in Churches? And those terms are now
so bald, and generally so boldly and ignorantly applied, that they prove
nothing more many times than the profaneness of the user; and have done the
Church of Rome more credit and service, in that many excellent things have been
made proper and singular to that Church, which in truth are not, then all the
franck language, and most averse practices of such men, have done them
discredit or hurt.

But it were very strange if they could here find nothing in Scripture to
color their cause, or credit this ungodly opinion. Christ says (say they, or
at least may) Thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have
Matthew. 6. 6.
shut thy door, pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which is
in secret shall reward thee openly. But do they, who turn these words thus to
their purpose, really think that Christ hereby advised men to pray rather at
home than in the public? When I can believe it, I will show the contrary, and
before. For Christ spoke not against the publickness, but the hypocrisy of
this prayer. It is not probable indeed, that a man should be so hypocritical in
private, as he may in public: And therefore, to obviate that mortal evil to
all divine prayer, our Savior both confutes and redresses it, showing it is
far better for such, and more acceptable to God, to be take themselves to their
closets, where no Man, but God and their own Consciences, can see them, than
with such vain ostentation to beg applause of men. And if all the world were
such Hypocrites as Christ reproved, it were better no man should ever come to
Church at any time. But there is the contrary vice to be shunned, and that is
Profaneness. For that is no less, scandalous, yea much more, and must be so
accounted. But they, who out of undue reasons refuse the public place of Gods
worship, are to be noted as Profane.

It is most certain, that they who keep to St. Paul's precept in his Epistle to
Timothy, That men pray every where lifting up holy hands, etc. cannot pray 1 Timothy 2. 8. Ephesians. 6.
always in one place, especially if we add that other precept of St. Paul, Pray
always: for no man can be always in that most common place of prayer. And
therefore it may be inferred from hence, that it is lawful and acceptable to
God to pray privately; but not that prayer in public is not to be preferred
before private. For would it not as well hold against prayer in families, which
is not in the closet? And if to every house there were a place dedicated
specially to Gods worship, as there is in every parish, I should hold that
prayers generally in the family, and particularly of persons singly, were more
laudably performed in that public place, than in a private chamber. But it is
further to be noted, That when St. Paul says, we should pray every where, he
never intended to equalize all places in fitness to Gods service; he intended
not to take off distinction of Christian places to that end, but Judaical, as
the Temple of the Jews: which diverse green Christians supposed was to be the
special, if not only place, assigned of God for his worship. St. Paul informs
them better, and assures them that they should pray every where as well as at
Jerusalem: meaning nothing less then that where there were Christian Temples to
which they might resort, they should not need go to them, but may keep at home
as well, being God is every where, and they must pray every where; but that a
place of worship solemnized by Christians, was altogether as proper as that
Temple of the Jews. Isidore, says indeed, Prayer is most opportunely made in
private places, and is more pleasing to God, viz. so qualified as before: A
sincere prayer at home is better, many degrees, than an hypocritical one in
public. And the Gloss upon St. Paul's words ^^ith, In every place, that is,
where ever you are, and not only in the Church. And the like it says upon
Christ's words in St. John to the woman of Samaria, That neither John 4. 21.
on that mount, nor yet at Jerusalem men should worship God. But who sees not
that it is to be understood signally, and not so superstitiously, as that a
Temple might not be as pleasing to God in any other place, as at Jerusalem, or
Mount Gerizzim? And I know he adds, as diverse other Fathers, the Temple of
the heart, which is worthily said, to encourage such persons to inward and
chamber-devotion, whose leisure or labors will not suffer them to repair to
Church, not to erect an alter in heart and house equal to that in the Church.
And for my part I see no reason to except unclean places from Gods worship, as
some Casuists do, when a more comely and convenient cannot be had? For there is
no place unclean in such Cases. But we are now enquiring about the right, a
place has to our Services, other things being equal. As if a man has as good
an heart, as simple intention, as pure charity, as laudable matter petitioned
for, whether the place of Gods worship be not it, he ought to offer his
Sacrifice in, rather than any other? And whether public is not required rather
than private? And here it may be noted that we make public prayer of two
sorts: Public in respect of manner, and public in respect of place: The
former, when there is an unanimous and orderly concurrence of many members of
Christ's Body in one common service. The other, when one single person appears
before God in his House, and offers his bounden service and devotion alone.
Both these we hold to be better than domestic or private worship of the same
nature: and thus prove from reasons not easily to be distinguished, but making
for both generally.

First, because the precepts of the Scripture much more often inculcate and
more earnestly press this, and more highly magnify this office than the other.
O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, says the Psalmist. This beauty
Psalm 96. 9. Psalm 27. 4.
of holiness was undoubtedly the Temple. And again, One thing have I desired of
the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
Temple. And to what end was the Temple of God built and dedicated so solemnly,
but to receive the prayers of devout persons, as well as sacrifices, and the
singers in order? Is there any thing more frequently repeated in Solomon's
Oration, than the use of prayer, there especially? And that they who 1 Kings 5.
8.
could not enter into the Temple it self, should direct and send their prayers
thither? The Jews, it is well known, turned to their Temple generally when they
prayed, as Daniel; and Hezekiah when he was sick, is said to turn his face
Isaiah 38. 2.
to the wall, because his house standing with the Temple, he thereby turned his
face that way. And I suppose upon this ground, which will be censured (I know)
as superstitious, that they held opinion their prayers did not immediately
ascend unto God, but by entering first into the Temple; which I gather from the
prayer of Jonah, who being in the belly of the Whale, and the bottom of the
Deep, cried unto the Lord thus, I am cast out of thy sight, Jonah 2. 4, 7.
yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple. Again, When my soul fainted
within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came unto thee, into thy holy
Temple. So that, wherever, or in what condition soever they were, they held
themselves obliged to offer their prayers up there first, as the properest
place and means to have them ascend unto God: and that

Secondly, because there were greater promises of audience of prayers made
there, than in any other place: as it is well known from the prayer of Solomon,
and the promises of God thereupon, in the Book of the Kings. 1 Kings 8.


Thirdly, where there is a greater approbation and consent in the worship of
God, there is a greater confirmation of our Faith and Confidence that there we
may offer up our prayers to God. But in public worship rather than private,
this is found.

Fourthly, in public Worship a greater increase of devotion toward God is
ordinarily occasioned at the consideration of the special place of Gods
worship, and the special presence God has promised in that place, in the
hearing the prayer, observing the postures and behaviors, of all such as
appear before him, and in the dispensation of his graces there. As likewise the
eye and example of Men are of very great use and effect to the checking of
light, and vain actions which may fall from us, and inviting us to a due
veneration of God there, and a decency to prevent the just censure and offense
of others: which was the drift and force of St. Paul's argument to the
Corinthians, and the case of public Assemblies of Christians, and their
behavior there; saying, For this cause ought the woman to have 1 Cor. 11. 10.
power over her head, because of the Angels: whether we understand it as does
Origin upon Luke, Because the Angels are present in the Church, which deserves
Orig^^. Hom 23. in Luc.
so much; to wit, that only which is of Christ; Therefore it is required that
women should be covered, because the Angels are there present, assisting
Photius Epist. (...), etc.
the Saints, and rejoicing in the Church. Or as Photius understands it, That
women have power over their head, that is, says he, have such, who have power
over them: and that for the Angels they ought to be covered; who are beholders
and witnesses of the production of women, out of man, and proceeding from him.
Or lastly, if we understand the words as some others, who take the Angels here
to be no other than the Bishop of the Church, or President of the Assembly, of
such Christians, for whose sake women ought to cover themselves: because,
according to the most ancient form and custom of such Assemblies, the Bishop
having a higher seat than the rest of the Congregation, might easily overlook
the actions and gestures of all the rest. And it is no strange thing for the
President or Bishop to be termed an Angel: as (what ever Origin playing many
times with the Scripture, rather than interpreting it, might fancy) in the
Revelation, and in other places of Scripture. Rev. 2. 1.


Lastly, The glory of God which (as has been said) is principally relative, is
much more declared and celebrated by the public than by private worship, even
in the single act of one, when occasion is not offered for more, in the public
place of Worship.

But to conclude this, I shall hear give the reasonings of St. Chrysostom to
this our purpose, upon the occasion of the effect of the joint prayers of the
Faithful in the delivery of St. Paul from death, mentioned in his Epistle to 2
Cor. 1. 10. Chrysostom. Sermon. 64. p. 662. 663 Tom. 6.
the Corinthians. If St. Paul, says he, being in danger, was delivered by the
prayer of the multitude, why should not we also expect great benefit from such
assistance? For seeing, when we pray singly by our selves, we are weak, but
when we are gathered together, we become strong, we more prevail with God by
multitude and auxiliaries. For so a King, who often gives one over to death,
and yields not to one when he entreats for one condemned; but yields to the
importunity of an whole City pleading for him; and upon the importunity of a
multitude respites him that is lead to the Dungeon from condemnation, and
brings him forth to Life: Such is the force of the supplication of a multitude.
For this reason we are here gathered together all. of us, that we might more
powerfully draw God to commiseration. For seeing (as is said) when we pray by
our selves we are weak, by conjunction of Charity we prevail with God to give
us those things we crave. But I speak not these things for mine own sake, but
that ye may daily hasten to the Assemblies, that ye say not, What is there that
I cannot pray for at home? Thou may pray indeed, but thy prayer not have the
like efficacy, as when it is made with the proper members; as when the entire
body of the Church sends up its Petition with one consent, with one voice,
the Priests being present, and offering up the prayers of the whole multitude.
Would thou know of what great force the prayer that is made in the Church is?
Peter was bound in Prison, etc. Acts 12. 5.


And is it not most strange to consider the bold ignorance of the common sort,
who dare to turn the words of Solomon, and that even in that prayer of
Dedication, and signalizing the House of God above all places else, for Gods
worship, against that, and all other Houses to that holy intent, and to make
all places alike, when there is nothing so manifest as, that that place was
only assigned by God with special injunctions and promises? For when Acts 7.
48. c. 17. 24. 1 Kings 8. 27.
they say, God does not dwell in Temples made with hands, out of the Acts of
the Apostles: what do they say more than Solomon at the time of dedication, But
will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold the heaven, and heaven of heavens
cannot contain thee, how much less this House which I have built? Does not the
argument prove that God is no where to be worshipped because he is locally no
where contained in a place? Or does it prove that he is to be worshipped in
private Houses, or contained in them, rather then in the public? The Gentiles
(as St. Paul's words intimate) imagined, that, by certain Images they could bind
their Gods to be present, and limit them to certain places, from whence they
could not well stir. And this is the reason that some ancient Fathers, as
Arnobius, and Minutius Felix denied, the Christians had any Temples then,
meaning such charmed Images and Shrines, to hold God fast to them. The Jews
imagined (as appears by St. Stephens words) that Gods promises and blessings
were so precisely determined to that One Temple, amongst them, that he would by
no means impart himself in like manner, in any other place. To this fond and
superstitious conceit, it was very proper to quote their own Prophets against
them; who imply what St. Paul expresses else where; Is he the God of the Jews
only? Is he not Romans 3. 29.
also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also, etc. And by virtue hereof,
whatsoever the Scripture may seem to ruder readers of it, to speak by way of
disesteem of material and visible Temples, implies no more than an equal right
of the Gentile Temples dedicated to God under the Gospel, with the Jewish under
the Law.

But that even the public places of Christians should be looked upon with no
greater respect or religion then that which comes next to hand, is no where to
be found; and far from being the purpose of Christ's words, out of which another
exception is made, viz. Where two or three are gathered together Matthew. 18. 20.
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. For what I pray is it to meet in
the Name of Christ? Only to take his Name into our mouths? To turn over the
Scriptures, and to turn them this way and that way, and prosess great matters
out of them? By no means. It Is true, this is somewhat toward it. But
notwithstanding this, men may meet in the name of the Devil rather than of
Christ, and do the works of the Devil rather than of Christ. For to do the will
and work of either, is to meet in the name of either. And no men who in their
very meeting it self, as such are enemies unto Christ, can be said to meet in
the Name of Christ, speak they never so gracious and glorious things of Christ
and Religion. But they who lightly, vainly, and causlesly affect separation,
and dismember themselves from the visible, I say, visible Body of Christ, the
Society of Saints by Election and Profession, are thereby direct enemies to
Christ, and can never meet in Christ's Name, according to Christ's intention,
though, as the worshippers of Baal, on Baal, they call on Christ, with never so
much zeal and earnestness from morning to evening; as we have already showed
where we treated of Schism: And when at length will they, who under such
obscure and fond pretenses separate, produce any one thing which may
countervail the notoriousness of the evil of separation, as a reason to warrant
them so to do? But this, either the gross insensateness of the vulgar in such
points, or the desperate resolution to hold their own, whatever may be said
against them, is little or nothing looked after, till it be too late.

CHAP. X.
A fourth corruption of the Worship of God by confining it to an unknown
tongue. Scripture and Tradition against that custom. A fifth abuse of Prayer,
in denying the People their Suffrage contrary to the ancient practice of the
Church.

BUT before we leave this public worship, we are to observe somewhat of the
manner how it ought to be performed, and that to rescue it from two abuses
principally crept into it. The first of the Papist, and the other of the
Puritan, unluckily falling into the same condemnation with the other. Two
things are as evident as Tradition, not to say Scripture, can make any thing;
First that all public and private prayers were instituted in a known tongue.
Secondly, that there was a concurrence of the vulgar Christians with the
public Minister of such Offices. Both these are now quite, almost, worn out of
use amongst the Romanists, and being disused, a defense framed studiously
against the practice of them: The latter has been practiced and maintained by
Puritans, though first invented by Papists.

The authority of Scripture for the public prayers to be made in a known
tongue seems to us, and not only to us, but to our more ingenuous adversaries,
very express in St. Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians. The subject 1 Cor. 14.
of the fourteenth Chapter of the first Epistle is to redress the vanity of
certain gifted persons, who presumed to teach and pray in such a foreign
tongue, which no man understood but themselves. For whereas it is commonly
replied by the Learned Romanists, that the Apostle speaks of preaching chiefly,
and not of praying in public: It matters not much if he does speak of
preaching, as certainly he does, so it be evident that he speaks of prayer
also, nor that he principally teaches of prophesying, if he omitteth not
public prayer. Is there any thing need be plainer than this, on our side, If I
pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but v. 14, 15.
my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then? I pray with the Spirit, and I
will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, I will sing
with the understanding also: Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how
shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? These words are plain
enough, one would think, to declare that the Apostle intended public prayer,
as well as preaching or prophesying: Therefore no arts are omitted to obscure
and pervert his meaning, but with such ill success, that it is thereby much
more illustrated and confirmed to the loss of such corrupters of Scripture, to
make it agree with their doctrine and practice. For Bellarmine confesses, it is
very hard to make it good, that the Aposte means Bellarm. de Verbo D. lib. 2.
cap. 16.
only preaching; and so in truth it must needs be, but that there is nothing to
necessity, and a willing mind. And therefore to mend the matter, he says, The
Apostle there treats not of Divine Offices, but of Spiritual Songs, which
Christians were wont to compose to praise God and give him thanks. And what if
this were so? For that they had any formed Liturgies in those early unsettled
days of the Church, while the gifts of the Spirit were so ordinary, I much
question, excepting the Lords Prayer, which was ever in public use, as well as
private; if it be not undoubtedly true what is affirmed by no mean Authors,
That St. Peter celebrated the Mass (taking here Mass in the ancient and
innocent signification) with the Lords prayer only; Does not the argument of
the Apostles hold altogether as valid in the ordinary as extraordinary Praises
and Service? But when the same Author can bring scarce any ancienter than
himself, who are of his opinion, and does bring Haymo, Primasius, Lombard,
Thomas, and others, that he means the Ordinary service; what worth can there be
in such an evasion? Hence it is that another is invented in the same Author,
which acknowledges that there is meant Common worship: But that the whole
Congregation is not thereby to understand, but only the Clerk of the Parish,
who is instead of the unlearned or Idiot to say, Amen. For Papists make no
doubt but such an one there was who should in such manner answer for the rest
of the people. But I make no doubt but they are miserably mistaken. For no
records among the Jews, from whom most customs of the ancientest Christians
descended, report any such thing: No custom of the primitive Christians warrant
this, but the contrary; whatever Ledesima the Jesuit says. For, as shall by
and by showed, the people in general without any such discrimination of persons
made their solemn returns unto their Bishop or Priest, who so celebrated in
public. And therefore Bellarmine honestly and learnedly rejects this
interpretation, showing that the phrase of the Apostle which we render,
Supplyeth the place of the unlearned, comprehends no less, all the vulgar,
then the pretended Clerk. And reason good he should so think, because
questionless, by Unlearned, is not there meant general ignorance of men, but
ignorance of that language which was spoken so extraordinarily: For as Salmeron
notes upon the place of St. Paul, by Place is meant the order of setting in
such Assemblies, where the Teachers had one place, and the Hearers, who for
that were called Unlearned, had another. Hence it is that Salmeron would make
clearer work: affirming, Salmer. Com. in 1 Cor. 14. Disp. 30.
That it is not the end of Divine Service that the people should be instructed,
but the worshipping of God. This Bellarmine approves, but betrays his cause in
another point; granting that, of old, prayers public were for the instruction
of the people, but now (is not this to own a forsaking of antitiquity) the
chief use of prayers is not the edification or consolation of the people, but
the worship of God. And the Reason which Bellarmine gives, is exactly the same
which Sectaries amongst us give, to silence the people in public Devotion,
because, The Minister speaks not to man, but unto God. To both which we
answer briefly, and against both, viz. The Priest speaks unto God only in
prayer, as the proper object, and to the people only in preaching, as the
proper object of that: But he also in prayer speaks to the people
instrumentally, i. e. as to so many instruments or causes concurring to the
same end and effect, and therefore ought to understand what is petitioned for,
and obliged to concur with the principal Agent, the Minister of God in such
worship.

For though we are far from denying what the Papists and Puritans may say, That
any prayer is unfruitful or unnecessary which is not understood by the people,
in whose behalf it is put up; for it may avail them who are many miles distant,
we all grant, and consequently, a prayer not heard, may be useful, as well not
understood, when heard: Yet this holds only when inconveniences or
impossibilities obstruct the due exercise of prayer. For as to such, who are
deaf and cannot hear, yet come with general reverence to the public place, and
so far, as they can, join with the prayers of the Church, I make no question,
but considerable benefit to accrue; so such as shall ignorantly, scornfully, or
uncharitably neglect to give their general consent and suffrage to the public
communion in prayer, I make no doubt but they bereave themselves of the benefit
both of the public service, and their own private worship. But this comes not
home to the purpose: For of extraordinary acts in Religion, as of particular
things in Philosophy, there is no knowledge, and nothing can be determined; but
this may, That generally and ordinarily, public prayers are more prevalent
with God when understood and concurred to by public devotion. And herein does
consist the vulgar error of the Romish Doctors, that they suppose St. Paul
should mean (which I confess, as I have said before, our Translation too much
favors) that when he says, The understanding is unfruitful, the understanding
of the speaker in an unknown tongue; whenas the context will certainly inform
us, he meant the understanding of the hearer, who knew nothing of what was so
delivered, which some of their own Expositors agree to: as also they do to the
great expediencie, as well as antiquity, of that custom of the peoples bearing
a share in the public Worship. To demonstrate which, I shall here at large
transcribe what I find in sober and learned Cassander. It were to be wished,
that according to the precept of the Cassand. Defens. Lib. De Officio Pii Viri,
p. 865. Op.
Apostle, and the ancient Rite of the Church, that some consideration were had
of the people, in the public prayers of the Church, singings, and lessons
which are undertaken for the peoples sake: and that the common sort of
Believers should not wholly and constantly be driven from all communion of
prayers and divine lessons. St. Paul's words are manifest, that what is said
cannot be understood, unless you express it by a tongue signifying your speech:
and that he who through ignorance understands not what is said, can by no
means answer Amen, at the giving of thanks of another. And that Oraculum by
notice whereof the Bishop of Rome, with the Senate of Cardinals, granted to the
Sclavonian Nation, that they should use the tongue of their Country in sacred
actions, seems to pertain to all Nations named Christians, Omnis spiritus
laudet Dominum and omnis lingua confiteatur ei. Let every spirit praise the
Lord, and every tongue confess to him. And Thomas Cajetane, a man doubtless
most learned and acute, wrote in a certain place, It were better for the
edification of the Church, public prayers to be said in the vulgar tongue in
the Church, which the people may hear, than in the Latin tongue: And when he
was for this reproved by some, he answered, He built upon the foundation of the
Apostles, in his fourteenth Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
etc. Thus far, and much more follows, out of that grave man, to this purpose.
So that in one of those things which convince the Church of Rome of Innovation
and obstinacy in novelties, as nothing need more be said against it to that
end, nothing being said more for it in the upshot of all Disputes, but that for
some time it has been in use there, and the Trentine Convention has Azorus
Institut. Mor. l. 8. c. 26. Salmer. in 1 Cor. 16. Disp. 30.
made all sure, according to their manner, by decreeing it inconvenient that
Divine Offices should commonly be in the vulgar tongue, as Azorius writes, and
as Salmeron; It anathematizes, such as will not be content with the three
tongues in which the super scription was written upon the Cross of Christ.
Which is a fancy without any firmness at all, it being certain no such thing
was intended thereby, and evident, that the Hebrew tongue was scarce ever used
in Christian services, though the Syriack has been. And it is not agreed
whether of the two was the Language: but this we rest not on: nor can the
Romanists. But when they have turned every stone to little purpose, they come
to that which will never fail them in this or any other point, the
determination of their Church, and practice of the same, which upon no accounts
must be violated, for that were to loose or hazard all, as Azorius in the place
forecited does with little modesty, and less advantage to his cause profess:
and answering this question, Whether the vulgar tongue might not be indulged to
Heretics petitioning for it, and for the peace of the Church? says, I answer,
Councils and Fathers and the Church were never wont to yield to such like
Heretics demands. But this he proves in matters quite of a different nature,
as if, when the Fathers would hear of no accommodation with Arius, Eutycheus,
Nestorius holding notorious heresies against Christ (even when they would have
introduced some verbal agreement) they could be precedents to oppose that
wherein, if it were false, can consist no heresy; but is true and most
generally was practiced by all the Fathers and Churches at first, and so
continued for eight hundred years. And therefore he speaks more to this purpose
in these words following: If it should be granted to Lutherans and Calvinists,
that they should celebrate Divine Service in their vulgar tongue, they would
afterward give out that they had got their wills: yea, that the Church had
changed her opinion, and left off her ancient custom, as contrary to Scripture,
and so charge the Church with erring: and would exult with incredible joy and
gladness over it, etc. This is in truth the very same reason which our grave
Puritans render, why they conform not to the Church in her Service, whenas they
confess they have nothing of sin to object against the thing it self, viz. They
should be judged of mutability and levity, and should thereby weaken their
Ministry in the esteem of their people: which in all probability they borrowed
from their Father Calvin, one of whose reasons against the moderation Calvin.
Epist.
of Melancthon was, that if they should make any correction in that
Reformation, which was so hastily hudled up, they should weaken their Ministry.
The reasonableness of which I leave to others to judge of.

But rejecting the common reasons (all of which we are not here to examine) of
Papists, we shall freely oblige them to give better grounds of the Liturgies in
unknown tongues, than may be ordinarily found amongst them, though no
sufficient can be given. And one is the great veneration had to the traditions
of the Ancients in worshipping God: not that anciently any instance can be
given, that may be a precedent to the corruptions of these times, but that
having, with sober, grave, and holy advice, framed a Liturgy in any one tongue,
they were very scrupulous how they made any alteration therein, though of words
only; and therefore that which is vulgarly spoken, altering daily, and that
which was written remaining altogether unchanged in words, tract of time bred a
diversity between the one and the other. But this we demand of our Adversaries,
what one president for many hundred years together they can produce, where, at
the first institution of public Service, it was so contrived that nothing of
the vulgar language should be taken into it? There is a vast difference between
a passive and an active and purposed inconvenience. The ancient predecessors
of the Roman Church never intended that their Latin Service should be hid or
unknown from the common people, which many generations after followed; yet so
it must needs fall out in time. But they, who at this day plant Churches in
both Indies, and obtrude their Latin tongue upon the people there; and who
deny liberty to other Provincial Churches in Europe, and elsewhere, to
celebrate in their known Language, do purpose mischief unto such Christians,
and become Schismatical, in not only not redressing themselves according to the
Rule of their forefathers, whom they should much more imitate in ordering
their service, so that the Common Christian might understand the same, as
primitively and for a long time they did; than in sticking so severely to the
bare Letters and Syllables they used: not making conscience of far more
scandalous practices, in altering the service it self in matter, by absurd
additions and detractions: but with denunciation of Excommunication against
such Churches as shall presume to redress that evil of ignorance, and render
Christians intelligent of what they do.

But I have been of opinion, that the vulgar have been no small cause of this
great superstition and inconvenience to themselves: In that, in process of
time, their devotion slacking in timely repairing to the Church, and in due
demeanor in the Church; neglecting to concur with the Minister of God, and to
reciprocate with him, and almost deserting the Service by coldness, sloth, and
indevotion; the Priest was constrained (perhaps with a Deacon or Clerk only) to
perform the service alone. And truly, let such people look to their modern
teachers, who have instilled such ungracious opinions into them, as to take
them off from an hearty and diligent answer and reply to the Minister; and
thank themselves, if ever they be denied the understanding the public worship
of God. For is there not much reason that the service should forsake them, who
forsake that? And that they who will not concern themselves reverently and
devoutly, as they ought to do, in it; should be made incapable of so doing, by
such an invention as this?

I know they of the Sectaries (as their writings testify) can be content the
Common people should say Amen, at the last: as if St. Paul had indeed intended
no more than that one word: whereas, in all probability, he intended not that
word at all, in terms; but such a constant and general suffrage as might be
implied in that word; and yet that word very laudably used in the conclusion of
several prayers. It may (I should think) put them to the blush, to consider
how, herein, they vary from the whole practice of ancient Churches; as I could
particularly show, and give us no reason why they presume so sacrilegiously to
defraud the People. I have, I confess, met in some of their writings, such an
one as can scarce be wondered at enough, coming from them. For they say, it may
give some occasion Account of the Conference at, etc.
to the Laity to invade the Office of the Minister, (Priest they would have
said, if they dared) to speak so in Public. And is not this wonderful and
ridiculous both, that they, who have by their own Principles, quite destroyed
the ancient Hierarchy of the Church, so far as power would enable them; and by
their practice, opened a way for all comers into the Ministry, by defending
Extraordinariness of Vocation, should be more zealous than any Hierarchical
persons in either Ancient or Modern days, for the Dues and Rights of the
Ministry? This surely can have no good meaning, as it has no good reason:
seeing all that the Laity does in such cases, is only to follow, and not to
lead, as Pastors do; and to answer the call of others, and not to give any
law, or word to any. Is there any fear that the common people should ascend to
the throne, when they give their approbation by shout and applause to the
Oration of their King made from thence? There ciprocation of the people was
never looked upon otherwise, than a suffrage, and an ^^^^ance, and argument of
the inward affection born by them to the worship of God, performed by the
Priest, and a proof of their communion with him. So that very early in the
Church it was constituted, that no such public Service should be performed in
the Church, where Consecrat. Did. 1.
there were not two at least, to make answer to the Priest. And as there was
never before these prevaricating Sectaries, any fear that the Deacon should
invade the Priests office, because he made answer to him; so neither, that the
people should usurp either, because they replied to both, as innumerable
instances may prove: take this amongst many which I could add to them already
collected by Vicecomes. In the Ethiopian Mass, which bears the name of Joseph.
Vicecom. Observe. Eccl. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 14.
the Universal Canon, thus speaks the Deacon, Bow the knee. People. Before
thee, O Lord, we bow it, and praise thee. The Assistent to the Priest says as
follows, Lord, Lord, etc. The People replies the same. Then the Assistent of
the Priest (or rather Bishop, for so the word Sacerdos and (...) properly used,
signifies) follow the Prayer, Lord, etc. The Deacon says, Arise to Prayer. The
People, Lord have mercy upon us, etc. Thus and much more anciently. Now for the
credit of the Roman Church, and much more for the Puritan, who agrees with it
herein, hear what follows in Vicecomes. This custom is long since antiquitated
in the Latin Church, a custom being brought in, that some one of the number of
Clerks should answer to the Priest in the sacred ministration of the Mass.
Which when it first began may well be doubted, by reason of the scarcity of
Writers who treat of it. But if I may use my conjecture, it was but a little
before Beroaldus his days [which Beroaldus I take to be him who lived about
the year 1480] because he is the first that I can find who makes mention
thereof in a Manuscript of Ceremonies, which is extant in the Library of the
Canons of the great Church, etc. By which it may be seen which are most popish,
the Church of England in its public Liturgy, commending and prescribing this
ancient custom and laudable; or Sectaries, who have conspired with Papists to
abolish it, and exclude it out of their Service.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Circumstances of Divine Worship, and first of the proper Place of
Divine Worship, called the Church, the manner of worshipping there. Of the
Dedication of Churches to God: their Consecration, and the Effects of the same.
That no man can convert any part of the Church to his private use without
profanation of it and Sacrilege. Against the abuse of Churches in the Burial
of dead Bodies, erecting Tombs, and enclosing them in Churches or Chancels.
Rich men have no more right to any part of the Church than the Poor. The Common
Law can give no Right in such Cases.

THERE are two very considerable circumstances in most Moral and Divine
Actions, Place and Time, which have great influence upon the goodness and evil
of an action. And we have already so far touched the former, as to assert the
Excellency of a Place Public above the Private Closet, or Domestic Rooms.
Now it is requisite we should enquire into the condition of such public
places, as we call Temples or Churches, omitting here Sic ergo appellamus
Ecclesiam Basilicam qua continetur populus, etc. Aug. Ep. 157.
the various names and significations and acceptations, as more proper for
larger and learneder Treatises. And yet we must not omit the distinction of
Church, into Proper and Improper, as Austin does thus use it. For so (says he)
we call the Temple [Basilica] the Church, wherein is contained the people,
which are truly called the Church; as that by the name Church, that is, The
place is called Gods Temple or Church, because the company and congregation of
Gods people (which is properly called the Church) does there assemble
themselves, on the days appointed. Homil. Chapter of Engl. Of the place, etc. p.
126.
the people contained in the Church, we should signify the place which
contains, etc. And to prevent all mistakes, we confess we here mean that
opprobriously called, The Steeple-house, as no bodies house; but, as we
believe, the House of God by institution and designation: however it proves
many times by Heretics and Schismatics intrusion and usurpation, the House of
the Enemy to God: But the Kings Palace is still the Kings, though Rebels and
Usurpers possess themselves by violence and injustice of the same.

And that certain Houses may become the houses of God, in a peculiar manner, no
less than Houses and Lands may be the rights of Man, will appear from the very
same grounds, which are generally three, Donation, Purchase, Occupation.
Donation is the Transferring of the Right of one Man to another, under which we
reduce Inheritance: which though now custom of Law has made to descend to the
next heir, without any act of the predecessor, yet originally it was
constantly by gift: and the Law supposes now a gift of the deceased, where no
formal donation is mentioned to him that is to succeed, nor any other. Purchase
is the transferring of the Right or Dominion one has of any thing to another,
upon civil contract and consideration; whereas the other seemed rather to be
natural. Occupation is the possession of a thing free from any proprietary, and
retaining the same unto his own proper use. All these ways, both Houses and
Lands may be transferred unto God, upon this farther supposition, that to the
acquiring of a Right of Dominion, the act of the person to whom it is
transferred, is not immediately necessary, but another in his name and right
may assume it. So that if any entering into uninhabited and unpossessed
Countries, to which no man lays a claim, shall take up such a quantity of
ground in Gods name, and declare it devoted to the use of Religion and the
Service of God, it as undoubtedly becomes the possessions of God, as it would
have belonged to himself, had he retained to himself the right of the first
Occupant, as they call it. Again, when out of the revenues of such sacred
Estate, commonly called Church Lands or Means, there is purchase made to the
same end, and in the same nature. But most known is that of Free Donation,
either of one or more to the Service and Honor of God, which we call
Dedication. Which Dedication is an outward act or ceremony signifying the
Alienation of the right formerly posited in others, and Translation thereof to
Gods Service: which because, God conversing not with us Civilly, as we do one
with another, it cannot be put immediately into the hands of God, is taken up
in Gods name for his use, by his more immediate Servants: and by consequence,
is not to be wrested from him, nor alienated to any profane, I mean common
humane uses; any more than is that which in right belongs unto one man, to be
granted to, or usurped by another, without concession or consent in some manner
employed, if not expressed.

This ancient Rite of Dedicating Churches was at first very agreeable to the
simplicity of Christian Religion it self; yet like all passing of Estates from
one to another in the more natural and rude condition of Humane Society, where
there was always a change of the Propriety, where was any propriety at all;
but very simple and rude without any formalities as are now in use in those
called civilized Countries, but with no less validity. And so it was at first
in the alienation of Houses from humane Proprietaries, and devoting them to
God. For as Baronius has observed, As the Kings Baron. Ann. 112. number. 45, 46.
or Emperors Exchequer was wont at first to lay claim to any thing by casting
over it the Emperors Mantle, or putting his Image or Name upon it, even so the
Bishops were wont to consecrate Churches to God, no otherwise than by marking
them with the Title of the Cross, or with its Banner. Whence it was that the
Emperor Theodosius, Leg. ult. de Paganis Cod. Theod. commanded that the
Temples of the Gentiles should serve for Christian Religion, by placing upon
them the sign of the Venerable Cross. Hence is that of Perkins concerning this
matter, who says, The ancient Consecration of Perkins Demonst. Problem.
Churches was with mere words and prayers, not with crossings, or such like
rites: And dedication of Churches began about the year 300 after Christ, is
partly found true, and partly erroneous. For Funcius yields much more,
confessing Funcius Comment. l. 2. ad Ann. 141.
that Hyginus Bishop of Rome ordained that Temples should be dedicated to God
with solemn Rites and Ceremonies, which was about the year 141. And yet it is
true what Perkins says, that very simple was the first form.

But we do not so much here enquire into the Antiquity or Form of Consecration,
as the reasonableness and effect of such consecration. And the reasonableness
does appear from the common grounds already laid, and the necessity of some
outward visible form to be used in such Dedications, as well to manifest to the
world the renunciation of propriety, in any that may otherwise pretend to
reserve their right to themselves, anciently enjoyed, as also to declare to
what end, and upon what conditions they so part with that right, and to whom it
thenceforward belongs: all which, if it must be traduced with the opprobrious
name of Superstition, and so pass as invalid or sinful, I would pray such
enemies, as he did those that desired Aristocratical Government, to settle it
first in their own Families, and then as experience should prompt to them, to
commend it to the Public: First, to take up estates upon such simple,
unceremonial acts, themselves; and as they find the event, to offer that as the
most simple and sober way for Gods House to pass from others hands into Gods: I
know the haters of Superstition, to far greater superstition, are wont to say,
It suffices that such is the consent of Christians, that a place should be
allotted in convenient manner to Gods Service, and that it is sufficiently
consecrated (if they dare speak such a bold word) by concomitancie, that is,
when such acts of Divine worship, as their prayers, and specially preaching,
are there exercised: But this will no ways be accepted, both because they do
the same duties in places which they hold no ways thereby alienated from their
common uses. And this is no more than for a man to lend another his house to
keep a Feast in it; and not so much as if a man should let out his house for
one to keep his Shevalry or Majoralty in. But that we require is, that a place
should so be made over to Gods use, that it should be out of all men's power
justly to reduce it to humane propriety and uses: And this can only be done,
and is done by such acts of public Dedication as we plead for, and never could
hear half a note of sense, reason, or religion against it; though we hear too
great and unchristian clamours to the contrary, with wonted revilings.

Supposing then this, we pass to the effect of such Dedications unto Almighty
God, one of which is contained and expressed in the formal abrenunciation made
of all Civil Right to such a place; and by consequence, for any man to convert
any part of it to his own use, is sacrilegiously to profane the same. A thing,
which I take this occasion to note against the gross abuse of Churches, by the
Greater sort; who commonly by building themselves large and stately Pews, and
enclosing what is every poor Christians Freehold, as well as the richest and
noblest of the parish, make it more sacred to the common Christian than any
other part of the Church besides. For that must be kept under lock and key; and
if not, yet the greatness and power of the person who has laid that out for
himself, suffices to deter any ordinary man from making the like use of that,
as of any other part of the Church, lest his secular hand lie heavier upon him,
than the Ecclesiastical power can, or must upon him, for such invasion of every
parishioners right as well as his; So that what it is not lawful for, or just
to do to the Common for beasts, or Town-Green where he lives, he makes no
scruple at all to do to Gods Peculiar, and the Common to Christians: As if so
be Churches now-a-dayes were of the same nature with new found and possessed
Lands in the Indies; every man may have what he can enclose and fense in for
himself and his friends only. Whereas this should be well understood by every
good Christian that has the fear of God, as a Christian ought, before his
eyes, that the poorest person that takes collection in the parish, has as much
reason and right to erect places in the Church to themselves, and to possess
themselves of any part of it, as the rich, but that it is not so much in his
power. And does any man think he has a good Right, because he can do it? That
we can do (says the Law) which we can Idpossumus, qued sure possumus.
lawfully do. But that we can lawfully do, which the Common Law does not
interdict always. For the Common Law (whether because it concerns altogether
men in their civil capacities and proprieties, such as this is not; or whether
it has not heretofore been such a Dragg to enclose all it could lay hold on,
without consideration of other Courts Ecclesiastical, which were always
received in all Christian Commonwealths, but left many things to the decision
of the more peculiar Laws made in behalf of Churches, and Ecclesiastical Cases)
has made no provision at all for the securing of the Rights of the Church, or
Christians thereunto belonging, I mean in their Capacities properly
Ecclesiastical: so that scarce any remedy can be obtained from thence, if a man
shall steal any thing off the very body of the Church it self. And can any man
that has any sense of Religion take sanctuary or protection from that, in
defense of his violation of Christians Rights, and think all well done that is
not punishable by that Law, and lawful that it does not interdict? For by the
same reason a man may enclose to himself a third part or more of the Church.
But they will modestly say, that were unreasonable. and I will boldly say so is
the other; and especially where, when the Authors of such Fabrics, making no
use of them themselves, shall deny the use of them to others, case so
requiring. But that which is yet more intolerable, is, That the power and purse
of the Great man (who is always to remember that the poorest man in the parish
has as much Law and Right on his side to shut him out, as he has to exclude
and overtop the poor in his building) should enable and embolden him so far as
to take a considerable part of Gods sanctuary, and enclose that from all use
and access, to lay the bones of his Family in, and wholly to alienate it from
all Divine Services, and dedicate it only to corruption, and with impudent
Sacrilege to erect many Monuments and Tombs in a Canton they have usurped to
themselves: which being, as is said, no less lawful for any man than for one
man, instead of Christians, in time, we should have a Church filled with
Sepulchers of the dead. And when this is once done, to endeavor a redress of
such sacrilegious invasions of Gods and good Christians Rights, is to expose
Gods servants to, not only the obloquy, power, and mischief of too potent an
Adversary, but to the damage of Common Law; which though it can give no right
so to do, yet will certainly defend the wrong-doer, if he can plead custom. But
I have often thought, that God in this last Age has done himself Justice
against such Families, as have been guilty of such profane usurpations, in
that he has stirred up a barbarous Sect of Christians of late, and let them
justly into Churches, like Goths and Vandals, to break to pieces, pull down,
and raze the scandalous monuments of many Churches erected to the honor of
Man, and dishonor of God.

At first, all dead Bodies were looked upon by the Heathens themselves as
unclean, and unworthy to be buried within the walls of their City. Lycurgus was
the first that suffered Corpse to be interred in the City, and that Plutarch. in
vita Lycurg. Eutropius Lib. 8. Cicero de Legibus, l. 2.
near the Temples in Lacaedemon, says Plutarch. The first of all Roman
Emperors (and much more of the inferior people) that was buried within the
City, was Trajane the Emperor; which was prohibited by a Law of the twelve
Tables, as Cicero witnesses. And St. Vedastus was wont to say, That the dead
should not be buried within the walls of a City, which was a place for the
living, and not for the dead; as Alcuinus in his life writes. And it is
certain, no Christians at all were buried in Churches for many hundred years,
but certain proper Cemateries or Dormitories were allotted for that purpose,
remote from Churches. Pope Nicholas the first, about the year 867, was thought
to be preferred to be buried before the Church doors of St. Peter, says
Nauclere. And the same Nauclere writes, how Nauclerus Vol. 3. p. 64. ibid. p.
94.
that about the year 983, Otho the third Emperor was buried at the Threshold
of St. Peter at Rome. And when they had brought dead bodies to the Church door,
they soon presumed to bring them in; and found a reason so to do: because the
bodies of true Believers, and holy Servants of God were not to be looked on, as
unclean or unworthy of so sacred a place, because they had been themselves
Temples of the Holy Ghost, and were to be rennited again to their blessed
spirits in heaven. And not only so, but the nearer the Altar, always the
better: mistaking that place in the Apocalypse, I saw under the Altar the souls
of them that were slain for the word of God, and Rev. 6. 9.
for the testimony which they held; collecting from hence, that for Martyrs and
holy persons that was the properest place to be buried in. And the Cannon Law,
surely misguided by such a vain persuasion, has decreed it necessary to the
Consecration of a Church, that there be the body, or at least some Relic of a
Saint there posited. But more reasonably does it err, when it affirms that
it is Desecrated by the interrment of Heretics there. But certainly the words
in the Revelation expressing a Vision, meant no such thing as they are alleged
for, but only that in that Vision, the holy Apostle beheld the souls of Saints
and Martyrs departed, humbled before, or at the foot of the Altar (as the
manner was anciently to pray especially at the time v. 10.
of offering) crying aloud, and with great importunity, for justice and revenge
upon the Persecutors of the Church, and Murderers of them for the Testimony of
Christ Jesus.

But because such has been, and I fear ever will be, the corruption of
Christian Religion, that he that has power in his hands, and money good store
in his purse, shall be Sainted, so far as outward ceremonies and privileges
can advance him, he that would be at the charge of breaking up of the ground,
has not been denied, nor dare any that I know (whatever they ought to do) deny
him the liberty of being buried in the Church This may be, and must be passed
over, but the affectation or irreligious ambition of building stately Seats,
and making that which is common to all Christians, peculiar to some house, so
as upon no occasion it must be used by others, is wicked and sacrilegious: and
much more the taking in of any the least part of Gods ground, as the Church is,
to the profane uses of making Tombs and Sepulchers, and no other. They are
wont to say, There is room enough besides. It may be so: for they commonly who
thus enclose or usurp Gods Land, have thin'd the inhabitants of the place where
they live, by illegal enclosures of the Common belonging to the Parish, and so
almost dispeopled the place. But what is that to them, more than any body else?
And why may not any man, upon the same reason, violently or fraudulently take
away certain Acres of Land from him, and say in his defense, He has left him
enough still? And least such as are Patrons of Churches, and have certain
supposed Prerogatives over the Chancels, above what can be pretended to by the
common sort of people, should conceive they may there do as they please; they
are to know, That in right and conscience such forementioned practices can
least of all be done. For as the Founder of the Church, so likewise the
Builders of Chancels (from whence only they can pretend such privilege) and as
the maintainers of it in repair, do at the time of the consecration consent to
a total alienation of all civil propriety from themselves; they can neither
build, nor bury there, nor incommodate the place, more than any other man, for
they are only Guardians, and not Owners of that place; upon which they may, and
ought to exclude and refuse all such incommodations of others, as may any way
deface, or straiten, or empair the same, but they have no more right to do any
such things there themselves, then he that is Trustee or Guardian to an Orphan,
to seize upon his estate, or any part thereof to his own use. And it is only
civil custom, which has given him a peculiar right of burial there, rather
then any body else. And this may seem sufficient, if not too much, to have said
of the Negative force of Dedication of Churches, against Usurpers of Gods and
Christians Rights.

The positive effect, which is a veneration and worship therein of God
Almighty, does farther confirm this, and is contained in the end expressed, as
well as in the form of Dedication used by Solomon, as the constant practice of
the Jews, whose Tabernacle or Temple had nothing of constant preaching or
instruction of the people, but only Prayers and Sacrifices. Afterward their
Synagogues (called also Proseuchae) for convenience, because Acts 13. 27.
all people could not meet at the Temple, were erected: where, as the Scripture
tells us, the Law was read, and Moses preached every Sabbath day: but they had
their special denomination f^ou^ the Office and Acts of Prayer; Synagogue
signifying no more than an Assembly in general. From whence (if not also from
the consent of all Nations besides, who had Temples to their Gods) it may
appear that the most principal end of Gods House was always (till an ignorant
irregular Generation sprang up) esteemed the House of Prayer, and Worship; and
teaching and instruction of people, very necessary indeed, as the foundation
upon which all worship must be built, was not that main end, as is pretended.
And this worship being in its proper place in the Church; was always, and ought
to be performed in most public manner, and most solemn, as to outward
appearance, as well as inward affection; to which too many deluded by a gross
and cheap piece of Sophistry, would confine Gods worship.

It is time, we have no direct precept in the New Testament, that I can call to
mind, enjoining any particular behavior at the time of Gods service; nor yet
in the Law. And why so? were not that very necessary, in case any outward
carriage were necessary: Yes truly; if so be such a Religious manner of worship
could be known to us no other way than by Revelation extraordinary. For Gods
word is very sparing in those things of which we may, by the common light of
Nature attain to the knowledge. For who is there that knows there is a God,
that knows not also, that he is to be worshipped? Who is there, that knows
that God is to be worshipped, thar knows not also that he is to worshipped in
the most lowly and reverent manner? And that reverence outward is mutable, and
various, according to the opinion of several Countries: and therefore no one
general Rule could be made comprehending and obliging all people: but this is
laid down to us, that what is accounted in any Nation, most solemn, humble, and
reverent, is that which is required of us in the worship of God. But surely
kneeling, bowing the body, uncovering the head, yea and prostration of the body
in convenient time and place, are acts of worship, such as were in use among
the Jews of old, continued by the Apostles and successors in Faith and
Devotion, as innumerable places of Holy Writ, in the Old and New Testament,
intimate unto us: where falling low at Gods footstool, bowing the knee, and
such like outward acts of reverence are put for prayer it self: which they
never would have been, had not they been the known manner of worship. And
Salvian describes Salvian. de Provid. lib. 7. Ad domos statim dominicas (...),
etc.
to us the custom of Christians in his early days, thus. We presently haste to
the Lords house, we cast our bodies on the floor, and pray with weeping and joy
mixed together. And I am not advised of more then one place which interdicts any
one piece of irreverence as unnatural, and that the superstition of Puritans
has cast them into; and that is, covering of men's faces in the time of
public prayer, when the hat, as an instance of devotion must be held before
the eyes, as if they were ashamed of what they did: whereas St. Paul says
plainly, every man praying, or prophesying, having his head covered 1 Cor. 11.
4.
dishonors his head; and again. For a man ought not to cover his head, etc.
7.
But surely he who covers his face with his hat, or such li^^, does
altogether as much thwart the design of the Apostle, as he that covers it
with his hair. I wonder much, who could be the author of such an indecent and
absurd custom; but more to find it defended in some sort by Calvin Calvinus in
Esaiam cap. 38. 2.
upon Esaias; and reasons rendered for the same, by Amesius in his Cases of
Conscience: the best he can devise, being these two, Either to prevent
avocation of mind, which may be occasioned by the eye: Or to conceal such
singular gestures, Ames. de Conscient. lib. 4. c. 18. quaest. 3.
which may be some times necessary to us, but seem silly and hypocritical to
others. These two occasions being taken away, Covering the head agrees rather
to women than men, 1 Cor. 11. 4, 5. Thus he. And that these are not sufficient
causes, thus appears: because such an accidental inconvenience, as is the
former, ought not to null a direct good: but public and open profession of
our duty, reverence and devotion to God, is that which God does require, as an
act of worship; and the good example to others should preponderate that
particular possible inconvenience. And as for the other; no man ought to use
such absurd and ridiculous ceremonies in his face, being in public, as should
be apt to give offense, but compose his whole man to such gravity and decency,
as might become the place wherein he is; which is in every man's power, as it is
his part. And it is very unreasonable, and somewhat more, that men should abhor
to receive ceremonies of Communion and uniformity from the Church, and yet be
more superstitious in inventing, and introducing private Ceremonies into the
Church, and unapproved by it: such as this is. But though all postures and
gestures be alike in nature; yet nothing must be done in public, but what is
reputed sober, modest, and grave; as well in respect of the persons assembled,
as for the place sake: of which, if we had a due opinion, it would be
superfluous to multiply arguments to extort reverence therein.

And what need we any farther proofs of the dignity of it, then that it is Gods
house, as has been showed, and the place where his honor dwells, and our
happiness especially. And therefore, before I end this, I cannot forbear giving
all good Christians warning of one of Mr. Perkins absurd and false dogmes,
which I doubt not, but has deceived many into profaneness in public. In
regard of Conscience, Holiness, and Religion, all places are holy and alike in
the New Testament, since the coming of Christ: The Perkins Cases of Conscience
lib. 2. c. 6. qu. 3.. 3.
House or the Field, is as holy as the Church: And if we pray in either of
them, our prayer is as acceptable to God, as that which is made in the Church.
All this we look upon as profane and false: Let us hear how, out of Scripture,
he proves his new paradoxes. For now (says he) the days are come which were
foretold by the Prophet, where in a clean offering should be offered to God in
every place, Mal. 1. 11. which Paul expounds 1 Timothy 2. 8. of pure and holy
prayer offered to God in every place. Of these words of St. Paul (which I
acknowledge to be the sense of the Prophet) I have already given the true
meaning, and so answered both to this effect: That whatever the Scripture
prophetically delivers concerning the diffusion of Gods worship, or the Apostle
actually declares as come to pass, comes to no more but that, God should be
more purely served under the Gospel by the Sacrifice of prayer, etc. than he
was by the Sacrifice of beasts to him, and such like: and that the service of
God should be as well performed out of Jerusalem, as in it: and in Christian
Temples, in what Country or Angle of the world soever they were built, as in
that of Jerusalem: but that it was ever intended, that he should be as well
served in the fields or private houses, as in Churches raised for that purpose
(when necessity constrained not men otherwise) does not in the least appear.
And the same answer likewise we give to the words of Christ to the woman of
Samaria, Joh. 4. 25. of which we also spoke before: As also to that of Christ,
Matthew. 6. 5. reproving the affected hypocritical practice of the Pharisees,
praying in all public places, to be noted: Then which kind of Devotion no
doubt but a Prayer in the Closet is much more acceptable to God. But does it
therefore follow, that such a prayer as is so acceptable in the closet, would
not be as acceptable in the Temple, and more too? surely nothing of this, which
ought to be the conclusion, is contained in the argument.

Now (proceeds Mr. Perkins) the opinion of the Papist is otherwise. (It is so,
and is much truer than the Puritans, and more agreeable to the word of God) For
he thinks, that in the New Testament, hallowed Churches are more holy than
other places are, or can be; and do make the prayers offered to God in them,
more acceptable to him than in any other: and hereupon they teach, that private
men must pray in Churches, and private prayers must be made in Churches, if
they will have them heard. All this they teach indeed, but do they teach this
as Papists or as Christians? Did not the doctrine and constant practice of all
ages and places, when, and where there were Churches, teach the very same? Nay
does not Bucer one of the most eminent Reformers for judgment and Quant^ jam
religione sunt and loca cultui Dei consecrata, huic uni reipate facienda, supra
aliqua ex part ostendimus. Adeo autem vulgo obtinuit horum locorum horrenda
sane prophanatio, etc. Bucerus de Regno Christi, l. 2. c. 11.
learning say in a manner as much in these words. With what religiousness
therefore are places consecrated to Divine worship to be opened to this one
thing, and to be preserved most sacred, we have in some measure before showed.
But vulgar custom has far prevailed in a horrible profanation of these places,
while men having thrown away all reverence of a Deity in them, walk in them for
their recreation, as in walks void of all sacredness, and in them exchange all
sorts of profane and impure discourse; so that to remove this so unseasonable
damage to the Divine Majesty, severe Laws of godly Kings and Princes are
requisite, and ready and constant vindications of such Laws; besides the devout
exhortations of holy men: whereby it should be brought to pass, that Gods holy
Temple should not be exposed to any other actions, than for which they were
consecrated, nor should any go unpunished who in them shall not accommodate
himself altogether to such sacred religiousnesses. And must that odious name of
Papist render such excellent acts and customs odious, as all the Christian
world, for many hundred years before Popery prevailed, frequented, be blasted
with the slander of Popery, and no more objected against it, but they defend
and practice it? Away with such fond (to speak more moderately than the case
requires) inferences, out of Christians and sober men's mouths. It is no better
than profaneness, all this.

For proof hereof (says Perkins) they allege the practice of some particular
persons in Scriptures, (which is much more then can be alleged against the
practice) Of Anna, who prayed privately in the Temple, Luke 2. 37. Of David,
who in his exile desired greatly to have recourse unto the Temple: And of
Daniel, who is said to look out of the window toward the Temple, and pray,
Dan. 6. 10. Of these likewise we have spoken above, and shown in what sense
they oblige to imitation. For that the Temple of Jerusalem, and the prayers and
worshippers in it may be in some case Presidents to us, Bertram himself, a
Genevan, does grant, drawing a determinate place for Gods worship in peculiar
manner, from the days of Adam himself, and not only from Solomon's Temple,
writing thus: It is manifest that a place is due in peculiar manner Bertram. de
Rep. Judaeor, cap. 2. Constat locum debitum esse, etc.
to Divine worship. And some of the ancient Expositours of the Jews, do not
unfitly draw from Genesis 4. 3, 4. that the Sacrifices of Cain and Ab^^ were
brought to Adam, for there was a place to that purpose, etc. But let us hear
how Perkins comes off from the allegations of Papists, as he calls them, to the
advantage of his Cause. These places (says he) are abused by the Popish
Church: For there is a great difference between the Temple of Jerusalem in the
Old Testament, and our Churches in the New: That was built by particular
commandment from God; so were not our Churches. That was a type of the very
body and Manhood of Christ, Heb. 9. 11. and of his mystical body. Again, the
Ark in the Temple was a pledge and signification of the Covenant, a sign of
Gods Presence, a pledge of his mercy, and that by his own appointment: for it
was his will there to answer his people: but the like cannot be showed of our
Churches or Chapels. And whither tends all this, so much as to show that the
Jews Religion was a better Religion than the Christian? For surely, that
Religion which has God nearest, and most of his holy presence, is better than
that which wants it. And if it be said, That this was the outward presence of
God chiefly, and not so spiritual, and therefore inferior to the Christian;
which is true: Then will I say, that notwithstanding the said instances of Gods
presence be not to be found with us in our Churches, yet the more spiritual and
properly divine is, in a greater degree in our Churches, then that Temple. And
therefore, those places of Scripture are not abused by Papists. 2. It does no
where appear in Scripture that they were commanded to build a Temple to God, as
is there supposed: but when David entertained the thoughts of it, and Solomon
prosecuted the same design, they had special directions how they should build
it. 3. There needs no Evangelical precept to enjoin that, which both by the
light of nature (as we have seen) and such a President of the Law, was
propounded sufficiently to Christians, without a new Revelation. 4. The Temple
of the Jews was not a proper type of Christ's body: Christ indeed, in the
Gospel, compares his body to a Temple: but every similitude is not to be held a
type: for then should every common shepherd have been a type of Christ, as
well as David: and the Vine should have been a type of Christ, and what not,
that bears any similitude unto Christ? But properly, they only (...) Chrysostom.
Sermon. 3. in Judaeos.
can be called types of Christ, which were ordained and instituted of God to
prefigure and shadow out Christ to come. And the Temple had not this for its
end, but only it was a thing merely incidental to it. 5. Our Temples or
Churches are no less types of Christ's mystical Body then was the Jewish. And
the presence of God is more eminently, though not sensibly, in ours than in
them. Nay, that Temple, as the worship in it, seemed to be a type of our
Temples and Religion; as our Temples are a type of Heaven, the Holy of Holiest:
As their Sabbath is granted by all to be but a type of our Evangelical, and our
Evangelical of the Celestial. Of which Evangelical Sabbath we are in the next
place to speak.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Second Circumstance of Gods Worship; Appointed times. Of the Sabbath or
Seventh Day, how it was appointed of God to the Jews, but not by the same Law
appointed to Christians: Nor that one day in seven should be observed. The
Decalogue contains not all moral duties directly. Gentiles observed not a
Seventh Day. The New Testament no where commands a Seventh Day to be kept holy.

THE Question and Scruple moved by ignorant, unquiet, and superstitious persons
against observation of Days in order to Gods Service, is, propounded and well
answered by the wise Man in Ecclesiasticus, saying: Why does one day excel
another? whenas all the light of every day in the year is of Eccles. 33. 7.
the same? By the knowledge of God they were distinguished: and he alters 8.
Seasons and Feasts. Some of them has he made high days, and hallowed them, 9.
and some of them has he made ordinary days. I make no doubt but here it will
be answered presently, That God did this, and appointed solemn days and seasons
to the Jews, and to them only, which things, as St. Paul speaks, Gal. 4. 10, 11.
are to be done away in Christ. And this is very true, in great part: For those
Judaical days were appointed by Gods immediate order, and by his will again
evacuated and revers't at the coming of Christ: But then all days in use among
the Jews were not so ordained by God; as the Feast of Purim, and the Feast of
Dedication, but by humane prudence: which when they would disgrace
sufficiently, and acquit themselves from, they are wont to call Humane
Inventions; as if, because God has in his Word signalized for evil, such
humane inventions as were quite contrary to his institution, none other
agreeable to his word and subservient to it, were to be patiently endured: St.
Paul then, when he says, Which things are done away in Christ, does
undoubtedly mean the Jewishness and figurativeness of them, and not absolutely
the days and times instituted to the service of God in Christ. God suffered,
God approved, and, for ought does appear, accepted well the said Commemorations
of his signal mercies and deliverances at the Jews hands, until the coming of
Christ: when the case was wholly altered, as that Service, but not so as to all
future. For an invincible argument it is to the contrary, that one day of the
week is still continued to serve God in a peculiar manner, notwithstanding
after the strong attempts made, especially of late (and never before later
days, either by Eastern or Western Christians, or by Reformed or Unreformed) to
make the Lords day a Sabbath, and obliging Christians by virtue of the fourth
Commandment in the Decalogue, nothing to that end is effected.

Indeed, if men will tenture and extend Gods word to that extreme, as thereby
to draw every thing, out of any thing, they may reduce all moral duties unto
the Ten Commandments, according to the custom of expounding them, viz. That
where the Effect is commanded or forbidden, there the Cause likewise: and where
the Outward act, the Inward: and where the Genus, there the Species: and where
the Thing, there the Circumstances: and where one kind, there all of like kinds
are forbidden or commanded; then were there some color for what they say of
all moral duties to be found in the Decalogue, and sins interdicted: But there
is no more ground for the expounding of this so, than any other part of
Scriptures: And if there were, this would make Eight of the Ten Commandments
superfluous, all sins and all duties being reducible, at this rate, to those
two our Savior in the Gospel refers to, viz. Love of God, and Love of our
Neighbors. And surely, most essential to all actions are the circumstances of
time and place, and nothing can be done by Man in Religion, or out of it,
without them: therefore it should seem superfluous expressly to enjoin a time to
serve God in, and distinctly from the act which unavoidably implies it. And if
it be said that not so much a time simply, as a time precisely so determined,
viz. to a Seventh Day, and that in such and such manner to be observed, is
instituted of God, then do fall to the ground the supposed naturalness, and
morality of the time there commanded: and that by natural light or law, no more
is commanded then time, or at most a day, but not a Seventh Day. Now if we are,
being Christians, under the Law no farther than in these two respects, First,
as some of it is repeated and enforced by the Law of the Gospel, given us by
Christ; Secondly, as it is consonant to the Law of Reason or Nature: And that a
seventh part of our time should be dedicated constantly to God is no where so
positively delivered in the New Testament, as it was in the Old: nor does the
light of Nations or Nature suggest any such determinate time (for that only,
and not of time in general, is all the question.) How can a Seventh Day be
commanded of God?

It is not to be denied but some of the ancient heathen Philosophers and Poets,
did talk of somewhat of sacredness in the Seventh Day. But first, whence had
they such opinions? from the thing it self? No surely, it was a superstitious
and blind admiration of the number Seven, of which we find so much in their
writings: and especially the consideration of the Seven Planets in the Heavens,
which made them think better of the Seventh Day; or cause the week to consist
of so many days and no more. But what real opinion they had of that above other
days, does appear in their practice, Philo In Decalog. page 585. Id. De
Opificio Mundi page 15, 16. and 21. Genevae.
which no monuments declare to have been in more sacred or solemn esteem than
any other. And the reputed sacredness of the number seven is that, which Philo
Judaeus plays upon so handsomely in his commendation of the Jewish seventh
day, as may be seen in his works.

And Chrysostom from thence takes a better argument to prove that a Seventh
day is not moral, from whence several have endeavored to prove that it is, and
that in a more sacred manner than any other of the Commandments. For to
persuade to a precise observation of it, these say, that God has set a
Memento, a Remember upon it, such as upon no other Commandment. Therefore,
there should be somewhat extraordinary in it. And so there is indeed: For,
says Chrysostom, whereas all other Commandments are very agreeable to the
Reason of man, and are in some degree known to him by natural light, and so
need not the like intimation and advice, this of a Seventh Day to be kept holy
to God, cannot be discerned by Natures light at all, and therefore needs such
a Memento and Remembrancer as this to bring that to his mind which is so apt to
slip out.

It Is granted, moderner Jews, in despite of Christ and Christians, have
asserted a naturalness and immutability of this Command, and an extent of it to
all Nations, but this concludes not Christians, knowing from whence such
Antichristian Dogmes proceed.

Now here lies the labor, to infer a Seventh Day from the Law, obliging
Christians, I say, from the letter of the Law, and not from the reasonableness
of the thing it self, to which they flee, who find their other proofs too weak:
and here I will not contend much with them. But all their Old Testament
testimonies being more easily evaded and nulled then they are alleged by this
one answer, That they speak only of Jewish Sabbaths, and so have no force at
all upon us, or the same in all respects that they have upon the Jews, they
must be constrained to repair only to Gospel for the Confirmation of any day
separate from civil affairs, and dedicate to God. And here they are altogether
to seek for any one direct or positive Precept: not one in all the New
Testament can be found for any, either Seventh or First Day of the week.
Whereupon they are compelled to betake themselves to the uncertain way of
arguing from Example to a Rule, viz. That because they read several instances
in the New Testament, of things done on the first Day of the week, in reference
to Religion and the Service of God, therefore, that day ought specially and
religiously to be observed: they will perhaps say, That the infinite blessing
of our Redemption by Christ, and his Resurrection, is the ground of our
observation, as the Creation was of theirs: This I grant to be a just and
sufficient cause: but it does not from thence follow that therefore actually it
was so constituted upon that ground. We now are in quest of the Constitution it
self, and not of the Reason why it should be so ordained. For many things that
seem to us very reasonable, are not certainly actually ordained. And many
things for which in the New Testament we may find presidents of the Apostles,
or Apostolical persons, do not necessarily infer a Rule or Precept: But in the
New Testament there is nothing but Examples, and they not peculiar to that day.
From whence I would conclude no more than this, That the true ground of
dedicating a day to the Service of God, is to be fetched from the light of
Nature, in which all Nations religious consent: but the ground of keeping the
Seventh Day, as Chrysostom. Homil. 12. page 542. Antioch.
the Seventh, was merely Mosaical and Judaical, as Chrysostom also has well
gathered from the reason annexed unto it. For in six days the Lord made Heaven
and Earth, and rested the Seventh day: whereas (says he) God has given us no
reason why we should not commit Murder or Adultery, etc. because the command is
so agreeable to nature. Again, the ground of keeping that Seventh Day which we
do, is to be taken wholly from Christian Principles. Thirdly, the form or
manner of observing that Day is to be taken from the Prescriptions of the
Apostles, so far as they stand recorded in the New Testament, and from
Apostolical practices shining successively in the following Ages of the
Churches: Yet not so, as if it were not lawful for this Age of the Church to
keep it more strictly and sacredly than did the very first Age of the Church,
and some following it; and the rather because it is certain, that the Primitive
Christians did keep two days Festival in one week to the honor of God: the
ancient Seventh Day of the Jews, and the newly instituted day of the
Christians, as might here be made apparent. Centur. 1. l. 2. cap. 6.
But I shall here only add the judgment of the Magdeburgenses concerning the
first Century of years, where they write thus: Mention is made of the Lords
Day, Apoca^. 1. 7. but at what time Christians separated themselves from the
Jews, and began to rest on the Lords Day, is no where mentioned in Records; but
that some rested on the Lords Day, and some on the Saturday in this Age, the
contentions in the following Age do witness: Thus they.

And for the Translation they speak of to be made of the Service of God from
the Saturday to the Sunday, they speak altogether without the Book of God, or
of the ancient Historians of the Church. For that had had little of
Christianity in it, and could serve to no end so much as to spite and reproach
the Jews, as Calvin has noted: For it had made indeed both against the Jews
and Christians too: Them, to have the precise command of God to them, so
directly violated: These, to retain the same thing which could not consist with
Christianity imposed upon them, with the Circumstance of time only varied. For
they who speak of Translation of a thing, cannot mean here the natural day it
self translated, or more properly adjourned to the First: nor can they mean the
worship of that day transmitted to this: For that was Judaical and
Antichristian: And if neither of these can be allowed, what mean they to talk
of changing, or translating of one day to another? And why do they not speak
the truth roundly, and dare to say, That Christians instituted the First Day of
the week in commemoration of the Benefits they received by Christ, without any
consideration at all of any command in the Old Testament; and that it was a
cessation of the Jewish Sabbath, and an introduction of a Christian, quite of
another nature?

And that so it is, appears from the concessions made by the greatest
defenders of a Sabbatical Lords Day, which I shall here contract, as necessary
to satisfy the Scruples and Doubts bred by careless handlers of this subject.
Things temporary in the Sabbath are these, says Mr. Perkins. First, the Jew
might not go forth on the Sabbath day, or take any journey, or do any Perkins
Cases of Conscien. lib. 2. cap. 16.
other business of his own, Exodus 16. 29. 2. He might not kindle a fire on the
Sabbath day, Exodus 25. 3. 3. Nor carry a burden, Jerem. 13. 21. These things
are temporary altogether, and do not concern the times of the New Testament,
etc. Secondly, It was temporary and ceremonial, as it was a special sign
between God and his People, of the blessings that were propounded and promised
in the Covenant, Exodus 31. 13. Thirdly, The set Day, namely the Seventh, was
temporary, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Numb. 28. 9, 10. Fourthly, That it was to be observed
in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Thus he of
things not moral in the Fifth Commandment. Now hear we what he accounts Moral:
They are these three. First a Day of Rest. This we also account Moral, but not
so much by the Fourth Commandment, as by a Superior Law, as we have said: and
so of the Second, That it be sanctified: and of the Third, That a Seventh Day
should be sanctified to an holy rest, is merely craved, and believed, before it
be proved from any text of Scripture: Yea, in his following Discourse, he
grants that St. Paul wrought with Aquila and Priscilla on the Sundays, and
observed the Jews Sabbath, out of Acts 18. 3, 4. but he adds, That it was out
of Charity and necessity of the Salvation of them with whom he so conversed:
and answers, secondly, That though he did not keep the Sabbath (he means
the Lords Day, for he constantly calls the Lords Day The Sabbath, and too many
have imitated his phrase) publicly, he might privately. He might indeed, but
such privacie of which we have no knowledge, can be no Rule or Law to us.

It is said by Perkins in another place, and by his blind Followers, That
Perkins his Digest or Harmony, p. 766. Vol. 2.
the Sabbath of the Old world is the Seventh Day from the Creation, which was
consecrated for Divine Service in Paradise before the Fall: And from hence they
have drawn an argument for the Morality, and that worthily, could it be proved
what they presume. But others, that have sifted the matter more Curcelleus
diatrib de Sabbato, c. 6.
narrowly and accurately, deliver the contrary for a certain truth, viz. That
the first Sabbath observed by the Jews in the Desert, was not reckoned from the
beginning of the creation, but from the day in which Manna was first rained
down, as may be seen out of Exodus 16. v. 4, 5, 13. which two are supposed to
meet together, but upon no good foundation. But this is certain, that we find a
breach of the Sabbath, and severe punishment executed upon the breakers of it,
before the promulgation of the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinah. But to this
(the best argument I find for the Antiquity of it) it is well answered, That
the same reason is for the Antiquity of the Tabernacle too, which most
certainly was not made till a long time after the first mention we have of it.
For Exodus 33. 7. Moses is said to take the Tabernacle, and pitch it without the
Camp, whenas the history following relates the particular materials, and form,
and solemn erection of it to be a good while after. So that the same difficulty
is in reference to the Sabbath and it; and is thus solved by Calvin himself:
That there were certain previous injunctions, given Calvin. Harmon. in Pent.
particularly and more rudely by God, concerning the observation of certain
Rites, before that more exact delivery of them by God to Moses on Mount Sinai.
And as always a day or time was allotted, so likewise some special place
separated from common uses, as that called here the Tabernacle, to the service
of God. For had there been any proper weakly day appointed by God before Moses,
surely we should have found some little mention thereof in the History of Moses
from the Creation to his days, but not a word of any such thing do we find to
that purpose.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Institution of the Lords Day. That it was in part of Apostolical and
partly Ecclesiastical Tradition: Festival Days and Fasting derived unto us from
the same Fountain, and accordingly to be observed upon the like grounds.
Private Prayers in Families, to the neglect of the Public Worship,
unacceptable to God. Of the Obligation all Priests have to pray daily according
to their Office. Of the Abuse of Holy days in the Number, and unjustifiable
occasions of them. Of the Seven Hours of Prayer, approved by the Ancient
Church, and our First Reformers. Mr. Prinne's Cavils against Canonical Hours
refuted.

THAT the Institution of the Lords day, has no known foundation from the
Command of God or Christ, may be collected from what is said. But that the
Apostles, and Church Apostolical, did by their example and practice commend it
to following generations of Christians, I acknowledge most true. But still
there remains a knot to be untied about the force of that Constitution, whether
it was only of Custom or Precept; or all the Obligation proceeded from the
decrees of the Church after the Apostles. For direct Precept we find little or
no Grounds in Scripture. For Practice Apostolical, and Custom upon that
descending to posterity, also the accession of the Laws Ecclesiastical and
Imperial, we make no scruple to acknowledge them to be very solemn and
obligatory upon all good Christians. But seeing all things practiced by the
Apostles are not Obligatory, it will be worth the enquiry, under what Capacity
they so acted; whether as Apostles, or as Governors of the Church in such a
large sense as might be communicable to their successors. That it was not
merely and precisely an Apostolical Act to establish such a Festival, seems to
appear from the grounds found in the Law of Nature moving men to celebrate a
day to God; again, that the first day of the week, being the day of our Lord
and Saviors Resurrection, seems to be no other than Common Ecclesiastical
Prudence, as that which agrees most with the End it self; viz. The due
commemoration of Christ's resurrection on that day: but that Christ should be so
Commemorated, and God so glorified, seems to me to be specially Apostolical,
and so Divine, that it is not alterable by the Counsel or Decrees of the Church
any time after: from whence may conveniently be reconciled the opposite
opinions of both Schoolmen and Canonists; some of whom have asserted the
divine Right of the Lords day, and others the Ecclesiastical or Canonical only.
For that a day be Festivally observed to God, is Natural; that on such a
Festival or Thanksgiving day, Christ should be magnified and God praised, is
Apostolical: but that on the First day of the week, Christian Prudence, and the
necessary power of the Church may seem to suffice. Which appears from the
manner of celebrating the Christian Sabbath, which has been always left to the
Authority and wisdom of the Church, varying according to occasions given. For
that Christians very anciently met to treat of divine matters, to communicate,
to celebrate the Eucharist, and to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
Justine Justin. Apol. 2. Tertul. Apologer.
Martyr and Tertullian, and the famous Epistle of Pliny witness. And to this
end they had a vacation from all worldly servile matters, as many proofs of
Antiquity demonstrate. And for the dignity of this day it was, that on it, and
none other, Bishops were to be consecrated by the constitution of Leo 1. And
what are the Prerogatives of this First Leo 1. Distinct. 75. c. 1. Quod die,
etc.
day of the week, are explained at large by the Ancient Fathers and Councils
here not to be rehearsed.

From this Fountain of Ecclesiastical power resident in the Church, springs
the Act of instituting other days to the Glory and Praise of God, of two sorts,
viz. days of Humiliation; and Exultation, or joy. For it is certain, that,
after it was agreed upon that Christ's Resurrection should be weekly celebrated,
it was consented to also, that a Yearly Thanksgiving should be kept for the
same, which was the Christians Passover; and our Easter day is immemorially
practiced, and without interruption derived to this present age. And therefore
as well because it is the greatest matter of joy that at any time befell the
Church of Christ; as because it regulateth other principal Feasts and Fasts of
the Church; as lastly, because thence is plainly inferred a power in the Church
of ordaining Feasts, and Fasts to the worship of God, it is called by the
Ancient, The Mother of Feasts. And surely upon this, the Fathers of the Church
produced many other Daughter-Feasts, not all in a year, nor an age: but
according to their power to maintain and defend them; which was very difficult
for them to do as becomed, under Gentile persecution: who were most severe
against such Celebrities instituted by Christians to the overthrow and contempt
of Gentile worship, which according to the Light of nature consisted much in
this: as Seneca Legum Conditores Festum instruerunt dies, ut ad hilaritatem
homines cogerent, etc. Seneca de Tranquil. Aninai, c. 15.
has said in these words, The Founders of Laws ordained Festival days, to the
end that men might meet publicly in Jollity, putting some moderation to
Labors, as necessary for them. These Gentile Institutions prevailing not only
to Idololatrical service, but corruption of manners, contrary to nature it
self; The Ancient Fathers of the Church knew no better Antidote against such
poison, than to introduce Christian Festivals, whereby all the natural and
Civil benefit of Vacation from Labors, friendly conversation, and such like
might be enjoyed; and due worship and praise be given unto God in Christ Jesus.
And therefore, Theodoret. Sermon. 7. de Sacrificiis.
Theodoret with other Fathers is not ashamed to profess, as a very laudable and
religious occasion of Christian Feasts, That they succeeded the Idolatrous, and
lewd Feasts of the Gentiles; which some (but in vain) would turn against the
use of them. But they stand upon surer foundations, than to be blown down with
the wind of vain doctrines blustering against them. For First, as is said,
Nature it self directs to them. Secondly, Religion of all sorts ever
acknowledged Festival worship. Thirdly, Apostolical practice and Prescription
commend them; and Fourthly, our Church Homilies (one reason possibly they have
suffered Homily of the time and place of Prayer. page 125.
so many reproaches of ungodly men) tell us, that Holy days were appointed by
the same Authority that the Lords day was: which as sorely as it may vex these
dissenters to hear, is most true. For though it says, with the same Authority,
it does not from thence follow, that they by that Authority were instituted
with the same sacredness. And Mr. Perkins is Perkins Preparat. to Problem. page
681.
deceived who tells us, Not a Feast except Easter, can be proved for 300 years
after Christ. Indeed Socrates (whom he quotes) says the Apostles did not much
concern themselves in Feasts, but his meaning plainly is, not about such
punctilio's or Circumstances of Feasts, as gave him occasion to write about
them; such as were the Contentions between the Eastern and Western Church,
about the day of keeping Easter. But that Easter was Apostolical, can be no
more doubted then that Sunday was so: And that fifty days after Easter (to
Whitsuntide) were kept Festivally, Tertullian witnesses. And therefore
Cartwright whom nothing Tertul. Advers. Psychicos. cap. 14.
could hold but his own fancy, and the Genevan Platform, thought it safer to
say (being urged with Antiquity) I appeal from the examples [of the Ancient
Church] to the Scriptures. There were other grosser Errors countenanced by
Antiquity? There were so; or there were none at all. But what greater error
did Antiquity generally assert to, then this of Innovatours denying all Holy
days lawful, but the Lords day? Do you appeal to Scripture to prove this? So do
we. Show one place against them, if ye can. Or show that the Church where there
is no precept of Scripture, in particular, may not ordain such times of
Worship. When will these Scriptures appear?

For the places commonly alleged against set days, viz. Romans 14. 5. I leave
Mr. Perkins to answer sufficiently, though not absolutely, in his Cases of
Conscience, Lib. 2. cap. 16. And that of Galat. 4. 10. to his Comment on the
words. And that of Colos. 2. 16. to the now quoted place of his Cases of
Conscience; intending here no formal disputation: though this Author falls into
many pitiful suspicions, and imaginations of his own, in these places. As for
instance, on Galatians 4. 10. he says, Indeed the Church of England observes
Holy days, but the Popish superstition is cut off. This is true, but the reason
he gives, very false, which is this, For we are not bound in conscience to the
Observation of those days: For Conscience binds every good Christian from
singularizing: Conscience binds to embrace all convenient opportunities to
praise and honor God. Conscience likewise binds to faithful obedience to our
Ecclesiastical Superiors, in such pious exercises as these, and against which
no more then the rude Effects of their private opinions, and passion has been
alleged: notwithstanding, I know how much Gelaspie, and after him Voctius,
have travailed in this subject: and notwithstanding his answers, Davenant on
Coloss. 2. v. 16.
I hold the Reasons of Bishop Davenant to be strong and Pious, given us for the
observation of Holy days, in his Comment upon the Colossians: to which I refer
the Reader, for brevity sake.

And for the same reason, I reduce what may be said about Fasts, to what is
already said of the Feasts of the Church. For there is the very same reason of
Antiquity Apostolical, for the observation of both power and Liberty of the
Church, just occasions offered; Conformity to the Primitive state of the
Church; Advantages of such exercises; Characteristicks of Christian, from
unchristian societies and professions; which all equally infer the duty of
Fasting on set days, as of Feasting; and the madness and wickedness of such
Christians, as dare open their mouths against them; because no doubt but both
one and other have been much abused by Roman superstition. Yet not Fasting so
much as Festival days. The abuses may here be noted to be these. 1. Multitude,
whereby works of Nature and Civil necessities should be so far impeded Origin.
Hom. 10. in Genes.
and retarded, that no small prejudice should befall the Commonwealth thereby.
Indeed Origin says, Every day is to be a Festival to a Christian, calling them
Jews who observe some now and then: but his meaning is not, that every day a
man should cease from his labor wholly, and only wear his best clothes, walk
about, and do nothing but worship God; but, as there he expresses himself,
should go to Church daily, and not content himself with his domestique
devotion, but appear before God in public place, though not in that public
manner, as with the assembly of Christians. This still binds, as a Council at
least, if not Command; and that which, as has been showed already, is much
better, then that which is performed within the walls of our Bucerus de Regno
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 10.
own house or Closets, if we will take Bucers judgment, who speaks thus. When
as all that we have, and are, and our very lives, we have received, and do
receive daily from the free bounty of God: is it not very meet also that we
should assemble daily also to render him thanks, and to renew our devotion to
him, and our worship of him, by his Word and Sacraments, which he has for this
purpose appointed for us, and by daily Prayers which he requires of us? Your
Majesty's therefore (he speaks to Edward the sixth) Part it is to enforce the
authority of the Divine Law, against this so great abuse of God, and unbridled
profanation of Holy days.

And therefore, if Sectaries Religion be examined duly, which has procured
them so much credit and esteem, amongst unknowing people, it will be found to
fall short by much, of that which is approved and established by our Church.
They are said to be frequent, and constant in duties (as they call them) of
their Families, meaning prayers, perhaps morning and evening: this is very good
and laudable. But consider we a little whence this practice has arisen,
whither it tends, and it is rather a defrauding God of that due which we
plead for, then out-doing others. The Church, the public house of God, is the
proper place of Gods worship, and that he is more glorified in, than by
home-made worship. Therefore for them to translate the Service of God out of
the Church at all times, but when a Sermon calls them forth, into their own
houses, and to offer the morning and evening sacrifice at home, when it ought,
and may be offered in his own house, is so far from deserving the name of
extraordinary Pieties, that it deserves rather the name of Sacrilege. And this
I speak meaning, when this proceeds either from that brutish opinion, that all
places are alike to God, (which is only true, in sensu diviso, and not
Composito, viz. before some one place be determined, and dedicated especially
to his worship, and not after) or from the contempt of Gods house, or from
dislike of the Public worship, or from admiration of our own Gifts and a
delight to show them; or lastly, a design to breed a faction in private,
against the public profession. I know likewise, and grant, that several just
Impediments there are to the public service; and in such Cases, most
necessary it is, that Gods service should be performed within doors: But it is
not necessary that this should be performed (as the affected manner is) in a
service quite distinct from the public, yea often quite contrary. What men
speak in prayer and spiritual devotion between God and their own souls
privately, they are the only proper judges of, and Christian, not Liberty only,
but piety requires they should so be. But surely, when Men speak before others,
as well as God, and there is nothing so much as the Place, which diversifies
the worship in a Family from that in the Church, that of the Church is most
proper: And not to say any thing of the Laity, no Priest or Minister of our
Church ought, upon common occasions, to officiate in Prayers in Private
Families, any otherwise than he is bound to do in Public: especially if they
to whom he officiates, and himself, have not performed their duties in that
manner before in Public; which when they have, then only is the proper place
for another free will offering unprescribed.

I shall not here insist on the obligation all Priests have to recite their
Office, as I could; but only give this general reason, That every Priest is
ordained of God by man, as a constant intercessour between God and Man in
behalf of the People, and especially them, of whom he has a Pastoral charge;
and not only the nature of his Office, but condition of his Benefice requires
that this he does constantly or daily twice: the old rule being very
reasonable, viz. Beneficium requirit officium; the temporal benefits received
by the Clergy, require spiritual office. The first is daily and so should the
second also be. And this is no such innovation as the contrary, that the Priest
should have nothing to do but when he preaches; or that he should pray and
offer to God as likes best every single Christian, which is impossible and
ridiculous; and an intolerable presumption in any man to prescribe to their
Minister how he should minister to them, when he is lawfully prescribed his
duty before: and if he were not, he ought to prescribe to others, not of the
same order with himself, and not take Laws from them: which is the corruptest
and modernest of all Innovations. But the Recitation of the Office by the
Priest, is a constitution of above a thousand years standing, according
Barthol. Gavantus in Rubricam Brev. Tom. 2. Sect. 2. c. 5. Tit. 1. Compilatio
Chronolog. ad An. 490.
to the account of them who set it Jowest. Sigebert in his Chronicle affirms
it began in the year 540 as Gavantus out of him. But I find another Chronologer
to place it in the year 490 saying, Anastasius the fifty second Pope, ordained
that no Clergyman should omit his Divine Office; the office of the Mass or
Eucharist only excepted. And therefore, with excellent wisdom and advice it is
in these words prescribed by the Church, before the Liturgy, All Priests and
Deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer, either privately or
openly; not being let by sickness or some other urgent cause. And surely, as
there is an Obligation upon Priests to use these prayers, there must be implied
an obligation in all the true sons of the Church to be present at them, and to
join with the Priest. Which because it cannot be expected that all men well
inclined, should be always in a capacity to do, the Priest doubtless may comply
with the exigencies of others, so it be not to the pre judice of the Public:
And now considering also the many extraordinary days of Festivals, and ordinary
days of Fasting, wherein especial obligation lies upon all Good Christians, so
far as they can, without justifiable impediment, to appear in the house of God,
and worship him, (not omitting their personal and private devotions at home)
and comparing the same with the practice of Puritans, who are so strangely
deluded with the great virtue of a Sermon, and extemporary prayers at home,
that it goes quite against the hair, if not conscience of them, to visit Gods
house upon the account of prayers and adoration only; let it be fairly judged,
whether they have such cause to insult over our Religion; and not be ashamed of
their gross defects, and dissonancy from all that ever professed Christianity
before their days. Will their bold pretenses to Giftedness (think they) in
their rare way of worship, cover these foul blemishes from God, when they do
not from men? But this upon the occasion of the contrary abuse of times in
order to Religion, wherein the Rom^n Church has exceeded and departed from the
practice of the Ancient Church, which indeed had some other solemn times of
worship before the fourth Century, besides Sundays and Easter day, but very
Erasinus in Matthew. 11. v. 30. Id. in Romanos. cap. 14. 5.
few. Truly and learnedly says Erasmus upon Matthew: The Age of Hieromne knew
very few Feasts except the Lords day. And in another place he writes thus. With
the Jews some days were profane, and some days holy, but with the Christians
every day is equally (this he speaks according to the sense of Origin, not
excepting the Lords day) holy; Not that Festivals are not to be observed, which
the holy Fathers instituted afterward, to the more commodious assembling of
Christian People, and to the worship of God; but that they were very few, to
wit, The Lords day, Easter, and Pentecost, and some such like reckoned up by
Hieromne. But I know not whether it be expedient to add Feast upon Feast,
especially since we see the manners of Christians to come to that pass, that so
much reason as there was of old, to institute them for pieties sake, so great
seems there to be to antiquitate them. Thus he. And this has been the opinion
of the Church of England, and the course taken in the Reforming the abuse in
the number of them.

And a second abuse has been pared off by us, seen in the end of them, which
is rather to the honor of Saints, than of God or Christ, among Papists. I know
at the long run, as we may so speak, they ascribe in their doctrine all to God,
but not half of them have this sense, and little or nothing many times comes
from them, but what is directed to the Saint they then worship. Bishop Whitgift
does distinguish ours from theirs many ways. This one shall suffice at present,
out of him: Neither Whit gifts Answer to the admonition, page 175.
are they [Holy days] called by the name of any Saint in any other respect then
that the Scriptures, which that day are read in the Church, be concerning that
Saint, and contain either his calling, preaching, persecution, martyrdom or
such like. A third, and yet worse abuse in the Roman Church is, that they
celebrate the memory of some who have been no Saints; and of others who have
been no good Christians, as their highly applauded Thomas a Becket, who indeed
was villanously slain, and with gross Circumstances, but by no better authority
than a man may be murdered upon the highway, and that for none of his
virtues: but for sticking closser to the usurping Pope, than to Christ or his
Prince; to whom he was a much greater Rebel than was Cranmere, which a very
late impudent railer has in print so termed, to disgrace him and the
Reformation so far as naked lies can prevail, without the least instance,
against which of those Princes he lived under, or in what he died an impenitent
Traitor, as he calls him. This we know, the Hall of the Jesuits Seminary in
Rome, is hung round almost with such Saints as have died convicted of treason
against their Prince and Country, as Judicially as ever any were, But no more
of this.

There yet remains somewhat to be said under this head, of Times and Seasons of
Prayer, and that is concerning Hours of Prayers, called Canonical: which were
retained and published by our Church, at the beginning of the Reformation, by
the confession of that unsatisfied and unquiet Puritan Mr. Prinne himself, who
wrote against them, and the Prinne against Consens. page 32.
excellent design of the Reverend Publisher of them, with great wrath and
bitterness, and all the reason he could, which was little enough, God knows. In
the year (says he) 1560 was printed Orarium, or a Book of Prayers, which
mentioned Canonical Hours. But in the second impression in the year 1564; these
hours were quite obliterated: and so in the Edition 1573. But if these things
be so, the First Edition is with me much more Authentic than the following;
unless it can be proved, that such alterations were made with the like
authority with the first. For we have diverse instances of Puritans busy zeal
to make alterations in impressions of such books as offend their corrupt humor,
and that upon their private heads; watching Presses that print any thing that
troubles them, and purging them. Has not the late Archbishop Laud in his
Lauds speech in the Starchamber. An. 1637. page 64, 65, 66, 67, etc.
solid and judicious refutations of their contumelies and scurrilous slanders
against their Governors, found out their falseness, in contriving the expunging
of that clause in the twentieth of the nine and thirtieth Articles of Queen
Elizabeth, viz. The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and
authority in matters of Faith. And having caused the Article with this rasure,
to be printed, to argue from that Copy, and fly most boldly in the faces of
the Prelates, as forgers of Articles in latter Editions; when there were so
many ancienter Copies retaining that Clause; as that of the year 1593 and 1563
and 1605: and in the public Records of them: And having so done, to say, the
Article was never so printed before the year 1628: But the reason there given
makes the matter more clear. For many scrupling such Right in the Church,
refused to swear to the Articles so framed: and thereupon made no scruple to
purge them of such troublesome matter; and having so done, to cover their
wickedness the better, to begin to clamor loudly against the Bishops, as if in
their Edition they had foisted (as they speak) that into them, of their private
heads. And what can be a greater, or more bold presumption in them to attempt,
than in the Title of the Singing Psalms, which never had the least approbation
of either Civil or Ecclesiastical Authority, to print these words, Set forth
and allowed to be sung in all Churches of all the people together, before and
after Morning and Evening prayer, and also, etc? whereas they could never yet
produce the least color of Authority more than gross connivance at that
will worship of their own heads: For the Church never owned any other Psalms or
Singing, but what she warranted by her practice in Cathedrals, which, as it was
much more ancient and solemn, so much more easy also for common people to
learn, and more easy to be understood by those who are not able to join with
them that so sing. And yet (what will not affectation of men's own invention,
and spite against others drive men to say?) they boldly argue against that
manner of singing, as not easily intelligible or to be learnt; and also as a
way most unfit to address ones self to a Prince in, and much more to God; as if
their contrived Psalming of it, were not much more obnoxious to these
exceptions, and more ridiculous to be used toward any man, than the other: The
only advantage these have above the Churches grave, plain, and cheerful way of
Reciting the Psalms, being that they are fallen into this their own way, but
cannot tell how, or why, and admire it infinitely.

But to return: Can we, knowing they have been guilty of such vile Artifices,
make any great scruple to think that they might play false with the said
Orarium too, of which Mr. Prinne speaks? Such doings, and the disuse of these,
might give occasion to the Rhemists in their Comments to affirm, that, The
Church of England has utterly rejected Canonical Hours of Prayers. Which is
not so. Indeed she does not impose them with that rigor, as does the Roman
Church, but commends the same as very godly and profitable. And there is not
one book in more esteem with her, next to the Office of the Liturgy it self,
than that book, to that end published by the late Reverend Bishop of Durham,
Dr. Cosens: notwithstanding all the dirt cast in the face of it and him, by Mr.
Prinne: And notwithstanding the three notable abuses noted amongst the Papists,
by Master Perkins in the use of the Canonical Hours; First, Perkins Cases of
Conscience, p. 79.
in binding to them upon mortal sin; This we acknowledge to be an abuse, unless
the persons have brought themselves under any Rule or Order which requires such
services, (as such may lawfully be) and wilfully neglect the same: Secondly,
binding only to those hours, whereas those hours differ not from others; But
here we are to distinguish; first, between binding to those hours only, as if
it were not permitted to use them at any other hours, which I know none do: and
not binding them to any others, but them only; this is lawful. secondly,
between binding to hours for the Hours sakes, and for Orders sake. Indeed Hours
(as is solidly and very philosophically argued) differ not in nature one from
another: But emergencies and occasions may diversifie them, and the devotions
belonging to them, without any just objection to be made to the contrary: A
Third abuse noted by Mr. Perkins, is, That a man may say the Canonical hours of
one day for another; which may be an abuse, or no abuse, as the matter is
ordered. To neglect wilfully ones usual prayers, is certainly ill: but having
so done, to double his prayers the next day, is no such error as may be
supposed.

Much besides this may be said out of the Authority of the Church, and more out
of Scripture, than may be found for some things by Puritans religiously
observed: Much likewise is here wont to be said about the Hours themselves, the
reason, and number of them: but I cut off all them at present, and resolve all
into the general reasonableness and piety of such a practice; and the manifold
benefit which may accrue unto the serious and devout user of them, though he
ties not himself to any one form strictly: and so shall rest, till I can hear
what can be objected worthy of a Christian against them, more than I have found
already, which may be as well objected against Morning and Evening prayer, as
them.

CHAP. XIV.
The Third thing to be considered in the Worship of God, viz. The true Object,
which is God only. That it is Idolatry to misapply this Divine Worship. What is
Divine Worship properly called. Of the multitude and mischiefs of New
distinctions of Worship. Dulia and Latria, though distinct, of no use in this
Controversy. What is an Idol. Origen's criticisme of an Idol, vainly rested
on. What an Image. What Idolatry. The distinction of Formal and Material
Idolatry, upon diverse reasons rejected. The Papists really Idolatrous,
notwithstanding their good Intentions pretended. Intention and Resolution to
worship the true God, excuse not from Idolatry. Spalato, Forbes, and others,
excusing the Romanists from thence, disproved. That Idolatry is not always
joined with Polytheism, or worshipping more Gods than one. How the Roman Church
may be a true Church, and yet Idolatrous.

FRom the nature, kinds, acts, circumstances of Place and Times of Prayer, we
pass to the object of this worship of Invocation and Adoration: which is the
most important of all; and which, as duly observed, is the end, complement and
perfection of all Religion; so mistaken, is the foulest of all errors, and the
highest of all provocations and affronts of almighty God; who Isa. 42. 8.
protests by his Prophet, upon this occasion, I am the Lord, that is my name,
and my glory will I not give unto another, neither my praise unto graven
Images. This therefore it were superfluous to prove, which all Christians, yea
almost all the world, as well Unchristian, as Christian, does readily and
unanimously assent to, That God only is the proper object of Divine or
Religious worship. And they that glory that they stick firmly to this, what do
they more than do Infidels and Heathens, who all hold that God is to be
worshipped, with supreamest worship, and that Idolatry is a notorious error
and offense against him? This I say, all rational men assent to in the notion;
that the worship of the true God, or which seems to be the very same, the true
worship of God, is to be given only to God; and yet fall flat into the Practice
of that great sin.

For though Idolatry be so odious in its name, yet in its nature it is very
pleasing and ravishing of our senses; and has of late days been so fairly and
neatly trimmed up, by the fine wits and curious hands of men, and they
especially Christians, and they more especially Catholics (God bless us) that
now there is either no such thing to be found in the world, or that, the least
sin, one of them, in the world. And this is brought about by the ministry, and
help of innumerable distinctions; which I think may be reduced to these two
heads: viz. to those concerning the Act of worshipping, and those concerning
the Object of worship. Concerning the Act, we find such as these very common
and current; first, Natural and Civil, and Divine and Religious: And these
again Properly Divine, or Improperly; supreme and Inferior; Direct and
Indirect; Absolute and Relative; Ultimate and subalternate or subordinate;
Mediate and Immediate: For its own sake or for another sake. Again, for its
own sake, which we worship, as a thing in it self, or as a Representation of
another: All these, (but these are not all) to be found in Learned Authors
books, to rectify the worlds errors in its Religion. And besides these, more
may be found concerning the Object, but this one shall I only name, which is
their strongest Hold and Refuge. That, to secure them from all assauls of
Adversaries; this, to receive them when they shall by strong hand at any time
be beaten out of their fastnesses: And that is that modern, but very famous
distinction of Material and Formal. So that some of no mean knowledge, have
thus defended themselves: What if (for instance in the Mass) we should by
error worship that as God, which is not God? yet this would be but Material
Idolatry, at the most, and not Formal: seeing we believe that to be very God,
which we so adore: and Material Idolatry (with such circumstances) we must
suppose, is one of the least sins that we can be subject to. Thus have some
discoursed to me, though it is well known, some others of them, as Costerus, do
acknowledge, that if Costerus Enchirid.
Catholics miss their mark, and that be not really God, which they with divine
worship adore in the Sacrament, they are gross Idolaters. Of this we shall
speak more by and by. Now are we to consider first, of the first sort of
distinctions; to pass over all which, by a particular examination, would be too
tedious a task for my self, and Reader too: I shall therefore only examine the
most reasonable, and comprehensive of them: and them I take to be that of
Worship Civil and Divine; and of Absolute and Relative: not omitting altogether
others.

And to understand clearly what is meant by Divine Worship, we are to enquire,
whether the Act makes the Worship, or the Object; For all worship, as other
Acts moral, takes it specification from the Object, as Philosophers say; then,
unless the Object be Divine, or God himself, cannot the Worship be Divine; and
so by consequence a man cannot give Divine Worship, though he would never so
fain, unto an object not Divine: and so cannot, though he would, commit
Idolatry; because the worship it self is not Divine, but much inferior: because
the object is such, which constitutes not Divine Worship, being some Creature.
But if the Act in its own nature be intrinsecally Divine, it would be known,
what is that which makes it so. For they say, all acts external are equivocal
and dubious in themselves; and indifferent to Civil, Religious, Inseriour, or
Supreme worship: and that nothing can be concluded from thence Idolatrous. For
we bow the head, we bend the knee, we fall down at the feet of men many times,
whom we give no Idolatrous worship unto, nor are charged by any understanding
reasonable person so to do. And what they affirm of all outward Reverence or
Worship, I see no reason but may be said of all inward Adoration too, viz. that
it is Equivocal and indifferent to Divine and Human Reverence; unless it be
determined and specificated by somewhat besides it self. For Fear and Love and
Reverence may be, and that inwardly, exhibited to the Creature, and the degrees
of all these may be greater and more intense toward our Prince, whom we so
reverence, humble our selves before, and Petition; than when in this manner we
address our selves to God, and yet this not reputed Idolatrous worship: Yea we
openly profess, we humbly, earnestly, and with all our hearts, desire such a
thing from man, and so I doubt not but many do with greater affection and
inward sense than they generally seek to God, and yet no man charges them with
Idolatry. So that the inward acts of worship are equivocal no less than the
outward; and consequently, no act in its self Idolatrous; or of it self. And
thus have we brought the matter to that pass, to relieve distressed
Catholics, that ordinary Heathens may evade the charge of Idolatry, though
they never knew the true God. And See Joannes de Palafox Epist. de Jesuitar.
Societate Extinguenda, etc. ad Innocent. 10. p. 23, 24. apud S. Amor.
if they know, and profess upon occasion, to worship the true God, yet may they
perform all outward acts of Worship generally reputed Divine, provided their
Intention be sincere, and their hearts upright before God: which elusions and
evasions the Jesuits have made great use of, in their compliance with the
grossest Idolatry Heathens are subject to, in the East Indies; as John de
Palafox has plainly and roundly charged them, to Innocent the Tenth: showing
at large, how under the favor of such new invented and minted distinctions,
(never thought of without detestation, by the Ancient Church) they have
presumed to converse with, and in all outward appearance communicate with
Idolatrous Heathens, in their Temples and Idols. And why not, if all outward
worship falls short of Divine; and their intention inward be not to give Divine
Worship to them?

For to define Idolatry, as does Azorius, to be, That whereby the worship
Azorius Institut. Moral. To. 1. l. 9. c. 10.
which is due to God, is given to another: and again, Then is Idolatry
committed, when we ascribe Divine honor to created things, for their own sakes:
what does all this signify, when it is not agreed upon; What is properly
Divine Worship? but sometimes Divine Worship is defined to be that which is
proper to God, and what is proper to God, is not plainly determined: and
sometimes, that which is proper to God, is called Divine Worship: For to help
us out with the distinction of Dulia and Latria, is to give us hard words for
easy, and that is all: and especially to add hereunto that unknown to ancient
and uncircumscribed to modern Ages, Hyperdoulia.

For though it does not hold constantly true, that those two words are so
distinguished in Scripture or Ancient Greek Writers, either Ecclesiastical or
Profane, as not sometimes to be used promiscuously and interchangeably as
might by instances be made undeniable, yet cannot we not deny, but generally
they have their distinct significations, and the things by them signified are
very distinct: and it is one of the easiest things in the world, to put a
difference between the Notions of servile Worship (which is Dulia; and Divine,
which is Latria: yet in the exercise of these acts, it is one of the
difficultest things of all, to distinguish, which is which: seeing it is hard
to say, whether the intention of the worshipper only, or the Act it self
precisely taken, or the Object, makes the worship Divine. The Object cannot be
it, because there could be no Idolatry committed in such cases: For, as is
said, If the worship be not Divine the Act cannot be Idolatrous; for all other
worship (say they) may be exhibited to a Creature: And it should not be Divine,
according to this opinion, that makes the Object to give the Divineness to the
Act. Again, there can instance be given in to one act, that in it self is
incommunicable to the Creature, according to these men's Theology. Therefore
lastly, all the specification of Idolatrous acts must consist in the Intention
of the mind, and that intention is seen in a profession of Religiously
worshipping a thing for its own sake: For so Azorius holds, that even Latria
(which it any act with them be Properly Divine, must needs be so) it self may
be given to Saints, and to Images, provided it be not given for their own
sakes, but for Gods sake. Now, it being impossible that any rational man should
thus strictly give, or intend to give Divine Worship to any thing for its own
sake, which he denies to be (...) Imagi is (...) culaus s^t Latria, non
continu^ sequitur (...) cre^a trituatur: quonian (...) Cor. Veum. Id. 1.
Quinto. 1 Cor. 3. 4.
God; it follows that no man can commit Idolatry, because every man gives that
worship he gives in a divine manner, either not for its sake, to which it is
immediately directed, but for Gods sake, whom he sufficiently understands; or
with an opinion that really such a thing as he so worships, is God.

But to make the matter fairer and safer on their side, they flee to Origens
opinion, or Criticism of an Idol, as different from an Image. An Idol (says he
following St. Paul to the Corinthians) is nothing in the world: An Idol is a
fiction made like to nothing in nature; but an Image is the likeness of
something: and fain would they, if they dare be so bold (for as yet they touch
the matter somewhat timorously and tenderly) cut off all color for accusation
of them of Idolatry, by defining Idolatry to be the worship of an Idol; and an
Idol, to be that only which is not in nature, nor like to any thing in the
world: But they worship only such things as either have natural being, or
represent somewhat natural; therefore they are no Idolaters: But I shall here
demand bluntly of them, Is it not then Idolatry to worship the Creature natural
and visible for its own sake, with Latria? I will suppose their answer, for
shame, It is. Why then read we in their books Origens wit rather then judgment
so vainly and idly abused? Surely Origin there spoke like a Schoolboy,
wittily, rather than like a School man, Theologically: And they are worse then
Children that draw his words to a solid definition of Idolatry. For what says
Gulielmus Parisiensis? When such kind of worship [Latria] or obsequiousness is
given Guliel. Paris. de Legib. c. 23. Cum (...) cultus au^ obsequium ad
^^iuderans feratur, sive illud sit, (...) non (...) etc. Acts 7. 4. (...) ref
60. p^lt Christ.
to another, whether the thing be, or whether it be not and what ever it be, it
is an intolerable injury and affront to God, to be exterminated with all fire
and sword, etc. And does not the Scripture expressly call the Golden Calf an
Idol? saying, And they made aCalf in those days, and offered Sacrifice unto the
Idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands. Truly therefore (whether
Grammatically enough, I will not enquire) says Philastrius, Ipsum nomen Idoli
species doli est, etc. The very name of an Idol implies deceit, and a
prevaricating of the form of any thing according to the Etymology, is so called.

It is therefore first to be known, what is an Idol, that we may know better
what is Idolatry: For it is too common mistake to think that the Idol makes the
Idolatry, and not the Idolatry the Idol: True it is indeed, that according to
the course of Nature, a thing must be before it be worshipped, but speaking in
the Christian sense, certain it is that nothing is an Idol before it be
worshipped: For until such an Act be directed to it, it i^ but an Image, or
some innocent laudable representation of a thing of Gods making; then it
becomes an Idol when it is worshipped. It were vain to object that the Images
of Saints or God himself Idols in themselves And it is as vain to answer, that
they are Representations of most holy persons, and not such as were the Images
of the Heathen, representing Devils or Imaginary Gods; for neither the one nor
other are Idols in themselves and most certain it is that either of them may be
made Idols at the pleasure of Superstitious man: and the Epigrammatist spoke
more like a Divine, than such Mort. Epig.
Schoolmen, who says

Non quisquis fingit sacros de marmore vultus
Ille Deos fingit, qui colat ille facit.
Not he that makes Images of Gods, makes Gods, but he that worships them, he
makes the Gods and the Udol too. And therefore as no works of Nature, neither
Sun, or Moon, nor Angel nor Cherubin, nor Saint, are of themselves Idols; so no
work of Art made to the likeness of any thing, is an Idol, until it partaketh
of the worship due to God, and then the Image intended for Idoiam est false
alacujus numihis (...) and sinulacoum, quod numen inane and ^anum reprae
sentar. Azorius ib. c. 11. Pagani ca colunt quae sunt, sed pro diis colendi non
sunt. August. Cont. Fanst. Manch l. 2. c. 3. Dallus obs. Cicero de Natura
Deorum l. 2. Nihil est difficilius quam a c^nsuemdine oceleru aciem mentis
abducere. Ea dif. ficultas indaxit and vulgos imperito; and simits Philosophes
imporitorum, ut nist figu is (...) constituts nihil diis of (...) sunt (...)
the true God, becomes an Idol: And therefore we utterly deny the definition by
Romanists given of an Idol, that It is the Effigies of some false God, which
represents an empty and vain Deity. S. Augustine much better; Pagans worship
things which are, but are not to be worshipped for Gods. And true it is, there
is not only Metaphorical Idolatry of the brain or Imagination, when the heart
is devoted more to some created thing than to the Creator; but proper also,
when a man frames to himself an object within himself, and directs his worship
to it, as to God: for still the general definition given by the best advised
among Papists, viz. That it is Idolatry to give divine worship to any thing but
God takes hold of this also: And it was an old piece of Epicurism, which I have
heard alleged in behalf of outward representations of God, viz. that we cannot
conceive of God without some material Quidditie, as they call, it in our brain;
and it is much the same Case, whether we frame a sensible, or a Mental Image of
God: I confess this; but Tully was the best Catholic in this point, when he
derided Epicurus his sensual divinity, for being able to think nothing of God
but under sensible forms. It is very true, we cannot conceive either what God
is, or any Spirit, but we must cloth him with figure and form answerable to
material things; and to conceive so of Spirits created, is only an error in
Philosophy, or the nature of things inferring no superstition natural: But
there is no necessity a man should think with himself, what God is, for then he
must needs circumscribe him; but that he is, Simply and Abstractly, and so
ought we to worship him: yet if any man shall, through the infirmity of oar
understanding, generally conceive of God under some shape, he does not
thereupon necessarily fall into Idolatry, no, though he uses it as a means to
worship by, so he makes it not the term of his service to the setting aside of
God himself, when he so worships As the framing a sensible Image of God, is no
Idolatry, nor Idolatry in the strictest sense to worship God by mediation or
help of that: but to make any Image of God was always interdicted, as tending
naturally to Idolatry; and if it should never be used in any Religious way, yet
were it no better than a blasphemous attempt, to compare God to any likeness of
Color, Wood, or Stone; or the likeness of any of these (...) nature and form
of God, as St. Paul tells the Athenians Acts 17. 29.
plainly in the Acts; We ought not to think that the Godhead is like to gold or
silver, or stone graven by art or man's device. And yet it is well known, with a
Scholastic distinction newly invented and accommadated to the case, Bellarm.
how boldly and impiously this is practiced by the Romanists, and defended by
the learnedest of them: however there are sundry very grave men amongst them
who declare against it; but in vain. The Greeks, who are more then enough
devoted tolmage-worship, and the moderner the worse, yet (God be thanked) have
kept themselves pure from this abomination: And Damascen pronounces it a folly
and extreme impiety Vide Lyram in Exodus 20. Dainascer. Orthod. Fid. etc. (...).
Theodoret. Sermon. 2. in Graecos.
to figure the Divinity. Nicephonus Patriorch of Constantinople (as Leo
Allatius has set him forth) affirms it a crime to be punished with death, to
make the Image of God: But none of all these, nor the constant practice of all
Christian Churches, move the resolute admirers of the inventions of their own
brains, and works of their own hands; but on they will go to prodigious
practices in this kind sheltring themselves under the protection of a Church
that cannot fail or deceive them; and a wretched distinction or two coined on
purpose to help them out of the mire.

But it is time now to consider the second main shelter, from the charge of
Idolatry made against the Roman Church; and that is from the distinction of
Formal and Material Idolatry: by which they would persuade us that, first,
having a certain knowledge of the true God; and next always intending most
sincerely to worship only that true God, though possibly they should err in the
object, yet the crime of Idolatry cannot cleave unto them; and especially when
we hear them so solemnly and zealously protest against worshipping any
Creature, what ever we can possibly instance in, as God. The vanity of this
protestation we may have occasion to discover by and by. Now we call in
question the foundation of all; and that is, their distinction of Formal and
Material Idolatry, upon this fourfold account: First, that if it were
reasonable, it were notwithstanding altogether superfluous: For, what more can
be honestly implied hereby, than was of old, in that distinction of Ignorantia
facti and Juris, Ignorance of the thing done; and Ignorance of the Law against
which this fact is committed. Ignorance, that such a Law there is, which
prohibits divine or supreme worship to be given to the Creature, no man can
plead: but Ignorance of actual Idolatry in such kind of worship, as by error
and false supposition is committed, a man may possibly allege, and that
colourably. Now, what can they make Formal Idolatry, but such a Divine Worship
as is given to that which is not God, knowingly and willingly? And what else do
they mean by Material Idolatry, but Divine Worship falsely applied to that
which by nature is not capable of it, as not God, though it be really believed
to be God? And what is this else but Ignorance of the fact? And if so what
makes this new Invented distinction here of Formal and Material Idolatry?
Secondly, this distinction is very rudely and ignorantly made against the Rules
of Logic. I know there is nothing more ordinary than to distinguish a thing,
and consider it Materially and Formally: but there never was received any such
division as good, which made Matter and Form of the same thing, distinct Kinds;
or made Parts several Species. A man may be considered according to his Matter
or according to his Form: but who ever went about to divide human nature or
humanity into a Formal Man and a Material Man? Or, to take an instance nearer
to our purpose, of Adultery; A man may consider it in its Formality and
Materiality, but no advised man can divide Adultery into Formal and Material.
For the general Rule makes against all such attempts; which tells us, that
nothing can be, or subsist without its form: so that either there is no
Adultery or Idolatry at all, or it must be as well Formal as Material: unless
we would be so vain and ridiculous to call them Formal, as we sometimes do a
Formal Man, when he is fantastical and affected: or we should use the term
Formal, for that which does appear in all its outward formalities, as we before
distinguished Schism into Formal and Real, or Material, or Vertual and Formal.
And in this sense the contrary sense is much more true. For in exhibiting
outward worship in Divine manner, unto that which is not God, all the
formalities of Idolatry do appear; what ever the intention, which does not
appear, may be. It will here doubtless be said, that in that common case put by
Casuists, of a Man who companies with a woman in a conjugal way, steadfastly and
unfainedly believing that she is his own lawful wife, does commit material
adultery, but not formal; and so in Idolatry, as the case may be put: But I
make no doubt to affirm, that such an Act of Adultery, so far as it is
Adultery, and such Idolatry, so far as it is Idolatry, are both Formal as well
as Material: and the only difference between them and those they call Formal,
consists only in Ignorance or knowledge of the Fact done: For either such Acts
are sins, or not sins: If not sins, then neither Formal nor Material Adultery,
or Idolatry; if they be sins, to what can they be reduced but to Adultery and
Idolatry? And that when they have the most favorable circumstances they are
sinful: Parisiensis thus clearly determines, If a Si quis mulierem cagnoscat
non suam pro uxore, vel adoret Luciferum, etc. Gulielm. Parisiensis de Leg. c.
21.
man knows a woman not his own, for his own wife; or worships Lucifer instead
of Christ, he sins; because God would have turned away his heart from such a
great Evil, if his sins hindered not, which he had before committed. Thus he.
So that the issue of this question comes truly to that which some Romanists
acknowledge, that all Idolatry derives it self originally from the
understanding, though it be an Act of the will principally: and that it is
because a man knows not actually what he does, when he commits Idolatry. For
surely, unless (to grant something to quarrellers, which prejudices little our
Cause) we except some prodigious persons and desperate: no man worships what he
is persuaded is not God, with supreme worship; and so consequently, no man
commits wilful Idolatry. And therefore, the only equal way of estimating the
Criminalness of Idolatry, is from the measure of knowledge in man: and the
means of discerning an Increated from a Created Object of Worship. It is
therefore to very little purpose, that the Archbishop of spalato, and after
him, Forbes Bishop of Edinburge, and after them, other very learned men of
these present days, allege in excuse of Papists from Idolatry in the Mass,
when they accept of their detestation of worshipping Bread, or any thing
Created, but only God: For it is no demonstration or proof at all, that they do
not do it, because they say they do not do it: For here are two contrary
suppositions made by contrary Parties. The one holds that the natural bodies of
the Eucharistical Elements are not present, nor have any being: the other holds
that they are there, as really as ever. Again, both agree that they worship
that which is there, what ever it be: therefore deny they it a thousand times,
they have nothing to save themselves from the actual adoration of those
Creatures, but a supposition that they are not there: but our opinion affirming
positively that there they are, no man of us can hold opinion that they worship
not the Creature, and Maimonides More Neboc. Part. 1. c. 71.
so are not Idolatrous. For as Maimonides quotes Themistius the Philosopher
speaking well, Natura rerum nonsequitur opiniones hominum: sed opiniones
hominum debent sequi naturam rerum. The Nature of things do not follow the
persuasions of men, but the persuasions or opinions of men, ought to follow
Nature: That is, not only Idolatry which men are persuaded is Idolatry, but
that which in it self is so; though men be persuaded of the contrary; yea
though they mean nothing less then to commit Idolatry: as will appear from
Tannerus in this his explication of Idolatry. Adamus Tan^erus Theologiae
Sc^olast. Tom. 3. Disput. 5. Q^aest. 7. Dub. 1. number. 2.
He is judged (says he) to give Divine Worship to the Creature, who directly
and expressly, or indirectly and implicitly intends, to beget such opinion of
it, as in truth agrees only to God. He directly intends, who really supposes
falsely any Creature to be God, and intends to worship it as God: or certainly,
he who otherwise out of perverted affection, desires to worship that which he
well knows to be a Creature, as God. He intends indirectly, who no ways
intending directly to honor a Creature as God; yet outwardly notwithstanding
this, does bestow divine honor on the Creature, as God. So that in the judgment
of sober men, he may be thought to account the Creature for God: as if any man
through fear of death should sacrifice to Idols.

Therefore if actually a man worships that which is not God, his intention to
worship only the true God, can relieve him no farther, than his opinion and
intention to accompany with his own wife, excuses him from Casual Adultery, in
lying with another woman: and that is but little, unless circumstances be such
as may render the ignorance of the Fact invincible (as they say) or
unavoidable: And the intention and opinion, if they be against ordinary
presumptions to the contrary, do not excuse. Now, to apply it to the last Case
of Christ corporally present in the Sacrament: This is agreed upon by us, that
what Christ says to be so, is infallibly true, seem it never so contrary to
our outward senses. But seeing the words of Christ, according to the like
expressions in Holy Writ, where things that bear Analogy with one another, are
said positively to be one another, (as where St. Paul says, Believers are
Christ's bone, and Christ's flesh, which is not true in the natural sense, but
Metaphorical; for otherwise, unbelievers might be said so to be, which St. Paul
never intended) do not necessarily infer that sense; and all the ends
imaginable are attainable no less by the spiritual sense, and metaphorical
acceptance of the words, than by the more gross and natural: And lastly, to
suppose what is said above concerning this subject, testimony of senses bear
witness to the contrary, as much after Consecration as before; the upshot of
the business will be this, Whether there remains any such infallible
inducements to produce an opinion of such a thing there being; whether such
gounds unresistible there be for to found such an intention, that may excuse
from error. And therefore I absolutely deny Spalatoe's opinion, saying, I
answer, I acknowledge no Idolatrous De Republ. Eccl. Lib. 7. cap II. number. 2.
crime in the adoration of the Eucharist, so long as the intention is directed
aright: For they who teach that Bread, to be no longer bread, but the body of
Christ, etc. For if they knew that the Body of Christ did not lie hid under the
Species, and his blood under those of Wine, they would not so worship: This I
say satisfies not, because they have no sufficient grounds that so it is, or so
Christ's words are to be understood. Secondly, and as to this point principally;
because Idolatry is primarily a defect and error in the understanding, as
their own men confess; and only secondarily and by consequence in the will or
purpose; which altogether overthrows the moderate sense of Forbes likewise, to
Forbes ubi supra. p. 439.
say no more. For as for that other evasion and purgation whereby they would
fetch off Papists from Id^latrous worship in the Eucharist; because there can
be no doubt made but Christ may be adored, as Austins known words are, in the
Eucharist with all outward and bodily, as well as mental worship, is much less
to the purpose: For, This quite changes the question, which is wholly about the
(...) (as the ancients call them,) the objects appearing, whether they be
Christ, and to be worshipped as Christ. For, Christ in the Sacrament, we may
worship, without exceptions of any divine or corporal manner. Christ's body and
blood are really present in the Eucharist, we grant, and in a more eminent
manner then in other places, or divine ordinances: but when we hear him say,
The faithful receive the body and blood of Christ in Forbes ibid.
themselves, corporally, but yet after a spiritual, miraculous and
imperceptible manner; we grant the manner to be wonderful and imperceptible,
but we cannot grant it to be Corporally and Spiritually in the same respect,
without a contradiction: For, What is corporally to receive a thing, but modo
corporali, after a corporal manner, and therefore to correct, as it were, that
Expression with that which follows, viz. Modo tamen spirituali, yet after a
spiritual manner, is quite to destroy what he seemed to say before: For,
Nothing can be received Corporally, after a spiritual manner. And it is much
more intelligible than that of the Romanists, which says, That the Body of
Christ may be received spiritually and bodily: For the body, according to them,
is taken into the mouth, and so bodily received by the wicked, and unbelievers;
and it is by the faithful besides received by Faith, spiritually, which may
stand together: But to suppose any spiritual way to explicatory of the corporal
way of receiving Christ, is to suppose contradictions: But this belongs to
another place.

Let us now touch the third exception I make against the distinction of
Material and Formal Idolatry, taken from the Novelty of it, and singularity, as
never heard of before late days; when extremities put men's wits to study for
new forms of Speech, to dress up the new body of Divinity framed to themselves:
Why did not the Heathen come off so? For surely they might: Why did not this
enter into the head of the ancienter Schoolmen, who, I dare say, make no
mention of it? How comes it about that the aneient Fathers and Councils knew no
other Idolatry than that which even moderner Papists approve of, when the
soberer mode is on them, viz. The worshipping as God, that which is not God;
without any notice taken of Material and Formal worship? contenting themselves
with the general distinction of Ignorance of the Law, and Ignorance of the
Fact: or wilful Ignorance, and unwilling: Or vincible and invincible. Surely
this implies somewhat singular in this case, which they either are ashamed to
express, or can not; which latter is my case: For, I confess, I see no reason
why we may not distinguish two sorts of Heresy as well, two sorts of Schism,
two sorts of Adultery, two sorts of Drunkenness and Murder, Material and
Formal, as of Idolatry: And yet we hear little or no mention of this
distinction, but only as it is applied to Idolatry; which, besides what is
abovesaid, renders it more suspected; and the coyners and users of it.

Fourthly, and lastly, The dangerousness of this distinction, and apparent
damage it does to Christian Religion, declares it to be wicked and
intolerable; while it both opens a way to all carelessness in worshipping, we
know not how, nor what, contrary to our Faith; and then when we may receive
competent information of our error, and should repent, it lulls us asleep in
that greatest of all sins, and hardens our hearts against repentance and
amendment; because, at the most and worst, we are certified, it is but Material
Idolatry, and material Idolatry is the least of all sins, if we mean well.

And thus have we seen what havoc is made with Idolatry; and whereas my,
perhaps private, opinion is this, that God has made that generally most easy
and obvious unto us, which is most necessary to be done, or avoided by us; and
Idolatry is the greatest of all sins, next to Atheism; and therefore should be
most easy to be judged of, and apprehended; such and so many have been of late
the subtil^ies and devises of men, that now it is one of the hardest things to
know what is Idolatry, and when it is committed; and that amongst Christians
too, the first principle of whose Religion is, the worship of the only true
God, in Christ Jesus.

True it is, That it is assented unto generally by Christians on all sides
almost, that it is Idolatry to worship any thing as God which is not, but we
are little the nearer for this, because it is made so doubtful and difficult to
judge, what is divine and proper worship. And secondly, when we intend such
worship to a false God, which happens to be given: For, upon supposal that we
do worship a false Deity, yet if we intend to worship only the true, all is
well and safe: But then, if it be doubted (as well it may) seeing all men
naturally desire and intend to worship the true God, how there should be any
Idolaters in the world, or any such sin as Idolatry: This difficulty has much
perplexed the Patrons of Formal and Material Idolatry: For the Heathens
themselves could scarce, if such a distinction may be allowed, be convinced of
the one; and Christians may easily be convinced of the other: For, I see
nothing of consequence replied to the instances of the learned amongst the
reformed, whereby it does plainly appear, That the wiser Heathens (and if we go
no further our turn is served) did not any, as all men, intend to worship the
true God, but in their writings and minds Gage Histor. West Indies. (...).
Theod H^retic. Fab. l. 5. 3.
d^d reduce all those various Gods to one: And though they worshipped Images of
Gods, they declared, they did it not for the Image sake, but for Gods sake; and
for their own sake; that they might, by means of them, obtain favor of the God
they worshipped ultimately. A modern instance we have in the Spaniards
conversi^g with, and converting the West Indians: They were very zealous, as a
late rude Historian has delivered, against the m^^^trous worshipped Idols by
the Indians, and broke them to pieces (as well they might) with great
indignation, and severe menaces against the servers of them; accusing them of
gross Idolatry and stupidity in worshipping such foul objects to the contempt
and dishonor of the true God: To this some of the freest and wisest answered:
You worship Images as well as we, do you not? Yes, said the Christians, but we
do not so worship the Image, but we worship the true God besides, knowing very
well that those things before us are not God: And so do we, replied the
Heathens: We know very well, that this we see is not God himself, but we
worship our God by this; and have found by experience that he answers us by
this, as well as yours: What those Christians did answer this, is not said;
neither could they say any thing whereby they should excuse themselves and
justly accuse others, that shall so defend and explain themselves, of Idolatry.

Therefore of late has a very grave and learned person pitched upon an unheard
of opinion concerning this, to salve the reputation of Christians laboring
under this grand imputation; which is this, That there is no Idolatry, but
where more Gods than one are worshipped: The ground and motive to which opinion
is this; because, he that worships more than one God, must inevitably worship a
false God; because there is but one True God: The inclusive part of which
opinion and argument, viz. That, without all excuse, such are Idolaters, I
readily grant,; but not the exclusive: That only such, and no others, are: And
my reasons are these; First, because none of the Christian Fathers of old ever
framed or received such a Restriction of Idolatry: and that they did not, I
need no better argument than may be taken from the learned Author himself, of
this opinion: For being so thoroughly verst in antiquity as he was, some
suffrage of the Fathers, some record of the Church must needs have fallen into
his hands, and so undoubtedly would have fallen from his pen, confirming his
opinion; but none we find produced. Secondly, I see no reason of departing
without greater necessity than has appeared as yet, from the consonant
judgment hitherto of the Church of England: which, though it has not in a
formal decree, declared this point; yet so far as her opinion does appear in
the writings of the Principal of the Church; it is to the opposing of that
sense of Idolatry; as has in part been shown by others, and make no doubt but
might further, by the same hand, as he affirms; finding it not difficult to
do it my self. Thirdly, They, for relief of whom, surely this opinion was
chiefly thought of and asserted, will not own the invention: For, though they
like nothing more, and alledg nothing oftener to retuod the force of our
arguments proving them Idolatrous, than the judgment of so learned a man as he,
against us, and in defense of themselves; yet they certainly disliking the
Premises upon which such a conclusion is inferred, and sticking only to the
Conclusion, viz. That they are not guilty of Idolatry, can take no more shelter
from thence or benefit, than can he that denies the Conclusion and grants the
Premises: For, I would thus expostulate, first, with the Author; Whether, if
Intention directed rightly does not excuse from Idolatry, the Romanists may not
be said to be Idolatrous? I make no question but he that holds, as he does,
that there is no transubstantiation, would grant they were, upon such a
supposition: Again I would demand, whether if this ground be false which is
supposed as true, by him: That all Idolatry implys a plurality of Gods
worshipped; He that worships one false God may not be said to be an Idolater? I
see no reason to doubt but he that held there was any such thing in the world,
would, and must yield to the Affirmative, viz. That it is, supposing that there
is Idolatry not consisting in more Gods than one. Now the Papists do certainly,
not only suppose, but hold, that Idolatry may be committed in worshipping one
God, who is falsely so called; and therefore though, according to his single
Hypothesis, they may defend themselves, yet neither according to their own
grounds, nor ours. Fourthly, The ground of that his supposition is not to be
allowed: For this it is, That divine Adoration receives its specification from
the intention: which is an act principally of the will, so, that be the object
what it will, yet if I have no intention to worship any other than the true
God, I worship him, when I direct my worship to that which we may suppose not
to prove, upon trial, God: But this is not to be granted, that intention is
sufficient to denominate worship, or constitute it true and Catholic; though
it suffices abundantly to make a worship false, when it is intended for such:
And then may a man be said to intend false worship, not only when he knows it
to be false; but when he might possibly know it to be so, and when he intends
to worship that which actually is a false object: For, as has been said,
Idolatry consists principally in the understanding; as also the Scripture
intimates, when it charges the Idolatrous Israelites with ignorance 2 King.
17. 26. Isa. 4. 9.
of God: For were, not the Samaritans Idolaters, who knew not the manner of the
God of Israel? And what says the Prophet Isaiah? They that make a graven Image
[i. e. to worship it] are all of them vanity; and their delectable things shall
not profit, and they are their own witnesses, they see not, nor know, that they
may be ashamed. Surely if any man saw, and were convinced of his error, he
would be ashamed of it; but it is his ignorance, that detains him, as well as
precipitates him into such errors; Ephesians. 4. 18.
as St. Paul witnesses of the Gentiles: Having their understanding darkened
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart.
Fifthly, There is no reason to grant, that simplicity and sincerity of
Intention and Resolution of worshipping none but the true God, may not consist
and hold good in worshipping more than one God: as in the Act. 17. 23.
case of the Athenians worshipping the unknown God in the Acts: For, as
Pausanias in Eliacis, taking notice of this inscription, has it: The Persians
threatening Greece with War, the Athenians sent to the Lacedaemonians to beg aid
of them: Pan met their Ambassador Philippides, and expostulated with him, why
the Athenians had made no statue to him, but left him our? adding that if they
received him, he would stand by them; Hereupon they erected this Monument, To
the unknown God. Others say, That they being miserably harrassed with the
Pestilence, and finding no relief from them they worshipped, bethought
themselves there might be a God neglected by them, who might relieve them, and
so dedicated an Altar, To the unknown God? Might not all these things stand
with very great sincerity of intention? And yet I suppose it was Idolatry: So
that sincere resolution and intention of worshipping none but the true God
only, may be found, where many are worshipped: For, though to us, as St. Paul
says, Toletus Instruct. Sacerdotum. l. 4. c. 14. 6.
There is but one God and one Lord, yet with all Nations, it was not so: they
might really and steadfastly believe, there were more Gods than one: And
therefore Tolet the Jesuit well writes thus: Therefore Idolatry is the
exhibiting of a Divine worship to a false God: For to worship him for true God
who is not God, either by praising him, or invoking him, or Sacrificing to him,
or any ways prostrating our selves to him, is to commit Idolatry -- False
adoration, which is Idolatry, is never but where an Error in the understanding
goes before. De Ratione and lure definiend. page 273. Number ut Supersationis
caput est Id. (...); i^a emnus Dei caltus non solum extrav ritatem fidei, sed
etiam extra uniatem Ecclesis, alterius Dei cultum in se contnet ab coquem Fides
Christiarorum communis intra Ecclesiam colendum prop^nit. -- Omnis enim
Commentitia religio talem sibi Deum colendum p^^ponit, qualem sibi ipsa
commenta sit; non qualem se ipse ostendit. Quod Idololatrioe instar quoddam est.
And besides all this, the Author of this tenet in another place, acknowledges
it to be a sort of Idolatry, to feign or device a worship of God, otherwise
than was instituted of God, and that not only to worship God out of the verity
of Faith, but out of the unity of the Church, contains in it a worship of
another God, than is propounded by the Christian Faith to be worshipped in the
Church. -- And again, All commentitions religion propounds such a God to be
worshipped as it has feigned to it self, not as he has declared himself to
be. By which words I understand him to explain himself, and draw nearer to the
common notion of Idolatry than he is commonly taken to do: For granting that it
is a kind of Idolatry to offer any superstitious worship interdicted by God,
and that in thus doing a man does in effect frame to himself a God distinct
from the true God; it may be easily granted that all Idolatry consists in
Polytheism or plurality of Gods; because in effect a man makes strange Gods,
though not formally as he that constituteth one of purpose, to worship, as the
object of his Devotion.

And this agrees with what othet learned men have written of Idolatry
Quicunque de Deo secus sentit quam revera est, etc. Erasm. in symbolum
Catechesm. 2. (...) Epict. Cap. 38. Perkins Cases of Conscience. l. 2. c. 11.
Luther Colloq. Mensalia. p. 91.
extending it to a false notion or judgment of the one true God: For, Erasmus
in his Catechism on the Creed, says; Whosoever thinks otherwise of God than
in truth he is, or does not believe him to be such as the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures has described him to us, believes not in God but in an Idol. To
the same purpose speaks Mr. Perkins thus: If adoration be given to the true
God with a false and erroneous intention, it makes him an Idol: For example, if
the body be bowed with this intent to worship God out of the Trinity, as the
Turk does: Or, if he be worshipped out of his Son, with the Jews, thus doing we
worship not the true God, but an Idol. To these I add these words of Luther:
All manner of Religion, let it have never so great a name and luster of
Holiness, when people will serve God without his word and command, is nothing
else but plain Idolatry.

It may be said in behalf of Jews and Turks, that they are not Idolaters,
because they worship God according to the true Light of Nature, asserting and
magnifying above all men the unity of God, and directing their worship after
the manner of the service of God, before Christ: To which answering, I shall
wave the question about the measure of knowledge, the Jews had of the Trinity
before Christ, of which somewhat has been said before; and rather distinguish
between the manner of their believing or disbelieving those mysteries: For it
is much different, Negatively, not to believe them, and Privatively, or
contrarily, to believe. The state of Nature, and of the Jews might be such
before Christ, as not to have the true and clear notion of Christ, as the Son
of God, and (...) etc. Chrysostom. ad Judaizantes. Sermon. 27. Tom. 6. page 369.
of the Trinity, and yet not to oppose or directly deny it; as Jews and Turks
at this day: For they have now a contrary Faith unto these; and therefore how
they can be excused from Idolatry, according to the favorablest staters of
Idolaters, here now mentioned, I cannot see: For they who worship God as he is
not, but as he is framed by such men's wits, are a kind of Idolaters: But
Christian Faith teaches us that to God, it is essential to be Three in One, and
One in Three; which is by all but Christians, I mean Turks and Jews, absolutely
denied: And therefore Chrysostom denies the Jews worship God.

This likewise prosecuted gives us no small help toward the resolution of that
doubt, and reconciling of that contrariety, which seems to have been the main
motive to the entertaining a new notion of Idolatry, and clearing thereby, the
Church of Rome from that foul and mortal Imputation: For it being generally
granted that the Church of Rome is a true Church, it must of force be denied,
that it is Idolatrous; because Idolatry is inconsistent with the Nature of a
true Church; and destroys the Faith in the very foundation.

To which argument very pressing, I confess, I offer this Reply; First, calling
to mind the distinction heretofore laid down of a true Church, either in the
Integral Parts of Christian Doctrine, or Essential: We deny the Roman Church
to hold all the Integral Parts of the body of Faith; and so not a true Church:
We hold also that it retains the Essentials, and so may be termed a true
Church. Again of Essential or Fundamental points of Faith, we distinguish the
Abstract sense, and the Concrete sense: And affirm, that although in the
Abstract sense or Proposition, the Church of Rome is in many points free from
Idolatry; yet taking their doctrines concretely with their practice,
interpreting them; they are certainly Idolatrous: But a Church is chiefly to be
judged by the article in i^ self, and not in the unnatural sense appearing in
particular practices. The Church of Rome holds, That the true God alone is to
be worshipped: But if the Sons of that Church notwithstanding worship somewhat
besides God, this is a corruption in Fact, and not in Faith: And perhaps the
Church being an Abstract Body from single Persons; and the Faith from single
Practice, the particular errors which are committed there, not flowing
necessarily from that general Principle, may not be charged, but in a vulgar
sense, upon the Church: But yet, be it so, that the Churches determinations
should not oblige men necessarily to Idolatry, the Idolatrous Practices of so
many in the worshipping of the Host, Agnus Dei, Images, and Saints and Angels
permitted and countenanced in that Church, were sufficient ground of separation
from that Church, without Schismaticalness: But secondly, we are bound here to
distinguish of Idolatry; which, as may appear by what is said, admits of
diverse senses and acceptations and degrees: For, there is an Idolatry which
has quite another object both real and formal, from the true divine object of
worship; and that cannot stand with Christianity: And there may be an Idolatry
which errs only in the real Object; but retains the Formal Object of Worship:
The real Object is the thing Qui ad Idol latriam develvitm, non plene, nec
integ^e prophams officitur, misi negaverit Chris^um. Ruffin. Invectiva 2. in
Hieron. Christians in their Apostafie neither did, nor were to make an absolute
Apostasy from God the Father and Christ, but in outward profession still to
acknowledge them, and to be called Christians, etc. Med: Apost. p. 66, 67. Genesis
20. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
it self, to which an Act is directed: The Formal Object is the thing under
such a Form or Consideration: Now, though the romanists do err (as certainly
they do) in the real Object of worship, they profess they own and retain the
true formal reason of Worship, in that they designall to the honor of the true
God and Christ; and lay that down as a Reason of their worshipping that Object:
For, if that be true which Ruffinus and Mr. Mede affirm, as I conceive it is;
That those [Christians] who in Persecution fell away to Gentile Idolatry,
became not thereby wholly profane, unless, at the same time they denied
Christ; much more is it true that they who profess and intend (as they say)
ultimately the honor of Christ, in their outward Idolatry; are to be looked
upon as belonging Radically to Christ's Church: The sum therefore of our opinion
is this; That we really believe the Roman Church to be Idolatrous, but not to
cease thereby to be Christian, unless it declared against Christ. And we
believe that more refined sense of Idolatry to be damnable, in it self; but
whether by general deprecation of all Sins known and unknown, as also that they
(as they profess) do it with Abimelech, in the integrity of their heart and
with St. Paul, fighting against Christ, Ignorantly, they may not find mercy, is
hard to determine; but it is easy to determine them to be in the way of
damnation, who shall fall wilfully after better education and information into
those heinous practices: But if they should urge this argument so strongly to
me, that I must be forced to that which as yet I am not sensible or, viz.
either to deny the Roman Church to be a true Church, or to deny it to be
guilty of Idolatry; I should soon choose to deny the Church of Rome to be a
true Church of Christ, especially since the late corrupt decisions of what was
ambiguous before, and capable of a fair interpretation, for the worst; than Ego
hoc arbitror quod non pallut nomen Domini, nist ille qui visus est homini ejus
credere: and quomedo tollit membra Christi and facit membra meretricis, qui
prius Christo credit, sie ille poliuit nomen Domini qui prius nominis ejus
fidem susceperit. Hieron. in c. 43. Ezech.
deny that to be Idolatry which the principal of their Doctors have taught, and
the generality of the People do constantly practice. For, what does it avail
them to confront those foul and notorious dogmes alleged cut of their prime
Writers making for plain Idolatry, or the instances of gross practices, with
showing some tolerable sense quite antiquated, which such Facts, may be done
in? Whenas, first, they can give not so much reason why the moderate and
favorable construction made should be the sense of their Church, as may be
given why it is. Secondly, if it were not so, that some remained in that Church
to buoy up, in some manner, the sinking Faith, and stand up for the oppressed
truth, they could in no tolerable sense be called a Church at all: But by
reason of that small struggling for Life in that Church, they may be termed a
Church, out of Charity at least, if not verity. For Charity believes all
things.

CHAP. XV.
Of Idolatry in the Romish Church, in particular, viz. In worshipping Saints,
Angels, Relics, and especially the supposed blood of Christ. No good
foundation in Antiquity or the Scriptures for the said Worship.

FROM what has passed, may we with greater expedition conclude, what remains
of the Object of Worship, and the superstition, even to Idolatry, committed in
worshipping of Saints and Angels, not only in themselves, but Relics: For
certainly, Prayer to them, or invocation of them is a proper Act of adoration;
no man doubts it: And therefore, see in what degree men pray to them, they
worship them, as likewise what outward honor they give them, or their Remains,
or Images.

And for the Spirits of just men made perfect, as also their Relics, really
such, we allow due respect, proper for such Objects: But for the Images of
Saints we know none proper to them, as not at all belonging to them, no part of
them, bearing no relation to them, but as it shall please vain men to appoint
it: Yet though we hold no reverence at all is due to the Image of Saints or
Angels for their own sakes, or for the sakes of them they represent, yet also
hold we it unlawful to offer any indignity to them, unless constrained from the
abuses and superstitions used toward them; which when they arrive at that
height as to be made objects, mediate or immediate of religious worship, may
lawfully suffer the same fate with the brazen Serpent, in Hezechiah's days.

But first of Invocation of Saints, in any sense: How can we sufficiently
wonder at the uncertainty, yea contradiction of the greatest Patrons of it;
Whereof not only some affirm and some deny, but the same Persons sometimes
affirm, and sometimes deny any such thing to be required or mentioned in
Scripture. Pighius and Cope give their reason why Saints were not worshipped
under the Old Testament, to be; because they were not then partakers of the
beautiful Vision, as afterward: Bellar. de Batitud. Sanct. l. 1. c. 19.
And this reason gives Bellarmin likewise; yet for all that presums to alledg
the words of Jacob, Genesis 48. very ridiculously. First, because he confessed the
Old Testament afforded no Presidents or Precepts for it. Secondly, because
those words have quite another Sense than that he would draw them to: I shall
therefore cut off all that may be answered to the frivolous allegation of
Scripture, in that behalf; as, duly examined, making more suspected of error
than point, than confirming it: so very violent is the use of them: And enquire
rather first about the manner, and then the reason, and lastly the Authority or
Tradition for this, very briefly.

Of the three several distinct ways wherein we are said to pray unto Saints
one is not to pray to Saints, at all; but unto God: For, the first named by
learned men, which is to pray to God that upon intuition, or consideration of
Saints worth, or prayers, or intercession he would hear us, does not make
Saints at all the Object of our prayers; but the subject, or matter of them:
which whether convenient to be used or not, is besides our present question,
and belonging to another place; and therefore may well be passed over, and
rather granted to be lawful and useful than disputed: For certainly, he that
petitions a King to grant him any thing for such a Favorites sake, who is about
him, and is his friend, does not thereby petition such a Courtier himself: And
this may be proved out of the ancient offices of the Church. A second way is,
when we directly pray to them, but not Particularly; supposing they should
either particularly understand all that we do, or beg; but by a general
Petition desiring that they would pray for us. A Third way is, when we desire
of Saints and Angels such things as are proper only to God to give us: As if we
should pray unto them to forgive us our sins, to give us grace of mind, and
health of Body: But these two do not seem to be distinct kinds, but only
differing in extent and matter: For in the first, a man does make the matter of
his request, that they would promote that request which tends principally to
God; and ultimately. In the second, that they would procure to them the things
prayed for; which two differ in degrees, not kind of Invocation.

Again they are wont here also to distinguish of Civil worship and religious:
And of Religious worship again into Divine proper, and improper: As for the
former, I see no reason, how common soever it is, to grant any such thing to
Saints or Angels: seeing all the ground of civil reverence given from one to
another, as in profession of our service honor and obedience to our Parent,
Masters or Governors, wholly depends upon our civil, and visible communion
with them, and civil Acts passing from one to another; which communion or
relation is extinguished quite by their natural death and departure out of this
world; as appears in the most intimate of all relations between men in this
world, which is that of Man and Wife; which Nature, Reason, and the Scripture
teach us to be as free, as if they had never met together, or known one
another, after the decease of either. And surely all civil relations being
founded on flesh and blood, or Nature: the foundation taken away, must also
cease and come to nothing: Should a subject ask a Petition of his Sovereign
that were alive, but some hundred miles distant, or out of hearing, or of whose
capacity to hear his prayers he had no competent assurance, I cannot tell what
more to call it, but I am sure, it were very absurd and ridiculous: Now whether
the communion of Saints and Angels, which generally is no more than mystical,
and not at all civil, or natural with us, be such as does not wholly render
them unsensible of our Acts, though directed to them, here, I at present
determine not; but this I may say, that the bond of civil communion is quite
broke between us and them, and therefore are all Acts of that nature vain and
groundless: So that I may pray any Christian brother to pray for me here, while
we hold both civil and religious communion together, but thi^ being built upon
that, cease together with that; and becoms no longer of a mixed nature, partly
religious, and partly natural or civil, but purely Mystical, and not to be
exercised by such mixed acts as Invocation; or outward veneration; there being
no known intercourse or reciprocation civil, between us. Therefore of
necessity, whoever maintains worship to be given to Saints, must ascribe and
defend divine worship to them: and so in express terms we find them to do,
however they please to mollify and extenuate the matter before such, as they
find startled and impatient, at such plain derogation of Gods honor: But they
who openly profess to give Divine honor to Saints, thus state the matter, as
does Azorius; Hoeretiques Azor. Instit. Moral. l. 9. c. 10. Quinto, quaeritur,
etc.
(says he) no ways deny that Saints are to be honored with that worship and
honor which men eminent for virtue power, wisdom, nobility, and Authority may
be worshipped with: for such honor as this is altogether civil and human; but
they tax Catholics for worshipping them as God; that is, that they give
divine honor to them -- But greatly are they mistaken? For Catholics worship
them not as God, but for Gods sake worship and honor them; For as before Minime
cols pro Deo s^d propter Deum, etc.
we said, Catholics worship not the Image for God, but for Gods sake. -- So
in like manner we honor not Saints only with that honor wherewith we honor
virtuous, wise, and noble men, but with divine honor and worship which is an
Act of Religion -- But we give not divine honor to them for their own sakes,
but for Gods sake: Thus he. Against which we object sacriledg, and Idolatry,
thus loosly delivered: For as for the distinction, it serves their turn nothing
at all. It implies with us a contradiction: For to give Divine honor to any
Creature is Idolatrous, for what reason, or for whose sake, soever it be given.
Neither is it possible a man should give it to a Creature for Gods sake;
meaning, as I suppose they do, for the honor of God: For, divine worship being
proper to God, and incommunicable to any but him, can no more be given, for his
sake to the Creature, than supreme honor to a Villain; for the Kings sake: And
therefore as he goes on, to erect Temples and Altars and offer Sacrifices in
honor of Saints (which is to tell us more plainly what they mean by Divine
worship) and this (as they say) for Gods sake, is with us Idolatry; who deny
that any such things can be done really to Gods honor; and much more that God
would have them so honored; or himself by them.

And whereas a little before he says, It was the Heresy of Eustathius, as
Socrates writes in his History. l. 2. c. 33. That Saints were not to be
worshipped, but God alone, as being against the first Commandment; There is no
such thing to be found in that place; but this we find, which expresses the
dealing of the Romanists in this and other controversies, viz. how that Sccrat.
l. 2. c. (...).
Eudoxius, being in Julians days placed in the Episcopal Throne of
Constantinople, he uttered these words in public, God the Father is impious,
but God the Son is pious; at the hearing whereof the minds of all present being
much troubled, and beginning to mutiny, He added: Let not this saying trouble
you: For it is true, thus: God the Father is impious because he worshippeth
none; but God the Son is pious, because he worshippeth the Father. Which being
heard, the tumult was appeased, and instead of it, they all fell out into
laughter, and so was that saying ever after looked on, as ridiculous: In like
manner, when these new Divines come with great swelling language of divine
honor, to be given to the Creature, in their interpreting themselves, they must
be very heretical and profane, or very ridiculous: Or, rather it is both, to
say, We must give divine honor to Saints for Gods sake: yea an abomination, yet
greater, to make God the author of his own injury and degradation; as it were
to set up a competitor to a King against his will, or at least without his
will, for his sake.

But, suppose what may not be granted, that there is a favorable
interpretation and tolerable practice in the Church of Rome of these things; I
am sure this is not tolerable, that such sayings as these, and many more should
pass untouched, or uncersur'd by them, yea are kept, and nourished, and
preferred much by the most Visible authority of their Church, and the other
softer, inferior sense allowed and made use of chiefly to dispute with, and to
decline the force of a resolute accuser, and to satisfy green proselytes with,
who are not able to digest the stronger and ranker Divinity, they have for them
in store when it shall be too late to see the truth; and must have their mouths
stopped, and all objections and scruples answered with this: The Church cannot
err.

It is most apparent, that God, neither in Old nor New Testament, has given
any such warrant as Ahasuerus did to Haman to exalt Mordecai; or Pharaoh to
honor Joseph; for us to honor Saints in exhibiting any thing of divine worship
to them. I shall not need therefore trouble this place with their citations to
that purpose, which is not to the purpose, when it was there manifest to all,
that such honor was the honor not of a King, but a principal subject and
Minister of state. Neither do Scriptural reasons advance their cause: Whereof
some are so parabolical and forced, that they fall to nothing before they come
to us: as that of Mat. 24. 26. and that of Saint Peter; 2 Pet. 1. 14. 15. being
plainly intended of the records he would leave with them he wrote to, to bear
in memory what he delivered to them; as Cajetane has noted: And the Power
promised Rev. 2. 26. to them that overcome, is not (as they violently give out)
a power to dispense blessings, and therefore to be sought to by Invocation: but
a power to be victorious in the Faith against all persecutions: And those
reasons drawn from Apoc. 5. 8. and 6. 10. and 8. 3, 4. Are all besides the
vanity of the form of the argument it self, upon a false foundation and
supposition, viz. as if those things there related were acted in Heaven, and
not upon earth. True it is (as has been noted before) that the Vision of the
Apostle is employed to have been in Heaven concerning things there revealed to
him; but it was of things only to be fulfilled on earth. And though it is most
easy, fit, and obvious to interpret the Angel offering incense, as the servent
prayers of the holy Saints upon earth to God the Father; yet it is, I conceive,
more literal and agreeable to the intent of the Revelations made, to interpret
them partly as descriptions of things doing then in the Church, and partly as
prophesies of the future condition of the Church, in the public Service of
God; where, by the Angel we are to understand the Bishop, who in the first
days of the Church was wont in presence and behalf of the people to offer up
the common prayers of the People at the golden Altar, viz. The special place of
his ministration; which prayers and worship did, like incense, ascend unto the
holy Throne of God: And the fire which is said to be cast from the Censer and
Altar unto the earth, is nothing else but the servent prayers of the Saints
offered by their Minister to God; for his favor against them on the earth,
which so miserably persecuted and oppressed the Christians: upon which Gods
judgments fell on the earth, after the manner of voices and thunderings and
lightnings and earthquakes. But Eccius and Cope gives us a Reason why the
Apostles left no precept or directions to us in the new Testament to give the
worship, now pleaded for as due to Saints, viz. lest it might seem a piece of
arrogance in them to seek such honor: Well, be this reason true or false, it
matters not; it seems plainly by this, no such things is to be found in the New
Testament, and this suffices us against them.

Let us next briefly enquire, What prescription from Antiquity they have for
it. Where we find not one cited by them but Irenaeus; who, as the Latin edition
only extant has it, calls the blessed Virgin the Advocate of Eve; meaning no
more, as has been soundly replied by others, than the Greek word (...) may
import which is Comforter: so that as Eve, by her sin was an occasion of Man's
fall, the Virgin Mary by bearing Christ, restored that loss: Not meaning any
personal intercession: For, Dyonisius the Areopagite, we make no reckoning of
him: Athanasius is cited too but falsely in a spurious work: So that till the
year 250 we find no mention of Prayers to Saints; though men were wont to put
up their devotions before that time, at the Monuments of Saints and Martyrs;
and did pray for the deceased. Nazianzen, Basil and Chrysostom do now and then,
once or twice in their great and many treatises intimate such a thing but as an
extraordinary thing. And Ambrose, who knew little but what he transcribed from
them, and Origin and Hilary, took the hint from them, and first mentioned it in
the Latin Church: For, though Cyprian, and Cornelius, and Hilary be cited to
this purpose, They only affirm that Saints intercede for us, which indeed was
made a ground of our invocation of them afterward, but it was not to do it; and
they only desired God for their sakes, which is not to desire them. And it was
not until the Council of Nice 300 years and upward that the opinion of a
particular intercession of Saints for us prevailed in any measure: Nor till
many years after that, became it a common practice: And above 1200 years passed
since Christ, before it broke out into that excess, that now it is commended
unto us by the Church of Rome: And in very late days has found such stout and
direct opposition from the wiser and learneder men, that the common practice
has been taxed of flat Idolatry, witness Ludovicus Vives and Erasmus. These
things are we are sure of: First, God no where requires it: Secondly, We offend
not in omitting it: And, Thirdly, That God is notoriously dishonored by the
use of it amongst Christians: But Cassander does in very few words answer what
may be alleged out of Fathers writings or ancientest Liturgies, (for it was a
long time after private pens had uttered somewhat tending Omnes Sancti Deum
orate pro me, ac si dicatur Utinam omnes Sancti Deum cren^ pro me! Quim velim,
u^ omnes Sancti Dei orent pro me. etc. Cassand, Scholio in hymns Ecclesiast.
page 242.
that way, that any place could be granted such Forms in the Liturgy in the
Church) in behalf of invocation of Saints. When it is there said (says he) All
Saints O pray ye for me, it is no more than, O that all the Saints would pray
for me: How could I wish that all the Saints would pray for me. But now alas
no such benign interpretation will be accepted.

To the contrary, we are able to produce much more probable texts of Scripture,
than are yet found there for this worship; and more express sentences of the
Ancients against, than can be brought for it; but it were to exceed bounds to
bring them in here. Our reason likewise from Scripture they have not yet
answered, That God and Christ frequently invite us to come unto them, and no
where to use such intercessors: And, that it is against the sufficiency of our
own Mediator Christ: To which they answering, That Christ is the sole medi^tor
of Redemption, but not of Intercession, do show neither good Philosophy nor
Divinity: For Christ intercedes for us chiefly by the Redemption he has made
for us; when he satisfied our debt, and purchased Gods favor, by his Death and
Passion; and these are they that make intercession for us. Intercession, I
know, is of a larger extent, and implies Acts of application of that general
Redemption, which notwithstanding does not justify the distinction, being of
Subordinates.

I know there are found some learned Moderators on our side, who have attempted
to compound this matter, by changing Invocation, which seems peculiar to God in
all proper senses, into Advocation, and Compellation Guiliel. Forbes modestae
Consider.
of Saints; meaning by this latter, the same with that Civil Invocation,
advice, or exhortation before mentioned; and stating the question so, that then
it should be only a Calling to Saints rather then upon them; but the argument
of all civil Communion, and Communication either immediately by our selves or
mediately by others, being wholly dissolved and extinct, at their departure out
of this life, being yet for ought we know not answered; and all such
compellation being a civil and humanely sociable act, quite overthrows that
supposition and imagination: And this must needs offend against the Rule of the
Apostle. condemning such as intrude into things they have not seen, vainly
puffed up in their Col. 2. 19.
fleshly mind: For the assurance of the object of our prayers is essential unto
prayer, however the matter may be uncertain; as when prayer is made for the
dead, which was very ancient, we may innocently err in the matter for want of
Scriptural information and reason, but keeping still entirely to the Object,
God; our error must needs be on the right hand: But framing to our selves a
groundless, and uncertain Object, we must needs corrupt the holy duty of prayer
much more. If the Saints and Angels do know what are our thoughts, (as they
must, our voice conducing little or nothing to the making them capable of our
meanings at that distance of place and condition they are in) it is more than
we can possibly know; and so in a manner as much as if it were not at all, to
us: If they have such Charity as is pretended, greater much than is to be found
in holy men on earth, (which is most probable) yet that it is greater to us, or
to one man above another, as it was upon earth, I believe not: For all
Affections being founded (I do not say managed) upon carnal or fleshly nature,
cease with the body; and the Charity being clearly illuminated and directed
infallibly by their knowledge or vision, so as it was not here, cannot be
exercised but according to that Light, and that Rule given them, which is the
will of God; which perceiving so fully, and in which being so absolutely
satisfied, they cannot be said to pray that it might be done, so much as
admire, and continually adore the doing of it; without interposing, by way of
particular intercession as we out of ignorance do here on earth, for the
inclining or averting of God from any thing they see in him future, or rather
present. They have therefore indeed greater Charity as to the purity and
intenseness of it, which is Charity Triumphant, but not Militant, according to
which last only they are said to assist us by their prayers: And, yet this I
may add, That as the intercession of Saints in Heaven for us is no ways to be
allowed to be vocal or proper, as on earth, nor by any special act direct to
God on the behalf of their Friends and Fellow Members on earth, for the reason
now given; so may they not be denied all influence upon God in his dispensation
of grace and benefits to us on earth; as God does please to consider their
Labor of Love not only for themselves, but fellow members here below.

And whereas one of the best testimonies alleged to prove special offices of
Angels done before God in behalf of the Militant Members of Christ here, is
taken out of the Revelation, where S. John prays, or saluteth Rev. 4.
rather with a Pastoral and Apostolical benediction the seven Churches of Asia
saying, Grace be unto you and peace from him which is, and which was, and which
is to come, and from the seven spirits, which are before Tobit. 12. 15.
his Throne: It may sufficiently be answered, with that of Tobit c. 12, 15.
where mention is made of Seven Angels before the Throne, (were this authority
greater with us, than it is) That we doubt not but God does make use of the
Ministry of Angels to impart his blessings to men on Genesis 48. 16.
earth: For, this implys the benediction of Jacob, given to Joseph, The Angel
which redeemed me from all evil bless the Lads: but this infers not either that
Jacob did then, or we should now address our selves to Angels; but as he
certainly there, so ought we to seek of God only, that he would by his servants
the holy Angels, preserve and bless us. Nevertheless, I, according to my former
Rule interpret the seven spirits in the Revelation to be none other than the
seven Governors or Bishops of the seven Churches, of which St. John speaks
immediately before: whom in a Vision St. John saw to stand before the golden
Altar, or proper place of worship; and from thence blessing the people. But no
more of this.

Agreeable to this is the doctrine of making Images and Relics of Azorius ubi
s^p.
Saints objects of divine worship too, and that though not for their own sakes,
yet for Gods sake: to which I need say no more than is already spoken of so
worshipping Saints.

But for their sakes who can be content with less honor done unto Cassan.
Consult.
them, it may suffice to say in few words, what Cassander has observed before
me: It is certain that at the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel for a
good time, especially in Churches, there was no use of Images at all, as
Clemens and Arnobius witness: And this was above two hundred years after
Christ: Afterward Pictures were admitted into Churches with great simplicity
and innocence, yea benefit to the vulgar Christian, whose book Gregory not
unfitly called them, as expressing the historical part of Christian Faith, and
no more worshipped then, than Papists worship their Bibles now: And that Images
should be erected at all, or being constituted that they should be worshipped
at all, or brought into Temples, there was never any admirer or adorer of them
could pretend to show out of Scripture. But the second commandment against all
Images in order to worship or reverence, has proved such a bone, that it has
broke the teeth of all that would break it: Erasmus in his Catechism stateth
the cause thus: Before the coming of Christ, when the Israelites were very rude
and dull, all Imagery was prohibited them. for fear of Idolatry: But now since
all Paganism is extinguished by the Light of the Gospel, the danger is not the
same, and if any superstition should lurk still in the minds of Christians, it
may easily be driven thence by holy Doctrine. Until the age of St. Hierom were
certain men of sound Religion which would endure no Images at all in Churches,
either painted, or graven, or wrought, no not of Christ: I suppose, by reason
of the Anthropomorphites: yet by little and little (Where are they then that
with so much importunity and little reason call for the very time precisely
wherein corruptions entered into the Church; or else will not be satisfied?)
the use of Images entered into Churches: And perhaps there would be no
undecency, if in such places as God is served in solemnly no images should be
placed, saving the Image of Christ crucified: But Pictures if they were duly
used, besides the honest pleasure they bring, conduce very much to memory and
understanding of history -- Yea the learned many times see more in Pictures
than Letters; and are more vehemently affected: And as the Ancient Church
prohibited all books, not canonical, to be used in Churches, so perhaps were it
not amiss, if all kinds of Pictures of things not contained in Holy Scripture
were excluded. To this effect and almost in these very words he: To which we
must so far assent, as to yield a possible good effect of Information and
Devotion arising from such outward occasions as Pictures, yet considering, God
has no where laid any obligation upon us to profit by such helps, as he has
to advance our selves in knowledge and Christian virtues by consulting Holy
Scriptures, and how great and manifest peril of falling into Idolatry by them,
there is; it were more pious and safe to interdict the falling down before, as
well as to them: man being naturally as prone to Idolatry as to unlawful carnal
copulation.

But whereas Erasmus proceeds to defend Images, because God in the Old Law
commanded to make Cherubins and Seraphins about the Ark, Tertullian answers,
That so may we too when we have the like command: For though God ties us up
strictly to his Laws, he does not so tie himself, but when he pleases he may
give us a dispensation: But besides Vid. Phil. Judaeum Legate. ad Caium p. 801.
Genesis
this, such Images were altogether hid from the peoples eyes, and much more,
use; being in the Holiest of Holies: and we speak now of such as are exposed to
view and reverence: And as common as this instance is, amongst the great
Doctors of Rome, it makes little to their purpose. Again, Erasmus; That which
is before God [meaning that, Thou shall have no other God before me] is made
equal to God. There is no necessity of this, and yet may be unlawful by virtue
of that Precept: For (says he) nothing void of Reason is capable of adoration,
that is, Veneration external, nor worship that is, Internal Veneration: And
when he says, If a man kiss the Crucifix without superstition, he offends
not; but as the Case stands now a days, and as worship is described by
Romish Authors, and as they expound the definitions of their Councils upon this
subject, it cannot be done without superstition: And himself seems to be of my
mind in these words following, That Images should be in Churches, no human
order requires: And as it is easier, it is safer also to take away all Images
out of Churches, than to prevail that no excess should be committed, nor
superstition mingled therewith.

And how dull and damnable superstition is constantly committed, yea publicly
tolerated, yea, countenanced and encouraged in the use of Images, I could
easily and undeniably evidence, were it my business: For, however I am not
ignorant there is a warier and soberer sense given of the use of Images, yet
this is chiefly in the ears of such as will not be gained to them, but by
drawing the sense current of that Church with Azor. Insti^. Mor. l. 9. c. 6.
Thomas Sum. Par. 3. Quaest. 25. artic. 3.
a fairer face; but this we find in their writings, It is the common opinion of
Divines, Imagines in eodem honor, etc. That the Image is to be worshipped and
honored with the same worship and honor wherewith the thing it self is to be
worshipped: And he that says this should know the mind of that Church as well
as any other; and the rather because he has many of the same mind with
himself: Thomas the Great leading them.

But I had almost forgotten the mad, or merry conceit of Baronius to Baron.
Ann. 34.. 275.
draw Image worship from Gods own institution; He says, God appointed the use
of Images by Peter's shadow, whereby he cured sick persons. I marvel much
(seeing such great use might be made of it) that among so many rare and curious
Relics of Saints retrived, or secured perpetually by the Church of Rome, they
could never happen upon a limb of the shadow of St. Peter, whereby sick folk
were cured; to be shown for Images, and worshipped: For, until that, I shall
not trouble my self to answer Baronius his argument for them, and then I will
profess, I cannot.

Now for the ancient use of Images, it is certain, out of St. Austin quoting
Aug. Civit. Dei.
Varro to that purpose, that the Heathen Romans had no Images, which they
worshipped for the space of an hundred and seventy years; and that Varro's
opinion was, that the Gods were more purely worshipped before the use of Images
was introduced, then afterward: And it is evident that until Origens days
Christians made no religious use of Images: And Origin. cont. Celsum. l. 5. p.
255. and l. 7. p. 374. See Fox Act Mon. Vol. 3. p 464.
in Gregory the Great his days, who commended Images in some sense, they were
prohibited, and that by himself, as objects of worship, though not as helps;
which Bishop Latimer approved in this manner: Images of Saints are called
Saints, and so are not to be worshipped, taking worshipping of them for praying
to them: For they are neither Mediators, by way of Redemption nor yet of
Intercession. And yet they may be well used, when they may be applied to that
use they were first ordained for: to be Laymens books for remembrance of
heavenly things. About the year 700 unto the year 800 of Christ, many and
bitter contentions arose amongst the Grecians concerning the use of Images,
then receiving another construction than former ages approved of: Many turns
happened for, and against them; till at length, that ambitious and unnatural
Beast Irene, who put out her own son Constantines eyes for standing up for his
right upon which he died; and then to fortify her self, took in with the Popes
Faction of the West, and calling that numerous, but sacrilegious Synod, called
the second of Nice, concluded the point for ever after; and so grossly, That
Charles the Emperor in a Synod of the West-Bishops, when the Popes Legates were
also present, condemned their decisions about Images. Which has so galled the
greatest defenders of them, that it is a pitiful thing to see what shifts and
evasions directly false in themselves, and contradictory one to another, are
invented by them. The most current is, that the Synod of Francfort mistook the
meaning of them at Nice; and this surely, for no good end, is received by some
of the Reformation as Grotius who was the first, that was not of that Church,
who could flatter the Church of Rome so far as to accept that answer for good;
Another of our Church of no less knowledge in divinity has since him, I cannot
say from him, owned that excuse; but by their leaves upon very ill advice, and
no sufficient grounds at all, as I could make appear; but there needs nothing
more, though much more might be said, than the Incredibleness of the thing it
self, that so many of them should not be able to understand the meaning of that
Synod of Nice, which spoke plain enough, that they worshipped the Image, not
for its own matter and form, but for its sake which it represented: But neither
did this Synod decree so grossly, as is commonly taught and practiced by the
Church of Rome, which though diverse in it of late days do condemn for
Idolatrous in that point; some of late among us would have spared, for no other
reason than that, by all means, and as it should seem, in all senses, they must
be maintained a true Church, the latter of which is as stoutly denied as
affirmed; and more easily proved.

And that from another head, viz. Their opinion and use of Relics; Concerning
which, We (as Dr. Rainolds has observed) all agree that honor Rainold. de
Roman. Eccles Idolat. l. 1, c. 9.. 1.
is due unto the bodies of Saints, yea even the Calvinists; and this especially
in decent interrment of them: And upon certain and well grounded information of
any Relic of Saints or Martyrs Body sound, with all civil respect we commit
it to its proper place: or reserve it in much esteem: But what that esteem
ought to be, may be, and much is controverted: This the Church of Rome says
conformable to their doctrine of Images, that the supposed Parts of Saints are
no less to be worshipped then the Saints to whom they belong; and that any Part
of Christ's garment, and especially his Cross, is capable of divine worship; as
that which received, we know not what, divine virtue from thence: And lastly
that the blood of Christ shown in many places and believed to be such, is to be
adored with the same worship that Christ himself is. And here we may convict
them of flat Idolatry, out of their own confessions, supposing this to be
Idolatry which themselves grant to be so, viz. To worship that as God which is
not God: For first, this is most generally believed by the Church of Rome, that
they have many small Remains of the blood of Christ: Next it is generally
believed and required, that Divine worship is to be given unto that blood in
like manner as to Christ: Now that this reputed blood of Christ, is not really
the blood of Christ, not we only, but the learneder of themselves teach
directly, yea Thomas proves it Thomas Sum. 3. Qu. 54. 2. corp. and ad 3.
cannot possibly be, because all the blood that was shed from Christ's body must
of necessity be recollected; and so was miraculously restored to his body
again; otherwise Christ had not risen again in that integrity of his human
nature, that he suffered in: But it is manifest says Thomas, That flesh,
bones, and blood are pertaining to the human nature of Christ, and therefore
must all rise perfectly with him: Now, because the scruple is obvious to all,
Whence that reputed blood presented solemnly as the very blood of Christ,
should proceed, if not from Christ's body, from whence we hear it cannot come?
He answers thus; That blood which in some Churches is preserved in Relics [of
his] did not flow from Christ's side; but is affirmed to have flown miraculously
from a certain Image of Christ which was smitten. Thus he: And I could give an
account of diverse Images, which, according to their own writers, having been
so smitten by spiteful Jews, have bled in this manner: And is it not as plain
as can be, that this is not Christ's blood? And if it be not Christ's blood, is
it not also as evident that Idolatry is committed, when divine adoration is
given to it? I make no doubt but there are innumerable in the Church of Rome,
who have more Faith and knowledge than to throw themselves thus heedlesly into
such precipices of Superstition, as are to be found there: And therefore
Grotius his design of a Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, quite
overthrown as he imagines by holding it Idolatrous; was not well laid: For, he
that affirms that the Church of Rome is Animad. in Animad. Rivet. Artic. 21.
Idolatrous, does not say that all who hold communion with the Church of Rome
are Idolaters, as he supposes: Though they hold it unlawful, upon peril, if
not of personal guilt of Idolatry very hardly to be avoided there, of
Communicative Idolatry: which all true Christians ought to shun with greatest
care and resolution.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Fourth thing wherein the Worship of God consists, viz. Preaching. How
far it is necessary to the Service of God. What is true Preaching. Of the
Preaching of Christ, wherein it consists. Of Painful Preaching. That the
Ministry, according to the Church of England, is much more Painful than that
of Sectaries. The negligence of some in their Duty, contrary to the Rule and
Mind of the Church, not to be imputed to the Church; but to particular Persons
in Authority.

WE come now to speak of the Fifth General, wherein the exercise of Gods
worship consists, and that is Preaching, of which having so far already
treated as to make discovery of the great error of Sectaries about it; and the
sacrilegious abuse of the true and proper Worship of God, by Idolizing a
Sermon, and making the House of God, and all acts of Religion, void, in
comparison of it; we may be here briefer in what remains of that subject: For,
we find an opinion too prevalent amongst Christians which not only overthrows
the worship of God for Preachings sake; but which is more to be wondered at,
overthrows Preaching too, for the Sermons sake: For to that Superstition are
they arrived in their opinions of teaching and hearing; that if it be not
performed without book, if not out of the Pulpit, if not a text formally taken
out of the Bible, If this text be not reduced to Doctrine and Use: If there be
not a formal (I do not mean a Form of) Prayer before, and after it, with the
common sort, it scarce deserves the name of Preaching: And when all those
conditions concur, it is not only Preaching and a Sermon indeed, but the Word
of God without more ado; and accordingly to be reverenced and valued: And it
were to be wished that were all, and the Scriptures themselves not esteemed, or
not much listened to, in comparison of them. Thomas Cartwright the Great
Church-wright (as I may so call him) of Schismatiques, has expressly affirmed,
That the Scriptures avail little unless expounded, [by themselves surely] and
yet they also hold an opinion, which no man can reconcile to this, that the
Scriptures contain all things necessary to Salvation, and that plainly; but let
that go: And let us know how a Sermon in its formalities now mentioned, became
the Word of God; and in what sense, and in what age, and by what authority? It
is more than probable that Christ and his Apostles seldom used a Prayer before,
or after their Preaching. It is most apparent out of Justine Martyrs second
apology, and Tertullians Apologetique, that Preaching was used in their
public Assemblies; and that principally as subservient to Prayer and
Communicating, and not set to domineer over them, and be made the chief of Gods
worship: And so long as their Prayers were unprescribed, was Preaching
unstudied for, and extemporary chiefly; according to the manner insinuated in
the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said: After the reading of the Law and
Prophets the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them Acts. 13. 15.
( Paul and his company) saying, Ye men and Brethren, If ye have any word of
Exhortation for the People say on: And by St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
14. 29, 30.
saying; Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the rest judge: If any
thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his Peace.
These speeches were after the President of the Jewish Assembly had either
himself read, or caused the Law to be read, and never without leave first
obtained from him: Which custom was for some time imitated by Christians: When
the Bishop only first spoke to the people, and then by his leave some other
began an Exhortation to the People: But this bringing certain inconveniences
into Christian Assemblies, in tract of time quite ceased; and nothing was said
but by the Bishop himself; and that not every time, much less in every place
where Christians assembled to the Service of God; there being for a long time
after Christians were multiplied and spread far, not above one Sermon in a
Diocese; and that in the Principal City of that Country: whither people, that
had a mind to hear a Sermon or communicate, resorted for the good of their
souls, as men do now adays to Market, for the food of their bodies. Which
being there purchased, the faithful Christian carried it home to his Family,
and dispensed to it of the same: following herein the Counsel of St. Paul, that
1 Cor. 14. 35.
women should ask their husbands, and learn at home. And St. Chrysostom often
exhorts his hearers to consider of what they hear in public, at home, and
meditate of the Scriptures at home: which was either privately with every man's
self, or to such as could not have access to the Public.

And this public way of Preaching had for a long time no prescribed subject,
but what the Bishop thought proper or seasonable for instruction or
Exhortation, was uttered by him: But in Saint Bafils, Nazianzens, Chrysostoms,
and Augustines Sermons we find mention made of the Scriptures read before; and
Sermons made by way of Exposition of them; after the manner that Epistles and
Gospels are in use with us, and commended as proper subjects, to instruct
Christian People; the one giving us matter of Instruction from the history of
the Life, Doctrine, Miracles, and Death of our only Savior Christ; and the
other, principally moving us to the exercise of all Christians Graces and
Virtues, conformable to our calling and knowledge of God and Christ.

Far were our Christian Ancestors (and well they might) from the modern
persuasion of Erratick Christians, that the Sermon was more necessary than the
Scriptures; or that reading of the Scriptures was not Preaching, or that
Catechizing and instructing Novices in Christian Religion, was not Preaching. I
confess, I am of opinion, that there is a distinction to be made between a
Preaching and a Sermon; taking here a Sermon for an Oration made by
un-Christian, as well as Christian Orators, to inform and persuade to what they
aimed at, in such speeches. And no instance can be given of any Orator Gentile
or Christian for many hundred years, that presumed to speak to the People out
of his own writings rehearsed to them (Poets were wont in Public to recite
their verses in Public out of their book) by reading; and therefore could
never in my judgment comply with the very modern practice of it; there being no
reason why it should be more tolerated in Divine than Humane Orations; or why,
setting the custom of the place aside (which must needs be corrupt and absurd,
as it is singular and new) it is less ridiculous to rehearse a Divine Oration
which we call a Sermon, by reading, than Humane. I am sure the ancient Fathers
whom we pretend to imitate, and all modern Churches without exception of any,
but our own, abhor it: And are not at all sensible of the vulgar arguments
weight to justify it, viz. because the matter is the same, And what difference
is there between a Sermon delivered without reading, and with it; if the hearer
sees him not or looks not on him that Preaches. But it is very expedient the
Hearers eye should be attent, as well as his ear; and yet that is not all might
be said neither, but all I will here say.

But undoubtedly they erregregiously on the other hand, who imagine such
sermoning as we now speak of, is only Preaching, according to the mind of the
Apostle; and that which is the only proper means of Salvation: We are not saved
but by Faith, we cannot believe but by hearing, we cannot hear without a
Preacher; as the Apostle, most undeniably, concluding from thence the absolute
necessity of Preaching: But what Preaching? When I said Recitation of a Speech
concerning divine matters and our Salvation, was not properly a Sermon or
Oration, unless pronounced after the universal Law of all Orators: (which is to
denominate things aright) I said not that it was not Preaching; taking
preaching from the end of it, and not so much from the form. The end is
undoubtedly, knowledge, first, of the Christian Faith: The next end, is Assent
to that Doctrine of Faith: The third end is, Obedience to the Faith: The last
end is, the Salvation of such a true believer: Now all these may, without
doubt, be obtained without the Forms of Oratory; and by so many ways as we are
made capable of these great ends, so many ways are we preached to: And
therefore, reading to, and writing to another (as the Apostles did their their
Epistles to several Churches,) or any communication may be called the word of
God and Preaching, as really as the most Oratorical Sermon: Though still,
considering the nature of man, and the ordinary course of persuading, settled
all the world over, I cannot grant that such ways are so effectual or
operative upon the partakers of the same instructions.

By what is said, may be gathered what I propounded at first, viz. in what
sense Preaching and Hearing may be reduced to the Worshipping of God, and
become part of his Service: For, taking the service of God strictly and
properly, neither of both of them are such; but they are a necessary foundation
to build our worship of God on. They have of late days amongst Sectaries, been
called, The Means, in so high and signal sense, as if they need say no more,
and they comprehended all Religious acts eminently, which is nothing so. They
are indeed, The Means, and that of Faith, worship, and Salvation: But
worshipping of God in prayer, and praises, etc. and obeying his will, and
living godly and soberly in this present world, are much more effectual and
excellent Means of our Salvation than they. They are but Means to the more
excellent means of Salvation, as Faith, Hope, and Charity: and therefore must
know their place, and keep their distance, and Mr. Thorndyck Epilog. l. 3. c.
25.
their limits too: For, as an excellent person has at large showed, the vain
abuse of this preaching by Presbyterians: (which shall cause me to contract
here) Preaching is not so much as the Means of Salvation, unless it contains it
self within the limits of the doctrine of the Church: To the confirmation of
whose opinion I shall here give St. Austins Judgment, Nobis autem ad certam
regulam loqui fas est, ne verb^rum licentia etiam rebus quae his significantur
impiam gignat opinicnem. Aug. Civit. Dei l. 10. c. 23.
who would have not only limits set to the matter, but manner of preaching too,
by obliging to the phrase of the Church, saying: We Christians must speak by
certain Rule: lest by a License taken of wording it, a wicked opinion be begot
of the things themselves signified thereby. And concerning this we know St.
Paul has thus provided, in his directions to Timothy: Hold fast the Form of
sound words which thou have heard of me, in Faith and Love which is in Christ
Jesus: It was very well known to the ancient Church, that if Preachers kept not
themselves in the compass of sober words and phrases, to which faithful ears
had been accustomed, though their new Forms and phantastique phrases might
possibly admit of a fair construction, yet naturally they tended to the
dissetling of men's minds from the truth, and drawing them to novelty of
doctrine and worship. By which means, as also by affected postures, gestures,
pronunciation, and such like carrying with them an outward show of self denial
and preaching Christ in sincerity; Christ is no less deserved, Religion no less
endangered, and men no less preach themselves (as they say) than they who with
much ambition of honor, profit and applause debauch the noble and Majestic
Simplicity of the Gospel, and preaching of Christ, with the vain and
impertinent mixture of human learning and eloquence; the difference is only in
this, that the one has his end, the making of the Common people; the other,
the making of the Court, and they perhaps somewhat worse than these; from
whence they suck no small advantage. Much and high talk there has been of late
about Preaching of Christ: And scarce any body has been thought worthy to be
accounted such a Preacher, who has not first laid aside modesty, manners,
civility, prudence and gravity, and flown out into certain exotique tones,
actions, and barbarous demeanures unworthy of a man; which Christ, nor his
Apostles, nor Apostolical persons after them, never taught nor practiced
themselves; never required of them; but have been taken up to serve their own
turns, rather than Gods; and has been a direct preaching themselves as any
they could ever instance in, on the contrary side. There are two things surely
wherein generally consists the preaching of Christ: Sober and sincere manner
of composing a man's self to that Great work, and the matter he is to treat of;
according to which latter, Mr. Perkins well notes, four things to be
requisite, Fist, Generally Perkins on Gal. c. l. v. 15. 16.
to teach the doctrine of the Incarnation of Christ; and of his three Offices,
his Kingly Office, his Prophetical Office, and his Priesthood, with the
execution thereof. This, in good earnest, is so much Preaching of Christ, that
scarce any thing else is meant in Holy Scriptures, where it speaks so much of
Preaching of Christ; they aiming chiefly thereby at the manifestation of
Christ, as the true Messiah promised of Old; and then come into the world: What
is said above this, is, or may be true, but somewhat besides the Letter of the
Scripture. Secondly, to teach that Faith is an Instrument ordained of God to
apprehend and apply Christ with his benefits. Which is very true in the
signification of Faith common, in Scriptures, viz. as it is taken for that
Complex Evangelical Grace, comprehending all particular Christian virtues and
Graces springing from that Head; but not so, as Faith signifies now adays, a
single Grace contradistinct to others. Thirdly, To certify and reveal to every
hearer that it is the will of God to save him by Christ, in particular, so he
will receive Christ, -- 1 John. 1. 11. It were to be wished, this Author had
kept closer to this opinion here expressed. Fourthly, to certify and to reveal
to every particular hearer that he is to apply Christ with his benefits to
himself in particular, and that effectually, by his Faith. Grant we now that
this is to preach Christ; yet that this must be done in such unnatural and
uncouth manner both of Speech and Gestures as are no less than ridiculous, we
must not grant; this is for them who affect and use it, to preach themselves.
Again, this preaching of Christ, or hearing of Christ thus preached, is not
Worshipping of God, as it has been mistaken grossly to have been. The reading
of the word of God was ever looked upon as a necessary part of the service of
God, amongst Jews of Old, and Christians to this day: Believers thereby
declaring their Faith toward God, no small act of serving God: But the Sermons
of men since the Apostles, never till this superstitious age, were advanced to
that esteem or dignity: For, no man can, without derogation from the
Scriptures, call them, though sound and Scriptural, the word of God; but with
limitations. Well, says a learned and grave Preacher; However the whole Sermon
is Dr. Done Sermon. 33. on Whitsunday.
the ordinance of God, the whole Sermon is not the word of God; meaning that it
is the Precept of God, that Christian people should be taught, by those that
have the spiritual care and tuition of their Souls; but that, what is taught is
not worthy of the glorious title of the word of God, no though it be very
agreeable unto it. It may much more properly be said to be the will of God than
the word of God.

But what falls short in the nature, they hope to make up in the measure of
their Worship. And therefore frequentation of Sermons, and painful preaching
(as they call it) must, and does carry it from all other Pretensions to the
true Service of God; and those they traduce with the reproach of a lazy
Ministry, must without farther dispute yield to be reformed by them, and to
their modes too. And truly, Industry and painfulness are such undeniable
virtues in all Moral and Civil matters, that no man can object against; no man
but must commend: And in spiritual matters often arise to the nature of divine
Graces, which are rewardable with proportionable glory; when the Great Lord of
us all shall take an account of every servants improving his Talent, and to the
fruitful, say, Well done thou good and faithful Servant; Thou have been
faithful in a little, be thou ruler over much. But what is all this, and more
which may be added to the nature of the work it self, which God requires at our
hands, as our bounden service: as a man may do a good thing negligently, so he
may do an ill thing diligently, and industriously: We are now enquiring whether
Preaching be worshipping God, or God is served principally by it: If it be,
then no doubt but diligence therein is the more commendable: But if it be not,
as we have showed it is not, then our diligence were better placed elsewhere,
namely on that wherein consists more formally the worship of God, which is
prayer. But what if after all this cry of Laboriousness on their side rather
than on their Adversaries part, their Ministry is the lazy Ministry rather than
ours, as in truth it is? I compare not here Persons which would be infinite;
but Religions: and the manner of Ministration and worship constituted by the
Church of England, and that of any Sect whatever. Let them tell which Religion
requires most vigilance, attendance, and pains: That which prescribes every
Parish Priest to officiate three days in a week, and propounds daily
Ministration in the Public place of worship, or that which sets men free all
the week unless on the Lords day: That which prescribes so strictly visiting
the sick upon all occasion, or that which is maintained chiefly by their
Minister visiting the Well, and gutling from house to house amongst their
favorers and benefactors of their Faction: That which observes or commands the
observation of constant Fasts, or that which derides them, and accuses them
contrary to all Examples of former Churches, of Superstition: That Religion
which requires a punctual observation of that Liturgy, which they profess to be
grievous to them, not only because it is a Liturgy prescribed, but because it
is too long, and painful; or that which prays, what it pleases, and as long,
and short as it pleases; and with what lazy, crude matter it pleases, never
more troubling themselves or being sollicitous what or how they shall pray
extemporary, than he is, or needs be that reads all out of the book: And surely
it is less trouble thus to pray without book, than with it; to any man that
will give his mind to it, or will boldly enough offer at it. And for their
Sermons, what have they in them to commend them for elaborate, or the Speaker
of them, for laborious? Have they not fallen into admiration of one kind of
order, and method in preaching, and which with so much Superstition they cleave
to, as neither to care nor dare to vary; that half their Sermons are made
before they begin? For the Form they have constantly by them, and that shall
serve for all texts, and occasions whatever, and that brings the matter in
naturally almost; and so neither their invention, nor memory are so pained or
hard put to it, that they should need to boast much of their painful Preaching:
Surely then, it must be their preaching twice a day, that they have to trust
to, for being accounted deservedly painful Preachers: But if we consider how
they that preach twice, spread and beat out their metal, and so slip it into
two pieces, we shall perceive we have but two Six pences for a Shilling, which
may make more noise, and number, but weigh no more than one: And, in truth,
upon trial, considering likewise, what constant Repetitions and Introductions
they make to their second Sermon, it will be found that to pass to a new
subject on Afternoons, by Catechizing, and treating for half an hour on the
principal heads of Christian doctrine, and worship, as it is more profitable
and to the edification of the Generality, who are not puffed up in their
fleshly mind with the name of preaching, and the place from whence it comes,
the Pulpit, (which is their High Altar) so is it more difficult to the
Performer of it. Now these things being so that there is as much work cut out
by order of the Church for Ministers to finish, as ordinarily one man's strength
of Body and Spirit can go through with, not prejudicing the health of him,
(which God no ways requires) how spiteful and groundless is that charge, viz.
That we have a lazy Ministry which they promise to out do, when they are
uppermost? If these Rules and Prescriptions of the Church which will certainly
keep him from Idleness that observes them, more than their Discipline will, be
not practiced as becomes, themselves that accuse are in fault chiefly, who
have shamefully traduced and opposed the same, and to gratify whom, negligence
has been countenanced too far in these things; And so are they (whoever they
be) that can content themselves with the titles, dignitys, and profits of
Governors of the Church, and withdraw themselves from their bounden duty and
service to it, in seeing better execution done. I know their Apology is the
strong hand of the Adversary opposing their endeavors in that behalf, which
would have justified and vindicated them much more than now it does, if they
had not given evidence of their little sincerity and zeal for Religion in those
things, which were free and easy for them to do, and for which they might have
thanks on all sides: But Prudence forsooth, has been so infinitely cried up
and magnified, and that consisting chiefly in doing nothing, and offending no
body, but God Almighty, that Piety and zeal are no better then incivility and
Pragmatiqueness, the Rule most sacredly observed by them being this, We do not
do it, therefore it ought not, or need not be done. And thus while we are
doubting what Government we should have, and how we should be ruled, are we
made subject to the Triumvirate of Pride, Folly and Laziness, nothing being
done without their consent and approbation: But this belongs more properly to
the next place.

CHAP. XVII.
The Fifth General head wherein the Exercise of the Worship of God does
consist, Obedience. That Obedience is the end of the Law and Gospel both. That
the service of God principally consists therein. Of Obedience to God and the
Church. The Reasons and Necessity of Obedience to our Spiritual, as well as
Civil Governors. The frivolous cavills of Sectaries noted. The Severity of the
ancient and latter Greek Church in requiring Obedience. The Folly of Pretenders
to Obedience to the Church, and wilfully slight her Canons and Laws more
material, than are Ceremonies.

THE Third and last General head wherein consists the proper worship of God,
is Obedience. The distinction of (...) and (...) Aristot.
the Philosopher of Practice into Acts and Facts, holds very good in
Religion, as well as Nature, or Morality: For, besides the Contemplative part,
which imploies it self in the knowledge and consideration of the doctrine of
Faith, there must of necessity be a Practical, or Operative Part, which is the
end of the former; as is apparent out of holy Scriptures, as well as books of
Philosophers. For, we read in Deuteronomy, how that Obedience was the end of
the Deuteronomy. 4. 5.
Commandments given to the Israelites, Behold I have taught you Statutes and
judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the
Land whither ye go to possess it. Keep therefore and do them for this 6.
is your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of all Nations. And in the
beginning of the fifth Chapter propounding the Law and Commandments given them
by God, it follows, That thou might fear the Lord Chap. 6. 1, 2.
thy God and keep all his Statutes and Commandments, which I command thee,
Thou and thy Son and thy Sons Son, all the days of thy life, and that thy
days may be prolonged. Hear therefore O Israel and observe to do it, that it
may be well with thee. Which condition and injunction is constantly annexed
unto the Promises of Life and Salvation, in the Gospel: We read indeed
frequently of being justified by Faith, and saved by Faith, and in what sense
we have explained in its proper place, viz. as it implies the works and fruits
of Faith, together with the acts of believing; and no otherwise: which is
plainly affirmed by the Apostle to the Hebrews, speaking Heb. 5. 9.
of Christ our High Priest, who being made perfect he became the author of
Salvation to all them that obey him. Sometimes Obedience is in Scripture put
for believing it self, because Faith is a principal act of the will bowing, and
yielding to God assent; as in the Acts of the Apostles; We are his witnesses of
these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God Acts. 5. 32.
has given to them that obey him; That is, surely to them that did believe
that testimony given of Christ by the Apostles: and so St. Peter speaks, 1 Pet.
3. 1.
Likewise ye wives be in subjection unto your own Husbands, that if any obey
not the word (i. e. believe and receive it not, but continue in infidelity)
they also may be wun by, etc. So that it is one part of Obedience, to believe
the truth revealed, by receiving it with an humble and ready mind: But this is
no more than the root to the Tree, or the Tree to the Fruit, which is the end
and perfection of all. Therefore our Savior Christ Parabolically John 15. 1, 2.
or Metaphorically says in St. John: I am the true Vine, and my Father is the
Husbandman, Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he purges it, that it
may bring forth more fruit: By Faith every true believer is inserted into
Christ, and abides in his mystical body, as the branches do in the stock of the
Tree; and this is the Act and Effect of Faith; but every branch that thus
abides in Christ is to proceed to Facts, or Fruits of that Faith; and this is
meant by bearing more fruit; the first no ways John 6. 28, 29. (...) etc.
Chrysostom. Ser. 56. Tom. 5. (...) Clem. Alex. p. 380. Mar. 22. 36, 37, 38, 39.
sufficing. And Christ's disciples asked him, What shall we do that we may work
the work of God; he answered. This is the work of God, that ye believe in him
whom he has sent; That is, The proper and effectual means to work the work of
God, is to believe in him, whom he has sent. And, infinite other places in
holy writ are there, which describe and require this obedience at our hands, as
believers: For, as Chrysostom well has noted; It is no benefit at all to us to
be Orthodox, so long as our lives are corrupt; as there is no profit of an
exact Conversation, our Faith not being sound. And Clemens Alexandrinus defines
Piety, to be a Practice following and waiting on God.

Now there are two Principal Branches or Parts of a Religious and Holy life,
according to our Church Catechism, and consent of all good Christians. Our Duty
toward God, and our Duty toward our Neighbor: or as our Savior in the
Gospel expresses it, in reducing all the Commandments to two, Our Love of God,
and Our Love of our Neighbor: upon which hang all the Law and the Prophets:
Love being here put for such Acts of Love, as justice, service, honor, charity
and obedience according to the place and capacity we are in, as the Scripture
requires at our hands: And to attain to this, we are to have before our Eyes
the things wherein both do principally and more specially consist: And
secondly, the means leading and moving us hereunto; which, because they are
such copious subjects, that they require a proper treatise to enlarge upon, I
shall not handle here, any further than offering these few heads and grounds of
our holy and obedient walking with God first, and that as I find them without
any great Art set down by Suidas, who I suppose Suidas (...).
collected them, as his manner was in other things from the Holy Servants of
God before him: Apostolical Conversation (says he) consists in these Acts,
and has these signs: 1 Strictness over the Eyes; 2 Government of the tongue; 3
Subduing the body; 4 An humble opinion; 5 Purity of Mat. 5. 41.
Mind; 6 Exclusion of anger; 7 Being compelled, yield; 8 Being smitten, offer
thy self farther; 9 Being wronged, avenge not thy self; 10 Being hated, love;
11 Being persecuted, endure it; 12 Being reproached, pray for him; 13 Be dead
unto Sin; 14 Be crucified to Christ; 15 Place all thy love on the Lord.

Now the means to exercise these divine and Christian virtues, and to practice
them, may be these, amongst many other: 1. To have a constant and clear eye of
Faith in the presence of God, believing and being thoroughly assured that he
beholds, and observes, and notes, and weighs our thoughts, words, and actions:
as surely had Enoch who walked with God. 5. 24. And Abraham Genesis 17. 1. And
more especially holy David Psalm. 139. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. 2. A Recognition
and owning of the Power, Majesty, Justice and Mercy of God. 3. A free and total
Resignation and submission of our selves to the will of God. 4. Patience and
silence under the Providence of God. 5. Constant and servent Invocation of God,
as well for his helping, as healing and pardoning Grace. 6. A constant exerting
and exercising of Gods Grace given unto us, by the proper action of Faith,
Hope, and Charity: And these seven by having a constant regard to the commands
and precepts of God: To the Promises of God: To the Threatenings of God to all:
To the Judgments of God executed upon others for their wickedness and
disobedience: To the Mercies of God singularly and plentifully conferred upon
our selves: and lastly to the Torments of Hell and Joys of Heaven. These are
principally the things every good Christian is to attend, that would add to his
Faith virtue, as St. Peter advises; and devout walking with God to his sound
knowledge of him. 2 Pet. 1. 5.


And as Christ has taught us, The second Part of our Obedience to him, is like
unto it, consisting in Love of our Neighbor; Which divides it self into two
Parts, Doing him justice in all things: for as St. Paul says to the Romans:
Love works no ill to its Neighbor, therefore Love is the Romans 13. 10.
fulfilling of the Law. Secondly, doing him all brotherly and truly Christian
Offices, either in respect of body, soul, or estate, which Christian Faith
obliges us unto.

But of all Justice, that is principally to be attended to, which ungodly
hypocrites most contemn and violate, and that is of Obedience to our
Superiors: For, whereas Christian Religion obliges us to mutual offices Ephesians. 4
2. Ephesians. 4. 21. Romans 15. 1.
of Love and Charity one toward another, to forbear one another in love, with
all lowliness and meekness and long suffering: And again, to submit our selves
one to another, in the fear of God: And that the strong should bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves; certain Sectaries not
having the Knowledge of God aright, or understanding in the Scriptures (in which
they flatter themselves, they know more than any other) or the true fear of God
before their eyes, do so corrupt and pervert the sense of the Holy Ghost, as
indeed to destroy all that order of Government, Christ has established in his
Church as necessary to the being of the true Faith it self; though in some
Formal language they would seem to allow of it: But this is only kept by them,
as a reserve to relieve and fortify themselves, when the time shall happen,
that they shall get the Scepter of power into their hands, and the Face of
Authority to show to others: For then, all their petty assaults, by such
arguments as above said, are disowned and rejected, as inconsistent with all
Order in Christ's Church; and more severe exactions of obedience maintained than
they groaned under before: Then are these texts of force, which otherwise
signify nothing, or are eluded with a sigh, a wry look, sad complaint and a
profession that they would submit, but that their Consciences will not suffer
them; their consciences being so stated as never to accept of any Rule but
their own: Christ says; He that hears you hears me, and he that hears me
hears him that sent Heb. 13. 17.
me: And to the Hebrews: Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, etc.
And our Savior Christ in St. Matthew allows so much uncharitableness (if we
may so call it) and not, justice rather, to them that shall not hear the Church
(which is certainly to stand to the determinations of the Church) as to number
them among Publicans and Heathens: Mat. 18. 17.
And this obedience is much illustrated by that required in civil Matters in
the Scriptures; Children obey your Parents in the Lord, says St. Paul: And
honor your Father and Mother, says the Decalogue; which the Ephesians. 5. 1.
greatest opposers of obedience in practice, cannot choose, in their
expositions of that commandment, to extend to Civil and Ecclesiastical, as
well as Natural Parents: And St. Paul to the Colossians says farther, Children
obey your Parents in all things: And Servants obey your Masters in all things:
But the misery and mischief is, that what St. Paul in his sixth Chapter to the
Ephesians v. 1. used, and intended as an argument to induce Col. 3. 20, 21.
men to obedience, is with wonted boldness and violence perverted against
obedience. St. Paul says, Obey in the Lord, that is, for Gods sake, and
because God does more require this of Christians, as they have greater and
sounder knowledge of God, than have other men: For thus St. Peter's words
corresponding with St. Paul's advise, Submit your selves to 1 Pet. 2. 13.
every ordinance of man, for the Lordssake, that is, (as we have showed before)
Humane Creature, in authority by God: And the reason hereof is rendered
presently after: For so is the will of God: These obligations 15.
and enforcements of this duty of obedience are from this Restriction, they are
pleased to understand here, In the Lord, and for Gods sake, quite nulled and
baffled to nothing: For, every thing that comes into their mind contrarying the
degrees and commands of their Superiors, are presently made Canonical
Scripture, with them; and so an absolute dispensation from all obligatoriness
(as to their persons at least) of the Precepts of their Superiors. And whereas
we have heard the Law of God so general and express for honoring, and obeying
our Governors, that very rarely, and then only upon very weighty Causes and
Grounds, a good Christian fearing to displease God in one law of his, as well
as another, would scruple nothing more than disobedience: Now innumerable and
those most empty and frivolous exceptions are framed to our selves, for the
qualifying us for disobedience: For, what can be more monstrous and ridiculous
at the same time, than when we are pressed so hard with the innocence, at
least, of the thing lawfully required, which was ever looked upon as sufficient
ground of Obedience to lawful Powers; that we have no more to oppose; we
shelter our selves under this umbrage, My mind and conscience is set against
it, though it cannot be said, why, but only: So it is, therefore I cannot do
it: and therefore, you may look for subjection and obedience where you can get
it; which is just no where, and in nothing; if this be good reason or religion:
But there is much worse and unbeseeming a tolerable heathen behind; which out
of Principles of disorder, ruin, and confusion professes that no Obedience is
due to Ecclesiastical Superiors in such things as you cannot bring proofs of
Scripture, that God requires them: So that they will obey God (and who but
they?) with a vengeance; but man not at all: For, if you bring Scripture for
what you require, and they cannot pick a hole in it, nor evade it, (which were
very strange and unheard of in these days) then they will most freely submit,
and obey; but not you, notwithstanding, but God, who requires it: But if you
come only with the general Rules and Precepts of Obedience, and argue from the
Power, God has given those in authority, to order and dispose all things
extrinsecal to the Faith, for the more uniform and charitable walking with God
in doctrine and worship, then think they themselves absolved from any duty but
that of resisting such attempts upon them: And which was never in the heart of
any Heathen, Heretic, or Schismatique before late days, and much less in the
mouth, a Principle directly contrary to nature, as well as Grace is wickedly
taken up and impudently professed, That because a thing is commanded, and that
by their lawful Superiors, they must not do it; otherwise possibly they might,
and would; And now is the matter no longer a Mystery of iniquity, but such
Impudency as though the Devil be not ashamed to put these men upon such
unnatural, and un-Christian dogms, yet I question whether he would not blush to
profess so much himself openly; For surely to him, that has any fear of God,
or reverence to men, this is, and ought to be a firm and constant principle: To
obey all that are in authority over him, not usurping that Power, in all things
which are not expressly contrary to the word of God. And the questions wherein
these men's Religion and learning lie chiefly, are quite from the purpose, when
to withdraw obedience, they ask; Whether such a thing is necessary to Salvation
or not which is required? thinking they are free, if it be answered, No. For,
though the thing it self be not necessary to Salvation, the obedience may: And
disobedience may certainly damn those, whom, in such Cases, Obedience would not
certainly save: Again, we see no reason to lay aside that excellent and ancient
distinction of things necessary and profitable to Salvation; or if not
absolutely to Salvation, to Charity and Edification, mentioned by Ivo
Carnotensis; And even these are to be observed, and Vid. Ivonem Cannot. Praef.
ad Decret.
that for their own sake, and Churches sake requiring them, as well as the
others, though not in the same degree of obedience, or necessity.

It is received as part of the Greek Churches Canon Law, what Nicephorus (...)
Juris Graec. Romans l. 5. P. 344.
answered to the demand of Theodosius a Monk objecting, that men generally
could not endure so much as to hear of the Canonical Precepts of the Church:
This ill becomes your Virtue: For they who will not admit of such, are no ways
of the Party of Christians: And it was of old the opinion of Tertullian, They
who tran^gress the Rule of Discipline, cease to be reckoned among Christians:
And as Clemens Alexandrinus says, As it behooves a person of Equity to
falsify in nothing, and to go back from Qui excedunt d^ Recul^, disciplin^
d^sinunt h^ber^ Christiani. Tertul. Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. p. 753 and 764.
nothing that he has promised, although others should break Covenants; so it
becomes us to transgress the Ecclesiastical Canon in no manner: And to
convince any man of conscience, or fear of God, of this Balsamon's reasons, may
suffice demonstrating a greater reverence and respect to be due to the
Constitutions of the Church, than to the Laws of the State: For, (says he) the
Canons being explained and confirmed by Kings and Holy Fathers, are received as
the Scriptures: But the Laws [of the State) were received and established by
Kings alone; and therefore do not prevail against See Photius's Nomocanon. Tit.
1. c. 2. cum Palsamone p. 817, 818.
the Scriptures nor the Canons. And this I rather instance in from the Greek
than Latin Church, because the ignorant and loud clamors of Sectaries have had
nothing more to alledg against the Sacredness of Ecclesiastical Constitutions
than that which serves their turns in all things; Popishness of Canonical
Obedience: But may they judge what they please, according as design and interest
sway them, this we constantly and confidently affirm; that, whoever despises
the Rules of of Obedience and Laws of the Church, cannot rise higher in that
Part of Christian Religion which we call, Worship of God, than may mere Moral
men: Because that which chiefly distinguishes good Christians from good honest
Heathens next to the doctrine of Faith, is proportionable Obedience, as well to
those God has substituted under him to ordain things omitted in the
Scriptures, for the security of the Faith, regulating devotion, and worship,
and peace of the Church: none of which can long subsist without such a Power
acknowledged and obeyed in the Governors of the Church: And this ^pparently is
at the bottom of the deceitful pretenses of Christian Liberty, and Conscience
for disobedience of them who are designed thereby to ruin and overthrow; as
matter of fact has demonstrated.

But it is not only the Puritans intolerable dogms against obedience, but the
contrary practice of no small persons of place, and esteem in the Church, who
can heartily, and with zeal even to indignation, prosecute Sectaries
inconformity to the Discipline and Rites of the Church, glorying and boasting
that they are Sons of the Church, and yet do more mischief to the Church by
their ill governed persons, as to common honesty, sobriety and gravity, and
more advance, and bring into credit, and reputation, the enemies of the Church,
than all their fair and fallacious pretenses could otherwise possibly do. If
such persons, who have not attained to common Moral prudence, or Philosophy,
bear such kindness as they flourish with, to the Church, let them show it as
that lewd Fellow in the Athenian Senate was advised, who notwithstanding his
vicious life, had somewhat very beneficial to the Commonwealth to propound in
the Senate; and commend it by the mouth of another: For, what can be more
absurd and ridiculous than for any such person to profess esteem to that Church
which condemns him, more than any other Society? And whereas it supposes as a
foundation, natural justice, continence and temperance, and the like moral
virtues, to the divine Precepts and Institutions of Perfection: what may turn
the stomach, and raise laughter more at a man, then for such an one to discover
his offense at an unceremonious Puritan, the matter of whose Crime is nothing
comparable to his? If thou be a Christian (says a holy Father) either speak
as thou live, or live as thou speak: What evil spirit has set thee on
first to abuse thy self with scandalous practices, and then the Church by
taking Sanctuary in it? Can stupidity so far accompany vice, as first to break
the known and common Laws and Rules of good conversation, which is affront
enough to the Church, and then to add to that affront, by professing a special
duty to that, which thereby is destroyed? There is no Sect or Schism whose
Orders and Laws of Christian walking with God can be compared with those of the
Church of England, there being nothing amongst them, besides Faith, which an
Heathen may not do, that never heard of Christian Perfection, accounting
nothing needful to be done, nothing unlawful to them which is not punishable by
the Law of man, or against the light of nature: Christ (they say) has
purchased for them a liberty to do what they please, in eating, drinking
sleepping, and other matters, so that they wrong not their own bodies, nor
injure their Neighbors; And shall there be that protect themselves under this
Churches shelter, in such light, loose, foolish and vicious courses to the
degrading of it beneath her inferiors? Is this to be sons of the Church; and
not only so but to brag that such they are, in open hostility to it?

I confess notwithstanding all this, in comparing the enemies to the true Faith
together, we are to distinguish between the doers of evil simply, and the
teachers of men so to do: And that though drunkenness and uncleaness, be
greater sins by far, in their nature, than is dissent from a ceremony, or Rite
not necessary in its nature: Yet for any man with a spirit of opposition and
contention to take upon him to declare against such an unnecessary order, and
teach men against the unity and peace of the Church, otherwise than becomes
him, is no less criminal, in the consequence, before God; yea probably much
more than those other more scandalous before men, and will more endanger his
Soul.

But concerning such persons as are in profession really Sons, and perhaps
Fathers of the Church, and yet wilfully and studiously violate the Laws,
Constitutions, Rubricks, or Canons of it, no necessity compelling them, no
reason being to be alleged defending them, but what is taken from their ease,
which otherwise would be much interrupted; or their benefit and profit which
would be much hindered, I leave their own hearts and Consciences to condemn
them, until God himself does: which certainly without repentance, he will; and
that out of their own consciences and mouths; their consciences which witness,
that these are the true causes of their negligence and contempt of their Duty
in their proper stations; and their mouths and professions, in that they
pretend obedience, and are much offended at the disobedience of Puritans; as if
God and the Church would be sufficiently satisfied with their Anger against
them, while they themselves regard it no farther than is for their turn.

Two vulgar apologies I shall here take notice of, only: For as for that which
is also commonly said, that evil times hinder them from their duty, I shall say
no more but humbly advise them to deal sincerely with God and their own
consciences in such cases, and examine themselves, whether that be the only
cause: The first of these is Custom, which has made the Laws and Canons more
favorable: And what is this custom? A direct violation of the Laws of the
Church and Orders and Precepts of it; and then a bold reply to an objecter of
this to them: It is not kept, i. e. They do not keep themselves to such
prescriptions, therefore they ought not; and therefore it is as well as it is:
For custom, what is it they mean by it? If a Custom of an hundred years has
confirmed a Law, a Custom of one year, when it lets in the said Graces of
Idleness, ease, and profit, shall prescribe and prevail against it: If infinite
persons backed by Laws have done, or not done such things; and one or two
indulgers to themselves, have transgressed on the contrary, these are the
Presidents we choose for us; these we alledg for our defense, This is that we
call a Custom; and soon by the flattery and temptation of the foresaid virtues,
will the infection spread, and the party become so numerous, strong and bold,
as to condemn those who make doubt of being Customed by them; and to deride
them as Hyperbolical Conformists to the Canons and Laws of the Church: So that
without some stop and fence against this encroaching and daring mischief, all
things will be sum'd up briefly into these two things: First, that there be a
Custom to make Laws and Rules for the modelling of the Church, and regulating
the worship of God therein: And another far greater and more prevalent custom,
that none of them should be kept which agrees not with the conscience of the
Sectary, and the convenience of the Church Party themselves, as well Rulers as
obeyers.

Another Grand Salvo against observation of any Ecclesiastical Canons to our
temporal prejudice, is taken from Dispensations obtained to the contrary: And
then conscience may be as secure as might the Disciples, when Christ going
toward his Passion, said to them, Sleep on now, and Mat. 26. 45*
take your rest; and upon the same reasons too, Behold the Son of Man is
betrayed into the hands of Sinners: Much here might be said concerning the
nature, reasons, end, and effect of Dispensations; but this place cannot
contain it: Only thus much of the nature and use of Dispensations: That it
being not possible for the wit of Man to invent a Law which will not sometimes
bring mischief and inconvenience, contrary to the Definitur Dispensatio, quod
sit juris communis relaxatio cum causae cognitioone, in co qui potestatem habet
Dispensandi. Barb. de offic. and Pat. Epist. Al. 33. number. 3. Part. 2.
Institutor of it, it is necessary there should be a Power of judging, wherein
it is inconsistent with the true ends and intention of the Law, and Author of
it; and therefore Dispensation (says Barbosa) is defined to be a Relaxation of
the Law, with the knowledge of the Reason or Cause in him that has power to
dispense: From whence it follows, that unless the cause be so just and
reasonable, that it is probable that the author of the Law, or Canon himself
never intended they should bind in such cases; both the Dispenser and Dispensed
incurr the guilt of the violation of that law so dispensed with which causes
are so rare. That, perhaps in the very judgment of them, that find the benefit
of them, it were much better that particular inconveniences should befall some
men, then such a door be opened as is commonly to the ambition, Covetousness
and Laziness of men to baffle the rule it self, and make it ridiculous: And
therefore, Ib. number. 7. Est quid Odiosum -- Sine caus^ est Dissipatio.
in the Church of Rome it self, where Dispensations abound most of all, and
most notorious, yet the Canonists cannot choose but call them Odious, and a
Dissipation when just cause is wanting: And where Personal advantage sometimes
to the Dispenser or his Retinue, and most commonly to the Dispensed, is the
chief or only Ground of Dispensations, they can never be good, unless this
benefit relates chiefly to nature, as bodily health, and not Fortune: For it is
so grand and general a mistake of the effect of them, that it is to be feared
it is affected in many, to think that Dispensations ought to be ordained to
relieve from the penalties, and not the guilt of the Law: For, that is truly
and alone an effectual dispensation, which exempts us from the obligation to
perform it: and not that which only excuses from the Punishments we should
otherwise incur; And does declare and satisfy a man, that in not observing the
Letter of the Law, he does not go contrary to the intention of it; which in
such cases would not that it should be rigorously observed. Now if a man be
soundly satisfied in his conscience, first that the Law it self would, if it
could speak, acknowledge the reason to be good, of not keeping to the letter of
it, then a dispensation would stand him in good stead, in securing him from the
penalties belonging to the same: But if men look no farther than that which is
least considerable in Dispensations, and merely accidental, viz. the saving
themselves harmless, under the breach of it; they are notoriously deceived in
the virtue of them: For, no dispensation can avail any man, which does not make
the thing just and reasonable to be done, or not done: I shall give but one
instance of this error, and the Evil of procuring dispensations (whereas they
should rather be enjoined than sought for out of private ends) out of Nicholas
de Clemangis: But perhaps (says he) some will say, that it is dispensed
Nicholaus de Clemangis de Studio Theolog. aped Pacherium. To. 7. Sed forte
dicent, secum, etc.
with them by the Bishop his Superior, that he should reside with his Sheep:
Why did thou seek for that dispensation, will the Judge say? Why with
importunity did thou extort that liberty of not doing that which thou know
thou were bound to do? Wherefore did thou retain the name of that Office, if
thou would not officiate? To this end were thou made a Rector, that thou
might govern; therefore a Shepherd, that thou might feed: Were your
Studies such that my Sheep must perish for which I shed my blood? Why would
thou asume the place of a fit Pastor, and not discharge the work? Another would
have fed my flock, preserved it, attended it, lead it, and been resident with
it, and have gained to me out of it: Do thou think thou were made a
Shepherd for this, that thou might neglect my flock, and leave it in the
wilderness, and wander about through Towns, Citys, and Highways, with the
wanton and idle, while the wolves scatter my flock, etc. This and much more
that zealous Person, who now would be accounted discontented, and envious, and
troublesome: But here I end this; only with this reasonable request, that men
pretending to true Religion, and to be cordially addicted to the Good of the
Church, or Glory of God, would use more civility and common Ingenuity, if not
conscience toward both, then purposely, and industriously to involve and
cumber themselves with multiplicities of inconsisting Cares and Cures, and then
use it as sufficient excuse for their ill discharge of their Duty in all, or
most of them, That they have so many occasions, as that they cannot attend on
them all, as they confess they should; and say, they would: For, this is
plainly to mock God and the Church too: But experience proves this to be too
true, that they who are most engaged in multitude of imploiments or charges,
seldom perform so much service to all of them put together, as he that has but
one single Charge, does to it alone.

Chap. XVIII.
Of Obedience to the Church in Particular, in the Five Precepts of the Church
common to all, viz. 1. Observation of Festival Days. 2. Observation of the
Fasts of the Church: Of the Times, Manner, and Grounds of them. Exceptions
against them answered. 3. Of the Customs and Ceremonies of the Church. 4.
Frequentation of the Public Worship. 5. Frequent Communicating; and the due
preparation thereunto.

IT was well said by a Reverend Person of our Church, even where he argues
against the blind obedience of the Roman Church: Certainly Donnes
Pseudomartyrs, chap. 6. p. 180.
the inestimable benefits which we receive from the Church, who feeds us with
the Word and Sacraments, deserves from us an humble acknowledgment, and
obedient confidence in her, yea, it is spiritual treason not to obey her. And
though I dare not say with Catharinus against Cajetan, The In e^dem gradu
habenda sunt pracepta Ecclesiae, si bona sunt, quo and ipsius Dei, quoad hoc,
quod similiter ligant etc. Catharinus Annotatin Com. Cajet. lib. 2.
Precepts of the Church are to be received with the same degree [of honor] yet
I may say with as real reverence, as the Precepts of God, if they be good, thus
far that they both bind alike under pain of eternal damnation. So that there
could scarce any doctrine be devised more pestilent to the Church, or
pernicious to the souls of Men, then that which infuses into men's heads, to
obey the Church as little as they can possibly, without danger from the Civil
Magistrate, or express and particular violation of some text of Holy Writ;
always excepted, that more then Antichristian Dogme, That men should refuse to
do any thing enjoined by any lawful Authority, because it is commanded; least,
forsooth, their Christian liberties should be invaded. But Bernard was
certainly a much better Christian in this subject, then these men, to whom none
in their own opinions are to be compared; who tells us, Whatever of Obedience
is yielded unto them that are set over us, is given Bernard, de Virtute
Obedientiae.
unto him who says. He that hears you, hears me, etc. especially when the
things so enjoined tend so directly to the service of God, as does those
particularly commended unto our practice, by our Church; against which the
Adversaries arguments are taken from the general quarrel, they have against
such Governors, whom they would not have to rule at all, but come under them;
or from the things themselves, which, they give out, are against the Word of
God, because, against their Negative Superstitions. When we therefore propound
to them and all faithful servants of God, and true obedient and humble children
of the Church, the Five Precepts of the Church, we suppose them to whom they
are directed, to be free from the leven and infection of Schism and
Stubbornness; we suppose them to be bred and educated in the bosom of the
Church; and to have no other Fathers in Christ, than the Fathers of the Church.
For when they have made defection from that body, of which they are, or were
Members, either in heart and affections, or outward declaration against it;
then, no wonder, if a thousand malicious reasons be at hand to enervate the
commands upon them, and defy all Authority. But they who hold to their sound
profession, and have any honor for their spiritual Parents, as well as
natural, or respect (...) the Fifth Commandment, which themselves generally
interpret to extend to Religious, as well as Moral Obedience and Offices, whose
interest will not suffer them to observe it, cannot boggle at the reasonable
use of Power in requiring such things, nor at the Piety of the Precepts
themselves.

Now the Five Precepts of the Church are these, which have been with long
continuance as to time, and with great conscience, as to all good Christians,
observed, drawn out of our Liturgy by the Author of the Collection Church
Calendar.
of Private Devotions, or Hours of Prayers. First to observe the Festival or
Holidays appointed. Of the reas^nabless whereof we have before spoken. The
manner of keeping them, is by suspending all humane businesses, wherein Justice
and Mercy (which are to be preferred before Sacrifice) do not principally
consist, inconsistent with that due service of God, on that day celebrated. It
is plain, that before distinction of days set apart in special manner to the
praise of God, which we now call Holidayes, there was a daily public worship
solemnly used by the Church, and Christians held themselves bound to be present
at the same. For Origin upon Leviticus, affirms, That to Christians every day
was an Holiday and Festival. And to Chrysostom. To. 5. Serin. 88. p. 602, 603.
the same purpose St. Chrysostom, in whose age the special Memory of Saints
was frequent, says, that Every day is a Feast to a Christian. And out of
Austin and others, it is manifest that there was wont to have been a daily
communication by Christians of the Eucharist. But this so solemn and constant
attendance on Gods worship, ill agreeing with men's daily civil employments, it
was the wisdom and piety of the Church, to restrain the more solemn Service of
God to some special days, which was signalized with the memory of Christ, or
his eminent Servants and Saints. So that if Sectaries would but keep to the
grounds of Christianity, rather than natural Policy and Interest, they might
find the contrary to that Calumny against the Church, viz. That it restrains
men in their callings. For the Church has rather made a Relaxation and
Indulgence to men in order to their worldly affairs, than laid any new
restraints upon them, in that it has much lessened the number of Festivals, to
what they were twelve or thirteen hundred years ago, and much more in the later
days of the Roman Church. It is a gross and profane Error of modern
Sectaries, to imagine that there is no obligation upon Christian people, to
repair to the house of God every day, whether to public or private Devotion,
as we have said before: but much greater, to imagine that the obligation is not
yet stronger, when the Authority of the Church determines the time and place,
though there be no Sermon, there to offer their Prayers unto God, and be
instructed and edified out of the Word of God.

But I hold it best (considering the many prejudices and superstitious surmises
that are bred in the minds of too many simple Christians, concerning the use of
Gods house and the worship therein) to propound, what might more accurately be
spoken of that subject from the opinion of Chrysostom, that devout and
judicious Father, in an Homily against such as absented themselves too much
from the House of God, in these words, so near as I could translate them. He
that loves, does not only desire to see his friend Chry^ostom (...) etc. Page 1.
2, 103. Tom. 8.
whom he loves, but the very house only, and the gate: yea, not only the gate
of the house, but the very holes and passages thereunto. And if he sees but the
garment or pantofle of his beloved, he imagines himself to be present. Such
were the Prophets, because they saw not God who is incorporeal, they beheld his
House, and by his House imagined they had him present. I should choose to be
prostrate [(...)] in the House of God, rather then to dwell in the Tents of
sinners. Every place, Every Room Psalm. 84.
compared with the House of God, is the Tent of sinners; though it be a Court
of Justice, though it be a Council-house, though any man's private House: For
though there should be Prayers, though Supplications there, yet must there
necessarily be strifes, and contentions, and evil language, and debates about
secular cares. But this House is clear from all these. Wherefore, they are the
Tents of wicked men; but this the House of God. And as the shore, free from
winds and waves, affords great safety to the Barks which put into them: In like
manner the House of God, drawing such as enter into it from the stroms of
outward businesses, causes them to abide in great calmness and security, and
to hear the Oracles of God. This place is the Foundation of Virtue, the
School-house of Philosophy [or wisdome] and that not only at the time of
assembling, when the Word of God is heard, and spiritual Doctrine, and the
Reverend Fathers are assembled; but likewise at every other time. Enter into
the Porch only, and suddenly, as it were, a spiritual Brees incloses thy soul.
And this quietness leads thee to trembling, and teaches thee to be wise: It
elevates the mind, and suffers thee not to mind these present things: It
transports thee from Earth to Heaven. And if so, great benefit does a^crue unto
thee being there, when there is not any Congregation, what great profit must
they needs reap who are then present, and what great damage must they suffer
who are absent, when the Prophets on all sides sound forth, when the Apostles
are preached, when Christ stands in the midst, when the Father disposes matters
there done; when the Holy Spirit affords its own joys. Would ye know where
such persons spend their time, who despise the Congregation, what witholds
them, and what withdraws them from this sacred Table, and of what is there
discoursed: Or rather I know clearly: For rather they prate of absurd and
ridicuious matters, or are fixed on worldly cares. But both these exercises
fail of pardon, and have extreme punishment. And for the former, there is no
need so much as of a word or demonstration. Yea, that they who pretend the
affairs of their house, and allege the unsupportable necessity from thence,
can by no means obtain pardon, being called once aweek, and even not then
enduring the preferring of Spiritual before Earthly things, is apparent from
the Gospels. For they who were called to the spiritual Marriage, made such
excuses as these: One, that he had bought a yoke of Oxen; one, that he had
purchased a field; another, that he had married a bride: but they were all
alike punished. They may be necessary causes, but when God calls, they are no
Apology: For after God, all things are necessary: After his honor, let all
other things be regarded. For what servant, I pray tell, attends the affairs of
his own house before he has finished his Lords service, etc. And in another
place he as plainly and zealously contendeth for the Time, as here he does for
the Place of Gods worship; directly refuting the vain imaginations of them in
his days, who contented themselves in appearing in Gods Chrysostom. Proaem. in 6.
Orat. in Annam. Tom. 5. p. 78. and To. 8. p. 8.
House on Festival days only (I would we had not them that had learnt worse
Doctrine then this.) Such (says he) are to be persuaded to communicate
according to every Festival assembly. For though (says he) Whitsuntide is
passed, yet the Feast is not over: For every coming together is a Feast. Whence
does this appear? From the very words of Christ himself, Matthew. 18. 20.
whereby he says, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I am
there in the midst of them. But when Christ is in the midst of them assembled,
what other proof of a Feast would ye have greater than this? Where there is
teaching and praying, where are the Benedictions of the Fathers, the hearing of
Laws, where the assembling of Brethren is, and the bond of sincere Charity,
where there is conversing with God, and God discourses with men, why should we
not call that a Feast and Solemn meeting? etc. Thus he. And are not all these
to be had many days, even when there is no Sermon? And have not men been of
late taught to despise, and profanely deride such incomparable daily blessings
as these, and the benefits flowing from them; the more is the shame, and the
more is the pity. God of his great mercy and grace teach us better, and better
settle us and incline us: delivering us from that profane imposture, which
has of late been wrought into the minds of Christians most unchristianly, that
it is needless, nay perhaps worse, superstitious, in public or private manner
to visit Gods House by Prayers and Praises offered there to him, but when a
Sermon is at hand.

A second Precept of the Church is to all conscientious Christians, and
obedient Children of God and the Church, To observe the Fasts of Directions
after the Calendar and Rubric after the Nicene Creed.
the Church: which Fasts the Church makes fourfold: The Forty Days of Lent:
Ember Days at the four Seasons, being the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday after
the first Sunday in Lent; after the Feast of Pentecost; after September the
Fourteenth; and after December the Thirteenth: The Three Rogation days, being
the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday before Holy Thursday, or the Ascension of
our Lord. In all which we must note and suppose that Fasting it self in general
is the Ordinance of God himself, and not of the Church: this duty in a manner
contrary unto that of rejoicing unto God and Feasting, standing upon the same
Grounds that Festivals and Days of Thanksgiving to God, do. For first, it seems
to be so far natural to man as Religion it self is; All people, that worship a
God, having generally their vicissitudes of Feasting and Fasting, according to
occasions justly offered, or the prudence of the first Founders and
Administratours of that Religion. Again, By the Precepts and Precedents
contained in the Scriptures, is Fasting required so that no instances are
needful to confirm the same. And the true reason why the Precepts positive in
the Old Testament are but few, is because it was agreeable to the Law of
Nature, that it was not so needful to add multitude of positive Injunctions to
confirm the same. The most express, if not only Law given concerning this in
the Scriptures, is that of Leviticus the 16th, verse. 29. where God ordains that
on the Seventh Month they should afflict their souls for ever, by a perpetual
statute; but in what manner is not expressed, whether by abstaining from all
meat, or their ordinary diet, is not mentioned, but the Tradition and Custom of
the Jewish Church interpret it to be total Abstinence, until the Evening; that
is, the Sun going down. And the reason why no express Precept is given in the
Gospel to Fast, where many Directions and Rules are given to Fast is, because,
To Fast was a settled practice of old in the Church of God, and needed nothing
more then the accommodation thereof to the future state of the Gospel, which
was done partly by the said Advices and Instructions how to Fast, and partly by
the power and prudence of the Governors of the Church, extending to such ends.

But they say against this, That Fasting must be voluntary, and not of
constraint and necessity, and therefore must not Authority impose such duties
upon Christians, but they must take them up freely, or omit them, according to
their Christian Liberty. But this miserable and contentious exception they are
forced to recall again, though they would not be seen in it, to save themselves;
who being in Power, however acquired, propose and impose both Fasts and Feasts
at their pleasures: so that they plainly mean, That such Fasts are only to be
enjoined by themselves, who cannot (as all others commanding contrary to them)
possibly injure Christians in their Liberty: For so says Thomas Cartwright,
mocking St. Paul, We cannot do any thing against the truth, but for the truth.
But farther, we say, Not only all Fastings, but Prayer and Hearing of the Word
of God, yea all Moral Virtues, as Justice and Temperance, ought to be freely
taken up of every good Christian: but does it therefore follow, they may not be
enjoined? Or lastly, does it follow, that what is commanded and conditionally
necessary, may not be freely chosen, if not according to the utmost extent of
liberty of will according to Philosophy, yet according to the Divine and
Scriptural sense, in which whatsoever is done readily, cheerfully, and
willingly in the Service of God, is accepted of God, who loves a cheerful
giver, as the 2 Cor. 9. 7.
Scripture affirms, not taking notice whether there be any incumbent necessity
or not, upon the person. And may not, what St. Peter advises and exhorts the
Elders and Governors of the Church to, viz. To feed the Flock of Christ among
them, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, but willingly, concern
the governed equally? May not there be a 1 Pet. 5. 2.
constraint upon these, as well as on them in their Ranks, consisting with a
laudable willingness? Nay more than so, and quite contrary to the Divinity of
factious Pastors and Flocks, should the laudableness of the thing it self,
fortified and enforced with the Commands of Superiors, make men that have any
just pretenses to Christianity, more willing and cheerful in the performance of
those duties? This was ever wont to be so, until pestilent tongues had
corrupted the minds and hearts of simpler Christians to make them suspect,
hate, and oppose whatever their Governors ordained, and then to argue, They
can by no mean do so, because they do not like it, and this dislikes their
Consciences. St. Paul says, Do all things without murmuring or disputings:
these modern Doctors say, Phil. 2. 14.
Do nothing without murmurings and disputings. Let therefore this be one motive
and qualification to Fasting, that it be done willingly, and the rather because
it is required.

A second reason is to excite to humiliation, and to quicken our Devotions in
Prayers and Repentance, while we judge our selves unworthy of Gods common
benefits otherwise appointed. But not to excurr here on this subject, as I
might: Let it suffice to relate here both the Description and Grounds of
Fasting, as we find them in our Churches Homilies. Homilies Church of England,
2. Part. p. 85. and 78.
Fasting is a witholding of meat and drink and all natural food from the body,
for the determinate time of Fasting. Again, There are three ends of Fasting: 1.
Chastizing the Flesh. 2. Fervencie of Spirit. 3. Sign of Humiliation.

But idle and ignorant persons give the same definition to Fasting as they do
to Repentance. For to abstain from sin, is both Fasting and Repentance: not
considering, as we have before showed, how that things, when the end and effect
of them is highly commended and magnified, are vulgarly described by them, yet
remain in nature altogether distinct: as in that remarkable place of Syracides,
He that keeps the Law brings Eccles. 35, 1, 2
offerings enough: he that takes heed to the commandment, offers a
Peace Offering. He that requiteth a good turn, offers fine flour: and he that
gives alms, sacrifices praise. Were not he (think we) an excellent
Interpreter that should take these expressions in the strictest sense they are
delivered? And is not he the very same that shall define either Repentance or
Fasting by abstinence from sin, in a proper sense, as all definition, Hom. 84.
To. 5. and Tom. 1. Hom. 8.
ought to be framed in? St. Chrysostom, who in a certain Sermon speaks as much
as any, in behalf of abstinence from sin, as a Fast truly acceptable to God,
was never so mad or silly as to exclude thereupon outward and bodily Fasting:
but in very many Sermons of his upon Genesis (which were delivered in the time
of Lent, as were St. Basils also upon the Six days work of God) nothing occurs
more frequently then that literal and outward Fasting commended to his hearers.
Infinite might be the citations to prove the Judgment of the holy Fathers and
Martyrs, and Monks in this particular: but it is confessed by dissenters, who
know any thing above the Divinity of Ursin and Calvin, and such like unhappy
masters of Errors in this point.

And what are the other principal reasons against such Fastings as our Church,
by virtue of Canonical obedience, injoyns? Why, A superstitious discrimination
of Meats, as if some were cleaner than other, under the Gospel. This they would
needs bring it to, because they can do nothing without this, which is just
nothing. For they say, out of the Decalogue, Six days shall thou labor and do
all that thou have to do, Therefore 1 Timothy 4. 3.
must thou not keep any Holy Day to Gods Service but Sunday: So say they, God
has created all Meats to be received with Thanksgiving, Therefore you must not
abstain from them. Indeed, one place excellently well interprets the other: For
just as God has said Six days shall thou work; so has he said, All Meats
shall be eaten under the Gospel. And as it would be unlawful under that
supposed command, to rest on any of the Six days from labor, so is it unlawful
under the Gospel to fast or abstain from meat any one day. How can, or dare any
man, if such arguing as this will hold good, cease any one day from eating and
drinking, if it be a command that we must eat and drink all meats now, not
hurtful to our bodies, and that without any exception or limitation of time? Do
not they much more offend against Christian liberty and Gods command, who will
not eat at all, those creatures that God has commanded or sanctified to our
use, by his Word, than they who eat some sort of Gods good creatures, but omit
others? But undoubtedly God never intended to enact a formal Law, or give a
Precept that the one or other should be done, but to grant a liberty and
indulgence so to do: Now no Indulgences are Commands, nor being not accepted
generally, offend the Donor. God in the Decalogue had chosen one day to
himself; and for the six remaining, left them free to do that which he forbad
to do on the Seventh: And this is all that is meant by Thou shall labor six
days: God under the Gospel, has taken of the distinction of meats clean and
unclean legally; and freely pronounces us at liberty to eat what of them we
please: for none of them can hurt or defile us naturally, as the Manichaeans
held; nor any Legally as the Jews held: But they may Evangelically and Morally
I hope, when we commit gluttony with them: may they not? Yes, excess they
except; but their Argument excepts not excess, taken from the natures of
things: For ten pounds of meat, and many quarts of wine, are as clean as an
ounce, or a pint, and God has made all alike. And so fish is as clean, and as
much Gods creature as flesh, and flesh as fish. Have they heard of any so
blockish as to deny it of late days? But what says St. Paul, They are evil to
that man who eats with offense. Offense of whom? Romans 14. 2^.
Of a man's own self? no surely; but offense of others. And to eat against
lawful commands, fish or flesh, is an offense to Superiors: and that is much
more an offense, than to offend ones equal, ones brother, or inferior; as it
would be for a man to strike his Master or Father, than his Brother or Fellow
servants. Whence then, I wonder to astonishment, should it proceed to
credibility, that the Conscience of an obscure and inferior Christian (no
doubt but an extraordinary person in his own eyes and opinion) should
preponderate the outward Laws, and inward Consciences of his Governors,
according to which, restrictions were devised and concluded? Against such
Egyptian Pursuers of the Israel of God, the Church, a cloud of Witnesses may
be opposed: but they who dare consult ancient Presidents, know it too well to
put it to that issue: That of the resolute and conceited man in the Commedian,
sitting their purpose much better, Ego mihi video, Ego mihi sapio, Ego mihi
credo plurimum: Plautus.
I see for my self, I am wise for my self, I believe my self exceedingly. And
therefore to final purpose is it to use allegations here, which for the
Observation of the Lenton Fast has been so amply and exactly handled by a late
Right Reverend and Learned Hand. And for the Vigils, Septuagesima, Sexagesima,
Ember and Rogation weeks, sufficient Authority and Reason are produced before
their distinct Offices in the abovementioned Collection of Private Devotions,
of old composed, and by Authority instituted to the benefit of such as pretend
to be of the Reformation established: But those that are taught solemnly to
quarrel at the whole, no wonder they oppose it in such parts of it. But yet
something to their fears of superstition in distinction of Meats, besides what
is already said. What if they be mistaken, and the Church distinguishes not
fish from flesh? Undoubtedly at the first Institution of Fasts, Christians were
equally interdicted both: and this custom is to this day retained in the Greek
Church: Our Christian Ancients not distinguishing between the flesh of fishes,
and the flesh of beasts properly so called, living on the earth: Imitating in
their Fasts the perpetual Abstinence of the Fathers before the Flood, eating
neither one nor other, but contenting themselves with the fruits of the earth,
and of trees: flesh and wine being brought into the World together by Noah, for
the use of man. For as Clemens Alexandrinus has observed, (...) Clem. Alex.
Strom. 7. p. 717. Origin. in Genesis 1. v. 29. Hieronym. in Jovin. lib. 1.
Munsterus in Genesis 3. 17.
Man before the Flood was an eater of Grain, rather than of Flesh. And Origin
after him upon Genesis, says, This History plainly declares that God at first
only permitted herbs and the fruits of Trees for man's food: But afterward
license was granted to Noah to eat flesh. And St. Hierome, about the beginning
of his Treatise against Jovinian, says the same; and of late, Munster and
others: which to cite here, were needless.

The Western Church, for ought can be perceived, at first abstained equally
from fish and flesh. And therefore St. Hierome, where he states the case of the
Church making choice of Meats, and shows the difference between the judgment of
it and Heretics; (such as were Marcion and Tatianus, of whom he understands
the Apostle to speak in his Second Epistie to Timothy) adds, Nec hoc dicimus,
quod negamus Pisces, and caetera, si 2 Timothy 4. Hieron. in Jovin. lib. 2. cap.
1^.
voluntas suerit, in cibo esse sumenda: whereby it may seem, as if no less
scruple had been made about the eating fish then of flesh. But it is evident
that about that time, some distinction in Use, not in Nature of Meats, was made
by the Church; nothing scarce more frequently occurring in the decrees of
Councils and Fathers writings, than the defense of the Church her practice in
discriminating Meats, and yet condemning and anathematizing such Heretics, as
absta^ned from any Meats proper for man's use out of opinion of uncleanness,
that should be naturally in some more than others. But the Western Church,
through favor and indulgence, has for many Ages permitted the use of fish to
all obedient Sons; as also of wine, at such times as her Fasts are observed. It
is therefore a great mistake in her Enemies and Accusers, to judge her of
rigor in limiting Christians to such sort of Meats, as are now allowed. For it
was rather her act of Grace and Lenity to remit the one half of that ancient
Severity commonly submitted unto in the earlier days of Christian Religion. And
who but ignorant and ill natured and nurtured children, could turn her Lenity
into Tyranny, and make her courtesy a matter of calumny? Nay, (which has more
disingenuity and absurdity) while they fret and complain grievously that the
Yoke, as it is, lies too heavy upon them, and presses them too hard, to invert
their spite and malice against it, by arguing from the lightness and
contemptibleness of such Fastings, as consists only in abstinence from flesh:
saying, It is no Fast which abstains not absolutely from all Meat. This were
indeed somewhat to the purpose, if so be that the Church did at the same time
command any man to eat fish, or so much as herbs or bread, when she forbids
flesh to be eaten: Or that they, who were able and did wholly abstain from
Meats at such seasons, did not more fulfill the intention of the Church, then
they who took the liberty left them of eating in some manner. What temper and
spirit do these men discover to themselves to be of, who are always in
readiness to charge their Superiors, either with folly, or tyranny, or
impiety, upon the same occasion, and never been able to prove any one them?
Scotus and Biel Scotus, lib. 4. Distinct. 8. Biel Lect. 8. in Canon Missae.
after him, distinguish of a Fast of Nature, which is a total abstinence from
all eating and drinking, and of a Fast of the Church, when a man eats but once
a day, and that according to the precept and mind of the Church. Now if the
Church has invented a favorable distinction and sense to gratify murmurers
at the rigor of her Laws, do they not requite her ingenuously, who turn that
also to her reproach? Nay, if another distinction be found, which makes a Fast
a Toto, a Tanto, and a Tali, from the Whole, from the Quantity, and from the
Quality of the Meats eaten, hereby willing to condescend and bring down her
Rules so low, that all men may have somewhat to exercise themselves in
according to their ability, in the graces of Abstinence and Obedience; who but
such, whose Religion impels them to be the worse for good usage, and resolve to
hear of nothing but their own inventions, would clamor against their
Governors for such moderation?

But when they are disappointed in their arguments and expectations to reduce
all men and things to their own model, their last Effort is to humble this kind
of Fasting into a civil Constitution only, and for a civil End, according as an
Act of Parliament misconstrued (as has more plainly and fully been declared by
others) has misled them: conceiving that the Fastings of our Church tend only
to the increase of Navigation, or are intended for the good of beasts, not of
men. But what hinders that the Church may have one end in her decrees, and the
Commonwealth another? and that which the Church designed for the exercise of
Christian virtues, may be embraced by Secular Politicians, to promote Secular
benefits to the Public? Nothing is so manifest to him that knows any thing in
Church History, as that such a reason was never dreamt of by the Propounders of
such Fastings in our Church, nor in any part of the Christian world before that
Act. And if the words of that Act were intended for an ease to the tender
Consciences (as those of dissenters are mis-called) and to draw them by little
and little, upon consideration of Civil ends, (which they less hated than the
Ecclesiastical) to some good order and submission; this is not to be drawn to a
perpetual Rule, nor made the only universal end of such a Constitution: For the
Church still keeps to the most ancient and general sense received amongst
Christians.

A third Precept of the Church is, The Observation of the Ecclesiastical Canon
6. Preface of Ceremonies, etc.
Customs and Ceremonies of the Church, and that without frowardness and
contradiction: as appears from her Canons and the Preface before the
Common Prayer: Of which obligation, that which we have before spoken of, the
Power of the Church, and even now of Fasting, may here be applied, and suffice.

A fourth Precept is, Constantly to repair to the Public Service of the
Preface to the Book of Common Prayer.
Church for Mattens and Evening Song, with other holy Offices, at times
appointed: unless there be a just and unfeigned cause to the contrary: And this
we have before also treated of: extending it to the worship of God in his
House, especially when there is an assembly of Christian people together to
that purpose, though there be no Sermon: and also to the humbling a man's self,
and putting up his private Devotions there alone, when occasion and opportunity
shall be offered so to do, according to the most ancient and godly custom of
good Christians, ever since there were Temples built for Gods Service: For the
disuse of which excellent acts, not the least reason has been, or can be
alleged by those that would be thought to be the only Rule of Reformation,
which we have not sufficiently refuted before.

Lastly, To receive the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ,
Second Exhortation to be read before the Communion-,
with frequent Devotion, but at least Thrice a year, whereof Easter is to be
one: And in order hereunto, as occasion shall be, to open our souls by due
Confession, and disburden and quiet our troubled Consciences by some learned
and discreet Minister of God, from whom Ghostly counsel and comfort may be
received, with the benefit of Absolution: Of the use of which we have also
before spoken; where we showed, that such Confession was not of such absolute
Divine Right either of Precept or Means, that Salvation could not be otherwise
obtained: but as an Ecclesiastical Expedient very effectual, as well for the
bringing Impenitent sinners to repentance, as for the due restoring of them
that are Penitent, to a comfortable assurance of Gods favor toward them, and
direction and encouragement in holy living, which the foul abuses in those
Churches, where it is excessively magnified, should by no means abolish. For
besides them above noted, doubtless it is no mean abuse to make that, which
undoubtedly should be an act of Judgment in Gods Minister, discerning between
the hopeful state of some, and desperate of others, and accordingly suspending
or applying the Free Grace of the Gospel, and the Power left by Christ to his
Church, an act of custom, formality, and course, or, perhaps, common civility:
which kind of rashness and profuseness the ancient Churches were altogether
ignorant of. When grievous offenders against God and the Church had fallen
justly under the censures of the Church, it was permitted to absolve them at
the point of death, so far as concerned their restitution to the Communion of
the Church, before they departed this life; but not so far, as to remit the
offenses against God; or that, without actual demonstrations of their hearty
sorrow for their sins, and steadfast purposes and professions of future
amendment, they should have pronounced over them the Absolution of all their
sins, and that, perhaps when they could no more desire, than deserve such a
Sentence.

CHAP. XIX.
A Preparation to the Explication of the Decalogue, by treating of Laws in
General. What is a Law? Several kinds of Laws. Of the obligation of Laws from
Justice, not Force only. Three Conditions required to obliging. Of the Ten
Commandments in special. Their Author, Nature, and Use.

BUT because a general Opinion, as well amongst Christians as Exodus 34. 28.
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. according to the Hebr. and Septuag. And Josephus Antiquit. l. 4.
c. 8 (...) appellat.
Jews, has prevailed, that those Ten Commandments, or, as they are otherwise
called, Ten Words, which God spoke to the Children of Israel by Moses on Mount
Sinai, are an absolute Compendium and Rule of Obedience to God, as well in our
immediate Service toward him, as our mediate, in our duty toward our
Neighbor, a brief inquiry into the Decalogue will neither be unseasonable nor
impertinent: and the better to accomplish this, first to speak of Laws in
General, before we treat of these more signal and eminent Laws of God.

A Law then (to begin with the Definition) seems to be nothing else, but The
rational and just will of a Sovereign Power, declared and manifested to its
Subjects, for the better informing, directing, and regulating them according to
truth and justice. This Description, though I find not entirely and absolutely
in others, yet is found in its several parts of which it consists, in diverse
Authors: and comprehends not only Humane, but Divine Laws, equally; and not
only written, but unwritten also: For it were a very fond and weak imagination
in a man to conceive that the Writing, Printing, or Graving in Stone (as the
Ten Commandments are said to be) can contribute any thing toward the force and
due vigor of a Law, any further than that thereby it becomes better known to
all therein concerned. Promulgation indeed is essential to all Laws, but the
Promulgation or Publication by the foresaid means, is not so: but any other
notice given thereof may suffice. But while a thing lies hid in the mind and
breast only of the proper Legislatours or Governors, it cannot, in reason,
obtain the nature or force of a Law: but then only it does, when it either is
known, or might, and ought to be known, according to the manner of publication.
And this declared will must not be the act of any inferior or subordinate
person, who of himself has no right to will or require the observation of his
Dictates or Orders, but of the Supreme, originally at least, though not
immediately. The universal and absolute Sovereign of all things is God alone:
and his Power alone, and right of Dominion (of which we have spoken in the
beginning) abundantly suffices to justify all demands of service and obedience
from his Creatures, and that according to his absolute will, without any
exception or limitation; it being intrinsecally good, whatever shall appear to
be the Will of God, even because it is the Will of God, who is nothing but
Goodness in the most absolute sense.

And hence it is that notwithstanding Laws are divided into Divine, Humane, and
Ecclesiastical: yet in truth, and upon due search, it will be found that they
all are Divine really, though not formally, and mediately, though not
immediately: as Tully excellently, and little less than divinely, has defined,
Lex est nihil aliud nise recta and a numine deorum tracta ratio, imperans
honesta, prchibens contraria. Cicero Philipp. 11. Clem. Alex: Strom. l. 1. p.
350. (...). Hierocles in Carm. Pyth. (...). Demosthen. in Anst. The Law of Man
(which sometimes is called the Law Positive) is derived by reason, as a thing
which is necessarily and probably following of the Law of Reason, and of the
Law of God -- And therefore in every Law Positive well made, is somewhat of the
Law of Reason and of the Law of God, and to discern the Law of God and the Law
of Reason from the Law Positive, is very hard. D^ct^ur and Student, cap 4.
saying; A Law is nothing else but right Reason drawn from the Gods themselves,
commanding honest things, and forbidding the contrary: And to the same effect
writes Clemens Alexandrinus, and Hierocles saying, Law is that Operative mind
and Divine will, which perpetually advances and preserves all things. So that
whatever Law, be it Civil or Ecclesiastical, which can not draw in some remote
manner at least, its descent from Heaven and God Almighty, is not just or
reasonable, and by consequence, not properly a Law, but the private Lust of
Tyrants.

But then in deducing Laws of Humane birth from God, there must not be such a
rigorous course taken, as that whatever is not contained expressly in his
revealed Word, or obvious to the eye of Nature, should be condemned as spurious
and illegitimate, and having no right to oblige men to observance and
submission thereunto: For some things are more clearly, and some more
obscurely; some things more nearly, and some more remotely, deducible from
their first fountain: some Laws natural (and the like may be said of Divinely
revealed, and Ecclesiastical) are sufficiently apparent to all, or most,
intelligent men, as just and reasonable; others (as Thomas has observed) are
evident so to be, to the more understanding and searching Wits: this being to
be received as a plain and undoubted Rule in doubtful Cases, that the professed
Authors and Interpreters of Laws are generally better seen into the Natural,
Divine, and Moral reason and obligation of a Law, and the common benefit and
expediencie thereof, than inferior and ignorant persons, who are prone to
judge of the reasonableness and usefulness of it, as it best agrees with their
own private judgments, none of the certainest; or Interests, none of the
justest many times, not considering, which is most necessary, the common good
claiming prerogative above particular: So that there can be no more unnatural
Rule than that which would have every man a Law, and Rule, and Reason to
himself; or definitively and finally to judge for, and of himself in all
things, what is just and reasonable: This is altogether law^ess, and repugnant
to the revealed Will of God, which has ordained several orders and ranks of
men, whereof some are to be in Power and Authority, others in subjection and
obedience.

And from hence it proceeds that Magistrates, who are the only Lawgivers, and
true Interpreters of Laws given, have had somewhat more of the Image of God
ascribed to them than other common men: because, as it is Gods primary power
and prerogative to give Laws to all the world, as his Subjects, so is it the
undoubted Right of lawful Governors under God, to propound and impose Laws
serviceable to the common ends of such a Society as thereby is disposed and
regulated.

And there are three things principally requisite to make a Law obligatory upon
men: The first is taken from the Person Giving or propounding this Law, and
that is Authority: without which the best Laws that can be invented are
directly tyrannical and unjust; as well in respect of the Person, whose Right
is thereby invaded and usurped (so that Conscience is so far from being obliged
by it, that rather it is bound to oppose and resist such Laws, though in
themselves very profitable and reasonable, because they imply a wrong to
another, to whom only pertains the Legislative Power) as of the persons to
whom such goodly Laws are given, because thereby is an unjust service and
bondage brought upon them. But no man can be bound to this double injury,
though peradventure such a Case may be put in, which to decline a greater evil
and mischief, a man may be patient and passive under such usurpers. A second
thing is taken from the matter and nature of the Law it self, which, if it be
not just and reasonable, binds not the Conscience, though enacted by
Authority altogether lawful and unquestionable: The reason whereof is that so
often abused place of holy Writ, which advises to obey God rather then men.
Gods eternal and indispensable Law Acts 5. 29.
exacteth of man due observation, and that chiefly upon account of his absolute
Sovereignty and Dominion, which no inferior Power ought to control, or can
make void. But should any mortal man command contrary of God, it could signify
nothing more then the folly of his own heart, and the distemper of his mind,
and a foul revolt and defection in him that should suffer himself to be so
abused. But is there no difference (think we) between the Powers on earth
acting quite contrary to God, and such as only want special warrant for what
they sometimes expect from their Subjects? The ignorance or wilful negligence
of this distinction or notion is it which has hurried men into so many
unchristian acts, and made such havoc, especially in Religion. A third
principal ingredient into a Law is that taken from the Persons to whom it is
made: not that they must owe obedience unto the Lawgiver (thought that be true)
for this is the very same with the first: For wherever there is the first part
of the Relation, there must also of necessity be the second: and so, wherever
there is Power and just Authority to command and rule, there must necessarily
be a duty of obedience in others: but knowledge and manifestation of a Law
(before touched) is absolutely requisite to bind people to the observation of
it. And yet I mean not actual and inevitable knowledge, but possible, and
ordinarily attainable: it being most certain, that the same persons who stand
generally obliged to observe a Law made and propounded, are likewise bound to
take notice of its promulgation: and this neglecting, subject themselves to the
like penalties as the wilful Violators of it.

There may well be added unto these three, a Fourth Condition to the validity
of a Law, and that is Power. How Power and Authority differ is not unknown,
viz. that the first consists in sufficient strength and force to constrain
obedience, or inflict the punishment denounced against disobedience, not
necessarily inferring Right so to do: And this is not intrinsecal to a Law,
because it is only to be exercised as a necessary instrument, subservient to
the ends of Right and Justice preceding, which is Authority properly so
called; which duly exercised, does oblige without force to submission, and that
out of Duty and Conscience, as appears from what we have said already in the
First Book of the First Part of this Treatise. Now though this Power be not
intrinsecal to the Obligation of a Law, as some unnatural Philosophers have of
late days imagined, and boldly and basely endeavored to maintain, yet may it
be essential to the Execution of the same; Men being generally so unreasonable
and averse to Order and Government, and the public Good, when no special and
immediate advantage accrues to their particular person, that without the iron
rod to constrain, the Majesty of the Scepter will not sway them: And but that I
have found such prodigious tenets in the writings of late Politicians, denying
all Justice and Conscience, and destroying them as far as their blind and
pestilent wits will enable them (which certainly they never shall, any more
than to destroy God himself, and extinguish the notion of a Deity out of the
minds of men) I should have thought that for want of such a distinction between
the Obligation and Execution of a Law, they fell into such flat and portentous
errors: For what does argue greater stupidity, than to conclude there is no
necessity (of violence) this should be done, therefore it ought not to be done?
Or because that man is impious, who, because he is strong enough to be
successful, scruples not at all to invade and prey on another: and he may
become ridiculous that commands without any ability or probability of
effecting what he requires; therefore no obligation lies on the persons to
whom he directs himself to obey. Aristotle indeed Arist. Politic. l. 3. c. 4..
78.
tells us of a Law that the Hares should make in their solemn Assemblies, that
all beasts should share alike in the earth, but at this (said Antisthenes) the
Lions laughed: and well they might, when such Laws proceeded from them, who had
neither Right to make, nor Power to enforce them; but where there is Right
without Might, the matter is more to be abhorred on the one side, than decided
on the other.

True it is that Marsilius Patavinus does make Coaction an ingredient into Lex
proprie sumpta, Praeceptum coactivum est, de fiendis aut omittendis humanis
actibus, sub poena transgressoribus infligenda. Marsilius Patavinus de
Jurisdictione Matrimoniali
the definition of a Law: and that not amiss, if we consider that definitions
of things are to be made according to the Habitude of things, rather than
Actualness; and so this his definition is very good: A Law properly taken is a
Coactive Precept of doing or omitting humane acts, under punishment to be
inflicted on transgressors. For though a Prince deprived of Power makes Laws
which he is not able to enforce, or the Church, yet while indelible Right to
Power resides with him as an Habitude, the Law is of force, and is of a
Coactive nature, though not actuated.

And this being not unduly, as we hope, premised, we now proceed to the
explication of that particular Law of God, called the Decalogue: which though
it branches it self into ten parts, yet, according to the Jews not amiss
conceiving, is but One Law, as proceeding from one Fountain, pronounced in one
breath, say they, engraven or written as one Line or Word on two Tables, and
hanging all on one string, Charity: which (says St. Paul) is the fulfilling of
the Law, as many Beads or Jewels make but one Bracelet.

Yet according to the several forms and distinct matter are they often
distinguished; Origin. Hom. 10. super Exodus Non ut simplicioribus videtur,
cuncta quae statuantur Lex dicitur, etc. Psalm. 19. 7, 8.
as by Origin in these words: It is not (as may seem to the simpler sort) that
all things that are constituted are the Law [Lex] but some truly are called
Law, some Testimonies, some Commands, some Righteousnesses, some Judgments,
which the 18 ( or 19) Psalm plainly teaches us, saying, The Law of the Lord is
a perfect Law converting the soul: the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making
wise the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. Neither does Gulielmus
Parisiensis much vary from his sense, who makes seven Parts of the Law of God:
the First whereof is Testimonies, Sunt autem parts Legis hujus [Dei] septem,
quarum prima est Testimenia, etc. Gul. Parisiens. de Legibus, cap. 1.
and these are of Truths, and therefore to be believed: The Second, Commands,
and these are of Honest things, and therefore to be fulfilled: The Third,
Judgments, and these are of Equity, and therefore to be obeyed: The Fourth, are
Examples, and these are to be imitated: The Sixth is Threatenings, to wit of
Punishments, and these are to be feared. The Seventh are Ceremonies, and these
are to be reverenced and observed: Thus he. But whether these do not concern
rather the whole Body of the Law, than the Decalogue in particular, may justly
be doubted, but shall not here be disputed: though upon this account it may
seem to concern this also: For if the Ten Commandments be the sum of the whole
Law of Moses, as is credibly taught, how can it so be, unless it vertually
comprehends the several distinct parts thereof? which will be farther cleared
in the brief consideration of these three Particulars concerning the Decalogue.
1. The Institution of this Law. 2. The Nature or Use of it: and Thirdly, The
Explication of it.

The Author and Institutour of this Law was insallibly God himself, as of all
the Writings of Moses, the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles received amongst
us for Canonical: But whether there were any more immediate act of God, and, as
I may say, personal, in delivering these Commands, than in communicating his
will by Moses to the Israelites upon other occasions, is not so well resolved.
The Learned of the Jewish Doctors do put a distinction between the Divineness
of the Pentateuch wrote by Moses, and the rest of holy Scripture of the Old
Testament, making that the Ground and Rule, as it were, of other prophetical
Writings: and so do many suppose the Law to be more Sacred than the other parts
of Scripture; and to be more Sacred, because more solemnly and formidably, and
with greater manifestation of Gods Glory and Majesty delivered to Moses; yea,
and because written with the finger of God himself, as the Scripture witnesses:
which seems to speak as if God herein had not used the ministry of Angels, as
at other times, and upon other occasions, but spoke and acted immediately in
his own person. These words (says Moses in Deuteronomy) the Lord Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
spoke unto all your assembly in the Mount, out of the midst of the fire, of
the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice, and he added no more,
and he wrote them in two Tables of Stone, and deliveted them to me. And when
the people in Exodus beg of Moses, saying, Speak thou with us and we will Exodus
20. 19.
hear thee, but let not God speak with us least we dye: it seems to imply that
God himself was the speaker. Nay, God says afterward, Ye have seen that v. 22.
I have talked with you from heaven: And to this effect the holy Scripture
elsewhere, as Deuteronomy. 4. 36. Nehem. 9. 13. Deuteronomy. 5. 4. Exodus 33. 11. from all
which there is nothing more certain then that the voice was sensible, and after
humane manner audible; contrary to some Jews, who, as Buxtorf tells us, presume
to say, it was imaginary only.

And what do not the Jews superstitiously devise to magnify this Law, and by
implication, themselves above other people, so favored by God? For they not
only say, that God, with his own mouth, spoke these Ten Words, but with his own
hands made the two Tables, as may be seen in Buxtorf: and Buxtorf. de Decalogo.
amongst others, Rabbi Simeon writes, That both Tables were created by God
immediately, and that before the world began, not regarding how contradictory
to Scriptures such an assertion is, Exodus 34. 1, 2, 3, 4. and Deuteronomy. 10. 1.
which they would understand only of the Second Tables, but without reason.

But if we consider first, how dubiously and ambiguously the word, God, is used
in Scripture, signifying Angels often, and sometimes Men of Renown and Command;
and the Finger of God, to be the same sometimes with the Spirit of God,
sometimes with the Power of God, Exodus 8. 19. Luke 11. 20. And secondly, That
then, according to our apprehension and the Scriptures phrase, God is said to
do a thing himself, when he does it, not by any humane instrument or help,
though he imployeth invisible Spirits therein, there will be no such necessity
of Consequence as may seem at first view: and thus Calvin upon these words of
Exodus 31. 18. interprets the matter, not amiss.

And if we consider, secondly, what sense the Writers of the New Testament take
them in, the other opinion which holds that these Commands were delivered by
the mediation of Angels, will appear most probable: For so says St. Stephen
expressly in the Acts, to the Jews; Who received the Law by Acts 7. 53. Gal. 3.
19.
the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it. And St. Paul, It was ordained
by Angels in the hands of a Mediator. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is
called, The word spoken by Angels. Some may say here, That by Law is here to be
understood, not the Decalogue only, but the whole Law of Moses at the least:
which cannot be absolutely denied, though the contrary seems most probable: But
if it be so, does not the whole include the parts? If the Law in general was so
dispensed, does it not follow that this Law in particular was so ordained?
Though if it be granted that this Law particularly was so delivered, it does
not follow that the whole Law of Moses was so given by the ministry of Angels,
and not only by Divine inspiration, without any Angels officiating toward it,
as in this Case we suppose. And Perkins on the Galatians affirms directly,
that this Law was given by the Perkins Gal. 3. 19.
ministry of Angels.

And to confirm this, I shall add a Scholastical Reason: For if it be true
what St. John says, that No man has seen God at any time; and what the John
1. 18.
Schools teach (as I believe) that fleshly eyes cannot possibly discern God
immediately; may we not much more truly say, that we cannot hear Gods voice
with our fleshly ears and live, any more than see God and live? But God says
expressly, No man shall see me and live. But as God makes certain Exodus 33. 20.
representations of himself to our eye, which are not himself, but yet bear his
name in Scripture, so God produces, or causes to be produced, audible sounds,
which are not really and properly his voice, yet represent so much to the ear
of man; which when it comes attended with more than natural, or ordinary
circumstances (as did the voice at the giving of the Law) it is more especially
and signally ascribed unto God as his.

Lastly, It is said in Exodus, that Moses wrote upon the Tables the words of
Exodus 34 28.
the Covenant, the Ten Commandments, which in the beginning of the Chapter, God
is said to write, I will write upon these Tables the words that were Exodus 34.
1.
in the first, etc. which moved the Fathers, as Cyprian and Austin, whom Lyra
follows, to understand them so that God wrote Autoritatively, and Moses
Ministerially. But later Jewish and Christian Expositours have thought good
rather to refer the later part of these words, And he was there with the Lord
forty days and forty nights, he did neither eat bread nor drink water: and
he wrote upon the Tables the words of the Covenant, the Ten Commandments, to
God, not without some violence to the sense, more current otherwise: But in
such variety and obscurity as is here, I see no remedy but men must judge for
themselves.

However, I suppose the second thing propounded, is from hence competently
clear, concerning the Nature of this Law: That as it is undoubtedly Divine, so
from the Authority delivering it, it has no more force or obligation upon us,
than other words of God extant in holy Scripture. Nor is it easily to be
conceived, how any thing can be said to be more or less divine, which is
acknowledged to come from God, by virtue of any manner of delivering it,
whether mediately or immediately, by a still and quiet inspiration, or by a
public and majestic declaration; but from the matter it may: And Buxtorf in
his forementioned Tractate on Buxtorf. in Decalog. number. 51. Priscis temporibus,
etc.
the Decalogue has these words; In ancient times it was a custom among the
Jews, that the Decalogue should every day in the Morning Prayers be publicly
and privately rehearsed and repeated -- This laudable custom, in latter times,
they have abolished: the reason whereof the Talmud renders to be, lest the
people should believe that the Decalogue had any ^ore divineness in it than
other parts of Scripture. From whence we may observe, First, That anciently the
Jews had a constant Form of Worship. Secondly, That there is no such
ridiculousness in Prayers public and private, to repeat the Creed and Ten
Commandments, as certain pretenders to giftedness have presumed. Thirdly, That
the Jewish Doctors discerning the great inconvenience that might happen from
admitting degrees of Sacredness in Divine Revelations, chose to prevent such
errors, by taking away the presumed occasion: For however some have
distinguished between Divine Right and Apostolical, making this a mean between
humane purely, and divine; yet in propriety of speech all Constitutions are
either divine purely, or purely humane. And therefore Apostolical Right can be
no more than humane Right, when it is distinguished from Divine.

This we speak of Constitutions taken in their formality, not as oftentimes
they are used, for the things themselves so ordained. For no doubt but as there
are degrees of sins against Laws, so these degrees are estimated from the
weightiness or lightness of the matter against which offenses are committed.
And thus we may hold that the Ten Commandments are more Sacred, that is,
contain more important matters than generally the rest of the Scriptures do,
that is again, in the like number words, being certainly the most perfect and
plain, and compendious form of serving God that the Jews had any where revealed
unto them, if not a more absolute sum of our practical duties toward God and
Man, then we find collected together in so few words in the Gospel; and
therefore not unworthily inserted into the Second part of the Office of our
Church.

But whether this Decalogue was ever intended by God, as such a perfect and
complete Rule of Obedience, that nothing to which Jew or Christian was obliged,
has escaped it, may well be questioned: understanding the Question not so much
of ceremonial or extrinsecal Duties of Religion, as moral and perpetual.

Many have this last age brought forth, who though they look upon it little
less than ridiculous to make any use of the Ten Commandments in our worship of
God, yet ascribe so great perfection to it as a Rule, that they suppose they
have convinced you of absurdity enough, if they drive you to either of these
straits, To deny any Moral duty to be contained in the Decalogue, or to affirm
any Ceremonial to be therein included: For then they loudly cry concerning the
First, you make the Law of God an Imperfect Rule: And concerning the Second,
(as by name does Dr. Twisse, in his Treatise on the Sabbath, with innumerable
others) If, for instance, the Fourth Commandment be not Moral, what does it
among the Ten Commands? And having said this, they need (they think) say no
more, to confound their adversaries.

To the former therefore we say that improving the Art of Reduction to the
height, no doubt but all Moral and Ceremonial duties too, may be reduced to
some of the Ten Commandments. For if our Savior Christ our Great and
Infallible Master reduced these Ten to two: and again, all things contained in
the Law and Prophets (which must be all Moral duties) to Love of God and Love
of our Neighbor, in St. Matthews Gospel, saying, On these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets: Nay, and Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40.
which is yet more, St. Paul brings all Christian duties under one Head of
Love, saying, Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Do we wonder at, or can Romans
13. 10.
we censure those who would have all Christian virtues included, and vices and
sins excluded by the Decalogue? But surely, they who contend for such a
comprehension as may be useful to a man, do not intend that it self should be
incomprehensible and illimited; which at this rate, it must be, reducing every
thing to any thing: but certain Rules have been invented for the limiting and
directing of men in this matter; which being not taken from the Reason of the
thing it self so much, as the Arbitrary wit of the Hic video quosdam in hoc
elaborasse, ut universa proecepta sive jubentia, sive ventantia ad hoec december
redigant: and Capitalium peccatorum species quae septem numerantur, in aliquod
horum referum: sed sedula diligentia magis quam serid. Erasm. Cateches. 6. in
Decal. Thom: 22. qu. 148. 2. ad 1.
Contrivers of them, may as well (as many other things) be refused at pleasure,
as an humane Invention: For mine own particular, I think Erasmus has spoken
judiciously and truly in the Case: Here I see some laboring hard to reduce all
Precepts, whether commanding or forbidding, to these Ten: and to refer the
seven deadly sins to some of these, but with diligence more sedulous than
serious: And no other instance needs be given of an incapacity in the Decalogue
of Regular reduction of this nature, than what Thomas has given us, whose
Logical head was able to do as much in this kind as any man's; Framing an
Objection to himself, that Gluttony was no mortal sin, because it was not
contrary to any of the Ten Commandments, answers thus: Gluttony is a mortal
sin, in as much as it averts us from the Ultimate end: and according to this,
by a Certain Reduction [by which every thing may be reduced to every thing] is
opposed to the Command of Sanctifying the Sabbath, in which is required our
rest in the Ultimate End. If this be fair, and allowable, what needed we any
more Commandments than that of keeping holy the Sabbath day? For surely, all
sin, as well as Gluttony turns us away from our Last End, which is God; and our
resting in him: and therefore, by this reason, all sin should be
Sabbath-breaking. St. James James 2. 10.
indeed says, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all; that is, a breaker of all. But he very well explains
himself immediately after, that he meant not so much in respect of the matter
of the Law, that a man could not sin against it in one case, but he must sin
against it in another; but in respect of the Manner. For, says he, He that
said unto thee do not commit adultery, said also do not kill, etc. implying
thus much, that the same evil mind that disposes a man to disobey God in one
point of the Law, will incline him to the like in others: and the Cords of Fear
and Love of God being broken, to offend God in one sin, leave him at liberty to
offend him in any other whatever. Not that a man does directly or actually
commit sin against the whole Law: As in the case of Moral Virtues, according to
Philosophers, all are so connected and dependent upon one another in Prudence,
that whoever wants that, lies open to all vices. But our enquiry is concerning
the connection of virtues and vices in the matter of them; whether the offender
in one sin, is guilty of all: whether the Drunkard be a Thief, or the
Sabbath-breaker an Adulterer: For according to the large extent of Rules
commonly given, either of these may be made good: and without such a latitude,
drunkenness will hardly find a proper place in any of the Ten Commandments,
unless we say, as some more wittily than solidly, Drunkenness slaggers through
all the Commands: And in the like sense, What sin does not? And therefore Thom.
ibid.
Thomas is constrained to acknowledge, that Not all Mortal sins are directly
contrary to the Precepts of the Decalogue, but those only which contain
injustice: because the Precepts of the Decalogue in especial manner pertain to
Justice, and the parts thereof.

That so many Ancient, as well as Modern Doctors of Christ's Church have
endeavored to bring all Sins, and Graces, and Duties to the Ten Commandments,
I take to proceed from this threefold cause. First in Imitation of the Jews,
who agreed with Christians in the Use of the Decalogue, Novatianus Epist^de
Judaicis (apud Tertul) cap. 3. Deniqu. and d^eem sermones ^lh in tabulis nibil
novum dacent, etc. Grot. in Decalogum.
as being no more than a restoring the decayed Law of Nature in man, and
reprinting it in his mind: as well has Novatianus observed thus, Lastly those
ten sayings in Tables teach no new thing; but what was blurred, they admonish:
that Justice contained in them, as fire buried, might, as it were, by the
breath of the Law be re-enkindled. And Philo testifies of the Jews not only of
his Times, but ancienter, that they were wont to reduce All the Precepts of
Moses his Law to these Ten: not that they did believe that they were all
contained in them, as Grotius has observed: but that those things we have
here, belong to such general heads of Actions, unto which for memory sake
others may be reduced; in like manner as Philosophers are wont to Sixth. Sen.
Bib. l. 4.
reduce all things to Aristotle's Ten Categories or Predicaments, (though by the
way it is observed by Sixtus Senensis, out of ancient Authors that Aristotle
was not the true Author of the Ten Predicaments, but rather Architas
Tarentinus.) And this Christians did more accurately, as being better endowed
with the Holy Spirit, and obliged to higher virtues. A second reason might be,
for that the Decalogue (as we have already said) though it be not such an
exquisite and ample Rule as to contain all things, without great straining and
force, yet it being the most significant is any where extant in Scripture,
Christians chose that for their Compendium: to which other duties might relate.
And this, Thirdly, because of the expediency of advancing some one Form of
Words to be a Rule of Practice, as were the Creed and Lords Prayer instituted,
as Forms of Faith and all Prayers: and that chiefly for help to the Memory of
men in their complete duty toward God and Man. The first that I have observed
who brought this way of Reduction of all things to the Commandments, was St.
Hieromne, who has delivered such General Rules for this purpose, as have been
much improved and multiplied by many Catechises and Commentators upon them. To
which I shall refer the Reader at present: passing, or rather posting from the
Use in General, to the Particular Use of it in the Third thing, viz. The
Explication.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Ten Commandments in Particular; and their several sense and importance.

IN all Laws three things are to be considered, says a late excellent Die
^m^bi H^los-phasier [Oretzere] si non tres Le^u^ parts d^^mm^^ Philosophis,
Platone, Possidonio, Cicerone, and alits consittuantur, nempe Preoemium, Lex
ipsa, and Epilogus; sive sanctio. Goldastus Replicat. ad Gretz. c. 11.
person in the Civil Law; The Preface, the Law it self, and the Epilogue, or
Conclusion to it, or Sanction: And these are all found in the Decalogue. And
where some have no special Preface, there the General Prologue is to be
current, and applied unto them. And so where other particular precepts want the
enforcement of them in the conclusion, they may well borrow it from some other:
as for Example, I am the Lord thy God, set before all the Commandments, ought
to have the same influence upon all, as upon the first: And so that in the end
of the Second, For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of
the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them
that hate me, and show mercy unto them that love me and keep my Commandments,
is of force upon all the other Commandments, exacting obedience to each in
particular, under the like Promises upon obedience; and Judgments upon
disobedience.

Concerning the division or disposition of the Ten Commandments in the
Decalogue, because the disputation about that conduces but little to the
benefit of the curious enquirer, I shall not insist on it; only premise a
caution against superstitious adhering to any one Faith in the case: For the
truth is, It matters not how they are numbered, provided that we loose not of
their number: in which case the modern Romanists, with great impudence, offend
in expurging the Decalogue it self, and expunging the Second Commandment. Their
Apology or Excuse is no less presumptuous and pernicious, and to be had in more
detestation than the Fact. Better a great deal they had so done, and given no
reason at all, or their Common one, That we must not enquire into the Acts of
our Superiors, and especially of the Infallible Church of Rome, than to bring
such a reason as may justify them, or any body else in taking away half a
douzen more Precepts out of the Decalogue: For doubtless (as has been said)
the virtue of those Ten Commands may be contained in a less number than they
are: Shall we therefore implicitly, at least, tax Gods Spirit of tautologie and
superfluity, and mend what it has unartificially delivered unto us? But it is
well they can endure to leave them in their Bibles, as they find them. For
surely they must either deny themselves or the Reasons why they leave it out of
their Catechises and Books of Devotion; that I mean especially which tells us,
It is contained in the First: though the true reason persuades them otherwise,
viz. lest the Second Command standing inviolate as God ordained, should be an
offense and stumbling block to the weak and unlearned: And there is no danger
in it, standing where they neither must nor can come at it, in the Bible. But
why may not weak and ignorant people understand that Commandment as well as the
others, which are no plainer at al then that? The truest answer is, Lest they
stumble so as to fall into an inevitable truth. And whereas they add ^arther,
That it is Ceremonial: First we reply, That it is not ceremonial or proper to
the Jews, as set down there entirely with its end and qualification, Bowing
down or Worshipping any thing representing God, whether Image or Statue: and so
the Eastern Churches always did, and still do understand it of general and
immutable nature, though they be too great admirers of Imagery otherwise.
Again, if it were so peculiar to the Jews, as is vainly pretended, that they
were to make no Images to themselves, is it also so proper to them ( Quarto
modo, as Logicians speak) that Christians are not capable of it, or must not
take it in that sense also, if they please? It is granted lawful to Christians
in a Civil sense, to use Images: but is it not also lawful for them to let them
alone? Against what part of the Decalogue should they offend, yea, what any
other part of Old or New Testament, if they refused to make any Images at all?
Time certainly was, and that for Two Centuries together (notwithstanding some
fabulous Records to the contrary) when Christians scrupuled to make any Image
in order to any Religious use, though but to call to mind things Historically,
or help Devotion: after many Centuries, they never farther used them than for
meditation. And what one Precept of Gods Word would suffer by it, if they
should have persevered in that simplicity to this day? I am sure many are
violated by the i^limited, or ill limited use of them. And now, what danger
would the common sort run into, if such words had been found in their Books of
Instruction, as the Second Commandment contains? Would they have fallen into
Idolatry, the worst of all sins next Atheism, as by the confession and
concession of diverse of the soberer sort of Romanists, they do in the use of
them? Austin indeed comprehended the Second Commandment in the First, as they
pretend toward their justification, but can they so much as pretend that he so
reduced it to that, that he contented himself with the words only of the First,
and left out, as insignificant or dangerous, the Second? No surely: For it is
plain he joined them entirely together: which, if Papists had done, they had
herein little offended Augustinus in Speculo ex Exodo initio.
us: Yea, so far was St. Augustine from so doing, that on the contrary, in that
Abbreviation he gives us of the Book of Exodus, he leaves out the First, viz.
Thou shall have no other Gods but me, and begins with this, Thou shall not make
to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, etc.

For, as I was saying, we are not such superstitious admirers of Numbers or
Measures in these cases, that we would have contended so much as now, if they
had made but Two Commandments of the Ten, provided they had given us the
Substance of them without mutulation: but to make themselves more jealous for
God than he is for himself, who here styles himself a Jealous God, is supreme
folly, and much worse.

The Scripture seems to divide the Commandments into two Parts, when it says,
that they were written in two Tables: as Exodus 32. 15. and 34. 1. and Deuteronomy. 4.
13. cap. 5. 22. and 10. 1, 4. But this does not prove that they were so
distinguished as many have imagined, that those duties which concerned the
worship of God immediately, should be placed distinctly in one Table, and those
which more immediately concern our Neighbor, should have another Table for
themselves; as common Painters have contrived them. For in all probability,
what was written Originally by God, was connected together so closely, that
though there were Two Tables to contain all the Commandments, there was no such
chasmes or distances left as are to be seen in the more modern distinction of
the Scripture into particular Verses, but as it fell out, so the words
proceeded from one Table to another, coheringly.

The Jews (as may be seen in Philo Judaeus and Josephus) divided the Law Philo
Jud. p. 579. Genev^. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3, 4.
into two equal Parts, not according to the matter respecting God and Man, but
the manner or number, and made Five Precepts in One Table, and Five in the
other. Austine, Prosper, and such as follow them, make but Three Precepts in
the First Table, and Seven in the Second: But later Ages, not without the
consent and concurrence of ancienter, have from the matter it self, divided the
Commandments so, that Four which relate principally to God, should be placed in
the First Table, and Six in the Second: which seems to be most rational, though
no less arbitrary than the other.

There are likewise among the Jews who agree not in the very matter it self of
the Ten Commandments: For some, as the Talmudists, and others following them,
do make that we call properly The Proaem, or Preface, I am the Lord thy God, to
be part of the First Commandment, which is denied by Aberbenel, and others of
them, as well as most of us. For this Proposition or Sentence, I am the Lord
thy God, is, as we say, properly Enunciative, or Indicative, or purely
affirmative, and not Imperative or Commanding, as all Precepts must be, which
are so properly called.

The First Commandment therefore is this, Thou shall have no other Gods. I.
but me. Where it is first to be observed, that almost through the whole
Decalogue, some variety in words is to be found in Exodus, and in Deuteromy the
Fifth, where it is repeated. The Reason whereof Grotius thinks to be this, That
here Moses did set down, or rather took precisely, what was spoken or written
by the Angel: but in Deuteronomy he rehearses the same himself, without such
absolute Punctualities of words or expressions; and yet must we not dare to
say, or believe that Moses transgressed his own Rule given by God in the Fourth
Chapter before, viz. Ye shall not add unto Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye
may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. So that it
is a vain Scholie some would give us upon that, and such like Texts of
Scripture, that nothing at all must be added to Gods word, more than we find
the Letter to require. For undoubtedly such speeches mean no more than that we
should do or say neither more or less to overthrow the intention of God in his
Commandments. For otherwise, all the large and far fetched senses devised and
applied by the precise Masters and Mistakers of that Rule, to each particular
Precept in the Decalogue, would be found either Superstitious or Sacrilegious
inventions, though not inconsistent with the Analogy of Faith.

Furthermore, Laws are of two sorts generally, Affirmative or Negative. In the
Negative (of which this is one) the ordinary method of explication, is, first
to declare those sins of Commission which are prohibited: and then the Duties,
Graces, and Virtues which are there implicitly required on the contrary: this
being one general Rule of expounding the Decalogue, that where any vice or sin
is forbidden, there the contrary virtue is commanded: And on the other side,
Where any virtue or holy act is required, there the contrary vice or evil is
interdicted. As for Example: Here it is forbidden, that we should have, or
make, or worship any other God but the one true God; therefore on the contrary,
there is an implicit injunction duly and faithfully to serve that one true
God. And though the sense Negative is most current and general through the
whole Decalogue, yet were the Affirmative duties they which God principally
aimed at and intended. For Negatives do not make us holy to God in themselves,
but only as they are necessary introductions, and good beginnings to the more
perfect performance of Positive Duties. It would avail a man very little
toward the fulfil^ing of this First Commandment, not to worship more Gods than
one; for so he might worship none at all, and be a greater offender than the
Idolater that worships many. We are therefore in the first place to enquire
what are those Virtues and Graces God commands, and so shall we more readi^y
and easily conceive what errors and sins we are hereby commanded to avoid.
Some of both sorts we shall here instance in, to make more complete that rude
and imperfect account given above of the Acts of Obedience and Holiness owing
from every good Christian to God; but as in a Table, rather than in a Treatise.

The Supposition then that this first Precept requires of us the true worship
of God, does infer all that train of Graces thereunto necessary; which are
commonly reduced to these three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Of the nature of Faith, as well in General as Particular, have we spoken
largely in the first Part: Yet rather in a speculative than practical or
obediential way, which is proper to this place.

By the duty of Faith then, it is first required that we should have a
competent knowledge of God and of his will; for some knowledge must of
necessity go before Faith: There is a twofold knowledge: One of simple
apprehension or intelligence; and this must go before Faith: For how Romans 10.
14.
(says St. Paul) shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? It is
impossible a man should worship God before he believes there is a God: And
impossible he should believe there is a God before he has some notion or
apprehension of a God, either by hearing, which is the ordinary way, or by some
inward suggestion: And therefore we read that Paul inquiring of the Acts 19. 2.
Novices in Christianity at Ephesus, Have ye received the Holy Ghost? they
answered, We have not as yet heard whether there be an Holy Ghost, or no. And
there is another knowledge of Assurance; which assurance is caused in Humane
Sciences by an orderly and necessary connection of natural causes one with
another, but in Divine matters, by Faith: which causes that, or greater
persuasion than any outward artificial Demonstrations. And therefore, both the
increase of our knowledge, and the increase and strengthening of our Faith, are
much required by this Precept; according as we have the Scriptures more
particularly advising us, and that by St. Peter: 2 Pet. 1. 5.
And beside all this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, etc. And so in his first
Epistle, 1 Pet. 2. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Taste and see how good the Lord is: And St. Paul to Timothy, God will have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth: And infinite other
places.

Next to knowledge of God, seems to be the fear of God, according as Acts 9. 39.
the Scripture has it: And the Churches were edified, walking in the fear of
the Lord.

Next to Fear comes Repentance and Sorrow for sins past: then Renovation, or
that properly called Obedience, in Newness of Life; with many others, not here
to be insisted on.

The second Grace is Hope, which excites to walk and act according to the
Gospel, from the consideration of the many Promises, and upon the intuiti^n of
an excellent reward, to follow certainly the fulfilling the will of God: Of
which we have spoken, in treating of Gods works.

Lastly, Charity with its retinue of Divine Graces is required here also: as 1
John 4. 16. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God
in him: and Love is the fulfilling of the Law, says St. Paul. And the
particular consequents and effects of Love are outward bounty toward Gods
Worship and Service, toward his Servants and faithful Children; Zeal for the
spiritual as well as temporal good of our Neighbor, and for the general glory
of God, and the propagation of the true Faith; Defense of the Church; Reverence
and Respect to his Officers and Ministers; Perseverance in well-doing;
Constancy in the true Faith, even to suffering of reproaches, displeasures,
contempts, indignities, and to suffer joyfully the Hebr. 10. 34.
spoiling of our Goods; and cheerfully the loss of our lives, by holy
Martyrdom, for the love we bear to God in Christ: For as St. John says,
Perfect 1 John 4. 18.
love casts out fear, because fear has torment: he that seareth therefore is
not made perfect in love: that is, Love is of such a powerful nature, that
where it is truly, there it overcomes all oppositions and difficulties which
are apt to assail it, and fears nothing that may stand in its way, between
Christ and it; or its duty, and God.

Now the contrary Vices to these, forbidden when it is said, Thou shall have no
other Gods but me, are Atheism, and contempt of all Divine Power, Disbelief,
affected Ignorance of the true God and his Worship, or Superstition in
multiplying Gods, either of equal, or inferior order to God: Confederacies
with the Devil, consulting with him, or any pretending to derive their art or
skill from Evil Spirits: Seeking to any such for remedy or relief in losses, or
sicknesses, or any such like distresses. And if any shall say, They can find no
other remed^es from some heavy Evils; they are to consider the excellent advice
and exhortation of St. Chrysostom, to persevere notwithstanding in that
condition it has pleased God to bring them to, and so patiently resisting the
temptation of such unlawful deliverance, they shall both suffer and be crowned
as Martyrs: For such were some of those Martyrs mentioned by St. Paul, Not
accepting deliverance. Again, Carnal Hebr. 11. 35.
Security, Despair of Gods Grace and Mercy by Impenitence: Worldly mindedness,
or any covetousness of the Creature, or the comforts of it above God, which is
Idolatry: But more literally, Any more than Civil and Coloss. 3. 5.
Humane Worship given to any Creature whatever, though with real intentions to
worship the true God only, when there are competent advises and means to
discern the mistake. Now what are competent notices, is to be judged from the
common Rule to other errors, as well as that of Idolatry. And therefore the
modern Invention of Hyperdoulia, or service above that ordinarily competible to
Creatures, is a manifest piece of Superstition, and that Idolatroas; it being
not found out yet by the wit of man, to put any mean between Divine worship and
Civil. For if by Hyperdoulia they mean a higher and nobler act of Service, than
is given to other blessed Spirits besides the Virgin Mary, they must either
mean Nobler and Higher in Kind or Degree: But there is no Kind betwixt that
proper to God, which we call Divine; and that communicable to Creatures, which
we call Civil and Religious, not for the acts sake whereby they are honored by
us, but for the ground and occasion of that act, viz. their Religion or
Holiness. And if they mean, Higher degrees of worship of the same kind, then do
they speak most absurdly and obscurely: because nothing can receive such
degrees as to denominate it above its nature. And besides, degrees have respect
not to the very thing it self, but to the quality of it. No man can say water
is cold above cold, or fire is hot above the nature of heat: So can no man with
sense, if he means honestly, say, Doulia is to be above Doulia; or worship
above worship: but must say, above such a proportion or degree of worship. But
the first is absurdly, and the second wickedly said: for where such a general
license of service is allowed and given without any limits set, stinting and
bounding the same, who there can stay his devotion from running out to
extremity and all excess? Hyperdoulia therefore, or as I may render it, Super
service does naturally lead men to Idolatry, and that before they are aware.
For if it be demanded, What mean you by this Super-service? Have they found
out, as yet, any other description than that most ridiculous of defining a
thing by it self; telling us, Super-service is that to be given to the Virgin
Mary properly: and it being altogether as obscure, what is that reverence due
to the Virgin Mary properly, How should we serve or worship her otherwise than
we do other Saints or Angels? have they at all explained themselves otherwise
than by this Hyperdoulia or Super-service? this say they, is due to her: but
what this is, we are as far to seek as at the very first: Only we are sure of
this, that by the term it self we may give her most properly Divine Worship,
and be born out by that word. For it manifestly implies somewhat exhibited
above other Creatures, but nothing at all of the inferiourness of that service
to that given to God: And therefore I see no reason to doubt, but this vile
invention does commonly end in Idolatry, and that against the first
Commandment: Let us now proceed to the Second.

The Second Precept in the Decalogue is, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, etc. The true meaning of. II.
which can have, or need no better exposition than the general practice of the
Popish Churches: For being resolved to hold to their corrupt way of making the
Image of God, contrary to their Forefathers, who always abhorred all
representation of God, whether by Picture or Statue; and to their gross sense
of giving reverence to that, and others of Saints and Angels, have laid this
Precept aside, as being certainly inwardly convicted that it makes against
them: as men are apt to turn those Servants or Children out of doors, who will
not be kept in good order, or ruled by them; or wicked Subjects who turn their
Sovereign out of his Place, his Throne, because he will not rule as they would
have him; yet still perhaps will allow him the title of King, under
confinement. This Commandment is not by them wholly cancelled and rased out of
Scripture, but it is kept under restraint, lest it should reduce Christians to
its due Obedience. They say, It is the same in effect with the first, and
contained in it: If so, why they do they not suffer it to speak and to bear its
part in their Religious Books as well as the other? If it be not, why do they
deny it its proper place and use? Surely, their reason at hand we cannot but
accept as good and reasonable, viz. It may give offense to the people contrary
to the use of that Church. And why so? It it not because their doctrine and
practice are quite contrary to it? Is it not because the native sense of those
words is so manifest and obvious, that they would certainly understand them
aright, could they be suffered to come to the true knowledge of them? And this
is the scandal and offense would be given them. And in the Reign of Henry the
Eighth of England, who opened the Hatches (a little) whereby men were kept in
hold from discerning the clear light above and about them, when they could no
longer conceal the Second Commandment from the people, but it must appear in
its own entireness, in the English tongue: Gardener and other Romanists would
have added for safety sake, their own gloss to the Word of God, viz. to, Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness Antiquit.
Brittan. 1 ag. 338.
of any thing, etc. with that intent to give to them Divine Worship. Which
sufficiently betrays the guilt to which they are conscious in their false
dealing with this Precept, and the common people about it.

But neither of these being likely to take effect, a more effectual and bold
coarse is invented and defended, That this Commandment was Ceremonial and
Judicial and Temporary; only ordained to prevent the Jews from falling into
Idolatry; to which they were so prone. It Is true, they were so prone then to
Idolatry; and however they are now-a-dayes more than enough averse from it, yet
would they at this day be as prone as ever, were but the liberty given of the
use of Images, in the sense of the Roman Church: This they have found by
experience of their Forefathers, and others of succeeding Generations; and
therefore hold it safest and best to set a less Superstition to keep at a
distance, a far greater; and to make a scruple of all use of images (which can
scarce amount to the nature of sin at all, though it may of folly) to secure
themselves from the contagion of the other extreme in the superstitious use of
them.

It is controverted between the ancient Hebrew Doctors (of which you Petavius
Theolog. Dogmati. To. 4. l. 15. cap. 6. Grotius Exposst. Decal.
may read Petavius and Grotius) whether Gods intent it was here wholly to deny
the Jews the use of Images, as Philo and Josephus suppose, or the use only in a
Divine manner, as others: this later Opinion is chosen by Petavius and the
Adversaries to the Iconoclasts, or Image-breakers. But my opinion is, First,
That all Jews concur in this, and all Christians, not led by the nose by the
Pope of Rome, that to make the Image of God at all, under what pretense soever,
is absolutely forbidden. And therefore I wonder more at Gerson than at them who
lived with, and after him, that he should endeavor to excuse the Latin Church,
thus: Before the Incarnation, when the Law was given there appeared no Image of
the Incorporeal God, either in wood Gerson. To. 2. De 10 Praecept. in Praec. 1.
or stone; because the Image of a Spirit cannot be made: And therefore all
Images were then to be rejected: but because that may be now done, since the
Incarnation of the Son of God, therefore from that time it is allowed to be
done by him who might dispense: Thus he. And how weakly, who may not see?
First, Why could not the Image of God be made as well before the Incarnation as
after? And why might not the Image of the Son of God be made before he was
Incarnate, therebeing some knowledge of the same (as we may well suppose)
amongst the Jews before the Incarnation, and some Umbrages and Representations
of it in Apparitions made to the ancient Patriarchs, without the view of his
Color, Stature, and Lineaments, as well as after, when we have certainly lost
the truest form of Christ? and go by guess and uncertain tradition? Again,
could not there be drawn the Image of a Spirit before Christ, and can there
now? I would fain see how? where? or by whom? What? Because Christ, who is a
Spirit, who is God, may be drawn according to his Humane nature, may be also
according to his Divine? The Divine Person may indeed, but the Divine Nature
can no more now than before be resembled; and that Deity only by concomitance
and implication, and not in form at all. When the Image of a Man is made, the
Image of him is made who has a spiritual and divine Soul, but the Image of his
Soul is not at all made: and much less is the Image of God made (unless
metonymically, as Man is said to be the Image of God) when Christ is figured
unto us. But could this be, which neither can, nor ought to be, what warrant at
all can it be to make the Image of God in contradiction to Christ, as is
pleaded for, and usual among Roman Catholics? when they, upon a vile fancy
occasioned from a vision in Daniel, make God the Father, like a dec^epit old
man well clothed indeed, and most like to the Picture of Winter, we have seen,
but that he wants a pan of coals by him, to warm his old and cold fingers over,
and as it were his Grandchild standing by him? Could not all this foul daubing
of the Deity have been made before Chrusts Incarnation? Or ought it in any
sober man's judgment to be made now? Lastly, because they speak of some special
Dispensation to do this now, which was never allowed formerly, let them be so
ingenuous and cour^eous to show us, if not the Original (lest they should be
cousened of it) the Copy, or but one word of it, and it will satisfy us;
otherwise we think they have said much more already than they needed: For we
should have been as well satisfied altogether if they had said only, It ought
to be so, as to give such a Reason which is as incredible as the thing it self,
viz. that It is dispensed with now under the Gospel: Nay, in that they say, it
is dispensed with under the Gospel, they impty it was more than Mosaical and
Ceremonial under the Law: because Rites and Ceremonies are not so much
dispensed with, as directly abolished and destroyed.

Secondly, I hold it absolutely forbidden the Jews by the same Law, to make use
of any Images in the worship of God; though not to that degree as to worship
them, but only, By them, and that for fear of Idolatry; and if not in passing
by or neglecting God himself, and directing and fixing the mind and heart on
the visible Object, yet by help of that: For that contradicts the mind of God,
as may appear by the whole Body of Gods worship, and every part thereof
instituted by himself, without the least insinuation of such manner of worship:
Nay, it is very strange what Erasmus has observed, That though indeed in
practice it has been connived at, yea Nam ut Imagines sint in Templis, ^ulla
praecipit vel humana Constitutio. Et ut facilius ita tutius qu^que est omnes
Imagines e templis submovere, qud^n imp^trare, uc nec modus praetere^^ur, nec
admiscedtur superscitio. Eratm. in Symb. and Decalog. Cateches. 6.
commended, yet have not men dared as yet by any direct Precept to command the
use of Images, at all, in Churches. For that Images should be in Churches
(says Erasmus) no Constitution, so much as humane, requires: And as is is
more easy, so is it more safe to withdraw all Images out of Churches, then to
prevail that the Mean should not be exceeded, nor Superstition mingled
therewith.

Thirdly, If that Rule of Explication holds good, viz. that in the Decalogue
where a sin is forbidden, there the occasion leading thereunto is also
forbidden, I make no doubt, but to worship the Creator, or any Creature by an
Image, is also here forbidden as Idolatrous, though perhaps not Idolatry
absolute. And contrary to the current sense and distinction of modern Romanists
concerning Material and Formal Idolatry (of which we have before spoken)
denying an error about the Object to be Formal Idolatry, provided the
intention be directed to the only true object of worship, God, we may more
safely and properly call this outward visible adoration given to outward
objects, or at least, seeming to be given to them, Formal Idolatry, than
Material: because there is nothing wanting to common sense which might make and
denominate it Idolatry, and this to have the Formalities of Idolatry: but if
they take Formal for the intrinsic specification of a thing, then it is a
Contradiction and Nonsense to say, or suppose that there can be any Idolatry
not Formal; as to imagine any thing can be without its form, or that which is
absolutely necessary to make it what it is.

Furthermore, this worshipping of God by any thing made, is forbidden by this
command, if not as simply and immediately unlawful in it self, yet under the
head of Scandal unjustly and unnecessarily given: For in this Case, it will no
more, if so much as excuse a man from the just suspicion of Idolatry, that he
upon occasion declares he does not worship the thing, before which he worships,
than it could do them of whom St. Paul to the 1 Cor. 8. 4.
Corinthians speaks, who sat in the Idols Temple, being Christians, and knowing
an Idol was as much as nothing in the world: and a man having so much Faith and
Knowledge, might do as he please in neglect and contempt of that: but St. Paul
could not be put off so, but knowing, and taking for v. 7. 10, 11.
granted that some did eat before an Idol with a conscience and sense of an
Idol, as it were, adjured such presumers under the terror of being accessory
to the ruin of their brothers Souls, not to have to do with them. So what if it
be true (as most true it is) a man may worship God or Saints before an Image,
and have a right intention and pure conscience toward God, is it not also as
true, that he may have an erroneous and idolatrous intention? Nay, are not the
Evidences and Presumptions much more clear and strong that his intention is
corrupt, then that it is pure? Can flesh and blood put any difference between
the visible act of him that does worship an Image directly and properly, and of
him that does not? Is not this then scandalous to sin? So that we may
reasonably conclude this Command to stretch it self to forbid all worship by
Images, and especially in public, where there is more danger to others; though
not under the same guilt or penalty as flat idolizing of any thing besides God:
For in that it is said, Thou shall not bow down to them, is plainly forbidden
external reverence to, or before them in any way of Religious worship: In that
it is said, Nor worship them, is expressed the internal act, and forbidden.

And thus far of the more literal sense of this Precept: the more remote and
reductive sense (as I may call it) is to interdict all worshipping of
Imaginations or vain opinions, which are certain Idols of the mind, as the
other are of the outward senses. And thus Hierom upon the Prophet Esaias Hieron.
in Isaiam c. 40.
tropically applies his words, To whom will ye liken the Lord, etc. We may say
that Arch-hereticks are here rebuked, who make sundry Idols out of their own
heart, etc. And again upon the same Prophet, afterward; Quicquid Id. in Isaiam
c. 44. v. 15, 16.
de Idolis dictum est, potest referri ad haereseon Principes, etc. Whatever the
Prophet speaks of Idols, may be referred to the Ringleaders of Heretics, who
dexterously frame out of their own hearts certain images of their opinions, and
of a lie, and worship them, knowing that they made them themselves: And think
it not sufficient to keep them to themselves, unless they seduce other simpler
folk with the adoration of them. Against this little noted, but most frequently
practiced Idolatry, we have an excellent Sermon of a Reverend Bishop Andrews
Sermon of worshipping Imaginations. Sin ulachris phantasmatum suprum sectatores
suos omnis error illidit. Aug. Expos. Ep. ad Romans Inchoata. lib.
Prelate, long since made, and never more need was there then is now to
inculcate this: when people blinded with the love of their own inventions and
opinions of the sense of Scripture, run carelessly and rashly into the Idolatry
of their own ways, having first consecrated them with an obscure and mistaken
Text of Scripture or two, and so made them (as they think) Divine: This is
condemned in this Commandment; as are also all corrupting, depraving,
mis-sensing Gods Holy Word; bringing in Sects and Heresies, disesteem and abuse
of his Sacraments. And, to name no more, to be remiss, profane, and negligent
in the true Service and Worship of God, either by inward aversion or outward
absenting themselves without just cause from him in his house, and denying him
that outward adoration and humiliation, which he here forbids us to give any
but himself: which he surely never would have done, had he not set some value
on it himself.

And on the contrary, we are required positively here to give all outward as
well as inward worship to him, as he is, in his illimited nature, without
circumscribing him in our minds, or likening him to any corporeal being, how
excellent soever.

The second Part of this Commandment gives us the reason of it, viz. For I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God; deterring all men from the violation of the
same, from the Power, Majesty, and Justice of him against such contemners of
his worship and his word. So that as too often it is seen, that some fond,
worldly, and covetous Parents, will even venture their own necks, and damn
their souls out of an extreme desire to advance their children, and to settle
them sure and flourishing (as they think) in the world after them, God
confounds this their plot and purpose, declaring that such a sin as this shall
certainly be the ruin of the Family; For he will visit the sin of the Fathers
upon the third and fourth generation of them that so hate him: That is, either
He will after some intermission, and when it may be supposed that God will take
no notice of the iniquity of them that thus offend him by Idolatry or
Sacrilege (which the Apostle matches together as both offending Romans 2. 22.
against this Commandment) then will God arise and revenge himself upon the
Posterity of such Malefactors: Or secondly, to the third and fourth
Generation, that is, beginning to plague the unhappy Offspring of such ungodly
Progenitors, he will not give over till the third and fourth Generation; by
which kind of persecution, it may well be believed an utter destruction may
have consumed that race.

And to the common Querie here raised, How God can justly punish the Children
for the Parents Iniquity? (not to trouble men with the many, diverse, and
tedious subtleties wont to be shown in answer hereunto) This plain and simple
Answer may suffice. First, that in matters of rapine, injustice, fraud, and the
like, whereby men design to enrich themselves and Posterity, with great injury
done to God or Man; for God out of his wise and just Providence to take away
from the third and fourth Generation that which was wickedly acquired and
possessed properly, the first Offender, is, in strictness of speech, no hard
measure or punishment properly, but common justice and equity, yea a favor, in
forbearing to exact that till so long time after, which he might the same day
have most justly required back again from the first offender, in that kind, or
his immediate succeeder in that injustice. For ill-gotten, or unjustly detained
goods can never in the eyes of God acquire a good title to him that possesses,
or inherits them: And therefore the world indeed may well call the
impoverishing of such offenders, a blasting and cursing of them and their
Estate, but in truth, it is a kindness in God to deferr the execution of his
justice for some times, that Repentance and Restitution might prevent his
wrath. Neither can it be thought injustice that God does not always punish in
the very same kind as the offense was committed in. For certainly, if with man
it be just to punish the Body of Malefactors, as well as in their Estates,
wherein perhaps the offense has been committed, it is no less just with God,
who is absolute Sovereign over us, to choose his way of afflicting an Offender.

But in some Cases there seems to be rather a personal punishment inflicted
upon Heirs of wicked Parents, and this seems to be hard when it is suffered for
their sakes rather than for any guilt of their own. To which, the Answer is:
That every man has so much guilt of sin upon him, that God might at his
pleasure have inflicted what punishment, and when he pleases: yet those general
sins incident to most men, would not have excited Gods displeasure to that
height, nor caused him to execute his just vengeance, but he considers that
such of his Predecessors offended in such a kind, as he will early or late
revenge; and takes occasion from thence to punish the innocent Posterity, as to
those things, which otherwise, though out of severe justice he might have
punished upon other respects, he would have respited and passed over. But then
indeed is there more apparent reason on Gods side when (as Thomas resolves the
doubt) the Children inherit the Evil minds and Consciences of their Parents, as
well as the Effects of their Evil Consciences. And thus is this Commandment
found consistent with the large vindication God by the Prophet Ezekiel makes of
himself, wherein Ezekiel. 18. 4. 20.
he shows that the Child shall not dye for the sin of his Father, which was the
principal doubt. And it is much more easy by the Rule of Contraries to
understand the reason, why God promises to be merciful to thousands in them
that love him and keep his Commands. For God being absolute, and able to
dispense with his own Laws, though a Righteous Father should have a wicked Son,
God may for the Fathers sake spare the executing his just anger on the
Posterity for the Fathers sake, taking occasion from thence, as many Instances
of Scripture do plainly inform us.

The third Precept of the Decalogue is, Thou shall not take the Name. III.
of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord thy God will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain. Which consists also of two principal Parts: The
Precept it self; and the Reason confirming and enforcing the same. Thou shall
not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, is the Precept: and in its
strict and proper sense does only forbid false swearing, or forswearing in the
use of the Name of God. And Oaths are usually distinguished into two sorts,
Assertorie and Promissorie. An Assertorie Oath is that whereby a man does
affirm or deny any thing, and that in the Name of God. If therefore a man shall
make use of Gods Name to give credit and weight to his Assertion, which is
false, as he frames it, he notoriously abuses the Name of God, and incurs the
severe punishment annexed to, and denounced against the breach of this
Commandment: He takes Gods Name in vain with a witness, as we say. Again, a
Promissorie Oath being the Declaration (...) etc. Philo Judaeus de Decalog
Hebr. 6. 16.
of a man's mind and intention, whereby he obliges himself to perform some act
to another acceptable to him, and that by the Name of God, used to assure the
same: For a man to neglect or disregard, or willingly to violate this Promise
so confirmed by Oath, is to take Gods Name in vain. To trifle and dally with
that most sacred Name and Majesty: yea, to bring it down so low, as to serve
base offices and acts of drudgery and wickedness, that no ingenuous or honest
man with patience could endure. It is not only to belie and slander God,
affirming that he knows such a thing to be true, which is known by him to be
utterly false; but to make him, as far as may be, accessory and instrumental to
such villainies as he wickedly purposes to commit. It is plainly to mock him,
and to give and take away again presently. Nay lastly, seeing (as St. Paul
says) An Oath is the end of all strifes; and there is scarce found any other
means, and to be sure none like it to determine Controversies between man and
man, without which no justice can take place, and without which humane Society
cannot subsist or continue: To be paltry, and frivolous, or frivolous, or
mercenary, or careless, or impudent in swearing for fear or love of any thing
but God, and his sacred Truth (for God is Truth) is the highest affront can
ordinarily be put upon the Divine Majesty: And therefore, when God says, he
will not hold such guiltless, that thus take his name in vain, it is
figuratively to be understood, God intending surely utter ruin and confusion to
such Atheistical contemners and affronters of him to his face, and before the
face of many others.

And reductively to this command does pertain the sin of light, customary, and
needless use of Gods name so sacred, upon no sufficient grounds or occasions.
This is indeed to take Gods Name in vain, and this will he also not suffer to
go unpunished: For this is in a manner to make sport with Gods Name, and to
make him a laughing stock to use his Name, and that many times under the form
of broad Oaths, to make the lie, or jest, or srippery take the better, and
degrade and disgrace God Almighty, to grace their speeches, their tales, and
witless, worthless, shameless language. For how stupid and miserable is the
error of such who move admiration and laughter by most unseasonable and
uncivil, as well as ungodly abusing of Gods Name, while they think they are
admired for their gallantry and wit, when really they are ridiculous for the
incongruity, monstrousness and absurdness of their speeches: For what is it
else for a man to bring Gods magnificient and glorious Name down from Heaven to
justify a mere toy or trifle, and that commonly a known lie, which he shall
vent at pleasure; but as if a man should bring a huge Cable to tie a fly by the
leg? This would indeed make men laugh, but at nothing so much as the folly of
the Actour of it. And so in profane and beastly matters, to utter the Name of
God with great boldness, it is very likely that as some would tremble, others,
to whom the wit is principally designed, would laugh loud enough; and the
absurd Coxcomb apt to think it is in applause of his wit, when really it is at
his impudence and presumption; as they would undoubtedly at him that should
break wind backward in the Kings presence: And what is such kind of swearing,
but breaking wind forward on Gods face? There Is indeed all the wit and mirth
too. But no more of this.

The positive Virtues required by this Commandment, are often, and reverend,
and affectionate using of Gods Name in Prayer, Praises, and Instructions of our
selves and others: To confess God before men to the glory of God, though to the
disadvantage and damage of our selves, when the Case requires, according to
our Saviors words: Whosoever shall confess Luke 12. 8.
me before men, him shall the son of man also confess before the Angels of God.
And more particularly, is required by this Commandment, sober and conscientious
swearing upon just occasion: For can any man of Religion or Reason imagine,
that if (as some of late, and not till of late) suppose, God would not have men
swear at all, he would pass that over in silence not only here, but through the
whole Scripture, and give rules and orders how they should swear, as here he
does? In that therefore God here says, Thou shall not swear in vain: he
certainly implies a permission and right to swear by his Name rightfully; and
no other argument ought to be brought to prove the same, especially by us here
aiming at brevity. But we have the Examples both of Old and New Testament
proving this. To them of the New Testament, I know not well what they can, or
have replied, St. Paul being frequent in it: as 2 Cor. 2. 23. Gal. 1. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. unless they say, That being divinely inspired, he had a particular
dispensation; which is as much as nothing; it being not at all proved that this
was from Dispensation, and not known Right. And to them of the Old Testament,
they say, It was a mere legal thing: but this also is only said, and not showed
as it ought to be: Nay the contrary may be showed; because nothing was merely
legal or determining with the Law, which began not with the Law of Moses: but
the Examples of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who all swore, were much ancienter
then the Law of Moses: and therefore it was a Natural Law rather than Mosaical,
whereby men swore anciently, and that was not disgraced, nor altered by the Law
of the Gospel. But this miserable mistake is most frequent in the
argumentations of presumptuous, but unski^^ul Treaters, and as they would be
thought admirers of Scripture, that a just and righteous document shall fare
the worse for being found by them in the Old Testament, though not at all
relating to the Mosaical Law: and when they see cause, be rejected and
disgraced, because it is there found.

But, say they, there are many places in the New Testament, as of our Savior
and St. James, strictly inhibiting swearing at all, Matthew. 5. 24. 36. and chap.
23. 16, 18, 20. James 5. 12. These places being urged hard by Anabaptists have
driven men to a distinction never thought of till of late, and then chiefly, if
not only by them of the Reformation, and especially beyond the Seas; whose
Common-places generally distinguish between an Oath Public, and exacted by the
Magistrates, and an Oath Private, offered and uttered without any such
Authority. That (say they) is lawful and not prohibited by the Scripture, but
this they grant is. But upon trial, as current as this notion is, there will be
found nothing in Antiquity, nothing in Scripture, nothing in the nature of the
thing it self, warranting it, or making it unlawful to swear that in private,
with the due conditions of an Oath mentioned by Jeremy, viz. in Truth, in
Judgment (not necessary public but private) Jer. 4. 2.
and in Righteousness, which a man way safely and innocently swear in public.
For who was over Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, to require them to swear to others?
Who can legitimate the Oaths of Princes one toward another? Who do except
against the mutual stipulations of man and wife in contracts, because they are
not always performed before a Magistrate? Princes when they treat with one
another, are but as private men: And yet all these swear solemnly and lawfully.
And the reason of an Oath employed in the swear given by St. Paul, does justify
this: For if an Oath be the end of all strifes, how shall those controversies
be ended between private men without an Oath, when no Magistrate is at hand? If
an Oath will effect peace and satisfaction without repairing to the Magistrate,
what should hinder but it should have its natural effect and end, without
molesting the Magistrate? Can the Magistrate make that part of the Worship of
God (as lawful swearing is said to be) which in it self is not the Worship of
God? But it may here be questioned farther, What? has not the lawful
Magistrate greater influence and power over an Oath than private men? To which
I answer, that in this the lawful Powers have a special Prerogative above
others, in reference to an Oath; that though it be just and lawful to swear
without commission or command from the Magistrate, yet no man can exact an Oath
but the Magistrate. It is free in private cases to give or refuse an Oath: but
when lawful Authority pleases, it may extort an Oath from another, for the
manifestation of truth, and to end differences; which no private man ought, or
can do, any mor without a man's consent, that he can take away his purse.

Lastly, This Right in private Persons to determine differences by private
Oaths, appears from the tacit consent of such as openly deny it. For they
generally practice it themselves, and it is altogether unavoidable by them that
have any commerce or controversies in the world: it being natural unto all men
to appeal to God, when they have truth and justice on their sides, not so
appearing to others. What is more necessary for the gaining of belief, and
giving satisfaction to doubters, than to say, God is my witness: I call God to
witness. God he knows, and such like, all which are forms of swearing, though
not after the manner of Judicial proceedings. And who does not fall into these,
unless we chance to except a sullein and superstitious Sect, whose Religion is
of their own making? For an Oath is (...) qui ad^^bet Testem Deum, Aug. l. 1.
de Sermon. Dom. in Mon. Jarame ^um cave qu intum potes.
the bringing God in as a witness, says St. Augustine in his first Sermon of
Christ's Sermon on the Mount. And in another place he advises thus: Avoid
swearing as much as you can: For it is better not to swear when a thing is
true. For by customary swearing men often fall into a precipice, and come near
to Perjury: But they (so far as I have heard some of them) do not know what it
is to swear. For they think they do not swear, when they have in their mouths,
God he knows, and, God is my witness, etc. I call God to witness upon my Soul,
because they say not, BY GOD: These are Austins words in his Eighty ninth
Epistle, where he writes against the Pelagians, who held an opinion (it should
seem by St. Austin there) that men should not swear at all; and yet used such
manner of speeches as these. By God, is no more than to say, God punish me if
it be not so, says Thomas. Nihil est autem aliud dicere, Per Deum ita est,
nisi quod Deus puni^^ me si non ita est. Thomas in December Praecepta. Opuscul.
page 100.


Now in answer to the places of Scripture, and also some of the Ancients
declaring against Swearing, we may in^erpret them to imply in their general
words, only a restraint in two things: The matter, and the manner. The matter
is expressly forbidden by Christ, when he instanceth in the Heavens, the Earth,
the Temple, the Gold of the Temple, the Altar, or a man's Head: all which, as
any other thing inferior to God Almighty, are forbidden expressly by Christ, as
derogatory to God: part of whose Prerogative it is, to be the Decider and Judge
of Controversies in such cases; and of whose worship, to be invoked in that
manner. The manner is to do this lightly upon a man's own head, and for his
pleasure, rather than for any use or necessity of an Oath.

The Fourth Commandment is, Remember thou keep holy the Seventh. IV.
day, Six days, etc. of which we have spoken what may suffice our ends, where
we discoursed of the Circumstance of Time of Gods worship. And to determine the
doubts of late about the morality or ceremonialness of this Precept, would
require a distinct Volume. It may only here be noted that Nothing in this
Precept does directly and immediately bind Christians, but only Reductively,
according to the opinions of such who hold that All Evangelical Acts are
reducible to the Decalogue, as well as Natural and Moral Acts. But if the whole
Law of Moses sufficed not to advise us directly and plainly of our duty toward
God and our Neighbor, can we think that so small a Segment, so few Lines as
the Decalogue, are sufficient? If the Law had been sufficient, according to St.
Paul, The Gospel had been in Gal. 2. 21. and 3. 21.
vain. Yet do we acknowledge a natural equity and justice contained in the
Fourth Commandment, which may give grounds to found other Doctrines of the
Gospel than are there expressed. And some of the Jewish Doctors, whom Grotius
cites, and much approves, do distinguish Grotius in Decalogum.
this Commandment from it self: For they say, That part of it is Moral (not as
is not amiss held by many, that it has through out a Moral and a Mosaical or
Ceremonial sense) and part Judaical; as they would demonstrate by the reason of
it given expressly and implicitly: For they say, That these words, Remember
that thou keep holy the Seventh day, do bind from the reason of the Creation,
and Gods making the World: but that the Jews were enjoined to rest from all
labor on that day, was from the consideration of their particular deliverance
from the servitude of Egypt: So that they were obliged to remember to sanctify
the Seventh day, in commemoration of the Creation of the World; but so to
sanctify it, as to rest from all Labors, in commemoration of their hard
labors in Egypt, from which they were delivered. Of which interpretation we
may say thus much; That it very well agrees with the reason given in
Deuteronomy of the Sabbath, which is Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15
omitted in Exodus. For there the Command is enforced thus, immediately after
the Precept of Rest, And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of
Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, through a mighty
hand, and stretched-out arm, therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep
the Sabbath day.

In the fifth place it is said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy. V.
days may be long, etc. which words have two Parts; The Precept and the Motive
or Reason of the Precept. In the Precept is to be observed the Ground of it,
and the Form of it. And what is the Ground and Original of Childrens Duty and
Obedience to their Parents, and of Servants to their Masters, and of Subjects
to their Sovereign, but a preventing benefit which they receive from them. And
surely one, if not the only (next to his own glory) end of Gods requiring here
obedience of Inferior to Superior, is the natural and moral benefits derived
by them to their Inferiors; and that by Gods will and appointment too. So
though it is scarce to be supposed that Parents or Governors should so
unnaturally fail of their duty and design God had in setting them over others,
as to acquit these from rendering honor to them; yet the better to facilitate,
and to oblige more strongly Inferiors to do their duties, God does in this
Command also require that Parents of all sorts should conscionably discharge
their part to their Children. For there being two general motives to all
duties, Love and Ingenuity, and fear of evil and necessity, it is not so
prudent nor so powerful to hang all upon one, as on both. It Is true, God has
put power into the hands of Parents and Princes and Governors to constrain and
exact the duty of Obedience from their respective Subjects: but he has put a
natural principle of Love into their hearts also, inclining them to goodness
toward them; which notwithstanding is neither so general nor effectual, but
many fail egregiously in it: wherefore God, by his holy Word, advertiseth and
exhorts to the exercise of it; and as it were, the better to dispose and bow
those in subjection to them, to perform their duty with cheerfulness. And
therefore St. Paul, after the duty of Obedience imposed upon Children, lays a
duty upon Parents on their Children, saying: And ye Fathers provoke not your
Children; but bring them up in the admonition Ephesians. 6. 4.
of the Lord: That is, Exercise not imperiously and impertinently that power
God has given you over your Children, rather be known ye can do it; and so,
when it is discerned, that it is rather the Lust of a tyrannous nature, than of
natural care, love, or kindness which urges them to rule with vain rigor, the
Children be provoked to break their bonds, and pass the bounds which otherwise
might have been observed to the glory of God, and comfort of both: Yet does not
the Apostle justify such excess in children, more than the extreme of Parents;
but only foretells the evil event of such unchristian rigor.

And the like may be said of Servants and Masters mentioned next by the
Apostle: who having prescribed an Evangelical principle of demeanor Ephesians. 6.
of Servants toward their Masters, does subjoyn the like Precept to Masters.
And ye Masters do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening, knowing
that your Master also is in Heaven: neither is there respect of persons with
him: Intimating the ground of hearty, ingenuous, and faithful service of
Children and Servants, to proceed commonly from the Fountain of love and
kindness in the Parents and Masters: and therefore, if they would be well
served, they should first serve God themselves, in educating them according to
Gods gentle Law, and be careful to instruct them in the fear of God. And so
where the Apostle stateth the mutual obligation between Ephesians. 5 21, 25.
Man and Wife, he tempereth his counsel with reciprocal kindnesses, that as the
Wife is to submit her self to her own Husband, the Husband is to love his Wife,
and that by virtue of this Commandment, which can never be well kept, according
to Gods mind, where there is a faileur on either hand; though St. Peter tells
us, like a true Evangelical Preacher, that with good Christians and true
Believers, it is no exemption from duty and proper subjection, that our
Superiors transgress the laws of modesty, sobriety and moderation toward us.
But Servants, and by the same rule, Subjects and Children ought to be subject
with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward; and
that for reasons immediately following: And the 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20. Titus. 2.
9.
same requires St. Paul to Titus.

But here it is queried by some, Why St. Paul having taken occasion to adjust
the duties between Masters and Servants, Parents and Children, Husbands and
Wives, omitteth wholly to restrain and regulate the power of Princes toward
their Subjects, leaves no Rules for them, as if they might offend, or offending
might not be informed of their duty by Christian Doctrine?

To this we say, First, what some have well observed and affirmed before us,
The reason hereof is, because in St. Paul's days there were no Sovereign Powers
of the Christian Religion; and therefore it might have seemed unseasonable and
vain, to offer counsel and rules to them who were not capable of them: For had
there been such Princes, no doubt is to be made but he would have seasoned
them, and sanctified them with his wholesome documents.

And yet Secondly, He does not absolutely dismiss them without advice, who may
be well reduced to the Head of Parents of Countries, and Masters of their
Subjects.

And thus much for the principle of honoring our Superiors, from the benefit
of their duties toward us. Now the Principles of Obedience more immediately
obliging us unto them, are in brief, The Fear and Honor of God, whose Image,
Representatives, and Instruments they are for our Good. No man after so many
Reasons and Precepts given us in holy Luke 10. 16.
Scripture of faithful and conscionable submission to our Superiors, can be
said to fear God, who does not honor his Superiors: For of all Civil Parents
or Governors, St. Paul says, They are the Ministers of God to thee Romans 13.
4. Eccles. 7. 27, 28.
for good: And of our Natural Parents well admonishes the Wiseman, Honor thy
Father with thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy Mother. Remember
that thou wast begot of them, and how can thou recompense them the things
they have done for thee? And of our Ecclesiastical Parents, Hebr. 13. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
to the Hebrews.

Now the Act, Honor, does imply all inward affection and proper humility of
mind; and all outward demonstrations of the same, by sober, modest, humble
respect and reverence unto them: As also service, assistance, obedience,
attendance, relief in straits, feeding, clothing, and comforting them in their
wants, weaknesses, and distresses, and finally contributing all we are able to
their well being, who, next under God, were the Causes of our Beings in the
world. But of the manner or extent of our Obedience, especial^y to our Civil
Parents, and of the contrary evil, Resistance, we have spoken before.

The last motive to this duty is expressed in the Reason annexed to this
Commandment, viz. That thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God
shall give thee: Intimating a signal blessing of God upon them that so
reverence his Deputies, whether Natural, Civil, or Ghostly, and a malediction
Ephesians. 6. 2.
unto such as deny the same upon false, wicked, fleshly, or vain pretenses: See
Part 1. Book 1. chapter 26
But of the virtue and duty of Obedience we have spoken before.

The Sixth Commandment follows, Thou shall do no murder, as it is well. VI.
rendered in our English Translation. For Murder is that which imports the
killing of Man only, and so does the Hebrew word here used (...), in opposition
as it were to (...) common to all killing, whether of Man or Beast. Which
though it might not be an argument to the Superstitious Heathens, of the
Pythagorean, or rather Indian strain, the Gymnosophists, (from whom Pythagoras
borrowed his opinion) denying it lawful to take away the life of any thing, in
so much as Aristotle tells us, that Empedocles the ancient Aristotel. Rhetor.
1. (...). Plin. Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 5.
G^eek Philosopher wrote a Book with this Title, Of not killing any living
thing: And Pliny writes of the Amycle, whose chief City was Anxur in Italy,
that being Pythagoreans, they suffered themselves to be consumed by Serpents,
because they would not kill them. Yet methinks, the Manichaean Heretics should
not have fallen into so great superstition, having the use of the Scripture:
where God gives Man free liberty to convert the Beasts Exodus 9. 3.
of the field to his food, as well as the Herb of the field. But perhaps the
Latin word occides being general, may have deceived them, as St. Augustine Aug.
Civ. Dei. l. 1. c. 20.
intimates; where he tells us that the Manichees grounded their opinion Of not
killing any living thing, upon this Commandment, Thou shall not kill: which St.
Augustine there refuteth from their own opinion and practice. For they held
also an opinion that Plants had life too: and yet they destroyed them, in
eating Herbs. And there wanted not some conscientious and learned Christians,
who held it against Christian perfection and purity to kill any man, though in
just defense; as did Ambrose, who does not absolutely deny it to be lawful, yet
looks upon it as a blemish to Christian Religion to shed blood. So that he
holds it scarce lawful in such a case as shipwreck, for one man to save his own
life, by thrusting another man of a planck, which might have carried him to
land; and so, to return Ne dum salutem defendat, Pietatem contaminet. Ambr. 31
Off. cap.
blows back to him again, that, as a Robber on the Highway, shall assail him;
least in defending his life, he corrupts or stains his Religion. To this we can
only say, That the Church has been so tender and pure in her Profession, that
though she has not any where condemned that we call natural and lawful
Resistance, to the securing of a man's Fortunes, and especially Life; yet has
she in her Canons of Irregularities, set such a value and reverence upon the
blood of man, that even involuntary, and much more voluntary killing any man,
does by her Decrees render one in Priestly Orders incapable of doing his
Office: because, as St. Ambrose his words imply, though the guilt before God
should not be great, yet the blemish and scandal before men would be so; and
all suspicion and appearance of evil ought to be avoided.

And this way of arguing, which is yet the only of any color, is of much less
force to make wars unlawful, being denounced by just Authority, as late
Fanatics would pretend at least to hold, to gain esteem of men of singular
consciences, which yet gross experience has certified us, extends no farther
than opportunity and advantage have enabled and encouraged them to violate. For
a man has not power absolute over his own person, but is under the command of
his Superiors, who are to judge of the reasonableness of the endangering his
own life, and destroying the life of another. For if we should so far affront
the Law of Nature, as to grant a man might not use any Self-defence to the
apparent loss of the life of another, it would not from thence follow at all
that he might not receive power and authority, and such a command (which to
deny were sinful) to bereave another of his life. How many examples in the Old
Testament justify this? In the New Testament, having no instance of such
Christians as had any Sovereign Political Power, do we wonder that we have
neither Example nor Precept directly commending this to Christian practice? But
by implication we have; when St. Paul exhorts thus, Let every man abide in
the same calling wherein he is called. 1 Cor. 7. (...).
Now it was well known to the Apostle, that there were continual wars in the
Roman Empire, and that many Christians were Soldiers, and that that was their
Calling wherein they were called: For Cornelius was a Soldier. And when the
Soldiers came to St. John Baptist enquiring, What shall we do? He did not say,
Lay down your Commission: Serve no longer: Luke 3. 14.
But, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with
your wages: which is as much as, Use your employment soberly and justly,
neither prey upon any man, upon your private account.

And whereas the words of Christ in his Sermon on the Mount, seem to Matthew. 5.
22, 38, 39, 40, 41.
be pretended to the contrary, Christ there exhorting patiently to bear
affronts and injuries, without revenging a man's self; they are to be understood
of violence repayed without lawful Authority, either expressed or employed: but
this is always employed in just defenses. And again, these are rather Counsels,
than Commands, peremptorily forbidding so to do, but advising to forbear that
out of a Spirit of meekness and patience, which is not utterly unlawful to do,
but to the disadvantage of the Gospel in general, and the diminution of that
reward annexed to the humble and patient suffering of wrongs for Gods sake: But
though this is to be preferred before the other, it follows not, that the other
is unlawful: or that it is so much as lawful to forbear executing justice on
such offenders, when commanded by good Authority. And so do the Jews interpret
those words of Leviticus -- Thou shall not stand against the blood of thy
neighbor, thus, as Fagius has noted on the place: Whoever See Paulus Fagius
on Lev. 19. 16.
is able to deliver his neighbor in any of his Members, and does it not, he is
in the same guilt as if he shedded blood, and becomes guilty of death. And it
is impossible a man should be guilty of blood in doing that, which he shall be,
in that he does it not.

It being thus explained, what is not meant by this Command, what is by it
intended, may more briefly be declared: and that, as in other Precepts, is of
two sorts, Negative, Not to murder: against which foul and crying sin, so much
and so plainly is denounced in holy Writ, that to recount them here in this
short Comment, were unseasonable and superfluous. It may be defined, A wilful
and unjust taking away the life of a Man. And there are two principle Causes of
this unjustness. First, No good or warrantable ground or demerits: Secondly, No
good Authority so to do. Now Authority is twofold, Express, and Implicit.
There is no express Law commanding the destruction of another that seeks mine,
but Implicit there is; and so it may be just. Express is that which exercises
it self against convicted Malefactors. And of both these is he destitute who
executes himself. I cannot say that it is unlawful for a man required by just
Authority, to kill himself: but of himself to do this, is certainly a murderous
act, though he were guilty of Death. For as St. Austin has observed, Aug. Civ.
De^ l. 1. c. 17.
He that kills himself, does certainly kill a man: and it is not said, Thou
shall not kill thy neighbor or another man, but simply, Thou shall not kill.
And though indeed about the earliest days of the Persecution of the Church of
Christ, some men, and more especially young women, to prevent the abuses of
their bodies, cast themselves away, and this was connived at by the Church;
yet, upon more mature discussion and consideration of the notoriousness of the
Fact, it was condemned expressly by the Church: nay, for men needlessly and
voluntarily to declare and publish themselves to be Christians, and so to offer
themselves to the Sword of the Magistrate, was judged wicked, and the
practisers of it denied to be Christians, any farther than in name: as appears
in Clemens Alexandrinus. And those Noble Persons, Clem. Alex. l. 4. Strom. p.
481. and 504.
who are recorded in Scripture to have affected such deaths, can be no more
presidents for to justify this sin, than others, other scandalous sins;
unless, as St. Austin inclines to believe, answering the furious Donatists
(who out Aug. 1. c. 26. Civ. Dei.
of mad zeal rather against the Church than for God, were wont to destroy
themselves) they had some special instinct so to do from God, as Sampson might
be thought to have, in that he was divinely assisted above his ordinary
strength, to pull down the house: And besides, his intention was not out of
weariness or discontent of his life principally to destroy himself, but the
Enemies of God, of himself, and the people of God. And there seems no great
difficulty or inconveniencie to grant that a man may run himself into apparent
danger of his life, to bring a most notorious damage to the Enemies of God and
his Country, though not upon his own head, but by just Authority. So that I
make no doubt but Voetius determined the Voetius Select. Disp. Part 4. p. 256.
Case of Conscience amiss, denying that a man in desperation of saving himself
and his ship of War, from falling into the hands of his Enemies, may with a
good Conscience blow it up, and all in it. For all his arguments prove no more
than that this a man may not do of himself; because no man must slay himself:
but they prove not that a man may not do this by command and injunction of his
Superiors, in whose power his life is, and to whom belongs his Vessel.

And what is said against a man's destroying his own life, or his neighbors,
makes also against any maiming or mutilation of the body of himself or others,
though not ending in death. The true reason of all which Recte dicitur inquit
Socrates, (...) etc. Plato in Phaedone.
is; First, because it is against a Law of Nature imprinted deeply by God
himself in the minds of men, yea all living creatures to study and endeavor
their own preservation, which Law is hereby directly broken. Secondly, No man
is absolute Master of himself: but first (as Plato has noted) is, as it were,
the Goods of God, and then a Servant to his Country, and therefore without Gods
consent, or his Countries, by the Sovereign power, discharges him of his duty
and service toward it, he is an Offender against both. And hereunto pertains
the high Crime of causing Abortion and Miscarriages of Women to hide their
former sin.

And as the Fact it self is forbidden, so all ordinary Causes tending
thereunto; as all evil and provoking language: All evil affections, as hatred,
anger, malice, and such like: All assistance by conspiring, counselling, or
acting outwardly, are certainly forbidden.

Lastly, as the thing it self and all evil acts and offices are forbidden, so
because the Righteousness of Christians must exceed that of Scribes and
Pharisees, as our Savior Christ says in St. Matthew, therefore Christians
Matthew. 5.
are obliged hereby to all reasonable and charitable acts of love, friendship,
piety, as well as justice, conducing to the support and preservation and
comfort of their brethren, especially in Christ; as St. Paul advises to the
Galatians: As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially Gal. 6. 10.
unto them who are of the household of Faith: And herein he followed the Precept
of Christ, I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse Matthew. 5.
44,
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you, and persecute you: That ye may be the Children of your Father which is in
45.
heaven: for he makes, etc. And therefore by this Commandment are requi^ed of
us all acts of Mercy; as Visiting the sick and imprisoned, Feeding the hungry,
Clothing the naked, Ministering assistance by counsel and action to the
oppressed, Comfort to the dejected, and such like: Knowing and considering that
they, who as Goats, stand at the Left hand of Christ at the last Day of
Judgment, shall not be condemned only for injuries and injustices done to
others, but because Christ in his members was an hungered, and ye gave him no
meat, was thirsty, and ye gave him no drink: Matthew. 25. 42, 43.
Was a stranger, and ye took him not in: naked, and ye clothed him not: sick
and in prison, and ye visited him not.

The Seventh Commandment interdicteth all uncleanness in these. VII.
words, Thou shall not commit Adultery: Which Philo Judaeus following herein
the Septuagint, and having no skill in the Hebrew or Original Tongue (as has
been observed by learned men, and is easily to be discerned by any Reader)
places before the Commandment, Thou shall not kill: though in the Fifth
Chapter of Deuteronomy, where the Decalogue is repeated, the order of the
Original is observed; which implies some Error happening in Exodus: For
neither is the reason of Philo or Grotius inclining to that opinion, valid;
viz. because Adultery is the greatest sin a man can commit against his
neighbor: For undoubtedly Murder is more heinous. There is some variety in the
New Testament in the reciting of this Command: For Mark 10. 9. and Luke the 18.
20. the order of the Septuagint in Exodus is kept; Matthew 19. 18. the order of
Deuteronomy is followed; which teaches that the diversity was ancient, and that
not stood scrupulously on. But the putting of, Thou shall not steal, before
Thou shall not commit adultery in Exodus 20. not approved by Philo, or his
Followers, should make that place of Exodus more suspected of alteration than
that of Deuteronomie.

But the matter not being great, and that only concerning the Greek
Translation, the End and Contents of this Law are more seriously to be
attended; which may be conveniently reduced to these following heads. First
unclean thoughts, and inward motions and dispositions, and most of all
Resolutions to offend in act, being not hindered: For this Christ our most pure
President and holy Doctor condemns for adultery in the Heart, Matthew. 5. I say
unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust Matthew. 5. 28.
after her, has committed adultery with her in his heart. Not he that looks
on a woman, but he that looks on her to lust after her, is condemned, though
all curious, studious, idle impertinent views of men or women, upon which may
follow ordinarily the sparks, and then the flames of lust, are forbidden.
Again, not all lusting of the heart is to be compared to the acts of lusting
inwardly with the act outward joined to that. Adultery of the heart our Savior
Christ does not equal to the Adultery of act; but makes it Adultery in a degree
inferior.

Secondly, There is uncleanness of the Tongue too, when it breaks out into
impure, light, foolish, lascivious speeches, tending to begetting evil thoughts
and acts in others; against which St. Paul declares in his Epistle to the
Ephesians: Let no corrupt communication come out of your mouth: but Coloss. 4
29.
that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the
hearers: Coloss. 3. 8.
And to the Co^ossians; But now ye also put off all these, anger, wrath,
malice, blasphemy, filthy communication, out of your mouth.

Thirdly, Actual uncleanness which is accomplished in the deeds of the flesh:
And ^a^h several degrees; which may be distinguished into Unnatural and
Natural. Unnatural consists in the vile acts a man or woman may commit upon
their own bodies, perverting the course and end of nature, instituting
diversity of Sexes for sober and profitable propagation, making that void, in
some manner at least. At which St. Paul may seem to strike, as Ephesians. 5. 12.
far as modesty would permit, when he says, It is a shame to speak of those
things which are done of them in secret: meaning the impurities of Gnostick
(...) Theodoret. Haret. Fabul. cap. 7.
and Valentinian Conventicles, to the reproach of Primitive Christianity:
Epiphanius relating how, besides those called natural lusts between Sexes
distinct, they dishonored and corrupted their own bodies, in the highest acts
of single uncleanness, and made up some of their Mysteries thereby. And however
single persons do not so prodigiously abuse themselves as did those impure
Heretics, pretending greater Sanctity and deeper Mysteries in their Religion
then the Catholics, yet must it needs be a great offense to God, so to corrupt
a man's self in yielding to fleshly temptations, condemned by Heathen Poets,
though themselves were immodest, for a violation of the Law of Nature it self:
which therefore all Christians, especially of weak reason, strong passions, and
young years, are most watchfully to beware of, and resolutely to avoid.

Another sort of acted, rather then actual, Uncleanness here prohibited, is the
foul sin of Sodomie, to which the wicked Citizens of Sodom, destroyed Genesis 19.
4, 5. Romans 1. 26.
by fire, gave denomination, as may appear in the Book of Genesis: And of which
St. Paul to the Romans speaks, when he says that God delivered up the
Gentiles to these unnatural Lusts, as a punishment of their gross Idolatry: For
this cause God gave them up to vile affections: For even their women did change
the natural use into that which is against nature. And likewise the men leaving
the natural use of the women, burned in their lusts one toward another, men
with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that
recompense of their errors which was meet.

A Third unnatural Lust is that called Bestiality, or abusing, or being abused
Lev. 28. 23.
by Beasts, in lustful acts, against which God has in his Word, as well as by
the Light and Law of Nature, declared.

The more natural, but yet unchristian Lusts here forbidden are Adultery, which
is either simple, viz. when a married person commits uncleanness with an
unmarried: where some make two kinds, the one when the man is married, but the
woman single, which they commonly make the less, and so indeed it is, by reason
that it brings no spurious brood to inherit or share the Goods of any other
man, but him that he knowingly and willingly bestows them on. The other is,
when the woman is married, and the man single, which is, besides the general
sin, subject to the foresaid mischief: And therefore hereby the woman offends
in these four respects: Incredulity, not believing or regarding the Law and
Word of God to the contrary. 2. Not reverencing the Laws of the Church. 3.
Treachery against her Faith and Troth given before God to her Husband, whereby
she delivered unto him 1 Cor. 7. 4.
the power of her Body, as St. Paul speaks 1 Cor. 7. as likewise does the
Husband to his Wife, upon the same occasion: and therefore thus far the Man and
Woman transgressing, offend equally. 4. They say, the Woman in such cases is a
Thief, in that she spoileth her Husband of his goods, and gives them to a
false Issue he would knowingly no ways yield them to.

But yet says Thomas, the man sins no less than the woman, however Thomas
in december Praecepta, Opusc. 3.
he may flatter himself otherwise: And the sum of his reason is this; First,
Because that the man has no more power over his Body than the woman over hers.
Secondly, Because the man is stronger naturally than the woman, and endued with
more reason. Thirdly, Because the man is the Head of the woman, and her
teacher, as St. Paul says; therefore, as it is a greater sin for a Priest than
a Layman to offend in that kind, so is it for a man, who is as it were Gods
Minister, even in spiritual matters to the woman. And in truth we find little
or no difference put by the Scripture between the fact James 4. 4.
of the one and the other; St. James joining them thus together, Ye Adulterers
and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with
Levit. 20. 10.
God? Yet Moses his Law decreed the Adulteress to be put to death, but not the
Adulterer, as offending more against the Civil capacity of Man: And perhaps for
the hardness of their hearts, least they should do it themselves, God would
have it done in a more orderly and just way: Some Laws of Christians at this
day granting the man leave to kill his wife himself, finding her in actual
Adultery.

Fornication likewise which some calling Simple, have legitimated in great
measure, is condemned by this Commandment: St. Paul, as it were foreseeing, and
intending to confound such modern Doctors, says, Know ye not 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10.
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived,
neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers
of themselves with mankind; Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And to the
Hebrews -- But Fornicators and Adulterers God shall judge. And so likewise the
Excusers or Extenuaters of them, so far as to bring down the guilt of either of
them to that of a venial sin only, which is as much as nothing: Est ergo
heresis dicere, Fornicationem simplicem non esse peccatum mortale. Thom. ib.
But Thomas speaks soundly and plainly, It is therefore an Heresy to say
simple Fornication is no mortal sin.

And if simple Fornication be, as certainly it is, a mortal sin, then surely it
is much more grievous, when it has the aggravations of Constupration, or
Deflouring of a Virgin; her Virginity being her natural grace and glory. And
much more Ravishing, or invading violently the chastity of others. And so
Incest committed against the Laws of Nature, of God, or the Religion we
profess, concerning consanguinity and affinity. And there is another Degree of
Lust, which is called Sacrilege, extending the word a little of the farthest,
to express the great wickedness of abusing those who have dedicated themselves
in a state of Virginity, to Gods Service. For as we have shown before, as it is
not only lawful, but very commendable in any good Christian, upon sober and
mature consideration of the probability of being able to make good such holy
resolutions, to devote himself, or her self, to such excellent means of serving
God, and that by a Vow, so can it not be but a notorious offense against God,
to mock him either with committing fornication, or entering into marriage,
otherwise lawful. If indeed Marriage were such a Law, as some grossly conceive
of it, that not to comply with it, were to offend God, then were it not lawful
to design any such life as Virginity, nor yet widowhood, being in ordinary
capacity; and then were most of their arguments good, urged against the state
of Virginity chosen by way of Vow: But it being a Jus or Right rather, that
every man has of God, then a Lex or Law, that he should marry, their reasons
prove very fallacious and vain: And they who shall go about to seduce to
marriage (and much more, other more scandalous and vicious acts) them that have
so decreed in their heart to live to God, do very wickedly, notwithstanding so
great a President as Luther may be alleged to the contrary, and the judgment
of Perkins and others.

Lastly, To these may be reduced all outward acts and signs of Lightness and
Lasciviousness, tending to Wantonness and Lust: Evil Dalliances and Speeches,
and Gestures, and Attire, and Ornaments to insinuate evil to others, or to
tempt them: as likewise Intemperance fomenting the Law of the Members, as St.
Paul speaks, against the Law of the mind.

The Eighth Commandment is, Thou shall not steal. In the Second Table. VIII.
Gods principal intention it was to preserve one man from offering violence or
injury to another. Injury is done to man two ways in General: To his Person;
or To his Goods and Possessions. The Injury done to a man's Person, is either
committed against him simply; and this is forbidden under the Commandment, Thou
shall do no murder: or against him jointly, as he is one with another. For so
God says, They two shall be one flesh, man and wife making in several senses
but one Person: and therefore to offend against the Person of one, is to wrong
both: And therefore it is said, Thou shall not commit Adultery. For hereby
notorious injustice is done to the person so united to the Party suffering
evil. Neither can it be alleged, what too often happens, that there is consent
on one part, and so no injury: because first, Neither God, nor the other Party,
to both which the will of the Offender is to be no less subject than to
himself, does consent.

A Second Injury is done to the Goods of a man by sustaining loss or detriment:
and against this evil does God here provide by saying, Thou shall not steal.
Concerning which we are to consider briefly The Ground, The Extent or Kinds,
and lastly, The Evil of Thefts.

The Original and Cause of this Commandment is certainly Justice, and (...)
Equity to be observed between man and man, in all Commonwealths: and without
which no humane, and much less, Divine or Religious Society can long continue.
Justice is or may be taken two ways, Abstractly, as it may be considered in it
self, as a Divine Rule and Law propounded by God according to which he
requires all men to conform their Actions. And therefore Plutarch speaks
divinely; God not only has Justice sitting by him; but is himself Justice and
Right, and the ancientest and perfectest of all Laws. In which yet he seems to
be prevented by more Divine David, saying of God, Psalm. 9. 4. Thou satest (or
sit) in the throne judging right. God is Justice, and so is his Will
revealed as a Rule of humane affairs. And Justice is in man too, concretely, as
they speak, and so is defined, A perpetual and constant will of giving every
man his due: though Gerson would have Gerson de Vita Spirituali, Lect. 3.
this to relate principally to God: And that of Fact it does, is most true: it
being impossible God should do or desire to do injury to any man: but as of
Form and Right it concerns man no less, because he is perpetually and
immutably obliged to do justly, though actually he does it not: For Aug. Civ.
Dei c. 4.
without this what are Kingdoms [or Common-wealths] (says Austin) but
Slaughter-houses? And much more may we say, What is Religion without Justice,
but extremest Villainy? there being nothing so ridiculous to all men, or
blasphemous to Christ, as to imagine a man can be a good Christian, before he
is an honest and just man.

This Justice has two parts, as Lactantius writes, Piety to God, and Equity
Lactan. l. 5. cap. 14.
to man. For Justice (as we have showed in the beginning of this Work) it is,
to be Religious toward God, and to worship him; and greatest Injustice to deny
him such his due. Equity toward Man, is that we even now described: and which
is in this Law commanded. But because Justice or Equity are said to be Virtues,
whereby a Man gives every one his due or own, they must be grounded upon
Dominion: and Dominion is nothing else but a Propriety a man has to use a
thing which he possesses as he pleases. The principal act of Injustice then,
is to violate this Propriety, or withdraw, or withhold any thing from another,
which of right belongs to him: not observing our Saviors rule in his Sermon on
the Mount, Whatsoever Matthew. 7. 12.
ye would that men should do to you, do you also unto them: for this is the Law
and the Prophets. The Law and the Prophets both contained, and here signify
the whole substance of Religion of the Church under the Law, and therefore such
moral honesty and justice as this, being the chief subject of these Books, is
likewise the substance of Religion it self, improved by Christ to some higher
perfections.

Now the Extent of this sin of stealing or injustice, is First, to open
violence in Robbery, and spoiling of others of that which they are rightly
possessed of without color of Justice: which is indeed the most notorious of
all, because all modesty and moderation, but what fear of their necks may
suggest, is laid aside, and all become a prey to them that fall into their
hands: To which may be referred all unjust and unreasonable and tyrannical
Laws, extorting from Subjects that which no cause requires: of which Esaias
complains, Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of Thieves: Esaias 1. 23.
And probably may intend to condemn all excessive Fees of Lawyers and
Physicians, who though they directly rob not men of what is theirs, yet
discover such unsatisfiedness and ravenousness in their Offices, that unless
they find unconscionable consideration for their pains, they will neglect the
trust put in them.

Secondly, to clandestine frauds and cousenages, which are committed sundry
ways: 1. By direct stealing from another his Goods; which being privily acted,
is called properly Thievery: against which God has specially declared in
Exodus 2. v. 2. etc. And it is either against the Public, and is called
Peculatus, or Pillaging; when a man robs the Common Stock, or uses artifices to
refuse to pay those legal dues of Custom or Tribute, or other just Taxes made
legal by good Authority. Many men think it scarce any sin, which in truth is a
notorious one, to cheat the Civil Powers of what is due to them: but Solomon
implies the contrary when he Prove. 28. 4.
says, Whose robs his Father or his Mother, and says it is no
transgression, the same is companion of a destroyer. And Christ commands by
St. Paul, Romans 13.
to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear
to whom fear, honor to whom honor. So that there seems to be, and really is a
justice in giving outward reverence and honor to our Superiors: and rudely
and stoutly to deny them this, is to rob them of their dues before God, and to
offend against this Commandment.

Thirdly, not to pay what we owe, and according to the Circumstances we owe any
thing to another, and especially to detain the wages of the hireling or
labourer from him, Lev. 19. 13. James 5. 4. which will cry against the hard
Master who delayeth to pay what is earnt according to agreement: For as
Casuists has observed, He that pays not exactly according to the known
custom and rule, though he afterward pays all in kind, yet in effect he does
not pay all was due, seeing many inconveniences do commonly happen to the
damage of the Creditour upon such delays. But that which is most intolerable
and unjust, is the too common craft of covetous and wicked minds, to withold,
or refuse due payment of debts upon many vain and unconscionable pretenses, so
long till the Credit our becoming almost desperate of that debt, shall be
wrought upon by fear, to abate of his due, least he should loose all. They who
do not pay according to the agreed time, ought rather to add for satisfaction
of so long detaining to their debt, than to make new capitulations whereby the
principal sum should be impaired, to the loss of the Creditour.

Fourthly, to use adulterations in Commodities, contrary to the common rule and
expectations of men, is a sort of stealing and unjustice here condemned: as to
mix and corrupt Wines, Siders, Money, Bread, or, after the manner of Druggists
and Apothecaries, to sophisticate any Drugg or Liquor, or to counterfeit any
more precious thing with a viler and baser, is to commit an offense against
this Command, and no better than stealing in the eyes of God, how customary
soever this may be, and with a seared Conscience, and bold face carried on. Nay
frequently this is worse a great deal than simple filching and stealing, in
that the bodies of men are often by such sophistications, if not poisoned, yet
corrupted, and so ends in a degree of murder: and if not for the present and
particular mischief, yet for the general and gentle, deserves the halter and
hell no less than direct Thieves and Murderers.

Fifthly, Sacrilege, and open, or subtle or private alienation of what is
devoted to sacred and common ends of Religion, and usurping the same to a man's
private secular use, against the intention of the thing, has this double
aggravation above common simple theft: First, in that what was designed for
public uses and ends, is perverted to particular: For example, Endowments and
Donations made to Churches, serve not only to the maintenance of that Person,
who in that capacity possesses them, but to the benefit and comfort of all in
that district communicating in Spiritual things: wrong is done unto all them,
who upon the withdrawing of such due support, want their due ministrations.
Secondly, in ordinary thefts or injustice, the matter passes but from secular
to secular ends; but in Sacrilegious Thefts, it passes from one kind to
another: from Spiritual to Secular or Temporal, besides the particular injury
done to the Person to whom it is due.

And whereas it is said in defense of Sacrilege, that the owners of such
Spiritual Maintenances abuse them themselves by lazy, luxurious, and other
vicious courses, contrary to the true end of them; all this may be granted and
lamented; But they who preach up virtue out of such wicked principles and ends,
should withal consider how this involves the secular as well as spiritual
Person. For no man has any legal temporal Right to any estate so far, as that
it should prejudice the common good. And if upon vitiousness of the one, the
estate he owneth may be alienated, will it not hold good in the other? And have
not the King and Judicial Courts as great power over Temporal estates as
Ecclesiastical? We can give many instances sacred and humane, whereby it should
seem he has greater. And would these zealous men for virtuous and sober life,
hold it reasonable the Estates of Spendthrifts, and Drunkards, and Whoremasters
should be taken from them by violence, and given to soberer men? I would fain
see the disparity. This scarce any but sees, to the advantage of Ecclesiastical
revenues above Secular: That if the Party possessing them commits Treason
against his Sovereign, neither Religion nor Common Laws do adjudge such Estates
to be confiscated to the Crown, as they do others, which argues that
Ecclesiastical Estates are put more out of the Kings power than are Secular;
and therefore more unreasonably are seized on than these. It is true, the King
is in a more immediate way a Guardian and Protector of Church-estates, than of
the Secular: but Guardians have no more Interest or intrinsic Right to the
Estate they dispose of to the true owner, than they have of other men's. Or does
it at all extenuate the crime, that frequently it is committed against such
persons as cannot help themselves? Yet even cold Friends to the Churches Right
in such Cases, has observed and been constrained to confess, that the
displeasure, or to speak without mincing, the Curse of God has pursued those
more then ordinary, and egregiously frustrated their hopes and expectations,
who have fingered or grasped Church possessions: great usurpations of this kind
serving no farther, and doing no more good, than a Jugg of Beer does a good
Fellow. I will favor mine own Country so far, as to forbear all instances
might here be given, and only mention that I find in Paggius. Petrus de Vineis
an Italian, and prudent Counselor, and Secretary to Frederick the Emperor,
called Barbarossa, who had wars with Pope Alexander the Third, and advanced far
into Italy against him, was by the calumnies of the Barbaria Faction, intimate
and prevalent with the Emperor, turned out of office, and had for his
punishment both his eyes put out. But the Emperor afterward being convinced of
the wrong he had done him, received him to favor again: and being at Pisa,
onwards of his way against the Pope, and much pressed with straits how to pay
his Army, took this Peter into Counsel what he should do to raise moneys: Peter
answered, Your war being against the Church, it is good policy and reason to
make use of the wealth of it against it self; and therefore should do well to
seize on the rich plate, and wealth of the Churches of Pisa, and convert them
to your service. The Emperor liked the advice very well: and accordingly
spoiled the Churches of their riches, and so raised an Army. Which when Peter
heard, he came boldly to the Emperor, and said; Now I am revenged sufficiently
of you for my two eyes. You stirred up to your self the hatred of men, but I
have made God your enemy through your Sacrilege. From this time forward all
things will go worse and worse with you. And so it fell out, for Alexander at
length brought down his pride and him to great shame and misery, even to be
kicked by the Pope.

But thirdly, he that would understand the heinousness of the sin of Theft, and
the heinousness of all Thefts, Sacrilege, may for his satisfaction find
infinite examples of saddest nature of Gods vengeance against it: and the
Scriptures thus declares against them: Ecclesiasticus 34. 11. Habakkuk 2. 6.
Proverbs 10. 2. Esaias 61. 8. Habakkuk 2. 9. etc.

There yet remains one more abomination to God, under this Commandment, and
that is, abuse and injustice in weights and measures, contrary to the Law of
Nature, God, and common Commerce, which is thereby destroyed. God says in
Deuteronomie, Thou shall not have in thy bagg diverse Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14, 15.
weights, a great, and a small: Thou shall not have in thine house diverse
measures, a great and a small: But thou shall have a perfect and a just weight,
a perfect and a just measure shall thou have; that thy days may be lengthened
in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee: For all that do such things,
and all that do unrighteously, are abomination unto the Lord thy God. And so in
Leviticus; Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight,
or Lev. 19. 35.
in measure. Just weights, just balances, etc upon which words Paulus Fagius
notes out of Jewish Doctors, a fivefold iniquity committed by him that offends
in weights and measures. 1. He pollutes the Land. 2. He abuses or prophanes the
name of God. 3. He causes Gods Majesty, Glory, and Presence to forsake the
place. 4. Causes Israel to fall by the Sword. 5. Causes them to be driven into
Exile, in a strange Land. Add hereunto what Solomon says against this wicked
practice, Proverbs 11. v. 1. and Prove. 20. 23. as abominable in the eyes of God
above other sins: This kind of cheating has more aggravations of villainy than
I can stand here to enumerate: It is worse then downright common filching,
stealing, and robbing upon the Highway, because it extends to innumerable
persons more than they do: and is seldomer a great deal repented of, and
consequently more damnable: For (as the Psalmist says) he flattereth himself
in his own eyes till his iniquity Psalm. 36. 2.
be found to be hateful. And being infatuated with the stupifying charm of
present gain, supposes too often that if he civilly hears Sermons, and has
recourse at the last to the Doctrine of Justifying Faith, all scores between
him and God will be quitted. But how much happier, how much honester, how much
holier are they who loose their ears in the public Pillory, than such solemn
and grave Cheats in their Shops, who loose their souls? customariness and
commonness extenuating the sin; and the course of trading, and art of growing
rich apace, as requiring, so almost justifying such abominations. But no more,
though not enough of this.

We are now briefly to touch and recommend to the true Christian practice, not
only justice in doing right to all men, but doing good to all men, Gal. 6. 10.
as the Apostle exhorts: and the Rule of Contraries in expounding the
Commandments, which is, that where a Sin is forbidden expressly, there
implicitly is a virtue commanded, as where a virtue is enjoined, there the
contrary vice is much more interdicted. And surely the first place is here to
be given to repentance, and repentance of such sin as this does indispensably
require restitution or satisfaction; without which, if men did not tacitly hold
they might be saved by the common false notion of Justifying Faith, so many
would not shipwreck their Souls and Consciences in acting, living, and dying in
such unjust ways as are above mentioned. Of Satisfaction and Restitution we
have already spoken, as necessary to Repentance, as Repentance is necessary to
Salvation; and this satisfaction not as relating to God, but unto Man wronged:
And therefore I shall more fully give Saint Augustine's judgment in the Case,
and so leave it: In his Epistle to the Macedonians, he writes thus: If what
belongs to another, Aug. Ep. 54. ad Macedon.
the ground of the sin, be not restored, when it may be restored; Repentance is
counterfeited, and not real: But if it be real, the sin will never be forgiven,
unless there be a restitution of the thing ill gotten, but as I said, where it
can be restored.

But besides and above this, acts of Mercy and Charity are here required of all
good Christians: and not only to keep our hands from any open or clandestine
violence to others, but to extend and open our hands to the benefit and comfort
of others. Not only are we forbidden to take what is not our own, but to keep
what is our own, so to our selves, that the exigencies of our brother and
neighbor requiring, we should withhold it from him. Withhold not good from
them to whom it is due (says God) when it is in Prove. 3. 27.
the power of thine hand to do it. And in case of the distress of thy brother,
that thou have is in some measure due to him, in the eyes of God, and by his
Law of Charity, though not by the Law of the Land.

In the Ninth Commandment it is said, Thou shall not bear false witness against
IX. Lu^e 1^.
thy Neighbor. What is meant by Neighbor, our Savior Christ informs us in
the Gospel, extending it to all in common civil society with us. And as in the
preceding Commandments, God required that we should not wrong our Neighbor in
evil acts or deeds, so here does he prohibit us from doing him any wrong in
word. Which word is primarily meant of wrong in Judgment, when men are called
to testify to the truth of a matter, they by no means should deliver against
their Neighbor what is false: which may be done three ways; First, by false
accusations and charges of facts or crimes not committed, contrary to Gods
word, Lev. 19. 16. Thou Lev. 19. 16. Accusatorum lemeritas tribus medis
detegitur: tribus poenis suljicitur. Aut enim calumniantur, aut proevaricantur,
aut tereiversantur, etc. Annot. in Grot. Par. 2. Cau. 2. Q. 3. Lev. 19. 15.
shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy people: neither shals thou
stand against the blood of thy Neighbor: I am the Lord. And this false dealing
in Judgment may be committed three ways, as the Annotatour on Gratian has
observed: For false Accusers (says he) either slander by bringing false
crimes; or prevaricate by concealing true crimes; or commit tergiversation in
quite relinquishing the charge. All which are enemies to justice and truth here
commanded. A second offense in Judgment is in the person of a Witness to affirm
a falsity, or deny a truth. A third is, to give a wrong sentence in the office
and place of a Judge; forbidden by God so severely and frequently; and
particularly in Leviticus: Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou
shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty:
but in righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor.

And in common conversation men offend against this Law several ways: Prove.
22. Eccle. 10. 11. Differunt susurratio and detractio in fine. Nam principalis
intentio detractoris est famam proximi denigrare -- Susarronis autem intentio
principalis est illum cui sie invidet, per mala quae de eo dicit ab amiciti^
altorum separare. Gerson de 7 Viriis Capitalib.
1. By detraction or defamation of our Neighbor, whereby properly a man
endeavors to lessen and bring to nothing the worthy parts or deeds of him; and
to amplify and aggravate his faults and failings, to the diminution of his
reputation. But Solomon tells us, A good name is better than precious ointment.
Of him likewise we read in Ecclesiastes: Surely the serpent will bite without
enchantment, and a babbler is no better: He smites, stingeth, wounds, and
destroys as a Serpent or Adder, before he be discovered; and has his name,
as he does the office, of the old Serpent, who has the name of Devil in the
Greek and Latin Tongues, from his mischievous slaundering of God and Man. He
differs from the Talebearer or Susurro (of which before) as Gerson observes,
in the end: For the chief end of the Detractour or Slaunderer is to slur the
reputation of his Nighbour -- But the chief end of the Whisperer or Talebearer
is to alienate him whom he envies, from the esteem and friendship of another,
by the evil he speaks of him. Which seems to be grounded on Solomon, Proverb.
16. 28. A froward man sows strife; and a whisperer separateth chief friends.
And the same more fully and particularly by Solomon, Prove. 6. v. 14. declaring
how God hates him that sows discord, and v. 19. A false witness that
speaks lies, and him that sows discord among brethren.

Another sort of offenders, are on the contrary, Flatterers and Dissemblers
with God or Man, whose lips are all oil, and their hearts gall and vinegar; or
if they should not intend any great mischief directly, yet by idle and
unreasonable, soft and smooth language, they corrupt and poison the minds of
their hearers with a vain opinion of themselves to the conceiving of Pride, and
bringing forth folly, and running into so many evils which an open enemy could
not have brought upon them: Of these therefore speaks Solomon also, Faithful
are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of Prove. 27. 6.
an enemy are deceitful. But of all flattery, none so abominable to God, or
pernicious to Man, as that of Religion, in soothing men up in wicked known
sins, for some special quality or singularity of believing and worshipping,
which upon trial, will not all prove worth a straws end; whenas the most
material parts of Religion, as Humility, Charity, Unity, Obedience of
unquestionable worth and excellency, are trampled on as of no use, or rather
hindrances to sinister and vile ends. Murmurers likewise and Complainers, may
well be brought under the lash of this Law: who, upon every frivolous and light
exception or defect in their Governors, are restless, unquiet, discontented,
envious, mutinous, factious, and given to alienate the hearts of the Inferiors
from their Superiors, by suggesting many groundless fears and suspicions, and
putting in Caveats against them, and all this while with very specious pretexts
of zeal for truth, and the public good: As did Dathan, Corah, and Abiram
against Moses and Aaron; as did Aaron and Miriam against Moses; and as did
Absalom against David; and sometimes the whole Congregation of Israel against
their Governors: which one would have thought, being the body of the People
(which some make the true Supreme Power) might have passed for Right and
Reasonable. St. Paul knowing that the Light and Faith of the Gospel seldom
masters men's corrupt natures and inclinations so far as to secure them in
innocence from such evils, advertises Christians from their examples to beware
of such sins; saying, Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed 1 Cor. 10. 10.
of the destroyer. And such are they also who raise false reports, and raise or
spread false news of no small consequence many times, without any tolerable
grounds.

But last of all, to this belongs the sin of Lying in general, even when it is
not accompanied with the mischiefs aforesaid of Detraction or Slandering. A
lie, says St. Augustine well, Est falsa significatio cum voluntate fallendi;
is Aug. de Menda. ad Consen. cap. 12. Quantum in ipse est, mentitur ille qui
dicit verum quod putat falsum. Quantum enim ad animum ejus attinet, quia nen
quod sit hoc dicit, non verum dicit quamvis verum inveniatur esse quod dicit:
nec ullo modo liber est a mendacio, qui ore nesciens verum loquitur: sciens
autem voluntate ment^tur. Id. Enchirid. cap. 18.
a false signification, with an intent to deceive. Where we must first
distinguish between Lying and Telling a Lie. He that tells a lie may not lie,
but speak truth: for it may be true that such a lie as is reported, was told:
but to lie, it is not necessary a man should make a lie, for it suffices he
tells that for truth which he either knows, or believes to be false, though it
were invented by another; yea, though it should prove true. Again, this
signification may as well be in work, act, or sign outward, whereby such a
thing is commonly understood, and is intended should be the signifier of his
mind; and in such manner be so taken, as if that thing were which really is
not. For otherwise a man could not lie to a deaf man, which certainly he may as
Qui sic loquitur ut credit, etsi vera non l^quitur, fideliter l^quitur, qui
autem non credit quae loquitur, ^tsi vera loquitur, infideiter l^quitur. Aug
Ep. 135. Item Enchiridio ad Laurentium, cap. 18.
well as to a blind man. And yet farther, Not every thing that we say of, and
from our selves, as true, is a lie though it be false: Why? because according
to this definition a man must willingly and studiously design the belief of
what is false, to make it a proper lie: For if he believes sincerely, he speaks
truth; and intends no otherwise to be credited by another, he does not lie,
says Austin, any more than he steals, who takes that which belongs to another
man, as his own; presuming without fraud or wilful error, that it is so: or he
commits adultery, who contrary to his intentions and will, uses another
woman, as his wife. Yet may all these partake of the sin of their respective
kinds, when that due and sober attention is neglected which may inform a man
better: for if there are offered unto him competent means of knowing the truth,
and judging more faithfully, and these not being worthily improved, the error
does redoung to the will, and that weak and general intention can neither
excuse from a lie or Adultery, or Idolatry. Lastly, not the intention of
telling a lie does absolutely constitute a liar, but the intention and will to
be believed, as true. For of the Three kinds of Lies frequent amongst
Schoolmen, and other, The Officious Lie, The Pernicious Lie, and The Merry and
Jesting Lie: The Two first are always Lies properly taken. The Second always,
and without all doubt, evil: The first may in some cases be commendable: as
killing of a man may be; when the ground is just, and the case deserves death,
one may be put to death by another, with the warrant of legal Authority: And
that a man may not deceive that man whom he may lawfully kill, wants proof: I
mean by a simple lie, wherein the Name of God is not used or taken in vain. For
though such case may be put in which a man may ruin him with a lie, whom he may
slay with the sword, or strangle with an halter, being lawfully required; yet
must not God be so far abused, or his sacred Name profaned, as to be brought
to attest a falsity. We find none of those holy or eminent persons in Scripture
that are brought for to authorize lying, who committed this great error. I
shall by an Instance out Nisi salubri mendacio Consul fugere hosts ab corn^
altero clamitans concitasset aciem, etc. Livius lib. 2.
of Livie express my meaning, who tells us that the Volscians and the Romans
being in fight, the Roman army began to give way, and turn their backs, and all
had like to have been lost, had not the Consul by a saving Lie cried out aloud,
from the other Wing, and said, That the Enemies fled, and were running away;
and thereby encouraged his Army to fall on again with greater violence, and so
get the victory. And if to destroy a man, may not the same be done to save a
Life, and that a man's own; no prejudice thereby happening to others? It will be
said, A man must not commit a sin to save his life: And to this it will be
answered by granting, all is said. But they, who defend such an officious lie,
do deny it, under those Aug. ad Consent. Tom. 4. cap. 9. De Mendacio. Pro
salute quorundam mentimur: Peccatum ergo est s^d ventale: qu^d benevolentia
excusat. Aug in Enchiridio ad Laurent. cap. 22.
Circumstances, to be a Sin. Augustine in the Treatise above mentioned,
affirms a Lie to be lawful to the end thereby the evil carnal pollution may
be avoided scarce otherwise: And no man more rigorous than he, and he scarce
less constant in any thing then that: For in the Third Chapter of the said
Treatise, he declares That in no case a lie is to be endured, for the good
event it may have. And yet in his Enchiridion he says, We lie for the safety
of some men: It is therefore a sin, but a venial one; which good meaning
excuses. What Austine meant by a Venial sin is not very clear; but that he
extended it not so far as modern Divines, is to me clear. But in his
Ennarration of the Sixth Psalm, he directly holds that Jocosum Mendacium is not
a sin; which is certain y the truth: when a man does not speak a thing to the
end he may be be ieved, but for recreation. This may come under the
reprehension of Saint Paul to the Ephesians, advising that Neither filthiness,
Ephesians. 5. 4.
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, should be used,
but rather giving of thanks; but not as the particular sin of lying, of which
we now speak.

But Mr. Perkins would prove such lying in jest a sin: 1. Because though it
Perkins on Galat. chapter 1. v. 20.
hurts not our neighbor, yet it is to the hurt and prejudice of truth. This is
new, and too subtle, seeing Truth abstractly taken is inviolable and
invulnerable, as God himself is, who is Truth: And therefore truth is then only
wronged when some person is wronged for want of Truth and Justice: Darkness
does not hurt the light, but such persons only or things as are bereaved of it.
But thus to tell a lie, is to tell a pernicious lie; which plainly was St.
Austins mind, who says, Omnis autem qui mentitur, ea contra id quod animo
sentit, loquitur. Id ib. 2. He says, But men are deceived hereby. But first we
so limit the innocence of Jocular Lies, that they be not spoken seriously, or
with any intention to deceive. Secondly, He himself grants it lawful to deceive
by dissimulation, or simulation of what is not intended in some cases: as in
the case of God threatening the abolition of the Israelites, Exodus 32. v. 10.
And of Joshuah counterfeiting a flight before Ay, Josh. 8. 5, 6. and of
Physicians deceiving averse and unruly Patients. And how can this possibly
stand with that opinion? 3. He that tells a lie hurts himself, though it be for
the good of others; for when he speaks the truth indeed, he is less believed.
This is true when a man tells a lie indeed, but not when he professes not to
speak truth. 4. There ought to be a conformity between the speech and mind,
which is not when a lie is uttered. This rule fails in many cases: For if a man
minds, or intends to do another a mischief, must he necessarily speak
conformably, or do conformably, and make good his bad intentions? If a man
intends to do one a kindness, and give him an estate, may he not carry himself
toward him, and all others, as if he never intended any such thing? But it may
be he would restrain this to positive Speeches and Acts, which he would have
always conformable to inward conceptions: And so they are when a man intends
to deceive, and does deceive. But that the general appearances must conform to
the reality of the Intention, his own concessions above-noted will not admit.
It is true therefore only, when it is justly required. And this suffices to cut
the throat of all (as they are now called deservedly) Jesuitical
Aequivocations, and Mental Reservations, and External dissimulations; viz.
because none of their real or pretended Superiors can give them any power not
to answer according to the serious intention and expectation of legal
Enquirers: and legal Enquirers they are, who have legal Authority in that
Nation. Again, unless their Superiors can give them power of Life and Death
(as it is an opinion amongst them they may, especially the Pope) over free
Princes and their Subjects, they can give them no power to deceive by positive
acts or words, lawful Powers, contrary to the common and received sense and
meaning of Enquiries and Answers. Thirdly, neither of a man's self, nor by any
Civil Authority, how great or good soever, nor upon any Case how important
soever, can a man lawfully use the Name of God in attestation of what is false,
or confirmation of what his Conscience and Judgment assures him is otherwise
than he declares it to be. Neither can any man give instance that God ever
permitted it, or any good or holy man in Scripture presumed to do so. And
therefore oequivocation in any oaths, whether lawfully or unlawfully
administered, is directly unlawful, and to be detested of all men, as it is of
God.

The Virtue then which this Commandment requires in opposition to bearing false
witness, is first, a love and veneration of Truth, as the sacred daughter of
God himself, and that in all things, and at all times not excepted, but more
especially Authority and public Justice requiring it. The Inducements
hereunto, abbreviated, Perkins has collected thus to my hands in the
forementioned place: 1. Gods command: James 3. 14. 2. Lying is a conformity to
the Devil. 3. We are sanctified by the word of truth, John 17. 17. 4. Truth is
a Fruit of Gods Spirit, Galat. 5. A mark of Gods children, Psalm 32. 2. and 15.
2. 5. Destruction is the reward of a Liar, Psalm. 5. 6. And thus far of the
Ninth Commandment.

The Tenth is, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, Thou shall not covet
X.
thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox nor his Ass,
nor any thing that is his. Which the modern Roman Church having carefully
turned the second out of doors, as a quarrelsome and troublesome companion, are
necessitated to divide into two, to make up the complete number of Ten: For
which fact they have no ground but St. Austin, and them who precisely followed
him. But none of these, or any ancient, proceeded on their grounds, viz.
because the Second Commandment gave offense. Now, seeing many more in number
and antiquity have otherwise than Austin, considered this Commandment as one
entirely: The Reasons why they so judge of it are worth enquiring: For some
eminently learned among them, especially in the Scriptures, have declared
expressly against it, as Oleaster and Mercerus; Petrus Galatinus inclining that
way, as Buxtorf has observed. Buxtorf. de Decal. number. 74. and 59.
And, as a little before he has noted, the Jewish Doctors, who are to sway
much in this Case (unless the Papists please to distinguish the Decalogue, as
they have audaciously the Canon of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, into
Jewish and Christian, or Ecclesiastical) have unanimously conspired to make
this but one Commandment. Aben Ezra and Abarbenel mentions indeed such an
opinion as the Roman Church maintains, but rejects the same, as a very fond and
vain conceit. And the like may be said Estius in Sentent. l. 3. Did. 40.. 3.
of Estius his answers and evasions of the reasons on our side: which are
First, That the object of the sin here forbidden is not to distinguish the
Command so much, as the Act, Concupiscence, of the mind or heart united in one:
because then we should have more than two: One prohibiting lusting after
another man's wife; another lusting after his Servants; another lusting or
coveting his cattle; and a fourth his possessions and movables. But St. Paul
speaking of this Concupiscence makes it but one, where he Romans 7.
says, I had not known lust except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. The
other Precepts therefore having provided against the Acts outward of sin; This
in the Conclusion goes, as it were, over all of them again, and interdicteth
all inward motions toward any of the sins before forbidden. To say therefore
with Estius, St. Paul says, Thou shall not lust, is as much as if a man should
say, Thou shall love, which does not make all the Commandments but one, is very
idle: seeing the word Lust is there taken in an evil sense, and may reasonably
extend to all the Negative precepts at least; as Love does concern them all,
and is the sum of the Decalogue. But we find no such particular Precept as
Love, indefinitely taken. And besides, we are not so much to enquire after
matter of Right, what might be, or ought to be, but of fact, what is. And to
collect what is done, we are not so much to consult the holy Writ of the New
Testament, which uses no precise or determinate speech in reference to the
number or order of these Commandments, but the thing it self, which ever
amongst the Jews was thus distinguished, as we do, and generally the Greek
Church, and the Latin likewise, until Austin's days. And it is certain, the
Holy Spirit here does not affect Logical Divisions, or Rhetorical Partitions or
Methods, but delivers things grossly to a rude people, inculcating the same
thing under diverse forms of speech: For according to one of the Rules of
expounding the Decalogue, viz. That where the outward act is forbidden, the
inward act is also forbidden; and where the Effect, there the Cause is also
forbidden; this should rather seem to be none other Precept than what went
before, in the seventh and eighth Commandments forbidding Adultery and Theft:
and by Implication, the inward acts of Lusting after the Persons or Possessions
of others: For that is the beginning and cause of those outward Effects, and
scandalous sins.

Another Reason for the entireness of that we call the Tenth Commandment, is
the order observed in Exodus: where Lusting after our Neighbors House, is set
before Lusting after his Wife, or other Persons: and then again follow his
Goods; which shows that there was no intention to divide that Period into two
Precepts: For then, in all probability, the Persons should have been ranked by
themselves, and the Goods by themselves, so to distinguish them: but no heed
being given to this, no intention seems to be for that. To this they answer
most colourably, That in Deuteronomy the order is otherwise: Coveting ones
Neighbors wife being first prohibited: and Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
that the Law as there repeated, and revised, is to be a President to us. But
first the contrary to this is most true, That the Law was more exactly
delivered in Exodus than in Deuteronomie, in all those points which are in
common to them, as has been showed out of Grotius: For Deuteronomy, according
to its Name, being indeed a Repetition, in a compendious manner, of what was
more expressly and at large handled in the four first Books of Moses, it cannot
be supposed but many, if not all things, should be in them more plainly and
accurately treated of, than in this. For as St. Augustine Evangelista autem
Lucas in oratione Dominica Petitiones non septem sed quinque complexus est,
etc. Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 115.
has observed of the diverse manner of reciting the Lords Prayer in Saint
Matthews Gospel and St. Lukes: St. Matthew setting down seven Petitions, and
St. Luke but five, and thereupon directs us to make St. Matthews words the Rule
of understanding St. Lukes: So questionless where a thing in the Pentateuch is
more distinctly and fully expressed, there ought we to take our measures for
the interpretation of what is more confusedly or briefly rehearsed elsewhere:
and by consequence the Law in Deuteronomy is to be regulated by that of Exodus.
But farther: The order of persons or things is not in Deuteronomie observed:
For first it is said, Thou shall not desire thy Neighbors Wife: then, Neither
shall thou covet thy Neighbors House: and then follows, his Servants, and then
again his Goods: which show that God would not have us too rigorously to seek
for methods in his word, but matter.

Therefore the sum of all is this, That God knowing how imperfect man's
understanding was, in the matter wherein his senses were concerned; and how
willing he was to be deceived and ignorant of his duty; and lastly, how prone a
man is to proceed from evil thoughts to evil deeds, he does here inform his
people in an higher point of Sobriety and Justice than Gentile Philosophers, or
common light of Nature could direct men. For Saint Paul says, he had not known
lust [to be a sin] except the Law had said, Thou Romans 7. 7. Matthew. 5. 28.
shall not covet: And our Savior in the Gospel interdicteth all vain and
lascivious looks, whereby Lust may be conceived: The reason of all which is
this, because, as (the Scripture often intimates unto us) God accepts the
heart for the act, and the will for the deed, where there is a defect of power
to bring things to perfection which are righteous and holy; so does God judge
that Evil to be done against him, which is so conceived and resolved upon in
the mind, as to want nothing but ability and opportunity to put in execution.
For as an holy Father says, No man is righteous who cannot do (...) Basil.
Mag. Per hoc etiamsi minora mala faciant, quia minus possunt, non minus tamen
mali sunt, quia nollent minus esse si p^ssent.
amiss. And as another speaks of wicked men's inclinations; By this, though
peradventure they commit less evil, they are no less evil; because they would
not be less wicked, if they could tell how to shift it: Thus Salvian.

And necessary was this Commandment, not only for the reasons now given, but
also for the general pronity of all men to fall into this sin. All men
naturally having this unnatural (called sometimes for the commonness, Natural)
Concupiscence in them, inclining and urging them to evil: none but Christ
himself (not the Virgin Mary) being exempted from it, in the root and first
seed called, Original sin. But Original sin is not here forbidden, as that
which surprises a man inevitably, and cannot possibly be prevented: but the
actuating or drawing that evil principle which lurks in our nature forth Neque
enim ea dimitti nobis volumus, quae dimissa non dubitamus in baptismo, sed
illa, etc. Aug. Epist. 108
to particular evil motions of the will. For as St. Austine has observed, We
do not pray God to forgive us those sins which we doubt not but are forgiven in
baptism, but those which through human frailty creep upon us unawares, which
though small, are frequent. So are we not here advised to pray against, or
resist Original sin, which is irresistible; but the vermin of evil thoughts,
which are apt to breed in the remains of natural Concupiscence, as Snakes in a
dunghill, which coming to get strength, creep out in evil outward acts, to the
endangering of the soul. Hence it is that the Scriptures exhort us to avoid the
occasions, and resist the Devil at first; and by Faith to quench these fiery
darts of the Devil that shall be shot into our souls: with some of which proper
and useful means so to do, I shall conclude this Chapter.

First, the outward occasions of wicked thoughts are carefully and resolutely
to be avoided; such as are Idleness, evil Objects, evil Authors, and evil
Company. Secondly, Not to give way, to the least friendly entertainment to the
first motions or injections of the Tempter, but crush the Cockatrice egg, and
quench the spark and growing flame at the very first. For as when an enemy
without throws in a Granado into a Fort to ruin it, if they within take it up
presently and throw it back again, before it breaks, it confounds the Enemy
rather then them in the Fort: so do evil thoughts cast into the Soul by the
Devil, rather torment him than hurt the Soul, when they are rejected suddenly
and cast out. Thirdly, By being instant and fervent Wisd. 8. 21. Matthew. 17. 21.
in prayer, whereby God is called to the assistance of the laboring Soul, as
some good hand, by crying out, is ready to pull out one sinking in waters.
Fourthly, Employing a man's self constantly and carefully in some laudable and
profitable actions, much secures him from the vain illusions of the mind, from
whence do spring that Lust of the Flesh, Lust of the Eyes, and Pride of Life,
against which St. John warns us: and all which with their particular branches
are forbidden by this last Commandment.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Superstition contrary to the true Worship of God, and Christian Obedience.

AS Heresy is a corruption of the Faith or Doctrine of the Church, and Schism
of its Unity and Christian Communion so necessary to its well being; so is
Superstition a degeneration and corruption of the true worship of God, now last
spoken of: And therefore as to the more complete handling of the two former, we
took in their Contraries, Heresy and Schism, so now does it appear in like
manner expedient for the conclusion of the latter, to treat briefly of
Superstition, the Enemy to the true Service of God.

There are two extremes (says Clemens Alexandrinus) of Ignorance, Atheism
(...) Id. Strom. lib. 7.
and Superstition. The former is a total Renunciation of a Deity: The latter a
vehement and excessive addition to a Deity, without judgment or sobriety;
Fearing Doemons or Spirits instead of God, and deifying every thing; or
mistaking the worship of the true God.

And to make a fuller discovery, we shall not much trouble our selves with the
various acceptations or uses of the word, Superstition: Whether it is derived
from Supra statutum, or Supra stare, it matters but little, provided we can
arrive to the due knowledge of the thing intended by that word: which men have
endeavored of late to render very uncertain and mutable, as their several
opinions, and fears, and interests of Religion lead them. But undoubtedly,
Superstition is a Religious Passion of the mind, as Atheism is a Passion of the
Inferior Senses, and a Stupidity of the Mind, as Clemens Alexandrinus now
cited, truly terms it. Now, what Passion can it be so properly called as Fear
in excess; and Fear not directed to Man but God; not cowardice, but confusion:
It may be answerable to the description given us by the Wiseman in these words:
Wickedness condemned Wisd. 17. 11, 12.
by her own witness is very timorous, and being pressed with Conscience,
always forecasteth grievous things. For fear is nothing else but the betraying
of the succors which reason offers. And we know the most generally received
word with the Greeks, expressing Superstition, is compounded of a word
signifying Fear [(...).] The Latin word which we retain in our Language,
Superstition, comes very much short in significancie to the Greek: For that
implies in it both the Act of him that is superstitious, and the Object about
which such Superstition is used. And that is a Fear, of somewhat of the nature
or esteem of God, Demons. Whis is not much amiss: For though Evil Spirits or
Good Spirits being the object of our Worship inevitably turn it into
Superstition, yet may there be Superstition in the manner of Worship, as well
as in the Object, when a man worships the true Object, God, in an undue manner.
But the Latin word Superstition seems to import no more than an error in the
choice of our Object, which it makes to be somewhat superviving, even beyond
our Senses or common Reason: Such as were the Spirits of men dead, and yet
believed to be alive in their souls, and honored either for their great
virtues, or the servent affection the superstitions person bare to him in his
life time. And thus Tully and Varro took the meaning of the word not amiss;
however Lactantius rejected this account, I suppose, because it was too narrow
to contain the whole Evil of Superstition, which truly relates to the irregular
manner of serving God, as well as to the thing we worship. For certainly there
is a Pharisaical Superstition, and an Athenian: and the one we find reprehended
by our Savior Christ in St. Mark, where he accuses them for admiring and
preferring their own Traditions before Gods express and more necessary Laws:
and Laying Mark 7. 9, 10, 11.
aside the Commandment of God, and holding the Tradition of men: supposing
surely that by such commutation, they should satisfy to the full, if not
exceed, the main intent of Gods Commandment: which was a very vain and
presumptuous supposition. The like to which if any stomacher of Ecclesiastical
Prescriptions and Constitutions could in the least degree of probability prove
to be either done, or intended by Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and Orders, they
had all the reason in the world to stand it out, as they do, to the utmost, and
contend resolutely for the Faith and pure Worship so endangered: but this being
impossible to be made good, as will by and by appear, it will there also appear
that Superstition as properly pertains to them as any other. The Athenian
Superstition, or Gentile ignorant of the true God is that which gives
Religious Worship to an Object incapable thereof; which was that St. Paul
condemns them for in the Acts of the Apostles, saying, Ye men of Athens, I
perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious: viz. for their infinite
and endless Acts 17. 22.
solicitude in multiplying objects of Divine Worship, when in truth there was
but one. And this is the most ancient sense of Superstition amongst the
Gentiles, as Clemens Alexandrinus notes, speaking thus: The Atheist is he, who
acknowledges no God: But he is superstitious who (...) Clem. Alex. 7. Strom.
fears [Daemons] Spirits or False Gods, and Deifies, as it were, all things.
So sensible and fearful is he of a Divine Power, that he thinks he cannot
extend his Devotion wide enough, unless he takes in all he can imagine to
himself, or others vainly suggest unto him: And least after all, he should
incurr the displeasure of any one, adds honor likewise, To the unknown God:
Neither knowing that any such there is, or what he is, but to make all sure,
worships at a venture, without rule of Reason or Revelation, for fear of the
worse.

From this consideration the Schoolmen do make all Idolatry a main part of
Superstition; and all combination and confederacy or consultation of Spirits,
whether Angelical or Humane, both Idolatrous and Superstitious, it being death
by the Law of Moses to deal in such Merchandise: and judged very irrational and
irreligious by the Prophet so to apply ones self: And when they shall say unto
you, Seck unto them that Isaiah 8. 20.
have familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards that peep and that mutter: should not
a people seek unto their God? For the living to the dead? To the Law and to the
Testimony: signifying that the revealed will of God, called the Law and
Testimony, is altogether sufficient, and necessarily requires our squaring our
Worship thereby at least, as to the Object of it. And therefore St. Paul to the
Colossians well advises, Let no man beguile you of Coloss. 2. 18.
your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into
those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, etc.
declaring unto us the dangerous Superstition of engaging in such Worship, for
which there is no ground to be seen in his Word, but only in the vain and
fleshly mind of man, which is curious in searching into that which is not made
known to him of God, and to please himself in such bold inventions. This
certainly is Superstition.

But this is not only Superstition, but that also which invents an essential
form of Worship, to the prejudice of that truly divine and ordained: and may
truly be distinguished into two parts, both of which retain with them
inseparably the necessary ingredient of Fear excessive and needless. And the
one is a Fear of omitting something judged necessary to be done, though in
truth it be not: The other is, a Fear as vain and groundless of committing
something necessarily to be avoided, as either unlawful in it self, or
interdicted of God, when there is no such matter, though he be loudly told
there is. Both these are really Superstitions, the first Positive, and the
latter Negative: being both influenced from Conscience, which terrifies the one
to do, and deters the other from doing, without cause, not without suspicion or
presumption. For Conscience taken in the Religious sense, cannot be affected
but at the apprehension of Apparent Good or Evil at the least. And if this be
but only an Appearance, and not a Reality, then is the conscience mistaken, and
falls into superstitious acts, and places Religion in those things which are
not capable of such high acts. Thus, for instance, If a man should ascribe as
much to the worship of the Body given to God, as he does to the Soul or Heart,
he were undoubtedly superstitious in excess. And on the other side, if a man,
having heard much of the excellency of Spiritual Worship above outward or
Visible, should think so contemptibly of this and all acts thereof, as unlawful
and sinful, or superstitious, without doubt he were notoriously guilty of
Superstition: Why? Because, according to his own principles and phrase, he
places Religion where God has not; and makes a conscience of that which God no
where wills him to do: but rather contrariwise, advises him to comply with,
though not by a particular express Law, by general and implicit. First
requiring as really, though not so primarily, bodily acts and outward
reverence, as inward and spiritual. Secondly, by endowing his Substitutes,
Governors Ecclesiastical with such power, as we have before proved to belong
to the Church by Gods concession. And this agrees very well with the most
received definition of Superstition amongst Christians, till of very late
years, when men having a mind to secure their own stake, and to blast and
traduce the opinions of such as think otherwise than they do, fansied and
framed to themselves definitions of that and other things, as might best agree
with their own persuasions, and impugn their Adversaries. By which unlearned
and unjust proceedings, they grossly define Superstition by Popery, it may be,
or somewhat else they dislike answerably, and Popery by Superstition: or a
little more regularly, not more truly, by Willworship or Humane Inventions: for
which there appear (at least to them) no grounds in the Word of God.

But this they are mistaken much in, as well in respect of the Rule, by which
they would try and condemn Superstition, as of the Cause, Humane Prudence,
which they will have no otherwise termed than Humane Inventions, when it suits
not with their pleasure, which is too commonly called called Conscience. For
the Scripture has no where tied up Christian Authority so strictly, as not to
permit it to interpose in any thing concerning the Worship of God, without
special and manifest warrant from thence. But the contrary is most certain,
that it has granted so much Liberty to Christian Churches, as to fashion
themselves, and modellize their Worship, without fear of incurring the
violation of it, or, the offense of God, so far as manifest restraints and
inhibitions do not appear to the contrary. And this Calvin himself once well
noted, if his own Interests would have suffered him to have been constant to
what he delivered against the Anabaptists, Improbare quod numquan impr^ba^it
Deus, ni^^ae est homini, etc. Calvinus contr. Anabapt. p. 27. 8o.
viz. To oppose what God never opposed, I must tell you, is more rashness and
arrogance than is fit for man: But let us constantly hold to this, that the
Authority of God is usurped, when that is condemned which he has permitted.
They therefore who set their Consciences against those things (be they Rites,
Ceremonies, or Traditions, by good Ecclesiastical Authority enjoined) which God
has no where forbidden, do certainly fall into flat Superstition, and that as
themselves describe it, though not intend it. For they, without Gods word,
frame to themselves Fears and Scruples; They (as the Prophet says) Fear where
no fear is, creating Good and Evil out of their own heads, and at their own
pleasures; yea contrary, very often, to the express general License and Warrant
of Gods Word.

And whereas Humane Inventions are much cried out against, and made very
formidable to such superstitious fearful Heads, they are to be earnestly
desired to be willing to understand, what we can scarce think them so weak as
not to be able to understand; How that in no place either of Moses or the
Prophets, or the New Testament, Inventions of Men are used in an evil sense,
but as they imply somewhat rather contrary to, then besides the Divine
Precepts. Sometimes they are used for gross defection from Gods prescribed
Worship, and for Idolatrous Superstition; and sometimes for opinions and
practices inconsistent with Gods Law; as the Traditions of the Jews condemned
by Christ in the Gospel. And what is all this, to those usances against which,
after more then an hundred years eager search of the Scripture to this evil
intent, nothing has been found or alleged contrary to them; But general
exceptions tinctured speciously with Scripture phrases to no real effect? There
is no more pernicious Humane Invention than this their fundamental Maxim,
Nothing must be commanded by Man which is not commanded by God: and, It is
against Christian Liberty to obey Lawful Superiors, but where they show
Scripture particularly for what they command: whereas the truth is, these
ought, according to all reason and good conscience, to produce sufficient
testimonies of Scripture exempting them from submission, under the guilt of
disobedience and superstition too, both plainly condemned by God in his Word,
before they oppose themselves to Authority.

And to this do well agree the Definition given by Thomas of Superstition:
Thom. 22. Q. 92. 1.
Superstition is a Vice opposite to Religion in the excess or extreme: Not that
a man can give more of Divine Worship than is due to God; but that he gives
Divine Worship either to that he ought not, or in a manner he ought not. To the
first part belong all Direct Idolatry, and all Indirect, such as are
Divinations and innumerable vain Observations of superstitious Heads, who from
every light unusual occurrence in the Earth, of Beasts; in the Air, of Birds
and Fowls; in the Water, or Fire, or Heavens, do collect and conclude unlikely
things, to the great disquiet and fear of their mind, their distrust or neglect
of Gods Providence, and the forsaking of the common rule of Reason, and the
word of God, which ought to regulate men's hopes and fears, above all things in
the world. To the other appertain both that we call Positive Superstition,
which is an endless and causeless pursuit of outward sensible acts and
ceremonies, to the corrupting of the more sound and necessary part of Religion,
starving this, by bestowing all cost and care on that; and seeking to quiet the
restless and suspicious mind, by new and vain inventions; in which the Roman
Church, and especially the vulgar there, knows no mean: And that we term
Negative Superstition, which on the contrary, thinks every small matter a load
unsupportable, which is imposed upon them: thinking it no less necessary to
salvation, not to do such things, than the other to observe them: and imagining
they cannot serve God in Spirit and in Truth, with such things, as the opposite
party suppose they cannot serve God without, when both are false, and both
vainly deceived. We may first give an Instance of both in the Indians, as a
great Traveller has reported: The Indians (says he) Vincent le Blanck Trav.
Par. 1.
adjacent to the River Ganges impute such Worth, and Sanctity to it, that they
believed, it washed them from all their sins, and value it as the best water in
the world: for which reason the Portugals hate it extremely, and will not, but
upon great necessity, make use of it; a superstitious humor. This is exactly
the Case between the superstitious Papist, and the superstitious Puritan. The
Papists have sundry Intolerable superstitions next to Idolatry; of these we
speak not: They have likewise many ancient and laudable Rites and Ceremonies,
innocent in themselves, and very useful to Christians, being not extolled above
their Nature and Office; which are to be subservient to, and not to domineer
over the more material part of Religion, to the extinguishing or oppressing of
it. But they being advanced to such an unreasonable and dangerous esteem with
them; the Puritans fearful Religion tells him, he can never sufficiently quit
himself of them, nor detest the number and nature of them enough; this is their
superstitious humor too. Calvin in the treatise even now mentioned, disputing
against the Anabaptists, Calv. contra Anabapt. p. 8. in 8o.
who opposed Pedobaptism, or Baptism of Children, argues from the antiquity of
the practice: against which, because they were wont to put in an exception, as
not Scriptural, but rather Popish, he proceeds to show, that It was not
brought in under the reign of the Pope -- which Ut simpsiciores faciam, hos
Fanaticos impudenter calumniari, etc.
(says he) I thought good to touch, for no other reason, but because I would
advertise the simpler sort, that these Fanatiques do impudently slander, when
they would persuade men that this so eminent Observation, is a new
Superstition, and feign it to proceed from the Pope; whereas the universal
Church held it before it understood what the Popes Kingdom meant, or had heard
any thing at all of it. Thus he. And how many Rites and Customs do the
Fanatiques nowadays detest and declaim against right loudly, and ignorantly;
because they hear (and that many times by most false and vain Relaters) that
Popish Churches do use them, as if they were the Authors and inventors of them,
who received most of their ancientest Ceremonies, (as they did the Scriptures
and Councils themselves) from the Eastern Churches: and that before the Roman
Church ever so much as pretended to that Power, or was infected with that
Leaven it now is. And this does plainly appear to any unprejudiced eye, able to
read but a little way into the monuments of the Church. And I remember to have
been within hearing of a great Zealot, but, God knows, of little knowledge,
preaching up his Directory, and consenting and advising, that the Three Creeds
now in our Liturgy, should be taken into the Body of the Directory, to garnish
it, as his own word was. But because they were not pure Scripture, and were
admitted into the impure Missal, what should be here done? He resolved this, by
saying, there was no great danger herein, because these were not made nor
brought in by the Pope: but they were in use before the Pope was Antichrist. It
were to be wished they would extend this somewhat farther: and the greatest
number of grievances and superstitious scruples would easily vanish. But Seneca
de Ira. l. 2. c. 12.
truly said Sencca of such persons, Vana vanis terrori sunt. Vain men are soon
scared with vain things, especially where there shall be invented such a
supreme piece of Religion, which shall persuade men, that the more full of
exceptions, doubts, scruples and fears, the more godly, and the more tender
Conscienced men; not distinguishing between a sore Conscience, and a tender
one: nor a distempered one, and a quick sens'd. We know very well that they who
are sick, are soonest a waked: and those parts that are inflamed and swelled
with corruption are most tender of all. And so is it with such Consciences,
which are no more, nor so much moved as others in matters of undoubted Good or
Evil; such as are division, disobedience, and uncharitableness, and scandal;
and on the contrary, humility, and study of unity; but so sore and tender in
lighter matters, that the least touch offends them, and enrages them. Which
Tully according to his natural Superstitio, qua qui est imbutus, quietus esse
nunquamposset. Cicero de Nature. D. l. 1.
wit found to be most true, when he said, Superstition was such a thing, that
he who is affected with, can never be quiet. Every thing but what he devises to
himself, molests and confounds him. And out of this unsettled and unsatisfied
humor, every man would very gladly have the constituting and modelling the
worship of God, to prevent all superstition, but what he himself is full of:
and to avoid the imaginary Idolatry of others inventions, fall into the subtle
and pleasant idolizing of his own imaginations. But if way should be given to
this, not only Religion, but even the world it self would soon come to an end,
if we believe that wise and Learned Doctor of the Jews, Maimonides, writing
thus: For the judgment of man is small and Maimonides deIdol. cap. 2.. 4.
weak, neither can all mortal men attain the pure truth: But if every man
should yield to his own conceits, we should find the world run to destruction,
through the weakness of his understanding. There can therefore be no more
deadly superstition, than for a man to fear no man but him that flatters him,
and every thing but what pleases him: and to require much more clear
demonstrations for the satisfaction of his pretended and superstitious fears,
than possibly he can give to ground them; and so become contumacious under such
colors. But to rip up this sore disease at the Core, we shall see so little
Religion in the tempers of these obstinately superstitious people, that there
will appear nothing of common reason, justice or ingenuity at the bottom of
all: For striking into men's minds and hearts the sparks of their dividing and
factious principles, as men do fire into a Tinder-box, when they have attained
so much of their ends, as by the flames they raise to undo and destroy others
and enlighten themselves, and become powerful and glorious, they presently
cover those mischievous sparks and put them quite out, denying they teach or
hold any such things; easily foreseeing they must needs have the same effect
upon themselves as they had upon others, if they be suffered to blaze out, as
they did when they lighted their Candles: Yet so again, that they reserved to
themselves the same instruments and means of kindling new flames to their
advantage, when their Interest shall so require it. This we have seen done most
unjustly and disingenuously: unless therefore men could be persuaded first to
be faithful and severe observers of the Rules of sincerity and common Justice,
and deliver no other Rules to their Superiors to Govern them by, than they
themselves being in Power would hold reasonable to keep religiously themselves
(which we hear indeed much prosessed, but ever saw practiced contrarily) in
vain do men endeavor to dispute men into Reason, Faith, or Truth. It must be
the singular and Almighty power of Gods Grace to convince and convert them to
the Truth; they being the true object of our Pity and Prayers, but not of
Instructions, Persuasions, or Arguments. And what more pertinent and particular
prayer ought we, or can we offer to God for their more sound information and
confirmation in the truth of Gods Word and Worship, then that they object so
often and unadvisedly against us, viz. That God would vouchsafe to deliver them
from their many private and humane inventions, and not teach for Doctrines the
Commandments Matthew. 15. 9. Hebr. 13. 9. Jer. 7.
of Men: nor be carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: Nor worship
God so as he never commanded them, neither came it into his heart. Alas, if
they would but keep themselves faithfully and entirely to these Laws, which
with so much rigor and zeal they exact from others, they must let go their
hold, not of Ceremonies and orders merely devised by themselves, but the
greatest part of their Doctrines and Worship wherein they differ from us. And
the time will once certainly come when we shall not only with confidence, but
with the greatest comfort expect the full decision of these unchristian
Controversies: For as St. Jude says, Behold the Lord Jude v. 14, 15.
comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly
sinners have spoken against them, etc.

I shall end all this with one or two instances of their Superstition and into
erable rigor, who loudly tax the Church therewith. They have often charged the
Church with Idolatrous Superstition in propounding and practizing Adoration
toward the East: And Voetius (who has another dogme for the Puritans comfort,
viz. That preciseness can no ways be separated from Voetius Disp. Part. 3. de
Idolatr. In dic. th. 2.
true Religion) has also said, That it is a sort of Idolatry, by
interpretation, for a man that prays in the Church to turn himself to the
East, although he has no consideration that there is, or was the Quire,
wherein Papists are wont to turn to the East. But what says his
fellow-Calvinist Maresius, who Quo utroque asserto nihil absurdius. Sam.
Maresius Fascicul. Paradoxorum. Part. 22. Nec minoris erit superstitionis, etc.
reckons up this, and another of his dogms of like nature? Then both which
assertions nothing is more absurd. And after a little interposed, he adds,
Neither will it be any whit less superstitious to beware of the East, at the
time of prayer precisely, then precisely to make choice of it: which was most
truly spoken.

Another instance we have from the same Author in the same Treatise, Paradox.
2S. where speaking against Voetius his preciseness in pleading for hair shorn
close to men's head (a fond piece of Religion, which in past years Puritans were
wonderfully strict in, but have of themselves lately seen the vanity of such
their practices, and laid down) he says; As he does amiss, Id. Parad. 28. Ut
perperam faciat, etc.
who glories in long hair; so shall not he be void of Superstition, whoever
shall affirm the hair ought wholly to be taken away, or clip't above the ears,
and shall therefore think himself holier than other men, that he shows the
Asses ears of Midas: and then adds very soberly, True Godliness is strong, and
being supported with the base of Christian Liberty thoroughly understood, is not
pressed with such anxiousnesses. Well advises Tilenus, Part. 2. These. Disput.
44. Chap. 19. and 20. That where the true knowledge and sense of this Liberty
is wanting, Consciences can take no rest, there is no mean nor end of
Superstitions. For Satan is wont of very toys and trifles to make dangerous
and deadly snares for souls, Romans 14. 5. So he that shall begin to doubt of
eating flesh, or the use of certain garments, by little and little shall find
scruples of a murmuring Conscience in other things likewise, and at length,
shall hang in suspense, in a perplexed and inextricable Labyrinth: Thus far
they. The evil event of the contrary precise Superstition appearing from two or
three instances given by the Parrons of Scruples. For according to former
grounds, Voetius his son by his Fathers insinuations (as may well be presumed)
in a public Disputation at Utrect, June 7. 1643. delivered it for unlawful to
wear shoes much longer than the foot, or horn-like. And I make great doubt
whether he had any better reason against that fashion than a certain noted
Puritan, who seeing me, being then a young Scholar, wear such shoes, accosted
me in these very words, Why do thou make thy foot longer than Jesus Christ
has made it? To whom I presently answered in these words, Why do thou make
thy hair shorter than Jesus Christ has made it? And in truth, I continue of
this mind still, that such a reply is no idle answer to such an idle
superstitious question. For if it should be demanded, why I extend Christian
Liberty in the use of Ceremonies farther than Jesus Christ has extended it,
not commanding them? I would first answer, I do not extend it farther, because
it is impossible for him, or any man else, to prove that Christ has denied
this Liberty. For that which they imply that Christ's command must go before all
Christian Acts or Ceremonies in his Service, is quite contrary to Christian
Liberty: For no Christian is left to his liberty, where such Laws or Precepts
are delivered to him: But Christian Liberty is an undetermined power of doing,
or not doing, within the sphere of Good and Evil prescribed: which power, next
under Christ, residing in the Heads or Governors of the Church, may restrain
the indifferency of inferior Members of it. Secondly, I would answer, by
demanding, Why they shorten and straiten Christian Liberty, naturally
stretching it self to the Positive, as well as the Negative part of our
Religious Acts? This seems to me to be both Sacrilegious and Superstitious too.
And why they make it shorter then Jesus Christ has made it?

But I return to a second Instance of precise Superstition, by the same Author
defended: That it is unlawful to salute with a kiss a Matron at first meeting
her, or departing from her, because it is the foretaste of Lust: yea, to kiss
is a very ill custom: And so after the English fashion to salute all women they
meet with. Thus the superstitious Precisian; not distinguishing between a thing
contrary to a sober man's Judgment, and his Conscience. Whatever is indecent or
unprofitable, may be against the Judgment of a sober man, but it is not
therefore against his Conscience: for only that can be said to be against
Conscience which either is, or appears at least to be morally evil. Doubtless a
grave and sober person may abhor the endless and witless fashions, and refuse
to follow them, but not out out of conscience, because they are of themselves
unlawful, but because vain, useless, indecent, and perhaps incommodious, and so
out of judgment, and if the consequents be apparently evil.

I shall conclude all with one instance more of the Superstition of Sectaries,
the great cryers out against Superstition, taken from Thomas Cartwright. They
commonly describe Superstition to be a rigorous exacting that at the hands of
Christians, which is not necessary to be done: which is likewise to take away
Christian Liberty, according to their estimation. And with this Querie they
suppose they come up so close to you, as you shall not be able to deliver your
self out of their hands. Is it (which you require) necessary to Salvation? If
it be answered, No: then again they come upon you with another expostulation,
Why then do you enjoin it? Has not God left us many, and those difficult Laws
and Precepts, and do you make the way to heaven more strait, and the yoke of
Christ more heavy by multiplying Superstitious Inventions? To the latter part
we have already made answer in effect, denying absolutely what is taken here
for granted, that by such moderate Ceremonies, both for number and nature, as
are of force and in use in our Church (fewer and clearer than any Church of
Christ has used for twelve hundred years before the Reformation lately made)
the way to heaven is not at all straightened or stopped; or the Precepts of God
rendered more difficult and burdensome, and not rather more light and easy to
be observed, and the truly laboring Christian helped and defended by them in
his rode to heaven; but where ignorant heads and evil tongues have cast
infinite snares and horrible stumbling blocks in their way; and so it is not
the superstitious Ceremonies, but the Enemies to such Ceremonies, which have no
other Superstition in them but what they have with much study and art, and ill
will (we thank them) devised, and traduced all things, not of their own
invention, yet double guilt with the glorious pretexts of Gods Word and pure
Spiritual Worship: which if you chance to be so profane and incredulous as to
call in question and bring to the Touch, you spoil all presently. Again,
farther, it is as necessary to Salvation as abstaining from notorious sins can
make it, to obey those that are over us in the Lord, in all things, against
which no more but general and foul language (which are solid and godly proofs
with the vulgar) can be brought, nor has been. But to come to our intended
Instance. Are all things, not necessary to Salvation, not only superstuous but
superstitious? What will these Objectours answer to Baptism of Infants, which,
many of them, I here aim at, do hold useful indeed and profitable, but not
necessary to Salvation, or to exempt from the pains of damnation, yet they are
due observers of it? They say, there is a special Precept of God for the same,
and therefore perhaps, though the thing be not of it self so necessary, it may
become necessary, by virtue of such a Precept. Granting all this liberally,
which if we would contend with them, we might put them harder to it than they
will be known of: But where will they find any such direct or positive Precept
that these Infants ought to be brought necessarily to Church, and be baptized
in the public Congregation? We commend their zeal, and much approve their
resolution so to have Baptism administered, that, seeing one end of it is to
enter, and as it were, matriculate them into Christ's Visible, as well as
Invisible Body, the Church assembled; they severely require this. But if
nothing can be needful which is not absolutely necessary: and nothing so
expedient as to be commanded by Man, which God has not before required; who
can without trembling read their horrible Superstition, who under such grievous
Obligations endeavor to enforce this, as Cartwright does in these words: And I
will farther say, that Cartwright against Whitgift, page 14.
though the Infants which dye without Baptism should be assuredly damned, yet
ought not the order which God has set in his Church [Publick Baptism] be
broken after this sort. Now that the Order which he calls indeed Gods, is but
the Order of the Assemblies so decreeing, is manifest from the impossibility of
proving this out of Scripture, and the easiness of proving the contrary out of
Reason, thus, from his own speech: For is it possible for any man to conceive
that God should require any thing of any man, the observing of which should
damn him? He therefore that supposes that the Infant, or any other person to be
baptized, must by Gods severe command, be brought to Church to be baptized, if
he be baptized at all, cannot so much as suppose that God will damn him for not
being baptized at home in private: But this is here supposed by him, though, I
know, not granted, that a child may be damned for want of baptism, and yet this
child must no where be baptized but in the solemnities of a Congregation. What
is Tyranny and Superstition in the height, if this be not? What is it to
advance humane Constitutions and Orders to an equality with Divine Precepts, if
this be not? to suffer a poor soul to be damned, rather than the Orders of
their Church should be broken: and to threaten and terrify with damnation them
that shall observe conscienciously the Orders of other Churches? Or how come
the Orders of their Churches, which have no Scripture to confirm them (as this
for instance has not) to be more of Gods settling, than they of other Churches,
no less consonant thereunto than theirs? Where is the Fear of God, Reverence
and Justice, Equity, and common Ingenuity wanting to Man, if not here? Such
dealings as this do really deserve our pity and prayers for them, as well as
for our selves tormented by them: That God of his great mercy to them and us,
would vouchsafe to open so their eyes, and affect their hearts, with such a
sincere and sober fear of God, that they may like lost sheep straying into wild
Deserts, and in untrodden paths, at length be reduced to the Great Shepherd of
their and our souls, making one Flock, and in one Fold of the Church, to the
Glory of God, the Safety of themselves, and the unspeakable joy of the Church
here, and the salvation of us all hereafter.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page io. lin. 33. ^. next for neat. p. 43. In the title of the Chapt. 1.
Temporary. p. 44. 1. 36. r. supposing. p. 48. l. 37. r. affectedly. p. 60. l.
38. r. vulgar use p. 73. l. 14. dele not. p. 74. l. 30. dele ^ere. p. 82. l.
26. 1. sure. p. 83. l. 33. 1. as. p. 93. l. 12. r. lighter. ib. l. 51. r.
people. p. 95. l 25. add po^^er. p. 104. l. 48. 1. Collatinus. p. 114. l. 12.
1. Iudicrous. p. 115. l. 6. straglers. ib. l. 7. r. assent. p. 117. l. 41. 1.
we. p. 130. l. 6. 1. over. p. 136. l. 4. poi^^^lus; after Political; p. 139. l.
25. deie be. p. 140. l. 2. dele of. p. 147. l. 35. dele not. p. 149. l. 12. r.
relaxing. p. 158. l. 44. r. there. p. 161. l. 42. r. illimirable. p. 167. l.
45. r. limitation. p. 17^. l. 20. put in us after have. p. 185. l. 2. r. is
instead of being. p. 198. l. 16. dele which sort of ^^gn^ are not distant from
the thing signified. p. 200. l. 4. dele it. p. 219. l. 29. ^. us. p. 230. l.
14. r. leading. p. 233. l. 28. r. hold. ib. l. 43 r. ward. ib. l. 49. r.
abuses. p. 234. l. 16. make? after Church? p. 242. l. 5. r. or. ib. l. 23. r.
there. ib. l. 45. r. with. p. 243. l. 21. 1. worth. p. 249. l. 2. add
accordingly. p. 253. l. 31. r. Pugio. p. 265. l. 32. r. wild. p. 269. l. 9. r.
good. p. 275. l. 39. ^^^nied. p. 281. l. 19. r. concourse. p. 296. l. 19. l.
prevision. p. 309 l. 19. l. Campian. p. 321. l. 29. r. grieve. p. 333. l. 20.
r. Reformed. p. 335. l. 29. r. Restriction. p. 339. l. 31. r. comminations. p.
341. l. 17. dele of after wills. p. 343. l. 19. add intended. p. 347. l. 3. r.
immutable. p. 352. l. 19. r. Christ for And. p. 355. l. 23. dele are. p. 357.
l. 30. r. ^ut ^here. p. 389. l. 9. r. thou nor. p. 392. l. 5. r. nothing but.
p. 443. l. 40. dele not. p. 446. l. 20. r. unintelligible. p. 455. l. 47. dele
no. p. 456. l. 16. r. that. P. 485. l. 30. r. should not. p. 493. l. 36. r.
derided. p. 503. l. 51. r. contradistinction.


