The Worlds Observation for keeping their Masse-days, and Festival days (so
called) fathomed and found groundless, or without a bottom, so needs must fall
that has not whereon to stand, for what is there to uphold it but Papists
traditions, Heathenish manners or customs of Nations which are vain? and they
that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.
AND where do you read in all the Scriptures the writings of the holy Men of
God of a day called Christmas's day, indeed in the writings of the Pope and
Papists you may read there of several Masse-days Candlemass-day,
Lammasse-day, Michaelmasse-day, but where did Christ, his Ministers,
Messengers, and Followers appoint Masse-dayes: Do you speak truth then when
you call it his Masse-day Christmasse day, when he never appointed it nor
commanded it, nor none of his Servants, Disciples or Followers? Is not your
work then your own who required it at your hands, if you cannot make it
appear that Christ had a Masse-day, then it is your own Masse-day or the
Papists Masse-day whom you are found imitators off, and so are you not
upholding Popery keeping the Popes yoke upon your necks, whilst you are
observing Popish days, feasts, names, times and seasons, and see not all times
in the Fathers hand.

The Apostle declared against observing days and Months and times, which you
are found observing off, so out of their Doctrine, therefore does it not
appear your work is your own, that you are of a contrary mind who said I am
afraid of you, least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain, and writ unto
them, and asked who had bewitched them; Observe a day and kill the just, or
they who live in pleasures on Earth, and are wanton, do they not kill the
just? Or is that the end of your observing days and times to put an end to the
Creatures of God to spend them upon your lusts, to swallow up the Creatures and
make havoc of them, which the will having its liberty runs with greediness
into. Did ever the Saints follow such practice the holy men of God eat and
drink but did not rise up to play, but they indeed whom God destroyed did so.
Therefore read your selves and consider every one betimes the work of your
day and the end of your work; Are you not to do all whatsoever you do to the
praise and glory of God, is drunkenness, night watching, revelling, riotting,
banketting, gameing, danceing, sporting, works done to his glory or that do
praise him, or does it not dishonor him people to spend their days in vanity?
Or does carding, diceing, foolish jesting, riddles, idle talkeing, corrupt
communication, stories and fables glorify God, what is done in your eatings,
drinkings, superfluities and wantonness, read well and consider these things
for God will not be mocked. Did God make the Creatures to serve you, and you to
serve your lusts, or is it equal so to do? and such as every one sows such
shall he reap, mind therefore the weight and worth of your immortal souls,
and spend no longer your time in vanity ye light airy wanton ones, that love
your pleasures, sports and pastimes more then God, so while you have time prize
it. For does not the light condemn you for these things, the witness of God
in your conscience. Or how can you expect God should love you when you love
your vanities, sports and pleasures more then him; Or is that a honoring of
God or of Christ or glorifying him, whose the Earth is and the fullness thereof
to kill and destroy his Creatures and spend them upon your lusts, and loose and
spend away your precious time with your fiddles music songs, riddles, foolish
jesting, idle talking and corrupt communication, does not the Scriptures
declare that with such things the spirit of God is greived: Ought you not
rather to delight your selves in the Lord and take your pleasure in him, and
not to spend away your days in vanity and follow after leasing, that the Lord
might dwell among you and delight to do you good.

Or who required that honor from you which you say you are doing for keeping
of the Saints days, St. Steven St. John and your Lady day, what Lord has
required such worship from you except the Pope from whom you have it by
tradition, or what other example can you show for your practice herein? Did
they whom you call St. Steven, or St. John in their day teach any such Doctrine
or give any such example. And was not Mary blessed and highly favored who was in
the fear of God, and said the mercy of God is from generation to generation
toward them that fear him. But this does condemn you who are out of his
fear so out of his mercy, and feeding your selves without fear. And what is
to you the holy day that are strangers to the holy life, can you say you live
their life that pretend to keep their day, otherwise does it not show you are
ignorant and know not what you are doing, your work is groundless without a
bottom, that know not the Saints life nor their day who are from the light
which leads to the holy day to the holy life, and so in the darkness
stumbling where you cannot tell what you are doing in your dark works, but
the children of light see you and can have no fellowship with your unfruitful
works of darkness which are to be reproved and for which you are reproved in
secret when no eye sees you for your hard speeches ungodly deeds and evil
actions, the light reproves you wherewith Christ has enlightened you who
lights every man that comes into the world, who love the darkness rather
then light because your deeds are evil, which light will be your condemnation
hating it and walking contrary unto it, which is the salvation of all that
believe and obey. So loving the light wherewith you are enlightened and
receiving it there will be a teacher present with you at all times and in all
places to teach you sobriety and the fear of God, always to depart from evil.

W. S.

London: Printed for M. W. 1659.


