A DESPERATE AND DANGEROUS DESIGN DISCOVERED CONCERNING The FEN-COUNTRIES; BY
A faithful friend, who as soon as it came to his knowledge, has taken some
pains, not only to discover, but to prevent the same; By order of the Committee
for the FENNS. Published for the Common-good, and in all humility presented to
the High Court of PARLIAMENT. And in particular to some Noble Personages
especially interressed and concerned therein.

LONDON, Printed by G. B. and R. VV. and are to be sold by Robert Constable at
his Shop in Westminster Hall. 1642.

TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
Most great and Honorable Senate:
I Shall not need to tell you what damages has happened to the Commonwealth
by some Projectors of late, who have pretended as fair to his Majesty, as Sir
Comelius Virmuden has done in this his Design; Your wisdoms have found them
out, and sent them packing: And if it shall appear by what is briefly set
forth in these following lines, that this Design is as dangerous, and may
prove as hurtful to the subjects as any of the former; I doubt not but your
Wisdoms and Justice, will be so far from giving power by Law, for the
pursuance of such a Design, that you will prevent the hurt and danger (being
discovered) that may come thereby: Let not my meannesse or unworthiness cause
what I have here done to be slighted; Once a poor Israelitish maid made
known to a great Assyrian Lord, how he might be cured of his Leprosy, which
was neither slighted by him, nor by that great King, but set them both on
work, and much good came thereby: And should I now have been silent, being
timely invited, (as one amongst others whom it may concern) both to make
exceptions against it, and to offer any other design (besides my own
particular engagement calling me thereto by that loss I have already, and
shall hereafter sustain) I should have been conscious to my self, (not only
of being no great friend to my country, but also of furthering this his design
than otherwise, by not putting in execution what I by practice and experience
knew might any way conduce to the preventing of so great, so eminent danger;
threatening not only one, or two, or a few private persons in particular, but
whole towns, nay whole countries too in general: I shall hear say no more,
but daily pray, that God will assist you, and give you happy success in all
your great undertakings.

EDMUND SCOTTEN.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF BEDFORD, and his Honorable friends
Adventurers in the great level of FENNES.
Right Honorable,
IF I should now be silent, I should not know how to frame my self an excuse:
Having heretofore been a servant to the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Bedford, and his Honorable friends in the drayning: And well observing how one
Mr Hill who had then power put into his hands, did begin to go a wrong way to
work upon Wisbeech River; which so soon as I perceived, I made it known, and
although some money was expended that way by him before I could prevent it, yet
I saved them a 1000. pounds; And can I now be silent? when by speaking I may
not only save 1000. but many thousands, in preventing the pursuance of a
desperate dessgne, which the Honorable Committee for the Fens have ordered to
be printed, that whosoever it concerns might make exceptions against it;
silence in this case might give the Parliament and your Lordships just cause to
approve thereof, which promise so fair, and to which none could take
exceptions, though invited to it. I have therefore with all faithfulness,
briefly laid open the danger, which in all humility I present unto your
Lordships, that the danger being discovered, which before lay hid under fair
promises and prete^^^ may be avoided: And now whether these my (...) may here
prove acceptable or no, I know not; Yet however, I have declared my opinion,
and left it extant, that future times may witness that the danger was
discovered. For my own part I am confident, that if this design be pursued,
what I have now written, one day by costly experience will be found to be true.

Yours Honors to serve to his utmost, Edmund Scotten.

Certain exceptions against Sir Cornelius Virmuden his design, for the
drayning of the Fens, with Queries upon each passage:
As also diverse arguments, drawn from the works by him already made, and such
as are propounded by him to be made; which show the deceitfulness of his
design, that it cannot make a perfect drayning. With some short rules in
general (...) they may be drayned and preserved from inundation.

ACcording to an Order the 25. of February, I have made some exceptions,
against Sir Cornelius Virmuden his design, as I find it in diverse passages of
his book, with queries upon each passage; and from them, and some works
already done by him, I have framed some Arguments whereby it may evidently
appear, that although he promises to draine the Fennes, and seems to take
care that none be wronged thereby, yet in pursuance of his design, he will not
be able to perform the former, nor make good the later; and also have showed
how the greatest part of the Fennes may be made winter grounds, and Navigation
preserved; and no man wronged nor endangered, and the charge not so great, but
that the Fennes will abunly requite the cost.

per annum, and upwards, which is more by one half then ever they will, as the
rates of Lands now go.

Cornelius might have the better allowances.

Wisbitch and Welland, will utterly decay, and that for want of water, Pa. 5.
li. 23. pa. 14. li. 6. and yet pa. 13. li. 30. he will take away part of Glean,
and all Welland, to Mortons Leame, and so to Wisbitch: and yet have water
enough to keep open the Outfall of Welland, pa. 18. li. 11. And yet one reason
why he turns the water of Welland to Wisbitch, is because that thereby he will
gain and keep open a good Outfall for Neene.

Welland will decay because there is no more water put to it, how can that
Outfall be maintained, when part of Glean, and all Welland is taken from it.

Welland will become very useful to the country, by the Sasse or Navigable
Sluice to be set at Waldron Hall, for Navigation to water the country in Summer
time, and to scowre the Outfall, and pa. 22. li 6. and if need be, the sooner
to gather head by means of the Sluice and Sasse, which are to be below it, on
Welland, to scour the Outfall.



Deeping and Thorney; his words are, If it were not to preserve Navigation for
Spaulding, it were not amiss to bring all the downfall of Deeping and Thorney
through Ellow, and so to Wisbitch Outfall by a new channel, and this is
another remedy.

Spaulding, kow is it another remedy? Or whether will he turn the downfall of
Deeping and Thorney, through Ellow, and so to Wisbitch Outfall by a new
Channel, though he do destroy Navigation to Spauding.

of the Dikes be dry, and will not then Spaulding Outfall Sand quite up, and
for winter time (if the Fennes be drained) will not the downfall be low in the
Dikes, of Deeping Fens, two foot, or at least one, under the superficies of
the Fennes; and Sir Cornelius says, pa. 15. li. 3. Deeping Fennes are very
low, and yet the downfall must run lower he will confess, then what force
can this downfall have to scour the Outfall, and preserve Navigation for
Spaulding; is non this if well considered, of as strange a conceit, as that a
Navigable Sluice at Waldron Hall should do it?

Wisbitch and Welland will decay by the increase of Sands, as now they are,
when they have so much fresh water to keep them open, that sometimes it cannot
be contained between the banks, then how shall the water that must come
through the Sluice at Waldron Hall and the downfall of Deeping and Thorney*
which is lower then it preserve Navigation for Spaulding, or keep open the
Outfall of Welland.

Welland and the Shire Drayne, will be turned to be good servants, in stead of
ill masters.

Cornelius has set forth, it be not most certain that Welland will do no
service at all, no not so much in Summer time as carry the smallest boat, nor
any part of the downfall.

part of the country, must go part to Crowland, and so by Spaulding, to the
Sea, and by Murro Plash, as need shall require: And if the fall can be gained
at Guyhurne, part may go by Wisbitch, otherwise Welland and Plash must remain
the only draines for the downfall, which are not sufficient to receive it.

Guyhurne) but if not, Welland and Murro Flash must be the only draines, which
he says are not sufficient to receive it; So that if the fall cannot be gained
at Guyhurne, this must remain an imperfect work; but then if the Outfall of
Welland be quite sanded up, then he has but Murro Plash alone, and if two be
not sufficient, what will one of them do?

Peterborough have Navigation from their town to Linne by the River Neene, as
now it runs, which will then be taken away; he answers, that the works
being thus contrived, they shall not need to fetch and carry their commodities
so far, but go the nearest way to Wisbitch.

Linne may suffer thereby) does give any satisfaction at all: if he mean they
shall go to Wisbitch and so by the Sea to Linne, then whether these watermen,
and their vessels be fit for a Sea voyage or no, if not, then what shall the
inhabitants of Peterborough do, until the two rivers meeting above have
ground out the Channel, that VVisbitch may be made an Haven town* may not his
banks placed at such a great distance be broken, or torn, and cut, as they
were this last winter; and then how many years may the inhabitants of
Peterborough, part of Northampton, Leicester shire and Rutland, wait by a
tedious expectation until VVisbitch may serve their turn, as Linne now does,
what shall they do in the mean time?

Owse may not go down the Fennes as now it does, but the best way is to turn
the River at Erith, into, and the next unto Bedford River, and to shut the
passage of Owse, as now it goes by a cross bank through the River to the
firm land* and li. 26. the three Rivers of Mildenhall, Brandon and Stoake,
must be made one River.

And to that end Mildenhall must be brought into Brandon, and both into
Stoake, and all into Owse, and in that manner, that the downfall of the Level
may be brought through a draine, to be made to a better fall then that of
Stoake for the downfall of Grant to go in.

Owse is stopped and Mildenhall, Brandon, and Stoake, be turned another way,
and fall into Owse near Stow Bridge, as is set forth in the Map, at the end
of his book, whether then the Tides which now flow up in Summer time four
miles above Ely, will not then flow up into old Owse also, as far as his stop
at Erith, and into the other Rivers of Mildenhall and Brandon, which then will
be empty, and fill them with Sand, causing them in short time to be so much
sanded up, that they will not do so much as carry away the downfall, having
no quantity of fresh water, to carry our their Sands again.

Owse is stopped at Erith, and must not come into old Owse again, until it
come to Salters Load, and Mildenhall, Brandon, and Stoake, must not come into
Owse, until a little above Stow Bridge, and all Neene turned to VVisbitch, so
that for above 30. miles space, there will be but Grant only, which in Summer
time will scarce cover the bottom of the old Owse, can there possibly be a
foot of water in many places, will there be six inches of water upon Ely Hards
which are shallow and broad; and what a design is this, to deprive Cambridge,
Linne, VVisbitch Spaulding, Ely and Peterborough, of Navigation, and does it
not greatly behoove those great towns of Navigation, and countries about them,
to seek in time to prevent the prosecution of such a design?

Linne haven, yet he says they do not lie long, for the first land waters or
next spring tides carry them away.

VVisbitch and VVelland will utterly decay by the increase of the Sands, for
want of fresh waters, Pa. 5. li. 29. and how is that the Sands now in Linne
Haven overcome the Ebbes in Summer time; do not the Spring Tides keep their
constant course all Summer long?



Glean, and all VVelland, and from Spaulding, and Neene wholly from Linne and
stop Owse and Mildenhall, and Braudon and Stoake, and turn them another way,
and leave no land waters in these Rivers for many miles together but only
Grant, must it not then follow by his own confession, that these Rivers will
be sanded up; and so not Navigation only destroyed, but the Rivers spoiled
that they will not so much as carry away the downfall.

Owse from Littleport to Linne, keeps his depth, by reason of the back waters.

Mildenhall and Braudon, and the Owse above Littleport, which are back waters
from Linne and Littleport, these he shows you plainly he means to take away.
And then if these back waters were the cause, as here he confesses, that Owse
keeps his depth now between Littleport and Linne, then must it not needs
follow, when these are taken away, the Owse will loose his depth, and Sand up;
what need we any other witness in this, he himself has confessed it, both
here and else where, pa. 5. li. 29. the mischief that will follow upon it.



First, that the works may be made at a far less charge.

Secondly, that they will stand with more safety and no hazard of inundation,
and so become habitable.

Thirdly, not subject to half that reparation.

Fourthly, and the land of a far better value, then the other way.



First, because he would seem to have more skill in drayning then others.

Secondly; and so indeare his service that he might have more money yearly
for his pay.



Glean and VVelland be sent to the Sea betwixt banks made of Clay and other
indurable earth, with such force and strength, that will cause and keep open a
good Outfall, with help of a Sluice placed below Spaulding? And yet he
advises to turn Stow brook, part of Glean, and all VVelland into Neene; and
all these waters in time of greatest floods must be pent betwixt two Banks
made of light Moore and Hassockes, between Eldernell and Guyhurne, is not this
a very dangerous way even by his own confession here?

Glean and VVelland, which may possibly go to Spaulding Outfall, and make it
very good, being as he says the higher grounds, to go to Neene, and so that
way to the Sea, which he confesses to be lower, pa. 17. li. 8. where it cannot
possibly go, as after will appear.



Pa. 7. li. 24. He says the Towns of Peterborough, Erith and many others,
standing upon the upper ends of the Rivers, and but low, would be thereby
sometimes drowned, unless great forelands, and receptacles be.

Tilth fields, by restrayning the water and houlding it up; It may prove very
hurtful to their Closings and Meddowes in Summer times, when any flood shall
come floating, and spoiling their Grass, more then formerly, and then does it
not much concern the six Counties to cry down such a design as this?

Owse should not anoy the Country any further, the said Bedford River is to be
imbanked on each side thereof to keep Owse within certain bounds, the banks
thereof must be a great distance the one from the other, so that the water in
time of extremity may go in a large room to keep it from rising too high;
and the more because there is a great distance of about 25. miles from Erith,
before it comes to the perfect fall.

Maine and Welnigh, might know how deep they shall be drowned in their houses,
whether four or five or six or seven foot deep, And their new repaired
Chapel at Welnigh, which had lately a gathering for, through many Counties;
whether they must not remove their Ministers reading Pue, and their own as
high or higher then their Pulpit is now; And that likewise Meepall men on the
other side, might have known how high they should be drowned in their
Chapel, and houses, that they might have time to remoove them higher upon the
hill side.



is flat with little or no descent of its own, and the waters go slowly away,
and come swift into and upon the Fens from the upland Countries, now is it not
most evident that where waters have a great fall that they cannot go back
again, and a wide and swift passage into a level between banks, and a
strait and narrow passage from that flat to the Sea: So that the water cannot
by reason of such narrow passage and the the tides, go above half so fast out
of the Fennes to the Sea, as it comes into them: must it not needs follow in
every man's judgment that at such times, though his banks be 10. foot high,
such floods will rise within two foot of the top, but if this be not plain
enough, By an example I am able to make it appear, to him that has the least
insight into such things.

Marshland, Wisbitch and Holland are fenced by banks from the waters of the
Fens, and sometimes they have been overflowed by the said waters and have
often been in great danger, and they are at continual charge for the
maintenance of the said Banks: And yet he cannot deny but these banks are
made of Clay and other indurable Earth, and the waters had liberty to spread
over all the great level of Fens and arose not at any time above three foot
in height over the level.

if banks made of good earth have bin sometimes broken and the Lands overflowne
to unspeakeable loss. And are often in great danger, and they are at a
continual charge to maintain them, and then the water but low, having scope
to disperce over all the great level; what a vain design is mine that I
should persuade to turn three Rivers into one to be carried to the Sea
between Banks made of light Moore and Hassocks which will never be able to
hold when six or seven foot of water shall rise in height betwixt them. But if
the winds blow (as seldom they do not when the waters are at highest) will
be sure to be broken and torn to pieces, And then what will become of me, and
my design, wherein I have pretended to his Majesty, and other great Lords, a
far less charge, and more safety, and no hazard of inundation, and better
for habitation, and make the lands be of a better value, when they shall find
by costly experience the contrary of all these to be true.



by the waters without the banks, will be in continual danger of inundation,
and by a wind catch, break and tear all the banks to pieces, and so undo
all again. What will become of my banks in time of such Wind-catches, when
the waters will rise 6. or 7. foot between them how will they be torn and
broken, and all undone again: And then what may the charge be to make them up
the next Summer? And they will be broken and torn and undone again the next
winter: And so every Summer, as long as money will last they may be made up,
and every winter be undone again, and then where is far lesser charge, and
where is safety from inundation, and where will they become habitable, and of
what value will these lands be of? And then lastly how shall I look for any
favor from his Majesty, and those Lords whom I have deceived they trusted to
my skill and honesty, and I shall prove no better then some cheater or
Mountebanke to them, sure I will never do this, though for the present it
might gain me a thousand pounds a year.





Wisbitch River in a larger manner then now it is, but forbeares to set down
how far in length he will enlarge it, how broad and deep he will make it,
and the charge with the purchase of those lands he must cut, worth 20.
shillings an Acre per annum, that the charge might appear, and that others
might discern whether that Outfall will conveigh three Rivers to the Sea, in
time of greatest floods before the Banks above be torn and broken to pieces.

li. 1. does he not in this and diverse other dark passages rather imitate the
popish Clergy, who keep men as ignorant as they can, that they may the more
easily deceive them, and lead them whether they list.

Wisbitch an Haven town like that of Linne, though not in such measure of
wideness.



Stand Ground to the fields of Wittleseii, and from Eldernell to Guyhurne on
that side.

But as it is verily believed by many, that he might be revenged on Master
Burrell who would not stoop to him, he has caused a bank to be made on the
same side through his several, and others, in length two miles nearer
Wisbitch, by which means he has not only wronged Mr. Burrell and others many
hundred pounds for the present, and cut up London Road, to the pitiful
foiling of Travelours, and deprived others of his Majesty's Subjects wholly of
their high way, but has endangered the utter ruining of Master Burrell and
others, and the drowning of whole towns and Churches, not caring, though he
spent his Majesty many thousand pounds in vain, to teach Master Burrell and
others hereafter not to oppose him.

Haman-like, because Mordecay would not stoop to him, he was not contented to
be revenged on Mordecai alone, but upon all the Jews, though he in no wise was
able to recompense the Kings damages by his wicked act.

ANd now having spent some time in reading and taking some. Notes out of his
book, and finding how one part of it crosses and contradicts another: And if
some part of it be true, the other must needs be false, and so needs no other
proof to confute it, but his own words I might rest here, but because this
way of keeping water aloft between banks set at a great distance is of such
dangerous consequence not only to such as shall be the adventurers, but to the
inhabitants adjoining near to such banks, and having such plentiful matter
to make it evident to all men, to be a most deceitful way, and the money so
expended to be utterly lost, altogether failing of the end it shall be
disbursed for; namely the drayning of the Fens, I shall add to what I have
already observed in his book 3. or 4. Arguments more, first from the costly
experience of others, the next from his own works alteady done, and lastly
from his proceedings and propositions set forth in this design.

It is most apparent by what has been already said, that when the land floods
shall descend from Northampton, Bedford, or other upland countries: and shall
arise in height 4. or 5. foot over the Superfices of the Meadows, they will
arise 6. or 7. foot high between his Banks, though placed at a great
distance between them; and when the waters are thus aloft near the top of the
banks the winds will have such power to raise violent waves against them that
will break and tear them to pieces, they being made of light and spungie
stuff. And that they will do so, all indifferent men that have experience of
the Fennes will witness with me.

It is well known there was a bank made between Upwell and Welnigh, about
four miles in length, made to preserve Fens called the Londoners Fennes, which
Bank by its often tearing, breaking and blowing up after great sums of money
expended, it wearied out the undertakers; And yet the waters arose not at any
time above three foot in height in the Level against that Bank; they having
liberty to spread themselves over the great Level of the Fennes, from whence
I draw this conclusion.

That if a Bank made in the same Fens which cost many thousand pounds, and but
four miles in length could not be made to hold, but was torn in pieces,
broken and blown up, and but 3. foot of water against it, whereby those
undertakers (though men of great estates) were forced to leave them and loose
all their labor and cost.

Then the Banks made by Sir Cornelius being of no better stuff, when 6. or 7.
foot of waters shall with violent waves beat against them, cannot possibly
hold, but will be torn in pieces, broken and blown up.

But what need I instance in Banks of like nature, for this very Bank which
Sir Cornelius has already made was so near breaking and blowing up this year
that it has cost much money in bringing Earth, Brush, Faggots, and Fodder,
sheaves, and many hundred of Fir deals cut to preserve it. And yet was
dangerously torn, in so much, that if one living near unto it, had not espied
it one Lords day at night, little before his going to bed, and called up
neighbors out of their beds, and road to Wisbitch for more help: in their
judgments in one two hours it had been broken, and had not only drowned
Walderseii, but Wisbitch and Elm.

From whence I frame this argument, that those Banks that will not hold one
year but require good cost to preserve them; And yet that cost would not
preserve them from tearing, nor secure them from breaking, when the waters had
liberty to spread, and so could not rise high, whereby the winds might have
power to raise violent waves against them, cannot possibly hold when the waters
shall be pent up between two banks, and so lie high against them.

But the new Bank Sir Cornelius has caused to be made in Walderseii, has had
great cost bestowed upon it by bringing, Earth, Fodder, Sheaves, Brush,
Faggots, and cutting many hundred of Deals to preserve it, and yet was
fearfully torn, and in great danger to break until it was cut in a
convenient place, or two, above, notwithstanding the waters had scope to spread
themselves over 30. thousand Acres, whereby they could rise to nothing near
that height they will, when restrained of that liberty.

Therefore the banks made and propounded to be made by Sir Cornelius Virmuden
cannot possibly hold long, nor secure the Lands adjoining.

Cornelius is taken for a man of judgment and experience, sure he would never
have been so bold as to persuade his Majesty and other great Lords, and now the
Parliament to disburse such great sums of money, if he did not well know his
works would hold, and cause a perfect draining.



That he that shall be entrusted to make banks for preserving of Marshes
intended to be plowed and sown, which Marshes, if kept dry, the first Crop
might have been worth 5 li. an Acre: if he shall make such banks as shall be
torn and broken, and thereby those Marshes drowned, may well be suspected to
want judgment or care fit for such a trust.

But thus it has fared with those Banks Sir Cornelius has been entrusted by
his Majesty to make on the Marshes aforesaid, intended to be plowed and sown.

Therefore his judgment or care may be justly suspected in matters of so great
concernment.

Another argument of this kind if needed, might be framed from his Sluice he
caused to be placed below the Shire drain, which has cost his Majesty some
1000. li. all which is utterly lost.

But in further answer to this objection, one argument now may be framed from
diverse passages in his book concerning his way of drayning, Thus,

That he that shall persuade his Majesty and other great Lords to turn two or
three Rivers into one, stopping them of their ancient courses, and carrying
them another way to the Sea; telling his Majesty that by this means the Fennes
will be drayned at a far less charge and made the better for habitation, and
safer for inundation; And all this, that his Majesty might take him for a
skillful man for devising such a thrifty way, and so allow him the greater
wages although by this design he deprive Cambridge, Ely, Linn, Peeterborough,
Wisbitch, Spaulding, and almost all other Towns in, and all the Countries
about the Fens (except some part of Huntington Shire) of their Navigation, and
wrong all the six Counties in their Lands and Meadows, and drown many Towns
and Churches, and in conclusion wrong his Majesty and all other great Lords in
spending their money in vain, altogether failing of drayning the Fens, ought to
be tried before he be trusted.

But all these particulars may be justly charged upon Sir Cornelius Virmuden by
this his design.

Therefore he ought to be tried before he be trusted too far.

I shall conclude with one argument more in full answer to this objection, from
the manner of his proceedings, Thus,

That he that to bring his own ends to pass, has not cared though he wrong
the poor in setting them on work, and not paying them their wages, nor poor
travellours in cutting up London Road, and turning their laden horses upon
his new bank, where they slip in, and are pitifully foiled. Nor other of his
Majesty's Subjects, depriving them wholly of their ancient highway, that of
necessity they must go at least 4. miles about: Nor others in cutting and
drowning their Lands, without giving them any satisfaction: Nor his Majesty,
but mispending his money, contrary to the trust reposed in his promises, only to
be revenged on Mr. Burrell, not caring though in so doing he drown whole Towns
and Churches, may also attempt to deceive and wrong this Parliament.

But Sir Cornelius Virmuden may be justly charged with the six former of these
particulars.

Therefore he may be so bold as to attempt the later.

And now since Sir Cornelius his great and maine design (which is turning two
or three Rivers into one, and putting all those waters in times of greatest
floods between banks set at a great distance made through moorish grounds) is
not only dangerous, as he himself confesses, but is, or will be proved to be
such a way as will never drayne the Fennes though all the aforesaid towns and
countries may receive much prejudice by this works notwithstanding.

I shall here in short lay down some general rules for drayning of this great
level, in such manner, that although all cannot, yet the greatest part of the
Fennes may be made winter grounds, and wrong none, and secure all, and the
charge not so great but that they will abundantly requite it.

Let Rivers be made large and deep, and there will be matter enough arising
thereout with the indikes to make high banks, near on each side the Rivers,
these banks being made high, and but a small distance between, will be a
shelter to the water that shall run betwixt them as a hedge, or wall, will
shelter cattle that lie near unto them; so that the winds will have no power
to raise violent waves against these banks to tear them as the others set at
a great distance; so that here is one maine mischief prevented already.

A second mischief will hereby be prevented with a benefit in the room, for
whereas such banks (though placed at a great distance) could be made to hold,
will restrain the waters of their former liberty, and so cause them to rise
higher in the Meadows above, then formerly, and so do much hurt, such deep
and large Rivers will prevent, for as soon as the flood begins to rise in the
Rivers above the Fens, it finds such fall and current passage to the sea, that
it is taken down as it begins to rise, so as that which would have been but a
little flood before, will be no flood now, and so in Summer time will be much
advantageous to their Meadows, causing their grass to be less flooted then
before.

A third benefit by deep and large Rivers with banks placed near the sides is
this, when a great flood comes it finds such fall and current passage, that it
will be gone half into the Sea, in such time, as without such Rivers it will be
climbing up to get above the superfices of the Fens between those banks so
far distant, for until it be got a loft, it can go but slowly (as is
confessed by Sir Cornelius) wanting the fall it had before, and the hassockes,
reeds sedge, and long grass will hinder the passage; and as soon as it is
aloft, the winds will have power to raise violent waves which will whinder the
banks to pieces, for it must lie high against those banks, until the two
Rivers will grind out a passage for it four miles between Wisbich-Horshooe,
and the Sea, as he says it must, p. 25. l. 25. but there is a straighter
passage before it come out of the Fens besides that.

Now is it not much better that half a great flood be sent speedily into the
Sea than to lie by the way tearing and breaking the banks?

A fourth benefit is a small flood or rise of water being pent up betwixt
narrow banks, will go with force down a deep River, and so scowre and keep
open the Outfalls, when the other loses a small flood by the way.

Lastly, this way, with some other necessary works as also some sluices and
slakers, or inlets (which Sir Cornelius says are remedies worse then the
disease) to conveigh the overplus of the great floods into the old Rivers,
Meares, and many division dikes, which will all be low, and empty, before such
great floods come, and will receive such overplus, and yet the greatest part of
the Fens will be dry in the time of the greatest floods; And this way there is
not a river nor drain, nor any other work of the late Earl of Bedfords but
will when it is made as it should, be of good use, and Navigation not so much
as hindered in any parts belonging to these Fens, and no man hurt nor
endangered in his estate; and the charge to make these works less then one
hundred thousand pounds, provided that there be four summers for the doing of
them, and that the work at no convenient time of the year stay or be hindered
for want of money. And the charge for maintenance of these works will be far
less then Sir Cornelius would seem to make it, for when these banks are
settled too low, as they will in few years, the indikes will be grown up, and
will need deepening, and that earth will heighten them again.

The breadth and depth of every River, the height and breadth of every Bank,
the bigness of every Sluice and Tunnell, and where they should be placed, with
an estimate of the charge of every particular work, as also the reasons why any
Sluice to be placed upon the River Owse, or Neene, more then now are, will
rather hinder then help Navigation, and will never in respect of drayning,
requite for one half of the cost, Is set forth in the second part.

FINIS.

