MIRABILIA DEI, OR, BRITANNIA GAUDIO EXULTANS.

Opened in a Congratulatory Sermon for the safe Return of our Gracious
Sovereign, and happy Restitution to the full and free exercise of His Royal
Authority.

Preached on the 14th. of June, (...) which was the day set apart for the
Members, Masters, and Students of the KINGS College, in the Town and Parish of
Old Aberdeen, to commemorat and solemnly praise the Lord for the rich mercies
above mentioned:

By ALEXANDER SCROVGIE Preacher of the Gospel, and Minister at Old ABERDEEN.

Psalm. (...). 1. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy
salvation how greatly shall he rejoice. Psalm. (...). 6. Now I know that the
Lord saves his Anointed. Prove. ^4. 21. Fear thou the Lord and the King: and
meddle not with them that are given to change. 1 Samuel 26. 9. Destroy him not;
For who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless? Ambros. ad Scapulam. Colimus Imperatorem -- ut hominem a Deo
secundum, etc. A^nob. cont. ^entes, lib. 8. Vo^ ethnici conscios timentes, nos
vero conscientiam solum. (...) H, Printed by a Society of Stationers. 1660.

To the Right Honorable and NOBLE LORD, WILLIAM Earl of GLENCAIRN, Lord of
Kilmawers, etc. Lord High Chancellor of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
MY LORD,
GOD left not mankind in a confusion like beasts, but has appointed a
Magistracy, by which Policy receives it is order* Quod Magistratus sunt (says
Chrysostom.) Quod Christ. (...) 23. (...) ad (...)
(...) quidem imperant, isti vero pareant: quod non simpliciter at temere
cuncta ferunt^r, nec populi fluctuum instar, huc at que illuc circumaguntur,
Divinae sapientiae opus esse dico: and blessed be God that has given such
power to men.

Government is so necessary, that better no Creation, then no Government:
better not to be at all, then not to be under Rule. When there was no King in
Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes: Micah and his
Mother, ^rivate Judge. 17. (...) and c. 18. (...) and ^. 21. 2^^
persons, made a goodly Image, and had a house of gods, Judge. 17. 4, 5. Gibea a
City, ravished the Levites Concubine to death, Judge. 19. 25, 26. and the Tribe
of Benjamin countenanced their villainy, Chap. 20. 13, etc. The Danites, a
Tribe robbed and set up Idolatry, Chap. 18. 17, 18. 30. Ubi Princeps non est
(says Athanasius) ibi prorsus disturbatio nascitur, Athanas. in Orat. ad
versus idola.
Where there is no King, there is nothing but overthrow, confusion and trouble.

First, Of all Governments, Monarchy is the best: 1. For Antiquity. 2. For
Order. 3. For Peace. 4. For Strength. 5. For Stability. It is the best, because
God settled it among his People, and the most perfect, being the last he
established among them. See Justin. in Orat. ad gen^tes: Cyprian. ^de idol:
vanit.

Hieron. in Epist. ad Rusticum Monachum.

Thom. in 1. part, 4. 103. Art. 3. and lib. 4. cont. gent. Arist. polit. l. 8.
c. 10. Plato in polit.

Plutarch in Opusc. de Mo^^^^hia. (...) sermon. (...). (...) civ. (...). 5. 29.




Secondly, Kings have their Authority from God, Romans 13. 1. its given them from
above, Joh. 19. 11. He sets up Kings, Dan. 2. 21. and by him they reign,
Prove. 8. 15. They are Gods Anointed, 1 Samuel 12. 3. 5. 2 Samuel 19. 21. Cujus
jussu nascuntur homines, ejus jussu constituuntur principes; by whose
appointment they be born men, by his appointment (and no other) are they made
Princes, says Iren. lib. 5. and that is only by God, Inde illis potestas, unde
Spiritus, thence have they their power, whence they have their breath, says
Tertuli, Apol. p. 695.

Thirdly, Kingly Government and Authority, is not founded upon sanctifying
Grace, nor is it lost by sin, which was the dangerous error of some Heretics
called Pseudoapostoli, who as Bernard relates, taught Omnem potestatem tam
politicam quam Ecclesiasticam, amitti per peccatum mortale, ac proinde illis;
qui mortalis culpae rei sunt, non esse obtemperandum: August. says well; Qui
Mario Imperium dedit, ipse Caio Caesari, qui Augusto, ipse and Neroni; qui
Vespasiano vel Patri vel Filio suavissim^s Imperatoribus, ipse and Apostatae
Juliano. All Kings are Gods Anointed, not only David, 2 Samuel 19. 21. Solomon, 2
Chro. 6. 42. Josiah, Lam. 4. 20. but wicked Saul, 1 Samuel 12. 5. 13. and Cyrus a
Heathen, Isa. 45. 1. want of Religion does not un-make a King, for then Cyrus
had been no King; nor had their been any King of old, but in Judah, nor any
now, but some Christian Kings, and but few of them both too. Tyranny un-makes
them not, else Saul a Tyrant, and persecuting Emperors had been no Kings.
Heresy un-makes them not, for then Constantius, Valens, Valentinian the
younger, who were Arrians, Anastasius an Eutychian, Heraclius a Monothelite and
others had been no Emperors. Excommunication divests them not of their
Authority, for then Saul deserted and excommunicate of God, 1 Samuel 15. 18. had
been no King. Yea, Apostasy it self deprives them not of their Crown; Julian
then had been no Emperor: But God acknowledged Cyrus and Saul, and other
wicked Kings as his Anointed and Kings: And the Primitive Christians
acknowledged and obeyed these Heretical Emperors; yea, and obeyed Julian the
Apostate: No Christian ever enterprised or taught, or stirred up the Subjects
to De-throne them, be their Religion what it will, and themselves never so
wicked, they continue Kings, and by God they Reign. Good Kings, Per Deum
propitium: wicked ones, Per Deum iratum, but still per Deum, by God.

Fourthly, The persons of Kings was still accounted Sacred; their Office and
Power Sacred, and they reverenced as Gods Ignat. Ep. 7. ad Smyrn. Tertul. in
Apolloge^. c. 30. and 33. 37. Tertulli. ad Scapulam.
Anointed, that could not lawfully be touched, 1 Samuel 24. 6. 10. 1 Chronicles. 16.
22. Neque enim rege quisquam praestantior aut quisquam ei similis in rebus
creatis, says Ignatius: Rex a Deo primus, post Deum secundus, says Tertul. He
is the second from God, and the first after God: count not God, and the King is
the first, count God, and he is the second. He is solo Deo minor (says that
same Author) and om^ibus major dum solo vero Deo minor est: How sacred and
highly did holy David esteem the person of King Saul, may appear from 1 Samuel
24. 6, 10, 12, 13. and Chap. 26. 9, 10, 11. and from 2 Samuel 1. 14, 15, 16. of
the heroic reverence of primitive Christians toward their Emperors will a
little appear from the next Section: Their Writ was styled, Sacri apices; their
Word, Divalis Jussio; their presence, Sacra vestigia; their Warrant, (...),
sacra praeceptio, piissima Jussio, jussum pium and pium decretum; these were
the usual styles of Councels when they spoke of them.

Fifthly, So great was the heroic Loyalty of the holy Fathers, Commanders and
Christians in primitive times, that it was Universally accounted unlawful to
resist their Emperors by force of Arms, although persecutors, or heretical,
or apostates; not because they wanted force, as Bellarm. and others would
Bellarm. l. 5. de Romans Pontif. c. 6. and 7. Cyprian. ad Demetrian. Tertul. in
Apoleget. c. 37.
make the world believe. Tertull. and Cyprian are living witnesses to the
contrare. Cyprian says the number of Christians was mavelous great. We do
not resist (says he) although our number be great; if we would be revenged, we
could not want force, we are visibly known to you and interested in all your
Affairs, Cities, Forts, Decuries, -- What war are we not ready and fit for,
etc. says Tertul. It is clear that the far greater part of Julians Army were
Christians, as appeared instantly upon his death, by their loud Acclamations to
Jovian his Successor; Christiani sumus: yet they having power did not resist,
not though the people be prone to resist you, says Nazian, not when Nazian.
Orat. 2. in Julian. Ambros. tom. 3. l. 5. post. epist. 32.
the people are present and offer a defense, says Ambros. when the same
Ambros. was sufficiently armed both by power of People and Soldiers,
strengthened with the might of Christ, and guarded by Angels, yet would not
defend his Church with violence against the fury of the heretical Emperor,
as witness August. Epist. 166. Athanasius having sufficient power to stir up
the Emperor Constance a true professor against his Athanas. in Apollog. ad
Constantium.
brother Constantius an Heretic, yet would not, but rather submitted to the
violence of persecution. That famous example of that renowned Thebean Legion of
6666. Soldiers, is well known, who having sufficient force to resist, yet
suffered themselves to be slain for their Christian profession by the Officers
of Maximinian the Emperor: multitude of testimonies might be produced from
Antiquity to clear this to the full, which the narrow compass of an Epistle
does forbid. The Apostles did choose rather to suffer evil, then to revenge,
although endued with the power of working miracles, Acts 5. 5. 9, 10. Heroical
Martyrs thought their faith glorified in this, that being persecuted, yet
performed obedience; for conscience sake they did it, in obedience to Gods
Command, says August. and Amobius. They thought it more lawful to be killed,
then to kill, by resisting the Emperor, says Tertul. in Apolog. c. 37. and
their August. lib. Expos. quar. Propos. ad number. 74. Arnob. cont. Gentes, lib. 8.
reasons were; First, Gods Command binding to obedience, and forbidding
resistance, Romans 12. 19. Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 13. 18. Secondly, The sword
is not put into the hands of Subjects, the Prince bears it, Romans 13. 4.
Thirdly, Princes have their Authority from God, and they accounted it unlawful
to rob and deprive them of what God gave them. Fourthly, Vengeance is threatened
against them that resist, Matthew. 26. 52. Romans 13. 2. These who bear the sword
against Rulers (says August.) must perish. Fifthly, Christians should be
preachers, August. cont. Faust. l. 2. c. 75 Cyprian. ad Demetr. August. Loc.
cit. Arnob. cont. Gent. l. 8.
(its Cyprians word) of the supernatural virtue of Patience, and not of
vengeance. Sixthly, By the enduring the miseries of this life, they avouched
their hope of a life eternal, says August. Seventhly, That thereby they might
make a distinction of Christian obedience from that of Pagans (says Anob.)
that whereas these yield obedience, proceeding only from fear of men, the
obedience of Christians should appear to be from conscience toward God.
Eighthly, They thought their Faith and Profession glorified by Suffering, which
would have been stained by resisting. Ninthly, They knew this was an excellent
mean to propagate the Christian Faith; They saw that Sanguis Martyrum was semen
Ecclesiae, and thereby also men were induced to search out the evil, for not
doing whereof they did suffer, and so came to know the vanity of Idols, and to
consider the good for which they underwent so many miseries, and so came to
know the excellency of Christian truth. If others should not resist, far less
Ministers who should be Paterns. My tears and Prayers are mine armor (says
Ambros.) for Amb. (...) cont. (...) and l. 2. (...) 14. and l. (...) Epist. ad
(...). Bern. epist. 22^^ ad Lodovic. Regem.
such are the defense of Priests. We beseech, O Emperor, we fight not, though
all the world should conspire against me (said Bernard) to move me to practice
conspiracy against the Majesty of the King; I would fear God, and not willingly
offend the King ordained of God: for I cannot be ignorant of that which is
written, etc. Romans 13. 2.

These Prerogatives wherewith the great King has privileged Kings his
Lieutenants and Deputies on Earth should work the hearts of Subjects to a sense
and practice of their several duties they owe to Gods Vicegerents, and to an
abhorrency of these following sins. 1. Not to comply with Traitors and Rebels,
against Gods Anointed, by being a Champion or Leader of them, as Joab to
Adonijah; by being spoks-man for them, as Jeroboam to his Crew, by blowing the
Trumpet, animating them, as Sheba to his Crew; by giving them shrewd advice how
to manage their matters; as Achitophel to Absalom, by praying for their
success, which was all Abiathar could do; by harboring them as the City Abel
did Sheba; by furnishing them with money, or supplies, as the men of Sechem to
Abimelech; by speaking or writing in defense of the Rebels, or their deeds; by
praising them, calling them the Godly Party, as some called Corah and his
Company the people of the Lord, and Holy: by reviling and cursing, which is the
base and presumptuous trade of Shimei, of filthy dreamers, and ignorant beasts,
by touching the Kings Person, His Regalia, His Crown, Authority and Dignity, by
wresting the Militia out of His hand, who bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.
4. touch these once, His person will soon fall under contempt, and if they go,
His life will not tarry long after.

As these Prerogatives forbid us to meddle with these sins, so they call upon
us to these following duties. 1. To take notice and discover Conspiracies
hatched and contrived against the Kings Person, or Authority, whether by angry
Bigthans and Teresh's, or crafty Achitophels, or fawning Judases. If Mordecai
did so to an Idolater and oppressor of Gods people, what should a Subject do
to his lawful and orthodox Prince. 2. To honor the King, by a reverent
conceit of Him, and by an outward honorable testimony of the virtues in Him,
and the good we receive by Him, 1 Pet. 2. 17. 3. To pray for them, their
persons and Government, 1 Timothy 2. 2. 4. To fear them, Prove. 24. 21. 1 Pet. 2.
18. 5. To fight for them, not against them, Joh. 18. 36. 6. To pay them
tribute, Romans 13. 6, 7. Matthew. 17. 27. Matthew. 22. 21. 7. To obey them for
conscience sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 8. To be thankful unto God for a good KING, 1
King. 1. 40. 2 King. 11. 12. and Psalm. 118. which was Penned to teach the
Subject how to entertain with joy and thankfulness David's advancement to the
Throne of Israel.

How greatly stand we of these Nations engaged to God for reestablishing among
us the best of Governments, and settling it upon the right shoulders, and
restoring to us our King. It was our sins which deprived us of Him, because we
feared not the Lord, Hos. 10. 13. and did not thankfully and reverently
entertian Him when He was with us, as became dutiful Subjects. The more ties
lies upon us to bless the Lord, that notwithstanding of our unworthiness, yet
he has restored Him, and set Him upon His Throne with Glory and Honor; and so
much the rather, in that His Majesty is no stranger by Birth, but our rightful
King; no stranger by Religion, not a Jeroboam to make the Land sin, but of that
same Orthodox Profession with us, and Fidei defensor: Not a Rehoboam, not able
to advise Himself: but a Solomon, a David, wise as an Angel of God to discern
between good and evil: not a Zedekiah, but a Josiah fearing the Lord: not a
Manasseh, but gentle and merciful as David; not a covetous Ahab, but willing
rather to dispense with part of His own Revenues. God has not dealt so with
every Nation, and in this he has magnified His mercy toward us in giving us
such a King, a King Primae intentionis, of special favor. God has been
Schooling us under the rod of Oppressors to know the worth of our King, and
teach us better principles how to entertain Him with more sincere, cheerful
and constant Loyalty; and I wish all may learn their Lesson well.

My Lord, To testify our thankfulness in this place with public Narrations,
Confessions and Praises for so great and rich a mercy. It was resolved upon by
the Masters and Members of the Kings College here, and Me, to set apart a
solemn day for that gratfull employment which was solemnly gone about by all
here, and many others both Ministers and Professors from several places of this
Country, and among others the Magistrates and many Inhabitants of the
Honorable and Loyal City of Aberdeen. And in this we had the precedencie
before many of this Nation, that we celebrate here the fourteenth day of June,
whereas others followed after upon the ninteenth day.

This Sermon was a part of the work of that day, which when ended, I laid it
by, not intending to have sent it abroad to public view: But the Masters of
His Majesty's College by their often and earnest entreaties fo far prevailed
with me, as to send it to the Press: Upon which when I had resolved, then
immediately some magnetic virtue from your Lorddship, drew my thoughts toward
you, and sweetly, yet powerfully, engaged me to transmit it under your
Lordships Protection. The Sermon it self is plain, in which is nothing but the
words of truth and sobriety; I speak most in the words of God; for in
preaching, Gods Word should have the pre-eminence, and therefore I purposely
forbear to garnish it with Testimonies of humane Writers.

My Lord, When mean men speaks to the King, they do it by the means of some
Courtiour, and when Scholars speaks to the Kingdom, they do it under the
Protection of some worthy Pattern. I have made bold to transfer this Sermon to
the Nation under your Lordships Name and Protection: Reasons moving me were
these; First, The subject of the Sermon is concerning the King; and who should
more own and countenance it, then your Lordship, beloved of the King and
advanced by Him to the highest place in this Kingdom. Secondly, The eminency
and concatenation of Gods Graces, and Heroic resplendent Virtues in you, as
they have drawn the eyes and hearts of all good and Loyal Subjects, so mine
too toward your Lordship, and in this I am happy. Wisdom leads men to
shelter themselves and their Labors under the wings of the most eminent for
Piety Learning and Virtue, and such is your Lordship, by the harmonious
testimony of truly good men. Thirdly, Your Lordships good affection manifested
to honest Loyal Ministers, countenancing and encouraging them, receiving them
when they came, with cheerfulness; intertaining them courteously, and
dismissing them with contentment. Fourthly, Your Lordships zeal for His
Majesty's restoration, testified by your valorous undertaking. When others
would not, ye went with a handful of Loyal Subjects and jeoparded your self in
the high places of the Field, and so wisely and valorously acquit your self,
that ye became a terror to the Enemy: But when the Lord was not pleased to
carry on his work by that mean, then your Lordship testified your Loyalty by
suffering for your Prince. To you it was given, not only to act, but to suffer
for Him. Fifthly, Tour Lordships activity and wisdom in advancing the work of
His Majesty's restoration when God offered the opportunity, by dealing with
the Lord General Monck, now Duke of Albemarlie, and others of his Army (as I am
credibly informed.) When open acting would have exasperated enemies, and
retarded the Design, ye acted secretly and successively, for which your praise
is through the Churches of God in these Lands, to the perpetuating your Name to
future Ages. Sixthly, Your several testimonies of love and respect which your
Lordship was pleased to extend to my Reverend Brother Master William Scrougie
Minister at Rathven, and on singular among others, which your Lordship procured
to him from the Kings Majesty. Be pleased therefore most Noble Lord graciously
to accept of this my humble address, and grant me and this Sermon your
favorable Protection, for the days are evil.

I have one word more, and so I have done, it is my hearts prayer to God, that
he will bless His Majesty's Person and Government, and make the Crown to
flourish on His head for many years, and on the heads of His Posterity, till
there be no more time: That He will bless His People with Loyalty, Unity, and
Obedience; The Ministers of the Gospel with zeal for God and the King: The
Church of God in this Land, with the continuance both of His precious Truth in
Power and Purity, and of the Privileges and Government thereof: and that He
will grant to continue your Lordship long in the high Charge His Majesty has
laid most worthily upon you, to the Honor of the King, the good of the
Commonwealth, the comfort of the Church, the Glory of God, and your own comfort
in Him, and that He will perfect His Graces in you, and after many prosperous
years on earth, will minister an entrance to you into His everlasting Kingdom.
And, I humbly beseech your Lordship to conceave of me as I am and shall be

Your Lordships humbly devoted Servant in all dutiful submission, ALEXANDER
SCROVGIE.

MIRABILIA DEI.
Psalm. CXXVI. 3. The Lord has done great things for us: whereof we are glad.
TO show this Text pertiuent to the present occasion, will require no long
process: We may say of it, as our Lord Christ did of an other Text; This day
is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears, Luke 4. 21. If ever God did great
things for these Lands and his Church in them, now has he done them; If ever
he gave us cause of Rejoicing, sure this is the time. God did a great work in
delivering his People the Jews from the Babylonian captivity; in freeing their
Consciences from Tyranny, in bringing them home to their own Land, and granting
them the free exercise of his Worship, and in overthrowing their enemies: This
was so great, that it wrought in the Heathen admiration, and in themselves
great joy and congratulation. Gods arm is not shortened toward us, he has made
it bare and turned again the captivity of our Sion, of our King, and advanced
him to his Forefathers, and his own Throne. He has put down the mighty from
their seats, in remembrance of his mercy, and scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts, Luke 1. 51, 52. 54. for his mercy endures for
ever, Psalm. 136. 23. and this is so great a work, that at first it seemd
incredible to us, so great* that strangers stand wondering at it, so great,
that Enemies stands amazed and discouraged at it: But I hope it is so great in
our eyes that it has wrought, and ere we have done, will work in us a
religious Intertainment, a solemn and thankful acknowledgment thereof, and
beget in us a great joy, even a full joy, joy of the heart and tongue too, and
engage all of us to pray in the highest fervency of our spirits, for the
increase and continuance thereof.

To come to the Text; I will first show the diverse readings thereof, and the
meaning of the words: The Arabic Version has the first part of this Verse,
thus, Multiplicavit Dominus beneficium erga nos. The Syriack, Multiplicavit
Dominus facere nobiscum. The Chaldee Paraphrase, Multiplicavit Dominus benign
facere nobiscum. The Septuagints, (...), The Ethiopian, Magnificavit Dominus
facere nobiscum, so the vulgar Latin: Junius and Tremelius, Magnifica Jehova
efficit erga nos: The last words both the Arabic, Ethiopian Version, Chaldee
Paraphrase, and vulgar Latin, reads, Et facti sumus laetantes: the Syriak, Et
facti sumus in laetitia: Trem. and Jun. Sumus laeti: August. Facti sumus
jocundati

The first word in the Original, is Higdil, from Gadal, which signifies to grow
or wax great; so Genesis 26. 23. the man (Isaac) waxed great: in Hiphil, it
signifies, to magnify, and also to multiply, and so here: and it is some
times taken intransitive, so Ezekiel. 38. 23. Thus will I magnify my self, and
other whiles it is taken, transitive, so Josh. 3. 7 And the Lord said unto
Joshua, this day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel. It
may be taken both ways here. First, Intransitive, I will magnify my self, to
do, or in doing, efficiendo, as Jun. and Trem. in their Marginal Notes
Translate it in the former Verse, and the Lord did magnify in this great work:
1. His power, when the people in their bondage were calling for the
manifestation of his power, Isa. 51. 9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of
the Lord; awake as in the ancient days, etc. It is answered in the 11 verse.
Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return with singing unto Sion, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, etc. and verse. 14. The Captive exile
hastneth that he may he loused, and that he should not die in the pit. And the
reason of this is taken from Gods power, verse. 15. I am the Lord thy God that
divided the sea whose waves roared, the Lord of hosts is his Name. and Nehem.
1. 10. Now these are thy servants whom thou have redeemed by thy great power,
and by thy strong hand. 2. His goodness, as it is Jer. 32. 41. I will rejoice
over them to do them good, and I will plant them in the land assuredly with my
whole heart, and with my whole soul. And God promises to magnify this his
goodness, that it shall be to him a name of praise, and an hononr before all
the Nations of the earth, which should hear all the good he did to his people,
Jer. 33. 9. 3. His faithfulness, in performing his promise: The Lord had
promised to turn again their captivity, Jer. 29. 14. I will turn away your
captivity, and I will gather you from all the Nations, and from all the places
whither I have driven you. says the Lord, and I will bring you again to this
place. So Jer. 30. 3. 10. and Chap. 32. 37. 44. and by so doing, he magnified
his word (his gracious promise) above all his Name, Psalm. 138. 2. 4. His
Justice, by the overthrow of the Babylonians, the enemies of his people, of
whom God threatened to take vengeance, Isa. 47. 3. by sending out upon them in a
moment, in one day, Loss of Children and Widow-hood in their perfection: verse.
9. and Jer. 25. 12. he threatened that after seventy years were accomplished, he
would punish the King of Babylon, and that Nation, and make that Land
perpetual desolations, see Isa. 13. and 14. Chap. and Jer. 50. and 51. Chap.
Secondly, It may be taken transitive, and then it relates either to his facere,
his doing, or to his people; and God did magnify both, he magnified his (...),
his doing. For First, he made it appear so great and glorious, that the Heathen
did notice it, as it is verse. 3 and Jer. 32. he promises that this restitution
of his people, shall be a name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all the
Nations of the earth, and he assures that he will so magnify it, that the
Nations shall fear and tremble, etc. and it is Lyra his observation on the
place, that Gods doing was so magnified in the sight of the Nations, that
thereby some of them were turned Proselyts. Secondly, He magnified his doing,
by making it grow and increase, as the word in the Original bears, and ye heard
some Translate it, multiplicavit: for this work was not done in a moment, but
of a longer tract, being much opposed and retarded, as appears from Ezra and
Nehemiah, and is clear, by comparing the former Verses of this Psalm with the
prayer in the 4 verse; but God left not his work in its Infancy, and half done,
but still stepped on in his glorious working, and multipliing his work, till
the top-stone was put on, that all might cry, Grace to the Work, and Glory to
the Worker.

As God did magnify his doing, and his work, so by it he magnified his people:
their enemies a little before mocked at their Sabbaths, Lam. 1. 7 They opened
their mouths against them, they hissed and gnashed the teeth, Lam. 2. 16. Their
King, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pit, Lam. 4. 20. Servants
ruled over them, Lam. 5. 8. Their Priests, Elders, Nazarites and Honorable
Persons were filled with contempt, but when God begins to work their
restoration, he wrought so great things, that his people who before were a
byword to cursers, wishing these they hated, to be dealt with, as the Jews;
became a pattern of blessing, so that men prayed, these they wished best unto,
might be in the Jews case, Zach. 8. 13. He made them a name, and praise among
all the people of the earth, Zephan. 3. 20. and it is clear from Ezra and Nehem.

The next word in the Text is, Lagnasoth, from Gnasa, which signifies more
then ordinary doing. Critics observe, that in strictness and propriety, the
word signifies two things: First, to do a thing compleetly and perfectly: Hence
Esau had his name, Genesis 25. 25. which signifies Perfect, because he was full
of hair, looking like a grown man with a beard, rather then an Infant without
teeth. Secondly, to do exquisitly, to adorn the work with comeliness and
beauty, though at first their appear disorder and confusion in it, yet ere he
leave it, and put his last hand (as we say) to it, to make it appear
beautiful; And thus God did this great work of restoration, he made not only
an essay, and left it in fieri, but carried it on to its perfection and beauty
too; the work was so full of comeliness, that it ravished beholders unto
admiration, and these who shared in it unto rejoicing and congratulation.

The third word in the Text is, Semechim, from Samach, which signifies, not an
ordinary, but a great joy, like the joy of the Harvest, and of these that
divide the Spoil, Isa, 9. 3. and like the joy of a woman when she receives a
man-child, John 16. 21. The joy of heaven is expressed by it, Psalm, 16. 11.

In the words we have two things, First, A solemn narration of Gods greatness
in working. Secondly, An answerable return, by solemn rejoicing, or there is
First, a worker, Jehovah, Secondly, the work and its quality, done great
things. Thirdly, the appropriating the doing these great things for us.
Fourthly, the Improvement thereof, whereof we are glad: Where also there is,
first, the measure of that gladness, it was great (as the word imports) in
some measure answerable to the work, according to their capacities. Secondly,
the ground of it, Gods great doing for them; so that all in the Text are great,
a great worker, the Lord; a great work, great things, and great joy, the result
of that work, the great Lord manifested his great power by that great work, and
the manner of its doing: and the people receive it with answerable
Intertainment; but in a different way, the Heathen with great admiration, yet
as unconcerned in it; but the Jews with great admiration and joy too, as
greatly concerned in it: the Heathen acknowledged it, but did not rejoice in
it, and it is like, their acknowledgement was extorted, even by the greatness
thereof: but the Jews did both joy in it, and with gladness acknowledge it,
and these both most voluntarly.

If ye ask what were these great things? Answ. Great and mighty things, as the
Lord calls them, Jer. 33. 3. the breaking the snare of the Fowlers, and making
his people escape, Psalm. 124. 7 Cutting asunder the cords of the wicked, Psalm.
129. 4. or as it is in the first verse of this Psalm, the turning again their
captivity. Take notice of these three great things: 1. God stirred up
Instruments, awakened and lifted them up above themselves, the chief of whom
was Cyrus a Heathen King, to whom the Lord having in a special providencc
brought to his notice, the foregoing Prophesies spoken 200. years before by
Isaiah the Prophet, Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 1. 2. did so turn his heart toward
his people, that he turned away by open Proclamation their Captivity, 2 Chronicles.
36. 22. and this was a great work, if we consider, First, That Cyrus was a
great Monarch, and the Jews poor Captives. Secondly, He a Heathen man, and
stranger to them. Thirdly, He an Idolater, and of himself an enemy to their
Religion, all these stood in the way of their deliverance, and might in all
likelihood have turned away his heart from looking after them: but the Lord,
the great Commander of hearts, turned his heart to send out a Decree for their
return, which sure was a great work.

The second great thing God did, was the overthrow of the Babylonians, who had
carried away, and detained Judah in captivity, and this was a great work. 1. If
we consider, who, and what they were: The Babylonian was one of the greatest
Potentates of the world: he made the earth to tremble, and shook Kingdoms; he
made the world as a wilderness, and did not open the house of the prisoners,
Isa. 14. 16, 17. He ruled the Nations in anger, Isa. 14. 6. All People,
Nations, and Languages trembled before him, Dan. 5. 19. the City was exceeding
great and well Fortified, as may be seen in Herodotus, Lib. 1. and Plinius Lib.
6. there were gates of Brass, and bars of Iron, Isa. 45. and 2. yet
notwithstanding of all these, Babylon was overthrown; and it was the Lord that
did it, Isa. 45. 1. 2. and this he did for his peoples sake, ibid. verse. 4.

The third great work, was the general liberty granted them by Proclamation, to
return to their own Land, and this was a great work also: for but consider,
First, that their captivity had many great evils in it: 1. They were removed
from their own Land given them of the Lord, and Natale solum dulcedine cunctos
afficit. 2. They were robbed of all they had: their pleasant things given to
strangers, their cruel enemies. 3. They were made bond slaves, and that in a
strange Land to proud and insulting oppressors. 4. They were deprived of the
free exercise of their Religion, Psalm. 137. 1, 2, 3. 5. Their souls were in
captivity, for they were threatened to fall down before the great Idol, or else
be cast in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 1. 6. And so they were in a worse case in
Babylon, then in Egypt: for there, although their bodies were in servitude,
yet they were not compelled to worship the Egyptian Idols, Isis and Osiris, now
to be delivered from such captivity wherein so many great evils were imbosomed,
was without doubt a great work of God.

Secondly, Consider the manner of their deliverance, and that also will speak
out the greatness thereof; For, 1. It was sudden, they looked not for it. 2.
It was free, they bought it not with their money, they purchased it not by
their sword; they had no trained Commanders to conduct them to the Fields to
fight themselves into liberty. 3. They did not so much as Petition for it. 4.
In was incredible that a Heathen King, an Idolater, and a stranger to them
should do it, who would had believed it? especially, it looking to be against
good Policy to set them at liberty, who peradventure might revolt, and breed a
new trouble to the State. 5. It was accompanied with much bounty, even all
things needful for their return, as may be seen in Eza, 1. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
verse. 6. It was carried on vigorously, notwithstanding of discouragements and
dangers of the way, and engagements upon some of the people to stay in Babylon,
they having purchased Lands there, and contracted affinity with the Chaldeans,
and the idleness and lasinesse of some others of them; sure these declare the
greatness of that work.

From the words, I shall present you some Doctrines, with Application suitable
to the present occasion: And the first I gather by comparing the Text with the
former verse (which I shall but name) is, That it is lawful to use the
testimony and saying of others, although Heathen and Enemies too: The Heathen
sounded, The Lord has done great things for them, and the Jews made the Echo,
The Lord has done great things for us, etc. Paul made use of Aratus, saying,
Act. 17. 28. of Menanders, 1 Cor. 15. 33. of Epimenides, Tit. 1. 12. a Heathen;
a wicked man may sometimes let fall a savory Truth. Balaam and Cajaphas may
prophecy, and a profane enemy utter some precious Truths which we may repeat,
as well as handle Gold that falls from the mouth of Swine: But we must take
heed; First, that we take up none of their profane sayings. Secondly, That
when we repeat Truths uttered by them, we do it in an other manner of way: sure
the Jews here, though the words were almost the same, spoken by the Heathen,
yet they were uttered in an other manner of way as was said before.

If then, a Papist, a Sectary, a Rebel say, the Lord has done great things
for us, in turning again our captivity, and restoring to us our King, let us
not stick to say it over again, but do it in another manner. First, They say
it, but it is sore against their wills that ever they had cause to say it: the
greatness of Gods work, has extorted and wrought it from them, but let us
with a willing heart and glad tongue say it. Secondly, They utter it, yet can
make no right application of it; but let us apply it, for God did not this
great work at random, but for us and our good. Thirdly, They say it, but with
grief, their hearts are cast down and disquieted within them: but let us say it
with glad hearts, a cheerful countenance, and joyful lips.

Obser. 2. The works which God does in behalf of his distressed people are
great, he does great things for them; it is his property to do great things: It
is true, he does small things, for the words are not exclusive; He is not like
the Heathens Jupiter, who took no leisure to notice small things, nor like
Moses, to whom weighty and knotty controversies were reserved, and the petty
matters transmitted and referred to the Inferior Judges, Exodus 18. 26. all
things come within the compass of his providence, there is nothing so small,
but he noticeth it, and his providence has a hand in it, Matthew. 10. 29, 30.
things that seem most contingent and casual, even to them his providence
extends; what more casual, in respect of the means, then when a man strikes
to cut down a Tree, and the head of the Axe flees from the helve and smites his
Neighbor that he die; yet Gods providence has a ^^^oak therein, as is clear,
by comparing, Deuteronomy. 19. 5. with Exodus 21. 13. but his glory shines most in his
great doings an works, whether of Justice, or mercy; great things he does in
behalf of his people, to pass by the works of Creation, which are great and
wondrous, Job 9. 10. and of Redemption and Salvation, which are yet far
greater; the works of his Providence have among them great ones, the bringing
of his people out of Egypt through the Red Sea, and overthrowing Pharaoh and
his Army was a great work, Exodus 14. 31. the driving out the Cananites before
them was a great work, 2 Samuel 7. 23. compared with 1 Chronicles. 17. 21. and this
spoken of, in the Text, was a great one, so great and strange in the peoples
eyes, that it seemed in some sort to abolish with them the memorial of their
deliverance out of Egypt: It shall no more be said, the Lord lives that
brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; but the Lord lives
that brought up the children of Israel out of the North, Jer. 16. 14, 15. and
Chap. 1. 23. 7, 8. when God comes to act for his people, he does like himself,
his great and glorious power does great and glorious works, he acts not like
man, who sometimes take a great deal of pains, and yet does nothing, or with a
great deal of Art and Policy brings forth trifles; but when God comes to visit
his people, we may look for great and noble acts: he is their praise and their
God that does for them great and terrible things, Deuteronomy. 10. 21. and the reason
hereof is, he is the Lord and not man, a great Lord, and of great power, and
will do like himself: Great is our Lord, his understanding is infinite: The
Lord lifts up the meek, he casts the wicked down to the ground, Psalm. 147.
5, 6. He that is mighty does great things, Luke 1. 49. Thou art great and do
wondrous things, (O Lord) thou art God alone.

What great things God did for his people the Jews, ye heard before: But to
make Application (which is the work of the day) God has done for us in these
Lands not small and contemptible, but great and glorious acts; I mention five
of them. 1. The re-establishing of Kingly Government; and to give you a glimpse
of the greatness of this work, consider first the thing it self: Secondly, the
evils which followed upon the want of it. Thirdly, the impediments that stood
in the way of its restitution: First, view the Government but a little, its the
only Government these Nations have enjoyed for many hundred years, and this
Nation, for near 2000 years. Secondly, God has blessed these Lands under it
with many rich blessings, both spiritual and earthly. Thirdly, Its the
Government that Scripture does most speak of with approbation, and blessed with
rare blessings. Fourthly, Its the most ancient approved Government amongst the
Nations, as appears from Scripture, and the Judicious among the Heathen
themselves: Certum est (says Cicero 3. De Legib.) Omnes antiquas gentes
regibus p^imum paruisse, principio rerum (says Justinus, lib. 1.) Gentium
nationumque Imperium penes reges erat, and Callimachus, (...), ex Jove sunt
Reges. 2. The miseris which have of late flowed from and accompanied the want
of it, may teach the most stupid how excellent it is; how many miseries have we
seen and undergone while we stood deprived of it. 1. The Church of God was
distracted and divided, Schismatic and Erroneous persons countenanced and
advanced. 2. The Church it self by some decryed as no Church; her orthodox and
venerable Ministers branded as Impostors. 3. Gods precious Truths detained in
unrighteousness, and Gospel Truths flooted as Errors. 4. Innumerable Errors
and Heresies owned and promoted. 5. The privileges of Congregations trod
upon, and none of the best obtruded upon them. 6. The Church Judicatories
prohibited, and not yet permitted to sit, or else raised by Military force; or
if suffered to meet, yet forbidden and impeded to act any thing prejudicial to
the Interest of any persons although never so faulty and Erroneous if they did
comply with the times and humors o^ these in Power. 7. Gods worship in several
places interrupted; Ministers officiating before God abused and threatened. 8.
All sin did abound, Rebellion, Murders, Oppression, Cruelty, ^erjury, Robery,
Uncleanness, Atheism, contempt of Gods Ondinances, etc. so that it was our
case, as it was When there was no King in Israel, Jud. 17. 6. Every man did
that which seemed right in hi^ own eyes. 9. Our brethren cut down by the sword,
or carried captives unto strang^ Lands, and sold for bondmen. 10. Our
Noblemen Despised, Captivated, Imprisoned, Forefaulted, their Inheritances and
Houses given to strangers, or treacherous and unnatural Contrymen. 11. Our
Laws lay silent, and we made liable to the Arbitrary power of strangers, or men
disaffected. 12. Loyalty was counted a Crime, and Rebellion a Virtue: and some
came to that height of Atheism and Turcisme, as to father their most wicked
and horrid acts upon God, and Martion like derive their Pedigree from him. 13.
The Inhabitants of the Land Impoverished by Robbery, Cesse, and Excise, Fines
and Compositions: To close this in a word, we sat as a disconsolate Widow in a
dark night lamenting the loss of her Husband, her solitariness, poverty, and
pressing miseries: or as a Ship without a Pilot and Helmn, tossed with
tempestuous and stormy winds and waves among rocks and shelves, or pursued by
Pirates: or we lay as a beheaded man without breath and life; like a dead Lion
over whom every timorous Hare or paltrie abject did insult at pleasure without
control: for our Head the King, The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of
the Lord, of whom the world was not worthy, being taken in the enemies pits,
was disarmed, Imprisoned, and cruelly Murdered, and by that one blow, the
three Nations lay Headless, without spirit and motion: any breath and motion
that seemed to be in the body, was but like the sturring of a man new beheaded
which soon ceased; But while we enjoyed that Government in its just Privileges
and Authority; we knew not these evils: Gospel Truths did drop as the dew in
plenty. Ordinances were administered, Church Judicatories were protected, honest
Ministers reverenced as the Ambassadors of Christ, the Laws were in force,
Justice administered, Treads and Traffic promoted, the Vicious punished, the
Virtuous protected and advanced, and propriety secured; our Nobles honored,
Rebellion discountenanced; in a word, it went well with Church and State: Then
without peradventure, great is the blessing of this Government, which ^rees us
from these manifold evils, and brings with it, yea secures to us these
refreshing and solacing mercies; so that we may say of it, God has done this
great thing for us.

Thirdly, View the Impediments that stood in the way of its restitution. First,
When it was brought under strange contempt and opposition, was it not spoken
against as unnecessary and burdensome, and so declared by an Act of their
Parliament, and did not some persuade themselves it to be inconsistent with
Christianity? as if Christ's Scepter like Aarons Rod did swallow up the Scepters
of earthly Monarchs: But non eripit terrestria, qui regna dat coelestia. Did
not others like these mentioned in Jude. 8. and 2 Pet. 2. 10. Filthy dreamers,
presumptuous, and selfwil^ed, despise dominion, and not afraid to speak evil of
dignities, and thus the bands of Monarchy were loosed and it trod under foot,
and its Authority contemned: Yet the Lord, who is wonderful in working,
wrought such a change, that it is now cried up as Gods Ordinance, to which all
reverence is due, 2 Pet. 2, 17. Romans 13. 1. Prove. 24. 21. He has made the
tongues of revilers, which a little before was their shame, now become their
glory, to advance its glory by their loud Acclamations. Secondly, When the
contempt and opposition having the advantage of many years, became strong. To
bend a twig is done with little strength, but when it is grown to a strong and
confirmed Oak, then either to bend or break it, requires Samson-like strength:
The fire when but beginning to smoke, is easily extinguished; but not so, when
it comes to a raging flame: To have broken and extinguished the
Anti-monarchicall Party in their raw beginnings, and while they were but
Incipients, or small proficients, would have argued no great Power; but when
grown to their full height and strength, that to themselves and others they
seemed like Giants insuperable, when they were habituated in the gainsaying of
Corah: when principles of rebellion, seconded with success were habituated,
and so become an other nature when they were hardened; so that the Ethiopian
could sooner change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, then they abandon
their Anti-monarchicall principles and practices: Then to overturn them, and
reestablish that which they had pulled down, evidenced and magnified the Lords
great power; when the Anarchicall Oak became so strong that he defied the Axe,
and the scales of that Leviathan became so hard, that he did laugh at the
shaking of the Spear, and counted Darts as stuble; then the great Lord made
that great Oak bow as a willow to the tall Cedar of Monarchy, and fastened his
hook in the mouth and scales of that Leviathan, so that now he is become a
suppliant, and speaks soft words, and has made a Covenant with Monarchy, to
become his servant for ever, Job 32. 3. The third that stood in the way, was
the several lusts of men: As first, Discontentednesse; every bramble being
unsatisfied with their own condition. 2. Pride and blind ambition,
Absolon-like, and Stanley-like, in the Reign of Henry 7. Some carrying a self
King in their bosom, thinking themselves fitter to Rule, then the Ruler
himself. 3. Covetousness the root of all evil, setting the Nations on fire,
that they might steal the goods, and troubling the waters, that they may catch
the fish; and having catched the prey and booty, became mad against Monarchy,
lest it should plume them. 4. Old rooted malice against Monarchy upon some
private and selfish account, making them restless and vigorous in opposition.
These lusts swelling like the raging sea, upon suspicion and hearsay of the
restitution of Monarchy, did cast up mire and dirt, and were enraged at it: But
what men could not do to the sea, the Lord did his power to these lusts: He
stilled the noise of these raging waves, Psalm. 65. and 7. and 69. 9. and tamed
their fury, and landed Monarchy safe on our Coasts, and set it up amongst us on
its pinnacle.

The second great work, is the setting of that Government on the right
Shoulders, putting the Crown on the head of Him whose by right it is, and
settling it in the hand of the owner our gracious and dread Sovereign, King
CHARLES the Second that now Reigns: And this is a great work, if we but
consider these. First, the impediments that stood in His way. Secondly, some
things relating to himself. I. The impediments, and they were many. 1. The sins
of the Subjects of all rank, sins against His Royal Father, and against His
Royal self: Here I have a large field; but it is my hearts prayer to God, that
he will grant repentance to all, and never charge these sins upon the
offenders, in the day of their Accounts. Sin is a great obstructer of mercies,
and rendered us unworthy of so great a favor as we now enjoy. But not for your
sake do I this says the Lord God, be it known unto you: be ashamed and
confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36. 32. 2. His Person
defamed by too many, who made it their work to cast the seeds of prejudice into
the hearts of His Subjects, that they should not any more look after Him. 3.
Himself exiled and impoverished, without Men or Money, the sinews of War. 4.
His Title to the Crown cried down, and voted down, as if the poorest Brat had
as good Title to it, as the righteous Heir himself. 5. His Possessions and
Revenues divided among hundreds, to encourage them to withstand His
restitution. 6. A victorious Army puffed up with Success, engaged by oath and
gain against Him. 7. His loyal Subjects rendered incapable of places of Trust
or Power, Disarmed, Impoverished, Sequestrate, Forefaulted, Murdered or
Banished, watched over, as the Leopard watches the Traveller, Hos. 13. 7. so
that they were in no capacity to act for Him. 8. A rebellious Subject stepped up
to the Throne, and Zimri-like, advanced himself by the execrable murder of his
Master; he caught that golden Ball, and endeavored to secure it by Power and
Policy, and to transmit it to his Posterity, to whom he bequeathed it, but
could not leave neither his Brain to manage it, nor Gods blessing to secure it:
all, and every one of these were high Mountains and deep gulfs to the eye of
natural reason, impassible gordion knots, not easily untwisted, and Labyrinths
inextricable: but the Mountains are levelled, the Gulfs filled up, and the
Knots untwisted; the Lord who knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, 2 Pet. 2. 9. the only wise God has extricated our King, and by
his great power mounted Him upon Eagles wings, Exodus 19. 4. over all
impediments, and brought Him to us, and His Thrones; and this is so great a
work that we want words to express it, or example to parallel it.

Secondly, View the excellency of our King, behold him in his beauty. I do not
take upon me, to draw Him to the life; ye may see an imperfect delineation of
Him, in others, who will acquaint you with His Piety, Charity, Mercifulness,
Prudence, Sobriety and other Graces and Virtues. I name only some things of Him
briefly. 1. He is the right full Heir of these Kingdoms. 2. The Son of an
incomparable Royal Father, made glorious not only by His Piety. Equity,
Clemency, but also by His Sufferings and Patience under the cross, and love
toward all His Subjects, and Charity toward His Implacable Enemies, and by
Martyrdom it self. 3. If the general approbation which he has among Princes
and People abroad, even these of a different persuasion, but especially, the
high esteem He has among the Protestant Churches abroad, can add any weight to
His Glory, He wants not this: His praise is throughout all the Churches, 2 Cor.
8. 18. 4. God who knows to put a right estimate upon every person and thing,
has highly and conspicuously made known to all, how excellent He is in His
sight, by His special care of Him, and wonderful preserving of Him from so
many and great dangers: forbearing to speak of all, look but to His dangers at
Worcester, where His horse was twice shot under Him; His Army overpowered with
multitudes, routed; Himself hotly pursued by His Enemies, but not overtaken,
being necessitated to dis-robe Himself of His Princly Ornaments, and cut His
hair, and forced with one Servant to wander unto a Wood, and there to make an
hollow Oak His Castle of refuge; yet not found out, although searched after:
thereafter rides thro^gh a Troup of His Enemies, yet not discovered: at an
other time by providence in company with one of His notorious Enemies, yet not
noticed; a great sum of money set on His Head, and offered to any that would
discover or apprehend him; for which many out of covetousness made it their
business to search for Him; all places of escape watched; yet so wonderful
were the steps and hand of Gods Fatherly Providence going along with Him, that
He gets safe into a Foreign Country: while He is abroad, He is not suffered
to live at quiet, but is still in danger of Powder plots, poisoning and
otherwise. Achitophels contrived His ruin; Nabals refused Him Intertainment;
some of His familiar Friends lift up the heel against Him, so that He might
have said, as once Tyberius, Timeo incustoditos aditus, timeo ipsos custodes: I
fear the passages that are not kept, I fear them who are set to be keepers, or
as Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. No man stood with me, all men for sook me --
notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me -- and I was delivered out of the mouth
of the Lion: The Lord numbered the hairs of his head, Matthew. 10. 30. Gave his
Angels charge over him, Psalm. 91. 1. His enemies contrived mischief, but
brought forth a lie, Psalm. 7. 14. He that neither slumbers nor sleeps, was his
keeper, and preserved his going out, and coming in, Psalm. 121. 5. 8. and made
him glorious by salvation, Psalm. 21. 6. 5. His Majesty's constant adhering to
the Protestant Truth (notwithstanding the many and strong tentations to
alienate His heart therefrom) speaks out His admirable excellency: Look but
upon these five tentations. First, How ill was He used and entertained by some
of His own Subjects in Power, highly pretending the Truths preservation, being
by them defamed, exiled, impoverished and persecuted, and by too many others
forsaken. Secondly, A note of ignominy cast upon the Protestant Religion by
these of the contrare persuasion, or Atheistical ignorants, as if it were a
principle of our Religion to rebel and dethrone our own Kings (which wrought
so powerfully upon some unstable souls, as to lead them to a detestation of the
truth and ways of God,) where as true Protestants teach no such seditious and
treasonable Doctrine, but does abhor it as the Doctrine of Devils, taught by
Jesuits, Anabaptists and other Sectaries, and with all our hearts, and with
deepest detestation condemns that execrable murder of our late King. Thirdly,
He was hotly assaulted and solicited by some Champions of the Romish Church,
and especially by some who had Apostatized from the Truth themselves, and so
knew the better how to persuade others. Fourthly, He receives kind
intertainment and protection from some of the Romish Party. Fifthly, Assistance
was offered by them of that persuasion unto Him, if He would turn Papist; were
not all these strong tentations? yet His heart was indivertible from God and
His Truth, that neither ill usage from His own, nor favors conferred and
offered by strangers could work that change, His heart like David's was fixed,
trusting in the Lord, his heart was established, Psalm. 112. 7, 8. He hid Gods
word in his heart, that he should not sin against him, Psalm. 119. 11. and this
was a great and special work of the Lords.

The third great work God has done for us, is, the bringing again our
captivity; of which remark but these shortly. First, It was National, for
although we were not all exiled, yet we were captivated in our own Land, like a
man Imprisoned in his own House; and this was a sore ill. A generous Woman once
said, Mallem mill mortes quam tributaria capita circumferre. Secondly, It was
of a large extent, reaching to all ranks. Our King exiled, our Nobles
Imprisoned, many of our brethren carried away, further then from Judea to
Babylon, even to Barbado's, and some of the Ministers of Christ removed from
their own Nation and Flocks. Thirdly, Our captivity was spiritual, to sin,
imposed on us by threatening, as was done to the Jews in Babylon. We were
threatened and urged to subscribe their Tender, thereby to disclaim our King and
the ancient Government of these Nations, and to bow to there Idol of Anarchie
and Usurpation, to which too many readily yielded: Ministers were prohibited,
upon no less pain, then silencing them from preaching the Gospel to pray for
His Majesty, a duty that lay upon all by Gods reiterated Commands. All
commanded to keep days of Thanksgiving for discovery of plots against
Usurpers, which was a justifying of them in their wicked Usurpations, and
proclaiming to the world, that God was well pleased with them and their ways.
Fourthly, It reached even to the Church, and Truth of God, the Government
thereof decreed as Antichristian, her Discipline opposed and slighted; Religion
hazarded by a vast Act of Toleration, her Ministers flouted, and while they
were officiating before God, abused, her Worship interrupted, her Patrimony
seized upon, some crying out, Let us take to our selves the Houses of God in
possession, Psalm. 83. 12. her Judicatories interrupted, and Gods Servants
driven out from the General Assemblies and made specticles to men and Angels;
but the Lord has turned away this our captivity, and it is his great and
glorious doing.

The fourth great work, was the overthrow of the Kings and our Enemies: 1. They
were many. 2. Proud, puffed up with Success. 3. Desperate, whom no command of
the Lord could bow, nor threatening affright. 4. Cruel, acted by Jesuiticall and
Anabaptisticall Furies. 5. Covetous, being mad upon unjust gain, and als mad in
the retention of it. 6. United and combined together by all the ligaments of
carnal Policy: Yet the great and good Lord divided them, and they melted away
like a snail, he laid their pride in the dust, and turned these boasting
Lamechs into Cowards, and made them flee as chafe before the wind; so that we
may apply that saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 76, 5. The stout hearted are
spoiled, and none of the men of might have found their hands. At the appearance
of that chief Instrument, they cried out as the Egyptians of old, Exodus 15. 25.
Let ^s flee from the face of Israel for the Lord fights for them against the
Egyptians, and this was the Lords great doing.

The fifth great work is, the raising up Instruments for carrying on these
great Works: I name but six. 1. The Lord General George Monck, an other Cyrus
to us, who wrought under God the foresaid great things: He our Ezra or help,
our Nehemiah or Comforter, our Zerubbabel, or mighty One, made so by the mighty
God of Britain: before whom the great Mountains became a plain, Zecha. 4. 7.
and Hushai-like defeated the crafty counsels of Achitophels: 2. His Debora,
whose loyal heart made her put forth the uttermost of her conjugall influence.
3. The good and loyal people of England, influenced by the breathings of the
Spirit of the Lord, calling for a free Parliament, and their and our King. 4.
The right Honorable, the City of London, joining their endeavors with the
Lord General and People of the Land. 5. That famous Parliament that now sits,
crowning the work by their unanimous calling home His Majesty, and restoring
Him to His just Privileges and Authority. 6. The Lord General Montague who
proved active to engage the Navy to own His Majesty, and waft Him over safe
unto His own Kingdoms. That so many should all with one mouth and hand carry on
so great a work is unto me an argument of Gods approving and working thereof:
for as it is an argument of the Divine Authority of the prophetical
Scriptures, that the Prophets though they lived in diverse places and ages of
the World, yet they all agreed in one and the same Truth, as if they had all
spoken by one and the same mouth, as ye have it, Luke 1. 70. As He spoke by the
mouth (not mouths) of His holy Prophets. So when God stirs up his Servants
in all places of the Kingdom, and them of all ranks, and ^etteth them all about
one work, as if they were one man, it may be taken for no less then Gods
doing; especially if ye consider the case of our King, while they begin to act
for Him; not sitting on His Throne and swaying the Scepter, but in His low
estate, even then to remember Him, and lay themselves out for Him; speaks out
Gods great doing, and that not only His finger, but His whole hand, yea His ten
fingers, yea both His arms (to speak after the manner of man) was lifting up
these Instruments and employing them in His work, and to this we may add; that
these Instruments should undertake the work against so many high and great
Mountains that stood in the way; against so many sons of Anak, and mighty
Giants combined so strongly together, and yet level them all, and scatter them
all, can speak no less then that the mighty Spirit of God was in them, and His
strong hand with them.

Take a word more to advance the greatness of all these doings and works, and
for that end consider, First, The time when; When we like the Jews thought it
Impossible, at least so soon, we were like these dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. our hope
was almost lost, verse. 11. yet though it seemed difficult in our eyes, it was
not so in Gods, Zech. 8. 6. to whom all things are possible, Matthew. 19. 26. and
does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 135. 6. he breathed upon us, and by his great
doing has made us live and stand up in his fight, both our King and us his
People, and delivered Him and us from the hand of our enemies, and blessed us
as in the days of old.

Secondly, Consider the manner; it was without blood or sore labor: Jud^h was
not so delivered, but God has magnified his doing toward us; for our enemies
melted away as a snail which melts, Psalm. 58. 8. As smoke is driven away so
were they, as wax melts before the fire, so did they perish at the presence
of God, Psalm. 68. 2.

Thirdly, Consider by whom, and in this also God has magnified his great
doing: it was not the Babylonians, but Cyrus that set the Jews at liberty; but
here, many of these who were isntrumental against the King, are now under God,
the means of His restitution. The great God who changed Labans heart to enter
in Covenant with Jacob, Genesis 31. 34. and made these who joined with Absolon in
his rebellion against David their King, prove afterward most forward to call
him home, 2 Samuel 19. 9. he bowed also their hearts to show all forwardness for
our Kings reduction, and kiss Him with the kisses of subjection and reverence,
and will, we hope ere long, secure them to Him by the Oath of Allegiance: As
the hearts of Kings are in the hand of the Lord, and he turns them whether
soever he will, Prove. 21. 1. so are the hearts of Armies and Subjects in his
hands, and he has turned them by his mighty influence to run in the ancient
and right channel, as we see this day.

Use 1. Let us improve the Doctrine: And first, let no proud oppressing Tyrant
glory in his might, and boast like Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2. Who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I
let Israel go: or as Senacherib, Can God deliver out of my hand, 2 Chronicles 32.
14, 15. presumptuous fools, the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the
weakness of God is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. He binds the arms of the
strongest, and takes the prey from the mighty, he catches the wisest in their
own wiles, He breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder, Psalm. 46. 9.
He brings out those which are bound with chains, Psalm. 68. 6. He wounds the
head of his enemies, verse 21. and brings his people from the depths of the
sea, verse 22. No might nor policy can withstand Him, Mountains melt at his
presence. When he writes, Mean Tekel on the wall, the spirit of the mighty
fails, their thoughts are troubled, their countenance changed, their joints
loosed, their knees smite one against another, and the Tyrant is forced to cry
out, Do victas in tua vincla manus, and with Julian, Vicisti tandem Galilaee.

Use 2. Secondly, Fear the great Lord greatly, who can do great things both for
us and against us: this use the Psalmist makes of it, Psalm. 89. 6. Who in
heaven (says he) can be compared to the Lord? Who among the sons of the mighty
can be likned unto to Lord: and then from this he in^erreth, verse 7. God is
greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and Exodus 14. 31. Israel
saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians; and the people
feared the Lord.

Use 3. Thirdly, Expect great things from him who can do them; we dishonor him
when we expect only little and but small things, as he requires our greatest
services, because he is a great Father and a great Master, even the Lord of
hosts, Mal. 1. 6. so it becomes us to expect from him great things, because he
is a great King, that works wonders: how unbeseeming is a petty fidian and a
great God; a little says and a great Lord, doing great things?

Use 4 Fourthly, Let none in the deepest distress despair of his own, or of
the deliverance of Gods people, although it seem incredible and above the reach
of man's reason and power, although thy condition seem desperate in the eyes of
the enemy, that he say, God has forsaken thee, there is none to deliver thee,
Psalm. 71. 11. although it seem so unto thy neighbors and acquaintance that
they look upon thee as a dead man out of mind; and like a broken vessel, Psalm.
31. 12. and although it seem so in thine own eyes, that thou say, as it is in
Ezekiel. 37. 12. Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our
parts: yet remember, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. Fear ye not, (as Moses said to the people) Stand still
and see the salvation of the Lord which he will show you, Exodus 14. 13. Believe
in God who quickneth the dead, and calls these things which be not, as though
they were, Romans 4. 17. Consider, that unto God belongs the issues from death,
Psalm. 68. 20. and that to him all things are possible, Matthew. 19. 26. and
improve the former experiments of Gods great doings in behalf of his people, or
of thy self, to the strengthening of thy faith in after times. Conclude from
former experience to future, so did David, 1 Samuel 17. 31. and so did Paul, 2
Cor. 1. 10. as former Victories encourage Conquerors to a new Conquest: so old
deliverances and favors should help us still to trust in God, and stand
nudaunted in all our troubles. Let us therefore register Gods former favors,
and the great things he has done for us, and make them as many Arguments to
build upon God for time to come; for God is always where he was the same
without any shadow of change.

Use 5. Fifthty, Give God great praise for his great doings; he will accept no
lean or starved sacrifices; Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, Psalm.
48. 1. and Psalm. 145. 3. When the Lord did a great work for Paul, in delivering
him from the Lions mouth, he breaks forth into great praise, to him be glory
for ever and ever amen, 2 Timothy 4. 18. when the Lord turned again the captivity
of his people, their tongue was filled with singing the songs of praise, as it
is, verse 2. God has turned again our Kings and our captivity, for ours was
bound up in His: Let us for this great work, render unto God great and ample
praise, this is the end of all Gods doings (for he does all for his own glory)
and let this be our end to give the praise of all to him, even praise in some
measure answerable to his doing.

Obs. 2. Secondly, we observe Gods prerogative, what ever great things are done
for his people, he is the doer of them, he is the sole Author of his peoples
good, whether of their deliverance, or their enjoyment of good things, or the
overthrow of their enemies; He is the Author also of their misery, Amos 3. 6.
and Isa. 45. 7. God fits not as an idle spectator, and leaves fortune to tumble
things up and down, but he is otherwise the Author of good then of evil, he is
provoked by man to afflict; For he does it not willingly, Lam. 3. 33. He is in
a manner enforced to it by man's sins, and therefore, Isa. 28. it is called his
Work, but his strange work, his Act, but his strange Act, but of his peoples
good; He is causa (...) and (...), he is the Author and occasion: it comes of
himself: he moved only by his goodness, does great things for them, this same
work of the peoples deliverance, is thrice ascribed to God, in this Psalm. verse
1, 2, 3. and God himself told his people, that he would be the doer of it, Jer.
30. 8, 9, 10. Though he made use of Cyrus, yet God was the principle, and Cyrus
but his Instrument; He stirred up his spirit, and held his right hand to subdue
nations before him. Isa. 45. 1. and therefore he subjoyns there, verse 5. I am
the Lord and there is none else: I girded thee, though thou have not known me.
He is the Lord, and beside him there is no Savior, Isa. 43. 11. He alone does
great wonders, Psalm. 136. 4. Salvation is of the Lord alone, Jonah 2. 9.

Applic. To make Application. Though the Army was Isntrumental in His
Majesty's restoration; and though the Lord General did his utmost to persuade
them to that great undertaking; yet if the Lord had not moved their hearts,
they had not moved their hearts, they had not moved nor promoved the Work.
There went with King Saul a band of men, but God first touched their hearts, 1 Samuel 10. 26. else they had proved as ill as others, children of Belial, and
despised him, as it is there, verse 27. King Saul sent a severe Edict,
requiring the Subjects to give their assistance for the relief of Jabes-gilead:
but it was not the ^everity of the Proclamation that brought them to obedience,
but when the fear of the Lord fell on them, Then they came with one consent, 1 Samuel 11. 7. There is no Savior beside him, Josh. 13. 4. It was the Lord who
did begin and carried on this work which we commemorate this day: Its
beginning, progress, and accomplishment is all of him.

Use 1. Then first, Let no Instrument mistake himself, for the author, nor
advance himself above his sphere, nor appropriate to himself the Lords
prerogative: It was the folly of the proud Babylonians to do so, Hab. 1. 16.
They sacrificed to their own net, and burned incense unto their drag; The
Assyrians also was deeply guilty of this, as you have it, Isa. 10. 13. What God
had done by him as an Instrument, he arrogates to himself, and ascribes to his
own power and policy. Instruments are sometimes ready with Israel to glory in
their strength and success, which is but a thing of naught, and say, That they
have taken horns to themself by their own strength, Amos 6. 13. but Instruments
should not ^acrilegiously robe God of his honor nor Deifie themselves. Let
them beware lest their hearts be lifted up and forget the Lord who has done
great things by them, and say in their heart, their power and might of their
hand, their policy and industry has done these things, see Deuteronomy. 8. 14. 17.

Use 2. Secondly, Let Instruments then be exhorted in a selfdenying way, to
say, Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy Name, give glory, Psalm.
115. 1. and with Paul in an other case, 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God, I
am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain, I
labored abundantly, yet not I but the grace of God which was with me, for they
prevailed not by their sword, nor did their right arm save them, but the right
hand of the Lord, and his arm, and the light of his countenance, because he
favored them, Psalm. 44. 3.

Use 3. Thirdly, My exhortation from this is to others: First, that they
Idolize no Instrument. When the people upon the hearing of Herod's Oration gave
a shout, And cried, it is the voice of a God, and not of a man; this puffed him
so up with pride, that he gave not glory to God, and therefore it turned to his
ruin, Act. 12. 21. 22, 23. Two extremes there would be shunned The first is:
not to Deiefie Instruments, although never so great, set them not up in Gods
room, for God will not give his glory to another Isa. 42. 8. and as salvation
is in vain expected from them, truly (says the Prophet) In vain is salvation
hoped for from the hills and from the multitude of mountains, truly in the Lord
our God is the salvation of Israel, Jer. 3. 23. so it is impiously ascribed to
them: for what could they have done without God, without whom they can do
nothing, Joh. 15. 6. God it is who works by them what he pleases. God said
of Cyrus his Instrument, Thou art my shepherd and shall perform all my
pleasure, Isa. 44. 28. The other extreme to be avoided, is the neglect of
Instruments; Idolize them we may not, forget them we should not; remember them
with civil honor and praise we ought: are not Moses, Joshua, the several
Judges, Deborah, David, Cyrus, and other Instruments of the Lord for his
peoples good recorded in Scripture with honor; in the 5 of Judges, Deborah
remembereth with honorable respect these who helped against the enemy, others
are branded with a note of Infamy, for withholding their assistance, and Meroz
is cursed with a grievous curse, because being near and called to give their
assistance, they refused to do it, and 23. let us then remember the Instruments
before named with civil respect and praise. Should we not honor them whom the
Lord has honored; let them be Chronicled to succeeding Generations; my heart
is toward them: (To use Deborah her wor^^, Judge. 5. 9.) That offered
themselves willingly, bless the Lord.

Use 4. Fourthly, Give all the Divine praise to God; praise him in and for
himself; he is the principal and author of these great works, For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen, Romans
11. 36. When Jehoshaphat was delivered from his enemies he gave the praise of
all to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 27, 28. so did Theodosius, being certified of the
overthrow of John the Usurper, Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 23. so did the people of
Israel when David their King was advanced to his Throne, see Psalm. 118. It is
true, we cannot sufficiently utter the mighty acts of the Lord, nor show forth
all his praise, Psalm. 106. 2. yet according to our capacity, let us sing with
Moses; The Lord is my strength and song, he is become my salvation. -- The Lord
is a man of war, -- Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power, -- who
is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods: Who is like thee glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, Exodus 15. 2, 3. 11. Let the King
say with David, It is God that avaingeth me, and subdueth the people under me;
he delivers me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above these that
rise up against me; thou have delivered me from the violent man, therefore will
I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and sing praises unto thy name. Great
deliverance gives he unto his King, and shows mercy to his Anointed, etc.
Psalm. 18. 47, 48, 49, 50. Let all of us say, O Give thanks unto the Lord, for
his mercy endures for ever; to him who alone does great wonders, for his mercy
endures for ever, Psalm. 136. 3, 4.

Use 5. Fifthly, Rely upon God alone in time of trouble, for he alone does
great things for his people; It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put
confidence in man, -- then to put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118. 8, 9. Put
not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man in whom there is no help,
Psalm. 146. 3. Yea, the Lord curses him that trusts in man, that makes flesh
his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. Make not wealth our strong
City, as the rich do, Prove. 18. 11. for neither silver nor gold shall be able
to deliver in the day of the Lords wrath, Prove. 11. 4. Ezekiel. 7. 19. Zeph. 1.
18. But let the Lord be our City of ^^fuge and strong Tower: run unto him, for
he sees our affliction and hears our cry, Exodus 3. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 12. and He will
save us, Psalm. 18. 3. Prove. 18. 10. for salvation is of him, Jonah 2. 9.

Obs. 3. Thirdly, Gods great doing should be well noticed: the Heathen did it,
verse. 2. and his people in the Text. Moses and Aaron with the men, and Miriam
with the women of Israel took notice of their deliverance from the Egyptians,
Exodus 15. 1. 20. David was very careful to remark Gods dispensations, and pens
many a Psalm on that account. Debora and Barak so noticed the deliverance of
Gods people from Jabin and Sisera, that they commemorate it with songs of
praise, Judge. 5. When the men of Judah got their young King Joash restored to
the Crown beyond expectation, they observed it, with clapping their hands and
prayer for him, 2 Kings 11. 12. And when Athalia the Tyrant was slain, all the
people of the Land rejoiced, verse 20. the Lord commands his people to notice
his doings, Psalm. 46 8. Come and see, (says the Psalmist) the works of God,
Psalm. 66. 4. the nature of his works call for it, being great, honorable, and
glorious and wonderful, Psalm. 111. 2, 3, 4. The godly takes pleasure to seek
them out, Ibid. verse 2. God shows his people the power of his works, verse
6. that they may notice them.

Use 1. Come then, and behold, what the Lord does done for us, Psalm. 46. 8.
take reasons to move you. 1. Ye offer a great indignity to God the doer, if ye
remark them not. When a great Crafts-man has brought a great and rare piece of
Work to perfection, and calls on us to look upon it, if we refuse, do we not
affront him? The Lord will sure take it as a high contempt, if we do not
consider his workings. 2. His doings and workings are so full of ravishing
wisdom, power and love, that there is in them a magnetic virtue to draw out
our con^ideration and meditation, and make us cry out as of all Gods works, so
of these in particular, There are no works like unto thy works, Psalm. 86. 8.
Who is like unto thee, O Britain, O people saved by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
Ask now of the days that are past -- and and a^k from one side of the heaven
unto the other, whether there has ^^en any such things as these great things
are, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. Who has heard, or seen such things? Shall the earth be made
to bring forth in one day, or shall a Nation be born at once? Isa 66. 8. but
sudainly, so smoothly, so wisely, so gloriously has the Lord done these great
things for us. 3. These things are done in our sight. God did marveilous things
in the sight of his people in Egypt, in Zoan, Psalm, 78. 12. he has done them
in our sight, that we with open face might behold them. 4. Strangers noticeth
them, they are saying as the Heathen did, verse 2. and crying, This is the
finger of God, Exodus 8. 19. and shall we not with the people in the Text, Echo
them, and recognize his doing. 5. It is a sign of a wicked man, that when Gods
hand is lifted up, he will not see, Isa. 26. 11. Notice then Gods doings, but
do it, First, advisedly, not slightly: Men should wisely consider of his
doings, Psalm. 64. 9. Stand still and see this great sight, Exodus 3. 3. Who is
wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 107. 43. Secondly, With joy and delight: The
righteous should see and rejoice, Psalm. 107, 42. for God does his works to make
his people glad, Psalm. 92. 4. Thirdly, Believingly and profitably, to the
strengthening our Fath and Hope for times to come, that we may set our hope in
God and keep his Commandments Psalm. 78. 7.

Use 2. Then justly reprovable are three sorts of men who come short of this
duty, in noticing Gods doings. First, careless and ignorant ones, who like
Swine take no notice of these Pearls, How great are thy works, O Lord -- a
brutish man knows not, neither does a fool understand this, Psalm. 92. 5, 6.
some are like the Israelites, of whom it is said, Psalm. 106. 7. that they
understood not Gods wonders, in Egypt; but these provocketh God, as it is in
that same verse. Secondly, Despisers, who undervalue his doings: They regard
not the works of the Lord nor the operation of his hands, Psalm. 28 5. Isa. 5.
12. like Swine, prefers the Accorn to the Pearl, or children in knowledge,
triffles to Gold: to such may be said, as it is, Act. 13. 41. Behold ye
despisers, and wonder and perish: God will destroy such, and not build them up,
Psalm. 28. 5. Thirdly, Envious persons, who envieth the glory of our King, and
the happiness of these Lands; of such the Prophet Isaiah speaks, chap. 26.
11. But they shall see, and be ashamed, for their envy, etc. for their envious
and spightfull carriage toward God's people, they shall be ashamed and
confounded.

Obs. 4. Fourthly, Gods great works should be publicly acknowledged: not only
noticed, but acknowledged, noticed with solemn Narrations and Commemorations:
so did Moses and the Children of Israel notice and commemorate with public
confessions and praises. Debora, Jud. 5. is large in acknowledging Gods great
doings. It is commanded that we declare among the people his doings, Psalm. 9.
11. and David engages to do it, in that Psalm, verse 1. I will show forth,
(says he) all thy mavelous works, and Psalm. 26. 6, 7. I will compass thine
altar, O Lord, that I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of
all thy wondrous works, and Psalm. 71. 17. he professes that he has performed
his engagement: Hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works. The Lord does
great things for this end, That we show forth all his praise in the gates,
Psalm. 9. 13, 14.

Use 1. Talk then of his great doings for us publicly, with all solemn
commemorations and confessions: Let Parents declare it to their children: If
thy Son ask thee, saying, What is this, and what means these things, thou
shall declare it fully unto him, as ye have the like commanded, Exodus 13. 14.
and Josh. 4. 5, 6, 7. the Psalmist promised, to make known Gods works to the
generations to come, 78, 4. 6, 8. hide not then these things from others, but
say as the Lepers, 2 King. 7. 9. This day is a day of good tidings, we do not
well to hold our peace, write them in your memories, and open them in your
communications; he is a son of Belial that does it not. Take these motives to
enforce the Duty. 1. Thereby we advance Gods glory; the workman is exalted,
when the work is commended. 2. Thereby we testify our own thankfulness to
God, and gives the glory of all to him. 3. We provock and encourage others to
the like performance; I will make thy name to be remembered (says the Psalmist)
in all generations, therefore shall the people praise thee, Psalm. 45. 17. Moses
told Jethro all that the Lord had done for his people, and Jethro thereupon,
blessed and magnified the Lord, Exodus 8, 9, 10, 11. 4. Thereby we engage our
selves and encourage others to a right Improvement of Gods works, that we
neither contemn nor abuse them, but take them with all dutiful respect and
submissive reverence out of Gods own hand, and entertain them as his gifts and
doings.

Use 2. Blame worthy then are they; First, who by their sinful silence
conceales these great doings. Conscience of former guiltiness, choaks and
shuts the mouths of some, they are confounded and lay their hand upon their
mouth. But secondly, Much more guilty and blame worthy are others, who like the
dog in the manger will neither commemorate Gods doings themselves, nor suffer
others to do it: Or, thirdly, Who stands fretting within, and gnashing the
teeth while they behold others about it; but these, as it was told before,
shall be ashamed and confounded for their envy, Isa. 26. 11.

Obs. 5. Gods people should not only notice and declare Gods great doings, but
also apply them: so did the Jews here, and therein lay the difference betwixt
the heathen and them; for the Heathen could lay no claim to them, nor had
interest in them; they could not appropriate, because they were not done for
them, but for the Jews they were done; they therefore had interest in them, and
rightly laid claim to them. Thankful ones are still applying and takes Gods
doings as his gifts given to them, and done for them. And it is to be marked
that their application was universal, they did it as one man with one mouth
and heart, and as all concerned in it. Search the Scriptures and ye will find
the Lords people upon the receipt of common favors done to the body, each of
them laying claim to the same, as a sharer therein, and counting it done as for
all in common, so for himself in particular. When they were delivered out of
Egypt, and possessed in Canaan, or freed from their enemies, or blessed with a
good King, they accounted these done to all in common, and to every one in
particular: and if any one did otherwise, he is branded as a son of Belial, 1 Samuel 10. 27. and looked upon as unworthy of fellowship or protection, but
worthy of death, 1 Samuel 11. 12.

Use 1. Look then upon these late Transactions and Revolutions as Gods doings
done for us, and not against us; they are of common concernment, and great
mercies, and should accordingly be entertained by all and every one of us, will
ye but reveiw the great things formerly mentioned, and pause a little in your
meditations, and consider the great evils we are delivered from: Church evils,
and State evils, and the great blessings bestowed upon both Church and State,
and ye will find that every true Protestant and honest Patriot is so great a
sharer therein, that he may truly say, The Lord has done great things for us;
take but one under your cognizance, to wit, the restitution of our King to us:
a King, the rightful Heir of these Kingdoms, endued with so many gifts and
graces, owned by the Lord, perfected by sufferings and made glorious by so many
wonderful deliverances. A King whom the Scripture calls our Father for His
Fatherly love and care, 1 Samuel 24. 11. and our Head, for His beneficial
Influences, Deuteronomy. 28. 44. Our shepherd, to lead and defend us, Isa. 44. 28. Our
Nursing Father, Isa. 49. 23. The breath of our nostrils, Lam. 4. 20. The great
tree under whose shadow we dwell, Dan. 4. 12. Our light, 2 Samuel 21. 17. The
Minister of God for our good, Rom: 13. 4. and does not these work so strongly
upon us, to cry out and say, The Lord has done this great work for us whereof
we are glade. Are we not his Children, and he our Father? we his members, and
he our Head; we the sheep of his pasture, and he our shepherd. Have we not seen
already the first fruits of his restoration: Let us therefore as one man say
and sing it over again, The Lord has done many great things for us, and this
in particular, in restoring to us our King, whereof we are glad.

Use 2. Far be it then from any, I hope there is none here to forbear to make
application of Gods great doings of late as done for us: And if there be any
such, I must tell them that it proceeds either, 1. From ignorance of the
blessings bestowed, and of the miseries from which we are freed: Or, 2. From
beastly stupidity, being insensible of good or evil: Or, 3. From prejudice: Or,
4. The want of Grace: Or, 5. Needless fears: Or, 6. Malice and desperate
opposition to the work of God: Or, 7. Envy, and such like. There is none in
whom there is any spark of Grace, or affection to his Country, and love to the
Church of God and his Sovereign, that can forbear to say it over and again, The
Lord has done great things for us, etc.

Obs. 6. Great and real favors and deliverances should work a great and real
joy; The word rendered glad, Imports so much. They wrought so upon the Jews
here, their hearts were glade, their mouths were filled with laughter, and
their tongue with singing. Our joy should in some measure be answerable to the
ground of it: the receipt of a man-child brings great joy to the Mother, Joh.
16. 21. A clear and calm morning, after a dark and stormy night brings joy to
the birds of the air that they creep and sing; the Child and Wife, exults at
the return of the Parent and Husband after a long absence; and the poor captive
being set at freedom rejoices with joy unspeakable; and should not a Nation
rejoice and exult, when after many and sore pangs and troubles under misery,
when after a long and dark night of calamity, when after long pantings often
desired, but withholden comforts; the Lord comes with both his arms full of
blessings, and cleares up a fair Sun-shining day of prosperity, and knocks off
the Fetters and delivers a fainting people from all their miseries, and
smiles upon them, and satisfies their longing desires, and sits down in the
midst of them, and bids them live in his sight: Sure these must quicken the
heart and fill it with joy glorious and abundant. Promises of good things
rejoices the heart, and cheareth the spirit; how much more (suppose ye) when
they are turned to deeds and fulfilled? If the promise have such an Influence,
then how much more when perfected and enjoyed.

Use 1. Let us resolve the Doctrine into practice to day, and with glad hearts
and joyful lips sing, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice
and be glad in it, and say, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me, bless his holy Name, bless the Lord my soul, and forget not all his
benefits, etc. Psalm. 103. 1, 2. And say, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
good: for his mercy endures for ever: Who remembered us in our low estate, and
has redeemed us from our enemies; for his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136.
1. 23, 24. We will sing, and praise thy power, O Lord, Psalm. 21. 13. But let us
take heed that our joy fall not short of the Jews joy; let us endeavor to
resemble them in it: 1. Let it be great like theirs, and like the joy of the
people when Solomon was anointed, after whom they piped with pipes, and
rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rented with the sound of them, 1
King 1. 4. Secondly, Let our joy be full: Let our heart be glad and our glory
rejoice, Psalm. 16. 9. Thirdly, Let it be sincere and cordial; saying, My heart
is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise, Psalm. 57. 7.
Fourthly, Universal, like the joy of Israel upon their deliverance from Egypt,
and of the people at Solomon's Coronation, when All rejoiced, 1 King. 2. 4.
Fifthly, Manifest, the Jews were not ashamed to publish their joy. God was not
ashamed to have done these great things for us, but did them with delight in
the open view of men and Angels, and shall we be ashamed to publish our joy
with loud acclamations. Sixthly, Constant, not for a flash: The Jews desires to
perpetuate their joy: And ye may observe in the Psam, joy upon joy, and joy
after joy, and such should our joy be: rejoice continually; let not the
memorial of it become wearisome to us, like Israel whose praises and prayers
ended almost as soon as they passed the Red Sea, within three days turning
their melody unto murmuring, Exodus 15. 24. They song his praise, but they soon
forgot his works, Psalm. 106. 12, 13. Be ever ready to embrace all fresh
occasions whereby our slumbering affections may be awakned; and pray, That the
Lord wilt not only make us glad, according to the days wherein he has
afflicted us; but that we may r^joyce and be glade all our days, Psalm. 90. 14,
15. Seventhly, Let our joy be chiefly spiritual, singing Psalms, Jam. 5. 13.
Speaking in ^salms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in
our hearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. singing praises to the name of the most
high, Psalm. 92. 1. and 98. 5. Let no drunken ca^^all, or ranting joy be once
heard or seen which will but provock the Lord: Remember the Statute among the
Jews upon their deliverance from Haman, to keep days of feasting, and to
remember the poor, by sending them gifts, Esth. 9. 22. Eighthly, Let our joy be
practical and strongly influentiall upon our lives; follow after holiness of
Conversation, which is a real Thanksgiving. Who can utter the mighty acts of
the Lord (says the Psalmist, Psalm 106. 2) Who can show forth all his praise?
and he shows in the 3. verse the best way to do it, is to keep Gods
Judgments, and do righteousness at all times: seeing the Lord has done so
great things for us, break not his Commandments any more, least he be angry
with us and consume us, Ezra 9. 14.

Use 2. What shall we think and say then of these in whom these great doings of
the Lord produces no real joy; but through the corruption of their hearts
occasions these following evils. First, Sorrow and indignation, like Haman
grieving at the safety and advancement of Mordecai; or like Athalia renting
their hearts with indignation, because of Joash his advancement to his own, and
his Fathers Throne, 2 King. 11. 14. The wicked see it and be grieved, he
gnasheth his teeth and melts away, Psalm. 112. 10. Secondly, Envy like Sheba,
fretting against the Instruments of David's reduction, and against David
himself, and turning away Israel from owning him, because he had not the chief
hand in calling him home, 2 Samuel 20. 1, 2. Thirdly, Confusion, Mi^^^ 7. 16.
being confounded to see their power and glory to vanish into smoke. Fourthly,
Fained submission bowing down with their faces toward the earth, Isa. 49. 23.
and licking the (...) a serpent, Micah 7. 17. Fifthly, Counterfeit joy like
Shimei, 2 Samuel 19. 18, 19, 20. or Rufus (of whom Tacitus (...), lib. 2) who
came to Vitellius after his Victory, Laetitiam and (...) vultu (...); at animo
anxius, Counterfeiting joy, yet with rep^ning hearts ^rinding and grieving:
these (...) ^^^^ming to themselves the fa^^^on (...) tongues to speak the
language of Canaan in thanksgiving but it is of no price with God who weighs
the heart. As dale of death so do I hate that kind
Whose heart from mouth, whose tongue dissents from mind.


Quest. If any ask, how shall I know such? And secondly, What be the reasons of
it? Answ. To the first it is answered, they may be known, First, by their
countenance: Ex tristitia cordis sequitur tristitia oris, says Gregory on the
place: a sad countenance discovers the want of joy. Secondly, If men have
learned the art of dissimulation, and not so ingenious as the former, they may
be discovered by a quavering voice, a tremblying note, or some such thing,
while they are speaking of these great transactions. Or, Thirdly, some word
falls through inadvertancy from their lips that bespeaketh their sorrow and
anguish of heart. Or, Fourthly, Qualifications and reserves in their speaking
and praying or preaching, crying up and crying down with the same breath, now
Hosanna, then Crucify in the neck of it; as for example, God save the King, if
he be for this or that, else, etc.

Secondly, The reasons why men are not really glad, are 1. Misapprehensions and
Jealousies, some being void of charity, that thinks no evil, but of disposition
suspecting the worst, and interpreting all to the worst, and therefore fear
possessing their hearts choaks their joy. 2. Deep rooted malice, having
contracted a habit of hating Kingly Government, the King and the Royal Family,
and inured their tongues to revile it and Him, therefore are tormented to see
that Government re-established, and the King restored. 3. Old guiltiness, being
guilty of so execrable wrongs, that although Shimei like they anticipate
others, and profess subjection yet their guilty consciences does so affright
them, still fearing Shimei's reward, that still echoes in their ears, had Zimri
peace that slew his Master. 4. Envy choaks the joy of some, others being chief
in the Employment in bringing home the King, and turning away our captivity,
and ther^^^^^ like to be chief in Thanks, Honor, and Reward: This (...) (...)
so ready to revolt when Sheba blew the traiterous Trumpet, 2 Samuel 20. because
they thought the men of Judah would have the greatest thanks for bringing King
David back, 2 Samuel 19. 5. Covetousness, men have gained on the Kings Revenues
and Church Patrimony, by the c^^ft of pulling down Kings, they have their
wealth and places of Trust, and by the Kings restitution they see their gain in
danger; and therefore Demetrius-like, Acts 19. 24. they are full of wrath 6.
Love to their opinions, lusts and fancies, like little Children who desire not
their Father may recover, that without control they may run up and down: They
fear the Kings bands and cords will ty them too straightly.

Conclusion. But I hope there is none such here; ye have been better instructed
in the principles of obedience and loyalty by my Reverend Father now with the
Lord, once your Pastor; whose Doctrine and loyal Conversation (notwithstanding
of his removal from you) ye have lively expressed in all these Revolutions;
And therefore let us all rejoice in our Kings salvation, Psalm. 20. 5 and pray,
Save Lord the King, and let him hear us when we call, Psalm. 20. 9. Let the
University say, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy
endures for ever, Psalm. 118. 1. Let Old Aberdeen and the Parish say, The Lord
has done great things for us, whereof we are glad: And bless thou the Lord, O
my soul; Let us all say: This is the day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm. 118. 24. God save the King, The Name of the
God of Jacob defend Him, and grant Him according to his own heart, and fulfill
all his Counsel, Psalm. 20. 1, 4. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

