Homer A la Mode. A MOCK POEM UPON THE FIRST, AND SECOND BOOKS OF HOMER'S
ILIADS.

Hoc ridere meum tam nil nulla tibi vendo
Iliade. -- --
Et sua riserunt tempora Maeoniden.
-- One for Sense, and one for Rhyme,
I think's sufficient at one time.
HUDIBR. OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Ric. Davis. 1664.

Homer a la mode.

To the Reader.
BEcause it was thought too difficult to Print so much Greek as was requisite,
And too mean to print the Latin Translation; The Learned Reader, that thinks
it worth his while to observe the correspondence betwixt this Translation and
the Text, is desired to compare them, as well for the Illustration of the one,
as the other: Further, by way of Preface, HOMER, though dressed in the new
mode, will only beg a favorable censure in his old tone,

Good People pity the blind.

ERRATA.
Some faults have slipped the Press, and would have done, had Homer himself
been Corrector, therefore the Reader is desired to mend, or pardon, these that
follow, and as many more as he can find.

P. 17. l. ^. blot out mind. 24. l. 1. r. ask's. l. 19. r. (...). p. 47. l, 13.
for a r. the. p. 67. l. 3. blot out to. etc.

Homer A la Mode.
The Argument.
One Captain at another swaggers,
And comes, almost, to drawing daggers,
The Army's plagued, not for their vices,
But long o'th prayers of old Chryses,
Which was a poor Clerk of Apollo's;
These the Contents, the Chapter follows.
COme on, strike up thou riming Goddess,
And sing me, in some blyth Rhapsody's,
Achilles his unlucky fury;
Which, as the sequel may assure ye,
Did bring upon the Graecians, double
Four or five hundred pecks of trouble;
And, as the tale does farther tell us,
Did send a number of good fellows,
Without as much as being sick,
Body and Soul down to old Nick,
Which, hash't before by Mars his cooks,
Made treats for mastiff dogs and rooks;
(...)
(For no man living dares say no
When crosse-grain'd Jove will have it so)
Since first Agamemnon (...).
the General,
He under whose command the men are all,
With stout Achilles fell at odds;
But which the devil of all the Gods,
Can any say by what appears,
Set these two swabbers by the ears?
Who but Latona and Joves son?
Who, angry with Agamemnon,
Did send the plague and pox among 'em,
He Had better took 'em both and hung 'em,
For, for their sakes, the harmless people Kick't up heels like rotten sheep,
The means how this did come about,
That with Apollo he fell out,
Was this; Apollo had a Flamen
Who used in's Temple to cry Amen,
For the present think one of our sextons,
This fellow Agamemnon vexed once,
Coming to pay his Daughters ransom,
For (to say truth) the Girl was handsome,
He brought along with him rare gifts,
Knowing the Soldiers wanted shifts,
He came well stocked with Canvas suites,
Good lockram shirts, and well vamp'd Boots,
Besides, for Food, Biscuit of Naples,
And, in his Pocket, mellow Apples,
For State, with him bore an attendant,
A Dog-whip with a Bell at the end on it,
To the Tent where Agamemnon kept her,
And told him 'twas Apollos Scepter,
With him there came another carle, and
Bore after him the parish Garland,
That Garland which did hang before
Over Apollos Chancell door,
Thus coming to the Grecian Navy,
He doff't his Cap, and cried God save ye
To all the Greeks, to each Atrides
Specially, who the peoples guide is,
Then tilting down's head, up his breech,
He thus began to make a Speech,
Right worshipful, you both Atridae,
And those that sit o'th bench beside ye,
(...).
You throng of Graecians altogether,
Whose Boots are made of good Neats Lether,
Were Jove so much your Friend as I am,
You quickly should vanquish King Priam,
I wish that all the Gods would lend
Their help to bring Troy to its end,
And bring you to your parish a'ter.
In the mean time pray free my Daugher,
Accepting what I humbly offer,
Brought hither out of my Wives Coffer,
Herein you shall Apollo reverence,
And make him of your party ever hence.
As soon as all the Soldiers heard it,
For Chryses straight they gave their verdit,
For the poor varlets mouths did water
More at his trinckets then his Daughter,
And therefore thought fit to respect
The Priest, and not his gifts reject,
Only, amongst them all, Agam-
Memnon began to curse and dam,
And, ceasing not to rant and swear,
Sent him home with a Fly in's ear,
Quoth he, Old man, I give thee notice,
Woe be to him that in thy coat is,
If ever Agamemnon catches
Him in our Ships, though under hatches,
Sexton i will spoil you for a ringer,
If any longer here you linger,
If e're you come again to the Navy,
You Will find your Scepter will not save ye,
If ever here again you dare land,
You Will find no favor for your Garland,
As for the Wench, I Will not part with her
Till age has rendered her whitlether,
With me she shall stay in the mean while.
(Though from her parish it were ten mile)
She shall not once budge from my quarters,
(...) --
But there shall weave bonelace and garters,
And with me tumble shall in the straw
Oft'ner then my wife Clytemnestra,
Therefore begone, provoke me not,
Or else by -- thou go to pot.
Old Chryses for fear almost dead,
Shrinking his ears close to his head,
And not attempting one word more,
Marched silently along the shore,
But all the way, in woeful postures
-- (...).
He muttered backward Pater nosters;
Making his Prayer to King Apollo,
Latona's son, as here does follow.
Quoth he look thou on my hearts wounds
That do in Chryse (...).
walk the rounds,
O thou which Cylla guardest ever,
And Tenedos, with silver quiver,
Thou heavenly (...)
rat-catcher, if ere
In The temple I made thee good cheer,
Or have e're flung the fat in the fire
Of Bulls, or Goats, grant my desire,
For thine own honor think upon it,
And let the Greeks rue this affront.
Thus, whining, prayed this great old lubberd,
The chinkes in's cheeks with tears all blubberd,
Apollo hears him and forth put's
From high Olympus vexed at guts,
His Bow in rage he straight flung over
His Back, and's Quiver (...).
with close cover,
And as he went his angry Arrows
Rumbled, as if the had been wheel-barrows,
Pulling his Cap down over his face,
He stole in a night walkers pace,
He came, and sat behind the boats,
Drew's bow, and cried have at your coats.
Straight a broad arrow he let go,
Twang says the string of's Silver Bow,
All his first shootes he made at random,
Or else no living wight durst stand 'em,
The first Bolt that he shot, did chance
Against a Mules fifth rib to glance;
The very next, believe me Sirs,
Did light among the fisting Curs.
Thus of the beasts having made havoke,
He turned his javelins against the folk,
And from among them forthwith flies one
(...).
Whose forked head was dip't in poison,
Which went directly as a line,
This trade continued whole days nine,
And all this while, I can assure you, all
That died, could scarce get decent burial,
Some they were feign to burn like witches,
Others were thrown by heaps in ditches,
At last when the tenth day was come once,
Achilles sent about his summons,
To give all notice, that they meet
In all post have, at a court leete;
For Juno, with her dirty Fists,
(Yet cleanlyer above the wrists)
Minded him to seek out a wizard,
For it did vex her to the gizard,
In The midst of all their warlike hurrying,
To see the Graecians die o'th muraine,
Then thus, as soon as all the commons
Were met according to their summons,
Achilles, (...).
nimble as any lacky,
Starts up amongst them, and thus spoke he.
Quoth he, right worshipful Atrides,
Either my guess o'th matter wide is,
Or home again we all must go
To save our lives, glad we escape so,
For all our Soldiers, on my word,
Cannot long hold out against plague, and sword.
In all our camp they will soon leave no man,
Therefore let us find out some wise woman,
Or some old Priest to interpret dreams,
And free us from these two extremes,
(For dreams from Jupiter are sent,)
So may we know Phaebus's intent
Or what a pox should be the matter
Why he this plague amongst us should scatter,
Whether it be cause we did fail him
In paying our vows, or what should ay'le him,
Or else whether the reason lies
In our default of sacrifice,
Or whether he will be reconciled
With the steam of mutton roast, or boiled,
Or if he will cure us of this pox
For the choice Kids in all our flocks,
Thus, having ended his fair speech,
He sat him down again on's breech,
Who starts me up when he had done?
But cunning Calchas, Thestor's Son,
Well wot he whatsoever birds spoke,
Whether Owls hoop, or Ravens croke,
Nor did he only understand
Things that were present, and at hand,
But that which was to be anon,
And what passed thousand years agone,
When first the Graecians hoys'd up sail
For Troy town, in their coats of Male,
Then this wise Calchas was their Pilot,
Which office fell not to him by lot,
But was conferred upon his merit,
'Cause he had a familiar spirit,
This fortune tellers, thus endowed
As has been said, mannerly bowed,
Then said, Darling of Jove, Achilles,
You bid me say what Phoebus's will is,
Which I Will perform, but first do you here,
I Will make you promise me, and swear
That you will stand by me, and assist
What e're I say with your clutch't fist,
And that you will heartily encourage,
And keep me safe from threatening, or rage,
What e're I say you must avouch,
For I believe, my words will touch
To the very quick some great commander,
(And yet I swear they are no slander)
And that you know's as bad, or worse,
Then currying a galled horse,
For why? you know, a Captaine's more
Powerful when vexed, then e're before,
And though he for the present smother
His rage perhaps, yet at some other
Time 'twill break out, when e're a suiting
Occasion comes fort's executing,
When e're he finds the other armless,
Then tell me, will thou save me harmless?
Then spoke Achilles swift of pace,
Fear not, (quoth he) take heart of grace,
What e're thou have to say, be it best or
worst, speak it out thou son of Thestor,
I swear by Phoebus great Joves darling,
Thou shall not need fear any snarling,
Whilst thou the oracle do expound,
As long as I am above ground,
And have mine eyes open, so long
None of the Greeks shall do thee wrong,
And on my honest word I tell ye,
No boat contains in's hollow belly,
The man that dares lay hands upon
Thee, though thou say Agamemnon,
Who (and good reason for it) does boast
Himself Commander of the host
Then the harmless wizard 'gan to take
A good heart to him, and thus spoke,
It Is not for breaking of engagement,
That Phoebus is in this inragement,
Nor does he to this plague us doom
Because he wants a Hecatombe,
But it is because Agamemnon
In scorn bid Chryses get him gone,
And neither took the gifts he brought here,
Nor yet would give him back his Daughter,
Therefore e're since this (...)
cunning Archer
Has been as mad as any March Hare,
And hitherto has laid plagues on
Us, and resolves never to have done
Till we the black-ey'd Girl restore,
And set her down at her Dads door,
Bringing her thither in our Barges,
And bearing all her Journeys charges,
And with her we must give Old Chryses
A goodly sight of Sacrifices,
And then Apollo will grow mild,
And easily be reconciled
When he had said thus, he sat down;
Then, shewing's anger in a frown,
Agamemnon rose, (or he belied is)
Who by his Surname hight Atrides,
He swelled, and then looked black with Ire,
-- (...).
His eyes cast sparks like charcoale fire;
(...).
Then first he furiously did blink on
Calchas, like the Devil over Lincoln;
Then thus belpake him, never had I
From thy mouth yet good Prophesy,
Thou damnable, unlucky, villainous,
Wizard, thou love still to speak ill on us,
Thou only do contention breed,
Never speak good word, nor do good deed,
And now you tell the Greeks you have found,
Whilst you the Oracle expound,
That long of me haps all this slaughter,
Because I keep old Chryses Daughter
Perforce, and would not take his present,
That therefore on us this plague he sent,
Indeed I love the wench a life,
More then I do my lawful Wise,
For better huswise never trod lether,
And, to say truth, she is not beneath her
Neither for wit, nor yet for feature,
Nor for her gentle loving nature,
But for all this, an't must be so,
With all my heart l'le let her go,
For who can help it? I had rather
Save my own troop, then my own father,
I Will give consent, and never ask why so,
But always making this proviso,
Neighbors, I should be very sorry
To loose by the Kindness I have for ye,
Therefore I hope, when she is gone,
You will not leave me thus alone,
For, is there any reason why
Each man should have his wench but I?
And truly I should be the loather
To leave her but for hopes of other,
I quitt her for the public ends,
The public must make me amends.
Achilles, footed like a dancer,
Starts up, and makes him straight this answer,
Quoth he, Ambitions Atrides
Thy greedy mind mind never satisfied is,
Such Avarice was never heard on,
How should the Greeks give thee a guerdon?
Does any man know, with a pocks,
What thou'ldst have? we have no common stocks,
What ere from Cities we have plundered,
Divided is amongst many a hundred,
Do think any will leave his share on it?
There Is no such fools I faith, I warrant,
If thou wilt be willing to present her
To th'god at present at a venture,
When by us any more girls are gained
You Will not repent you have thus bargained,
For her we will give rich interest
In three or four more of the best,
As soon as Jove will let us destroy
This paltry mudwall'd burough Troy,
Then Agamemnon 'gan to make him
Answer to this, and thus bespake him,
Hold hold Achilles, though the had been,
As good a man as George a Green
Although thou were a pretyer fellow
Then any man that lives here below,
Think not that thus thou shall me Cokes,
And bore my nose, like John a Nokes;
Though the art the bravest of thy inches
Shall't nere ore reach me with thy clinches;
whilst thou art furnished with females,
Should I sit down and suck my nails?
You bid me let my Doxy go,
But first I must know whither or not
The lusty Graecians will bind
Themselves to fit me to my mind
With some one else, and it is but right
But if in case you all deny't,
I Will take a girl where ere I list
And let me see who dares resist,
Thine, or Ulysses, or Ajax,
As sure as the coats on your backs,
To loose his girl I know it would
Uex any, but I must make bold;
But of this we will discourse here a'ter,
At present lets draw down to the water
A lighter used to carry seacoale,
Whose pitchy backs as black as the coal;
In it let us place some lusty barge men,
Such as amongst us are most large men,
With them the Hecatombe when she is
Ready to launch forth, bring Chryseis,
Then let a Steersman go aboard her,
The waryest our camp can afford her,
Ajax, or else Idomeneus,
Or, if they both desire excuse,
Let't be Ulysses; if his will is
To stay at home; go thou Achilles,
(...).
Who have such dreadful gogle eyes,
For us to Phoebus sacrifice,
Light-foot Achilles twice or thrice
Star'd at him like a cockatrice,
Then spoke, (pausing a little while)
Thou bundle of impudence and guile,
How can thou entertain a thought,
That ere the Graecians should be brought
By virtue of command from you,
To charge the foe, or lie perdue?
Do think that I come for my own
Interest to besiege Troy town?
Or charge their pikemen? by the mass
On my ground they did nere trespass,
They never with me played the thieves,
Or stole my horses, or my beeves,
Nor ere in Phthye (whose rich pastures
With good increase does feed their masters,)
Came they in the dead of dark night creeping,
(...).
To rob my orchards of one pipin,
Or genet moyle; the reason's plain,
Because betwixt them lies the main,
(...).
Ditches and banks on which are thick set
Crab-trees, and poynant thorns of quick-set:
The cause that did to Troy town draw us,
Was to right wronged Menelaus,
Only to please the mind, Jove knows,
Of that good man, (...).
and you dogs nose:
But all our service is forgot,
Our courtesy you value not,
But swear you will rob me of my hire,
Which I Am sure I got out oth' fire,
And since it was the Graecians gift,
To keep it, I shall make a shift,
I Am sure with you I shall not part stakes,
When ere the Grecian army takes
Troy town, this little tidy ham,
As full of men as ere't can cram,
And yet though th'warres continue an age,
Most part of them my hands must manage,
When we come to divide the spoil,
Thou always tak*st a huge great pile,
But if I get a little heap,
It Is all that e're my labors reap,
For which I Am thankful, and go merry
With it along to my own whery,
But now I bid you all God b'wy ye,
For my part I Will go home to Phthie,
There I Will stay with my Sea-coale lighters,
And never think of the Grecian fighters,
For truly I think that is far better,
Without me little can you get here:
You never shall again disparage
Me, with your unmannerly carriage.
Agamemnon Captain of the Rout
Answered, mary if you are so stout,
With all my heart, I faith, be jogging,
I Will never call you back by cogging,
Here are sufficient coppyholders
Tenants of mine, are as good Soldiers,
That honor me, and call me Landlord,
Besides Jove our preserver, and Lord;
These are on my side, and no dastards,
(...).
I hate thee more then all Joves bastards;
Thou Art quarelsome, and love a life
To be at the end of every strife,
What though at football thou giv'st odds
To all the Parish, thank the gods,
Here I Have no great need of your aid,
Go home and look thee a comrade,
Command thy Myrmedons, aboard
Thy Scullers, and there play the Lord,
Thy anger I not value do
More then the dirt under my shoe,
And since thou art so peremptory,
I Will tell thee ee'ne the down right story,
Since Phoebus ask' my concubine,
I Will send her in a boat of mine,
Besides two or three of my men
I Will send along with her, but then
I Will come my self as sure as she is
Alive, and take away Bryseis,
She whose cheeks are as red as cheries,
And bring her home in my own wheries,
From thy tent, whereby thou shall know
That I am none of thy fellow,
And this I Will do that others may
By an example learn to obey,
And tremble ever to out-braue
Me, as thou do, thou saucy knave,
This when Achilles heard, a sadness
Seized him, he could have cry'de for madness;
Whilst he be thought him what was best,
His heart nigh brake in's shaggy breast,
He Would feign have drawn his trusty dudgeon,
And been the death of that cormudgion,
Because he talked to him so surly,
But that he feared a hurly burly,
His mind, when he thought better on it,
Was to have put up the affront,
But then again he thought it base
To put up such a foul disgrace,
Standing and doubting thus with in a yard
Of Agamemnon, he drew's whinyard,
And whilst, he scarce yet knew's own mind,
Who comes me stealing in behind,
(Sent from one Juno, an old witch,
Whose wrists were white with scurfe, and itch
Who loved 'em dearly both) but a lass
That lived with her, whose name was Pallas;
She striking him two or three wherets
O'th ears, (...) --
took hold of's bunch of carrets,
Her shape seen only by Pelides,
By none of all the rest espied is,
Achilles wondered who should be
So bold, and turned about to see,
And staring at her, straight her knew,
Although she looked then deadly skew,
And Bawling at her, these words uttered,
As swift as if his tongue were buttered.
Daughter of Jove (...)
that of Goats lether
Wears doublets what wind brought thee hither?
Art come to testify the slander
Thrown on me by Atrides yonder
I Will tell the one thing, and that truly
He presently shall come of Blewly,
For by these trusty hilts, this strife,
If I miss not, shall cost his life;
To him then thus said bleare eyed Pallas,
Art mad? What, do not fear the gallows?
My dame, which too well loves you all,
Has sent me to compose this braul,
I Am sent by Juno with white wrists
To keep the peace, and hold your fists,
Therefore hands off, do not thou draw
Thy sword, agree, you know the Law
Is costly, if you please you may
Berogue and rascal him all day,
For this I tell you, and it is true,
This combat he shall dearly rue,
He shall e're long be put to's shifts,
And court you with three times these gifts,
Prithee therefore put up thy tool,
say thou were once ruled by a fool,
Then said Achilles light of feet,
If she command me, then so be it,
we must of force obey old wives
Needs must he go the Devil drives,
Though I were vexed, and nere so bold,
I dare not strike when she bids hold,
(...)
I know if I be ruled by thee,
Thou Wilt do as much again for me,
This said, e're any blood was spilt,
He put his fist in's basket hilt,
To the scabbard that did it in viron
He thrust again his fighting Iron.
When Pallas saw't, she took her flight
A stride a cowle-staffe, out of sight,
And straight, before one could have mist her,
She was, where she had many a sister,
That sat in Joves house daily working,
That Jove that wears a goats skin jerkin,
Mean while Achilles kept the peace,
But to berogue him did not cease,
Quoth he, (...).
thou drunken, dogs-face, coward,
There Is all the parish can tell how hard
It Is for us ever to persuade
Thee to lie in an ambuscade
Nor ever will thy faint heart yield
To put on armor for the field,
Y' had rather live on what you pillage,
By these dog-tricks, from your own village,
Forsooth if any contradict
You, straight his pockets must be picked,
It Is forty pittys the have such power
Thy poor dragoons thus to devour
But, for my part, I tell you plain
You nere shall rail at me again.
But this I say, and if I took,
To it my oath upon a book,
I should not be forsworn, I swear
By this comanding club I bear,
-- (...).
This club that: nere again shall bring
Forth blosomes, for it was cut last spring
Out of the Copse where't grew before,
And now it is dayntyly guilt over,
(...) --
Borne by a Grecian Constable,
To keep the peace among the rabble,
And yet I tell you that is an oath
To break which l'de be very loath,
I swear, and I will never draw back,
That when the Greeks my aid do lack,
Which will be shortly, I conjecture,
When they fall into 'th hands of Hector;
Then thou in vain shal't fret at heart,
And fret thou shal't still for my part,
Then will thou rue the time and place
Where thou the stout'st Greek did disgrace.
So when he had said, he did doff his
Cap, and -- (...).
(...) --

flung down his staff of office,
On which the badge, and name o'th town
Was writ in gold, besides his own,
And sat him down upon his bum,
When streightway with a hauk and hum,
To clear his cough, there rose up aged
Nestor (the while Atrides raged)
Well-spoken Nestor, (...).
from whose chops
Flowed honey words as fast as hops,
He was Pylian, and had bore
All offices in the parish over:
(...),
(...)
(...).

Two years together he had took
On him the keeping o'th Church-Book,
In which he faithfully writ down
Those that were born, and died in the town,
And that year, least the accounts should err,
He was the third time register;
This yeoman among them up did rise,
And made this preachment grave and wise,
Gods bobs, quoth he, how great a sorrow
Will this bring all the parish thorough!
This will make Priamus rejoice,
And with him all his Trojan boys,
He Will be at heart glad, when he hears
You're fallen together by the ears,
You Sir that are the Grecks conducter,
And you that are their grave instructor;
Leave off, and be ruled by me rather,
I Am old enough to be your father,
I have been bred I tell you true,
With many men as good as you;
And none of them ever despised
To do the thing that I adviz'd;
And no disparagement, I may say
You shall not see in a summers day
Such as Pirithous, and Dry as
The sheaphard, that lived here hard by us,
Besides Exadius, and Ceneus,
Men who in war were of no mean use,
And then another, who may seem as
Though he was Joves Son, Polyphemus;
And Theseus, of whom we come short all
You would have sworn h' had been immortal,
These were stout men as ere were borne;
Or that ere eat bread made of corn,
And though I say it, many a hard battle
They fought in fields with neighbors cattle;
(...).
And butchered them in cruel manners,
And after sold their hides to tanners,
I of this gang for some short while was,
When I did travel out of Pylus;
And, lest the hue and cry should seize us,
We trudged out of Peloponesus,
Then did I, as well as I could;
Rob pastures for my livelihood,
They took me with them at the first;
No man lived in those days that durst
Fight with these kilcows, and yet they
What I adviz'd would still obey,
Do as these men did then, pray do Sirs,
By my advice you will be no loosers,
And though you, Agamemnon, may,
Pray do not take the wench away,
Prithee for my sake let him have her,
Because to him the Graecians gave her,
To give a thing and take a thing
You know is the Devils gold ring,
And you, Achilles, pray forbear
Against the General to swear,
How can you think your honor even
With his, which is bestowed by heaven?
It Is Jove has given him his place,
In sign of which he bears a mace,
What though you'ue a good pedigree?
And are a lusty fellow? he
Must take place of you, and that duly,
He is your general, and must rule ye,
And many more; for you, Atrides,
Soon as your anger pacified is,
Achilles I shall reconcile,
And put an end to his mad coil,
For* in this war, without a bragg,
He Is the best pear in all our bagg,
Thus Nestor gave in his opinion,
When next, Atrides, whose dominion
Reached far and wide replied, says he
I mary gaffer, there i am w'ye,
But this contentious rascal here,
Over us all will domineere,
He would command, as who should most,
And with his nod would rule the roast,
But here I doubt he will scarce find those
That will be tame at his dispose,
What though he could toss a long pike,
So well that none could do the like,
Is It therefore fit he should be bold
To rail at any uncontrolled?
To this Achilles answer made,
(...).
Snapping him up ere h' had quite said,
Quoth he well might a man suppose,
If I should be led by the nose
Whether pleased thee, I were a coward,
But I Am as good a man as thou art,
Therefore command your boys, that can
Obey, you will find I am a man.
And yet I Will tell you one thing more,
Which I Would almost forgot before,
Pray lay't to heart, I Will make no puther
With you, or else with any other
About the wench, because, like boys,
You give and ask again your toys;
But as for any thing beside
A board my boats, let it be tried
Whether thou dare touch them or no,
Without my leave, all these shall know
I can defend my own, thy gore
Shall stain my long spear over and over,
These two still wrangling in this sort,
With an O yes dissolved the Court,
And all went to their several charges,
Some to their tents, some to their barges.
Achilles like a sad malcontent,
Marched off directly to his own tent,
And with him went Menaetiades,
And many more of his comrades.
Mean while Atrides did not dally,
But straight prepares me a swift gally,
And, shoving it off from the shore,
Put twenty men, each to an oar,
Then, with the Hecatombe, the Greeks
Chryseis brought with chery cheeks,
And after this, the cunning seer
Ulysses went aboard to steer,
And so they sailed along together,
For th'present it is no matter whether.
Mean while Atrides, by all means,
Would all the camp from rubbish cleanse,
To which end men were put in trust,
To cry about, Bring out your Dust,
Which in carts carried to the shore,
Was thrown in the sea, and seen no more,
When that was tumbled down the ocean,
They fell forthwith to their devotion,
And tied upon Apollos altars
A hundred bulls and goats with halters,
Whose steam went up with such a smoke,
As if it would Apollo choke.
Thus the while all the camp throughout
The sacrifice busied the rout,
Agamemnon not intending to miss
That which in fury he did promise,
That which he did Achilles threaten
When by him he was almost beaten,
Talthybius calls, and Eurybates,
Who in all messages his mate is,
(These were two fellows that dwelt near hand,
And used to run on every errand,
They wore blew coats, and the town badges,
For why? the town paid them their wages,
Nor used they only to run post,
But sometimes cried things that were lost
About the town on Market days)
And to them said, go you your ways
To The quarters of Achilles, and
Take me Briseis by the hand,
Bring her, if he will not let her go,
Take me her whether he will or no,
Or else my self I Will come in person,
And will make him deliver her soon,
I Will bring a file of Musketeers
And pull him out on's Tent by'th' ears,
Therefore command him at the first
To yield her, and prevent the worst,
Then, giving under's hand a warrant,
He sent them with this surly errand,
Which he no sooner had quite spoke,
But they marched off, like bears to th'stake,
Their ears like sheep-biters they hanged,
And by the barren sea shore gang'd.
When they came where he did entrench
His Myrmedons, upon a bench
They found him sitting, 'twixt his boat
And tent, mending his ragged coat
In The Sun shine, and hard by the stairs
Where all his scullers plied for fares,
(...).
Spying them, he did nothing less
Then leap for joy, you well may guess;
The foot-posts too backward did sneake,
And out of fear could hardly speak,
But there like loggerheads stood scraping;
Achilles knowing by their gaping
What they did mean, Give you good 'en,
Quoth he, ye posts of gods and men,
Come near house pray, you have done naught
Against me, it is Atrides fault,
Of you I shall not think the worse,
But put the saddle oth' right horse,
I know the reason why you came, as well
As he that sent you, for the damazell;
Therefore Patroclus pray deliver
The wench to them, that they may give her
To him that sent them, and wit you well
My friends and neighbors, and your cruel
Landlord, by all the gods I Will near
With club in hand amongst you appear,
Though 'twere to save you all alive,
And Trojans from your doors to drive,
No let them make you all their slaves,
As for his part, he is mad, and raves;
He has no forecast in his noddle
The Greek Battalia to model,
That they might amongst their boats be safe,
He can do naught but fret and chafe.
Thus when he said, Patroclus went,
As he was bid, into the tent,
And brought Briseis from her needles
And samplers, to the two town beedles;
And gave her, scarce without a grudge,
Away they to the navy trudge,
And she along with them did trot,
But with a heavy heart, God wot.
Achilles now, like a great lout,
Sat him apart from all the rout,
And vexed because he had lost his bride,
Sat pensively upon the side
Oth' sea that looked like Muskadine,
And thus to's mother he did whine.
Rearing his fists, Mother, quoth he,
In an ill hour you groaned for me,
Would I had layne in the parsly-bed
Still, if so soon I must be dead,
Honor I thought I should have got
From Jove who gives me never a jot,
But scandal, for just now Atrides
Whose jurisdiction far and wide is,
Has sent foot-posts, who are gone with
My concubine spite of my teeth,
His mother being within call
By good luck, heard him cry and ball,
(...)
As with her father she was diving,
And catching craw-fish for her living,
(For she belonged to Billingsgate,
And often times had rid in state,
And sat in the bottom of a poole,
Inthroned in a cucking-stoole;)
She, hearing him rose (...).
like a mist,
As wet as though she were bepist,
As soon as she close to him came,
She spoke, and called him by his name,
Stroking him on the head, Pigsny,
Quoth she* tell me, who made it cry?
Speak, tell me which of all the boys
Beat it? or took away its toys?
I Will pay 'em be they one or the other:
Come, dry thine eyes, tell thine own mother.
Achilles, sobbing still, thus spoke,
And 'twixt each word his chops did quake,
Why should I tell you? you do know,
I Am sure, already well enough,
For in the parish there is no man
But that does count you a wise woman,
But if so be I needs must tell
My cause of grief, thus it befell,
We went to Thebes, not long agone,
The city of Eetion,
Which our Greek companies did sack,
And brought a world of plunder-back,
Which when they had divided fair
Chryseis fell to Atrides share,
But afterward, Chryses the Flamen
Of Phoebus, with some other laymen,
Waiting on him, came to the boats
Of the Greek soldiers (...).
with red coats,
To ransom the fair maid, and they meant
To give him for her present payment,
They brought rich presents too from their land,
For state the scepter and the garland
Of great Apollo, who is as good
At pricks and buts as Robin Hood,
Thus he made humble suplication
To all the Gracian congregation,
But specially, above all others,
To both the camp-controuling brothers,
Now every Greek except Atrides,
Presently on old Chryses side is,
And in one note do all agree,
For's gifts to set his daughter free,
And give him due respect, but only
Atrides, that did love her fondly,
Was not contented with his humble
Petition, but at it did grumble,
And not affording him a civil
Answer, bid him begone to th'devill,
Chryses in wrath went home again,
Whom his friend Phoebus heard complain,
And amongst the Greeks sent a damned weapon
Which made the people straight dye heap on
Heap, whilst Apollo's poisonous arrow
Flew the Greek Army thorough and thorough,
Till at the last we found a Prophet
That told us all the meaning of it,
And being a cunning Necromancer,
From Phoebus Oracle made answer*
Then first of all, I did advise
TO appease the God by sacrifice,
And humbly to entreat his pardon,
When Agamemnon rising star'd on
Me in a rage, threatened, and stormed,
And what he threatened, has performed,
For he prepared a boat, and fraught her
With gifts, and sent home Chryses daughter,
And black eyed Greeks sent from the Navy
To Phoebus go to cry peccavi,
But which does vex me most, he sent
Just now two beedles to my tent,
To bring my girl home for his use,
Judge you if this ben't an abuse,
Unless therefore you help your son
Some way or other, he is undone,
You may go up to high Olympus
Where Jupiter does live, and him buss,
Then ask (taking him in the mood)
If ever you have done him good
At heart, by word, or else by deed,
He Would help you now, I Am sure you will speed;
I Have heard you tell in the chimny corner
A tale how that ere I was born or
Begot, by your sole aid a lowering
Cloudy Saturnius escaped a scowring,
When all the rest of's imps did bragg
That they would their father bind and gagg,
The plotters Pallas, and Neptune, who
Was a fish-monger, and dame Juno;
You knowing what they had designed
Hindered them Jupiter to bind,
Calling with speed up to his starry house
A lusty fellow named Briareus,
By all in heaven, but when he on
The earth did live, he height Aegeon;
This fellow had an hundred hands Sir,
(...).
And was a stouter man than's Grandsire;
And sat him down next to Joves chare
As proud as if he had been Lord Mayor,
While he sat there, all the immortal
Gods dreaded Jove, that spoiled their sport all,
Therefore when next you come to his
House, pray put him in mind of this,
Then toward him draw your stool nigher,
And stroke his knees, or something higher,
Wish him to assist the Trojan pikemen,
That they may order matters like men,
And that they may the Graecians slaughter
Among their boats, and in the water,
That every one may have enough
Of their commander that is so gruff,
And that it may be to all them known;
Specially to proud Agamemnon,
How far he erred from the right
Whilst he the stoutest Greek did slight;
Then Thetis ans'ring him did whine,
And from her blood-shot eyes flowed brine;
Woes me, my boy, quoth she, accursed
Be the time where in thou were nursed,
Would thou had sat still at thy wherry;
Without this wrong and sorrow merry;
For now thy life is short and bitter,
Thou were bewitched of all my litter;
But yet let me alone, I warrant
To Jupiter I Will do thy errand,
For I my self in person will
Go to his house, (...).
upon Snow-hill,
In the mean while sit here about,
Nere home, and at the Graecians pout,
But meddle not with any fray,
I charge you keep out of harms way;
(...)
(...).

For Jove, and all his household a'ter
Him, yesterday went cross the water,
To th'signe of the black boy in Southwarke;
To th'Ord'nary to find his mouth work;
Where he intends to fuddle's nose
This fortnight yet, under the rose;
When he comes home, I Will watch my time,
And up the hill to's house I Will clime,
To that house which he has by lease-hold,
(...).
With the horse-shoe nayl'd upon the threshold,
Then, as thou told'st me, I Will petition't,
And I believe I shall not miss on it,
Thus when sh'had said, she did depart,
And left him there, vexed at the heart
For th'wench, which was not long ago
Took from him wheth'r he would or no.
But hold a little, methinkes this is
Too long of the sea to leave Ulysses,
Who brought the Graecians offering, by seas,
And the girl home again to Chryses,
Who now by this time did arive
At a wharfe, almost, like Queen-hive,
Then took they down their sail, and mast,
And other tackle, in all have;
Which when they had in the bottom 'stow'd,
One side held water, the other rowed;
Then throwing out their hooks before,
They fastened them, and leapt a shore,
Then did they bring forth of the hollow
Lighter, the Hecatombe for Apollo,
And next of all, in a black scarf,
Chyseis set foot on the wharfe,
Her did Ulysses full of guile
Straight forward lead to the Church style,
There into the hands of her nowne daddy
Having delivered her, thus said he,
O Chryses, Atrides our Cheiftaine,
Who had thy daughter, like a thief, taken,
Has sent me, both to bring her home,
And to bring Phaebus's hecatomb,
In The name of all the Grecian dragoons,
For he has sent a heavy plague on's,
This said, the girl embraced her father.
He in his heart is glad he has her,
But almost before he could touch her,
Each Greek began to play the butcher,
For having placed in comely wise
About the green the sacrifice,
Washing their dirty fists, they take
And offer each an oaten cake,
Then Chryses stretched his arms, and prayed
For 'em, as loud as er'e ass brayed;
Give ear, quoth he, to that which I say
O thou whose white Bow guardeth Chrysa,
That governest Cylla, and Tenedos,
With as much power and might as any does,
Thou that before heard'st my petitions,
And honor'd'st me, plaguing the Graecians,
Hear me I pray thee once again,
For my sake ease them of their pain,
Thus while he prayed Phoebus attended,
Then, after their orisons ended,
They offered first their cakes of oats,
Then dragged the beasts, and cut their throats,
And from the flesh fleying the hide,
In The next place did the legs divide,
Ore which with skew'rs they stuck the cawle
Double, and over that gobbets small;
This, on cleft wood fetched out of's garret
The old man burnt, pouring on it claret;
About him many scullions were,
Each charging a broach like a spear,
As soon as ere the legs and guts
Were thrown ith'fire, the rest he cut's
Into small parcels, thus prepared
They straight were spitted by th'black guard.
As soon as all was roast enough, and
Ready to take up, this cook Ruffian
To's trusty turn-spits gave the word
To bring it to the dresser board,
The drudg'ry over, themselves they placed
On their bums, without any grace said;
Amongst them there was none would starve, e're
He would consent to be's own carver,
Nor was there any there that won'd
Own manners, more then did him good;
Every one fell to like a Cormorant,
And if he liked ought, still called for more on it,
Till they were so crammed with beef and mutton,
That every one was feign t'unbutton,
Until at last there came that happy tide,
That satisfied every one's appetite,
Then when they sound that never a chinke
Was left for either meat or drink,
For what remayn'd they g'an to snatch all,
And with the scraps eath filled his sachell,
Then drank they nappy ale in brown bowls,
Each filled to's neighbor, and sent round bowls,
Which orderly course none did omit,
Till he was drunk, and 'gan to vomit;
Thus all the live-long day these tall lads
Made Phoebus sport by singing ballads,
All this while Phoebus laughed and gigl'd,
To hear 'im bawle as he were tickled,
Till night came on, and spoiled their sport,
then every one in the barge did snort,
They lay like pigs spewing and yawning
At one another, till day dawning;
As soon as ere day 'gan to peep,
They shook their ears and out did creep,
And homewards did direct their barges,
Toward the Greek camp which so large is,
(...),
Which when Apollo saw, cried he
All the wind in mine A -- go w'ye;
Then up they hoys'd their sails, and mast,
And the boat ran before the blast;
And all the way the waves before,
As the boat cut them through, did roar;
Thus coming to (...)
the Greek camp wide,
They dragged the barge from reach of tide,
And propping it up from the water,
Amongst the tents themselves they scatter;
But all this while the sturdy son,
Of Peleus, who so fast could run,
Sat pouting close by his own gally,
Nor forth against the foe did sally,
Nor ever stirred he from his boat,
In the Court Martial to vote;
But there he sat crying, and whining,
With very grief his own heart pining,
Looking as if he were bewitched,
And yet to fight his fingers itch'd.
Thus twelve days passed, till all the gods
With Jove returned to their abodes,
Now in the mean time good-wife Thetis,
Bearing in mind her son's entreaties,
From the deeps bottom cut a caper
As nimble as any didaper,
And up the hill Olympus climes,
To breath her, in the morn betimes,
Where, from the rest apart, she spies
Saturnius with (...)
sawcer eyes,
On one oth' highest stumps alone,
(For on that hill is many a one)
She drawing her a joint stooll nigh,
Tickled him gently on the thigh
With one hand, whilst to 'ther did stroke him
Under the chin, then thus bespoke him;
Father, if ere in word or deed
You received help from me at need,
Fulfill my will, honor my boy,
Who among all that came to Troy
You have made shortest lived, beside his
Other misfortunes, now Atrides
Who governes every Grecian yeoman,
Has robbed him of 's beloved lemman;
But thou, grave, prudent, heavenly, Jove,
Let me entreat thee of all love
To give the Trojans still the day,
Till all the Grecian Soldiers may
Repent of each abusive action
The have done, and offer satisfaction.
Thus when she had proposed her suite
Cloudy Jove sat a good while mute;
And answering her not one whit,
He looked as though h' had been be --
But Thetis kept fast hold of 's knees,
And with her hands his legs did squeeze,
And vowed she never would let go
Till he had answered I or no,
Speak out, quoth she, nere muse upon 't,
Tell me either you will or will not
Never fear me, of all the rest
I Am sure I Am she you care for least.
Then cloudy Jupiter, being vexed
To the very heart, spoke these words next,
D'spretious, quoth he, 'twill be foul work,
Juno will rate me like a Turk,
Beware of making bate among
Us, she, you know, has a long tongue,
You know she is always used to scold
At me, and says I do up hold
The Trojans roysters in their villainy,
And never let the Graecians kill any,
Get you gone, let her not perceive
That you have spoke to me, and leave
The rest to me, If what I Have spoken
You do distrust, I Will give y' a token,
My nod, on that you may rely,
And cannot be deceived, for why?
From me that is the surest sign,
Nor is there any word mine,
If I but nodded when 'twas spoke,
That can be, or reversed, or broke;
(...)
(...)
(...).

This said, he bends his beetle-browes,
And's greasy pate demurely bows,
Thus, while too forward he inclined,
He could not so well hold behind,
And not being abl' his wind to: contain,
He let a f -- that shook the mountain,
Thus they; agreed upon the matter,
Parted, she rolled into the water
Down high Olympus, Jupiter
Went in a doors, not minding her;
Whether as soon as he was come,
Every one, rising of his bum,
His children on a row did stand,
To welcome him with cap in hand,
Making a leg, nor did they dare
Do any other then stand bare,
While towered his chair he did pass by:
Then, by the leering cast of's eye
Juno perceived (for she was jealous,
And knew he had been amongst good fellows)
That with some wench he had been private,
And such faults she would never connive at,
Yet could she not think with a p --
With whom, but (...).
Thetis in the white socks
She guessed at; for she was far younger
Then her self, got by a fishmonger,
And when she could no longer hold,
Thus she at Jove began to scold;
Did I but know, thou crafty lecher,
What wench was with thee last, I Would teach her
To be so lusty, thou do hide
What ere thou do from me thy bride,
By thy good will I should know naught
Of what e're thou have done or thought,
Then, on this wise, straight her good man
To make a grave reply began,
Quoth, he dame Juno, hold a blow,
Nere expect all I say to know,
For, though the art the wife of my bosom,
TO shall escape me hard if ere thou know some,
But as for what becomes a woman
To know, believe me, there is no man
Shall sooner know it, but of occult
Business when I please to consult
In private, be not you to curious,
If you be: I shall be as furious.
Thus he had said, and lowred at her,
When Juno, (...).
with face broad as plater,
Perceiving him so touchy, cogged,
And made this answer, Lord, how dogged
You speak? when ere you have been busied, I Have
Nere, as I know, been too inquisitive,
For me, you may consult at ease
OF Gods name about what you please,
Only, at present, my fear great is
That you have been collogu'd by Thetis
The Oyster woman, who wears socks
whiter, for the most part, then her smocks,
For I believe I might have seen
Her to day where I should have been,
Had I come early to your bed,
Besides, the nod of your grave head,
Or I Am deceived, has promised that
Forsooth to honor her base bratt,
You Will be content to run the hazard,
Of loosing thousand Graecians as hard.
(...).
Jove who makes clouds as black as pitch,
Answered, faith I think the art a witch,
Of us thou always art so jealous,
That from thine eyes naught can conceal us,
But all thy watching's of no force,
'Twill make me hate thee worse and worse,
And that you will repent do you see,
As for this business, it shall be,
If it please me to have it so,
Lets hear whether you dare say no,
Sit you down houswife, and be quiet,
If I say ought, be you ruled by it
Or else, who ere is on thy side,
Though Gods, I Will clapperclaw thy hide;
When (...).
broad-fac'd Juno had heard this,
She sat her down as mute as fish,
And streight-ways down came her proud stomach,
On this, the Gods were all like to make
An uprore in the house, until
Vulcan, a blacksmith full of skill,
That knew what pleased his mother best,
Began this speech among the rest,
These (...).
pestilent doings are intolerable,
Quoth he, that things which are so small, are able
To set us by the ears, for these are things
That concern men, not us two farthings,
If this trade hold, as I Am a sinner,
We had as good never come to dinner,
'Twill do us no more good then bare ling,
If we cannot eat it without snarling,
And, mother, pray let me persuade ye,
(Although they say you are a wise lady)
To please and smooth my father up here,
That he may not scold, and spoil our supper
For, if he will this Thundrer can
Turn's all out, he is the better man;
But speak him fair, and call him honey,
You know good words do cost no money
Call him pigsny, chicken, and love,
He Will be as gentle as a glove,
He Will soon be pacified by cogging:
Whilst he said this, he filled a noggin:
Which, ending's speech, he gave to's mother,
And, while she drank, began another,
Be not so sad, quoth he, bear up
Still mother, and take off your cup,
I love you well, I take my oath,
And therefore should be very loath
To see you wronged, but it is in vain
For me, though I would nere so feign,
To think to rescue you from Jove,
Tw'ere eene as good for me nere move,
I know, by this my maimed limb
That there is noe incountring him,
For by my left leg once he caught
Me, I remember, when I sought
To fet you free, won by your prayers,
And flung me headlong down the stayers;
It Was a long fall, but, God be thanked,
At last I was caught in a blanket,
By honest men, whoever them knows,
That dwell in a place called Lemnos;
There lay I gasping, and like to dye,
With scarce any breath in my body,
Thus when he had said, Juno did sneere,
And bid her son fill out more beer,
Which he did, and gave it about
Into the hands of all the rout,
Which every one totally quaf't, e're
It came from's nose, but what a laughter
Did it afford, to to see grim Vulcan
Deliver to each man his full can!
Thus did they sit, and cram, and eat,
All the day long until sunset,
(You Will swear their stomach's were set sharp)
-- (...).
(...).

Apollo playing oth' welsh harp,
Then in the nick as they were dining,
To them there came wassellers nine, in,
Who did, by turns, and not at once all,
Sing ballads, each with a responsall;
Now one, then to'ther, put a word in,
Then all together sung the burden,
At sunset, with a giddy head,
Each of them reeled home to bed,
To that place where (...).
the famous hobler,
For he was bricklayer, and cobbler,
As well as smith, of every trade)
For each of them a house had made,
And Jove home to his own bed crept,
Where he snor'd, and profoundly slept,
And with him lay Juno his mate,
Raised from her Wicker chair of state.
Homer A la Mode.
The second Rhapsody.
The Argument.
The second Rhapsody, called Beta,
Of Agamemnons dream does treat a;
Tell's the proceedings oth' Court Leet,
And numbereth the Grecian Fleet.
THe Gods that night did sleep and snort all,
And so did many a daring mortal,
(...).
Wearing on's head a payr of locks
Made of the spoils of young colts docks,
Only except Jove from that number,
Who then, did neither sleep nor slumber.
Not (as some write) perplexed with fleas,
But cares, he could not take his ease;
For he resolved (since he had said it)
That he would stout Achilles credit,
Though by the death of honest fellows
To be slain amongst the Greek Gondelo's:
Whilst this, all night, his mind was busy on,
He thought it best to send a Vision
To great Atrides his pavilion,
Which he had pitched before Ilion;
Then, having called one to him, the sage
Jove sent him with this hasty message;
Be gone, dispatch, false shape, toth' place,
Where the Greeks entrench, with speedy pace,
There go toth' tent of Agamemnon,
Whilst within hearing is, but him, none,
And, faithfully, in words at large,
Tell him what now I give in charge;
Bid him, soon as he may, fall to 't,
And arm his men, both horse and foot,
Bid him be sure arm all his ragged
Regiment, of -- (...).
Greeks, whose haire's shagged,
Every man with a trusty blade,
(...).

From the General to the Lanspresade,
For now at last, his warlike feet
This day shall tread in -- (...)
(...) --

Troy's broad-street,
The Gods will stand no longer doubting,
But yield the Trojans to his routing,
And, woe be to them, for by Juno's
Prayers, they are like to have many a blew nose*
As soon as he said this, the dream
Took swifter flight then boats with stream,
And almost e're one could have cried
What Is this? came where the Greek ships ride:
As for Atrides, without rapping
At's door, he came and -- (...)
(...) --

caught him napping,
His sleep, with odors, not like amber,
Backwards, and forwards, filled the chamber:
He came and peeped over the tester
Ofs bed, in the shape of gaffer Nestor;
Whom he loved most of all the Aldermen,
Yet among them there were some balder men,
Though not perhaps so old; his visage
The vision bore, and th'markes of his age.
Then said, sleep'st thou so sound Atrides?
Thy sire, old Atreus, would have plied his
Stumps had he been as thee, his soul
God rest, and happy man be's dole;
When he died we lost a stout warrier,
And, though I say it, (...).
a skillful farrier,
Neighbor, you ought more to regard
The public, then while watch and ward
Should be kept by you, to lie sleeping;
You have, committed to your keeping, -- (...).

The public peace; who shall now catch,
While you sleep here, rogues on the watch?
Come, mark my council, for it is Jupiter's,
That loves thee, as the dee'l loved Hugh Peter's,
And, when thou little think on it, cares
For th'management of thy affairs,
He bids thee without further stops,
Arm the -- (...).
Greeks, with heads like whiting, mops;
See that you all your forces rally,
The Gods will now no longer dally,
But yield up -- (...).
(...) --

Troy, with her fair high ways,
Therefore make great haste, and go thy ways
About it, Juno now prevails,
Therefore woe to the Trojans tails,
Take heed you: don't forget ere day
(As you use) what over night I say,
I hope you went not drunk to bed,
This when the cheating dream had said
He left him musing, like an Ass,
On what should never come to pass;
He leaped in's very sleep for joy,
And dreamed of naught but taking Troy,
His conquest now seemed within viewing,
But he thought not -- (...).
what Jove was brewing,
For he intended, by next light,
To make both parties rue their fight:
He waked (...)
and saw his dream as plain
As if it had stood by him again,
Where e're he turned, he thought he heard
The voice come from Nestor's bush-beard,
When he had sat upright, and scratched
His bum a while, in have he caught
His coat, it was soft made of bucks leather,
Thick enough against wind and wether,
Then did he is plad on's shoulders d'on,
And buckled too his clouted shoon;
Then, thrusting through his belt his elbow,
He hung by's side his blade of Bilbo,
And next, he took a crab-tree-cudgell,
With which his father used to trudge well
From town to town, this did he carry
With him still, as hereditary,
Thus walked he to the boats accoutr'd,
Gladness within, and these arms outward.
By this Aurora had given warning
To Jove, and the rest, that it was morning,
For she is the chambermaid, and, early
Each morning, calls up those that there lie.
When Agamemnon sent the bell-men
To exercise their throats, and tell men
His will, of which the whole purport
Was that they all should meet at Court;
They came in haste togeth'r, and then at
Old Nestor's barge sat the grave Senate,
Otherwise called the Common-counsell,
Jolly old men that wear fur gowns well
When these were met, and when they all at
Him star'd, He thus 'gan, like a ballad,
( (...).
Producing a contrivance, full.
Of subtilty, from his thick scull)
Good people, friends, and masters, list ye,
There did appear to me, this misty
Night, a strange Ghost, that made me tremble,
You, Nestor, it did much resemble;
Your shape, your fat guts, and your gesture,
And made this speech from my beds tester.
Can thou sleep, or securely bide here,
Thou son of Atreus (...)
the horse-rider?
It Is not fit that one in whose trust is
The peace-keeping, next to the Justice,
And Proclamations in his head,
Should lie so like a thing quite dead,
Except for snoring, like a carcass,
For shame rise, be not such a stark Ass,
You well may credi't what I presage,
And pray obey't, for it is Joves message;
(...)
Who, though his house from yours be far off,
Cares for you more then you are aware of,
He counsels you to cloth in mayle
All your men, (...).
tag, rag, and long tail,
And arm each (...).
shaggy pate in hell met,
For now your prayers the gods have well met,
And they no longer will delay,
But bring you into Troyes (...).
broad way,
For Juno's prayers have turned the mind
Oth' gods, and -- (...).
mischief hang's in the wind
Over Troy town, when from you sleep's banished
Forget not: and away he vanished.
Thus, when the dream had me forsook,
I yawn'd a little, and then woke;
Therefore let us forthwith put in armor,
As well as we can, each Greek farmer;
One thing by the way I have projected,
To try how they all stand affected;
To retreat home I Will them persuade,
To try of what mettle they are made,
But say each of you the Contrary,
And give them your advice to tarry.
Atrides thus said, and sat down,
Then Nestor rose up in's furr gown,
An officer (...)
in sandy Pylus,
Which parish from that place three mile was,
Who in this speech laid forth his will,
According to his Simple skill.
Friends, whom the town does not exclude hence,
'Cause you are (...).
stout, and of great prudence:
Who for each purpose carry staves,
To keep the peace, and knock down Knaves
Had any mean man told this story
About a dream, I Would have been for ye,
And counseled you forthwith to pack
To Graecia, bag and baggage, back,
Thinking he ly'd, but now since, it is he on
Whom we depend that saw this vision,
Therefore forthwith let loud alar'mes
Warn the Greeks to stand to their Arms.
This was old Nestor's speech, which yet he
Had hardly finished, when (...).
the petty
Constables, with their Staves and Maces,
Rise all together from their places,
As going forth, with resolution
To put his will in execution,
By this the rabble rout was coming
To court apace, and made a humming
For all the world like swarms of Bees,
That use to live in hollow trees,
Which all day long busi'd about
Their work, are going in and out,
And up and down fly (...).
in a cluster
From flower to flower, so the Greeks muster,
And come in throngs along the shore,
Whose very sands were scarcely more;
For Jove sor fear they should not all
Have notice, bid Fame sound a call,
Which she did with her shining trumpet;
-- (...).
The Earth seemed to groan they did so thump it
Before they were all placed, there was
Amongst them a confused buze;
In country churches such confusion
I often have heard, when toward conclusion
The priest has drawn his tedious prayers,
Some running down the belfry stayres,
Some more devout clownes, partly guessing
When he is almost come to the blessing,
Prepare their staves, and rise at once,
Say'ng Amen, off their mary bones,
Nine Cri'rs together that were then bound
TO attend the Court, on pain of ten pound
Proclaimed silence, and did make
O yes, before Atrides spoke,
Then every one in have caught room
Where he could find place for his Bum,
All hush't, Atrides up did stand,
Holding his gilt-Staff in his Hand,
A Staff which all the rest for bulk, and
Fair shape excelled, first made by Vulcan,
And given to Jove the Sun of Saturn,
When he as Constable served a turn,
Jove makes use on it, and when his term is
Expired, leaves it to nimble Hermes;
Hermes resigned his mighty Mace
To (...).
Carter Pelops with his place;
Pelops gav't Atreus his succeeder,
He to Thyestes (...).
the sheep feeder,
And after (...).
Rich Thyestes died, his
Constables Staff he left Atrides,
With which he governed many an Island,
And ruled his ward, by Sea, and by Land,
On this he leane's; and twist's about
His Leg, and (...).
straight these words fly out:
My friends, and stout Greeks (...).
that wear his Mars
Buff livery upon your A --
This damned Saturnius has betrayed me;
He owed m' a shame, and now has paid me,
He promised me, when I had taken
Troy Town, I should come home again,
But now I see too plain, god's dud's
He leaves me basely in the suds,
He charge us to face about,
Now we have received a general rout,
These are his tricks, h' has shown his power
Often in the fall of many a Tower,
And yet he will batter many a wall,
In spite of any of us all,
The children, yet unborne, here aster
At us shall stretch their sides with laughter,
If ever they should chance to hear on it
That we returned without our errant,
That we staid eight years and a half
Before Troy Town, as Walt^^'s Calfe
Went nine miles once to suck a Bull,
We shall b' as wise as he was full;
And yet, for ought as I can se,
Of this war no end's like to be*
Though we should make peace with the Trojans
And with them take up Friendly lodgings,
And if we should divide our men
In companies, by ten, and ten,
And every ten should take a (...).
Denizon
Of Troy, to fill him wine to 's Venison;
I doubt me many a ten would lack
A man for them to fill out sack,
So far our numb'r, in my account,
The Trojan Citizens surmount,
But, besides these, the auxiliary's
Do vex me most, among whom each carries
A long spear, but for these, this borough
Had long since been by us run thorough,
But now, nine years are passed and gone,
As for ship-timber, we have none,
And, for our use we are scarce able,
The are so decayed, to strain a cable,
And god Knows what is done by our wives
The while we here venture our lives,
Whilst here our business lies undone,
Each of us has an unknown Son,
Some perhaps more, who do expect us,
And if we come not, may neglect us,
Therefore, hark all to what I say,
To morrow we will cry westward hay,
And hoise up for our native soil,
Leaving this endless, fruitless toil;
We Will, as we can, our own enjoy,
Since here is no hopes of taking Troy.
-- (...)
(...)

When this was said, the sooth to tell ye
Each man's heart hoped within his belly,
Among the throng, but theirs did not
Which knew before hand of his plot;
With this speech each mind homeward bent he,
And, nemine contradicente,
They cried like mad men, hay for our town,
Just as the Icarian waves do power down
Their foam oth' shore, when ever the stern
Eurus disturbs them with his Eastern
Blasts, or when Notus roaring loud,
Rusheth upon them from a cloud,
Or as fierce Zephyrus does grumble
In corn fields, making each stalk humble
His weighty head; this speech inclined
Just so, to a retreat each mind,
They ran, and flourished their Caps over 'em,
Beating along the dust before 'em,
They lancht their Boats out in all have,
( m) Each lent a Hand, and cried havast;
And when into the Sea they 'd got 'em,
Each began to cleanse his leaking bottom;
After this, twerling round their Mops
To dry 'em, they took in their props,
Then, as they anchor weighed, their cries
And joy full hooting pierced the Skies;
And reached the Ears of great Joves dame,
The had gone else as wise as they came, -- (...)

She heard it, as she sat by Pallas,
And cried, out on a sudden, alas!
What means this hooping great Joves Daughter
(...)
Untamed yet? what is the matter?
We 'l never let the Grecian Scullers
March homewards thus with folded colors,
Never shall they (...)
back grim Neptunes billows,
Instead of Laurels, bearing Willow's,
Never shall they stir thence, till they take
Troy Town, and Helen, for whose sake
Many bold Greeks lie, many a mile
In cold clay, from their native soil,
To the Greek (...)
Red coats haste therefore
With fair words keep 'em still a shore,
Let them not draw down to the water
Their barges, after all this slaughter.
This when she said, her *wall-ey'd maid
Made no more bones on it, but obeyed,
She dropped from the welkin down, as quick
As a Kite striking at a Chick,
And, in the turning of a hand,
Among the Grecian ships did stand,
And there, according to her wishes,
Near his own boat she found Ulysses,
In cunning aequal unto Jove,
He had not put a hand to shove
His Boat off shore, but there he stood,
Stamping, and vexed, as he were wood,
Minerva, slanding by his side;
Unto him thus her self applied,
Laertes's bold and wily Son,
Will all the Greeks thus homeward run?
-- (...).
They tumbl' as if they could afford
To break their necks to get aboard,
Will you thus simply run away,
And leave old Priamus the day?
Will you leave here behind the wench,
For whose sake, on the Gracian trench,
And before I'lium's cursed walls'
Have been caused many stout men's falls?
Which, god knows how far off, lie dead
From the parish where they were borne and bred,
Make haste for shame, -- (...).
make noe demurre,
Go to 'em, and let noe man stir,
With your fair words you may persuade 'em,
Let them not lanch their boats, nor lade 'em,
Ulysses (...)
knew the wench by'r tone,
For she had still a bauling one,
He, entertaining a great trouble at
Th'intended voyage, dost't his doublet,
And bid a neighbor of his bear it,
The weather was too hot to wear it,
Thus, vexed that is Comrades were so unstable,
He met Atrides the high Constable,
To whom, at large, with sorrow; showing
The thing about which he was going,
That he might have what to show for it; he
(...).
Borrowed the Staff of his Authority,
Which yet was sound wood, though it were bore
By many a Constable before,
With which being armed, he walked a round
The Red-coats quarters, if he sound
There any of the better sort.
Them with this speech he began to Court,
Sir, you should not Faint-heart resemble,
And at the enemy's sight tremble,
You should your self, and others order,
Be n't in such have to go aboard, ere
You know what is Atrides mind.
Perhaps he has done this to find
How men's affections are bent,
And, I believe, it is his intent
To punish, as he finds occasion,
According to this proof, each lazy one,
Tis' not yet clear what he does drive at;
All know not what he said in private;
Therefore, good Sir, provoke him not,
His anger's fire when once it is hot,
None of us all dares him abide,
As long as Jove is on his side:
But if he met a common soldier,
Or heard him hoot, (...).
a thwart the shoulder,
He hit him, with his staff of command,
Down to the ground, then bid himstand,
Say'ng: sirrah, we will provide you setters
If you cannot be ruled by your betters,
Thou dastard, sneaking rogue* thou be'st
(...) --
Scarce worthy to have room ith list,
What good have thou ere done but mutiny?
Thou can nor plot nor execute any,
Let Us not be masters all, I pray,
Tw'er better one should bear the sway,
Who has from Jove received commission,
In rule, pray, let us have noe partition;
Thus, whomsoever he could find
In all his walk, he disciplined,
Some, with intreates, and some, with menaces,
He brought back from their tents and pinaces,
To court again, with such a roaring
As when the waves do make the shore ring,
Which noise is echoed back again
By others, further in the maine;
The rest were all quietly sat,
Only Thersites 'gan to prate,
Against his officers, this beast,
In lavender still had a jest,
And what e're he thought would move laughter
He Would out with it, what ere would come after,
No Greek was ugly'er, yet this foul
Rasscalion thought himself a droll;
(...)
(...)
(...).

He limp'd, and looked nine way's at once,
Distorted were his shoulder bones,
His head, from's forehead to his crown top,
Resembled much a reversed towne-top,
His beard right China, and as thin
The hair of's head was, as of's chin,
This scurvy rascals humor still is
To jeere Ulysses, and Achilles,
He was a lover of scurrility,
But foe to these, and all civility:
He then began thus to deride his
Prudent commander, great Atrides,
On whom all looked with indignation,
(...).
Cause he had fooled their expectation,
Against him he made this speech, in the middle
Oth' Greeks, like squeaking string of fiddle,
What Is the news, with you now? what want you
Atrides, with a vengeance? have not you
Of Gold and Silver more then one tent?
And the choice Girls yet y' are not content,
All the captive Wenches, that are under
Thirty years, you choose out oth' plunder,
If any Trojan comes to ransom
His son, and with him brings a Grand sum
If we demand it, they will contemn one
Of us, and ask for Agamemnon,
And then besides, if that could quiet y'e,
Of private tumblers y' have variety,
(...)
(...)

It is not right that he who is chief
Amongst us, should lead us into mischief,
And after many an error, and turn,
Bring us through Bry'rs, like Jack a Lantern
(...).
Faint hearted Greeks, rather Greek Wenches,
Shame to our Camp, and to these Benches,
Come home again, our markets done,
Let Us leave this Tyrant here alone,
That in Greece he may never enjoy
Our goods, but spend them here in Troy,
Let him know, mangre his commands,
We may have the law in our own hands,
He keeps Achilles's wench per force,
Though then himself he cannot be worse,
For that good man then made it plain
How much he could himself contain,
Had he not then his passion curbed,
Thou should have us no more disturbed,
Ulysses heard Thersites chide his
Commander thus, the bold Atrides,
Starting up, sternly he began, ere
The other had quite done, in this manner,
(...).
Thou prating Jackanapes, Thersites,
What ere thou say ou't of mere spite is,
Those that came with us hither ask all,
There Is not amongst 'em such a rascal,
Dare thou against the high Constable
In The open court on this wise babble?
Hold your peace, -- (...).
make your foul mouth clean
Before his name come there again,
You must, forsooth, against him rail,
And be enquiring when he will sail,
Before there is any of's that know
How the matters of this siege will go,
How we shall come off none knows truly,
Whether (...).
with victory or blewly,
What reason is it you should condemn one,
As here you do great Agamemnon,
And basely cast into his teeth
Those things the Greeks honored him with?
One thing I Will tell thee too to boot,
And, as God judge me, I Will stand to it,
Sirrah, if ever I catch you more
Abusing folks in this mad humor,
May my head off my shoulders fall,
And let my little boy never call
Me his own father, but some other
That has been dealing with his mother,
If I don't of thy Jerkin strip thee,
And thy red waste-coat, and then whip thee,
In Faith I Will pluck thy breeches down,
(...).
Some Market day, and through the town,
I Will drive thee, whining with a carters
Long, knotted whip, to thy own quarters;
This when he ended, ore's bunch back
He took him a confounded thwack;
The cur (...).
duck'd down his head, and whin'd,
As howling mongrils, when they find
They Are warned too late by the bell
Oth' whips approach, from's bleare eyes fell,
It Is hard to say wheth'r rhume, or tear,
Perhaps 'twas rhume, which still flowed there,
And on's crook-back there rose a new
(...).
Great bunch, of color black and blew,
Raised by the crab-tree-cudgel's knobs,
He sits him down, and sighs, and sobs,
(...).
Making foul faces, (...).
and's wet eyes,
And snotty nose, on's sleeve he dryes,
He durst not speak, he was so feared,
But grin'd, and pulled the hair off's beard,
The Graecians, though they had scarce done chasing,
At that sight could not forbear laughing,
He looked so like a baboon, vex't
Then said one to him that stood next,
O Gemony! neighbor, what a bliss is
This, that we have amongst us Ulysses?
Good he does practice, and impart,
And now (God's blessing on his heart)
H'has taken a course, into this idle
Rogues sland'rous mouth to put a bridle,
It seems he will pluck down his proud stomach,
Or he is resolved to make his bum ache,
Against his betters now I Will warrant
He Will not rail, he had best have a care on it,
Thus talked the vulgar, when (...).
Ulysses,
Who to storm hen-roosts seldom misses,
Rose up, and there stood by his side
Pallas, a wench that was wall-ey'd,
In cryers clothes, she cried, O yes,
And bid the people hold their peace,
That the grave speech might reach the ear
Of him that stood far off, and near,
When all were quiet, spoke Ulysses,
With staff in hand, and his speech this is
Atrides, all the Greeks contrive
To make thee the very'st fool alive,
Of all their promises they fail,
Which they made when they hoys'd up sail
From Argos, that, till Troy was taken,
By them you nere should be forsaken,
Your regiment of Gracian yeomen
Do cry like children, or old women,
Some two or three meet in a hole
Together, their state to condole,
Yet none of them knows what they lack,
Unless they would be brought home pick pack,
(...).
And on my word it is a hard case,
Now after many a Greek's turned carcass,
And all have undergone turmoyle,
For going home to quit the spoil,
Yet I cannot blame 'em, I confess
I think my self should do no less,
It Is sad to be kept back by tempest,
(For any one that does love them best)
From's wife and children; said I sad?
Nay, faith, 'twould make a man horn mad,
Now almost nine years are past, since
We came, we are almost in our teens,
Therefore no fault with any neighbor,
I Will find, since so much trouble they bore,
Let loosers speak, it is an affliction,
But yet, my friends, since honor pricks ye on,
Bear a good heart with your hard fare, and
Let Us never bring home a sleevelesse errand,
Besides, among us there is a talk, as
If we were cheated here by Calchas,
Therefore let us stay till we have tried him,
And then a heavy death betide him,
And if, at their time, all his prophesies
Don't come to pass, then quit your offices:
All (but a broth'r, or so, whose soul is,
I hope, at rest) know that in Aulis,
When Greeks, with barges that did them bear
Made rendezvous, you may remember
That by a well in a backside,
From whence in troughs did water glide
Into the house, for the use of the kitchen,
We killed (and Calchas, good at witching,
Was then in place) a lusty steer,
God bless the mark, in that place where
A straight, wide-spreading sycamore
Grew, nigh the well I named before;
There then appeared a cruel dragon,
(...).
His neck looked as if it had red shagge on,
By Jupiter's will so't befell,
He crept from under th'lid of the well,
There, up the sycamore, to th'thatch'd
House eves he twines, where, newly hatched,
He found young birds, in number eight,
The old one th'ninth, which on them sat,
They were young sparrows, or Tom Tits,
I know not which, but at eight bits
I Am sure, (...).
though they poor things did chirp, and
Tremble, they were eaten by the serpent,
And, all this while, the enraged old one
Flew up and down, and seemed to scold on
The greedy monster that had robbed her,
But he contrived a slight and bobb'd her,
For (...).
as she flew about, and clapped her
Wings at him, he sprang forth, and snapp'd her,
Thus soon as he had cleared the nest,
And eat the old one, and the rest,
(...).
The mighty son of crafty Cronus,
Conjured him back again to's own house,
And when we looked all about for him,
We could find naught but th'well-stone over him,
We knew not (it did so astonish us)
What by this sign Jove did admonish us:
Nor guessed we what he should foretell
By the serpents coming out oth' well,
When Calchas, straight, the cunning man
Thus to unriddle it began,
(...);
Why are ye silent all and hushed,
Ye noble Greeks, whose hair is bush'd?
Wise Jove has shown us this portent,
(...).
We must with patience wait the event,
'Twill be a thing (...).
that will commend
The Grecian name, world without end,
Just now you here have seen this same
Serpent eat th'young birds and their dam,
The meaning of it I divine,
The young birds eight, one more makes nine,
That Is the old one, had there been one more
Amongst them, the had been half a score,
This shows that, nine whole years, we shall
Lay tedious siege against Troy wall,
In the tenth year, by this I see 't,
We shall all enter -- (...)
Troy's high street,
This Calchas said, and still we find
All falls out true he er'e divined,
Therefore, ye -- (...).
booted Greeks, couragio
Let stay this while though 'twere an age ho;
Till we take Priam's town, and truly
If we do not, then Calchas you lie.
This said, all flung their Caps in the air,
And cried out, Sir, your speech is fair;
The ships, as if they would rend in pieces,
Rang with the praises of Ulysses,
(...).
Every one there judged it as fine
A preachment, as er'e from divine
Could be expected, thus they roared,
Commending largely every word.
-- (...).
Old Nestor, used to ride about
Allway's, by reason of the Gout,
To make a Speech among them stood,
Which this wise he begun; By the rood
Ye talk like Babes, all, skilled in rattles,
And hobby horses, more then battles,
Where shall we find us out evasions
Enough, to salve our protestations?
Must that which skillful men invented,
And sound conveyancers indented,
Be now despised? as (...);
for our solemn
Cov'nants, and leagues, what must befall 'em?
To perish must it be their lots
In Greg'ry's Bonefire, like the Scots?
Shall we now violate (...);
that agreement,
On which we all did take the Sacrament?
And that to which we set our hands?
If so, none ere will take our bands,
When we have thought all the live long day on it
There will be found no other way on it
Then to stay out our time with patience,
And that is now not many days hence,
(...),
(...)

Atrides, to your purpose stand,
And still continue your command
Over the Greeks, if any be
Among them (As there is but two or three)
Who from the rest consult apart;
You need not value them a f --
Bid 'em be hanged, or kiss your a --
For, let them do their best, they will scarce
Find their way homewards, till we know
Whether Jove fools us, I, or not,
This I Am sure, (...).
(...).

when we went aboard,
Bringing for Troy town fire, and sword,
Jove gave's a pass, and did express,
By favorable signs no less,
For then (...).
his lightning, to our wonder,
Showed us the way, and his loud thunder,
In consort with our drum's, did beat us
A march, pray therefore never let us
Think of returning back to Greece,
Without a Trojan Girl a piece,
Let no man think of his own dwelling,
Ere he has been revenged for Helen,
(...).
But if there is any that is so stern,
That will in spite of us return,
Let him but touch his barge (...).
well plank'd,
And straight, with death, he shall be thanked,
For you Atrides, though you are wise,
Pray take, as well as give advice,
What I say, though it does not proffit,
You Will not be the worse for the hearing of it,
Then, briefly, thus I do advise,
Divide your men by companies;
So files will help files, in each squadron
So may you find out who ere's a drone,
This if by your command you do,
What each man does will lie in view,
(...).
(...).

Then, if you take not Troy, you will know
The cause on it, how it happens so,
Whether it be long of Joves will,
Or of our Soldiers want of skill,
'Twill put a stop against all profaning
The gods, if it hap for want of trayning,
Then thus Atrides made him answer
(...)
(...).
(...).

Nay, by my faykins now, old grandsire,
You still do go beyond the young
Greeks, in the smoothness of your Tongue,
I would to Jove, Phoebus, and Pallas,
We had ten men amongst us all, as
Well bred as you, to Read and Write,
Then should Troy town, to day, ere night,
Be brought, by all our hands, to ruin,
We Would open the gates, and let all you in.
But alas Jove with his (...).
Goats-skin mantle
Does somewhat scurvily me handle,
-- (...).
And thrusts me into brauls, and brables,
Whence none to set himself free able's,
For you know how, about the Girl, I
And stout Achilles did grow surly
With one an other, -- (...).
the affront,
I found, in cool blood thinking ont,
I gave him first, but if again
He would consult with me, why then
We Would by no means delay to murder
These miscreants -- (...).
one minute further
For the present go all to your suppers,
And after that, have at their cruppers,
Each rub's spear, surbush up his shield,
Arm ye at all points for the field,
(...).
You of the Cavalry, by all means
Give your Horse store of Oats and Beans,
Give 'em fresh litt'r, and rub their heels,
You Wagoners, liquor your wheels,
That all the day long we may fight,
Till we be parted by dark night,
I Will set you all so hard a working,
(...)
(...) --

That every one shall sweat through's Jerkin,
And all the while the Drums shall strike up,
Whilst any man can hold his Pike up,
The teeors shall sweat too, and take pains,
That draw along our laden waines,
If any of you I see hanker
Here, nigh the Boats that ride at anchor,
'Twill be well for that Jackanapes,
If he the Dogs and Kites escapes,
This when h' had spoke, the Greeks cried hilo
With such a noise as when a billow
The North wind against a steep rock dashes,
(...). (...).

Which waves, on each side driven, washes
So standing in the midst oth' flood,
That no wind ever blow's it good,
They rise and with shout's strain their throats,
Scat'ring themselves among the Boats,
Then through the camp they made great bonefires,
And supped, with mutton broyld upon fires,
(...). --.
And each said over a rosary
To's several Saint, with Ave Mary,
Adding to all the rest this prayer,
To come from field alive, and fair,
(...).
And that he might come off from grim
Mars his assaults, sound, wind, and limb,
Atrides, amongst the rest, did call
On Jove, and killed an Ox from's stall,
Of five years old, and for the best
Oth' parish, with him, made a feast,
But to him there came never a guest, or
Neighbor, before jolly old Nestor,
Idomeneus, next, made one more,
Then the two Ajaxes made four,
In the fifth place came Diomedes,
And sixth Ulysses came, to feed his
Ungodly gut, -- (...).
his brains as full
Of plots, and crotchets, as Jove's scull;
Then Menelaus (...).
good at bauling,
For's wide throat famed, came without calling,
His throat perhaps at table better,
There he was counted no small eater,
Thither he came of's own accord,
Knowing his brother kept good board,
(...).
These eight sat rownd then to be brief,
And presently up comes the Beef,
They draw their Knives, and take their loaves,
Then said Atrides, let us crave Jove's
Blessing, and having said his grace,
Holding his hat before his face,
Whilst the meat coold piec'd out his prayer,
With these words, or such like as they are;
(...).
Most powerful, and glorious Jove,
That do inhabit the Heavens above
The Clouds, grant ere the Sun go down,
I may demolish Priam's Town
With wildfire, (...).
(...).
(...).

and pay Hector's, jacket,
And at one blow in two may hack it,
And put the Noses in the gutter
Of his comrades, that makes this clutter.
Thus while he prayed (e) Jove, all the while;
Did naught but laugh in's sleeves, and smile
Biteing his Lips, to hear him cog,
I, quoth he, when the Dev'l's a Hog,
And thus as soon as grace was said,
And every one had took him bread,
Atrides took the pains to serve
His guests, and to them all to carve
First, toward his Trencher he drew't nigh,
And then the Gooze did scarifie,
Then from the rest he pulled it clean,
And with it sent some fat and lean
That thoroughly had not been boiled,
Down to the Scullions, to be broyl'd,
This they did, over a fire of cleft wood,
And broyl'd the Tripes oth'coals oth'left wood,
Thus, having their Beef and Tripes dres't,
They chopped, and joynted all the rest, * -- (...).

Which some no sooner had quite fitted,
But the were by others took and spitted,
(...).
The turn-spits roasted it with stedy
Hand, and took't up when it was ready:
Atrides, having carved round:
Cut's for himself at least five pound,
Putting 't on's trencher, to it does fall,
Say'ng, now I hope I Have pleased you all,
(...).
The cooks too, having done, were set
At table hay fellow well met,
The meanest scullion had like cheer
With the sufficient'st man sat there:
Thus they allayed their hung'r and thirst,
Then spoke old Nestor these words, first:
Right worshipful, our great commander
Atrides, let us no longer stand here,
Let Us by no means seem to put off, or
Abuse the occasion the Gods proffer,
Send about cryers to give notice
To every Greek who at his boat is,
No longer let us here hold prattle,
But quickly rally, and join battle;
This Nestor had no sooner said,
But Agamemnon straight obeyed
And bid the bauling cryers rouse
The sleeping Greeks to rendezvous,
They called (...).
the Graecians with curled locks,
And they came thronging in by flocks,
(...).
Some corporall's that lived on spoils
And what god sent 'em, through the files
Marched with Atrides, crying, this stands
Too near his fellow, keep your distance;
Thus they with him, surveyed both flanks,
Passing through all the files, and ranks,
Amongst these swashing swordmen, came
An ugly, (...).
blear-eyed, ramping, dame,
(...).
In a short peticote she was clad,
Time could not change it, 'twas so bad,
Old fringe 'twas trimmed with, on which, rows
There hanged, of tinsel, decked with oes,
Well worth a hundred pound (believe it)
Of that man's money that would give it,
Thus, like a Bedlam to and fro
She frisk'd, and (...).
egged 'em on to go,
And at last, witch'd 'em in that plight,
That they were almost mad to fight,
That every man there would have chose
Rather by half a bloody nose,
Then to have free leave home to sail
To Argos with a prosperous gale,
As when the fire furiously rushes
Over a a hills top, through dry furs-bushes,
More and more still amain it blazes,
And at it all the country gazes,
So while the Greeks marched, at the glaring
Of their bright arms, the god's stood staring,
As flocks of wild-fowle fly together,
(Whither wild Geese, or Cranes, or whether
Swans with long necks) they clap their wings,
And with their noise the whole Fen rings,
So toward Scamander's flowery banks
Did march the Grecian Files, and ranks,
The very ground did roar again,
Beat with the (...).
hoofs of horse, and men,
Their number vy'd with Summers Flowers,
Or leaves brought forth by April showers,
Or might compare with flies, when the air is
Soultry, that fly about the dayrys,
So numerous a force did rally
Before Troy Town, then, in that Valley,
Then, just as neighbors highly Piglie,
Let their beasts graze, but then can quickly,
Knowing the ear mark of their own,
Spy 'em from every one's in the Town,
And, doing damage against no man,
When they please, take them from the common,
So, ere they did begin the sport,
Each officer his men did sort
From all the rest, then when the were ready,
Them up against the Trojans lead he,
They marched, the van Atrides lead,
His staring Eyes, and beetle head,
Were like great Jupiter the thunderer's,
His belt resembled Mars the plunderer's,
His breast like Neptune's, thus to battle,
Like one Bull amongst so many cattle,
He lead the men of his own Town,
Thus that day Jove gave him renown,
And over's neighbors, set this beast,
Exalting's horn above the rest.
The remnant of this Second Rhapsody, being only a bead-roll of hard Names,
was purposely left out.

The END.

