Children of Beliall, OR, THE REBELS. Wherein these three Questions are
discussed: I. Whether God or the People be the Author and Efficient of
Monarchy? II. Whether the King be Singulis major, but Universis minor? III.
Whether it be Lawful for Subjects to bear Arms, or to Contribute for the
maintenance of a War against the King?


MAT. 12.30. He that is not with me, is against me, etc. Printed in the Year,
1647.

TO HIS HONORED FRIENDS, Sr. G. C. AND HIS VIRTUOUS LADY, A.
Sir, Madam,
YOu have been informed of my Loyalty, and believe it; I have felt your
Charity, and acknowledge it: That the World may say, I dyed a loyal Subject,
and a thankful Servant, I have left these lines as a testimony of both, from
him that was while he lived,

Sir, Madam, Your Beads-man, T. S.

Some few faults have escaped, which the Reader is entreated thus to Correct.

Page 13. line 26. read sine. ibid. l. 36. r. distinction. p. 14. ult. r. ipse.
p. 15. l. 3. r. Regali. p. 16. marg. Pars for Ps.

1 Samuel 10.27. The children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought him no presents.
THis latter, and therefore this wicked age, has broached three seditious
questions: the questions were heretofore brewed by Bellarmine and his fellow
Jesuits, by Buchanan and his fellow Schismatics: and this age, this
Jesuiticall, Schismatic age has practically broached, what they but
speculatively brewed. Viz.

1. Whether God or the people be the author and efficient of Monarchy?
Questions.


2. Whether the King be only Singulis major, but Universis minor.

3. Whether it be lawful for Subjects to bear arms, or to contribute for the
maintenance of a war against the King?

And this age, this wicked age, resolves these questions just to the peoples
humor; and says,

1. The people are the author of Monarchy:

2. The people represented, are greater then the King. Resol. Populi.


3. It is lawful to contribute for the maintenance of a War, or to bear arms
against the King.

But to make good that old Adagie, Quod vulgo placet, sapienti displicet, the
Prophet Samuel, in this Chapter, in this verse, resolves clean contrary, and
tells us,

1. That God, and not the people, is the efficient of Monarchy: So he says,
v, 24. See ye him, Resol. S^muelis.
Quem populus elegit? at no hand; but Quem elegit Deus, see ye him whom the
Lord has chosen: The King has his power, not precario, by the peoples
courtesy, but Dei gratia.

2. That the King is greater then the people, not only in piece-meale and
particulars, but also in gross, and general; so he says again; v. 23 24.
He, the King, stood amongst the people and was higher then all the people by
the shoulder and upwards; not only in stature, but also in power, and therefore
all the people shouted and said, God save the King.

3. That contributions to maintain a war, or to war against the King, are
unlawful, utterly unlawful, because the King is to be assisted in his wars by
the people; And they are here marked Carbone, for children of Belial, who
brought him no Presents: Certainly they are ten times more the children of
Belial, who bring Presents against him.

Indeed this Text within its own verge resolves these three questions.

1. In the description of Rebels; they are children of Belial.

2. In the expostulation, the saucie expostulation of Rebels, How shall this
man save us?

Division.
3. In the condition of Rebels, the condition positive, and the condition
privative; positively, they despise the King, and privatively, they bring him
no Presents.

1. The result of the whole falls into these particulars. ^. They account the
King but as one of themselves, and as one chosen by themselves; and therefore
they said, How shall this man save us? And therefore they are called the
children of Belial: Had they looked a little higher, and observed how God chose
him out of them, they would then have believed, that God by him would save
them; because God chose him out of them for this very end and purpose, to be
the King over them, and Protector of them.

2. They looked upon themselves Aggregation, and in conjunction, and thought
themselves in that bulk and collection greater then him; and therefore they
despised him; and therefore they are called the children of Belial: Had they
looked upon him as the Head of that Body, whereof themselves were our members,
they would have confessed, that neither some of the principal Members
representatively, nor all the Members collectively had been worthy of
comparison with him; and that he, the King, had been greater, not only then any
one asunder, but then All together also.

3. They looked upon their enemies, how strong they were, and upon themselves,
how numerous, how copious, and therefore how well able to defend themselves;
and therefore they brought him no presents, and therefore they are called the
children of Belial; and therefore not only by symbolical, but also by rational
Divinity: It is unlawful to contribute for the maintenance of a war, or to
bear arms against the King.

I begin with the first, the description of Rebels, in the first words; the
children of Belial said: And first, Ps. 1.
what is here meant by Belial? Why, as Christ tacitly tells his Disciples
there are many kinds of Devils, when he says expressly, this kind goes not
out, but by fasting and prayer; so the Prophet Samuel here tells us, that there
are diverse names of Devils, Mat. 17.21.
or the Devil has diverse names, and this of Belial is not the best. V. G.

Sometimes he is called Demon, for his knowledge; sometimes Satan, for his
malice; sometimes Beelzebub, for his filth; sometimes Diabolus, for his
traduction and accusing of man; sometimes as here, Belial, for his rebellion,
Belial, what?
and casting off the yoke of obedience, for contending against him, as much as
in him lies, by whom he should, and shall at last be controuled; for Belial
signifies Absque jugo, or Absque Dominio, a Masterlesse Imp, and it is not
unworthy your remembrance; That wheresoever people are so called, children of
Belial; disobedience and rebellion are the ground of it.

But what then? Did the Devil beget these men in my Text? Children of Belial,
how?
or else, how and why are they called the children of Belial? No, the Devil
cannot beget children; neither, 1. As the common cause; for so Sol in
concurrence with man generat hominem; nor, 2. As the proper cause, either a
sirvile genere, or a simile specie; nor, 3. As the material cause; for he is
not Spermaticall.

They are then here called the children of Belial, not by any natural or
virtous generation, but by a vicious and sinful imitation: As Christ told the
Jews, that they were of their Father the Devil, Job. 8.44.
because they sought to kill him, and belie him, and gives the reason of it,
for the Devil is a murderer from the beginning, and the Father of lies: So
here the Prophet Samuel calls these men the children of Belial, i. e. of the
Devil, because they by his example and tentation sought to shake and cast off
the yoke of obedience: And therefore they barely apprehended the King, as a
creature of their own, and chosen by themselves, or of faction amongst
themselves, saying, How shall this man save us?

And this brings me to the examination of the first question, viz. ^ a. ^ ae.
whether God or the People be the Author of Monarchy?

To this is is answered by the children of Belial for the people; saying, How
shall this man, This man, and no more, save us? But by the Prophet of God, it
is resolved for God, saying, see you him whom the Lord has chosen?

Act. 4.19.
And now, Beloved judge your selves, whether it is fitter to obey God or man, as
the Apostles spoke in another case? Whether it be fitter to believe the
children of Belial, who from their Father have learnt to speak nothing but
lies, or the Prophet of God, who from the spirit of God can speak nothing but
truth?

If I thought there were any children of Belial here, I would for their sakes
examine this question to the full, either to call them by repentance to
acknowledge the truth, and do their duty, or that they might with more
security, and less excuse wander to hell: If there be any such Devil in
Samuels mantle here, any complyer here with the children of Belial, elsewhere,
let him at least know the truth, and if he will be blessed, let him do it too.

The very work of creation speaks this truth; God made many Angels, he made
but one man, and yet he could, if he would have made as many Legions of men
upon earth, as of Angels in Heaven: He could, but he would not; would you know
the reason of it? Truly I dare not pry into this Cabinet; such secrets of
State are not for the Commons; yet according to my evidence, I shall dare show
you the outside of it; thus:

God found not heaven it self free from mutiny amongst a multitude of
inhabitants, and therefore to take off all color of Rebellion, and to prevent
all pretense to disobedience against Sovereignty, he made but one man; one, and
no more; hereby teaching us, That the power of a King over his Subjects is as
natural as the power of a Father over his children; that the power and person
of a Monarch is from God, and not from the people, and so to be acknowledged by
the people: Sic fuit ab initio.

And this is acknowledged by Aristotle, who was led only by the light of
nature, and saw as far into the Laws of nature, as ever man did: At first,
says he, Regal Power belonged to the Father of the Family, and he gives this
reason for it; Pol. l. 1. c. 8.
because in the infancy of the world, the Fathers were so grandevous and lived
so long, that each Father begot such a numerous Posterity as might people a
whole Country: And therefore Regal power over them as Subjects was no less from
God, then Paternall power over them as children.

Will you hear another Naturalist, little inferior to this, say the same?
Principio rerum, Gentium nationumque, Imperium penes Reges erat; The Rule of
Nations, of all Nations, was in the hands of Kings from the beginning, and the
people had no more right to choose their Kings, then they had to choose their
fathers, because the Kingly Right appertained to the Father of the Family: Sic
fuit ab initio. And so it has continued ever since, and in all places.

Look else upon Moses the first Catholic and visible King of the Jews; Exodus
2.12 14. Act. 7.25.
(the Sanhedrim was but his great Counsel) He was fully persuaded that God had
appointed him to be Isreal's deliverer: And when God called him, he alone called
him, not with the people, not to the people, for their approbation by vote, but
to Pharoh for the execution of his own justice: And all this to tell the
people, that yet they had nothing to do in the appointment of a King: That God
himself and he only, he inclusively, and he exclusively, is the efficient of
Monarchy.

When afterward God left them to themselves, and gave them no Kings, and that
monster the Multitude took the power into their own hands; O, what hideous
births did they produce? Licentiousness instead of the Subjects Liberty,
Rapes, and Rapines, Judge. 19.8.10.
instead of the Subjects propriety; enough to affright people from affecting
any kind of government whereof God himself is not the immediate efficient:
And he is not so the immediate efficient of any kind of government as of
Monarchy.

Well, afterward when God in mercy looked upon their misery, and gave them a
little refreshment in the succession of two Judges, Eli and Samuel, and they
were weary of this government, 1 Samuel 8.4.
and would needs have a King to govern them, as the Nations had: Why, even
then God did not give them leave to choose one themselves; but he himself
appointed one over them, even Saul, of whom Samuel says, see ye him whom the
Lord has chosen? It is still to tell them, that God is the Author of
Monarchy, and not the people.

And was it not so afterward? What else means Solomon's Per me Reges regnant?
Pro. 8.15.
That's for the Jews, you will say; It is true, and it is as true of the Nations
too; what else means Isaiah's Vnctus Cyrus? Isay. 45 1. Dan. ^.25.
Daniel speaks them both: The most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will; mark it, God gives it, not the people, and
God gives it to whomsoever he will, not to whomsoever the people will.

Thus it was in the days of Moses and the Prophets; and was it not thus in the
days of Christ and his Apostles? Joh. 19.1^. Romans 11.1.
Why else did Christ acknowledge Pilates power to be de super? Why else does
St. Paul say, the Powers that be, are ordained of God.

Object.
1 Reg 12.2^0
That Objection of Jeroboam, that he was a King of the peoples making, does not
soil this truth a jot, for Jeroboam confesses himself to be but an usurper,
saying, This people will return to their own Lord, Answ.
if they do sacrifice in Jerusalem: We have good hope, if ever our old
Religion be set up, this new rebellion must go down: And it concerns you,
Gentlemen, to look to it to the establishing of our Religion,

Reply.
Nor does that reply from Saint Peter any more help this lame cause; 1 Pet.
2.13.
where he calls Monarchy the Ordinance of man.

For Saint Peter speaks of the final cause of Monarchy: Resol.
It is for the good of man; and Saint Paul speaks of the efficient cause; it
is ordained of God.

Pareus himself, Pareus confesses as much, saying, The very word (...) ad
Deum primum authorem nos revocat; this word Creation, shows plainly that God
is the author of Monarchy.

Thus it was in the days of Moses and the Prophets; thus it was in the days
of Christ and his Apostles; and has it not been so in the days of Christians
ever since.

Look else upon Athanasius for the Primitive Fathers; Ad Antioch. q 55. De
reg. pa. l. 1 c 6.
the power of Kings is of God: look else upon Aquinas, for the Schoolmen, All
Kings are Gods ordinance, even wicked Kings to punish the peoples sins: look
else upon Luther, for the modern Writers; Ye ought not to reject the Prince
whom God has set over you: It was his answer to the assembly of the German
Rebels.

Thus it was in the days of Moses and the Prophets; thus it was in the days
of Christ and his Apostles; thus it was in the days of Athanasius and the
Primitive Fathers; thus it was in the days of Aquinas, and the subtle
Schoolmen; thus it was in the days of Luther, and our honest Grandfathers.

But has it been so with the Kings of England? look else upon his Rights,
look else upon his power.

1. His right to the Crown is by birth, not by election: he has it not by the
peoples votes, but by Gods blessing, and hereditary succession: King Charles
that now is, and long, and long may he so be, was King of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, so soon as ever King James was dead, by the Law of Birthright;
and so had been, though he had not yet received the ceremony of Coronation:
Henry 6. Speed. l. 9. c. 26.
was not crowned until the ninth year of his Reign, and yet he was King the
eight preceding years.

2. His power is universal, in all Causes, over all Persons, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil: So is his Power Military; he may, Polyd. Virg. l.
11.
the people may not, ( de jura) proclaim war, and establish peace: So is his
power curiall; no Court, not the Court of Parliament can meet, Smith. C. W. l.
2. c 4.
but by the Kings authority; yea, the Court of Parliament it self was at first
devised, framed, and instituted by the Kings of England! O fortunatos Anglos
bona si sua no rint: So is his power official; He bestows all offices, the
Lord Keeper, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Chamberlain, and all the rest
acknowledge the King their only Patron and Donor; and lastly such is his power
origenall, and that runs thus, Carolus Dei gratia, not, Carolus electione
Populi.

fol. 34. ab.
The King has under him freemen and slaves, says Bracton, but he is under
none but God: And it may be said of our King in his Chaire-Royall, as it was
said of Solomon, That he then sits, not in solium Populi, as if they made him
King; but in solium Domini, because he is, what he is, Charles, by the grace of
God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, etc.

And may Almighty God with his grace, by which he made him King, continue him
in his Kingdoms, and restore him to his power, that he may punish all those
men of Belial, who say, they made him King, and He shall no longer reign over
them; yea, O God, let all those Children of Belial taste of thy mercy, and the
Kings justice, who say, how shall this man save us? And so deny his Authority
to come from thee, and despise him because they conceive him less then the
whole Body, though greater their particular Members. Amen.

It is my second part, and I am now to discuss it; I called it the positive
condition of Rebels: Ps. 2.
They despised him: And first what is the meaning of these words, they despised
him; why the meaning of this consists in these three branches.

Eccles. 10.20.
1. They did male cogitare, and so came within the compass of Solomon's
prohibition, curse not the King in thy thought. A thought of despising the King
is treason, as well as a word, and a word as well as an action: So it is said
of the intentions of Bigthan and Texesh, Traitors they were, and yet they never
came to an insurrexerunt, or any act of treason, but only to a volueru^t, a
bare intention, they sought, or, Est. 2.21.23.
they thought to lay hands upon King Abasuerus, and for this very thought they
were hanged: And as the Law of God, so the Law of this Kingdom construes a
bare purpose against the King, a despising thought of the King, to be treason,
and makes it deadly my prayer therefore is:

Convert them O God; if they will not be converted, confound them O God, as
many as have evil will against my Lord the King, and do male cogitare, despise
him in their thoughts.

2. They did male dicere, saying, How shall this man save us? and so came
within the compass of Moses his prohibition, thou shall not speak evil of
the Ruler of thy people: Deuteronomy. 27.16.
A word against the King is treason, as well as a thought, or action; greater
treason then the thought, and lesser then the action: And they that now word it
against the King, if they be of the Clergy, they are of Balaams ordination;
because they curse whom God has blessed: And he was killed with the sword;
Number. 23.
If they be of the Laietie, they are of Shemeies condition, because they revile
whom God has anointed; 2. Sam. 16.5.
and he was put to a violent and shameful death: And at this time by the Law
of this Kingdom, there stands one Pym endited and arraigned for saying, He
would, if he could, embrue his hands in the blood of King Charles; my prayer
again is:

Convert them, O God, convert them, If they will not be converted, confound
them O God, and let them perish, as many as speak evil of my Lord the King,
and do male dicere, despise him with their tongues.

3. They did male facere; for they brought him no presents, and so came within
the compass of King David's prohibition, 1. Sam.
thou shall not stretch forth thy hand against the Lords Anointed; (And drawing
our hand back from the Lords Anointed is equivalent) I know King David there
speaks by an interrogative, quis, who can? But I know withal that that
interrogation, quis, is a most tryumphant Negative, and says nullus, no man
can, unless he will bring guilt upon his own soul: Absolon did against his
Father the King, and was both hanged and stabbed for it; Robert late Earl of
Essex did, and was beheaded for it, and how many in the same conspiracy were
hanged, you may read in that story; my prayer again is:

Convert them, O God, Convert them, and return them to their duty of Loyalty
to thine Anointed; if they will not be converted, confound them O God, as many
as lift up their hands against, or withdraw their hands from my Lord the King.

You see what is meant by these words, they despised him; will you now see why
they despised him? Why, it was because they looked on him as a single man, how
shall this man save us?

Happily they thought him greater then any one of themselves in particular; but
they thought themselves in a collective or representative Body greater then the
King; and this brings me to my 2 a. 2 ae. and the unfolding of my second
question, which is,

2a. 2ae. or Quest. 2.
Whether the King be Singulis major, but Vniversis minor? But of the first
branch of this question, I shall not need to speak; for that the King is
singulis major, no man denies; or if any, only such as are more Beasts then
men, and live more by sense then reason, or rather, have lost both their sense
and reason.

My inquiry therefore is upon the other branch of this question: viz. Whether
the King be universis minor, less then the body representative? This is the
thing in agitation in this wicked age, and affirmed by wicked men, the children
of Belial.

But how truly they affirm it, you may see: First, by their Sophistry: and
secondly, by our verity grounded upon Scripture, Fathers, Reason, and the Law
of England.

1. They tell us, the fountain or cause of the King is greater then the King;
but the people representative is the cause and fountain of the King.

But with their favor, that Axiom upon which they build, Quicquid efficit
tale est magis tale, though it be always true, Ante effectum productum, yet
it is often false, Post effectus productionem: V: G: The fountain was once
more water then the river, the spark was once more fire then all the wood in
the chimney, but it is not so.

And indeed, the assumption is never true, for the people is not the fountain
or efficient of the King, God is; I have showed it before, and thither I
refer you.

And yet, were it true, why, yet it would not follow, that therefore the people
are greater then the King: For that Axiom is true only in those agents, in
whom the quality by which they work is inherent, and from whom it cannot be
separated: But the people (if they had power to make the King) have by that Act
divested themselves of that power; and the King is not under them, but over
them; and not only over them, Sigillatim, but also Conjunction; else the body
representative need not petition him; for they might command him, they need not
else call him their Sovereign, but their fellow-subject, they need not else
write, To the Kings most excellent Majesty; but, To our very loving friend:
But you know the usual style of the body representative; to the Kings most
excellent Majesty; We your Majesty's most humble subjects in this present
Parliament assembled; and this I hope is no complement, or pro forma tantum:
Sure I am they call God to witness it, and so by their own practice and
confession, the King is, not only singulis, but also universis major.

2. And so secondly, the Scripture says as much; for when that Army Royal was
to join Battle against Absolon the General of the Rebels, and his
Rebell-Armie; and David the King had appointed his three chiefes over all his
Cavalrie and Infantrie, Joah, Abishai, and Ittai, and said, 2 Samuel 18.2.
He would go forth himself to battle, No said the people, the people
represented the great Council, the Council of War, and the Council of
State: they all desire him to forbear, and tell him, It is not safe for him to
go along with them; and why? What reason have they for it? marry the best
reason in the world, salus Populi, salus Regui, both depending upon the safety
of the King: If we fly away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us
die, will they care for us but now thou art better then 10000. of us: id est,
Thou art worth us all, thou art better then us all, thou art over and above us
all.

Ps. 89.20
And so much says God himself, when speaking of the King, he says, I have
exalted one chosen out of the people; Mark it, it is Vnum electum e populo,
not a populo; and that one so chosen by God, God has exalted; and over whom
has God exalted him? over the people sure, or over no body, and not over this
or that part of the people, but over the people indefinitely: i.e. over all the
people generally and universally.

1 Pet. 2.13
The New Testament too speaks the same, (...). In which words the body
collective, and the body representative, are both subordinated to the King: the
body collective is the people; and says Saint Peter to them, Submit your
selves, the body representative is the inferior Magistrates, the Peers,
Nobles, and Counselors, call them what you please, the House of Peers, and
the House of Commons; and says Saint Peter of them, They are Governors sent
by him, id est, by the King: for (...) cannot here relate to any word but
(...), else there had been an absurdity, and if there were a (...) to (...),
there were an impossibility too, as absurd to suppose one Kingdom to have two
supremes, as one Firmament to have two Suns, and as impossible to grant
obedience to two supremes commanding contrary things, as to serve two masters.

In a word, the inferior Governors are made by the chief, and who is the
chief but the King? God only made the King, and the King only makes Inferior
Magistrates; (for they are sent, or made only by him;) God only can de jure
unmake the King, and the King only can de jure unmake the Inferior
Magistrates; And therefore, they are not coordinate with him, but subordinate
to him.

If now you believe Samuel the Prophet, or St. Peter the Apostle, or God
himself, the King is as well universis, as singulis major: id est, in plain
English, Greater then people, or Parliament: viz. where the King and Parliament
are distinguished; for the Parliament is sent, or made, or called to be a
Parliament by the King.

And has it not been so ever since? Ad Scap.
look else upon Tertullian for the Primitive Fathers, We account the Emperor
Sovereign over all, and acknowledge him subject to God alone: Look else upon
Aquinas for the Schoolmen, 2 a. 2 ae. q. 104. ar. 6.
if a successive King, or King by inheritance turn Tyrant, recurrendum est ad
omnium Regem, Deum, we must have recourse to God alone, because God only has
power over Kings.

And says Gregory Turonensis to Childerick that King of France, You may
chastise us if we transgress, but if you exceed your limits, who may chastise
you? None, no man, no assembly of men, who but God? surely then the King is
above all men in the judgment of Divinity.

And is he not so in the judgment of reason? why else do we call the Ring
Sponsus Regni? and at his Coronation he is wedded to the Kingdom with a Ring:
Why else do we call the King Caput Regni? not of these or those particular
Members, but Regni, of all the members in the kingdom: For all the members in
their politic capacity make but one body, and has one body any more then one
head? and has not every body a head? else it is a monster, or a carcass:
Fortesacut.
Nec populus Acephalus corpus vocari meretur; quia ut in naturalibus capite
detruncato, Residuum non corpus, sed truncum appellamus; sic in politicis sive
capite communitas nullatenus corporatur: And certainly if the King makes the
community a body, and the community without the King is not a boby, the King is
above the community, for the head is above the body.

To these two Denominations, I add a third; the King is Oecenomus, or Pater
familias: the kingdom is Familia, the King is Dominus, the kingdom Domus, and
that Criticisme is ^ truth; Dominus domni praeest, as well in universis, is
singulis.

Agesilaus foresaw the danger of this Destruction and therefore to a Citizen of
Sparta, that desired, an alteration of Government, he returned this answer,
That kind of rule which a man disdaines in his own house, is very unfit to
govern a Kingdom by: You disdain that your Wife, Children, Servants, the
Representative body of your little Kingdom, should carry themselves over you,
and command you; it is a graceless Family that does so, and they are
graceless and rebellious Subjects, that say, They are, or esteem themselves
to be above the King.

They that say so, speak against reason, for the King is sponsus, and the
People sponsa; for the King is Caput, and the people Corpus; for the King is
Pater, and the people Filij; for the King is Dominus, and the people servi.

They that say so, speak against Divinity: for it has been the universal
opinion of all the Fathers, of all, I bate not one till the year 1300. and
odd; that the King is inferior to none but God; and they speak against the
letter and sense of the Scripture too, for the Scripture calls such despisers
of the King, Children of Belial: And lastly, they speak against the letter and
sense of the common laws of England too.

l. 2. c. 8.
Omnis sub Rege, says Bracton; Parem non habet in Reg^^ de Chartis Regiis, and
Factis Regum, neo privatae personae, (...) Justiciarii debent disputare.

Notorium est, says Walsingham; It is beyond all doubt, th^^ the Kings of
England are of an unbounded preeminence, and ought not to answer before any
Judge Ecclesiastical or Civil.

It was an answer of that Parliament to a Popes demand, and for such demands
our forefathers accounted the Pope to be Antichrist; I wish they had not sent
that reason of Antichrist from St. Peter's in Rome to St. Peter's elsewhere; for
some wise men do not now stick to say, if this be his badge, Populus is
Antichristus; It is an ordinary thing for Antichrist to lie, and I take this
for one; for if the King be of an unbounded preeminence, then by no means
under the peoples girdle.

Object.
That objection is of no force; Ad tutelam Legis, subdit^rum, ac eorum corporum
and honorum Rex erectus est, and hanc potestatem affluxam ipsa habet: Answ.
For Fortescue there speaks of a King merely Politic, saying, Rex hujusmodi,
whereas Regnum Anglia in Dominium Politicum and Regal^ prorupit, and in
utroque, tam Regale, quam politico, populo suo dominatur; The sense of this
great Lawyer is, in reference to his power, he is a Regal King, and Rex
naturalis, and a King by birth; in reference to his duty, he is a politic
King, or Rex nationalis, a King by Law; But in both, a King; and therefore
universis major in both respects.

Nor does that reply from Bracton or Fleta, (for they both have it) do any
more harm; Rex sub Lege est, Reply. Resol.
for howsoever the King be under the Directive Power of the Law, as the Law is
the Rule of justice; yet he is above the Corrective Power of the Law, as the
Law is the instrument of justice.

In a word, the Law declares the Kings Right, the people admit him to the
possession of that Right, the Counsel advise him in the safest way of
governing his people; and so they use all but as instruments and servants to
him, and he is above them all.

The King is the life, the Head, and Authority of all things that are done in
the Realm of England, says Sir Thomas Smith in his Common wealth of England.
l. 2. c. 4.


Summam and supremam potestatem habet in omnes Regni or^^^s; Nec praeter Deum
superiorem agnoscit, Elisab. page 391. Brit. page 132.
says Master Cambden; and if he be under none but God, he is above all the
people, unless they be God.

And to all this you have all sworn in the Oath of Allegiance, some of you in
the Oath of Supremacy, and the late Protestation, viz, To maintain the Kings
supremacy in all causes, and over all persons, Ecclesiastical and Civil: A
sovereignty then he has, and you have sworn to maintain it, not only over
singular persons, but over all persons, and as you endeavor it, so help you
God.

But you may justly fear, if now you unsweare that, or swear, or do against
that which you have so solemnly sworn to do; that God will, not only not
help you, but wound you, wound you while you live with the infamy of Rebels,
and a tormenting conscience, and wound you when you are dead with the eternity
of fire, and all the torment of hell.

From both which Almighty God deliver you for Jesus Christ his sake: and from
both which that you may be delivered, I pray God to give you grace to
acknowledge and esteem the King to be universis as well as singulis major;
Amen.

They that think less of him, do despise him, and are therefore the children
of Bellal; And so are they that bring him no presents.

Ps. 3.
It is my last consideration; I called it the Privative condition of Rebels,
and children of Belial, they brought him as presents.

I need not spend any time in the explication of these words, they are obvious
to the thinnest understanding, and they intend thus much; These men, these
children of Belial, did not contribute to the maintenance of the King in his
wars, they did not aid him, they did not assist him, they aided him not with
Arms, they assisted him not with money, they withheld his vectigalia from him,
they brought him not his Customs, his Crowne-Revenues, his Subsidies, and his
Pollmonies.

I shall therefore spend my ensuing discourse, in resolving that question,
which does even naturally arise from these last words, viz.

^^. 3 ae.
Whether it be lawful to bear Arms, or to contribute for the maintenance of
a War against the King?

And this Text resolves it negatively, and says, It is not lawful; for they
who brought the King no presents, were sons of Belial; and therefore much
more are they the sons of Belial, who fight against, or contribute to
maintain a fight against the King.

And to make this good, I shall take leave, 1. removere, to remove those
objections, those grand objections which seem to check this truth. 2. Movere,
to commend to you a choice and pregnant place of Scripture, or two, which give
the checkmate to those objections: 3. Perpendere, to weigh some speeches of the
Fathers, and so make it good by their Theorie and practice: and 4. Proponere,
to lay before your face some of those fearful judgments, which have befallen
some men that have borne Arms against their Kings, 1. Mediatione non
Rebellione: Junius, Borth^ius, Osiander, Willet: non Fustibus, sed precibus:
Peter Martyr.

2. Revelatione, non oppositione.

3 Speciali jussu, non lege.

4. A populi tumultu non Regis tyrannide.

5. Verbis, non Gladits; persuasione, non insurrectione: and leprosus fuit.

6. Usurpatrix fuit.


as fearful examples for them, who now contribute for the maintenance of such
wars.

And first, for the objections; I meet but with two that carry any seeming
validity with them, many more there are: As 1. The peoples rescuing Jonathan
from Saul: 2. Elisha's shutting the door, and holding fast the messenger that
came from King Joram: 3. Jebues killing that King Joram: 4. Ahikams defending
the Prophet from the tyrany of King Jehoiakim: 5. The withstanding of Vzziah
the King by Azariah the Priest: 6. The Deposing of Athaliah the Queen: But
they are all frivolous, and want weight, Et eadem facilitate repelluntur, qua
proponuntur.

The first that carries any show with it, as I conceive, is David's taking up
Arms against King Saul; and hence the Rebels argue thus: David the Subject
took up Arms against Saul the King, and was not rebuked for it, either by
Divines, Lawyers, or Statesmen; many of his Fellow Subjects took up arms
with him, to the number of 600. and very likely, many more contributed to the
maintenance of that Army; nor yet were they reprehended by Divinity, Law, or
Policy: and therefore Subjects may in some cases take up Arms, and
contribute to the maintenance of a War against their King, (if he be an
oppressor of their Properties, Liberties, or Religion.)

And to this colorable objection it is answered, the allegation is false,
false and absurd both; false, because David was so far from taking up these
Arms against King Saul, that he continually fled from him, and never fought
with him: Object.
1 Samuel ^2.1.2.24.28.
yea, so far from fighting with King Saul he was, that when God had delivered
him two several times into his hands, Answ.
once at the Edge hill of Hackilah, and once in the wilderness of Eugedi, he
durst not himself, nor would he suffer any man else to stretch forth his hand
against King Saul, and for this only reason, Because he was the Lords
anointed, false therefore:

And absurd too, to imagine that David should raise or entertain 600. 1 Samuel
26.1.
men to fight against King Saul, who never went without 3000. men at his
heels: Impar congressus, and very unlearnedly is David with his 600. men urged
as an example or argument, to justify disloyalty.

Nor will that addition help it, viz. That King David was 40000. strong; for
he was not so strong till after Saul's death, as appears in the story: 1 Chr.
12.22.
But admit it for truth, that David was 40000. strong in the days of Saul, yet
this is so far from being an argument to justify Rebellion, or taking up
Arms against the King, as that it does altogether condemn it; for
notwithstanding so great strength, yet David never pursued Saul, never let fly
any murdering arrows, dart, ston^, at or against King Saul, but still fled
from him; and to put him out of all such fears and jealousies, he got
himself with all his Forces out of his Kingdom, and begged a place for his
habitation of Achish King of Gath.

Let all our rebels follow David in the whole example, and we shall both
allow this quotation, and also commend their imitation; yea, and pray they may
have so many followers, that there may not be one Rebel left to lift up his
hand against King Charles the Lords Anointed.

Jeroboam; 1 Reg. 12.
from whence it is thus argued: Rehoboam the son of Solomon refused to ease the
people of their burdens, and therefore the people took up Arms, and set up
Jeroboam to be King over them; and this was so far from being a sin that
the Text says, It was from the Lord; and therefore Subjects may in some cases
bear Arms against their King.

Answ.
It was answered, The Scripture here sets down, Rei gesta veritatem, non facti
aequitatem; and hereupon says Saint Austin, Quia factum legimus, non ideo
faciendum credimus, s^ctando enim exemplum violimus praeceptum, nor can we any
more free our selves from the breach of the fifth Commandment, if we take up
Arms against our King upon this example, then we can from the breach of the
eight Commandment, if we plunder and rob our neighbors upon the example of
the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians.

True, Jeroboam was King, and that was from the Lord; but by permission only,
not appointment; and God in that permission at once punished Solomon's Idolatry,
and Rehoboams folly; but notwithstanding this, that act of the people, in
revolting from Rehoboam, was Rebellion, 1 Reg. 12.19. 2 Cro. 10.19.
and so called by God himself in two several places, and God punished this
Rebellion of theirs so fearfully, that he first gave them up to Idolatry, and
afterward drove them out into Captivity; and this is commonly the reward of
Rebels: First they turn Idolaters, or what is tantomount; irreligious, (let
any one say what Religion the Rebels are of) and so are hated by God, and
afterward are made slaves, and so are hated by men; That we may never fall
into the one or the other, either Idolatry, or Captivity, Almighty God keep
us from Rebellion. Amen.

The Scripture affords not one more colorable example to justify the taking
up of Arms against the King, and therefore the Rebels of this age borrow one
from our own Country.

Richard the second was deposed by Parliament, and therefore a King of England
may be resisted.

I answer it, Infandum scelerate jubet renovare pudorem: Answ.
If the Rebels were not past all shame, they would never have remembered this
Factum, since it is without all Aequum, and to this day remains the blemish of
our Nation; and this very act brought such miseries upon this Kingdom, that
until two Kings, one Prince, ten Dukes, two Marquesses, 21. Earls, 27. Lords.
2. Viscounts, one Lord Prior, one Judge, 139. Knights, 421. Esquires, Gentlemen
of a vast number, and 100000. Common people were slain in these Civil Wars,
England never saw happy days; This repetition has rethorique enough to stir
you up to sorrow, I say no more of it therefore; but, that we may again see
peace and happiness in our days, God put a period to them that bear Arms
against King Charles: Amen.

For it is unlawful, as appears. 2. by Scripture, 4 a. 3 ae.
I will name but two instead of two hundred: The first is that of Solomon's,
whose precept is, That we keep the Kings Commandment: Eccles. 8.2.3.4.
id est, Whatsoever he commands, so it be not against the word of God: The
reason of this precept is double: 1. In regard of conscience, Because of the
Oath of God, we have sworn to it, and we have called God to witness to the
truth of our intention and endeavor to perform this Oath; and accordingly we
may expect God^ rewarder, or a revenger: The second reason is, in regard of
power, For where the word of a King is there is power: q. d. For a while, the
word of a King, like the word of God, may be slighted, but in the end, it will
appear a word of power, and shall be suffered with death, Pro. 30.31
where it was not obeyed with duty: For against the King there is no rising
up: Nemo qui insurgit, says Junius; Nemo qui insurgat, says Clarius, (I wish
he had been a Prophet:) By Solomon's rule, it is unlawful to bear Arms
against the King.

Romans 13.1.2.
And so it is by Saint Paul's rule too, his precept is obedience to the higher
powers, not to the naked authority, as Mr. Burrowes would make that man
believe, that is given over to believe a lie, but to the person clothed with
that power: For if (...) may signify power in the abstract, or the power of
the Law, without relation to the person that made that Law; yet (...) must of
necessity note the person, and the superiority of the person, that has this
power conferred upon him; and such power no person in England has, but only
the King of England: His great Counsel may ju^ dicere, he only can jus dare;
and therefore to him must every English soul be subject; subject actively,
licitis, and subject passively, in illicitis; both ways so far subject, as
that we may not resist: The reason is, for if we do, we shall receive
damnation: the word is (...), and that signifies, not the plundering of the
goods at home, not the hanging of the body abroad, but the everlasting
damnation of the soul and body in Hell, notwithstanding Mr. Marshals new
Lexicon.

If now you believe Solomon, or Saint Paul, (I could add Moses and all the
other Prophets, Saint Peter and all the other Apostles) It is not lawful for
any man, for any sort of men to bear Arms against the King: Yea, therefore
every man must assist the King with Arms, and contribute to the maintenance of
his Wars, for they that do not are the children of Belial: The children of
Belial said, How shall this man save us? they despised him and brought him no
presents.

And do not the Fathers assent to the same? 5 a. 3 ae. Apol. 2. ad Ant. Imp.
page 113. Ad scap. Apol. ad Constable. Orat. in Julian. 1. Contr. Auxent. Ep.
31.32.33. In Ps. 114.
Why else did Justin Martyr say; For our Religions sake, and preservation of
public peace, we Christians, O Emperor, yield you our help and assistance:
It was Tertullians glory, that Christians were never found Albinians, Nigrians,
Cassians, or any other sort of Traitors: Athanasius professed it not lawful to
say or speak otherwise then well of Majesty: Nazianzen knew no means lawful
to restrain the persecutour, but tears: St. Ambrose knew no other way to resist
then with tears: St. Austine commended the Christians for obeying Julian, I
could name St. Gregory, Fulgentius, St. Bernard, and many more: For all, hear
the Anathema of a full Assembly of Bishops in the Conncell of Toledo, Whosoever
shall violate that Oath which he has taken for the preservation of the King's
Majesty; Conc. 5. Canc. 2.
whosoever shall attempt to destroy or depose the King, whosoever shall aspire
to the Regal Throne, Let him be accursed, cast out of the Church, and together
with his Accomplices be condemned with the Devil and his angels eternally; let
them be all tied in the bond of damnation, who were joined in the society of
Sedition.



Tertullian tells you, In Apol. Ep. l. 7. ep. 1.
They had; Cyprian tells you, They had; Saint Gregory the Great tells you, They
had; the number of Christians was A principio, from a few years after the
Apostles. Nimius and copiosus, both strong and numerous.

Constantine the Great, and his successors established them, and daily added to
their Immunities.

And now, judge your selves, Beloved, whether you were better believe the
Scriptures, and the Fathers, then some young Teachers, and schismatical Divines
crept up but yesterday, and never durst appear in Old England till now; and
now they do appear, they dare not dispute verbis, but verberibus, and God
first or last will give them their belly full.

Certainly if our Brethren were not wilfully blind, they would join with us,
and conclude, It is not lawful to bear Arms, or contribute to maintain a
War against the King: They were children of Belial that brought King Saul no
presents; and to Belial they all must (without Gods infinite mercy and their
own repentance) who now maintain a War, or bear Arms against King Charles.

6 a. 3 ae.
And this is evident, fourthly and lastly, by those fearful punishments and
judgments, which God and man from time to time have inflicted upon Rebels and
Traitors, even such as have borne Arms, and maintained War against their Kings.

Look else upon those intentionall Rebels, Corah the Clergy Rebel, Dathan
and Abiron the Laie-Rebells; the one by a fire from Heaven is sent into the
fire of Hell, the other through the earth fall into the pit of the damned: So
Saint Basil. Hom. 9.


Look else upon that verbal Rebel, Shimei, he is put to an untimely and
ignominious death.

Look else upon those actual Rebels, Achitophel a great Politician, Absolon
a Favorite of his Fathers, and of the peoples affections; the one hangs
himself, the other is hanged in a tree: And Sheba for but blowing a seditious
Trumpet, for but striking up a rebellious Drum has his head cut off.

See my Beloved, see if ye can find but one, even but one Rebel, either in
holy, or humane Histories that ever escaped unpunished, either by the hand of
God, in a troubled and perplexed conscience, or by the hand of man, in an
untimely and odious death: Brutus with the same hand and Dagger, he stabbed
his King Caesar, he kills himself.

That seditious Ringleader of the Jews against Adrian the Emperor, who
called himself Ben-Chobab, or Filius stellae, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7.
is suddenly killed, and ever after scornfully remembered by the name of
Ben-C^zba, or the Son of a Lie.

I have heard of a certain Commander, whose name I am not willing to remember,
who often wished he might rot, if ever he lift his hand, or drew his Sword
against the King; notwithstanding he did both, and God answered his wish, he
rotted within, and dyed.

A certain Lord I have likewise heard of, a great Ringleader in a Rebellion,
yet a great pretender to a Reformation, who in his exercises of Devotion would
often desire God; If the cause he took were not right, if the cause he managed
were not just, he would take him away suddenly; God heard him, and answered
him, for by the shot of a Musket he is killed so suddenly, that he had not so
much time, as to say, God be merciful unto me, and so without sign or
symptom of repentance dyed.

I need not remember you of Pausanias, Ariobarzanes, Rodolph Duke of Suevia,
Catiline of Rome, and many of England.

Not one of them all, nor any other that I remember, or have read of, but if he
lived, he lived the scorn of honest men, and if he dyed, he dyed the shame of
his Friends, the mirth of his enemies, and the example of all; God in the
shameful and fearful punishments of them, telling us, That to bear Arms,
or contribute to maintain a War against the King is utterly unlawful: That
the people of this Kingdom may no longer do it: With the Church I pray,

From all Sedition and privy Conspiracy, from this present dangerous
Rebellion, from all false Doctrine and Heresy, from hardness of heart, and
contempt of thy Word and Commandment,

Good Lord deliver us. Amen.

FINIS.

