THE Method and Means TO A TRUE Spiritual Life: Consisting of Three Parts,
agreeable to the Ancient Way.

By the late Reverend Matthew Scrivener, Vicar of Haselingfield in
Cambridge-shire.

Cleared from Modern Abuses; and rendered more easy and practical.

Feb. 1. 1688.
Imprimatur.

Jo. Battely.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Queens head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1688.

TO THE READER.
COnsidering with my self, and lamenting the many polemicall or contentious
Discourses about Religion, and that Christian, this unhappie Age has produced,
it might be feared that through the subtlety of the Old Serpent, such strifes
may have the mortal event upon too many, of liking no Religion at all: To
prevent or obviate so great an evil, I found my self inclined very much to
treat of such a Subject as might, by Gods blessing, conduce much as well to the
obliging of men's minds to the Faith and fear of God in general, as to
reconcile Christians one to another, rather than divide them farther, or
increase Animosities between them.

But I must confess a more special reason hereunto exciting me how
insufficient soever I found my self to the worthy perfourmance of so good
work, was the consideration of some Persons of our Communion, I mean the
established Religion in this Isle, who though shining with Piety and devotion
toward God to the ecclipsing of fantastic lights lately appearing; do keep
up that temper of Spirit, to which our Savior Christ has affixed this
Beatitude, Matthew. 5. Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. For as Gregory the Great has it
in an Homily on the Gospells; Herein differ the delights of the body, and the
Soul, that bodily pleasures, while we have them not, enkindle in us a sore
desire of them: but so soon as we devour them greedily, they turn to loathing
through satietie: but on the contrary, spiritual pleasures are only loathed,
when we have them not; and are so much the more thirsted after, by how much
more they are received by the hungring Soul. And this kind of hunger,
observing to increase in them, by conversing with spiritual Books wrote by
others, I conceived my general Office, and particular Obligations to such
Persons in a manner demanded of me an endeavor to gratify such religious
Appetites. And hereupon I chose rather to publish mine own inabilitie, than to
frustrate the expectations of such Christian Spirits; intending hereby to
divert them with a mean view and sense of heavenly things, which as Saint Paul
speaks, Ephesians. 1. 4. are the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption
of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

But it will appear by the Method I have here chosen and the manner of my
proceeding in this Discourse, that it was not my principal, much less only,
design to be useful to greater Persons, or sublimer Christians, but to the
lowest and meanest of both Orders, I having laid my foundation so low as the
weakest may rest on, and improve by, and so raise themselves by orderly
gradations to a more considerable height. Which course I have taken not out of
affectation of singularity, as some may conjecture who are either wholly
ignorant that this is of very long standing in the Catholic Church, or do
know that books of Devotion in our Mother Tongue have very rarely, if at all,
insisted on this Subject, or trodden the same path with me: and they of the
Unreformed Church who have often treated of this matter, have very seldom
handled all these parts of Piety together: but passing over lightly the
Illuminative and Purgative parts of Religion, have ambitiously (to my
apprehension) strived to abound and excel in the Unitive-Way, and their
Mystical Theology, soaring very high, if not exorbitantly toward Heaven, and
gaining to themselves and Church no small estimation for divine Contemplations,
strange Notions and Language, as if they had themselves been wrapped up into the
Third Heaven, as was Saint Paul, and were privileged to do what was denied
him: viz. to utter those unspeakable words, which he tells us, 2 Corinthians. 12.
It is not lawful for any man to utter: and exalting Contemplations, to the
undervaluing of operations and active life: under pretense that Marie, who sat
still, not attending Christ being present, chose the better part; and Martha,
the inferior, in serving of Christ: which notwithstanding it be so generally
received and applauded by Scholasticall as well as Mystical Doctors
auntienter and later, seems to me to be no otherwise true, than as Mary
represented the state of bliss hereafter, consisting altogether of
Contemplation and Affection; and Martha, the state of a Christian in this Life,
in which unactive Contemplation and barren in the work of the Lord is scarce
laudable; and, as the Quietists are said to magnify it not tolerable; they
amongst other notorious Errors charged upon them excluding divine Meditation
from their contemplation, by too great niceness: though we our selves have in
this Treatise distinguished them as degrees consistent one with another, so far
as they are Acts of the spiritual life we now live.

For according to our present Subject; we first, not without good advice,
consider simple Intelligence or knowledge of God, acquired by Illumination of
the natural Man, whereby a Christian comes to a right belief of God, and a
knowledge of himself, and a discerner in good measure of Spirits, and
fallacious Visions, and Revelations.

This being competently attained unto, disposes the Soul to right Reformation
of it self, from the inveterate evils of sin corrupting and afflicting it,
which is the Purgative way every true Christian should exercise himself in,
until he has purged out the Old Leaven, and cast out the Old Man, of which
Saint Paul speaks, with the affections and Lusts.

And because it suffices not to deny, and even to dye unto worldly lusts (if
this may be supposed) unless we also live the life of Christ, and be truly
united unto God through him, and that by those proper helps and ascents
prescribed by him, and in some manner by us described here, therefore do we
proceed to the third State of a Christian, commonly called, the Unitive;
wherein is to be found that true rest of the Soul promised by Christ: not so
as to cease from a possibility of sinning, or suffering perturbations, as late
Quietists are also reported wickedly to maintain, but so as to prefer God and
Godliness above all things in the World; and by love of and delight in them to
persevere immutably to perfect consummation in bliss hereafter.

And having thus given thee, Christian Reader, a brief account and Prospect of
my present Design, I committ my self to thy favorable acceptance, and
commend thee to God, and to the word of his Grace which is able to build thee
up, and to give thee an inheritance among all such as are Sanctified.

The Sum of what is contained in the first Part.
SECT. I. Previous advice concerning the necessity, reasonableness and
usefullnesse of being truly Religious. Page 1 SECT. II. A brief description of
the Illuminative, Purgative, and Vnitive way of Religion. p. 9 SECT. III. Of
the necessity of Illumination: and of Faith, with its subordinate Graces
especially conducing thereunto. p. 12 SECT. IV. That Faith and natural Reason
improved is the only proper cause of Illumination, being taken for the things
revealed, whereof some principal heads are here given. p. 20 SECT. V. Of the
Grace and act of Faith leading to Illumination: and of the difficulties and
means of believing. p. 40 SECT. VI. Of the gift and guidance of Gods Spirit
toward true Illumination: the abuse and true uses of it noted. And of the
necessity of believing. p, 51 SECT. VII. Of Illumination Reflexive, whereby
the Christian Soul comes to the knowledge of its self in its Spiritual
State. p. 63 SECT. VIII. Of Revelations or Illuminations extraordinary by
Spirits: and the discerning of them: with the use of such Revelations. p. 76
The Second Part. Of the Purgative part of Religion.
SECT. I. THAT Action and good Works must be added to true knowledge and
Believing: And of the distinction of sins to be purged. Page 99 SECT. II. Of
the Office of Faith in purging the Soul from sinful defilements. p. 105 SECT.
III. That in purifying our selves, principal regard is to be had to the
purity of Faith: and of the affections of the Inward Man, not neglecting
outward severities. p. 114 SECT. IV. Of the proper means and method of
cleansing the Soul: And first, of Baptism. p. 124 SECT. V. Of the Grace and
power of Repentance in cleansing the Soul. p. 129 SECT. VI. That this
purgative Repentance must be general of all sins; and perpetual. p. 147 SECT.
VII. Of Self denial required to true Reformation, and that both of
Understanding and Will. p. 156 SECT. VIII. Of the custody and discipline to be
had over the outward man; especially the Eyes, Ears, and Tongue. p. 174 SECT.
IX. Of outward moderation, and modesty to be used in abstinences, and
Apparel. p. 189 SECT. X. The connection of what has passed with what follows
concerning the Seven Capital Sins. p. 201 SECT. XI. Of Pride, the first deadly
or Capital Sin. p. 203 SECT. XII. Of Anger, a Second Capital Sin: its
Concomitants, and Remedies. p. 219 SECT. XIII. Of the deadly sin of Envy, its
nature and Remedies. p. 233 SECT. XIV. Of the Capital Sin, Covetousness. p.
244 SECT. XV. Of Luxury, and Uncleanness. p. 254 SECT. XVI. Of Gluttony, its
sinfullnesse and Cure. p. 265 SECT. XVII. Of Slothfullnesse, the last Capital
Sin. p. 277 SECT. XVIII. The Conclusion of this Second Part; with some short
advices relating to what has been said therein. p. 288
The Third Part. Treating of the Unitive Way of the devout Soul with God.
SECT. I. Of the Nature of true Union with God, and of Mystical Theology: and
of the Abuses and due Use thereof. p. 297 SECT. II. That this Union consists
chiefly in the true knowledge of God, and Love experimental and reciprocal.
p. 304 SECT. III. Of the excess of Vnitive Love of God, in Ecstasies and
Raptures, with their abuses and uses noted. p. 309 SECT. IV. Of the Union of
the Soul with God by Divine Contemplation and Meditation; with some instances
of particular Subjects for this latter. p. 317 SECT. V. Of the Union we have
with God in Prayer habitual and actual, as the proper matter of Worship. p.
328 SECT. VI. Of the defects incident to the Act of Praying, and their
Remedies. p. 334 SECT. VII. Of the due use of Public and Private Prayer. p.
342 SECT. VIII. Of the several sorts of Prayer, viz. Sensible, Mental,
Supramentall, Extemporarie, Formed or fixed: as also of Singing of Psalms. p.
350 SECT. IX. Of Union and Communion with God in the Holy Eucharist, or Lords
Supper: to which certain instructions are premised p. 359 SECT. X. Of the
difficulties and dangers in receiving the Holy Communion, here discussed. p.
367 SECT. XI. Other impediments and scruples observed against Communicating
especially, with their proper Remedies. p. 378 SECT. XII. A brief
recapitulation of what has been treated of before: with advices and directions
concerning the interruption, and recoverie of actual Communion with God; and
of Consolations. p. 387
THE Method and Means TO TRUE SPIRITUAL LIFE.
The First Part Treating of Spiritual Illumination.
SECT 1. Previous advice concerning the Necessity, Reasonableness and
Usefulness of being truly Religious.
1. THERE being three principal Stages (as I may so speak) which every true
Christian is to pass over in his travail toward that Sabbath of Blessedness
hoped for hereafter, and aspired to, it may seem both very methodicall and
profitable to that great end, to prepare the way thither by clearing up the
defaced Characters written by Gods own finger on the tables of Man's heart
concerning the sense of God and Religion toward him, in general: that such a
fundamental persuasion being well received, the edification in our most holy
faith may be more firm, absolute, and better advanced.

2. For what may we call Religion (speaking here more practically than
artificially) but a through conviction of a Supreme Being and Power, able to
save and destroy everlastingly; inferring a strong and just obligation, upon
all creatures, especially Man, to pay the debt of veneration and obedience to
that God from whom he received his present being, and to whom he owes his
subsistence, and upon whom depends his future state of happiness or misery.

3. But may it not here also be said, Who has believed our report, and to
whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed? too many obstinately refusing any
better guidance or conduct of their Lives, but such as may favor their
degenerous and dangerous humor of gratifying their sensual appetites,
hurrying them to a liberty inconsistent with that whereby we are made free to
God by Christ Jesus. For his service being perfect freedome', when we are
dedicated to him in Baptism, we renounce the servitude, and turpitude of the
world; and enter our selves Apprentices to learn and do the will of God, by
Religion, the Art of all Arts: God at the same time Indenting and Covenanting
with Believers so faithfully serving him, when their times come out by death,
in this world, to give them a more noble and desirable freedom, by making
them Citizens in Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all; than which
the heart of man can desire no greater or better event of all his labors and
services in the world, nor so good, nor great remuneration.

4. Who would not then sometimes retire into the chamber of his heart, and
seriously consider these things? And who considering these things, would not
apply himself to this so necessary, so divine and beneficial a work? shall we
see so many Artists of this world strive to excel one another, not only for
lucre sake, but esteem of men, in their several professions and trades, and
shall we be cold, indifferent, and careless in this of Religion, the glory of
all? How many have become poor, infamous, miserable, and perished finally
merely for want of Religion better informing and governing them? And how many
on the other side, has Religion celebrated and immortalized, above all other
arts, sciences, or heroic Feats in the world? How many pitiful persons in
the eye of the world for birth, parts, education, possessions and the like,
admired by the world, have outshin'd men even in this world, in true honor;
whom yet the world has accounted most renowned and happy, and after this life
have perpetuated their names longer, and propagated them farther than the
wisest of the worlds Philosophers, and the noblest Princes and Potentates
thereof? And yet how few are there who contend so zealously for this, as the
other?

5. For what are all arts or sciences, or powers, or pleasures, or profits
unsanctified, or unseasoned by Religion, but so many instruments of
wickednesses, cousenages, and villainies? And what are all humane Societies and
Polities but so many shops of injustice, deceits, and uncontrollable rapine and
spoil without Religion influencing the conscience and regulating the Actions of
Men? For without this, no such Laws can be enacted which may secure either the
persons of men from violence, or their properties from injuries. And the
advantage that some irreligious persons make to themselves by contemning
Religious Rules, tends directly to the ruin of the Common body, or innumerable
particular persons. For one man having no sense or conscience of God and the
fear due to him, corrupts wines and other drinks, with some benefit to
himself, and great prejudice to the bodies of many more: others falsyfie
stuffes, silks and clothes, and deceive the wearer: others counterfeit lawful
money, contrary to the Standard; and bring damage to their neighbors, and
often loss of life and goods to themselves. Others defraud in weights and
measures; others emboldened by gainful success in unjust practices, cast off
wholly the very vizor of Conscience and Religion, and with open face rob and
spoil their neighbor, and in conclusion bring confusion to themselves.

6. These are indeed lamentable consequences of an irreligious mind; but how
much more to be lamented and avoided are the corruptions and wastes made upon
the Inward man, by the want of Religion? How hereupon do as well monstrous as
pernicious dogmes invade the understanding, and mislead it into many idle,
foolish, false, and absurd paradoxes? And these prevailing, how are the
affections set at liberty to run into all manner of sensualities, and
sophisticate the powers of the Soul; more criminal in the account of God,
than corrupting the Kings coin, or defacing maliciously his Image can be with
men: more prejudicial to man himself than outward blindness of the eyes,
mutilation of members, or lamenesse of limbs: as our Savior teaches, when he
tells us, it is better to go to heaven without a right eye or right hand, than
having such iutegrity of bodily parts to be cast into hell, for want of true
Religion. But because such as want Religion are least of all sensible of such
remote and inevident evils preached against wanters of Religion, it may not be
inconvenient to bring down the Appeal against them to their senses and outward
observations, which may inform us what havoc irreligion makes upon men's
persons and outward conditions, bringing their wits into suspicion of weakness;
who to appear somebody in dogmatizing, are constrained to take up the opposing
the received principles of Religion: an extraordinary subject drawing men's ears
to listen after such a vain Philosopher; whom otherwise no man would regard
talking and walking according to the known Rules of sobriety, and piety,
through the defects of reason, aiming at no greater glory, than those obscure
and pitiful fellows of little or no place or power considerable, who to
acquire somewhat of a name, provoke and set upon invincible Champions, or
choose to perish by a Royal hand.

7. And must not the portion of reason be very weak and low in him, who
undertakes the oppugning that which so many before him have attempted without
any other event than their own infamy and stupidity after a wilful opposing
the once approved truth? For so impregnable is the Rock of Religion, that it
could never be mastered considerably by any assaults; nor so far sunck or lost
to the view and approbation of men, by the leaden weights of men's
ratiocinations, but it buoyed it self up above all such enemies, and triumphed
over them, while the names and memory of its adversaries rotted, and their own
deeds contrary to Religion oppressed them in their vices, and confounded them.
So that delighting not to know God, but holding the truth in unrighteousness,
stupendous infatuations have seized upon many of their minds and disturbed
their affections, that not only contrary to that they call Religion, but to
that we and they both call Nature, they have corrupted and abused themselves,
so that such things as they would not understand, in process of time they
cannot; and those actions which seemed unreasonable and brutish once to
themselves, become their supreme perfections, in which they glory, and perhaps
perish.

8. These mischiefs then foreseen; and the contrary benefits of Religion
discerned and believed, put me upon the design of S. Paul, desiring men to
suffer a word of Exhortation; that they would be reconciled to Reason,
sometimes magnified by them in word, but not so often allowed of in practice;
to God, and to Religion, and to Christ Jesus bringing salvation unto all men;
whereby they can only be happy. And that they would not here expect
demonstrations to compel them to come into the Faith, nor eloquence to
persuade them, (not pretended to here) but the simplicity of the truth, and
the power of Godliness, and the tranquillity of mind and conscience, no
otherwise to be attained; and the unspeakable happiness believed and expected
hereafter, may suffice to awaken diverse to enquire seriously, whether these
things be so; as good Bereans; which will easily appear to every unprejudiced
mind, under this great advantage above worldly doctrines, that none of these
have so much as dared to promise so great future blessings in a world to come;
nor have any made good such fair promises of present happiness in this world;
which notwithstanding so many have been charmed with and unhappily trusted to,
and been deluded by.

9. But yet I would not be here so understood, as if I intended to insist upon
the Principles of Christian Religion; but supposing that to be the truest, and
most perfect; and also the Scriptures to be the word of Life, and of God, and
Rule of Faith and holy worship, and Christ the true Messiah that was to come
into the world, and that there shall be a resurrection of the just and unjust,
yet I held it requisite speaking of Illumination, to instance in the principal
heads of Christian Knowledge and Faith whereby Religion does furnish the minds
of believers, which either not at all are to be found in other books, or so
uncertainly and obscurely as the full assurance of them must only be owing to
such divine Revelations; Before we speak of which particularly, we shall, in
the next place, give some account of the three main branches of our present
Method.

SECT. II. A brief description of the Illuminative, Purgative, and Vnitive way
in Religion.
1. THE seeds of Religion being sown in the heart by God himself, and some
smaller and dimmer strictures cast into man by the same hand directing man to
God, it is the duty of every one to improve the same by orderly progressions to
the measure of the stature of Christ; as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 4. To this
end Antiquity (not without competent grounds in Holy Scripture) has pitched
upon three more considerable states of a Christian, and ascents of the Soul
toward God by Religion, though not absolute, yet necessary to Salvation. For
Saint John's words, 1 Epist. 12, 13, 14. seem to tend to this, distinguishing
little Children, Young Men and Old Men: or Beginners, Proficients, and Perfect,
not so absolute as God may not find fault with, yet so as before man they may
be irreprehensible, and allowable by God, according to the scantlings and
infirmities of Flesh and Blood. And agreeable to this, Cassian in his
Collations, with some others, have observed that Solomon wrote three Books: One
for instruction and illumination in wisdom, which we commonly call the Book of
Proverbs, initiating young beginners in the knowledge and fear of God, which is
there called the beginning of Wisdom, and good understanding; laying the
foundation to eternal Life. The other Book of Solomon called Ecclesiastes,
represents to the eye and understanding the vanities of the world, and the
pollutions of earthly joys, with a tacit disswasion from the use of them, to
the dishonor of God: which performed introduces a man to the third and last
degree of perfection in this world, contemplation of God and divine matters,
whereby such a sensation of the divine goodness is so far wrought in the Soul,
that it becomes united more entirely with God; which we call the Vnitive way:
and seems to be figured out to us by that Song of Songs, called commonly
Solomon's. And this threefold Cord binding the Soul to God, seems to have
some little insinuation made to us from the wisdom of the world, the Ancient
Pythagoreans teaching three manner of ways of attaining happiness, Labor and
Action about Virtue: Meditation conducting to Knowledge of God, and Love of
God, which is the true conjunction of the Soul with God.

2. Such concurrence then there being of divine and humane wisdom to justify
such a partition of Religion, no wonder that the reputed Dionysius the
Areopagite took hold of such an occasion given to him to commend this
tripartite doctrine of the Illuminative, Purgative, and Unitive way of serving
God; in which many have imitated him, and much; and perhaps too far advanced
it. From whom I take the liberty so far to vary as to make Illumination the
foundation and first step to all regular ascent to Godward, as proceeding from
that faith which is the foundation of all Christian graces. For by it, we come
to have the eyes of our understanding opened, and judge our selves, and purge
our selves, and fit our selves for an higher and nearer conjunction with God,
as will appear more fully hereafter.

SECT. III. Of the necessity and use of Illumination: and of Faith with its
subordinate graces, properly conducing thereunto.
1. FAmous is the distinction of St. Paul of Theological Virtues into Faith,
Hope, and Charity, as of them upon which all other Christian duties and
virtues are founded and move toward that perfection competible to believers in
this life. Faith illuminating, Hope purging, and Charity or love of God
uniting us unto God. For the natural man is blind and cannot see afar off, as
St. Peter teaches us. And naturally we all lie polluted in our blood, and so
naturally are aliens from God and unreconcileable by any other name or means
but that of Christ Jesus, in whom to believe, is to know God and our selves.
For as the Wise man says, Proverbs 19. 2. That the soul should be without
knowledge, is not good. Faith with Christians begets knowledge properly
divine in Christians, being the light and eye both of the soul regenerate. So
that, as it is not possible for the blind man to work any curious work without
the use of his eyes, but every act tending that way, must be a fault and error
(For how can it be expected that any man should sew well that cannot thread his
needle) so they on whom the light of the Gospel shines not, who are not
enlightened. The first thing that God produced in creating the world was light;
not that he absolutely needed it, but that the creatures did; and to intimate
unto us the order of true Regeneration; that it must begin with Illumination.
And therefore God who more immediately of old revealed himself to his chosen
servants, did, in following ages set up and fix a light in his Church, the
written word of God, which received by faith should become a constant Guide to
our Feet and Lantern to our Paths, passing through this dark Vale toward
the Mount and true City of God.

2. For without this the Philosophers of this world professing themselves (as
St. Paul speaks Rom, 1. 22.) wise, became fools: erring in the very first step
and prime principle of divine knowledge; which teaches the only true God: they
for their part, in groping after God, changing the glory of the
incorcorruptible God into an Image made like unto corruptible man: as St. Paul
also observes, v. 23. which is much the same as to turn the image or very
substance of man into God. But when it pleased God that the Day Star should
arise in our hearts, as St. Peter speaks, which is Christ revealed to the world
and minds of men: and when as St. Paul speaks 2 Corinthians. 4. 6. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shined in our hearts, to give us
the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ, then did the
shadows of darkness and ignorance flee away. Holy David having foretold of
this, when he said, Psalm 36. In thy light shall we see light. So that as
Christ says of himself, He that gathers not with me scatters: in like
manner may it truly be said, Whosoever enlighteneth not with, by, and from him
darkeneth: as it happened to those subtle and wise disputants, Jobs Friends,
Job 38. who darkened counsel by words without knowledge.

3. And too near do they approach to the like error, who darkening of late the
doctrine of Faith and the use of it, imagine the strong persuasion they have of
the goodness of God and Grace of Christ sufficient to the great end of light
and salvation; and that the Instrument whereby they should work, is the work it
self, to be performed by them, and such in which a man might acquiesce; as
having fulfilled the whole Will of God; and thereupon entertain such a
persuasion of himself, that infallibly he shall be saved, while he remains
very deficient in the common and known duties of a true Christian: mistaking
the true notion and office of Faith, which is not so much to teach us what we
are our selves, but what God is, and what is his Will, and what our duty is to
him, and the effects of obedience, and holy life prescribed by him: So that
justifying and saving faith, is Godliness in the power of it, and Godliness in
the power, of which St. Paul speaks, is a Confluence of all Christian Graces
and Virtues, the principal of which are reckoned up by St. Peter, where he
counsels, 2 Epist. 1, 5, 6. to Add to faith, virtue; and to virtue,
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to
patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness, Charity: And having profited so far as to be possessed of such
Graces, to strive, as the same Apostle has it, to abound in the same; which
having competently attained unto, gives the best assurance of the good purpose
of our heavenly Father, to give us the Kingdom promised to them that believe.

4. But the presumptuous and preposterous faith whereby men are prone to
fancy themselves into the highest favor of God, before they have passed
through the discipline of Faith, which is laboursome and uneasy to Flesh, is
that which leads men into blindness of mind, and perhaps perdition, in the
midst of strong persuasions of the contrary, our Savior Christ teaching us so
much, where he says, Luke 17. 7. Which of you having a servant plowing or
feeding cattle will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go
and sit down to meat, And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I
may suppe, and gird thy self and serve me, and afterward thou shall eat and
drink. Which teaches us, that it suffices not presently to take up our rest of
assurance of our salvation by faith special, so soon as we are called home to
God from the wide and wild conversation in the field of this world, but must
yet farther attend the service God has for us to do, and then to expect his
farther favor of an eternal rest.

5. And because, amongst various acceptations in holy Scripture of the word
Faith, it is sometimes used for the Grace of faith, and sometimes for the works
and fruits of faith, every prudent and pious Christian must be very careful
that he puts not such a fallacy upon himself as to infer to himself the
whole virtue of faith taken in its full latitude, upon some particular branch
thereof found in him: crouding all duties of piety into one, and that rather a
preparation unto true, religious life, than the principal part of it, such as
knowing and believing, and the means thereunto tending, reading and hearing of
Gods holy word. For being well initiated in those necessary principles and
helps of devotion, there so to stop, or in them to improve, that acts of faith,
hope, and charity should be neglected, overthrowes the whole design of faith
it self: whereof no small part is to confess our sins, to repent heartily and
thoroughly, to attend to good works, and acts of mercy, to bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance: and not to think to commute with God; that when he
requires private or public worship, we should think it as well and perhaps
better, to read certain Chapters in the Bible, or to be present and hear a
Sermon: and when God calls to perform good deeds of Charity in visiting the
sick, and being at charges for the relief of the poor, to exceed in reading and
praying, supposing such cheaper parts of splendid profession, will answer all
obligations to God and our necessitous neighbor. Whereas it is one principal
point of true Christian Illumination by faith, to understand what it teaches
us by the Apostle, saying, Coloss. 4. 12. Stand perfect and complete in all the
will of God; to the effecting whereof Faith is ordained and given us by God, as
a tool and Engine, not as the work it self.

6. And therefore the ancient and more experienced Father we read of,
handsomely and truly reproved the mistakes of three well inclined novices in
the sounder part of Piety, when the First declaring the course of his Life,
said with expectation of applause, I have got the Old and New Testament by
heart. Then, said the Old man, thou have poured out many words into the air:
intending he should understand, that all that was to very small purpose without
proportionable acts of holiness. And the Second said, I have wrote over all
the Old and New Testament with mine own hand. Then (said the ancient Father,)
thou have filled thy windows with store of paper. And the third glorying that
the grass grew on his hearth; implying how much cold and hunger he had
suffered; was answered by the same person, Then have thou driven away
hospitality; intimating, that no man abounding in some good duties must
persuade himself that he shall thereby make compensation for such defects in
other graces wilfully neglected: being better informed from St. Paul that
knowledge, and the Scriptures themselves were entrusted with us by God that the
man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all Good works, 2 Timothy
3. 17. And as David's practice was, to have an eye to all Gods commands, without
exception, or limitation, Psalm. 119. 6.

7. Against this if it chances to be objected, (what vulgarly is said) that
there is no perfection in this world: we may answer without great difficulty,
That perfection there is in the Scriptures themselves, and Christian Religion
above what is to be found in any other Authors, Sciences or Religions. There
is a perfection of integrity or of parts, which St. Paul to Philemon ver. 6.
calls, Communication of faith becoming effectual by the acknowledging of
every good thing, so that not one virtue or duty prescribed to a true
Christian must be wanting to the true believer, however the degrees of those
virtues may be, and generally are imperfect. And yet again, having in some
degree been initiated into all Christian virtues, we are not there to rest as
if we had already attained the end of Religion, but must prosecute those mean,
yet good beginnings till we arrive to that pitch which God has not revealed
unto us, that he will accept to our justification and salvation; but only have
a sound, firm, and comfortable Hope of the Favor of God, which some are
pleased in these last ages, to call Faith justifying: But faith properly so
called has for its object truth, and that as relating to all men: but Hope
has for its object, Good; and that as pertaining to particular persons; of
which nature is the persuasion we have of the foresaid Good as truly belonging
unto us: and thereby, as St. John speaks, 1 Epist. 3. 19. We assure our hearts
before him.

SECT. IV. That Faith, and not natural Reason improved, is the only proper
Cause of Christian Illumination, being taken for the things revealed, whereof
some principal Heads are here given.
1. IT is a common and useful distinction of Faith by the Learned, not
difficult to be understood by the unlearned, into the matter or articles of our
Faith propounded to our assent by God himself in his Word; and the Gift and
Grace of Faith enabling us to believe things so revealed, and necessary to our
Salvation. It will be therefore very expedient for the better informing every
plain and sincere capacity, to make some recital of those things our Faith
Christian is founded upon, and which we are to believe, and that principally by
Revelation: and not wholly to be silent herein any more than St. Luke was in
writing his Gospel, Luke 1. 1. For as much as many have taken in hand to set
forth in order those things which are most surely believed amongst us: because
several forms and phrases may help toward the same sense and end of
believing, and illumination.

2. And here first of all is to be considered and believed the great
Prerogative of Christian Religion above all other discoveries made to Man: when
our Savior Christ in St. Matthew says, Chapter 11. v. 25. I thank thee O Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise, and
revealed them to babes. Not that Christ maligned the knowledge of these things
to others; but that he admired the privileges conferred by God upon his mean
flock. And what these things are, and how, and to whom, revealed, St. Paul
certifies us, 1 Corinthians. 2. 6, 7, 8, saying, Howbeit we speak wisdom among
them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world which comes to
naught; but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom,
which God ordained before the world to our glory -- For God has revealed them
by his Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of
God. Meaning hereby to teach us, that whatever knowledge man may attain to in
the search of the mysteries of Nature, Revelation is absolutely necessary to
the knowledge of the deep things of Gods counsel and pleasure concerning his
own Nature and Being, and our service of him, and salvation by him, discovery
should be. made unto us, some other way than by our natural reason, darkened by
our own apostasy and infatuations. So that the whole Bible may be called one
entire book of divine Revelations: the Jew having received many things from God
which were denied unto the Gentiles, and the Christian having received from God
more clear dispensations and sublime than were granted unto the Jew, for he
beheld things as in a glass darkly, but the other, face to face; that is, the
very things themselves, and not the darker shadows, which were to flee away at
the rising of the Sun of righteousness: which is by the Apostle called, the
Mystery of Christ: which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men
as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit.
Whereupon St. Peter, 1 Ep. 1. 5. tells us of Gods Elect, that they are kept by
the power of God through faith, unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the
last times: which last times were the same of which the Apostle to the Hebrews
speaks, that in the last days God has spoken unto us by his Son: and those
last days were the days of the Gospel revealing the mysteries of Godliness
unto us: and not these last days phansied by some.

3. Now, notwithstanding innumerable are the divine documents and notices
extraordinarily delivered through the New Testament, and more especially there
be a fair Catalogue given us Heb. 11. of the singular virtues and uses of Faith
in revealing divine things, yet because we now speak chiefly to babes in
Christ, or St. John's Little children, it may not be amiss to assist the
weaker, without offense of the stronger, in giving some special instances
whereby the knowledge of a green Christian is either actually improved, or
improveable to a greater degree than can readily be found in aliens from Christ.

4. There have been, in former years, some leading men in the Reformation and
learned, who have collected ten several and considerable grounds in which all
Religions concur, and this was the ingenious contrivance of Bibliander: since
which, diverse with tolerable design, but I fear with no good event at all, but
rather the contrary, have in these very late years, written about Natural
Religion, and the Reasonableness of Christian Faith manifested by natural
Light: hoping it may be, to begett a better opinion in many rank Rationalists,
of Christian Religion; but perhaps they considered not what evil consequence
follows from hence, viz. that the very first principle of our Christian faith
is hereby weakened, and more slighted; as judged from hence, not to be so
necessary as commonly is received. For Revelations divine, and that these
writings we call Scriptures, are divinely revealed, is the most fundamental
part of our Religion: which to make credible by sundry Topics of reason, have
been always the practice of the Ancients, as it is still of the modern, not
illaudable: but to offer demonstrations, and those such upon which they would
constrain belief of that first principle, is to cause the whole fabric of
Christian faith to rest on that tottering and unstable foundation; and of
divine, to dilute our faith into humane persuasion; all superior articles of
our faith having no stronger stay than such a bottom will allow them.

5. And I must confess, for my part, I am so far from being pleased with the
pretended Golden sayings of Pythagoras, or the divine sentences of Plato,
Seneca, and especially that moderner vapourer, or rather vapor it self,
Hierocles, and such as Eunapius presents unto us, that they rather turn my
stomach at their aemulation of Christian perfection, thereby to lessen the
value of Christian Religion it self, than draw me to affecting or admiring
them. For St. Paul 2 Corinthians. 1. 14. tells us, it is By faith we stand: and
again, that our faith it self should not stand in the wisdom of men but in
the power of God. And it will be found by experience, that humane reason thus
coming officiously to the aid of divine Faith, unable to satisfy the doubting
mind about the doctrine proper to Faith, will in the end, prove so saucy and
domineering as to give law to faith, and like Ivy which clings to the tree for
a subsistence, will weaken it and suck out the heart of it, in time. Herein
therefore consists the very soul, or (as scholasticall men speak) the very
formal reason of Christian faith illuminating otherwise than the humane Lights
of this world, that we believe what we have not seen by sense, nor learned by
experience, viz. That the Scriptures we now are possessed of, are the
Revelations which God has given us for our instruction and direction in the
knowledge of him, and holy conversation before him and the world.

6. Now from this foundation laid, this principle granted, this fountain of all
spiritual wisdom and understanding opened, do issue all particular branches
of our faith illuminating us: some few of which articles reduced into the three
eminent Creeds of all Christian Churches, viz. The Apostolical, the Nicene and
Athanasian, which may yet be more plainly and vulgarly thus ordered, to easy
capacities.

1. First that there is a God: and this God but one in nature and substance; of
an infinite, eternal, immutable Being; and there is, or can possibly be no
more; number herein destroying all perfection proper to the divine Being: which
article, though some of the wise Naturalists did give their cold assent unto,
yet scarce ever so, but they tolerated such opinions and religions of others as
maintained the contrary; feeling rather, as the Apostles phrase is, after God,
than finding him, or holding him fast by such a strong faith as Christians are
and must be endued with: knowing assuredly, that Religion, and our Salvation
receive by no one superstition, so deadly a blow, and destructive to all sound
Christianity, as to err about this first principle, by acknowledging directly
or indirectly, more than one God: that is, either in the Proposition,
professing more than one, (which totally subverts Christianity) or in Practice,
worshipping that for God which is not God, though under a strong persuasion,
that what we worship is that one true God; and though in mind and intention we
design to worship only the true God. For such a fact upon involuntarie error
(and all error is said by wise men to be involuntarie) may mitigate the
offense before God and man, but it cannot at all change the thing it self;
making that to be no idolatry which is Idolatry; or that no heresy which is
heresy in it self, but only by certain circumstance may alleviate (and yet we
know not how little or much) the crime of the offender: which crime is in it
self directly damnable, and so by the doctrine of our Christian faith to be
reputed, and even with the loss of our lives to be avoided.

2. And the same faith likewise teaches us, as necessary to salvation, to
believe aright of the several and distinct ways of the subsistence of the
Deity in the Trinity of the persons: which we commonly call, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; which, as we must believe to be three, and not one Person, so must
we believe to be one in nature and substance, and not three: so that the Father
begets the Son, and is not begotten of any: and the Son is begotten of the
Father by an Eternal and incorrupt generation, not to be paralleled in any
other productions, though dimly represented unto us. And the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son; by such a divine emanation as is not
imitable by any created procession. And in this article of our Faith,
Christians being wholly destitute of all natural assistance to believe, the
whole must redound to the power and pleasure of God revealing these things, and
rendering them credible, our faith upon that ground receiving them.

3. And a third point of our Faith proceeds to reunite, as it were, in our
minds and persuasions, those persons we acknowledge to stand so distinguished
by their intrinsecall Relations mentioned, in their outward operations, such as
are acts of Creation, Preservation and Governing, by a most wise and just
providence, all things which are in this visible world, and in that or those
worlds which are to us invisible, called Celestial.

4. And hence it is that, by the same faith, we are taught more expressly and
particularly, that the One God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost gave a being to all
the world, and out of nothing, produced what we see, and what we understand,
and more than we can behold and apprehend; determining that knottie
controversy which the Philosophers could make no work with, concerning the
Creation of the world, which some would have never to have been, but subsisting
from eternity of it self: and not only so, but we understand by divine
Revelation and Illumination, how the world was made: and that not by the
contriving of the brain, or a model laid before the eyes, or by the labor of
the hand, the sweat of the face, and tedious, but necessary toil of many
days, years, or ages; but by the lightest and easiest way we could possibly
understand any thing to be wrought; For thus we read Heb. 11. 2. Through faith
we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things
which are seen were not made of things which do appear: And so we read Psalm
33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them
by the breath of his mouth: And yet not so by the word or mouth of God, as that
any such part is to be admitted in God, or that properly God so spoke vocally,
(For to what, or whom should God speak so, when there was no body, yea nothing
to hear) but it was a mere, simple, pure velleity, or willing of him, so
effectual as to produce the Universe, without the labor of his hands, or of
any other Agent or Instrument under him, as some have vainlie imagined,
contrary to our divine Faith. For by the same power that God could create a
worm, he could create an Elephant, and with the same ease that he could create
a Mite, he might create the hugest Monster that ever the earth bare; yea, the
earth it self: and that without delays; or distances of times; though, to
show his liberty and not necessity of working, and to teach us advisednesse in
all our Actions of importance, he vouchsafed to distribute his acts into
several orders, and spaces of duration, called Days. For (as it is said) in
six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and all that is therein, etc.

5. And from this general working or acting of God, we are lead to an higher
degree more nearly concerning our selves. For it must necessarily follow from
hence, that, as the Psalmist affirms, He has made us, and not we our selves,
Psalm 95. And that as he made all things very good; so the more noble in rank
such things were, the more perfect and unblameable they must needs be, as they
came out of Gods hands. For God does not work or proceed after the manner of
nature from imperfect to perfect, as all natural productions are ill formed
and defective at first, and in tract of time arise to their ordained
perfection: but God made all things, and especially Man, at once; most perfect,
both as to inward endowments and outward form, stature, and parts: so that
nothing was wanting either to the ornament of his mind, or the perfection of
his body, Crowning both with holiness and happiness immortal: wherein his
own Image and likeness principally consisted; adding unto them here in this
life, power and dominion under him over all earthly things.

6, Furhermore the same faith teaches us the Original of the soul or spirit
of man, which was variously canvased by the wise men of this world, without
resolution satisfactorie, and that he, and not natural generation was the true
cause thereof, and that Christ and his Father works hitherto, and he works,
John 5. 17.

7. Seventhly, we learn from holy Writ, concerning the government of the
World, that God leads not such a sedentarie and careless life as some
Philosophers imagined, after the manner of many Great Men, who build fair and
stately Houses and furnish them richly, but so leave them to fall to decay, and
the things therein to be lost and spoiled, neither does he trouble his head or
vex his heart (as some men do) about the management of their Houses and Lands,
but by a mean way of sufficient protection and providence, disposes all things,
even Good and Evil, so wisely and harmoniously, that no molestation is given
to himself, nor any damage to the Universe it self, though innumerable
changes are constantly wrought to the detriment of some particulars there, and
the like advantage to other things not before noted. So that what, for its
time, lay hid and contemptible, is raised, as it were, out of the dust, and
exalted to greatness and splendor; and for a season having so continued, by
the same all-disposing hand relapses into its ancient obscurity, and this by a
perpetual vicissitude which some times an Age or two declares; some times,
not many Centuries of years. And by the same Faith we according to St. Peter's
Doctrine, 2 Ep. 3. 7. understand that as the heavens and earth were formed and
stood out of the waters, so the heavens and the earth which are now, by the
same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment.

8. By Faith likewise we know that the fine and admirable Masterpiece of God
himself, Man, created in the foresaid perfection, and being in great honor
and happiness, through his own folly (as did the Angels before him) fell from
his steadfastness into blindesse, poverty, and general misery of body and
mind: contracting thereby disorder of affections inward, and diseases and
death outward, the seeds of all which he transmitted to his posterity, and is
that Original sin all are infected and infested with. This the Learning of
this world could hardly, or not at all instruct us in, but is the office of our
faith to inform us: From whence also we can only give account of the many and
strange exorbitances of our mind, and the several infirmities, distempers,
and pains of our body before our reason comes to that ripeness as to entitle
us to the guilt of erroneous actions, or free election of Good and Evil.

9. Neither could humane learning or books of the greatest Philosophers inform
us, how, tied and bound in the chain of our sins, and fallen into the depth of
common destruction, we should recover our losses, and repair our breaches;
neither could we our selves devise any more than we could really desire to
evade the evils we were surrounded with: But that light from above which
enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, shows that God out of the
Abyss of his Counsels and freeness of his Grace and Love toward Mankind,
first determined the redemption of him, and when the fulness of time was
come, actually sent his Son into the world in the likeness of sinful flesh,
to condemn sin in the flesh, Romans 8. 3. Galat. 4. 4.

10. And this Salvation was ratified to man, soon after his fall; God entering
then into a new Covenant with man to the reenstating him into his favor, and
restoring him to the blessed hopes of salvation eternal, upon Evangelicall
faith, and obedience answerable thereunto. And that these terms of this
Covenant may, as well as ought, be performed on man's part, though not upon his
own strength, is a material point of our faith, and a prime motive to our
obedience. For were it not, that man bounden thus to God, might come up to that
degree of perfection, as to be judged by God to have performed what is
necessary to obtaining the promises made by God, no wise man would trouble
himself to begin such an impossible work; and no faithful man or true
believer could be sure of his salvation, as is often taught we may and ought to
be: but rather every man may be sure of his damnation, knowing thar he can in
no ways do that upon which his salvation depends.

11. Furthermore, It is necessary to salvation (as the Athanasian Creed tells
us) that we believe rightly the Incarnation of out Lord Jesus Christ; who by
taking flesh of the Virgin Mary his Mother, unto the divine nature, became an
apt and sufficient Mediator between God and Man; and Administratour of the New
Covenant made between God and Man.

12. And this administration was wrought two ways principally: First, by the
divine doctrine and knowledge revealed unto the world, delivered by himself,
and his elect servants to that end inspired extraordinarily; and contained in
the several Books of the New Testament. Secondly, by his Passion and death
upon the Cross, as a Lamb of God offered for the sins of the whole world, in
which God rested satisfied, and became appeased; and Believers had access to
the throne of Grace, and became accepted in the beloved.

13. But to the effectual application of so glorious a benifit as this, is
somewhat more required of all true Believers than a Faith passive; it being
necessary that first we should use the means ordained by God to that great
end, before we can have any sound hope of attaining the same. And supposing
faith preceding, the sum of what remains and to which other duties may be
reduced, may be three fold.

1. The use of the Sacrament of Baptism, instituted as a laver of
regeneration, and a form of initiation into the Covenant, without which we are
of the number of Infidells, and aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, and
without hope of salvation, and in our sins, and natural blindness, which
hereby was so cured that the newly baptized were said in Scripture to be
illuminated or enlightened, Heb. 6. 4. Hebr. 10. 32.

2. And unto this comes in, as an Auxiliary improving and perfecting the low
beginnings of those once initiated, to an high degree of holiness and comfort,
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained by Christ to the ratification of our
Covenant entered into with God, and the memory of Christ's passion and death
upon the Cross for us, and our being more strictly and intimately united to
Christ; as shall hereafter be more fully declared.

3. A third most necessary and effectual means of applying Christ's merits to
us, is that excellent gift of God, as the Scripture terms it, Acts 5. 31. Acts
11. 18. Repentance, of which (with the concomitants of it likewise) we may
speak farther hereafter.

14. Of the Resurrection likewise of the body, and the reuniting of the soul
unto it: and upon such restoration, the receiving of the proper reward of Good
and Evil done now in the body, is another article of our faith not
demonstrable by the wisdom of this world, but discerned by Revelation.

15. To this likewise appertains the knowledge which Faith teaches us of the
Second coming of Christ in glory and Justice, to be the Great Judge of Quick
and Dead; bringing his reward with him: so that they who have done good shall
go into life eternal, and they that have done evil, into everlasting fire.

16. Lastly, as the nerve and bond of our Faith, we are by Gods Holy Word
taught assuredly; that God has two Cities or Societies in this world of his
own Constitution, and not framed by the will or power of Man. The one is that
Civil Government, wherein God has set his Delegates to maintain order and
unity, by the due administration of Justice: to whom men are to be subject, as
the Ministers of God, sent to those ends. The other is the Church of Christ, or
company of true Believers, of whom Christ is the supreme Head: From whom the
whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint
supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body, unto the edifying it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 16.
And it being impossible that Faith it self should subsist long, the Church
being dissolved; and it not being possible the Church should not be dissolved,
where there is no order of Superior and Inferior; nor possible that such
order should be preserved without subjection and obedience, the Catholic
Church is to be believed to be holy, and obeyed as our Guide and Governor, and
so is every particular Church managed by lawfully succeeding Pastors, to be
reverenced and obeyed: until such time that they, or it be convicted of some
gross error, and defection from Christ; and not only till all exceptions made
against them be resolved to our minds. So that enviously and proudly to oppose
that Hierarchy instituted by Christ, or the precepts delivered by them for the
conservation of the Body in faith and worship of God, is to resist God and not
man, and to make themselves obnoxious for officiousness without authority
received of God, to shame and perdition.

5. And this Abstract of knowledge given us by God in his Revealed Word, I held
very requisite to premise, as the grounds of our Christian faith, and as so
many instances of his singular favor to his Elect ones, in discovering unto
them such mysteries as the Princes of this world were and are ignorant of: and
we might walk worthy of such light given us. And to these of a speculative
nature might we add those of the practical order; whereby God does teach us
above the doctrines of men, not only not to commit such things which are
dishonest, unjust, unreasonable, filthy, and the like, but not so much as to
desire them: and that inward concupiscence of evil is a sin condemned by God,
however tolerated by humane Laws; either because they do not actually break
the peace of the Commonwealth, or because such close iniquities cannot come
under the cognizance of humane judicature: But God searches the heart, and
tries the reins, and judges the inward motions of the soul, as our faith
tells us: The sum of which knowledge is given us by St. Paul, Romans 7. 7.
when, as learned as he was, he tells us, I had not known lust, except the Law
had said, Thou shall not covet. So that from hence we may discern the truth of
what David says, Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the
soul; The Testimony of the Lord is sure making wise the simple: And again, v.
8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure enlightening the eyes. And what David
says there and elsewhere, Solomon in his Book of Proverbs more fully
confirms, and especially in the first Chapter; as in the beginning giving us
the Subject of the ensuing Treatise, To know wisdom and instruction. To
perceive words of understanding, to receive the instruction of wisdom,
justice, and judgment and equity. To give subtilty to the simple, to the
young man knowledge and discretion. So foolish are they and ignorant, who out
of mistaken greatness and Gallantry, and presumption of knowledge falsely so
called, are prone to despise the Revelations of Allmighty God, and establish
their own imaginations, serviceable to their Lusts and scandalous manners;
falling thereby under the just censure of the wisest of Men, Prove. 1. 7. Fools
despise wisdom and instruction: the reason whereof is, because it is their
enemy, in the unrighteous and unreasonable courses they choose to themselves:
verifying what our Savior Christ says, John 9. 41. of the haughty Pharisees,
If ye were blind, (i. e. through unaffected and involuntarie ignorance) ye
should have no sin, but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remains.

SECT. V. Of the Grace and Act of Faith leading to Illumination: and of the
difficulties and means of believing.
1. NOW we proceed to the second sense of Faith, mentioned before; and that is,
the Grace or Gift, or both, by which we believe: or the next disposition of the
mind toward Illumination. For as it is in nature, so likewise is it in the
case of Religion. To him that is naturally blind and discerns nothing,
exterior objects are in themselves as visible, as they are to him who has the
perfect use of his eyes, and sees all things duly offered to his sight; but
the indisposition of the organe hinders the exercise of the same. So we find
that what is presented alike to all men's understanding and faith, has not the
like effect upon men to apprehend or believe what is spiritually discerned.

2. One reason whereof may well be that which our Catechism, directed by Gods
holy Word, assures us of; viz. that we were borne in sin; of which state,
blindness is a principal part. So that as it seemed an incredible thing to
the Jews, John the 9th. that Christ should open the eyes of him that was borne
blind; may it seem one of the greatest difficulties to us, that being so
naturally ignorant and averse to spiritual things, we should be cured of so
great a malady. But the resolution of this doubt is given us by Christ
himself, in the same Chapter, v. 39. saying, For judgment am I come into this
world, that they who see not, might see: and that they who see, might be
blind. Christ therefore calls himself the light of the world, John 5. 8.
yea, and more than so, John 1. 9. according to the testimony given of him by
John the Baptist, He was the true light that lights every man that comes
into the world: that is, all men that come into the world, and are enlightened,
by him only they are enlightened.

3. And when it so falls out, that men are not the better for the light offered
to them and shining before them, a reason thereof is to be fetched from
themselves,, and the depravation of their own will, and obstinacy and
obdurateness in their natural state, according to Christ's own judgment of
the world, John 5. v. 40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. So
that as it is written by Sulpitius Severus in the life of St. Martine, that
being endued with a mavelous gift or faculty of curing sick and impotent
persons, The blind, and lame, and decrepit, who got their living by begging,
were afraid of him and would not come near him, lest being cured of such their
defects and impotencies, they should lose their livelihood. In like manner,
many getting a miserable and beggarly livelihood by serving and complying with
the world, and so being blind and crippled in an heavenly sense, refuse that
light, and life, and renovation which Christ brings with him. An instance
whereof we have in the ministry of St. Paul, preaching to the Athenians
prepossessed and captivated with worldly wisdom, and thereupon saying; Thou
bring strange things to our ears: In their judgments more strange than
true. And though it be Mannah it self, and that dropped down from heaven, for
their edification and comfort; men, out of their scepticalnesse and curiosity,
will question it, and perhaps in time, loath it; as the Israelites that bread
from heaven: there being generally too little agreement between the notions of
half-sighted natural reason, and delectations of our senses natural, and the
divine Revelations, and more spiritual prescriptions given us by Religion:
though natural reason not counterfeited nor corrupted by baser allayes of
vicious men, may pass also as Gods true coin. But that pure Gold it is not,
which the Holy Ghost counsels us to buy, Revel. 3, 18. that we may be rich,
and wherewith we may get white raiment, that we may be clothed; that the shame
of our nakedness do not appear; and get that eye salve, that we may see;
which is the word of God. For the knowledge or illumination which we have from
thence, and that which we have from the Holy Spirit, differ no otherwise than
that money a man carries about him, or that which the Tradesman has present in
his Bank, and that which he has in his Books, which must put him sometimes to
trouble to fetch in. The manner of which fetching in is by the Holy Spirit
also, opening the heart that we may, (as the Disciples going to Emaus, after
Christ's Resurrection) understand the Scriptures: until which time that will be
found too true which the Prophet Hosea, Cap. 8. 12. complains of in Gods
behalf, I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted
as a strange thing.

4. But if we should enquire faithfully into the grounds of such incredulity,
and prejudice against Religion; we may find them too often in the corrupt
manners of men, influencing the understanding with mistakes and gross errors:
which yet some to cover with show of greatest candor in judging, and
ingenuity, have wished they could believe the things Christianity requires of
them. But if reality and common integrity be not also laid aside here, how
easy a thing is it to reconcile them to the truth? For does not their own
prime reason, and of all civilized People tell them that nothing truly humane
is more natural to Man than to be of some Religion? And yet if they be men but
of indifferent reading and observation, they shall find that there is no
Religion, nor ever like to be, all whose Principles are obvious to all
competent understandings: And so consequently, that men, to avoid the
barbaritie of Atheism, must believe more than nature can compel them unto, by
her philosophical demonstrations; or fall into an absurdity little inferior
to Atheism, That every man should frame his own Religion, and be so far
religious as he thinks fit, and no farther; and which must necessarily follow,
call his freak, and humor, his reason and judgment. So that it is scarce so
true that a man cannot believe the mysteries of Religion, as that he will not:
and he will not, because he dares not, for fear of the worst. Or let it be that
he cannot, when St. Paul (if he be but so far believed) says of some, 2 Corinthians. 4. 4. The God of this world (who that is I suppose is well known) has
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ who is the image of God, should shine unto them: vain and
vicious men having by their presumed wit, and evil lives, tempted evil
Spirits themselves, and drawn them to be accessaries to their infatuations. For
as every good and perfect gift comes from above, from the Father of lights, as
St. James tells us, Chap. 1. 17. So does every notorious error and
wickedness proceed from the Prince of darkness, who rules in the Childeren
of Disobedience, they being called children of Disobedience in Scripture, who
obey not the Gospel, nor believe it reasonably propounded.

5. But it may seem strange and worth our wondering; How the same effect of
blindness of mind, should be ascribed to God; and also to the Devil, in
Scripture: as John 12. 4. speaking of God out of the Prophet Isaias, He has
blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, etc. This is in truth a
Scholasticall difficulty, which belongs to another place; to which I may
refer it: but here I would have it observed, that as Judges or Princes are
said to put Malefactors to death when they do it not themselves, but deliver
them over to the Executioner, whose office it is; so God, upon just
provocation, delivering great Sinners to the Devil, may be said to be a cause
of their hardness and blindness, when it is caused directly by Satan only,
and themselves. But the true light of Faith, and life of Grace does most
properly appertain to God: as it is said, 2 Corinthians. 4. 7. By grace ye are
saved through faith, it is the gift of God. The reason whereof is, That the
excellency of the power may be of God and not of us. And this key of knowledge,
which is also of the Kingdom of God did Christ deliver to his Apostles: by
virtue of which, God assisting, Lydia's heart was opened: as we read, Acts 16.
14. And so necessary is the assistance of God in this case, that he seems to
keep this key by his own side, and not at all times to lend it to his
Ministers; no not the Apostles. Nor did Christ himself, (who as God had the
command of men's minds) always succeed in his teaching and exhortation, but,
by I know not what deep providence, suffered his labors to be frustrated by
the incredulity of men. But this, we may say, falls out, by divine
dispensation, that God may be all in all, in the beginning, continuing, and
consummation of every good work: and to repel that spirit of presumption,
whereby too prosperous Laborers in Gods Harvest or Vineyard might be prone to
attribute much more to themselves, than comes to their share.

6. For this reason God sends such tempestuous and dark weather at Sea to the
skillful Navigatour, that he shall not be able readily to know or say where he
is, till the restored calm Light better informs him: And sends Shipwracks
sometimes to the subtle Merchant, that he may understand better who it is that
gives skill and strength to get Riches: And diappointeth the hopes of the
understanding and painful Husbandman. And as the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 44.
makes diviners mad, and turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolish, teaching them all, and us too, and that in all senses, more perfectly
that necessary lesson of humility, Deuteronomy 8. 18. Thou shall remember the
Lord thy God. For it is he that gives thee power to get wealth, etc. And as it
is with the riches of this world, it is with the riches of the world to come,
or being rich toward God, as the Scripture speaks, Luke 12. 21. For
undoubtedly, God may, and does apparently deny the ordinary means of
Salvation, sound knowledge, and holy faith in him, and of divine mysteries to
some. To others he grants to be initiated, and to have some knowledge of the
saving truth; who there stop and proceed no farther, as tender plants rising
out of the earth wither, and perish for want of the blessings of heaven falling
on them; without which they can proceed no farther toward perfection: and some
proceed farther, and promise fair, and for the same reason attain not to the
intended end.

7. But nothing of this nature can reasonably be taken into an Apology or
defense of the unprofitable servant, whom God has delivered such talents and
means unto, that in themselves tend unto such progressions and consummations
as are saving and beatificall. But admit thou art becalmed, and can make no
way, through want of divine aspirations and influence; How can thou? how
dare thou impute this cessation and oscitancie of thine, in not doing the
known Will of God, unto an unknown cause, or rather, a not cause of doing:
which whether it is so, as thou imaginest, or give out at least that thou
imaginest, when thy heart contradicts thy tongue, thou know not. For who
can say, that God denies him the inward power and means of Salvation; that is
of effectual Grace, to whom he gives the outward means of Illumination,
Faith, and Salvation? Whatsoever may be wanting in the abstruse counsel and
dispensations internal of God, and known to him, cannot be so known to a man
without divine Revelations. It is an uncharitable and rash act in any man,
directly to charge his Neighbor with denying him his due, or taking away his
goods from him, when he can prove nothing against him: and much more injust it
is and impious, for a man to say directly, that God denies him grace, or does
harden his heart, so that Rules, and exhortations and sufficient reasons of
becoming faithful, righteous, and holy before God and man, are of no effect
upon him.

8. It is not so much pardonable as commendable in all Good Christians, to be
sensible of their natural insufficiency and infirmity to do any good act,
St. Paul having taught us, 2 Corinthians. 3. v. 5. That we are not able to think
any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. But do not the
very next words, as well as the latter part of that argument, plainly tell us,
that God has a sufficiency for us, and God does make us able Ministers of his
Will? And does not St. James tell us, that every good and perfect gift comes
down from the Father of lights? James 1. 17. And does not our Savior Christ
direct us how we should fill our selves from that Fountain, when he says,
Matthew. 7. 11. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your Children,
how much more should your Father, which is in heaven, give you good things,
that ask him? And this good thing is the best and fullest of all good things,
being interpreted in St. Lukes Gospel, Chap. 11. 13. to be the Holy Spirit it
self, the fountain of all Grace, which he gives to them that ask him. The
Querie then must needs be made to our selves, whether, upon sense of our
infirmities and defects, we ever did, and that as we ought, invoke Almighty
God, implore the gift of his Spirit, and its concurrence: and whether we ever
submitted to its Dictates and directions, to that power God has given us. For
to do this, as well as believe that, we have an excellent president from the
wise Man; Wisdom 8. v. 21. Nevertheless I perceived I could no otherwise
obtain her (i. e. True Wisdom, comprehending all intellectual graces) except
God gave her me, (and that was a point of Wisdom also, to know whose gift she
was) I prayed unto the Lord, and besought him, and with my whole heart I said,
O God of my Fathers and Lord of mercy, etc. Which prayer for that illuminating
gift and Grace so necessary, might not very unfitly be transcribed hither, and
used by all true lovers of light rather than darkness; at least until the
Day Star shall arise in their hearts: according to which, true Believers may
shape their course more steadily toward Heaven; but I shun prolixnesse.

SECT. VI. Of the Gift and guidance of Gods Spirit toward true Illumination.
The abuse and true use of the same, and necessity of Believing.
1. BUT the use or act of the grace of Faith rests not here, but is
wonderfully assistant to the natural understanding in discerning the mind of
God revealed unto us in his Word. For as the discreet and diligent Master does
not only set his Scholar, whom he teaches to write, an exact and fair Copy
to imitate and follow, but also guides his hand in the making the Letters and
joining them together, according to their true shape and order; in like manner
does he, whose Chair is in heaven, teaching the hearts, as his Instruments and
Officers do the ears and eyes of men below, to understand, receive, believe
and act according to the Rule and scope prescribed. For man naturally is apt to
believe those things only which his Reason assures him of, but his reason (how
acute soever) cannot demonstrate the Scriptures to be the Word of God, which we
believe and must believe to be so, if we would be accounted good Christians:
And having the Scriptures in that esteem, we cannot, out of our promptitude and
acuteness of wit, discern clearly and readily many useful things therein
contained, without the direction of that great Author, the Blessed Spirit,
principal in the composing them. For it is truly said, The Scriptures must be
understood by the Spirit that indicted them. According therefore to the gifts
and grace given unto Me, do they understand the mysteries of Faith, Romans 12.
6. And to every man is given grace according to the measure of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 7. whereby that light revealed shines unto the true Believer, as out of a
dark place. So that Christ continues his wonted method to reveal such things
to the ignorant and Babes, which is commonly denied to the wise, noble and
Great ones in the world: until such time as the simple and unlearned shall
proceed so far as to forget whence themselves derive that understanding they
have; for then suddenly it degenerates into folly: and men priding themselves,
and transgressing the limits of modesty, humility, and subjection, to which
they are called, become insolent, and contumacious toward them that are over
them in the Lord. For scarce can it be imagined, that God, like the foolish
workman, should pull down with one hand, what he builds with another: or, as
the wise Man says, Ecclesiasticus 15. 20. give any man license to sin: which
he should do, if he allowed fruitful Hagar to contemn her Mistress Sarah,
not losing her dominion for want of what was given (and that by God himself)
to Hagar. And it is but too common to all presumers of gifts exempting
themselves from the ordinary method of Commander and Soldier, Leader and
Follower, Teacher and Scholar, what was mutinously uttered and murmuringly
against Moses by Mirian and Aaron, Has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses?
has he not also spoken by us? Numbers 12. 2. Revelations may be, and are given
unto men, but not to such as are the worse for them; nor to them through whom
the Church of God fares the worse. But most probably such egregious abilities
are given by the subtle and Evil Spirit, who, if men that are evil may give
Good gifts unto their Children as Christ implies, Matthew. 7. 11. may also do
the same to his Children: Children of pride of mind, and disobedience of life,
being of the same nature and complexion with himself.

2. S. Paul therefore says, 1 Cor. 12. 7. The Spirit (that is, the truly
divine) is given to every man to profit withal. And this profit is manifestly
the profiting of the whole body of the Church of Christ; the advancing of
that, and the thriving in Faith and Charity. So that whatever knowledge (as
singular and admirable as it may seem to short-sighted Christians, who cannot
see afar off) may be pretended prejudicial to the Body of Christ largely
taken, and to the glory of God in general, but swelling the minds of some
particular persons, is far from an edifying faith, or knowledge, whatever
specious effect may be offered to the world thereby, causing admiration.

3. But notwithstanding such frequent mistakes, scandalous to the prudent, as
insnaring to the simple, such a Faith there is, and such an inward Light many
times is given and added by God unto the natural perspicacity of man, that the
effect is wonderful upon the mind and life of the simple, above the Learned.
For the natural man believes because he knows; but the truly spiritual
knows because he believes: and his belief is directed by a superior power;
agreeably to that saying of the Ancient, supposed to be in the Prophet Isaiah:
Unless ye believe ye shall not understand. For seeing a promptitude and
preparedness in the mind to receive all impresses from him without
disputings, or suspicions of error, he will not suffer such honest and devout
simplicity to want his influence disposing thereunto: so that there should be
no room or ground left for the faith of God to stand on the wisdom of men, and
subtle ratiocinations of sophistical heads. For many are the Mysteries of
faith, not intelligible, and yet Credible divinely: which may be compared to
well composed and well performed Music; which, as the common observation
teaches us, is most sweet and pleasing in the next room; or at a competent
distance: and yet we see few can content themselves so, but must needs be
pressing, contrary to their own interest, into the company of them who make
it, and be viewing curiously, and perhaps touching the Instruments which yield
it, though they have no skill in them. But the honest and faithful spirit
persuaded of the necessity of things to be believed, and conscious of its own
infirmity in making out the intrigues of Religion, acquiesces with Humility
and Charity in the things propounded without endless discussions, which
render them less credible many times, and bring less satisfaction than
before. For the more a man argues, the more he may.

4. I have not a little wondered at the expression and comparison apt enough to
signify the virtue of an easy Faith, and the unhappiness of curious
enquirers into matters of Religion without faith. It was of one who had the
least measure of Christian faith of any of his age, as his works declare,
intending to give a new scheme or model of Philosophy and Religion both:
infinitely ambitious of applause and disciples: to whom he promised great
notions, and them more rational than former Ages, or any Country but England,
had been acquainted with; but with so foul failleur in his first principles
which he begged, and would with no patience suffer to be questioned, as scarce
any unlucky Sophister was subject to. And surely suspecting that what he taught
might be as coursely handled as he does Scripture, and the very Creeds of the
Church, i. e. with monstrous boldness, he would divert men from such attempts
by such a fine similitude as is very serviceable in other Cases: As it is with
him that is to take physical Pills, for the health of his body, if he takes
them into his mouth, and considering of them will needs chew them before he
swallows them, he will rather spit them out of his mouth, as vehemently
disagreeing to his palate, than use them to his health: In like manner he who
having delivered to him, by good and skillful instructers, the wholesome
principles of spiritual life and salvation, shall, as it were, grind and chew
them by his natural Reason to prove what manner of things they are, before he
will receive them by Faith, will perhaps never take them down, but cast them
out again, and with them more than them; the greatest part of all Religion,
which before he disliked not. If this comparison ever fitted any man, it did
the Author.

5. But Reason, as the Renowned Roman Lawyer of old told us, The greatest in
the world, is that which makes for Religion; and if men would but reflect upon
their ever doubting Wit, and whither it at length hurries them, they would
never trust it so far, nor give it so much rope and such loose reins as they
do. For, as is said, there being nothing more agreeable to Reason, than to
acknowledge a Deity; it more strongly follows, he should be worshipped: And
if a man should be free to take his choice amongst the great variety offering
it self to a man, methinks out of natural reason, he should prefer the
Christian Religion with all its circumstances and difficulties, before any
other in like manner considered and examined. And so I should think, if by
education having only common reason to guide him, he were indifferent, he
should choose that which was revealed of God, and as revealed, having first
imbibed that fundamental principle of Revelation made already by God, how he
would be worshipped, contained in the Scriptures; and those as infallible
Laws, but liable to fallible Interpreters and Judges: witness the palpable
errors they are overtaken with who cry down all men for fallible, themselves
tacitly excepted. By which sad experience appears the necessity of
consulting God the Author of his own Laws, confidence in his Goodness and
Grace, and an obsequious mind to be lead farther, and otherwise by him, than
natural reason can, or would manage us.

6. This credulousnesse was it which Primitive Christians, and especially the
Martyrs excelled in, and whereby they became invincible, and even invulnerable
in their Religion: and whatever the contemporary heathen objected against it;
and reproached them with as Barbarous, their own Religion (as mean as it was)
could never be carried on or subsist long without: as might be showed by
instances. Nay, the Christian Fathers of the Church retorted that reviling upon
themselves, in natural affairs and civil; as amongst many others, Arnobius
did in this manner. Tell me, do ye plow the ground, and fill it with variety
of Seeds, not believing that ye shall reap the fruits of your labors with
increase, at the return of the Season? Do not you join your selves in
Matrimony, believing your Consorts will be chaste and faithful to their
Covenants? Do you not endeavor procreation, hoping your Children will live, be
toward and obedient? Do ye not merchandise and sail into far Countries, hoping
ye shall escape the dangers of the Sea and Land, incident to Travailers, and
return with safety and booty to your own Country and Dwelling again? And do
ye not commit your bodies to the care of the Physician, when ye are sick,
believing that he can, and will relieve your Dolours? And ye war also against
your Enemies, presuming ye shall win the day. And do ye not worship your Gods
believing that they hear you and will answer you? Yea, and every School of
Philosophy has such as very readily believe the Master of the Sect, without
much arguing or contending. And why then should men so boggle at Christ and
Christianity, and so hardly digest them, because they can pick out many
difficulties in it, for which they can give, or perhaps understand no
sufficient reason, nor find easy resolutions?

7. But it was well replied to this last obstacle of Faith in natural
Rationalists by Saint Paul preaching to the Athenians, Acts 17. 29. For as much
then as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is
like unto gold, or silver, and stone graven by art and man's device. Nor indeed
ought we to think that God is like unto man or any thing made by God: so as to
bring down the notions of a Deity, and the manner of that he chooses to be
worshipped by, to agree with man's imagination. To whom will ye compare God, or
what likeness will ye compare to him, says the Prophet Isaiah? intimating
unto us, that as God in matter and form agrees not with any created being, so
neither in his will, acts, or outward operations is he to be measured by any
created Rule, or judged. But he is only Rule to himself, and us too, of
believing and doing; and none understanding God clearly and fully but himself;
the understanding which we have of him and his Will must be derived from
himself, according to that expression of the Psalmist, Psalm. 34. 5. They
looked unto him and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed. For as it
is in the same Book of Psalms, In thy light we shall see light. Moses was thus
enlightened in his face even to coruscation, when he beheld Gods face; and that
borrowed luster communicated it self unto standers by, and beholders. So
likewise God having discovered himself by his holy Word, by the eye of Faith
steadfastly beholding him we are illuminated also, more clearly, fully and
sublimely than by all the tedious lectures of the wise ones of this world,
wanting such assistances: as he that puts on Spectacles shall (if defective in
his sight) see more, and better, than any of the same imperfection, who shall
spend his whole life in reading over the learned Treatises of Optics, or Art
of Seeing. An experience of more than one or two, I could instance in,
I-suppose may teach us, that when the Soul is truly devoted to Religion,
which infinite surmises and suggestions would weaken and molest, they have
heartily wished they had known less, and believed more; or that God would
strengthen their faith, or weaken their reason; there being a kind of natural
petulancy in unsanctified reason, upon all turns, to give molestation to
Faith, till it be silenced with strong resolutions of firmly adhering to our
Christian Principles.

8. A man would think that much reading, and much learning, and profound
knowledge not only of humane stamp and order, but Divine, consisting in the
knowledge of the Scriptures and the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the snares of the world, and the deceivablenesse of sin, and the infirmities of
flesh and blood, and the several stratagems of the Devil, might secure a man
from the several temptations incident to our spiritual warfare. But all these
be the Gifts and blessings of God, and very useful to others as well as a man's
self, and so very desirable; yet very often it so falls out, that they least
of all suffice to encounter the assailants spiritual the owner meets with in
this world, but are profitable and serviceable to others inferior to him. So
that what we read, Ecclesiastes 1. 18. becomes verified, He that increases
knowledge increases sorrow: For as Great Emperourrs and Conquerours in this
world, increase their Enemies as they enlarge their Dominions: so that whilst
they content themselves with narrower Territories, they have fewer Adversaries,
than when they have extended their sphere to more, and remoter Countries: for
then the orb without them, and surrounding them, is also much more large, and
affordes more evil Neighbors ready at all times to infest them; so as a man
dilates his knowledge, he shall start more difficulties warring against his
faith, than those plain and honest Believers who in comparison of them, know
very little. And as hard, if not harder a matter it is for men of great
knowledge, to encounter all those objections which discover themselves to the
learned, as it is for the more ignorant to withstand temptations occurring to
him, fewer and weaker.

9. And in truth, neither the one nor the other suffices of himself to cast
down imaginations (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Corinthians. 10. 5.) and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, so as to bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. But God has ordained
certain special Intellectual gifts, whereby man is assisted in his course and
conflict in this world: which are usually termed the seven Intellectual Gifts,
illustrious in Christ in the first place, and derived unto his faithful
members from him the head; mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 11. such as
Quick understanding, Wisdom, Counsel, Might or Fortitude, Knowledge, and the
fear of the Lord: and if there be any others distinct from these, (into which
quarrel I will not now enter) surely they are the special gifts of God, given
unto man for his instruction, direction, guidance and assistance in the affairs
of his soul.

SECT. VII. Of Illumination reflexive, whereby a Christian soul comes to the
knowledge of its self, in its Spiritual state.
1. BY the Book of Nature a man attains to many rare and useful things, and
especially of God; and by common revelation in holy Scriptures may the
mysteries of God and Godliness be made known unto him: all which may be said
to be necessary and useful; but scarce otherwise than as they lead him to the
knowledge of himself and the state of his soul toward God; to which a
twofold Revelation is required. The first common to all Christians, declaring
the Doctrine of Faith and rules of holy Life, principles of well believing and
doing. But the second we are taught to be more necessary than the first; that
is, such a knowledge, or rather sense of a man's particular and inward man,
which tends to a censuring and condemning himself, or a peaceable and
comfortable persuasion of such a state of Grace and Gods favor as ends in
immortal Bliss.

2. And as our Savior Christ says, What will it profit a man to gain the
whole world and lose his own soul? So may we say, What will it profit a
Christian, to know the whole world and to be ignorant of his own soul? For to
know the Heavens themselves and their nature and number, and various motions,
is no heavenly knowledge. And to know God himself by extraordinary
speculations, is no Godly knowledge of it self; but the knowledge of a man's
self in the particular relations he has to God, and Christ the Son of God,
and Savior of the world, and of himself especially. For this knowledge, God
seems to reserve to himself, to be communicated at his pleasure. For as Christ
himself teaches us, Matthew. 11. 27. No man knows the Son but the Father, and
no man knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom soever the Son will
reveal him; it may no less truly be said, No man knows himself in his
Religious or Spiritual capacities, but he to whom God has revealed himself.
For this kind of knowledge a man is as averse to, as he is prone to natural
knowledge by industrious speculation. For who desires to find an hole, or spot
in his own Coat? Yea, who can patiently be told of any blemish in his Face,
that his Nose is too big, and that his Eyes are too little, or that his Face
is pimpled and high colored, or that his Mouth is too wide, or that one Leg is
shorter than another, or such like imperfections of nature or deformities? And
the mind and soul being more near unto us, and valued by us than our visible
parts, much more troubled are we, when any defect is in them noted. For as it
is observed that Nature has made all men handsome enough in their own opinion,
as to their outward person; so has it made all men wise enough, virtuous
enough, and holy enough: And though a current principle of Religion teaches
many men sometimes, and upon some occasions, in a manner to acknowledge their
weaknesses and imperfections, yet if another affirms the like things of them,
they are much molested and offended, conceiving some ill will, or spite to be
the cause of such censures. And men do naturally but jest with themselves to
others, when they undervalue themselves, in hopes and expectation that such as
hear them will take an occasion from thence to refute them by the return of
praises and commendations of their worth, for that very thing in which they
disparaged themselves, more than recompensing such defects.

3. Religion then, and that not in Books but written in the tables of the
Heart, and affecting rather than advising, can alone sufficiently imprint in a
man the knowledge of himself toward God: to which notwithstanding a good
preparation is made by Gods Word, until the Grace of God and Illumination
truly supernatural shall open more fully the eyes of the understanding, as
Saint Paul speaks, to a more perfect sense of a man's self, by the
consideration of these Five things, What we were not: What we were: What we
are: What we ought to be: and What we certainly shall be hereafter.

4. By what we were not, I mean, that once we were not at all: which Divine
Revelation has only infallibly taught us and determined, above the Philosophy
of some, and against the Philosophy of others: And once it was, that not so
much as in the loins of Nature man was to be found; as all we at present may be
said to have been in the loins of Adam, before we appeared in the world. For
Adam himself was no where amongst natural causes to be found, in the most
slender being of all, until God had produced him absolutely: nothing of it
self producing only nothing; and being worse than that vile lump of earth out
of which man was shaped; all these things concurring to humble man upon the
review of his base extraction by his Mothers side, and being no better by his
Fathers side, God Creator of all things, than other ugly and odious creatures
in his eye; but much the worse, as the mass of humane flesh being leavened
with the vain cogitations of the mind, and inordinate concupiscences and
affectations, corrupted himself above other creatures, and by that contagion
infecting him. With what great blushing and confusion then should we reflect
upon our frustrating Gods design and order, which being to be exemplarie in
virtue and obedience to God, unto other inferior Creatures, have rendered them
more vile and disorderly. And which is more lamentable, as it is most
shameful, in the state degencrate into which man is fallen by his free
frailty, for man to be more puffed up, and fancy to himself an Empire, even
while he is tyrannized over by the rebels of his own breast, this is that which
requires his severest examination and judicature of him; and not, as the common
manner is, with modester Christians, to shuffle up accounts between God and the
soul, (others taking little notice of one way or other, their past perfections
or present imperfections) and to confess we are all to blame, we have all
sinned, and are fallen short of the glory of God, and that we generally carry
about us a body full of spiritual infirmities, and subject to failings and
falls. But these things touch us not more particularly; or, that besides the
confused mass of sin acknowledged to dwell in us, we have some proper and
special passions, or addictions to sin, this we either cannot discern in our
selves, or through selfe-conceitednesse natural to all men, we will not
understand, until a Light from heaven (as it happened to St. Paul) though not
in that outward and miraculous manner, but by a certain tacit splendor and
illumination, all the recesses and dark corners of the soul are discovered,
and the foulness of them manifested in particular.

5. For as it happens to the poor Cottager, or simple careless Tenant; while
the Houswife is alone with her own plain company only, she sees little or
nothing amiss in her House, it is clean enough, as it seems to her self; and
all things are set in order, and place convenient enough to her liking; but it
chancing that she is surprised by some Great and delicate Person coming into
her habitation, or that her rich and fine Landlord comes into her House, then
presently she looks about her every way, then she sees nothing is clean
enough, handsome enough, or in place and order good enough; but complains how
she is taken like a Slut: So falls it out in Divine matters, and with the
careless and secure soul, while she looks only on her self, and compares her
self with her self, as St. Paul speaks; or perhaps with other of the same
rank with her self, she discerns very little amiss within her self; but
Christ our Lord, and the Holy Spirit the light of the mind and searcher of the
heart coming into it; then she begins to apprehend her own uncleanlinesse and
defects; then is she sensible of her disorders, foulness, and even Sluts
corners; and begins to lament her state, and confess her errors, and beg
pardon for her unfitness, and unsutablenesse to the Divine presence; A lively
instance whereof, holy Job may be in the Old Testament: and Peter in the New;
both eminent Saints. Job had discoursed freely and confidently of God and his
ways, and justified himself to a high degree before him. He asserted his own
innocence and cleanness before him, and men: Yea, God himself vindicated him
from the calumnies of Satan, saying, Job 1. 8. Have thou considered my servant
Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man,
and one that fears God and escheweth evil? But notwithstanding all this, God
drawing yet nearer to him in a discovery of himself, and Job to himself, we
find Jobs note changed to this, saying, Job 42. 5. I have heard of thee by the
hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, therefore I abhor my self
and repent in dust and ashes. And in like manner St. Peter; Christ manifesting
himself at the miraculous draught of Fish, cried out suddenly at the
apprehension of his own vileness and imperfections, Luke 5. 8. Depart from me,
O Lord, for I am a sinful man: not sustaining the presence of so holy a
Master, under the sense of his own unholinesse, then chiefly appearing to him.

5. And thus particularly informed and affected, the soul not only judges sin
in others to be sin, but in it self exceeding sinful: not only believes that
Anger, and Malice, and censuring, and slandering others, that unclean acts,
that light, wanton, and carnal thoughts are evil in others, but in it self;
that immodest words and gestures, unkind, sour, froward behavior and looks
do ill become others professing the Gospel, which sweetens sour blood and
carriage naturally, so far as may consist with sobriety and gravitie, but in
its self too; and disposes to a change of temper, knowing what St. Paul says,
Galat. 5. 22. That the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-sufferance, gentleness, faith, meekness, temperance: And that the Rule
of Justice given by Christ, Matthew. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye even so unto them, extends to the regulating of outward
looks and behavior, which should be no other toward others (distance of
Relations being observed as becomes) than we expect from others toward us.
And so in all other vices flesh and blood is subject to, even less observable,
the good man first condemns himself, being more quick-sighted in perceiving,
and severe in censuring himself than others.

6. And upon, and together with the sight and sense of a man's imperfections and
pravities, does the Day Star arising in the heart direct to the exercise of the
contrary Virtues both Moral and Evangelicall; and such a transformation by the
renewing of the mind, whereby, as the Apostle speaks, we may prove what is the
will of God: and that the will of God is our Sanctification, as it is said, 1
Thessal. 4. 3. And that Sanctification consists in a conformity to the Image
of his Son: wherein the illuminated mind may perceive all the lines or
Lineaments of the new man, and the form of true Godliness. So that as he that
copieth out an exquisite Picture, or he that draws to the life must have a
clear eye, and that eye must be constantly fixed on the Pattern before it, which
is to be followed; in like manner, in the spiritual Fashioning of the Soul to
the Grand Example Christ, a perpetual and strict eye must be had and fixed on
him; whereby it will appear, what of the natural stone is to be knocked or
pared off by mortification, what is to be done toward conformablenesse to the
Image of Christ.

7. And to this also conduces much what is mentioned farther concerning our
future state of happiness or misery hereafter, and the vanity and fallacies of
present enjoyments and possessions, which latter seem to an unenlightened eye,
great and corpulent, being in truth but shadows; as the former, to the eye of
the understanding opened, solid and weighty, and to be considered above all
things. For we dye but once naturally, and are not like the herb, or flower,
or plant which flourishes in its season, and in his season fades and dies,
with an aptness to return again to its former perfection, even to many such
vicissitudes: the tall Cedar, or fine Flower, in his own estimation, Man,
necessarily and naturally tending to decay and ruin, Dies once and where is
he? says Job, Chap. 14. and by no sent of waters buddeth again, or rises from
his cold bed of earth, till the heavens be no more: and arises by an Allmighty
power, but no more to return to his place and condition, to amend what he
before had done amiss, or so much as to repent fruitfully of what he formerly
offended in. How then does it concern every true Believer to be serious with
himself, and standing assured there is no Sabbath of pleasure here, suddenly
all our vain imaginations of sensible delights here, are surprised by the
shadows of our approaching death, overtaking, and extinguishing them: and that
being come, there is no redemption of our misspent days, no recovery of our
voluntary losses of the treasures of temperance, sobriety, chastity, modesty,
meekness, charity, good works, and devotion toward God. Can any that has his
senses (I say not, that wit which such inconsiderate worldlings too often, but
vainly vaunt of) run such a notorious hazard as this, in pursuit (as Children
of Butter flies) of the empty and perishing vanities, and fouling (even in
this life) their Fingers in catching these worldly pleasures.

8. And why should I add the consequences of such evil infatuations, and
choice, as is made here by such whom the God of this world has blinded? Does
not even Nature teach us, that there is a reward of Good and Evil? And do not
our senses or common observation teach us, that that reward is not precisely or
constantly dispensed in this life, but very often all things (as it is in
Ecclesiastes) befall all men alike; him that sacrifices, and him that
sacrifices not: which the Divine Wisdom has so ordered, that men might erect
their minds and direct their hearts to the state after Death, and stead fastly
believe and accurate remuneration both of good and evil; and that sevenfold,
to what men suffer or enjoy of all the labor or pleasure taken in this life,
in pursuit of Good and Evil. This our Christian Creeds would have us perfectly
settled in: This the Holy Scripture often inculcates unto true Believers: And
the Wise man says, Ecclesiasticus 7. 36. Whatsoever thou take in hand,
remember thy latter end and thou shall never do amiss: Know thy self and
present frailties, infirmities, and vain inclinations exposing thee to sin and
errors. Remember the great end thou were placed for in this world; Remember
the inevitable stroke of Death destroying this Body, and the inevitable
Resurrection restoring it again to never-dying joy or misery. Know and believe
these things, soundly and effectually, and thy self thoroughly, by a spiritual
Philosophy making thee wise to virtue and godliness here, and to salvation
hereafter.

To the attaining this Divine Knowledge of a man's self, some of the wiser and
soberer Philosophers, and much more, ancient and holy Fathers of the Church,
do often exhort others and exercise themselves, at the conclusion of the Day,
revolving in their minds, what they had done, and what they had not, the day
passed: and all this discerning themselves, and judging their actions
impartially, they might adjust the accounts between God and their own souls;
and as the Tradesman desirous to thrive, often turns over his Day book (as he
calls it) and his Debt-book, the better to understand whether he thrives or
runs behind-hand in the world, so every prudent and thrifty soul frequently
reflects on its self and actions; what he has laid out, and what he has
taken in to its advantage, or prejudice. If the good Emperor bewailed his hard
hap when he upon reflection upon what had passed one day, said, My Friends we
have lost a day: how much more reason of lamentation may inconsiderate and
dissolute Christians ruminating upon ill-spent time, say, My Friends we have
lost Eternity, we have lost our Souls, or at least forfeited them so far as
may not be regained without true and timely repentance, and renovation, neither
of which can be obtained without discerning our selves; nor that, without
search made into our selves, nor this without reflections made upon our selves,
nor this without Illumination, nor Illumination of this nature, without devout
imploration of the Father of Lights from whom comes every good and perfect
gift.

SECT. VIII. Of Revelations or Illuminations extraordinary by Spirits: and the
discerning of them: with the use of such Revelations.
1. BUT hitherto have we treated of such Light and Knowledge, which God, in the
ordinary course of his Covenant with Man, generally vouchsafes unto him: Now we
proceed briefly to consider the Extraordinary way of Illuminations; and (as
Saint Paul speaks, 2 Corin. 12. 1.) come to Visions and Revelations in the
Lord. For that such there have been, and such there may be, who ever believes
the Holy Scriptures, must not deny; and whoever will allow any credit to
Ecclesiastical Histories and Traditions, cannot deny. I know God has given
us a sufficient Rule revealed in his Word, and so sufficient that we ought not
importunately to seek for such extraordinary manifestations of himself; yet
has he not so far tied his own hands, as he has our luxuriant appetites after
knowledge, which transported our first Parents, and darkened, and degraded
them; but having distributed to every man according to the measure of his
Faith, he, of his undeserved, and unexpected liberality, casts into our
dimension, the overplus of immediate Illuminations. The gift of Prophecy
before Christ; and the frequent grant of Visions to the beloved and honored
Patriarchs before the Law of Moses, manifestly prove this beyond doubt or
exception. Of which reasons are endeavored to be rendered by the subtle and
learned, not belonging to this place. But as for Prophets and Seers, after the
Law given, they were not only the Life and vigor of the Law so delivered,
which otherwise might, and too often did lie languishing and neglected; but so
many special intimations of the mind of God to his people, which became a Law
likewise to their Posterities. And we, upon whom the ends of the world are
come, as the Scripture speaks, 1 Corinthians. 10. are entered into their labors
and Lights of Revelations; and that with the advantage and accessions of more
clear and plentiful Revelations than the world before had been acquainted
with. And with this Body of Divinity or Divine Revelations, we may safely, and
ought thankfully and modestly to acquiesce: not despising Prophecyings, as the
Apostle advises, consonant to that known Rule given us. And that these
material Revelations (as I may so call them) are not so full and manifest, as
to make all Illuminations superfluous and fruitless, even the precisest
admirers of Scriptures will grant; themselves laying special claim to
accessorie Revelations or Inspirations. And an eminent instance to this purpose
is given in the two Disciples travailing to Emaus, Luke 24. who understood the
Scriptures, we may suppose, as well as others, generally; and to help them
therein, had acted before their eyes, what was before prophesied of Christ, and
yet could they not understand nor believe the Scriptures, until Christ
expounded unto them all the Prophesies from Moses and downward, concerning
himself. And upon the same occasion of the other Disciple not believing,
Christ, ver. 45. is said to open their understanding that they might understand
the Scriptures: which gift of God (as has been touched before) will never
cease to be useful to the same ends. For the office and gift of the Spirit
shall never cease, until the Saints and Servants of God come to contemplation
of God face to face: and Christ has delivered up the Kingdom to the Father.

2. A great instance whereof, though perhaps a little digressive, we have in
one of the most fundamental Articles of our Faith, questioned by that wretch
Socinus and his followers, directed only by their private natural wits: Upon
the words of St. John's Gospel, Chap 1. v. 1. In the beginning was the word,
and the word was with God, and the word was God, we believe that God became
Man, and the second Person in the Trinity Incarnate. And some natural
Philosophers (as the famous Emilius the Platonist) by common understanding
discerned a Great Mystery of the Deity to be intended thereby; but that
unnatural Christian Socinus could not, or would not apprehend so much; the
reason whereof may be that given by Christ himself, John 9. 39. For judgment
am I come into the world, that they which see not might see, and they which see
might be made blind. They who have nothing to help themselves but mere
natural light, may sooner come to the light of Religion, industriously and
modestly using that one Talent delivered to them: but they who stand upon
terms with God, and refuse all other information besides natural reason,
shall fall by the folly of their presumptuous knowledge. This is the ordinary
fate of such persons puffed up with their fleshly mind.

3. So on the other extreme, diverse Christians having heard and read of
extraordinary Revelatious imparted by God; and looking upon the Light without,
the Scriptures, as a dark and dead letter, in comparison of extraordinary and
Inward Light, ambitiously aspire to that, and credulously flatter themselves,
not without ostentations outwardly, that they are privileged thereby, to their
ruin: answerably to the excessive curiosity of the Greatest of the Heathen
Philosophers, who having passed the bounds of vulgar capacities, were pricked
forward with immoderate study of such secrets of Nature, which they found they
could not attain to but by commerce with Spirits; and therefore, with many vain
and vile rites were tempted to combine with them in such pursuits of knowledge.
So that it is observed by Learned men, very few there were of them, who had not
his familiar to assist him. And I have often and much wondered with my self,
whence it should proceed, that evil and natural men should so easily and
readily obtain the conversation and assistance of evil Spirits; and good and
spiritual men, so rarely obtain without delusions, the cooperations of Good
Spirits, or Angels for their more perfect Illumination and directions. Yet at
length, I satisfied my self with such an account as this; not knowing how it
may satisfy others.

4. The ground of all Divine Presence I take to be Purity of heart and
affection, which is so rarely and hardly attained unto, as to make the soul
susceptible of such an Harbinger: and therefore no wonder that Gods Spirit
should estrange it self from such as are not purged according to the rate at
least of humane frailty, from their uncleanness of flesh and spirit: But
wicked spirits stand not so much upon such preparations and predispositions as
those; though, to conceal from men what their reason would teach them to loathe
them for, there constantly were used certain Ceremonies purgative, (as they
supposed,) disposing to pretended purity: as Poets have taught us. And even in
the Apothegmes of the Fathers in Olympius a devout Hermit; we read of a
certain Heathen Priest, who entering into the Cell of a Christian Monk, who
lived in great austerity and Devotion, demanded of him, whether God did not in
extraordinary manner reveal Mysteries to him; who answered, No. It Is strange,
replied he, that so it should not be with you taking such pains: whereas we
seeking our God so, find answers and see mysteries: therefore sure it must
needs be (said he) that your hearts are not clean before him: which the
Christians wondering to hear from him, confessed it to be so indeed. But did
that Heathen Priest persuade himself, that their hearts were cleaner than the
Christians? It may be so: but the truer reason was, that their god, (so free of
his Oracles and Revelations) was not so clean himself as the Holy Spirit by
whom Revelations are given unto men; and therefore might be more forward to
afford an impure heart his impure company. Their cleanness consisted in
carnal abstinences; such as they write that great Magician Apollonius Tyaneus
to have excelled in, and to have had communication of Spirits. But purity of
mind and unroyled and undisturbed Passions are that wherein such Christian
purity does consist, which disposes to, or at least goes before Inspirations
truly Divine, and spiritual Illuminations.

5. Another reason why evil Spirits are so officious to attend their
Confederates; and the Holy Spirit not so signally present with Holy Men, may
be, the purity of intention required to the Spirit of God, more than to
deluding Spirits. For no more or greater impediment needs there be to the
entrance of the miraculous Spirit of God, than a passionate thirst after
Revelations and Visions, which imply a mislead understanding, not rightly
judging wherein consists true Divinenesse; but supposing that Gifts proceeding
from unmortified curiosity, and tending to vain glory and elevation of a
man's, mind above others, render a man spiritual, which God, who scatters
the proud in the imagination of his heart, and exalts them of low degree,
Luke 2. 51, 52. most of all detesteth, and will not be accessarie to: but
rather delivers him over to Spirits answerable to his appetite and humor,
which shall deceive and abuse him. A famous instance whereof we have in this
Nation in the last age, of a man very Mathematically learned, and not wanting
in other Sciences: very retired in his Life, and exemplarie in his
conversation, with Devotion extraordinary toward God: but being ardently set
on Revelations, and seeking Oracles from Spirits, obtained his end so far as to
have Specter presented to him, through Glasses, and certain answers humouring
exactly his superstition and curiosity; so that he could not consider, that it
is without precedent Divine and of God, that female Spirits should appear as
sent from him; and that such theatricall gestures and speeches could not
consist with the Majesty of God, or the solemnity of his Angels sent by him:
so that the large Volume of such like Impostures remain to this day as a
monument of his infatuations, and a Rock to such as shall sail by such
Compasses. It is above an hundred years since this Delusion disturbed England,
and other parts of Europe too, especially Germany. But not many years are
passed since a more prodigious one of this kind was afforded us in Scotland,
by a phanaticall Major, almost Sainted by the vulgar Innovatours in Religion,
for his well-managed hypocrisy and stupendous gifts of Prayer extemporie; so
that no less than Simon Magus, he of a long time had bewitched that unhappie
people to an obduration in an inveterate Schism, and admiration of his
Illuminations; until his iniquity was found to be hateful, as it is Psalm
36. and such a discovery of his bestialities and damnable practices, as are not
to be uttered by chaste mouths, or heard by chaste ears.

6. These and such like specious pretenses to spiritual Illuminations ending
in such scandalous events, have put wise and grave Heads upon the Doctrine of
distinguishing of Spirits, as they inform or possess men: having so just
warrant as such sad experiments minister'd, and the precept of Saint John, 1
Epist. 4. ver. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the spirits
whether they be of God, because many false spirits are gone out into the world.
And to this end I hold it useful to distinguish three kinds of Illuminations:
the first merely Speculative, representing unto the mind fine and rare
objects, and heavenly Scenes of God himself, and Christ, and the Virgin Mary,
and Quires of Saints, and such like; not at all tending to edification of him
that has them, or of any others. This sort I should think to be generally vain
and illusive; as tending to nothing so much as the swelling of a man's mind up
with conceit of his being a favorite of Heaven. This that prudent holy Man
saw, mentioned in ancient Histories: When the Devil appearing to him with a
glorious retinue, representing Christ, and the good Angels attending him;
Saint Itor (for so was his name) demanded what all that meant? Answer was made,
by that Liar Lucifer, that he was Christ, whom he had so faithfully served, and
was come to refresh and comfort him with the manifestation of his presence in
that resplendent manner. Christ come to me, said he? I desire not to see Christ
on earth, but in Heaven: and him I there daily worship and enjoy; whereupon the
Devils Stratageme not succeeding, he with his Accomplices is said suddenly, and
with shame, to have vanished. The like does Gerson (Of the Trial of Spirits)
relate of another Holy Man, to whom none other, but the Devil appeared in the
form of Christ, telling him, that he was Christ: but he believing him not,
clapped both his hands before his eyes, and said, I will not see Christ here upon
earth! it suffices me that I shall one day see him in Heaven. And Sulpitius
Severus in the Life of Saint Martin tells us, that upon a time, an Apparition
very splendid being made to him, resembling Christ; he flatly denied to behold
it, saying, I will not see Christ any otherwise than as he appeared on earth,
crucified. From whence may be, it is, that modern Revelations and Visions
pretended of Christ and the Virgin Mary, are much framed after this Pattern,
yet often also otherwise, and with the same probability and use. It seems to me
therefore a very good argument of an evil Vision, when such are sent only to
be admired and star'd on. And when a strong desire in men, not otherwise evil,
to be partakers of strange sights and Revelations possesses them, it is
probable enough, that God may punish their carnal fondness of that nature,
with delivering them over to such delusions of Spirits, ready enough to do
their office of deceiving.

7. Secondly, From the matter of Revelations, judgment may be competently made
of the Revelation it self; whence it comes and what it is. For in our
Religion towards-God, we must always build upon some such firm and unshaken
foundations given us by Christ in his Revealed Word, whereby we are to try all
extraordinary Illuminations, or Visions, or Revelations. So that whatever
shakes or weakens those principles given us, must not be allowed to proceed
from God, but from our vain imaginations, or the subtle blandishments of the
Tempter. To deny Christ come in the flesh, was in Saint John's age a sign of
an Antichristian Spirit. To subvert the Doctrine of Christ, and the silencing
of Moses his Law; To abuse Christian Liberty, to an occasion of the flesh. To
break the bond of Unity and Christian Charity, by disowning and
contemptuously disobeying Governors for every frivolous matter, and such like,
was, in Saint Paul's days, looked on, and taught by him, to be inconsistent
with a Gospel Spirit, or sound Revelations, and such, that though an Angel
from Heaven should teach such contrariety to Christianity, he was to be
Anathematized. There must be therefore, as judicious Authors tell us, the like
form in all sound Revelations to us, as was found in Christ's, at the time of
his Transfiguration; there must be Moses and Elias joined with them: that is,
the Law and the Prophets, viz. the Word of God vouching them.

8. A Second sort therefore may be such Visions as are partly Speculative and
partly Practical, having indeed extraordinary Discoveries, but not resting
there, but tending to good or evil: by which, their good or evil natures may
be discerned. For as much as God cannot deny himself, as the Scripture
assures us: neither may he by Extraordinary intimations warrant us to do that
which ordinarily he forbids: so that they, as pretended Prophets, may be known
by their works, as Christ tells us. For though the Devil may do good
sometimes, (at least in appearance) yet God never does evil: neither (as Saint
James says) tempts he any man so to do. To Preach therefore against Truth;
to pray against Edification of the whole Body of the Church, with a seeming
advantage to some few; to Prophecy without Rule, order, or subjection, is to
bewray the bitter fountain from which such sweet waters flow. And though the
Devil may sometimes speak as well as foresee the truth, God cannot at any time
speak what is untrue. When therefore pretended Lights and Visions fail of their
due event and end, it is certain that that Light is from him that transformes
himself into an Angel of Light: but is not so in truth. And this was the
Character God himself gave unto his own People the Jews, to preserve them
from Impostures and delusions of false Prophets; and by which they were wont to
try and judge of Prophets, Deuter. 18, 22. When a Prophet speaks in the name
of the Lord, If the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing
which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously:
thou shall not be afraid of him. But in some cases the sign was to be judged
by the matter, and not the matter by the sign; viz. When the extraordinary
Revelation tended to the subversion of the fundamental points of Religion, as
is said before. For so we read, Deuter. 13. 1, 2. If there arise among you a
Prophet and a dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign or a Wonder: And the
sign or the Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us
go and serve other gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them,
Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, etc. So that we may see
from hence, that Visions leading to superstitions, do not so much commend
these, as these condemn them.

9. Again, as it is with Diamonds and other Jewels, generally of great value,
when they are scarce and rare, but being brought in heaps, and common, are
either counterfeit, or lose their wonted worth; so is it with Visions,
Raptures, and extraordinary Illuminations, where they are common and familiar,
they may lose their esteem and reputation, and be reduced to the Classis of
Diseases, and the sublimating of the understanding to strange apprehensions and
speeches incident to bodily inflammations, of which, notable instances and many
are extant in the reports of Physicians, as well as them who treat of
Possessions. And I can think little more reverently of the frequentation of
Visions and Revelations celebrated in the Lives of those three famous Women
published together, viz. Hildegardis, Elizabeth, Micthildis: which afford us
such instances by bushells, as it were; I will not instance in Jacobus de
Voragine his Golden Legend, nor Caesarius Heiberstachius, as I could, to the
great disadvantage of that Cause which was intended to be advanced thereby; as
such, at which the modester and graver of the Roman Communion need not any
other to put them upon blushing at; they do it of themselves. But when I read
in the Visions of Katharine of Sienna sainted, a perpetual story of God
himself appearing to her, and preaching in person to her, almost through the
whole book, (though I like the Sermon very well, and must needs acknowledge the
Documents delivered to be many of them very Divine and useful) I cannot assent
unto the Scene there given us. If these Revelations, (as we say of Phanaticall
and pretended Inspirations and gifts of Prayer in Public) were so Divine as
reputed and affirmed, why do they not become Canonical? Why are they not
equallized to the Holy Scriptures? But things are not come to that height,
thanks be to God, unless with them who glorying immodestly of a Light within
them, and the Word and Will and Wisdom of God given into them, contemn the
written Word; themselves, for this very reason, becoming suspected, convicted,
and detestable.

10. But those Visions which are so practical and gross as that they end, as
in their consummation, in the gratifying of our senses outward, and them the
grossest, overthrow, in my opinion, the spiritualnesse, and even the honesty of
Revelations, and notably shake the reputation of that Religion which
countenances them. If it were recorded only in an unapproved Author, what I
find in the Sermon of an eminent Preacher, Granatensis, Vol. 5. page 387.
concerning the same Katharine of Sienna, Granatens. Vol. 5. Conc. 3. in Cathar.
page 387.
it might have been less scandalous, to read of the great and frequent
familiarity between Christ and her, so that terms of wooing passed between
them for a long time, till at length, she was sensibly espoused to him: but
what were the consequences of that Wedding, I know not. This, to my
apprehension, is a true consequence of such Revelations, that it must be the
Devil rather than Christ that so appeared, and led away a silly Woman laden
with sin in the midst of her profession of Sanctity, or that these
Talemongers have shamefully belied that reputed Saint. And on the other side,
the like instances might be given of such who were so vehemently devoted to the
Virgin Mary as to win her love so far, as to condescend to suffer her breasts
to be handled by her Saints. A little more cleanly and credible is that story
in the Remains of Gregory Thaumaturgus Bishop of Neocaesarea, of an Exposition
of the Faith which he received from Saint John the Evangelist, by the means of
Mary the Mother of God. But the Romanists themselves are so modest (we thank
them) as not to hold it to be the same we now have under that name. And we are
so bold to tell them, that their Visions, Miracles and Revelations, so much
sometimes with the ignorant sort boasted of, have done them more discredit with
the wiser, than good, or honor.

11. And to these another note of true and false Illuminations and
Alluminations, (which I may call all outward Discoveries made to the senses)
may be that made by the observation of the Masters of such Learning: That in
the true and near approach of God and his Holy Spirit to the sense outward, or
mind inward, first great trouble, surprisement, consternation, and deep
humiliation are wrought upon the spirit of him the Lord vouchsafes so to honor
with his presence, as it appears by Ezechiell the Prophet, Daniell; and before
them, by Manoah: who were struck with dread and confusion at the Revelations
made unto them: as likewise was the Blessed Virgin, at the aspect and
Annunciation of the Angel Gabriell, but in the winding up and conclusion, they
were all refreshed and comforted abundantly. On the contrary, the specious
Pageantry and Insinuations of Evil Angels are begun with great delight of the
deluded mind; and in the conclusion, bring shame, sorrow, and confusion:
answerable indeed to the method of the tempter in all other Cases: in which the
good Wine is brought forth first; of which when men have well drunk, follows
the bad: but Christ first sets before his faithful servants, the bad, and
keeps the best to the last of all: that he might humble thee, and that he
might prove thee, to do thee Good at the latter end; as it is said, Deuteron,
8. ver. 16. Brisk, Pert, and vaunting are the gifted by Evil Spirits,
reflecting upon such their perfections above others; but modest, humble, and
grave are they who are indeed taught of God.

12. And thus having briefly prepared the true Christian with a prospect given
him of the nature, use, and necessity of true Spiritual Illuminations,
translating him out of the Kingdom of darkness into the mavelous light of
saving Knowledge and Faith, before due progress can be made to the life and
power of Faith in holy Conversation; and likewise showed the hazards of
miscarrying through mistaken Light; I proceed to the Second Part of Christian
walking with God, by walking according to that Light, consisting principally in
Spiritual Purgation or Sanctification.

A Prayer for Spiritual Illumination.
O Allmighty God and Heavenly Father, the Light and life of the world lying in
darkness: Who by thy Son Jesus Christ coming into the world, enlightenest
every one that comes into the world: and whom to know is eternal Life. But
who can know thee the Father but the Son and he to whom he shall reveal him?
and yet none can come unto the Son unless the Father draw him: and none does
the Father draw unto him but by his holy Spirit, teaching all things. Send
down, I beseech thee, that Spirit of light, life and truth into my mind and
heart, that they may preserve me, prevent, and inform me, and rule me: that by
that key of knowledge, the door of my heart may be opened, and the eyes of my
understanding to perceive the things of God, which are only spiritually
discerned; and that I may not love darkness rather than light, because my
deeds are evil. But grant that in thy light I may see Light, and know how to
choose the good and refuse the Evil; not calling darkness, light: nor light,
darkness; nor bitter, sweet; nor sweet bitter; nor good, evil; nor evil,
good. Various are the Mazes and Labyrinths of this World, and many are lost in
them, Difficult is the road, and strait is the way that leads unto truth,
and life, and few there be that find them. Dangerous it is to lean to mine own
understanding, or wisdom who am but of yesterday and know nothing as I ought
to know. To whom therefore should I betake my self for help and succor, but
to thee, O Lord, who alone can open the eyes of him that is borne blind; and
who art the Father of Lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift;
and give to all men liberally and upbraidest not. And how should we come unto
thee but through Jesus Christ, who is made unto us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption? In him therefore coming unto
thee, I pray thee to give me wisdom that sits by thy Throne; and reject me
not from thy Children. For I thy servant and son of thy handmaid, am a feeble
person and of short time, and too young and weak for the understanding of
judgment and thy Laws: O send her out of thy holy heavens: and from the
throne of thy glory: that being present she may labor with me that I may know
what is pleasing unto thee, and what is that good and acceptable will of God.
For hardly do we guess aright of the things that are upon earth, and with
labor do we find the things that are before us; but the things that are in
heaven who has searched out, but by thy Spirit which searches all things,
even the hidden things of God. I am a stranger and a Pilgrim upon earth, O hide
not thy Commandments from me, that so having a sound and saving knowledge of
thee and of my self and mine own ways, of my errors and my negligences, and
ignorances, of mine infirmities and emptinesses, and so diffident in, and
disliking my self, I may apply my self to thee, lay hold on thy strength,
partake of thy fulness and freeness, and have a sincere faith in thee, a
fervent love of thee, and holy life before thee: and professing thee outwardly
may believe thee inwardly, and serve thee in all good works, in all godly
conversation and honesty, and persevere therein through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The Second Part. OF THE PURGATIVE PART OF RELIGION.
SECT. 1. That Action and good Works must be added to true Knowledge, and
Believing. And of the distinction of Sins to be purged.
1. AS Light was at the first Creation produced by God, as an Introduction to
his Six-dayes works; so has he continued that light to all his Creatures, but
especially Man, the greatest Artist of all other, to the better discharge of
those Acts and Offices assigned him in the few days of his labor in this
World. And according to his gift in works of Nature, has he provided a
proportionable light of Understanding and Faith, to give him Means, Rule, and
Opportunity to work the work of God, and that especially, upon his own soul:
to the end it may draw near unto God both in likeness of perfection, and
fruition of blessedness. For the Image of God defaced by our Apostacy, having
contracted many and monstrous deformities, the great business we are to be
employed about, is, how to refashion our selves to that Grand Pattern, which
became visible to us by the Incarnation of Christ, the brightness of Gods
glory, and the express Image of his Father: So that as we see it is with
Statuaries, who are to make an accurate Image out of a rude and natural stone
taken out of the Quarrie, what light is necessary, what judgment, what
diligence, by little and little, to chip and hew away all irregular parts, and
roughness, till the intended form rises out of it; so must it be with every
good Christian, to whom God has given his Light to work by, and Instruments to
work with, and matter to work upon, his own soul; overgrown and misshapen and
wholly out of order and rule; as taken out of the common rock of Nature.

2. God therefore has set up his Holy Word amongst us, as the Greater Light to
rule the Day: according to whose Illumination we should direct and rule all our
actions: and not, contrary to our Saviors advice, put it under a Bed, or under
a Bushel, that is, not under the bed of slothfulness and laziness, nor under
the bushel of worldliness, and secular businesses, and traffickings; whereby
men are wont to make use of the Scripture the better to advance worldly
profits, as hypocrites do: or sweetly to flatter themselves that they know
much: as if the gifts of God to us, were service done to him, and he were so
well satisfied with the talents committed to our trust, that he would never
require any thing from us; or perhaps some lipp-service, whereby with religious
Discourse, we move others to think well of us, were to be good and faithful
servants to him, though we remained unfruitful: as if he that gives aim to
another should persuade himself, that he had hit the mark himself. But the
Holy Scriptures quite contradict this, and that often: as St. James, 1. 22. Not
the hearers of the Law are justified before God, but the doers: And St. Paul,
Romans 2. 13. speaking the same thing. Which we must not so understand as if the
Law of Moses were here only commended, but the Law of Christ; obedience to whom
is no less necessary to our justification and salvation; than the works of
Moses his Law were once necessary to him that would live by them. For this is
the Doctrine of Christ himself, Luke 12. 47. He that knows his Masters will
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And so where he says, John
8. 19. If ye had not known me, ye had had no sin. (comparatively) but now ye
say, We know, therefore your sin remains. For at the day of Judgment (as
Gerson observes) it shall not so much be demanded of us, how much we know, how
well skilled we are in the Scriptures, what notable Disputers and Arguers we
have been out of them: nor how many good Sermons we have heard, nor how many
Chapters we have read, or how often: but as the form of proceeding in that
Great Day contained in the Scriptures, assures us, Matt. 25. 34, 36, etc. what
good works we have done in the true faith we profess: and what good fruits
the tree of knowledge of Good and Evil has produced. And in our spiritual
warfare, it will not suffice to beat the Drum, or sound, as it were, the
Trumpet, to stir up others to fight that good fight appointed by Christ against
flesh and blood, and spiritual wickednesses: unless as St. Paul exhorts, we
quit our selves likemen in Christ's Camp.

3. Applying then our selves to so Divine and necessary a work; before we can
do what is required, we must judge what is amiss; and being now about to
purge our selves from filthiness of flesh and spirit, as St. Paul speaks, 2
Corin. 7. 1. we are first of all to be thoroughly persuaded of those spots, and
blemishes which are to be cleansed from the soul, and those scales which are
to be taken off our Eyes: and those infirmities and distempers our souls
naturally labor under. For we see not, if we lament not our rude, and polluted
natural state; our defects and deformities, and find the smart of our sores:
there is little probability we should be sollicitous so far about our selves,
as to seek for redress and remedy for the same; but having attained this,
that which follows in the mentioned words of the Apostle, viz. perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord, may happily succeed.

And this advantage by the same words is put into our hands toward so great
and good work, as to learn the general division of our sins and impurities to
be removed: and that some sins have the resemblance of a spiritual nature, and
others, of a fleshly: For according to the diverse constitution of Man
consisting of Soul and Body: whereby he partaketh both of the nature of
Spirits, and Beast, so are his inclinations; sometimes transporting him to the
excesses of Evil Spirits, and sometimes sinking him down toward brutish
lusts: but which are insinuated unto us by St. James, Chap. 3. 15. thus
writing, This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
devilish. Whereby we understand that some sins, and especially they of the
mind of man, are really devilish; as having the Devil as well for their
Author as Actour, viz. Envyings, Gloryings, Strife, Lying instanced in by St.
James, a little before; and some others of the like nature. And on the other
side, Hatred, Murders, Violences offered to others, Intemperance,
Incontinence, and slothfulness and such like, are such which senfuall
appetites dispose us unto and we have in common with beasts prone to them. Yet
to the shame of Man may it be spoken, beasts many times governed by their
senses being not so great offenders thereby as men directed to higher and
better things both by Reason, and Religion, or Faith. For in truth, there is a
fourfold restraint appointed by God for the keeping us within due compass of
living. First, our very Senses not made by evil customs more brutish than
naturally they are, do certify by a natural reluctancie, when we exced due
measure in the use of sensible pleasures. And a greater light, and check to
such exorbitances, does our Reason give us, not bribed by corruption to give
false reports and dictates. But the Light and Rules of Faith are yet more
clear, full, and perfect to direction and sanctification: but the life and
Crown of all is the Grace of God bringing the will of man into subjection, and
obedience. Most of which we shall here speak briefly to.

SECT. II. Of the Office and Power of Faith in purging the Soul from sinful
defilements.
1. FAith (as we have showed) is by descent, of heavenly extraction: It is the
gift of God, and not owing originally to the will or election of man: And it is
given as an Instrument to work the work of God: And this it does, well applied
and improved, by the Illumination already spoken of, and discoveries of Gods
Will, and our Duty in a clearer and fuller manner than otherwise we could
attain to. But this is not all; this is not the greatest or chiefest part of
its Power and virtue; but that which impells and enables us too, to do the
Will of God; For as Christ our Lord and Master says, He sent me into the world
to bear witness unto the truth, and that not by affirmation only, but by
exemplarie holiness consummated in dying for the truth; so should every good
Christian, by doing, and dying, if need be, testify to the truth.

2. And surely, great is the influence true and strong Faith has to that end:
according to St. John, 1 Ep. 5. 4. telling us, This is our victory, even our
faith: so termed, because it is the principal means whereby we become
Conquerors of Gods and our own Enemies: which St. Paul, 2 Cor. 10. 4. calls the
pulling down of strong holds, and of every thing that exalts it self against
God (as all sinful lusts do) and bringing it into the subjection of Christ.
For here is verified what Christ foretold in the Gospel, A man's enemies shall
be they of his own house: A militant Christian never being free from intestine
jars and warrings of the Law of his members against the Law of his mind and
faith. So that if we listen to any suggestions, or lean on any other aid, but
what our Faith furnishes us withal, we are liable to fail and fall in our
contentions. For as Christ said to the Father of the Demoniacall Son. Mark 9.
All things are possible to him that believes: So shall we see on the contrary,
all things are impossible to him that disbelieveth: it being said of Christ
himself, Mark 16. 5. He could do there (viz. in his own Country) no mighty
works, because of their unbelief: as if unbelief in man, had tied Gods hands,
and disabled him who is ever omnipotent, to act accordingly: though we must
understand the words of Scripture not absolutely, but according to the ordinary
course of Gods proceeding toward man; who must not expect that God will
obtrude his blessings upon him contemning him, as did these his Countrymen, who
astonished at the Wisdom and Doctrine of Christ, carped at his Relations and
Education, and meannesse of his Person and Parentage, believing, with prejudice
reproveable by their senses, that Christ could not do that they saw him do;
and therefore refused to bring forth to him their sick and impotent, so that he
could not do many mighty works there. And the case is the same in spiritual
mortifications, and cures of the distempered soul: To him that believes, all
things are possible, but unbelief makes possible things impossible; and easy
things, most difficult. For Faith not doing its office of declaring to the
ignorant mind, the nature of God, an implacable Enemy to sin; and the nature
of sin, an intolerable Enemy to God, man must needs be carried away by that
false natural light that he has, after those pleasing objects that seem,
rather than are good to him: And again; He whose faith is firm, is also
operative as well as intuitive, and so far influenced and excited by it, that
he cannot choose but he must act according to his judgment, persuasion, and
principle of life.

3. For what was that which moved Moses to forsake Egypt, and bid adieu to the
Courtly pleasures of it, and to suffer affliction with the people of God, and
to esteem the very reproach of Christ greater riches than the Treasures of
Egypt; but that, as the Scripture tells us, He, by his faith, saw him that was
invisible, and by his faith had respect unto the recompense of the reward. He
by faith both believed aright in God; and by the same, loved what appeared to
him most noble and desirable. Which held not good then only, but is of
perpetual truth, as is that of our Savior Christ also: According to thy
faith, so be it unto thee. So it is, and so it ever will be unto Christian
Souls. If a man believes truly but does not fully, his faith is impotent in
its hands and feet, and can profit very little to the main end of Faith. If a
man believes firmly, but not soundly nor truly, his faith (like to the
knowledge acquired by our first Parents upon the eating of the forbidden fruit)
brings him to shame and confusion of face. And of this sort are innumerable
mistakes, not to be here instanced in; that only excepted, which is of most
general evil consequence, whereby men are wont, and willing to divide and
rend faith from it self; I mean the Form or inward act of believing, from the
power and effect of Faith; persuading themselves that Faith alone so taken,
gives us Justification; and if so, it must needs give us Sanctification too.
For none are justified, but such as are thereunto prepared by a competent
degree of Sanctification. And so in truth at length, it will be found, that
whatever is pretended and more dangerously presumed, no man is more Justified
alone by Faith, than he is Sanctified by it alone: and the works of Faith are
in no place of holy Scripture, opposed to Faith it self, the cause of such
works, in reference to our Justification: And it is altogether as derogatory
to Christ's merits and the freeness of Gods Grace, to rest upon such Faith for
justification and salvation, as upon such works of Faith. But this I speak as
I pass.

4. However therefore the Authors of such Doctrine, or, at least, forms of
speaking, as have lately prevailed, disown the necessary ill consequences of
the same; and allow, yea urge much good works; and with many flourishes
commend the use of them, yet advancing immoderately and injudiciously the Act
of Faith, creeple it, and bind it up from the free course and full influence
it may, and otherwise would, have upon men's lives, to the purging of the Soul
from evil, and impregnating it to good works of virtue and holiness.

5. But leaving that Controversy, let us proceed to what is without
Controversy, showing, by plain instances what we have propounded concerning
the power of Faith in our militant state here. And let it be ingenuously
judged, how a man, by Faith thoroughly convinced of that one first Principle,
that there is a God, Creator of all things, Judge of all things, and of all
Men especially, and their hearts and actions, and infallibly rewarding the
good, and the evil, can easily omit the good so amply hereafter to be
remunerated; or rashly fall into the evil of Sin-tempting, standing by his
Christian Faith assured, that his temporary trifling, vanishing as soon as felt
pleasures, shall end infallibly in bitterness, and never-failing sorrows. Who
would sow that seed in his Field, which he might easily believe will rise up to
an harvest of Serpents, which will sting him to death? Or can a man steadfastly
believe that Article of his Creed teaching and assuring him, that Christ that
righteous Judge, shall appear a second time in glory and severe Justice
toward quick and dead; rendering to every man according to the good or evil
he has done in his body, viz. Life Everlasting, or shame and torment
everlasting, and not fear? or fear, and yet committ such things, as will weigh
him down into the place of such misery? What wise man would be tempted so with
the beauty and desireablenesse of drinking out of a Golden Cup, when he knows
it is filled with deadly Poison. Or would any man eat of that bread fair to the
Eye and perhaps pleasant to the palate, which he knows will suddenly after
breed gravel and stones in his reins and bladder, and infinitely torture him?
Certainly such a man's persuasion (which in Religion we call Faith) must needs
be very weak, and his fondness, strong, which can impose so hard things on
him, unrejected.

6. No more can any man have a sound and sufficient persuasion of the heavenly
Mansions and the unspeakable Glories thereof, yea the perfection and beauty of
Virtue, and Divinenesse of holy Life, and good Conscience, and neglect or
contemn the same for the fallacies, vicious practices put on the outward
senses, for a moment, or less, if less we can imagine. Is not this next to a
Miracle, if we may allow the Devil to be able to work Miracles, contrary to
the Doctrine of the Schools? For what way we call a Miracle, if not deluding
the senses, and so far changing the natures of things to man's eye and common
sense, that he shall call good evil, and evil, good: and have no other
opinion of Flames, into which he must be cast, than of a Feather bed.

7. To him that lives by Sense, the present sweet is most sweet, and the
present bitter most bitter: but to him that lives by Faith and not by Sense,
the future exceeds in both kinds: And, to a truly wise man knowing the worst of
troubles and hardships in this world, no more to be compared to the miseries
wicked men suffer hereafter, than the joys of sin in this life are to the
glory to be hereafter enjoyed in Heaven by the Righteous, it may seem most
reasonable to choose the least of Evils, and to run the least of hazards too:
as that poor, simple austere man vilely and coldly clad, and as ill fed, did;
with whom (as our own histories tell) a boisterous and soft Gallant meeting,
demanded of him, Why he used himself so hardly? and was answered by him, I do
this to escape Hellfire. But, said the Gallant again, If there be no Hell;
what a Fool art thou to use thy self so ill? But he more wittily and sharply
replied, But what if there be an Hell, how much more Fool art thou to live so
as thou do? Put the case to common Reason, (for true Faith is infallibly
assured of it) that it was a doubtful point, Whether there were an Hell or
not; a Heaven, or no Heaven; and the Scales weighing both sides were equal:
would not general Reason advise so to believe as to take the safest course,
and live that life which may lead to the supposed happiness, and escape the
threatened torments? What hurt befalls that man that lives continently,
temperately, modestly, justly, soberly, yea and selfedenyingly as to those
things which are not necessary; though no reward follows upon his rigours,
but the ordinary comforts of health and peace of mind which are greater to him
than the riotous liver and pleaser of his appetites and senses without
restraint? But what hurt does not befall him hereafter, who by indulging to his
sensible Soul, bereaves himself of everlasting happiness in the world to
come? that not being all neither, as our Religion truly informs us.

8. Let us therefore truly examine our selves, as St. Paul exhorts, whether
we be in the faith, and prove our selves, knowing of our own selves, that Jesus
Christ is in us, except we be reprobates? 2 Corin. 13. 5. Surely if Christ be
in us, it must be by Faith: and if Faith be in us, it will discover so much of
the events of an holy, and wicked life, as not to be like a Horse and Mule
which have no understanding, nor like such men who have lost their
understanding: but like to that Great Example set by Christ, for imitation
here, and salvation hereafter.

SECT. III. That in purifying our selves, principal care is to be taken of the
purity of our Faith; and of the affections of the Inward Man, not neglecting
outward severities.
1. FAith is not only by the Reformed very often, but sometimes by the
Unreformed also of great note, compared to, and called an Hand: But if this
hand of Faith be all on the taking side, and little on the giving, (both which
are properties equally of the spiritual hand) then is it very defective. For
the Philosopher termed the hand of the Body, the Organ of Organs, or
Instrument of all other Instruments useful to us; and such is Faith to our
spiritual life and actions, given us to work the work of God with. If
therefore it be only extended to receive Christ, and justification by him, to
the quietation of the sollicitous and troubled Conscience; and not to prepare
the way by diligent and dutiful actions, our faith being first unfaithful to
God, will in the end also prove treacherous to our own Souls. And that
Instrument which is blunt or ill framed in it self is very apt to mar the
work intended. Without a good Pen, a man, how expert soever, cannot make a good
letter; and much less write a fair hand. And not only an heretical Faith
subverting the true Faith, but an Orthodox and sound, yet barren, credulous,
presumptuous, unactive, impatient of both good and evil, fond, contumacious,
turbulent, or unnecessary querulous, and quarrelsome, being entertained and
rested on, draws nearer to perdition than salvation, how flattering soever it
may appear to the owner of it.

2. And on the other side, blind zeal, and violence rather than zeal going
about to reform the Soul with an unreformed or unsanctified Faith, do
oftentimes expose the Body and Soul to unprofitable and dangerous injuries:
perhaps upon a mistake of perfection commended to us in the Holy Gospel. For
instance; If a man should put out his own Eyes, lest they should, or because
they had misled him; or to the end he might become a better Philosopher, as
they write of some Philosophers, and it is said of Didymus the Alexandrian,
otherwise an holy Christian given to contemplation: or if a man should mutilate
himself because he would not be chosen a Bishop, of which Antiquity gives us
instances, or to prevent or to revenge acts of unlawful Lusts, should destroy
what Nature has ordained: or, in fine, should, having fallen into any great
and shameful sin, think to make propitiation for the same by laying violent
hands upon himself, all this must be imputed rather to want, than abundance of
Faith; and to impenitence accumulating sin unto sin, till the Soul sinks under
the weight, which by true Faith might have been removed or lightened.

2. The inordinate passions therefore of the mind are to be the task of every
good Christian; and the purging or chastizing of the irregular appetites; and
casting out of doors, and so purging the Temple of God, as Nehemiah did the
profane Stuff of Tobiah the Samaritan, out of the Chambers of the House of the
Lord polluted thereby. Several Inmates there are which either creep in for
entertainment, or perhaps plead prescription, which must be dislodged, or there
will in a short time, be found no room for the Master of the House himself to
reside in, or rule over the Soul. To wash the outside of the Bouls, Platters,
and Cups, is not amiss, for it is required of every man not only to be
religious but to appear so, lest he comes under the condemnation of those who
are ashamed of Christ, his Doctrine, and holy Discipline; but to content our
selves with that pittance of performance, is to rank our selves with the
Pharisees and Hypocrites condemned by Christ. Oh that there were such an heart
in them, was the wish of God himself, to his peculiar people the Israelites;
Deuteron. 5. 19. when they promised fair, and spoke well concerning obedience,
which God requires. But not the obedience of the tongue, which without the
heart ends only in aerie Complements absurdly used toward men, and ridiculously
toward God, when the heart is far from him. And far is that heart, (and must
needs be so) from God, which is unclean: and unclean it must needs be, which
entertains such a Rabble of lusts; which, like drunken Companions in Taverns or
Alehouses, quarrel notoriously one with another: but agree to foul the Room
with their Pipes, Pots, Glasses, Liquor, and perhaps with their own vomit and
other evacuations. The sober man seeing this disorder and hearing such noise
and havoc, says, I would not be bound to dwell there, if I might have never
so much. And can we think that Gods pure and piercing Eye beholding such
distempers of the Spirit, and disorders which the lusts of the flesh make in
the Soul, and the uncleanness contracted thereby, can, or will condescend to
take up his habitation there? Into a malicious Soul wisdom shall not enter;
nor dwell in the body which is subject to sin, Wisdom 1. 4. For all sin
consists of two things contrary to Wisdom, and to God the Fountain of
Wisdom, Folly and Foulness; which cannot consist with the Spirit of
Holiness, and the true Wisdom which comes from above, and is first pure, and
then peaceable, etc.

3. If it were therefore only because God so frequently, so earnestly, so
pressingly requires inward Purity; Purity of intention and understanding,
which qualify exceedingly actions otherwise irregular, and faulty; Purity of
affections freed from smuttie delectations, and clear and sincere and fixed and
fervent toward the best Objects, and that upon the best Grounds and Motives,
Gods service and honor; who well advised would not apply himself to so noble,
and necessary a task as the searching and trying his heart, and casting out
thence whatever may cor^upt the rest of his exterior services, and offend the
eyes of his heavenly Father, though not scandalous to man.

4. And this may be another Motive to interior holiness; the powerful
influence, the inward temper and disposition of the mind has upon all
exterior actions, whether good or evil. For according to the Regencie of the
mind, is the obedience of the outward man; as our most wife and holy Master
Christ informs us, saying, Mark 7. 21. From within, out of the heart of men,
proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy,
pride, foolishness. All these evil things come from within, and defile the
man. All sin defiles, but principally, and in the first place, the inward man;
and thence as from a bitter or corrupt Fountainhead, unsound and impure
actions do flow. Or as we see in Clocks and Watches, the Hand outward pointing
to the hour, goes true or false according to the Spring, and inward frame of
them: so our external practices are right, just, and holy: or, on the
contrary, false and depraved, according to the corrupt or sound principles of
Reason and Faith, and the sober affections of the heart purified by Faith. For
until the Spirit of Sanctification, and mortification and renovation has
wrought our corrupt nature to a blessed and through change, little may be
expected from us outwardly, either acceptable to God, who looks more upon the
manner and form of the Deed, than the Deed it self; or profitable to our
selves. For, (to continue a little farther our similitude) as we see men having
bad Watches, will with their Finger or Thumb place the Hand aright to give some
credit to them which presently, according to their ill frame, return to their
wonted error. So Hypocrites, to appear fair and good to men, push themselves
on sometimes to regular and laudable acts, and sometimes restrain and set back
their rank course of sin, for some imperfect, if not evil end, but soon
relapse to their accustomed excesses, for want of the principle of holiness,
and a constitution heavenly inclined, the only true Spring of good and laudable
actions.

5. Again, The inward man may well be compared to the Marketplace of a strong
City; The Enemy may surprise, or by some sudden violence, may possess
himself of the out-workes, and yet be repelled again, and the City stand
firm and safe, and faithful to its Sovereign; but if the Enemy once
possesses himself of the Marketplace, there is no hopes of standing true to
the Owner, or withstanding the Adversary. So is it with them who have suffered
the Legions of foul Spirits to enter into their hearts, and there to nestle and
triumph. All attempts are but feeble and insufficient to exhibit just and
reasonable service to God. For no sooner do some good inclinations arise, no
sooner do we offer at good, but a party of vain thoughts, dishonest motions,
are sent forth to suppress all good but weak purposes of returning to our
allegiance to God, and the doing of his Will. Great circumspection therefore
must be used, strong resolutions must be taken, and many difficulties of
hunger, thirst, and hot service must first be passed through, before our
Redemption draws nigh, and we be restored to the Masterie of our selves, and
the ministry we owe to God.

6. But add hereunto, fourthly, a more intrinsic argument to the stirring us
up to the cleansing our hearts; the great benefit redounding to a man's self,
who shall so acquitt himself. For however this conflict with the powers of
flesh and blood, and this Conquest is very difficult and tedious, and therefore
is called in Scripture, Mortification and crucifying the Old man with the
affections and lusts; yet the work once done, and the victory obtained, brings
wonderful ease, quiet, satisfaction, and cheerfulness unto the Spirit,
rendering it much more expedite and lightsome than it was before, struggling
against a contrary Principle, which evermore clogged it, obstructed, and
either wholly impeded, or grievously retarded the performance of Divine
Services. For men being scarce able to extinguish the clear notice of a Deity
in them, and little less able to deny wholly such a service as is due to God,
do with an unwilling will, diverse times, submit to Religious acts: but
wearisome and tedious are they to them, through the prevalencie of unsubdued
lusts; which by this necessary Discipline being mastered and expelled, a great
change is made in the Soul; and then, with lightness and readiness, is that
done which before was irksome and grievous. As David himself found it in
himself, when he said, Psalm. 119. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandments,
when thou have set my heart at liberty. And then are our hearts at liberty,
when the Bondservant Hagar, with her offspring, which would domineer, are cast
out. Then are we free indeed, when the Son shall make us free; then does the
Son make us free, when he delivers us fo far, as St. Peter speaks, 2 Epist. 1.
4. as by a Divine nature given unto us, we escape the corruption that is in the
world, through lust. Then shall we not fear the Law of the Land constraining us
to Gods service, more than God; then shall we not shrink and murmr at
Fasting-dayes, nor repine when, on days of public Thanksgiving to him that
is glorious in all his Saints, it is expected we should suspend and intermitt
our lawful labors, and wholly cut off and deny our unlawful pleasures. We
shall not need then, as Beasts under the Leviticall Law, one, or more to drive
us to the House of God, nor drag us with violence to the Altar of God, to offer
an holy, living and acceptable sacrifice to him, which is our reasonable
service: But with David's Spirit, we shall say, I was glad when they said unto
me, Let us go up unto the House of the Lord. And how much better is it, we
should do a thing with Alacrity and great content, than with constraint? But
this we may do, if we can but free our selves from that load of corruption we
are apt to lie under. And what effect in this kind and progress a man has
made in himself, may be competently discerned from the sense a man has in
himself, of the fear of God, and love to his service and worship: which though
the most pure and perfect in this life, is not without some tepiditie of spirit
sometimes; yet the seed of God sown in the heart will generally spring up with
gladness.

7. This therefore should be our great and chief endeavor which is the
Counsel of Solomon, Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of
it are the issues of life. And if, as Solomon says, Prove. Chap. 18. 21. Death
and life are in the power of the tongue, much more true is it, that both of
them are in the power of the Heart; as it stands affected or disaffected to
God: seeing the Poison or Balsome which distilleth from the Tongue is
originally owing to the Heart: as the Heart does comprehensively signify the
entire body of affections, which must be dedicated to God. But given to God it
cannot be,, without a mock or derision, but as it is whole and sound; clear,
and clean, according to the balance of the Sanctuary of the Gospel, which
consists much of Christian Equity. We never heard of any that lived a life of
nature with half an heart only; neither of any that was sick on one side of
his heart, and well on the other: no more is it possible to please God with one
part of our heart, and to please the world with the other; or at the same time,
to live the life of this sinful world, and of Christ: My son (says God) give
me thy heart; and not a piece of it: for that must needs be dead flesh, odious
to man, and much more to God.

SECT. IV. Of the proper Means and Method of cleansing the Soul: and first of
Baptism.
1. SUCH is the contagion of sin naturally infecting the very Soul, as
inheriting our Forefathers corruption, that being in love with it, (as all men
love that which is natural to them) there is but small hopes a man should be
able, or so much as willing, to help himself out of that evil state. The
wisest Physicians admit of Counsel and assistance from others, when they are
in any languishing condition: And some Sores or Wounds there may be of the
Body, which a man's one hand cannot come at to dress or cleanse; and therefore
needs the applications of others: And this is the case of the corrupted Soul
by Nature. This is thy wickedness (says the Prophet Jeremie Cap. 4. 18.)
because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart: It is every man's
case, Thou have destroyed thy self, but of me is thine help. God must, and
does prepare us to a new life, and salvation, by his own Counsel and Hand: and
a Laver of Regeneration, a Sacrament of Baptism has he ordained to the
cleansing of our original defilement, and purging our inward man, which no
outward ministry, not ennobled with Divine Virtue, can reach or remedy. This
was prophesied and promised by God in Ezekiel, Chap. 13. 1. In that day there
shall be a Fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness: And this we, to our wonderful
satisfaction and comfort, find accomplished in the pure water of Baptism: the
force and effect whereof we are well taught by our English Catechism, which
says: Being by nature borne in sin and the Children of wrath, we are hereby
made the Children of Grace. And Children of Grace we are not made, but by such
purification which proceeds from the blood of Christ shed for the expiation
of our filthiness, and offenses. And the Blood of Christ is no otherwise
effectual to our cleansing, than as applied by that which represents it,
Baptism: So that the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 6. 10, 11. having described the
lamentable and foul state of the natural man in Fornication, Idolatry,
Adultery, Effeminatenesse, abusings of Mankind, Thefts, Covetousness,
Drunkenesse, Extortions, whereof whoever is guilty, shall not enter (that spot
and guilt remaining) into the Kingdom of Heaven, adds, to our humiliation and
comfort at the same time. And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified, by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God; which plainly directs us to Baptism, Washing and
Sanctifying from all uncleanness of Nature. And therefore none were ever
admitted into the number of Christ's flock or holy Fold, the Church, but such as
were so sanctified: contrary to the frequent errors of the Modern Divinity,
which denies the power of spiritual mundification, to Baptism, and of
pardoning sins: restraining its virtue to significations only of remission of
sins, by Christ; and the Incorporation of us into the Church, which is the Body
of Christ. Which Doctrine, as very new and contrary to the faith of the Ancient
Church, and so many clear and express places of Scripture, ascribing a power
of cleansing and pardoning unto that Sacrament, I wonder how men of Learning
and Conscience could readily maintain: And that is all I shall at present say
against that Dogme; avoiding here all contentions, and pursuing the plain
trueths useful for our edification.

2. And this leads us to another effect of Baptism upon the Soul, which
concerns actual transgressions; as well as original sin removed thereby. For
not only is that sin actual and original which we bear about us, purged away
at the time of Baptism, but by virtue of the Covenant God makes with us then,
we are in a capacity to purge our selves (Gods grace always supposed as
concurring with us) and to obtain remission of sins, and reconciliation to
Allmighty God, by repentance, whose efficacy to that purpose, depends
absolutely on preceding Baptism; so that Repentance inward attended by change
of heart, and life, can ordinarily be of no power to reconcile us to God, but
as we are before baptized into Christ: whatever God may do by his
extraordinary and unrevealed Will, not to be relied upon, without adding sin
unto sin, and that of presumption, tending to a new provocation.

3. And the manner of so expiating sin committed after Baptism, is yet farther
improved from the Sinners serious reflection upon the solemn Vow made in
Baptism, between God and himself, of forsaking the World, Flesh, and Devil,
and all sinfulness occasioned by them. For what ingenuous Christian calling to
mind what God has in that Holy Sacrament done for him, or what he has vowed
to God, but will farther bethink himself how to demean himself agreeable to
such Covenants; and consequently apply himself to those Duties incumbent upon
him? And to this St. Paul would argue us, Galat. 3. from the established
Custom among men, saying, Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it
be but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth or adds
thereto. According to the general Law of Nations, it is base, and dishonest,
and very dangerous, to break the Agreement made, or to invent, and forge new
terms, never condescended to by the other Party. And how can we think but God
should make good what he threatens his own people, viz. Avenge the quarrel of
his Covenant, Levit. 26. 25. So that God having thus freely premised his pardon
of our sins, and washed us with pure water, and moreover, furnished us with
such a Fund of Grace, then given us; and following us with actual Graces
superadded to the general, what should more prevail upon us than to improve
them all as well to the clearing us from our former evils, as resisting the
manifold temptations occurring in our Christian warfare? For by Baptism and
the Vow made therein, has God put a word into our Mouths of truth and
holiness, whereby we may confound sin and Satan: he has put a Sword into our
hands, wherewith we may strike through the Loins of the Old Man: he has made
us more than Conquerours; and more than clean, in that, Naaman-like, a Miracle
is wrought upon us by the true Jordan-streams, in renewing our leprous and
foul flesh, to its pristine purity: and granting unto us that we may so
preserve our selves when we happen to fall into the mire of sin; by virtue of
an efficacious Repentance, made so by Baptism: of which in the next place we
are briefly to speak.

SECT. V. Of the Grace and Power of Repentance in Cleansing the Soul.
1. O Divine! O Blessed Repentance! How like our Blessed Savior, art thou
despised indeed, and rejected of men, a Lady of sorrows, and acquainted with
griefs? How do we despise thee, as one of no beauty, that we should desire
thee? Isaiah 53. How beautiful art thou in the Eyes of God? How powerful in
the presence of God? For as God sees not as man sees; so loves he not as man
loves. With vain man, that person is lovely and enamourring which has a well
featured face, a fresh look, a ruddie Complexion, bright and sprightly Eyes,
and such like ornaments of Nature; which if they be not accurate enough,
recourse is had commonly to Artifices imitating and excelling Nature. But with
God lovely are the Eyes swelled with weeping: the moistened and blurred Face,
the drooping Head, neglected Attire, pale Countenance, and dejected, not daring
so much as to lift it self up to Heaven, sackclothes on the Body, instead of
Silks and gorgeous Apparel; and ashes on the Head, and halfe-formed language
directed to God, through confusion of mind and oppression of spirits under the
sense of sin and offenses committed against God. This is the thing God is most
in love with; this is the Image, methinks, I could worship above any other
representation; and by mediation of which, I should hope to have greater
acceptance with God than by the intercession of the most eminent and renowned
Saint in Heaven. For if Saints can help and befriend us seeking to them, they
cannot prevail for us before God, but as we repent: but certainly Repentance
may prevail with God without them. Though thou wash thee with nitre ( Jerem. 2.
22, 23.) and take much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says
the Lord. How can thou say, I am not polluted? But, Take to you words [of
Repentance] and turn to the Lord: say unto him, take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously, etc. and you shall be saved from your sins. Offer to God
all the Beasts of the Field, and the Sheep upon a thousand Hills; yea take the
fruit of thy Body and offer it and them all, as a sacrifice of expiation to
Almighty God for the sin of your Soul, and it shall not be received: but the
sacrifice of a broken spirit, and contrite heart, O Lord, thou will not
despise. And what should I mention, in this case, the treasures of Princes, of
no account with God in comparison of Repentance to find favor before him, or
to cleanse us?

2. Who is there then that should be afraid of Repentance, which removes all
consternations and fears? Who is there that should be ashamed of the
deformities of Repentance, so beautiful in the eyes of God? or the baseness
of it, so exalted and honored by God? It Is true, At first she will walk with
him by crooked ways ( Ecclesiasticus 4.) and bring fear and dread upon him,
and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his soul, and try
him by her laws: then will she return the strait way unto him, and comfort
him, and show him her secrets. For what can be more easy, or equal, or
comfortable than what St. John says, 1 Ep. 1. 8, 9. If we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: But if we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness?

3. But all this while (though the danger be not so common or great as the
contrary, undervaluing and neglecting Repentance) caution is here to be used,
while we thus applaud and magnify Repentance and the power of it, lest we
ascribe too much unto it. For here may Repentance curing the distempers and
purifying the pollutions of the Soul, say with the Apostle Saint Peter, Acts
3. healing the impotent man, Not by our own power or holiness have we made
this man to walk: But by the power and institvtion of God, is the great cure
wrought by it upon the Souls of the penitent. For what is Repentance of it
self? Even as vile and contemptible a thing as it appears to be; as course and
uncomely, as unhappie and unfortunate, and unprofitable to such great ends, as
it seems. What can a melancholy look contribute to the clearing Gods
countenance toward a Sinner? Or what can a wounded heart conduce to the
healing of the diseases of the Soul? What satisfaction for the wrong done to
God, can wringing of hands, beating the Breast, sackcloth and ashes, severe
Penances, liberal Alms, (very commendable in such cases) avail to recompense
the injuries done to God, our Neigbbour, or our own Souls? How is it possible
these things should restore innocence to the Person, or integrity and purity?
No surely. But God seeing man plunged into debt with him, in ten thousand
Talents, and having nothing to pay, so condescendeth to the necessities and
extremities of his miserable and forlorn Creatures, as to raise up one Mighty
to save, poor in Spirit, and rich in Mercies and Merits, which he extended to
the relief of us lying under guilt and Gods heavy displeasure: but yet not so
absolutely and inconditionately, but we should concur by our endeavors to
put efficacy actually into the general means ordained by God to our
restoration and reconciliation: amongst which none is more prevalent with the
Father of Free Grace and Mercies, than Repentance, and that quickened and
enlivened by such adjuncts and fruits mentioned. For who shall except against
God, if he pleases that so many Ciphers of our penitent actions and
humiliations, shall stand for round Numbers tending toward the payment of our
debts? Baptism by natural water is but a poor and beggarly Element of it
self, to wash away original Sin: but God may, and has elevated it to a noble
and Divine Effect. So the baptism of Repentance is altogether insufficient to
such high Ends as washing the Soul, but by Gods Institution, it becomes
thereunto effectual, to a miracle.

4. Whatever therefore may be pretended of free Grace on Gods part, and feared
of superstition, on man's part, in disciplining the Soul by outward
austerities, such as afflicting the body to bring i^ under subjection to the
mind, and rebating fleshly concupiscences and motions toward Sin; Watchings,
Fastings, Confessions to God and man, Prayers, forgiving others that have
offended us, Alms and such like Christian acts and exercises, as inconsistent
with Christ's full satisfaction upon the Cross, it is more inconsistent with
the Goodness and Grace of God to oppose these: and may in like manner tend to
the abolition of that small pretense to Repentance, and Prayers, yea Faith it
self remaining with such selfe-securing Scruplers. The power indeed of Faith
and Repentance is in a manner infinite, through Gods Power and Grace
influencing them: but God works rather by his own prescription, than according
to our imagination, and fond Faith, naked of such a proper retinue as is
mentioned. It is abundantly sufficient to all ingenuous minds, and thoroughly
repenting, that God will admit them to the benefit of Repentance, upon the use
of it in deepest manner, and with all its circumstances: and therefore for men
to speak evil of that way; and to study for excuses from severer practices,
and to declaim against them as derogatorie to Christ's merits, may provoke God
to deny that grace of acceptance, which in many cases, he grants unto
Penitents. For God has wisely and justly hid from every man's Eyes the precise
and particular terms of our reconciliation with him: neither has he declared
precisely all the qualities and circumstances of that humiliation upon which he
will acquitt and absolve us. But God undoubtedly does remitt offenses to some
men's repentance, which he will not do to another, by reason of the variety
of the circumstances of the persons. As for instance, If a man heinously
offending God, and having knowledge, opportunity, means and special motives to
exercise and demonstrate the same, shall speak lightly of that way, and with
presumption rather than Faith, securely lay all the duty on some inward
trouble of mind, I may justly fear such a man's repentance will fail him, and
frustrate his expectation: though, in some cases and of some persons, it may be
accepted. No greater evil surely to Gods grace, and man's well-grounded faith
is there, than to have recourse to what God can do, and what Christ has done;
and so therein to rest, as wilfully to forbear what they themselves ought to
do. And men ought to do what in them ordinarily lies, to the recovery of
their fall, and standing right in the Court and favor of God, neither
attributing too much to such outward works wrought; nor too confidently laying
claim to the freeness and amplitude of Gods favor, unqualified wholly for the
same.

5. Two eminent Examples Ancient stories afford us, for the better regulating
our belief and actions in this Case. The one is of Father Paemen in the
Apothegmes of the Fathers: To whom one coming, and confessing a great sin,
whereinto he had lately fallen, humbled himself before him, assuring him, that
for so doing, he would do Penance for three years. No (said the old Father,)
it is too much. A year then, said the other: It is too much, said he. Forty
days, said the offender; It is too much, I tell you (said Paemen) three days
Penance, not committing the same sin again (the sin was Fornication) may
suffice. No doubt but this resolution was sound and good: because of a fervent
and strong determination of taking upon himself a more difficult task and
heavy burden, through deep sense of his wickedness, which God principally
regards. But should any man set such like sin at so low a rate as to contemn
much outward trouble; and say within himself, that true Repentance is to be
sorry at large, and not to committ the same sin again; I doubt whether such
selfe-absolution, upon such easy terms, would be accepted by God. For those
who probably have not fallen into such scandalous sins, but devoted themselves
more entirely and intimately to the service of God, have judged their whole
lives not too much to win Gods favor by Repentance, and that of the severer
sort. For Gregory Nyssen in the Life of St. Ephrem the Syrian, writes of him,
That as it was natural for all other men to use respiration, and motion; so
became it customarie to him, to weep: so that there was scarce any day or any
night, or any considerable part of day or night, or very short time, in which
he did not shed tears: teaching us, that we ought never to resolve against
weeping for our sins; or having confidence in Gods mercy; where the grace of
true Repentance is found, and true fruits, though not so high and heroical,
(as I may so speak) are not wanting. Nothing is more contrary to the free
Grace of God or our Duty than limiting him or it, where he has not
circumscribed himself. To say within a man's self, God will not have mercy
upon me, unless I truly repent, is the Doctrine God himself put into a man's
mouth, and must be held immutably and inviolably: because he has so often said
it, and has limited his pardon to that condition. But to say, To do thus much
in Repentance, or to go thus far only, is sufficient without farther troubling
flesh and blood; or, on the contrary, to say positively, God will not pardon my
offenses, unless my true repentance be attended with, and demonstrated by such
or such outward exercises, is to determine what God has not determined, and to
lay the stresse of obtaining mercy upon uncommanded services; as we are
taught, by some of late days, to speak. It is left therefore by God, obscure;
as to the visible part of Repentance, what God will accept, and what he will
not, for reconciliation: But to condemn outward severities, as too many do,
upon a possibility that God may save us without them; may, for ought we know,
turn Gods face from approving our presumed-on Repentance inward. For there are
so many instances of Great Sinners, greatly humbled outwardly as well as
inwardly, upon the sight of their sins, in Holy Scripture, as well as monuments
of the Church, that it is a wonder to me, to observe the confidence the modern
divinity of some, has put into the hearts of men, by a prodigal faith, to
make up a short and easy reckoning between God and them, adding taunts, and
reproaches to them who surpass them in sensible exercises and concomitants of
inward sorrow. He therefore is in the safest way to have his soul cleansed
from his sins; and the scores wiped out between God and himself, who shall
bear such a venerable opinion toward Repentance, such a hatred and detestation
of sin, such an equal opinion between the Justice and goodness of God, as
that, by abundance of penances imposed on himself or by others, whose
judgment he may follow better than his own in such cases, he cannot merit
properly Gods favor; nor, keeping up a faithful and humble spirit toward God
in sincere Repentance not so fairly qualified, must despair of remission. For
undoubtedly the contrition of the heart shall much preponderate the bodily
exercises, weighed together in Gods balance, but it is no reason at all,
because that is principally to be done, that we should leave the latter undone:
and that upon several accounts, not so well consisting with our present
design.

6. But yet in general, to reconcile men to the complexe duty of Repentance
thus asserted, I shall offer to the devouter minds, these few Considerations
of the excellency of Repentance. As first, that Repentance is the greatest
Good God could bestow upon the lapsed Sinner: so that it may be doubted,
whether his singular love to mankind had appeared more conspicuously in
preventing his fall by a powerful hand, than by giving him Repentance, to lift
him up again. It was much easier for man to have persever'd in the state of
Grace at first received of God: and seems more easy to God (if any thing may
be said to be difficult to him) to have preserved man so, than to have restored
him. So that of that great evil of man, Apostacy from God, this great good
ensued, the manifestation of the greatness of his power and mercy in giving
repentance unto man; and by such an abject thing in the eyes of the world, to
produce so glorious effect as the conversion of a Sinner, the very joy and
applause of the blessed Saints and Angels in heaven. Nay, though Christ, as a
Mediator and Redeemer, was the pure gift of God to man; yet the influence and
effect of Christ's mediation, God would have to depend wholly on Repentance: as
is employed in these words, Acts 5. 31. Him (Christ) has God exalted with his
right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sin. So that as there is no forgiveness without repentance,
and there is no saving repentance without Christ, so is there no saving Christ,
without repentance. For this was one end of Christ's coming into the world,
Repentance: as we read, Acts 17. 20. The times of former ignorance, God winked
at, but now commands all men to repent, every where. And hence it is, that
the Apostles having heard what success St. Peter's preaching had amongst the
Gentiles, make it matter of astonishment and glorification of Allmighty God, as
it is written, Acts 11. 18. When they heard these things they held their peace,
and glorified God, saying: Then has God also to the Gentiles granted
repentance unto life.

7. But farther, let us see more particularly the dignity of Repentance; in
the managing of which, all the principal Attributes of Allmighty God are
engaged: as first of all, that which is most formidable to a guilty, and
conscious Soul, his Justice. For when by foregoing Illumination, the mind of
man is brought to the knowledge of the nature of sin dwelling in it, and the
strong opposition which is made against it, and enmity; and the fearful reward
due to it, who can but tremble, to find himself brought under the plagues due
to it? But withal, considering the wonderful condescension of Allmighty God
entering into a Covenant of Grace and favor with Sinners, upon the terms of
true repentance, and that he will infallibly be as good as his promises declare
him; the bitterness of his Justice is changed into the sweet waters of Life,
to the desponding Sinner. For if God had only said as he does, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering and abundant in
goodness, and truth. Keeping mercy, for thousands, forgiving iniquities
transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, etc. the
matter had not been so wonderful: For it is imprinted in the minds of all
Believers, that God is merciful, and Good to all, even to Sinners that repent:
Almost every Chapter in Mahomets Alchoran proclaims that aloud: and this is
most pleasant to the ear of a Sinner dejected for his errors; but much more is
that refreshing the languishing Soul, to hear, that Justice it self is turned
to be a Friend to a Sinner; by virtue of repentance: as St. John assures us, 1
Epist. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. However, therefore
Scholasticall doubts and disputations may be raised about the manner, how God,
out of his justice, may be said to save a man; yet it cannot be doubted, after
such express words of Scripture, that so it is. And that this comes thus to
pass, that God has so great regard and esteem for his own gift, Repentance;
that where ever he finds that, he has obliged his honor, his truth, or
faithfulness, to his word, and Justice it self to acquitt that Sinner, and
cleanse him from his pollutions. Not unlike to the gift of some great Prince,
or Person, to some inferior one: who in token of his fidelity to him, and
firmness in all great calamities and distresses endangering his life,
delivers to him a Ring, or other privy token well known to him, advising
that if ever he be called in question for his life, or like to be oppressed by
his Enemies, he would send him that, or show it him, and it shall suffice to
oblige him to come speedily to his deliverance, and safety: so pleases it
Allmighty God, to grant to his friends in Christ, this excellent gift of
Repentance, which he beholding, is so much affected with the dangerous
condition of the miserable Sinner, that in honor and justice, he holds
himself bound to secure him from the malice and mischiefs which his Enemies
long and strain hard to bring upon him.

8. And so may we say of the Omnipotency of God, concerned very much in the
deliverie of the penitent Sinner. For as there is guilt, danger, and damnation
in sin; so is there likewise shame and confusion of mind and face, at the
apprehension of so foul errors and odious spots as accompany the commission
of sins: so that the same pierces into the very soul by its stain; and
infests the Conscience with intolerable pain, at the apprehension of such a
shameful condition. What would an ingenuous Penitent give? yea rather, What
would he not give, that he had never offended so Great a God, and so Good a
Father? With what shame, (the eyes of his mind being illuminate) does he
reflect upon himself? so that it is questionable in some truly repenting, and
generous souls, whether the abhorrence of that foul state it finds it self
in, by sin, be not altogether as intolerable as the foreseen punishments of
Hell it self: In such cases as this, when all other hopes of being restored to
its pristine integrity and purity; so infinitely desirable to a true Convert,
fails; relief and remedy is discovered in the Allmighty power of God, which,
and none but which, could cause the Leprous and filthy parts of Naaman to
return to the soundness and sweetness of the flesh of an Infant; and can as
easily renew the defaced and defiled Soul; so that when one day it shall
appear naked at the Tribunal of Christ, before the sharp-sighted Angels and
men, they shall not be able to discern the least blott or blemish in the same:
And why? because, as by a second regeneration after Baptism, Repentance renews
the soul by Gods powerful Grace, to a new habit; and is therefore called a
Second Baptism.

9. Furthermore, what can be more worthy of every good Christians practice,
than Repentance, which God honors above many splendid Graces in the sight of
the world; yea, which men, more thoroughly seen into the divine study and art of
conversing with God, judge to be inferior to none in dignity, and above all
in necessity? How do we read of David's Repentance, and Peter's, restoring them
entirely to Gods favor? so that former sins which were great, obstructed not
their ascent to the highest pitch of Gods favor, and of Rule and Authority in
the Church of God. For does not the incomparable Parable of our Savior Christ
in the Gospel, Luke the 15th, of the lost Sheep; of the lost Groat, of the
lost Son, prove the certainty to us? all which declare unto us this miserable
state of Sinners fled from God, and unreduced; and the happiness and glory,
upon their return, by Repentance; and the joy in heaven and earth upon their
conversion unto God and goodness, as upon a Victory wun over the Devil, and a
soul wun to God.

10. And if we compare Repentance with other Christian virtues adorning the
Soul, we shall find great glory ascribed unto it, and set at the Right Hand
of the very chiefest: For what is more commended or extolled by the Holy
Fathers of old than Virginity? And yet by Saint Austine, Humility is
preferred before it. And Humility is but one branch of the main body of
Repentance: which therefore must much more excel the other: And the same have
many devout Hermites said, as Palladius relates.

11. Lastly, How sour and severe soever acts of Repentance may, at a distance,
do appear to a natural eye, in the midst of its clouds and darkness, light
does spring out: and when the greatest agonies for sin, and the wounds of a
Conscience stung with it, smart most sorely, there may arise this true ground
of consolation, that even this repentance, as bitter as it may seem, is a
notable instance of Gods favor: for God does not give such singular gifts but
to his beloved and chosen ones: and that, under his apparent frowns against a
Sinner repenting, are hidden real smiles of love to such penitents' to whom,
if he had not a special favor; he would have suffered him, with the throng of
the world, to pass without any remorse, or means of readoption, holiness, and
happiness: but repentance proves the contrary. Which may both support the
wearied mind, in the midst of crushing sorrows; and excite the secure to
undergo this easy Yoke of Christ, (all things considered) and reduce the
fugitive Shulamite, the straying Sheep, unto the Chief Shepherd of our Souls,
Christ Jesus.

SECT. VI. That this Purgative Repentance must be general, of all sins; and
perpetual.
1. AS God looks upon sin, and as sin looks against God; so must every one that
is borne of God, in this, as other things, resemble his heavenly Father. There
is no fin but God hates: there is no Sinner but hates and opposes God: there
is no sin but fights against our Souls, wounds, defaceth, and defiles the
same: there is therefore no Christian but ought to hate all sin: as David may
be understood, when Psalm 139. he says, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate
thee, and am not I grieved, O Lord, with them that rise up against thee? I hate
them with a perfect hatred, even as though they were mine enemies. So that he
not only submits to, but, afterward, demands a search to be made in his
heart, whether any kind of iniquity lurketh there, perhaps unbeknown to him,
which ought to be expelled.

3. Learned Masters of Christian doctrine tell us, that God cannot forgive
absolutely one sin, and leave another unpardoned; and much less can a man
deny one sin, and embrace another: no more than a Fornicatour can cease to be
such in disliking one whorish Woman, and choosing another: Nor may he be said
to repent, that he has abused his body by such unrighteous practices, but
that happily, he had to do with such a person: so is it with the Sinner that
forsakes not wholly, but changes his sin: As if he has in his young and
wanton days, lived luxuriously and prodigally, and in his declining strength
and years, should begin (as the Prodigal.) to be in want, or aim at the
raising of a Family, and leaving an ample Patrimony to his Posterity, and so
take up; basely now sparing, as he spent basely formerly; he may flatter
himself, and sometimes, like a notable Convert and mortified person, condemn
his youthful follies, and mad exorbitancies, and moreover speciously bless
God that he sees his error past, and securely bless himself in his late
wisdom and abstinences; but all in vain, yea more perniciously than before, if
he turns pinchingly abstemious, denying himself many things after the manner
of true Asceticks, and renouncers of the world, and all this, out of a new
espoused vice, Covetousness, which infatuates his judgment so far as that he
flattereth himself in his own eyes (as it is Psalm 36.) till his iniquity be
found to be hateful: or, Till his abominable sin be found out.

3. For God, who abhors commutations of Virtue for Vice, much more abhors
commutation of one Vice for another. Whence it is that Saint James so expressly
affirms, Cap. 2. v. 10, 11. Whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet offends
in one point, is guilty of all. For he that said, Do not committ Adultery,
said also, Do not kill. Disobedience, Rebellion, or but contempt of Gods
commands, is seen in one sin as well as in another. And though all stains or
spots upon the Face or Clothes be not of, the same color, yet as they are
stains and defilements, are they to be equally cleansed. And it is all a case,
whether a man be wounded with a Knife, or a Sword; or bruised with a blunter
Weapon, to his no less danger. All Virtues are linked together in prudence,
faith the moral Philosopher; for as much as without prudence, men must needs
offend, even in doing good things: And all sins are founded and grounded upon
folly, even those which carry along with them a pretense and show of wit and
cunning; all sin being error and all error proceeding from ignorance affected
or involuntarie: And all sins being managed by disobedience against God, a man
cannot heartily and sincerely apply himself to obey God in any one point,
unless he bears about him a disposition to fulfill the will of God in all
things commanded by God.

4. And this Rule extends it self likewise to our duty toward our
Neighbor; whom having seen and not having seen God, if we love not, we
deceive our selves, as St. John teaches us, 1 Epist. 4. 20. He that uses
despitefully the Image of his Prince, shows his malice against his Prince
himself. And no cheating or violence does a man, out of covetousness and
desire of revenge, offer to his Brother, but, for shame, or fear, or inability,
he would use to his Father also, yea to God himself. This does appear by
profane, blasphemous, and outrageous speeches often used against his God, as
the malice of a bitter spirit and tongue; when the hands cannot reach him. For
I cannot but think that a man covetously bent to any great degree, would, if it
were possible, cousen God of what he has, as well as his Neighbor, and tear
from him by violence what may serve his turn, as he sticks not to do from
his poor and weak Brother, when he is in the power of his hands. But no man is
made innocent from impotencie of offending: And no man acquiescing in any one
fault or Vice unrepented of, can pronounce himself clean from any, or hope to
obtain pardon for any one.

5. Again, as Repentance cleansing us must extend to all manner of sins, so
that no man can deserve the name of a true penitent who is angerly inclined,
and not covetously; or lustfully given, and not a Drunkard; or Proud, and not
unjust; or a zealous censurer of profaneness, and deboistnesse, and yet
worldly; or contumacious against Just Authority; so must the same repentance be
general as to time also; that is, perpetual. A man must never have any kind
thought of that sin whereof he pretends to have repented. He must have a
perpetual displeasure against himself for having so offended; he must have an
immortal enmity against it; And though perhaps he be not actually warring
against it by open violence used against himself for it, and against it, for
his own sake, he must never hang up his Arms so as never more to pursue it, as
occasion shall require. We are to imitate upon our selves, Gods Justice against
sin, which never ceases, where pardon does not prevent it. God punishes the
impenitent Sinner with everlasting torments; and therefore man should so judge
himself that he be not condemned of the Lord, And therefore, though a man
ought not always to be in tears, penances, and lamentations for sins passed,
yet always must he bear an habitual grudge against it, an ill will, and
enmifie: which intermitted by suitable actions for seasons extraordinary, upon
fresh returns of the same into his mind and memory, he must exercise fresh
acts of detestation, and humiliation for such his failings and miscarriages.
Some men have ceased from the sin they have been formerly overtaken with; but
upon occasion can with some degree of content relate the same, amongst them who
will make merry with it: Such, we may be sure, are not cleansed thoroughly from
that sin, though they have laid it aside, and that so, that they never committ
it over again. For were their souls but so much estranged from it as they
ought, as they never committed such a sin but with pleasure (such as it may be)
so they should never think of it but with displeasure and detestation; and with
an hidden smiting of the breast with the Publican, say, Lord be merciful to me
a sinner.

6. This, I say, ought to be done in some degree, occasionally, though not in
the intensest; as when at the time of illumination and conversion the soul
repenting travaileth under the weight and sense of sin: especially by them who
are not by office, occupation, profession wholly sequestered from the world. For
Monastical and Heremeticall lives are described to be nothing else but a state
of repentance; Repentance being so called from that which is most eminent in
that state, Fastings, hardships, watchings, solitariness, but when the worship
of God requires communion with others.

7. But the degree required of all is not inconsistent with the due
Alternations and vicissitudes of Consolations and spiritual Cheerfulness
before God and others. For upon repentance prescribed and sincerely performed,
it pleases God in Scripture to declare himself reconciled to the broken
spirit: so that when God is said to repent of the evil suffered by others for
their offenses, the offender may be sure, to his great satisfaction, that his
repentance is accepted. As when upon Moses his intercession in behalf of the
Idolatrizing Israelites, it is said, Exodus 32. 14. The Lord repented of the
evil which he thought to do unto his people. And Judges 2. It repented the
Lord because of the groanings of his people. Therefore in the like cases, he
says, Isaiah 40. 1. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people, speak comfortably unto
Jerusalem. Which God says unto particular persons, upon their sharp sufferings
and deep humiliations; upon the reason rendered for the mitigation of the
punishment of the incestuous Corinthian, 2 Corin. 2. 7. Lest such an one should
be swallowed up of too much sorrow.

8. And besides this, Cheerfulness and Gratitude toward God may be esteemed a
part of true Repentance, taken in its latitude, for such a general change of
heart and mind which gives that affection to God which before was bestowed on
the world. Too much lightness, and jollity, and vanity having transported a
man into evil before, transportation toward God well becomes the true
Convert. David may be an instance and a Rule to us in this kind. Who had
fallen more fowly than he? And who repented more thoroughly than he? So that he
says, My sins are ever before me. Psalm 51. The act of sin was over; the
repentance was not so: but frequent representations thereof were made to him;
which abashed and confounded him: Yet found he such Lucid intervalls, and
seasons of recreation and joy in God, that he took to him his Harp, and
celebrated the praises of Gods mercies to him. And no doubt but he administered
the Nation under him with proportionable sweetness of behavior and severity
of Justice. Which should be the care and prudence of all true penitents; least
instead of humbling themselves under their sins, they mortify others by their
froward and sour behavior toward them who are about them. For unless some
custody, in such cases, be had over a man's passions spiritual against
himself for his sins, those which should wholly terminate in himself and
against himself, will steal out and be troublesome to others also: which is a
great error, and scandalous: as it is often seen that a man being vehemently
set against his Enemy, does strike them also that are next to him, and would
part them.

9. But now let us see wherein consists this conflict between the flesh and
the Spirit: and by what means the Soul is sanctified and secured from such
relapses as are incident to our infirm nature: always remembering this, that
no good Christian can indulge to himself any such sins as are commonly called
Failings of our corrupt flesh, or sins of infirmity. For no sin connived at,
and willingly suffered to abide with us, can be properly called a sin of
Infirmity, but comes under the notion and nature of presumptuous sin: For as
much as God the all seeing Judge, does principally look upon the temper and
disposition of the will, and heart: according to whose alienation from him, or
opposition to him, or affectation of an evil committed against him, is an
estimate set upon that sin, though very tolerable, and minute, yea perhaps
having somewhat of gracefulness in the eye of the world. This will therefore,
comes here to be considered.

SECT. VII. Of Self-denial required to true Reformation; and that both of
Understanding and Will.
1, NO doubt but all things that God made, as he made them, were at first good,
and so continue: but all things continue not in that first and perfect state,
wherein they were, as well depending on God in their doing, as in their being.
God gave man the most excellent gift of Reason; and under that, Appetites and
affections, which are the inward motions of the Soul either to, or from God.
So long as we walk by his light, we cannot err in knowledge: so long as we
desire by his Will, we cannot err in desiring. Subordination to the Supreme is
no bondage; and confinement to him that is infinite, is no loss of liberty or
freedom. It Is ignorance therefore which impells men no illimited knowledge:
and servitude, to study and endeavor to be absolute and commanders of our
selves, without exception. It Is not to know, that God prohibits; but to know
without true wisdom: the Apostle St. Paul, so flattly contradicting, and
confuting men's opinion vainly conceived of themselves, thus writing, 1 Corin.
8. 2. If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know. Which is most true, when he would needs know as Adam and Eve
did, without God, or what God would have hidden and concealed from him: And
when a man would needs know all things, but can be content not to know
himself. For as Charity (of which the Apostle there also speaks) according
to the common, and generally true saying, begins at home; so does, or ought to
do, knowledge: For the Alpha of true knowledge, and the Omega too is to know
God; but a man cannot know God as becomes him, when he stands in his own
light. And in his own light may he be said to stand, when he understands not
himself, his measures, his capacity, and means to true knowledge. He that
lays hold of more than he can well span, or embraces more than his Arms can
contain, commonly lets all go, and loses it. And so it is in curiosity of
knowledge; he knows nothing, that would pretend to all things. Like to the
Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3. 17. which because she gloried in her riches, was
poor and wretched, and blind, and naked, and knew it not. What blindness,
what ignorance so gross, lamentable, and dangerous as this? And yet loath are
men to have their eyes opened to perceive it, as if in the mist of their mind,
they discerned and feared that which he who was cured of a phrenzie bewailed in
himself, that in his distemper he was much more happy, than in his cure. For
in that he imagined and pleased himself with nothing less than a fair
Principalitye under him, subjects obsequious, Palaces stately, with Crown and
Scepter: but reduced to his true reason, found the contrary to all these, to
his great loss and trouble. And to such excesses does our presumptuous
knowledge betray us. For as St. Paul before says, Knowledge puffs up: swells
and apostemateth the Soul with corruption, which often breaks out into
rottenness scandalous. Hence it is, that if a man erres wilfully and
notoriously to all, he is not ashamed; as Seneca observes: as when in Grammar
he speaks false Latin or English, or gives a false pronunciation to a word:
but if he does it ignorantly, and be told of it, then he either blushes, or
boldly defends his error against his own tacit persuasion, least he should
seem not to have known as much as another: And Cardane (himself a Physican)
tells us, he knew one of the same faculty, who having through ignorance,
destroyed his Patient, rather than he would be thought ignorant, professed he
killed him on purpose, though there was no such matter: to such a
monstrousness of absurdities, and iniquity does this unbridled and untamed
humor of seeming wise, and appearing so, transport a man.

2. This evil Appetite wars against nothing so much as Religion, and is
inconsistent with nothing more; and therefore should Religion war against that;
turning the forces of the Spirit against this Tower of the Flesh built up to
this dangerous height, by the evil spirit of Pride and affectation of
vain-glorie. And this I look on as a prime and material part of our
self-denial, when we shall be able and willing to submit our private,
busy, and clambering Reason to the simplicity of the Faith; and know our
infirmities and failings, as well as we know others; yea and better too; having
attained to that perfection which the wise Man only owned in himself, Prove.
30. 2. Surely I am more brutish than any man, I have not the understanding of a
man: with this limitation notwithstanding, that if God, or good Authority under
him shall have chosen any such humble Person to preside, teach, and lead
others, no modesty nor humility in him ought to withold him from discharging
his office. No more than any knowing himself more wise, or learned, out of his
abundance, is to withdraw himself from the guidance of such an one, as he
excells; under suspicion of calling Gods Providence and Right in question, to
rule and teach by whom he pleases: and especially the difficult lesson of
humility and self denial. Don't I know? Can you teach me? is the language of
a proud Spirit, very often; and of one who wilfully, how ignorantly soever,
must and will have his saying. A man out of common charity, might blush for
such as do not blush, to hear them, oftentimes indeed wise and more than
vulgarly knowing; when they fall into Paradoxes, when they stumble in plain
ground; when their mistake happens by surprise or other incogitancie, how loath
are they to be taken in the snares of truth it self? how they, by all tricks,
pretenses, fetches and innumerable devices and defenses, would justify what
once they happen to say, though conscious to themselves of error, they would
not have said or done such things, yet they once passing from them, they will
maintain them to the last; though the more they struggle, the more they are
ensnared, and fall into a far worse absurdity in defending, than committing an
error. And all this that they might not suffer in their beloved and
selfe-admired wit. And because they cannot deny them, neither for Gods sake,
nor for trueths sake; but hold it the most honorable course to themselves, to
bend both to their saying, than to yield to be measured by such Rules. And if
their wits fail them in framing evasions and shuffles which may justify, in
some degree, their slips; Passion and loud clamor shall support their cause,
and drown the noise of weak truth: as the Idolatrous Jews were wont in
sacrificing their Children to Molech in the Valley of Hinnon, to use Fife,
Trumpet, and Drum, that the voice of the massacred might not be heard, or
pity shown to them, nor justice: O foolish Galatians (says St. Paul in
another case, Galat. 3.) Who has bewitched you that ye should not obey the
truth? Answer may be made, self love, selfe-preservation; which are such,
that a man can better endure a blow on the Pate, than on his Opinion. But St.
James says, Chap. 3. 14. My brethren, Lie not against the truth. a reason
whereof may be, because he that opposes an acknowledged truth, though not very
important, sins, in some degree, against the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
truth, and the testimony of his own Conscience; and to have his will in
arguing or doing, grieveth the Spirit of truth; truth in all things being
Sacred and Divine; which, when it possesses the mind of a man, seasonable and
true is that advice of the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap. 2. 29. The Lord is in his
holy Temple, let all the earth keep keep silence before him.

3. And this Advice reaches unto the other Branch of a Christians
Self-denial, which consists principally and more immediately in the
subjecting the will of man to the Will of God, as that did in the subjection of
the understanding to the Wisdom of God. Oh how natural? how sweet? and
almost, how necessary it is, for man to have his own will? And yet in truth,
how monstrous is this unruly appetite? It arises from a root worse than
ordinary Idolatry: as much as to make ones self a God, is a much more
heinous sin than to worship any other false God. And what is that (whether we
mean it, or not mean it) that impells men so passionately to desire, and so
violently to contend for their will, and as much of it as is possible, but that
they would be great thereby; they would be supreme; they would rule and
govern, not so much themselves (for they are the worst at that of all men) but
others, and because they would be admired and worshipped; and that more, and in
an higher degree than they dare openly own. When men have given themselves up
to this misleading and mischievous temper, they would have no bounds prefixed
them. God himself shall not escape their murmures, if open accusation and
expostulations: Every thing is uneasy to them, that is not projected by their
own wits, and managed by their wills. And whereas, according to St. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 13. Charity, (that Divine grace made up of meekness, humility, love
of God, and that which in any manner resembles God) bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, the Idolizer of
his own will, (on the contrary) can bear nothing, believe nothing, hope
nothing, endure nothing contradicting this his humor. Reason he will by no
means professedly affront or oppose, but then he counts it all the reason in
the world, that matters should be carried as he judges, and wills; otherwise
the power and effects of his impatience shall be his remedy. Whereas there is
nothing more unworthy of a wise man, and nothing more inconsistent with a good
Christian, than to desire to have more wills under him than his own: for in
truth, he never is master of his own will, who would tyrannize over others.
For this may be but one sin in form and appearance, but it is the parent of
many, if not of all, to strive to have our wills.

4. For what is Pride but an appetite of our unmortified wills, pushing us
forward to be great, Ruling, admired, followed, not to be led by any? What is
Anger, but a desire of satiating our lust of revenge? What is Avarice, but to
have all, and part with nothing but what Justice and Necessity extorts? And
what is Lust properly so called, but a furious will of carnal pleasure? He
therefore that will ever obtain any command of himself in any of these things,
or the like, must lay the Ax of Reformation to the root of all these trees, the
general lusting after a man's own will, and the satisfaction thereof naturally
inclined. For though there may seem such a distance outwardly between one sin
and another, as that there should be no consanguinitie between them, yet, in
the practice, they, like persons at domestic difference or civil dissensions,
will join against a common and foreign Enemy; and help one another; according
to the observation of that mortified Father mentioned in Ecclesiastical
History: who delivered it for a truth, That a man can never observe the rule
of Chastity, unless he subdues the Lust of Anger. For surely if we shall give
leave to our corrupt wills to take their swing in one thing; they will take
leave to excurre into other evils, against our more advised judgments and
wills. Therefore let us a little insist upon the reasonableness of such
affectation of our carnal wills.

5. But first it is to be observed, that Religion it self is not of that
morosity, or indeed tyranny, under color of mortification, that it should
deny us the liberty wholly of that natural faculty of desiring and loving;
for that God himself has placed in us: For then we could not love God
himself, nor choose the good or refuse the evil, as himself commands. It
is not the rooting up of that Vine which Gods own hand has planted in the
heart of man, but the pruning, and dressing it to bear generous branches, and
bunches. It is to cut off those Suckers; to destroy that Nature which is become
such, and not made so by God. It is, according to the ancient Philosophy, for
our earthie Sphere, and inferior and smaller Orb, to be ordered by the first
mover of all; and to say, and to pray as Christ has taught, Thy will he done
in earth as it is in heaven: to live in this world as Christ came into it, and
lived and died in it. As appears by the history of his holy and humble Life,
which tells us, John 18. 37. To this end was I borne, and for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: every one that is
of the truth hears my voice. And this was the holy Gospel he taught, and
left us. And his bearing witness was to make himself of no reputation: as
great, and as good as he was: to be obedient unto the death, even the death of
the Cross; and to appear, as it were, without a will of his own: or, which is
a greater victory and glory, to have a will always obsequiously included in
the Will of his heavenly Father; as it was, when, in great Agonies and
conflicts of Soul he prayed to God, Luke 22. 42. Nevertheless not my will but
thy will be done: demonstrating what he before affirmed for a truth, John 5.
30. I can of my self do nothing, as I hear I judge: and my judgment is just:
because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which is in
heaven. And as the Disciples said, most loath to hazard so precious a Vessel of
honor, and service, as St. Paul amongst Jewish Barbarity, Acts 21. 14. The
Will of the Lord be done. And what better or wiser resolution can any good
Christian take, than what he saw Christ to practice before him; and the most
Heroical Christians did, to have no will stirring but the Will of God and
Christ? For this is to be what St. Paul exhorts to. Romans Chap. 6. 11.
Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: that is, content to be directed by the
Wisdom, and acted by the pleasure of God alone: So that we may say as that
good old Father in his Cell, having relinquished the world; who when one came
to him, and brought him the tidings, that a ^ere Kinsman of his was at the
point of death, and therefore he should do well to repair to him, and take
possession of what descended legally to him; made answer, And would you have
me inherit his Estate, who have been dead a long time before him? And this I
intended for one distinct argument to deny our own wills, either wholly
impeding the Will of God to be done in us, or the perfecter conformity to that,
and the Example Christ has set us.

6. Secondly, The special care that God takes of him who cares least for his
own will, but commits the management of it into the hands of his most Wise
and Gracious Father. It Is true, To have ones own will, and to do as we are
impelled by it, is the preciousest Pearl in the world to the natural man;
nothing so dear to him as that; and that when it is really evil in it self,
and hurtful, though pleasing to himself: But man having so little skill how
to use such a dangerous instrument, were it not much better to resign it into
the hands of him that cares for us more than we do for our selves, and is
wiser for us than we for our selves? As we see it in Children. When a thing of
great value is bestowed upon them by some Friend, the Parents have the keeping
of it, least it should be lost, spoiled, imbezel'd, or hurt the young owner;
till he comes to years of discretion: So our Godfather properly so called, God
himself, bestows upon us that great Jewel of Freewill, and Choice, which he
denies to inferior Creatures, but with this tacit condition, that we should
commit it to his custody, and by his wisdom and direction only use and
exercise the same, till we come to years of true discretion, which is only in
Heaven, and not in this life. Then shall we have the full and absolute use of
it, because then there is no fear that we should use it amiss, as here we
do. And this is that which holy David advises, Psalm 55. 22. saying, Cast thy
burden upon the Lord and he shall sustain thee, he shall never suffer the
righteous to be moved. This is it which St. Peter also exhorts unto, 1 Ep.
5. 6, 7. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt you in due time; Casting all your care upon him; for he cares for you.
And more expressly and particularly, Christ himself counsels thus his
Disciples, Matthew. 6. Take no thought for your life, etc. For, Which of you by
taking care, can add on cubit to his stature? The truth is, no man exalts
himself so highly, as he who, secluding or not considering God, follows the
will of himself; and the greatest of all humiliation is by the subjecting of
our wills to Gods, and the next and readiest way to true preferrement, or
exaltation. And take no thought, (says Christ) not commending supinenesse,
sloth, or laziness in any; but none without God, none not directed and
regulated by his Will and Prescripts: none, without consulting him, and
submitting the event with all confidence aed calmness, to his all-disposing,
most wise, most just, most gracious Providence: and in suffering as well as
doing his Will: For it is a Maxim or Rule berter becoming a Heathens mouth
than a Christians. Every man is master, or maker of his own fortune: not but
that every man has a hand in, and contributes toward Good or evil events
befalling him, but that the Architectonicall, or Overruling Power of all is in
God, who does not always give the Battle to the strong, nor the Race to the
swist, nor bread to the wise; to teach us that he is Lord paramount of all:
according to the Divine acknowledgement of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 26. 12.
Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works
in us. And therefore it seems to me a thing, as very memorable, so more worthy
the mouth and practice of a Christian, what is written of Muhamed Olbarsalanus,
the Great Prince of Bagdet or Babylon, a Saracen; who being wounded to death in
a Battle, which he fought; as he died, said, I never before this once, fought,
but first I desired Gods blessing. I would all Christians would do so, and
have so much confidence in God, in all matters, especially of importance; that
they would first implore Gods aid, and then depend on him for the success:
which if it be favorable, he must be humbly thankful; if improsperous, in
like manner, patient; as the effect of Gods Divine and wise Providence requires.

7. Thirdly, The Scripture both by Example, and Precepts directs us to this
reasonable, as well as religious resignation of our wills unto Gods Will; when
it sets before our eyes the practice of earthly Parents and Children, as Hebr.
12. 9. We have had Fathers of our Flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits
and live? For they verily for a few days chastened us, after their own
pleasure: but he for our profit, that we might be patakers of his holiness.
Fathers of our flesh may take a cruel pleasure, rather than intend any real
profit or benefit unto Children, in chastising them; but it is not to be
imagined that God can transgress the mean, or err in the end of any
Dispensation severe, or unpleasant to us: therefore much rather should we be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live a more easy, safe and
comfortable life here, than otherwise can be expected, and a most happy life
hereafter, where all things be perfectly subject to the Father, as Saint Paul
speaks, 1 Corinthians. 15. that he may be here also, as well as hereafter, All in
All.

6. Fourthly, This Self-denial is the true Holocaust or absolute Sacrifice we
can give to God, and most acceptable, imposed upon us as true Believers,
according to Saint Paul, Romans 12. 1. saying, I beseech you brethren by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service: And be not conformed to
this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of the spirit of your mind,
that ye may prove what is that good and perfect Will of God. Sacrifices came
alive to Gods House and Altar, but were not accepted, till they were slain: so
it is with the spiritual or reasonable Sacrifice of our selves especially: our
natural wills so long as they live, cannot please God; but they must be
crucified, as Christ was crucified for us. And as the same Apostle advises,
Romans 6. we must reckon our selves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God,
through Jesus Christ. He that is dead, cease from willing, and so from
sinning. He that denies himself and his will, is dead indeed unto sin, and
lives by the life of the Son of Man; and is acted by the Will of God. And
surely, if it be our Duty, our Wisdom, our Righteousness, to committ our
very Souls and life into Gods hands and disposal, shall we stick to render
that one faculty of our Soul, our Wills, into his hands? That does Saint Peter
exhort us unto, 1 Epist. 4. 19. Wherefore let them who suffer according to the
will of God, committ the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto
a faithful Creator. Let God then have the keeping of our Wills as he has of
our Lives: as he had of Christ's humane Will: as he had of David's Will; when
Saul was in the power of his hands: when Shemei railed to purpose, and when at
the word given, his head might have been taken off, and the King revenged of a
Petulant slanderer; yet he committed his cause to God; and seeing, at some
distance, his Hand and Will, humbly acquiesced.

8. Fifthly, Nature it self teaches us (and upon that Abimelech bowed the men
of Sichems heart to make him King) to be subject to one rather than to many,
there being no personal disparity, which may alter the Case: how much more
elegible then must it needs be, for a man well advised to submitt to the
Monarchy of God, than to the Anarchie, or tyrannical Democracie of
innumerable lusts? whereof some vote one thing, and some another. One tugges us
this way, and another draggs us that way; commanding many times inconsistencies
and contradictions; and worreying and wearing out the simple Soul by
unreasonable solicitations and vexations. For most truly said Saint Paul, 1 Corinthians. 6. 16. Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to
obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Every irregular Affection, every inordinate Lust
is a Tyrant, and would needs subject us to it: so miserable is that Soul which
listens or leans to them, being divided from God and it self. For prodigality,
and covetousness; Anger, and desire of Revenge; Envy, and Malice;
Superstition and profaneness; Pusillanimitie and rashness; Slothfulness, and
indefatigable drudgeing for the world; Loving strange Faces, and embraces,
Lothing lawful, and laudable, excessive exaltation and exultation, when
matters proceed, prosper, and succeed according to our loose phansies and
fondness, and dejection of mind and spirit, when we are worsted in our
designs, and crossed, and frustrated of our hopes and expectations. All these,
and more than these never cease molesting and disquieting a man, until they
see him secured under the protection, and in the service of Allmighty God,
resolving to obey him against all temptations, and to look on all occurrences
as sent chiefly to make proof of his obedience and patience. And that this free
and full submission do not only bring admirable quiet and tranquillity to the
mind, but sanctity and purity (the thing we at present pursue) appears by
the Discourse of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10. 9, 10. where, having
propounded for an Example, and our imitation, the ready obedience of Christ,
of whom it was said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God: it follows, By which
will we are sanctified. That is, by that ready conformation of our wills to
the Will of God.

SECT. VIII. Of the Custody and Discipline to be had over the outward Man: and
especially the Eyes, Ears, and Tongue.
1. BUT now let us pass to the other part of a true Christinas care and
labor, consisting in the Purging of the Outward man, and regiment ought to be
had of our Senses: from whence, lust having conceived inwardly, proceeds
outwardly, deadly sins: and through which, outward temptations pressing in,
defile the Soul. For our Senses are as Gates to a City, through which there
is continual passing to and fro, and that of Good and Bad: and are the weakest
and easiliest surprised, unless very strictly guarded. I will but look, I will
not like nor love: I will but taste, I will not eat the forbidden fruit: I will
but touch, I will not embrace, says the natural and wary wisdom of this
world: But the wisdom of the Word of God teaches us otherwise, when it says,
Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all shall perish with the flesh, Coloss.
2. 1. especially when such touches and light Essaies are of things unlawful,
dangerous, or wholly unprofitable. Do we not read how Death enters in at the
windows? that is, deadly sins, at the Eye? Do we not read in St. Peter, 2
Epist. 2. 14. of such Persons, who have eyes full of Adultery, and cannot
cease from sin? Not that the visive faculty good in it self and a great gift
of God, can of it self be subject to such a crime; but that, through the
communication and combination between the inward and outward Man, such lustings
are either bred or stirred up by such Aspects. The Jacks or Keis in the
Virginal, Harpsicon or Organ being touched with the Finger, do not sound
themselves, but they strike the inward strings, which render the sound: So when
the outward Senses themselves are struck by their particular objects, they soon
communicate that passion scarce felt by them, to the inward Senses, which make
all the noise. Saint Augustine delivers this as a truth experimented in
himself ( Confess. Lib. 7. 1.) when he said, After what outward forms my
mind wandered, the same Images did my heart run after also. So that even the
subtiller Heathens could not but see the coherence between Fancy, and Senses,
and between the Appetites of the Soul and them both, when they tell us, By our
Eyes we are Luxurious; by our Eyes we are hurried into all manner of Vices; by
our Eyes we are wanton, by our Eyes we look on the Wine, when it shows it
self in the Glass: our eyes are cast upon the Riches of the world, as Achan's
upon the wedge of Gold, and the Babylonish Garment, and by orderly unhappie,
but almost necessary gradations and consequences, we, as he, are led to see,
to covet, to take them. That subtle Serpent the Devil knew too well what
power the temptations had entering into a man through the eye; when by his
artifice he presented to Christ all the glories of the world, and with such a
sudden surprise that scarce any but Christ could have withstood or rejected
them. Job therefore would not so much as cast a vain and idle glance upon a
beauty which might delude him, Job. 31. having no occasion justly so to do:
knowing assuredly, that the conjunction of the mind with an unlawful object,
without that bodily conjunction, adulterates the Soul: And imagination with
resolution and strong intention does that before God, which men cannot censure,
and so according to the diversity of the object, is the pollution diversifyed
also. So that if there be (as natural Philosophers tell us, Coel. Rhodigin)
an hundred Diseases of the natural Eye: the moral distempers by ill use of
them, may be accounted many more.

2. And if I should give some instances of the many ways of corrupting the
sight, the rest may more readily be made up by men's own observations. Poring
upon Faces prepared to catch fonder Spectatours: Taking pleasure in beholding
wanton Pictures, under pretense, it may be, that it is but a dead object; or
that fowl things are finely drawn. Viewing wanton postures and gestures, by
either Sex, or of either Sex. Yea casting an eye upon the mutual and natural
actions of Animalls doing according to their kind, a man would think it should
put one to the blush, but too often the contrary is found by a sympathy to be
abhorred, which the Masters of Jewish morality noted; and wisely dissuaded all
to turn their Faces from. Amorous Romances, and Lascivious Poetrye are to be
reduced to this caution. And that eye cannot be accounted innocent which,
coming into a Shop of Rarities and great varieties, looks not so much, nor
demands what it does want, but seeks for somewhat; which when it begins
first to see, it begins also to want and desire: and to want it because it
desires it; and not desire it because it wants it. Excellent therefore is
that counsel of Ecclesiasticus Chap. 9. v. 5. 7. against both these, and their
fellows, and that when there were no Monks, nor Friars in the world, upon
whom we would cast such severe counsels as their prosession leads them to:
Gaze not on a Maid that thou fall not by those things that are precious in her.
Look not round about thee, in the streets of the City, neither wander thou in
the solitary places thereof. But our Saviors Evangelicall counsel exceeds
this, Matthew. 5. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out. It is better for
thee to, etc. Nature (as Lactantius observes) to preserve the eye (a very
tender and precious part) has fenced it with hairs on the lids, as so many
Spears; which, at the approach of the least Enemy to it, being but lightly
touched, give notice to shut it presently, for its securitye. But it has not
provided such means to defend the eye from moral objects which are ever in
readiness to offend it: but that is the special gift of God, and should be
the Christian prudence of every true Believer.

3. And the like circumspection is necessary to be had about the Ear, another
most profitable, yea necessary Sense, and no less passionate than the other:
It Is incredible even to them that are overcome and captivated by dishonest
Speeches, lewd Books, obscene Poetry, what a change, and that for the worst,
aptly tempered sounds and melodious Voices have upon a man. They deject him and
make him moody, and heavy; they inflame and lighten him, make him brisk and
wanton, make him full of talk, and ridiculous motions; and finally, ensnare and
draw him to humor the notes in his actions, good or bad. Cease my Son
(therefore says Solomon) to hear the instruction that causes to err from the
words of knowledge: whether Poetical, or Prosaicall. For when the form of
words, the eloquence of the Tongue, and gracefulness of speaking are the gift
of God, the matter clothed, and adorned, and adapted to the ear by them, may
be of the Devils devising; and sent before him to fowl the room of the Soul,
for him and his unclean Spirits to dwell there. For as the Good Spirit of
Wisdom, will not enter into a body given to sin, no more will, or can the
evil Spirit enter into a Soul or body not fitted for his turn by impure
cogitations and devices. Turn therefore (says Solomon, Proverbs 14. 7.) from
the presence of a foolish man when thou perceivest not in him the lips of
knowledge. Which knowledge is there used for wise and profitable talk, opposed
commonly to foolishness: which in Scripture signifies, as much as Sin. And in
so advising he does implye the next and right way to avoid not only certain
single acts of corrupt communication, but even the inclination and desire of
impure matter imbibed by word or writing. For it is true in moral things as
well as natural, that the understanding is made all things, according to the
impression made by the object, as Philosophers teach; being formable into any
shape: So, according to divinity, is it true, that, according to the pure and
chaste subject we choose to meditate on, and converse with, or the light,
obscene, and frothy, is the inward Sense affected, not only actually or
transiently; but habitually and permanently. So that in accustoming a man's
self to immodest and immorall acts or businesses, the mind is so tainted that
all Diviner things become unsavourie and irksome. In like manner, to the palate
of the Soul accustomed to spiritual, pure, and chaste Discourses, and reading,
the pleasureablenesse of vain, idle, and foolish Subjects, and especially
obscene, becomes altogether extinguished; an irksomenesse succeeding in its
place.

4. And there being such near relation (as we have partly seen) between the Ear
and the Tongue, as there is between a Fiddlestick and Fiddle, to strike it as
it pleases: the same doctrine of Sanctity reaches unto the due regiment of
the one, as well as of the other; but more especial care and custody seem to
be due to this, than that. For as much as the Tongue is an active part and
Organ to evil, but the Ear, passive chiefly. And sometimes it so falls out,
that a man must, whether he will or no, hear what is lewd, vain, riotous,
wanton, unclean, and profane; but no man is constrained to use his Tongue so
indiscreetly and wickedly: he has it more in his power, than he has his
Ears; and therefore he is the more obliged to make a good use of the one than
he can of the other. And as some have observed, Nature by fencing it double
with Teeth and Lips, least it should trespass upon God and our Neighbors,
teaches us with what good advice and moderation we are to use it. For in
truth, generally it so demeaneth it self, that few can give that a good word,
which is the great instrument of Speech: And seldom is it better employed than
when it accuses it self; and commends taciturnity and silence. What can be
said of it, or any thing else more bitterly or truly, than what St. James
writes of it, Chap. 3. The Tongue is an unruly evil; full of deadly Poison.
Therewith bless we God even the Father, and therewith curse we men, which are
made after the Image of God. And Solomon says, Prove. 21. Death and Life are in
the power of the Tongue: meaning, that by a Lying, slandering, perjurious,
profane and unclean Tongue, we hasten Death to others, so that our own
damnation at the same time, lingreth not thereby; Christ telling us, Matthew. 12.
36, 38. that, For every evil word that men speak, they shall give an account
at the day of judgment. For, By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned. So that the Tongue or sting of the Adder is not
so poisonous and pernicious as the evil tongue of Man. For that does not sting
or hurt the user; but this does: verifying what is said of wicked men, Pssalm
6. 4, 8. They shall make their own tongues to fall on themselves: All that see
them shall flee away, viz. as from the face and sting of a Viper. And if we
would judge of the ill Tongue, as we do of Persons of worth, from their
Extraction, we shall find how low and base an original it has, from St.
James, Chap. 3. The Tongue is a little member, boasting great things: the
Tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: it defiles the whole body, and sets
on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of Hell.

5. We see here what purgation the Tongue needs, which is so foul that it
defiles the whole body natural, and disordereth Families, Towns, and whole
Countries; yea Nature it self.

6. To insist upon the particular Vibrations used by the Tongue, to execute its
mischiefs, would be to launch out too far into an ocean of matter: but it may
suffice to point at the principal Vices and pollutions, to be carefully
avoided and wiped off: such as murmuring against God, and our Governors, upon
every light occasion; and because things are carried on in the Public
otherwise than our private wisdom can comprehend; we not being of the Counsel
of State, nor our approbation desired. Upon which follows scoffing, belying,
and slandering our Superiors, and thereby setting on fire the course of
Nature, and making public combustions and confusions. Beware therefore (says
the wise Man) Wisdom 1. of murmuring which is unprofitable, and refrain your
tongue from backbiting. For there is no word so secret that shall go for
naught, and the mouth that belieth, slaieth the Soul.

7. And when bare Lying will not effect what we intend, it takes unto its aid,
Swearing, and Cursing, and blasphemous Speeches against Heaven it self:
provoking that to revenge the injury done to God and man thereby. Of which
many instances might be produced, but that only shall I give which Matthew
Paris Lib. 7. in the year of our Lord 1701. gives of one Simon de Thurway, who
rashly boasting in the Schools, that he understood thoroughly the Law of Christ,
and could make it nothing in confuting it, became suddenly so ignorant of all
learning, that he could not so much as say the Lords Prayer over, nor read the
Alphabet. And late years have produced such presumptuous and virulent Tongues
against the Holy Worship of God settled amongst us, glorying in the mean time of
their own abilities and gifts, that as they at first wilfully rejected the
Lords Prayer, so have they at leugth, been unable to rehearse it, themselves
alleging why they did not use it, least they should be out, in saying it;
though they wanted not other reasons, which sometimes they were ashamed to
render for the disuse of it. And in truth, I am much ashamed of the little
severity taken against blasphemers of our Religion; when I read in the
Adventures of a late Author in Barbary, that, When any amongst the Turks or
Moors in Africa, commits Sacrilege, or does any action to the dishonor of
Mahomet, or the Religion professed in that place, they pour scalding Lead into
his Mouth, which sinks in with an horrible smoke. But with us, alas! such
remissness against blasphemers of our Religion is in fashion, that it is
almost become one of the privileges of the greater sort, and part of the
liberty of the Subject amongst the inferior, to dishonor Religion; and if
the Protectours of the Church and Religion shall venture to be sharp upon such,
they have in readiness a reserve of evil language to wound their Judges and
Persecutour by, calling them proud, busy, domineering Prelates: and so the
guilt is of a sudden, transferred from them, unto the punishers of it.

8. To these may be also added, the soothing, hypocritical, and flattering
Tongue, which while it coxeth, and stroketh, and tickleth, sorely wounds.
Surely God will not show himself so plausible to such a Tongue, if we believe
the Psalmist, saying, What shall be done unto thee thou false Tongue: sharp
arrows of the Allmighty, with coals of Juniper, etc. Psalm 12. 3. And Psalm
12. 23. They speak vanity every one with his Neighbor, with flattering lips
and with a double heart do they speak. The Lord shall cut off flattering lips,
and the Tongue that speaks proud things: To prevent which, David prays to
God, Psalm 141. 2. to set a watch before his mouth, and to keep the door of his
lips: And surely, not so much for the evil which that tame Beast (as one of
the Auucients terms the Flatterer,) does to another, but brings to
himself, by delusive fawnings. For as no Person is more formidable than the
wild Beast, the Railer and open Reviler, which with the teeth of his Tongue,
teareth the Name and reputation of him he seizes on; and so, as the Be
stingeth with that violence that it kills it self thereby; in like manner,
nothing is more ridiculous or odious than that tame Beast which licketh with
its Tongue, till it poisons the party; himself in the mean time perishing in
the esteem and value of all men. A guard therefore of the Tongue is most
necessary, both to secure the Speaker and Hearer. The Flattering, the Railing,
and slanderous Tongue: and the incessantly or superfluously tatling Tongue, all
want the bridle of advice and prudence to stay their Currier, and to stop the
Rheum that defluxeth from the distempered brain to the corrupting first of the
very vitalls of Religion inwardly, and then infusing the contagion of its
venom into others. Well therefore advises the wise Man, Ecclesiasticus 9. 9.
10, 11. immoderare Praters of all sorts, If thou have heard a word, let it dye
with thee, and be bold it will not burst thee. A Fool travelleth with a word as
a Woman in labor with Child. As an Arrow that sticks in a man's Thigh, so is
a word within a Fools Belly. It is a pain to a Fool to hold a little, that he
thinks he knows, within him: And his Tongue must be taking the air, till like
Dinah it be defiled. If a notion comes into his head, like a vain Prodigal,
though he be in want himself, he will spend that, and all that he has upon
others; who, as it happens to another kind of Spend-thrifts, when he has done,
will laugh at him for his pains and liberality: St. Peter's advice is this, If
any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. Oracles were given of
Divine, or very weighty matters. And in very few words; and them very true. If
a man therefore, (observing this rule) would speak, 1. With deliberation. 2.
With brevity. 3. About matters of consequence. 4. Rarely. 5. Profitably only,
he should prevent great mischiefs to himself, and conduce much to the good of
others. And before a man can be truly master of his Mouth, so far as not to
speak what he should not; it will be needful that he get such a victory over
himself, as sometimes not to speak when cause is offered, or occasion rather.
For he that says, ( Ecclesiasticus 4. 23.) Refrain not to speak when there is
occasion to do good, and hide not thy wisdom in her beauty; says also,
Chap. 32. 7. Speak young man if there be need of thee; and yet scarcely, when
thou art twice asked. According to circumstances of Persons, Aged, or Young;
Strangers, or Acquaintance; of matter, understood, or obscure; within our
Sphere, or out of our faculty; of time and of place, are words to be used: Lest
talking inordinately becomes a Disease; and intemperance of speaking, (as
Theophrastus calls Garulitie) be accounted a flux of the Mouth, and not
eloquence; folly, and not prudence; ignorance, and not knowledge: according to
the acute replye of Demaratus in Plutarch ( Apotheg. Lacon.) unto one demanding
of him being silent, when others talked, Do you say nothing out of doubting,
or ignorance? This latter cannot be, said he, for a Fool cannot hold his
Tongue. Here therefore let us end this Discourse.

SECT. IX. Of outward Moderation to be used in Abstinences and Apparel.
1. THAT the Perfection we are capable of here in this World, consists
principally in inward Mortifications and Selfe-denialls, That God requires the
heart; that God will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth, is most certain and
excellent Doctrine: which the crafty Sophister the Devil perceiving to be much
applauded, and himself not able openly to gainsay or destroy; he with wonted
subtilty betook himself to drive it on farther than God himself ever
intended, and to overthrow it by excessive celebration and praises given of it:
and by confining Religion to its Chamber, at first; at length to smother it in
his Bed. For as the Spirits and natural faculties of man are the cause of
motion and actions, so are they maintained and cherished by outward acts and
exercises. But if a man shall pretend (as is before intimated) that it suffices
that a man's life is entire; his Understanding sound and good, his Will free and
brisk, his Affections vigorous and powerful; and, these things standing so, it
is superfluous to take any pains about the outward parts; it were to rob God of
his due; and, in time, himself of that presumed Perfection of his heart and
mind. For undoubtedly there is a natural communication and correspondence
held between the outward and inward man, the Spirit, and the Flesh; the outward
actions and inward affections: and that they mutually assist or weaken one
another, is apparent to reason, and experience. A man therefore may possibly
cousen himself with a persuasion of a good heart, and pure mind, and i^ention
spiritual, while he takes all the liberty to himself which Laws will allow
him, of indulging to himself in eating, drinking, clothing, adorning his
outward person, sporting, and pastime, sleeping and slothfulness, and argue
strictly from the nature of the things, or from St. Paul's words, I know that
there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems a thing
unclean, to him it is unclean: or from Christ's words, Matthew. 15. Not that
which goes into the man, defiles the man, but that which comes out, that
defiles the man; or from the nature of Clothing, Attires, Gesture, Postures;
that nothing is unlawful of it self; and therefore it is unlawful to forbid
it, and perhaps looks on it by bleer or envious Eyes, as a part of the liberty
Christ has purchased for us, to do what we please, and to prove the same; and
to act contrary to the prescriptions of our lawful Governors, endeavoring
and designing to regulate the outward man answerable to the habit which best
becomes the inward; in simplicity, in abstinence, in gravitie, in humility,
and conformity to anholy profession, and possession taken of the Soul by
Religion.

2. For it is undoubtedly a very false notion of common prudence or virtue,
(and much more of Religion) to imagine a man cannot offend both God and his
Brother, by the scandalousnesse of morose or affected singularity, provided his
heart be upright toward him: which yet can scarce be supposed. For unless
some perverse opinion or disposition first seizes such Spirits, it is hard to
believe they should affect a disconformity to the Rules and Practice
established and designed for the promoting of decency and Pietye.

3. But next to the detestable humor of opposing things because they are
commanded, is the unreasonable opposition they make to prescribed severities,
and testimonies of holding unity with the Churches of all Ages and places, by
undervaluing that little that remains amongst us of auncienter, and stricter
observations. They, for instance, will tell you, that Fasting is abstinence
from all Meats, and Drinks, for the time designed; and not to admit of, or
tolerate, a distinction of Meats; and because some exceptions must, according
to the charity of the Church, as well as wisdom and goodness of States, be
made from all Rules and prescriptions of men, and sometimes the general order
given by God, (as appears by the argument of Christ taken from David's practice,
Matthew. 22. 3. in eating the Shewbread; against the hypocritical and precise
Pharisees) they infer from such Dispensations, the absurdity of the Rule,
with greater absurdity; and scoff, and laugh, as if they were mighty, and
much more perfect Chastisers of their Bodies or deniers of their Senses, than
the low rate prohibitions are set at, by the Church. The Church, to be sure,
means and designs much greater things than it indispensably requires; and
that while relaxations are but too easily obtained. And such glorious asserters
of such great things, should do very well to exceed vulgar practices: but
while they speak contemptibly of the Day of small things, themselves, in the
mean time sometimes alleging the grievousnesse, and sometimes the lightness
of the burden laid on them, will do just nothing in that kind, they and their
laughter too, become ridiculous.

4. But what shall we say of such late Divine Disputants as the Christian world
never heard of, or if heard of, lothed and disowned? who stick not to make the
uncircumscribed freedom of eating and drinking, as Nature moves them, a part
of that Christian liberty which Christ purchased with his blood, and whereby
he made us free; and in which we must stand fast, as they mistake the Apostle?
As if Christ at the same time that he freed us from the Jewish restraints by
Moses, had also freed us from all Christian Laws; and proclaimed an
everlasting year of Jubilee, and liberty for the Natural Law of men's Appetites
to take place, without distinction of times, seasons, or reasons left
undoubtedly in the power of Superiors to moderate. What is this but to make
the Coming, and Gospel of Christ to advance the brutish part of man to its
perfection? upon which must necessarily follow the great imperfection of the
Spiritual. What is this but to interpret the Oracles of God, by the Oracles of
the Belly suggesting such Scholies? Do I speak this that I can glory in any
gift in this kind, above others? No surely, but rather blush at my defects
herein: Only this I may say, that I retain such a veneration for the use and
ends of abstinences and the universal practice of the Catholic Church, that I
abhor the petulancy of such, and their presumption, who teach otherwise: not
doubting but they fall under that menace of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 5. 19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so
to do, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven. And surely,
denying our Senses, was always reputed a Command of Christ, in general:
which to apportion to every man's capacity, belonged to his Ministers. So that
a general Rule prescribed by the Church concerning the same, ought not
securely to be interpreted and applied by every man's single and private opinion
that he has of his sufficiency, or insufficiency to practice the same, but
may better be committed to the judgment of others, and by them dispensed. For
some are too rigorous to themselves, and others, (the greater number) too
partial and indulgent; and therefore safer and more reasonable it is, to deny
our selves that natural and dear Judicature which every man is fond of; and to
committ our selves, and especially our Senses to the wisdom of others not
repugnant to greater Authority.

5. But that which is most of all to be avoided, is the intemperance and
excess which Art adds to Nature: which is that we may call Luxury,
specially to be considered hereafter. Surely it is too much for a good
Christian, to be allwaies full within, and always warm without, and always
at ease, and to fence our selves by all care and solicitude, against all
ordinary incommodations, and inconveniences, so esteemed by flesh and blood:
the Scripture pronouncing them rather miserable than happy, by the Prophet,
Amos 6. 1, Woe be to them that are at ease in Sion; i. e. under no hardship or
molestation! rather drudging infinitely, to gratify Back, Belly, Eyes, Ears,
and Palate, with all Delectables; contemning the simple sufficiency and
salubritie of Nature; and exciting Lusts of all sorts, by inventions strange
and new, to a greater rampantnesse than corrupt Nature it self disposed to:
Nay, to that excess of Fashion and Folly do men strive to arrive, that to
attain praise and admiration, or but estimation for their Vanities, they can
suffer more pain, and run greater hazards of mischiefing their Bodies, than
they do, who for Heaven sake (I mean the strait Gate of Austerities leading
thither) suffer willingly bodily incommodations: and by affected nakednesses of
Back, Breast, and Arms, show themselves more hardy for Fancy and Fashion-sake,
than the Plowman or Carter. If a man should prescribe this for Gods sake, which
is done so frequently for the Worlds sake, he should be judged very
unreasonable, if not superstitious also. And yet St. Paul says, Romans 12. 2.
Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind: And Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. 14. As obedient Children not fashioning
your selves according to your former lusts in your ignorance; Ignorance and not
skill; cunning, and not Art being, according to him, the Parent of
superfluities and vanities worldly. For, witness Experience, witness Saint
Paul, 1 Corin. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passes away. Before some can
get well into a Fashion, it wears out. And if it would last a Mortal for
ever, i. e. as long as a man lives, it were scarce worth the striving for;
especially with greater contention than men do to be conformed to the
meannesse and meekness of Christ; so that by changing of this vile Body, we
may at length be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, as Saint Paul speaks,
Philip. 3. 21.

6. Surely, something of this nature was aimed at by Saint Paul to Timothy, 1
Epist. 2. 9. prescribing, That Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
shamefastness and sobrietye, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array: but (which becomes Women professing the Gospel,) with good
works: And Saint Peter, 1 Epist. 3. 3. speaking of the same Subject, says,
whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair or of
wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel, but let it be the hidden man of
the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit; which is in the sight of God, of great price. How does this
Doctrine of St. Peter cross and confound the Apologies of the Advocates of
outward lightness in Apparel and Behavior? The Wisdom, yea the Religion of
this World argues this, It matters not much what habit a Man or Woman uses,
nor what fashion they follow in outward Dresses and Ornaments, provided they
have good hearts toward God; and be upright, and innocent, and true, and
devout in the main Duties of Religion: But Saint Peter plainly says, do not
that, but see to this. And whose sense of Scripture is so narrow as to imagine
that it intended none but Women here, and not effeminated Men? And who does not
see, that if it had sufficed to regard the inward man only, and the heart of
Christians, that these wise and holy Apostles would never have urged the
gravitie and sobriety in wearing Hair, and using Apparel, and Gold, and
Silver, thereby disobliging wavering or green Converts, and by such indifferent
severities deterring them from submitting to the uneasy Gospel of Christ? But
more blameable are such affected Artifices about the Body in men of greater
minds and designs than Women: and most of all in Persons devoted to holy
functions and ministrations: some of whom we may suspect to have a worse end
than the Pharisees in their religious Offices, viz. to be seen of men: and to
covet rather to be seen and admired by Women, for the spruceness of their
Habits: to the lothing of their improper affectations, by sober Persons, and
contempt of their Character and capacity spiritual: appearing to commend
themselves to men's Eyes rather than their Consciences, which was Saint Paul's
choice and practice.

7. Nature and Infirmities are sometimes justly alleged for the vindication of
such from lightness in such modishnesse: which sometimes may be true, and
'twere to be wished were never otherwise: but that Nature or Distempers require
such curiousness, as is upon such pretenses taken up, who can say? or that all
such ends could not be satisfied as well by artlesse supplements. Neither would
men betake themselves to that wretched Topic for refuge, taken from the
absolute nature of things in themselves no ways sinful: and that there is
nothing unclean in it self: whereas all such things are to be judged by the
circumstances of Persons, Sexes, Places, Offices, Age, Time, and such like; all
which to confound with such an universal argument is absurd enough to
themselves, at the first appearance. But Religion heretofore never made Nature
Judge in such cases as this, unless in St. Paul's sense, demanding, 1 Corinthians.
11. 14. Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man has long hair, it is
a shame unto him? And may not this be extended farther also, were it not that
greatness, strength, and numbers concerned are in a readiness to oppress
such Discourses and the Author of them. The times were, in my memory, when
the Puritanes preached loudly for short Hair; but whether they changed their
Opinions and Notes when they perceived the Bishops likewise required the same
of their Clergy; or whether the Faction conquering and prospering thought it
time to lay that Fashion down, and be the first of the Ministry, that I
remember, to have made use of artificial Hair, I will not determine. But this
I may say, that they found not long after, followers in this way, who differed
in other things from them: but hereupon began to be better reconciled to that
injudicious, crude and dangerous Doctrine of worshipping God so with the heart
and Spirit, as no Censure should remain for any outward indecencies, in the
Ministers or Worship of God, but what are common to all men.

8. But with me, that is more wisely and authentickly delivered, which I find,
Ecclesiasticus 19. 29, 30. A man may be known by his look; and one that has
understanding by his countenance, when thou meetest him. A man's attire and
excessive laughter, and gate show what he is. And if they only showed and
declared what a man is inwardly, either for ingenuity, or Piety, the error of
affecting gentilenesse and prettiness, were more tolerable: but the pride of
the heart and vanity of mind does not only give being to such outward
affectations, but receive back again great increase from them. Whereupon the
wisest of Christians have ever preached up and prescribed plainness with
cleanliness of outward habits of all sorts, as a notable correcter of inward
vanity, and lightness: as the Philosopher writes of Mares in their Venereall
fury are tamed by shaving their Manes. Plinius.
And if Men or Women should shave off all that Art adds to them in the like
kind, I am of opinion, they would loose a great part of their confidence, and
wantonness, and gain a nearer step to humiliation, and Gods acceptance
thereupon; as the Scripture plainly teaches us in the case of the Children of
Israel, offending God highly, with whom God refused to treat of a
reconciliation, until they laid by their gaudinesse, Exodus 33. 5. Therefore
now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do to thee. And
according to the Leviticall Law, there were several uncleanness in Garments,
properly so called; and so certainly are there, in a sense spiritual, when
abused in such sort.

9. And this I speak not so absolutely, but with allowance for degrees, ranks,
and orders of Men and Women, distinguishing them: but rather it is such
affectation of Habits, Fashions, and Gallantrie I look on and condemn as is
inconsistent with Sobriety, Wisdom, and true Piety, which bring in a
confusion of these, and a scandal to Godliness; and many times prove an
introduction to gross impieties.

SECT. X. The Connection of what has passed with what ensues concerning the
Seven Capital Sins.
1. BUT having thus spoken generally of the Duty of Sanctification and
Purgation of the whole Man; it will be requisite, for greater plainness, and
easier progress herein, to descend to some particular Sins, which every good
Christian is obliged to quitt himself of, not only for their own sakes, but
for the tail or train of sins they draw after them. For we find a common
distinction of sins into Mortal and Venial; against which, or for which, I
shall enter into no Disputation at present: only I shall presume this as
granted on all sides: That all sins are not equally sinful: and that some sins
are more prolificall and fruitful than others; and that these, however in show
they appear not foul and scandalous, are indeed more dangerous and deadly than
others; more detested in their consequences. Such, for instance, are Pride,
Covetousness, and Slothfullnesse, and some others.

2. Neither shall I here contend about the number of these Capital Sins, in
which I find some difference among Authors, as also in the very kinds; but
shall pitch upon these Seven, which I may first rank according to that
distinction before given of Sins proper to Evil Spirits; and of Sins more
proper to Beasts: Of both which miserable and frail Man too much partakes. For
Pride, Envy and Anger may seem to have the Devil for their proper Sire. And
Covetousness, Gluttony, Luxury, and Slothfullnesse, are more brutish than
the other: And both sorts are so bad, that if a man were to choose, he could
not tell which to be most ashamed of: neither being at all desirable, or
cligible. Sometimes the Scripture teaches us that Pride is the Original of all
sin: and sometimes that Covetousness is the Root of all evil: which are both
true, if we consider them thus ranged. For of all mental sins, wherein man
draws nearest unto the Devil, who is a Spirit, Pride may be said to be the
Mother. And of all bodily sins, viz. such as proceed properly from corrupt
Flesh and Blood, Covetousness may be said to be the root; taking it,
especially as Saint Paul does; for a concupiscence tending to the satiating the
Senses, ever least satisfied, where they are most cocker'd and indulged. But
omitting curiosity and prolixitie, we shall consider them in their order
mentioned; giving a brief description of these distempers of the Soul, and
then of their Cures.

SECT. XI. Of Pride, the first Deadly Sin, or Capital.
1. PRIDE, (we know) was the first Sin committed, and the first spot that
blemished the fair Works of the great Creator of all things, and that one of
the fairest and noblest made by him. For as Angels were the top and Crown of
Gods Creation, so was Lucifer the Head (as is generally believed) of Angels,
of his order especially. And his sin was Pride, and his Pride an emulation of
God himself, saying within himself, I will ascend and be like unto God. He
thought himself such a freeborne Subject, that he ought to cast all
Sovereignty off him; and bring the rest of the world to be governed by
Aristocracie; in which he hoped for a principal place, and to have a negative
Voice, at least. But that Pride which infatuated his understanding to aspire so
high, weighed down his person to a base and monstrous condition, both of
ugliness and torment. And this his Leader, the proud man follows; and with
the same event likewise. His great design and aim is to be high, honored, and
applauded: and of all men, is the most odious to God and man. It being said of
God, that he resists the proud, James 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. and this agreeing
with what we read, Job 40. 11. as a property of God, viz. to cast abroad the
rage of his wrath, and to behold every one that is proud, and abase him. and as
if the sin of Pride were greater than the punishment of the guilty person could
any ways answer, God declares he will destroy the house of the proud, Proverbs
15. 25. Infinite other Texts of holy Scripture testifying the like vengeance
ready to fall not only on the person, but family of the proud: and that where
the pride of the heart aspireth to an high and perpetual name. For what can
they expect from God more justly; than that they should follow Lucifer in his
fall, whom they have imitated in his selfeexaltation.

2. And what a piece of short-wittednesse is that, for men not to be able to
discern, that by that very means, whereby they hope to be overvalued in the
world, they are undervalued, hated, scorned, and cursed by men; so far as the
greatness, power and tyranny of the proud do not crush them into more
conformity to their humor, than they are disposed to of themselves. Whereas to
the humble and lowly, love and ingenuity impell men to ascribe more than they
claim.

3. And here it is well to be observed that Pride casts it self into more
forms, and acts more parts than one; so that it many times passes
undiscovered. For there is a Mental pride; when the outward deportment may
seem to be lowly and orderly: and there is a Corporal pride, consisting in
outward ostentations of words and phrases affectedly lofty, and gloriousness
of Apparel, strange fantastic, and above the Purse, parts and rank of the
wearer: This is in truth, set on foot by the high mind, but the high mind is
augmented in its vanity, by the lifted up Neck, which the Scripture censureth
so often; and by other gestures and habits invented to make men admire the
user; and for which the user most of all admires himself. And so are we
influenced from without, that a costly furnished House, and new fashioned,
shall have a great power to corrupt the mind with this vanity; yea and a
proud carriag'd Horse shall communicate of his virtue to his Rider, producing
this Vice in him.

4. But this low sort of Pride though very troublesome, frivolous, and
oftentimes ridiculous, has more of the Child than the Man in it: For it is much
the same with that Children manifest, when they have new Coats or Shoes given
them. But there is another sort of Pride which is properly mental and
spiritual, much more dangerous and pernicious to the affected with it, and
still so much the more fowl and damnable, as it seems to have somewhat of
Religion for its foundation, and fomenter. As when men are conceited of their
natural parts, Wit, Memory, or Reason: or when they reflect upon some
accomplishment, and faculties acquired, which lift up the Head, and cast the
Eye this way and that way, to see whose eyes are upon them, and may seem to
admire them: and who shall say, That, that is he: which observed, or overheard,
sowes the seed of the Serpent in the heart, which wonderfully delights the
mind, so that scarcely, or not at all, it can contain it self from uttering
its vanity to others.

5. But no Pride comparable to that of the Spirit, or spiritual Pride,
properly so called, noted in the ancient Canons of the Church: when men shall
presume themselves so spiritualized in gifts and religious abilities, that
impatient they are of any rules of moderation, but what proceed from their own
dictates and inventions. And to pass better undiscovered and unsuspected in
such a Malady, they discover themselves very unluckily and insensibly by
crying down pride in others. Much noise they make, and much pains they take, to
beat down pride in others: For not only Fashions, as Ribbands, Patches,
Dresses, Gesticulations, and such like, come under their severest Censure; but
some they will needs have accounted proud by their very office and order, be
their personal carriage never so inculpable in that kind, otherwise. They are
proud, because they will not suffer others to be so. They are proud, and must
be humbled, otherwise they cannot be exalted. So that I may make this the
Character of a really proud person, that he is too studious, careful, and very
active that others should not be proud. For though some Sinners agree very
lovingly and side together, as the Drunkard, the Covetous person, the Thief,
and open Robber; they bless one another, and love one another humors, and
company; the proud man is altogether unsociable and unsufferable; and cares
for none so much as Sycophants and Flatterers of him. None so intolerable to
him as he who is likest himself, and carries on the same trafficking for
esteem and vainglory: Unless we except such, who vainly puffed up of their
fleshly mind, would have the sober, deliberate, and best composed gifts of
their Superiors, subject to their imaginary, rash, petulant, sudden flashes,
magnified for purely Divine. Which to a discerning eye is the worst pride of
all: which because it relates to spiritual matters may be called Spiritual;
more odious to God, and more pernicious to the Soul, than that about worldly
advantages presumed on: as may appear from the fearful judgment of God,
sinking them down to Hell alive; who denying any singular gifts to Moses and
Aaron, assumed the same to themselves, and thereupon exalted themselves above
their ranks and order, and established Ordinance of God. Which was much the
case also of all the proud men resisting the Word of the Lord in the mouth of
the Prophet Jeremiah, contrary to their opinion and humor, Jerem. 43. 2. And
so subtle and busy is the Spirit sometimes, that it disposes men to be
conceited of their humility, forsooth, it self: so contradicting Levitie,
that they fall into morositie; and would confute superfluities and vanities in
others, by affecting indecencies and slovennesse in themselves: hoping thereby
to have as many admirers of them, as gayer and finer Persons. And with as great
ostentation in the eyes of God, covet a name for Enemies to ostentation. And we
find in the writings of the ancient and holy Fathers, a special caveat given
to them who have denied the world in outward appearance, not to be proud of it:
And specially against the conceit of the excellency of Virginity: And
Fastings, abstinences, and multiplied, and produced Prayers have given too
great occasion many times to appearing Saints, to become conceited. Which that
good man mantioned by Gerson in a Tractate Of the Trial of Spirits, perceiving
and fearing in himself, prayed to God earnestly that he might be possessed
with the Devil three months together, to prevent such an evil; choosing
rather to be infested with the Spirit of Pride, than infected with the Pride of
Spirit; and was accordingly answered by God. And Saint Hierome writes in the
life of Saint Hilarion, that having the gift of Miracles which he showed by
acts of mercy on indigent, impotent, and sick persons, that becoming noted and
admired for such works, so soon as he perceived it, fled from that place, lest
he should possibly be tainted with the corrupt breath of Fame and applause. The
like to which we read in Aeneas Gazaeus his Dialogue called Theophrastus, or
the Resurrection of an Ancient holy Man, who being persuaded by the
importunities of a dear Friend having lately lost his Child, to restore him to
life again, he did so in a miraculous manner: and to avoid the glory and
admiration of the people for so great a work, chose to go into voluntary
banishment. For as a wise and Holy Father observes, Omnia vitia in malefact is
timenda sunt, superbia in benefact is plus timenda est. Augustine. in Psalm. 58.
the case of Pride is quite contrary to that of others. In doing evil, men are
generally to fear evil; but men are to fear Pride most of all when they do
well. When men preach eloquently and powerfully; when others pray fluently and
giftedly as they suppose, to the admiration and applause of others, the vain
spirit of man licketh up, as it were, and draws greedily to it self the
fumes of praises offered so to him, as the Gentile Philosophers taught the
paltrie Spirits of the air, (for they made several orders of Spirits too)
attended the Altars at the time of Sacrificing to them, and with great pleasure
drew to themselves the fat vapor that ascended from thence, and were nourished
by the same, as they tell us. And if men be so wanting that they of themselves
refuse to offer a sacrifice of praise answerable to the appetites of the vain
expecter; pretty sly artifices are invented to ensnare, as it were, men to
ascribe something to them: of which that is none of the least or rarest, To
cast out some light disparagement of themselves, that the Friend or flatterer
may catch that occasion to confute what was said, and amplify his deserts, on
the contrary, and extol him: as it is often seen in young Children, who
discerning their Parents fondness toward them, will sometimes cast themselves
down upon the ground, that they may be taken up into their arms, dandled and
kissed.

6. But so much as to point at the several sorts of this Vice might require a
greater latitude of Discourse than is proper for this place. Ambition or
affectation of great Power, or Honors, or Place is that which can hardly
consist with a sincere mind, or spirit truly apprehensive of the vanity of
the world, or the unsociablenesse, I do not say of the things themselves, for
such orders and subordinations God would have in the world, but of the
Affectation and appetite of them, so far as least of all to desire that Good
work the Apostle mentions in Dignities: but wholly or chiefly to desire
grandeur, profits, and perhaps ease from inferior labors, and less
advantageous: becoming so much the less sollicitous and industrious as the
reward requires and deserves greater. Here must necessarily be either
Vain-glorie or Covetousness or both, too prevalent.

7. But Saint Chrysostom gives us an Instance of vaingloriousnesse, and pride
of mind, even after men are dead and turned to corruption; an exorbitancie
Great men are subject to in this sin more then in any other. For other sins
commonly end their days with the Sinner, but Pride diverse times manifests it
self after death; and Drunkenness and Uncleanness, and Gluttony and
Covetousness fall away with the guilty person: but he that is ambitious and
vainglorious provides for the continuation of his blindness and error by
appointing lasting and magnificent Monuments, to that purpose: stately devices
and Edifices must declare to Posterity that such an one was once great and
renowned, whether he were so or not; ay, and as now the wicked world goes, men
shall be Sainted by an Inscription, who have been profane to a great degree in
their lifes-time: and by stately Tombs, proudly, after their death, cease not
to profane the Church or Chancell by usurping that part of Gods Soil
dedicated to Holiness, to the celebration of rotten flesh, and dry bones; and
it may be, to the bringing down the judgment of God upon that Church, which
tolerates such abuses when it is in its power to hinder it: which often it is
not, through the power and Lordlinesse of Great Persons too resolute to be
diverted, and too strong to be resisted in their unrighteous actions:
especially when it so happens that men of such advantages over poor Ministers
of Christ and their Superiors too, shall take a kind of Antichristian pride
in showing how they can exalt themselves above all that is called God, or
reputed holy; and especially in following the Fashion, and that when they are
dead.

8. Wherefore the mischief of this Deadly evil being duly considered and
observed, it will concern every true Christian truly and impartially to make
inquiry into the depths of his own heart, and so judge his Spirit as to
deliver himself from the same. Many for kind, are the sorts thereof; and some
very monstrous for nature; all delusive of the affected therewith, procuring
him Hatred instead of Love, contempt instead of esteem and honor; and
restlessenesse of mind; ever more thirsting for that with which he can never
be satisfied. Let us therefore take the Apostles advice, Galat. 4. and not be
desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. And if such
mutual Emulation were all, it were more to be endured; but by such
vainglorious provocations of God and Man, we stir them both up to the ruin
and dejecting of our selves, exalting our selves: some Philosophers being so
wise, as well as some Christian contemplatours of the ways and works of God,
to see and say that God sits above in the highest Heaven observing who by
humility is capable of Exaltation, and who by exalting himself deserves to be
crushed and confounded.

9. And this is it which the wise Man, Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 10. v. 9. teaches
us; when he seemed to be altogether ignorant of the ground of Pride in Man.
Why (says he) is earth and ashes proud? For asking, why? it is certain, he
knew not Why. Yea rather asking Why? he knew, why not. Which appears from
what he had said formerly, ver. 7. Pride is hateful before God. And so ver.
13. Pride is the beginning of sin: and the parting from God is the beginning of
it. Pride and Apostacy from God are mutual causes one of another, by a kind
of monstrous incest begetting one another; but having for their common Father,
the Devil himself; that Apostate Spirit Lucifer, who first committing that
sin and suffering condign punishment for the same, has made it his Office to
draw men into the same offense and condemnation, and loss too by aspiring, as
Holy and humble Job informs us, Chap. 41. 34. thus speaking of him, He
beholds, ( i. e. according to the language of the Scripture, he loves and
admireth) all high things: he is the King of all the Children of pride: that
is, his own children, made so by pride.

10. And who is not ignorant of the reason why Flesh and blood should be proud,
which Ecclesiasticus resolves into Earth and Ashes. And why so? but because
Ashes are barren of good, and Earth is base, ordained to be trampled on, not
lifted up, but in such cases as great calamities seize on a man: and then it
was wont to be heaped on the head to augment his vileness and misery that
brought it upon him by his folly and vanity: Man having by pride advanced
himself above his original, Earth, by as unnatural a course, as if the
stream should rise higher than the Fountainhead, reason good that Earth should
recover its dignity and place, by becoming higher than the calamitous proud man.

11. Let not therefore (says God by the Prophet Jeremie, Chap. 9. 23.) the
wise man glory in his wisdom: neither let the mighty man glory in his might:
let not the rich man glory in his riches: which is an Inference following upon
what is said, ver. 22. Even the Carcasses of men shall fall as dung upon the
open field. Is there any so wise that he can deliver his Soul from the hand of
the grave? The Psalmist says, no. Psalm 49. He sees that wise men die as well
as the ignorant, and foolish. Or can the Rich man's wealth defend him from the
violence of death? Of such in the same Psalm, it is said, None of them can
redeem his brother, by any means: nor give to God a ransom for him. And what
is beauty more than strength? Nay, it is much less. For generally it fades
first: and while it stays, what is it but an apt contemperation of blood, and
choler, and phlegm, and that more earthy humor, Melancholy: which to be proud
of, is much the same, as to be proud of fine Clothes and Fashions, which
suddenly alter into absurdities, and every night, as duly as they were put on,
are put off and laid aside. Wherefore rather as the Prophet says, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord: that is, account it his greatest honor
and happiness, that he knows God, and is educated in the Doctrine of
Salvation: which principally instructs all true Believers in the practice of
humility.

12. And Humility alone made glorious, by the example of Christ, and made
easy by the Yoke of Christ persuading to it and wearing of it, and lightening
it to us, is instead of a thousand directions to induce an ingenuous Christian
to the study of it, and imitation: and will wholly leavell the towering mind
of man, to due compliance with the simplicity of the Gospel, and purge out
the sour and ungrateful leaven of Pride. Therefore Christ exhorts, ( Matthew.
11.) Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and ye shall find rest for your
Souls. Stupendous was the humility of Christ in his several condescensions:
but whether not equally stupendous it be, that after an humble God (as Austin
speaks) there should be found a proud man, I think may be doubted. It is
written of Heraclius Emperor of Greece, that having obtained a glorious
Victory over Cosdroes or Cosroes King of Persia, he was so puffed up with that
success, that he made all possible preparations to enter into the Gates of
Jerusalem with greatest triumph and splendor; having Christ's Cross carried
before him: but that an Angel of God opposed him and shut the Gates against
him, not suffering him to enter; but rebuking him, said, The King of heaven
entered in here in mean and low estate: which so far affected him, that laying
away his Imperial Robes and Trophies, and blushing at his own error, he
lighted off his Horse or Chariot, and walked into the City barefoot. Which made
good what St. James speaks and St. Peter also, God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble: And from hence does St. Peter exhort us to be
clothed with humility, which is the true Robe of Christ militant, and ought to
be of every one that will follow his example, and obtain his Promises.

13. Lastly, Because I know the difficulty of Self-denial in this case, is no
small impediment to the performance of this Duty; let the generous mind
conceive from thence, a resolutenesse to encounter such an Adversary, as is
worthy of his Christian warfare here on earth: and as that Conquest, which must
needs be great, and in the conclusion of all, glorious in the best sense;
because difficult: but this difficulty well mastered wonderfully facilitates
the Victory we are to gain of the subordinate Vices introduced and acted
principally by this leading only.

SECT. XII. Of Anger and its Concomitants, the Second Deadly Sin: and some
Remedies thereof.
1. IT is requisite, for the better detecting and pursuing of this deadly
Enemy, that some description be premised thereof, but more Divine than
Philosophical, properer for other Treatises. Anger, therefore wrath,
displeasure, revenge, and violence in Spirit, Word, or Deed, is a Passion
properly belonging to evil Spirits, and a resemblance of them, furiously bent
against God and all that are unlike themselves. Beasts indeed have their rage
and fury, especially provoked, but without transgressing any Rule of Reason
prescribed them, as angry Spirits and men do. Woe be to the earth, says the
Angel in the Revelations, Chap. 12. 12. For the Devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows his time is short. Not for any just
cause given him, but because his perverted nature impells him to indignation
and fury: and by the just Sentence of God upon him, he rages by his Office;
thus described by the Son of Sirach, Ecclesiasticus 39. 28. There are Spirits
that are created for vengeance, which in their fury, lay on sore strokes: in
time of destruction they pour out their force, and appease the wrath of him
that made them. By which it seems, there should be some color and cause for
the execution of the wrath of Evil Spirits; but I know no ground for the
immoderate wrath of men, but their lust of tormenting others, contrary to Gods
institution.

2. And this Vesuvian flame works principally three several ways: sometimes
like that fiery Mountain, it frets within and consumes its own bowels with
madness, wanting power and means to burst out upon others. Sometimes it spits
fire outwardly in horrible language, casts the same in the face of such as it
is incensed against, calling them all to naught, and that if they be not so,
they may be such by such violence offered. And sometimes violent actions,
assault with what comes next to hand, sparing neither limb, nor life of such as
stand in its way: And men having done what Passion urged them to, they make
this cold defense of their woeful effects: They were in a Passion: making one
sin to justify another: and voluntary Drunkenness of mind, and phrenzie, to
apolologize for the worst of actions.

3. It is true, some men are by their natural temper, more choleric than
others and furious; and much more to be excused than they whose nature is more
governable, and not unhappie, but made so, by affected and acquired Habits of
this nature. But God having blessed every man with Princely Reason, and
fortified the reason of every Christian with the wise and grave Precepts and
Documents of Religion and the assistance of the Holy Spirit promised to all
that ask it at Gods hands, Luke 11. 13. No man can reasonably excuse himself
from the guilt of such intemperances, or say, they are not voluntary in him;
when, as he is obliged, so it is in his power, to bring his Passions to a
conformity to Reason and Gods Will rather than to his own turbulent humor. But
when frequented excesses in this kind, acted outwardly shall have added
strength and improvement to natural inclinations, then is the Passion wholly
owing to the will of the fomenter of it: and the necessity pretended, when men
say, I cannot endure this: I am not able to bear that: What flesh can suffer
this? all is to be imputed to choice and not constraint of nature: As if his
nature were one thing, and he another: or the furious habit and stock of
Passion treasured up against a day or occasion of raging, by frequent lesser
acts, (as they say proverbially, Light gains make heavy Purses) were not the
effect of his own will, and so consequently the effects of such evil habits
imputable to his will also.

4. It is disputed amongst the curious and Learned, how Fire can afflict or
torment evil Spirits, that being material, and these incorporeall: And what
place of torment there is wherein Fire rules and so rages. To which some have
replied, that the Fire wherewith the Devil and his Angels are tormented, they
carry about them; it being, by the just Judgment of God, so inseparably fixed
to them, that every one carries about him his particular Hell. I have often
likened the angry Man's evil temper and state, to this sort of torment. For he
carries this fierinesse always about him, and is always plagued with it
himself; and lessens, as it were, his own torment by scattering sparks,
whereby, as Saint James says, the course of Nature is set on fire: being a
right bred Son of the Leviathan, of whom Job thus writerh, Chap. 41. 19. Out
of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. Out of his
nostrills goes smoke, as out of a seething Pot or Caldron. His breath kindles
coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth. For so also the Angry man fumes,
and fomes, and flames, setting all into a combustion, where he has to do, and
acts his part: and which is most strange and Lamentable, this rage spares
not the author or subject of it, but oftentimes hastens Death by Apoplexies:
as that famous instance given us by Munster in his Geographie, of Matthias King
of Hungary; who having on a Palmesunday, received a Message from the King of
France that pleased him much; being at Dinner, called for his Figgs to be
brought: and understanding that his Servant had eaten them, became so enraged
as to fall into an Apoplexy, which bereaved him of his speech, grunting only
like a Beast for that Day, and dying the next.

4. When therefore men are angry (as they say) for nothing; as angry Souls
wanting matter of quarrelling will create it. When men are out of measure
offended for a real, but light cause, as the too hard clapping to of a Door,
or a Servants letting fall of a Trencher, while he waits upon his daintyear'd
Lady at the Table, or offends others in some such frivolous ways, who would
have it an argument of their greatness to have no command of their Appetites
any more than of their Passions? When men shall be too frequent in their
choleric humor, imagining that nothing can do well without that Engine which
mars all; then may they well be assured, they are much out of the way
themselves, having lost the command of themselves, and in no likelihood to
govern others as behooves them. For Saint James tells us, The wrath of man
works not the Will of God; meaning, that God seldom prospers that with a
good success, which Choler principally sets on foot. For this were for God
to bless Vices. Yea, where it is the Will of God that a thing should be done,
as Vice in its several kinds reproved by such especially whose place and
office it is so to do, yet if zeal be transported into Anger, so that it
appears to be the effect of Choler rather than Conscience; or it seems to be
an enmity against the Person rather than his offense, men arm themselves with
obstinacy against such attempts of reducing or correcting them. And daily
Anger, is no better than daily Physic, to move dry and slow bodies: seldom
used, it may do good: but constantly, has no power over them. For it will
then too justly be suspected, what is commonly too apparent, that men greedily
catch at occasions to be offended, not out of ill will to the Vice, or faults
committed, nor out of good will to the offender to be amended, but to satiate
their humor and please themselves in their proper and dear Vice: many, diverse
times, being really less displeased at the crime committed, than they are
pleased with the opportunity offered of exercising their angry faculty.

5. Be instructed then, and persuaded, true Christian Soul, in what becomes
thee in this Case. Will thou entertain such a Guest within thee, which will
turn thee, I mean the best part of thee, thy Reason and Religion, out of
doors? Or will thou torment thy self most dangerously to afflict others? See
thou not from whence wrath proceeds? See thou not whither it tends? namely,
to put thee beside thy self, as a temporary madness, or dry Drunkenness;
to prey upon the very Vitalls, to precipitate thy latter end; to have no
content but what is found in Hell, by tormenting and being tormented; to open a
door to diverse mischiefs public and private, personal, and sociall. For if
that be true, which upon experience the Ancient Hermit delivers for such;
That a man cannot live Chastely, as he ought, that is given to Anger, nor subdue
Lust, till he be master of this, how many sins does this one expose him unto,
seeing that the unnatural heat which lurketh in the Angry man, is indifferent
to the forming of other sins, as well as that?

6. Consider with thy self, how frail thou art thy self, and apt to offend,
and that sometimes unfortunately and unwillingly; and do not always
interpret the errors or failings of others as purposed: much less, anticipate
by rash conjecture, that to be done which perhaps was not done nor intended; to
the end thou may indulge to thy self the wonted pleasure of fretting and
storming without cause; and so with shame thou be constrained to muster up
thy Forces, and glory what thou would have done, upon occasion, but art fain
to withdraw, as upon a false Alarm; yet least thou should be up for nothing,
should fall fowl one way or other, before Choler will be quiet, upon the
undeserving.

7. It is no good ground of wrath against another, that thou being wiser than
another, should either deride, or rage against the folly of him; but a true
Christian should consider, that he who suffers men to be borne and live with
crooked limbs or bodily parts, does permit some crooked Souls to abide in
bodies: and therefore should rather pity and endeavor to rectifye them, than
to expose them to shame, or insult over them, thereby contracting the like
perverseness to that condemned by them. We that are strong, (says the
Apostle, Romans 15.) ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please
our selves: especially by displeasing others, and God especially.

8. And the better to crush the Viper of Anger in us, stinging all that come
nere us, we must note, that, as Pride is the beginning of all sins and
wickedness, the contrary Virtue Humility is the mother of all Christian
Virtues. This foundation then must be laid here also; otherwise all repairs of
the ruinous Soul will be frustrated. For where Humility is wanting, a thousand
false phansies of our perfections, and merits will swell the mind above its
proper height, and largeness: so that every little thing will stand in its
way, and offend it. For men suspecting themselves undervalued by others (as
they do and needs must, who overvalue themselves) presently the vindicative
Spirit falls to work by word and deed, to satiate it self upon detractours, as
it accounts them, mistakenly, childishly, and madly at the same time.

9. Where therefore true Humility is found, Meekness will not be far distant,
nor long absent. And where Meekness dwells, Madness and Choler will have but
cold entertainment. And to the Spirit of Meekness, do much conduce a
Discipline and cohibition imposed on the outward man. It is often alleged by
the riotous mind, I cannot bear that abuse, or this affront, or such contempt,
or disobedience, or neglect; I cannot be so advised as I should be: But no man
can say, that professes manliness and humanity, but he can move or hold his
hand; and can speak or keep silence, or compose the outward parts of his body,
or suffer them to break out into disorders: which Regiment when he has
obtained over himself outwardly, and for a time practiced, he shall find a
considerable change in his inward man, in due time; and the heat allayed, and a
wonderful calm and tranquillity, with admiration that he should heretofore
be hurried away in a storm frivolously occasioned. And as it is observed that
too hot mettall'd Horses which are apt to run away with their Riders, are no
ways better tamed and taken off their courage, than by accustoming them to
walk a foot-pace: so modest and moderate actions outwardly will in time
qualify the impetuousnesse of the mind. It were therefore well worth a man's
labor, attendance, and time, to bend his mind resolutely for trial of his
strength, and what Mastery he has of himself, to act, though an unwilling
part of patience, and to prove how impregnable he is against wonted
provocations: and having some few times hardened himself against such
provokings, it will become easy to do and suffer the same in earnest, even
when the like caution and attendance are not used.

10. But because there are certain junctures, and causes which do almost
naturally dispose to anger; such as are Sickness, and Pampering the Body,
making it thereby more than one way, resty: immoderate Cups, and even Fastings,
rarely used; and such as the Body is not accustomed to, and some other, which
justle, as it were, nature out of its Rode, and so offends it: Great
circumspection is, in such cases, to be used. And in truth such excesses are
wholly and absolutely to be avoided, as they which blind the eyes of Reason,
inslame the Blood, precipitate the Spirits to act violently: And Abstinences or
Fastings themselves, stand in need of watchings over a man's disposition. For as
all things are molested inwardly by denial of wonted food, and naturally
complain; so the Body of man being disappointed of its ordinary supply and
refreshment, is apt to be murmuring, discontented, and querulous, until it be
better acquainted with such changes: and fretting and pinchings within will go
nere to vent themselves outwardly, upon such as shall stand in their way, and
converse with them: Care therefore is to be taken, not (as some may infer) to
shun fasting, but to bridle, at such times especially, the sharp humor which
may stir up strife or discontent, lest the good be evil spoken of: or a
scandal brought upon a Christian Duty, by some misbehaviour consequent
thereunto.

11. And to the better preventing of such ebullitions of the Spirit, it is
requisite a man should carefully avoid such Passion, when it seems to carry
much innocence and veniallnesse, with it. For it seems to diverse no offense
almost, to be angry as Balaam was, with his Beast; to be in Choler against
Dogs, that will not hunt, and Hawks that will not fly, against Horses that
will not go according to our minds: and some think themselves excusable when
their Choler is high only, against their Servants; but all with a dangerous
error. For as much as liberty being allowed to a man's self in such cases,
Flesh and Blood will not long contain themselves in those bounds, but being
accustomed to such heats and perturbations, will transgress, where perhaps
they never intended. For by such usances tolerated, men become easily
inflameable, and their blood, before they are aware, is as it were sowr'd, and
disposing to other excesses, and that upon occasions, less warrantable.

12. And upon the same reason, circumspection is to be had, how a man is
offended and angry with himself: for some men have held it very laudable so
to be; and some have been religiously vindicative upon themseves by severe
Penances for their follies and offenses against God and others, which must not
be disallowed, when governed by Christian prudence, which many times being
wanting, a man punishes one sin by another, and offers unnatural violence to
himself; which is worse than to do the same to another. So that herein is
requisite the Counsel and conduct of others, no less than in Controversies of
trespasses against a man's Neighbor: to whom he would seldom do justice, if
he were Accuser, Judge, and Executioner too. And so not rarely, men transported
with a religious Passion against themselves, (as it may seem) offend in
punishing offenses. And this is seen in cases extra-religious; men fretting,
and storming, and raging, that matters under their hands, succeed not according
to their minds, and merits. They will miscall themselves, complain of
themselves, and be enraged: as if no man had so ill luck as they, or did so ill
as they: and this doing, hold themselves very excusable, because none but
themselves, suffer hereby. But there is herein commonly a double error. For
first they who give way to any exorbitances against themselves, prepare a way
to be injurious and furious against others, much more: and that upon the reason
here given. But secondly, what seems to be, seldom is really so. And men
fretting and in a toss against themselves, to outward appearance, are in
truth incensed against Gods Providence, or perhaps their tutelarie Angels,
not doing their parts toward them, in giving better events to their good
actions. For no man (as Saint Paul says) ever hated his own flesh, or himself
naturally; and no man that is supernaturally, or by Grace vindicative upon
himself, can lightly fall into such passions, and therefore inconsiderately
accuses others of his mistakes and miscarriages; who can be no other than the
mentioned, whether he intends so much, or not. Some instances may make this
more probable: as, When he misses a thing he had in his hand a little before;
and cannot suddenly find it for his present use: When the Joiner having used
sufficient Art and care, cannot make a joint: When some little thing is so
forgot in setting together a Watch or Clock, that when all was supposed to be
ended, it must be taken apieces again. When such a snarl is made in a skean of
Silk or Thread, that the thread must be broken; men are apt to frett at higher
causes than themselves, which they vulgarly call Luck, or Fortune, really no
where extant. And when Cyrus (as Herodotus writes) in a fury laid Gyndes, a
River in Armenia, dry, by cutting three hundred and sixty Rivolets out of it,
because one of his white Naggs dedicated to the Sun, was drowned in it; could
not be so stupid to think that the River merited that punishment, but showed
his rage against that, because it could not reach higher causes; how much wiser
man had he been, if he had put a stop to the torrent of his Passion? which is
much more the wisdom and Piety of a Good Christian: whom God suffers, many
times, to be provoked, that the prevalence of true Grace may be seen in
mastering himself: and sometimes suffers to become fretfull, waspish, and
ready to sting him that stands next him, upon either no fault but his own, or
very frivolous; and so, if any has offended him in such manner, he punishes
the innocent for it; making such as converse with him to feel the effects of
his embittered Spirit: than which there needs no cleerer argument to convince
any ingenuous mind of his excess: it being but tolerable to be in Passion
where the cause is given; and not so, to extend the same to the faultlesse.
This therefore, all Reason and Religion requires to be corrected by the
conscientious Christian.

SECT. XIII. Of the Deadly Sin of Envy, its nature and Remedies.
1. NEither will I go with consuming Envy: for such a man shall have no
fellowship with Wisdom, says Wisdom. For that likewise is a proper bratt of
the Evil Spirit, who since his degradation and fall, cannot love, nor wish
well to any, because he can hope for no good to himself. Gods Kingdom is a
Kingdom of order, peace, quietness, love, charity, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; called also the fruits
of Gods Spirit by St. Paul, Galat. 5. 22, 23. because they spring from the seed
of Grace sown in the heart by it. But the Kingdom of the Devil is a Tyranny
of Adulteries, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Wrath, Strifes,
Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revilings, and such like:
as the same Apostle speaks, just before. And as if Envy, Hatred, and Malice,
(all of a knot and fraternity) descended from the Common Father the Devil, and
differing rather in degree and duration than nature, conspired with Anger and
wrath to their mutual advantage; St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 21. ranks them together
in this advice, Let all bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking be put away with all malice. And again to the Colossians, Chap.
3. 8. But now ye allsoe put off all these, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy.
And in that he writes to Titus, Chap. 3. 3. of all the Lusts charged upon men
in the state of Gentilisme, he instanceth more specially in Malice, and Envy;
whereby men are hateful to, and hating one another. For where these Vices
abound, the Soul may be c^mpared to those Cities which we read were by the
Invader and taker, sown with Salt, rendering the Soil burnt, and barren to all
wholesome fruits, and fertile to all unwholesome and pernicious weeds.

2. For how nerely does he resemble the Devil himself, who becomes pale,
thin, cloudie, frowning, of an averse countenance outward; fretts, boils, and
burns inwardly at the prosperity, ingenuity, dexterity in actions, dignity,
and wealth of others, exceeding him: having an evil eye, because Gods is good,
spiteful against the Donour, who preferred not him; against the gift, as
ill-placed, out of him: against the Person possessing it, as standing in his
light, and usurping what he adjudges due to none so justly as himself. And the
expostulation against Providence it self lies higher than that, cursed by the
Apostle and Prophet, which demands of the Potter, and Creator, Why have thou
made me thus? For the envious Person demands rather of God, Why have thou not
made me so, or so? And why have thou made such an one so, and not thus? Thus
Cains countenance fell, when he saw his younger Brother better accepted than
himself, of God. And then lift he up his hand against him and slew him. And
wherefore (says Saint John) slew he him? Because his works were evil and his
Brothers good. And because Gods favor was greater toward him than to Cain.
Monstrous impiety! But not there only resting; as it were to be wished, but
imitated and acted over again in two Brothes of a wealthy and noble Family in
this Age, and Nation: whereof one judging himself undervalued in comparison of
the other, killed him right out, and suffered the just penalty of the Common
Law. This was much the same case with that malicious part played upon Joseph by
his Brethren, because he was clad a little finer than they, and was supposed to
be loved best.

3. So that no place can be said to be free from this Evil Spirit of Envy,
which is wont to creep into the low Cottage, and stir up silly Creatures to a
combination with the Devil himself, to wreak their otherwise weak spite
against their envied Neighbor. And in Courts it reigns most powerfully; every
one almost, contending for the highest Seat, and greatest favor, and place,
so that restless is the ambitious and envious Spirit, till it has defeated,
by fine plottings and devices, such as by this Vice are accounted their
Enemies. So that when their counsel is slighted concerning Public affairs,
and that of others preferred, to convince the world of the imprudence of his
Competitour or Adversary, little or no conscience is made of rendering it
improsperous, though with the peril of the whole Commonwealth; that so, for
the future, such a man's wisdom might be blasted, and his flourish and be
admired. This was seen notoriously in the emulation between Hanno and Hannibal:
he envying the glory and success of this, in Council constantly advised, and
contrived what might crush him rather than advance the good of his Country:
whereby at length, he was the ruin of both. So that a King may not without
double security of integrity, and such generousnesse of mind as can master
Malice and Envy, ever follow the advice of that Counselor in the managing a
design, who has directly before opposed the same. For such is the pride of
men's heart, that they hate to build sincerely and faithfully upon that
foundation they at first rejected; but tacitly, if not openly, triumph at the
miscarriages of others Projects, how reasonable and profitable soever they
might have been in themselves, though of an unhappie event; because their will
and wisdom consented not to them.

4. Neither can Justice in the Country, nor Piety in Church, nor Learning in
both, nor beauty (especially amongst Women) nor Riches amongst any, defend men
from this evil Spirit possessing men, when emulation has first leavened the
mind of the envious. For even for his honesty, and unblameable integrity,
did Aristides of Athens find his name entered into the list of them who were
to be banished for ten years; and demanding a reason thereof from the Writer;
He answered, I cannot tell who this Aristides is, but this I like not, that he
should be so esteemed for Justice. And a more horrible instance than that is
given in Churchhistory of the mischief of Maliciousness, in Nicephorus an Old
Monk, and Sapritius a young Professor; who being had in greater esteem than
the other, gave unwillingly such great offense to him, that he could not endure
him, and would admit of no humiliation or reconciliation, till the Spirit of
Grace wholly deserting him, when both were called to martyrdom, the young man
suffered cheerfully and constantly, but the Old envious Father denied Christ.
So that most truly as well as Divinely, said Solomon, Proverbs 27. 4. Wrath is
cruel and Anger is outrageous, but who is able to stand before envy? A
reason whereof may be that complaint of holy David, Psalm 55. If it had been an
open Enemy that had done this, I could have borne it, etc. Anger, and wrath are
acts of open hostility, and may better be either opposed or declined, than the
dark Plotts, and privy wounds which Envy gives to its Enemy; and, which
declares its monstrousness and unnaturallnesse, to its Friend; who indulging
to himself that Vice, like the Vulture in the Fable, preyeth upon the Liver:
and nothing commendable in it is to be found, but what Saint Basil acutely
observes, saying, Envye is good for nothing but to mischief the owner.

5. Against this Evil, the remedy may be, First, to consider the absolute
Master God All-mighty is of his own; and that all things we enjoy are more
properly Gods than ours who have the use of them: And that to repine at the
happiness or prosperity of another, is to call in question Gods Wisdom and
Justice in ordering his Family, and setting some of his Servants in higher
places, and giving them greater Offices, than to others: without which the
world could not be well administered or subsist. And the envious Spirit should
consider, that if the quite contrary were appointed, and thou who enviest
another greatness in Riches, Honor, or Prosperity in the world were such,
the envious eye might as justly dart its spiteful arrow against thee, as thou
do against him: and so never would there be quiet and content in the world.
Let that righteous Document therefore here take place, Do as thou would be
done to, and envy no more than thou would be envied in the like cases.

6. Secondly, Learn to seek the honor of God, and to prefer that above all
things in the world: and become like to that communicative nature of God, who
gives to all men, yea to all things liberally, and grudgeth not. If that which
is bestowed upon another went out of thy store, and thou were less great
because another was greater than thee; or thou loosedst so much of thy beauty
as another is fairer than thou art; or thou were the leaner because another was
fatt and fairer: If there were fear that Gods Fountain would be so exhausted,
by the affluence another enjoys from him; that there remained not sufficient
for thee, then, like hungry Currs feeding greedily at the same Carcass, men
might worrey one another: or if what was given to any but our selves, were lost
to God, then murmuring and envying might be more tolerable: but it is far
otherwise: the Universal Good, and Giver is not diminished or impoverished by
the plenty of another more than of thee. And so the Nation is no less Learned
when another excells, than when thou: And the Kingdom is as honorable, and
strong, and prosperous, and happy, when another is in place, and power, and
flourishes as much, and possibly more than when thou: excepting personal
imperfections and infirmities, to which thou art as subject as another; and
much more art to be suspected of future personal failings and errors, as thou
more vehemently aymest at great things and covetest an evil covetousness to
thy self. For seldom is it seen that he, who most passionately strives for
great Places, Commands, Dignities, or Riches, uses them as he ought to do,
when he attains them. But as it happened to the lusting Israelites, Psalm. 106.
15. He gave them their request, but sent leanness into their souls: God
fills some men's Bellies, and Purses, but leanness and emptiness afflicts
their Souls. And what a bad exchange is that? and how much more to be pitied
than envied?

7. On the other side, Thirdly, consider we what benefits in singular manner,
matter, and measure God may have dealt to us, which he denies to others,
objects of our envy; and a stay and stop will necessarily be put to that
Distemper. Are not, truth, humility, quiet, and tranquillity almost proper
to Persons of low Spheres and mean Fortunes, and Innocence, much better
observed in contemning than courting the world, to be preferred before those
tempting opportunities of transgressing by fulness and Power? While the weak
eyes of the envious are dazzled at the luster of others, if they could reflect
upon themselves and duly weigh all circumstances, they may find cause to
bless themselves in the solider part of happiness, above the envied, and
therein to acquiesce, cashiering such an ignoble Passion.

8. Fourthly, If men thoroughly considered the chief Author of Envy in a man,
and that the Devil is he who both gives force, and finds materials for this
Sin to work by, he would hate it as the pit of Hell, and the Prince of
darkness himself. For St. Basil (that great Philosopher as well as Divine)
supposing what Poets and natural Philosophers deliver of the malice or
mischievousnesse of an envious Eye, doubts not to affirm that it proceeds
from the influence of the Devil; who tempereth his Poison with the rays of
the eye of the Spirit embittered with Envy, shot at the envied Person to his
ruin, diverse times. Unless therefore men resolve to prefer the Devil
before Christ, as he that is more serviceable to the lusts of men, dreadful
should this notorious Vice appear to all good Christians.

9. But we not having so learned Christ, nor Christ having so taught us, but
rather often inclucated by Precept, and by Example led us to that heavenly
Virtue, Charity; let that as comprehending many, if not all means of purging
out this old Leaven of Malice, as the Apostle speaks, be the last argument now
to be used, to that end. Charity (says St. Paul) is the very bond of
perfection. Coloss. 3. 14. Charity, or love, fulfilleth the Law. Romans 13. 8.
and ver. 10. Love works no evil to his Neighbor. And to the Corinthians, 1
Epist. Chap. 13. 4, 5, 6. Charity suffers long and is kind, Charity
envieth not, Chartie vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; Does not behave
it self unseemly; Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth,
Bears all things, endures all things: Which whosoever so does, cannot
envy; nor seek nor desire the evil of another, nor rejoice at any evil
befalling any other, as if thereby some good had befallen him; which is the
guise of Envy. Wherefore, O Lord, who know that all our doings without
Charity are nothing worth, pour into my heart that most excellent gift of
Charity, the proper Antidote against this Poison of Envy, hatred, and malice,
and the very soul of all Christian Graces, and the Earnest of, and key to
Glory, and that fire of unquenchable blessedness, contrary to that
unquenchable fire of Hell, where the Devil and his Angels are tormented: that
fo for his fake, and through his Spirit, who loved us and gave himself for us,
I may with faithful, servent, and never failing Charity, love thee who have
first loved me, and in thee, and for thee, all, as they belong to Thee, through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

SECT. XIV. Of the Capital Sin, Covetousness.
1. I Have sometimes doubted and wondered how the excessive Declamations found
in humane Authors, and the sharpest Censures found in Holy Writ can be true of
several Vices, as if more than one were worst of all: For sometimes Pride is
the original of all Evil: and sometimes Covetousness is said to be the Root
of all Evil, as 1 Timothy 6. 10. And than which nothing can be said more severely
against any Sin, the Apostle advises concerning Covetousness, Ephesians. 5. 3.
Let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints. For what, indeed, can
worse become Saints, whose conversation is in Heaven, than to fall flat upon
the earth, and like Moles, to work in it. And, There is not a more wicked thing
than a covetous man, says Ecclesiasticus 10.

2. But comparing the Diseases of the Soul, with the distempers of the Body,
some satisfaction may be given of such exaggerating forms of Speech. For as
the Maladies of natural Bodies cannot so well be estimated from their kinds,
as from the degree of affecting; and the danger from the part so affected: so
is it with the evils of the Soul. For a Pin thrust into one part, may be more
mortal than a Sword run through another. And oft-times, the pain of the Tooth
is less tolerable than the Gout in Feet or Joints: and a lighter distemper at
the Heart more dangerous than a Cancer in the outward parts. And thus may Pride
be the chief and worst of sins of a spiritual nature: and Covetousness may
be the root of all Evil tending to bodily and brutish pleasure, though it
takes the least sensible pleasure of any, but only treasures up materials for
all other Vices, and impells to monstrous desires and actions. For gaping, and
hungry as the unsatiable Grave, and dilating its stomach as Hell; it fetches
from thence also hellish appetites, contriveth plotts to catch its unjust
prey, or most unjustly hoardeth up and detaineth what perhaps not unjustly was
acquired. Or if at any time it lets go abroad part of its Magazine; it is,
as Garrisons send out Parties, to bring in more spoil, by pilling and robbing
the Country, that is, by Usurie and extortion, or Money lent most
disadvantageously to the borrower.

3. Certain old Stories do commonly pass of some Caves, Hills or holes of the
Earth, wherein are great Treasures of Gold and Silver, and precious Stones; but
so, that they are kept by Dragons, or evil Spirits from being carried out, and
become useful to men. Very true is this of Wealth in the possession of
Covetous Persons. There it is to be found; but thence it may not be taken, by
any means: For it is kept by Evil Spirits so close, that the pretended owner
himself scarce durst touch it. For, as Solomon says, What good is there to
the owner of them, saving the beholding of them with the eyes? Ecclesiast. 5.
v. 11. And yet this is not all: but ver. 13. There is a sore evil which I have
seen under the Sun, Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt: A double
damage generally happening to the Amassers of Wealth: One to the wicked
treasurer of it; while the more he has, the more he wants; and the more he
possesses, the less he enjoys. And therefore very aptly in our English
Tongue, we call a Covetous Person, a Miserable Person, as most unhappie of all
men. And it proves a sore evil to him for whom it is so gathered: the
Posterity of the Covetous Person scattering with like, though contrary
pleasure, as the Father gathered: and by prodigious Prodigality hasting to the
Grave, and so to Hell for spending, as his Predecessor, for sparing. And the
Evil Spirit that stopped the course of due spending, now, on a sudden draws up
the Sluice, and drowns the Country with Vice and Vanity managed for a short
season by Money. But to begin the torment of the Covetous in this life, he is
told by truth it self, Prove. 28. 8. He that by Usury and unjust gain
increases his substance, he shall gather for him that will pity the poor: a
thing which he dreadeth most of all, who so hoardeth.

4. But another Reason may be given why St. Paul calls Covetousness the root
of all Evil, taking here Evil, for Punishment, and future Torments. For I am
of opinion, that Covetousness sends more grist to the Devils Mill; and finds
more Fuel for to maintain Hellfire than any other Sin, infidelity perhaps
excepted. For very many great Sinners, in the days of their youth and Vanity,
drawing toward the end of their lives, have seriously and savingly repented;
changed their minds and manners, finding thereupon the effect of Gods
bountiful Promises, and Goodness. But Covetousness, like an inveterate
Cancer in the Flesh, the older it is, the more it proceeds, and consumes the
Body and Soul. Seldom do men repent of their parsimonie and baseness in
their youth, but often of their profuseness and licentiousness. And not so
seldom as it were to be wished, so rashly retreat from their former Errors,
that they run into the contrary Vice of Covetousness, from which very few
return. But the old Sinner thinks he makes God some recompense for his former
Vices; and doubts not but he repents notably, if he declaims against young
men's, and his own expenses in foolish Fashions, in riotous Company, in costly
Dames of the worst rank; and such like miscarriages of youth, and sees not that
another Sin is to be repented of, and his base sparing shall but add to his
punishment for base spending. Here comes in a Mock-gravity, Sobriety,
Temperance, Continence, zeal against all sins but that he is lately wedded to,
and embraces as fondly as any he did formerly: to the apparent hazard of his
Soul, mistaking change of sins, for Repentance and Reformation of Life.
Whereas the Rule and Power of true Repentance for our former sins, is, to act
contrary unto them; and in this case especially, when we have in youth ill
squandered the temporary goods, God has lent to us for a season, not to be
tenacious of them, in age, but to employ them as freely in the service of God,
and promoting Piety exiled by costly Lusts. And not be like that unjust old
Usurer and Oppressor, of whom Henry of Huntington speaks, who being
exhorted, toward his Death, to give Alms plentifully, toward the expiation
of his wicked Covetousness, refused, saying: No, I will leave my Son all I
have got; and let him, if he pleases, give Alms out of it, for the good of my
Soul.

5. It is therefore the advice of our Lord and Master Christ, Luke 12. ver. 15.
Take heed, and beware (as if one word sufficed not to obviate such a pestilent
Disease) of Covetousness. For a man's life consists not in the abundance of
the things which he possesses. Take we heed of it, for the intrinsic evil in
it self; and beware of it, for the viperous brood of sins which it brings
forth and nourishes: some of which may be these: Obduration of heart against
God and Man: being unsensible of the Duty of Worship, Thankfulness, and
fruitfullnesse in all good works, the end of his bounty to man in that kind.
And a hard heart, and barren womb toward the necessities of his Brother
craving some little of his abundance. Yea, cruel is the covetous to his own
flesh, denying what may be convenient for the same: and no better to his mind,
tormenting it with restless and endless cares, to add to the unprofitable
heap, and bring about that design which never comes to pass: For he tells
others first, he desires but an honest livelihood, but having attained to that;
he proceeds and tells us, He would willingly leave a competent subsistence to
his Wife and Children: and having gained that Point also, then he is no less
sollicitous about that competencie, never knowing when he has it, though he
has it: but would make his Posterities rich too, and Gentlemen, and Esquires
and Knights, and Nobles, if it were possible, and what not? Then should he
sleep sweetly in his Grave: and for his Soul, it is the least part of his
solicitude. But if doing no good, or doing no evil but to himself, were the
evil in which the Covetous man was only guilty, it were a laudable sin (if any
may be said so to be) in comparison of the wicked Pranks it plays upon other.
What Choler and wrath rages not at a trivial loss, which a liberal Soul
would not be moved at, or stirred? Break but an earthen Vessel of two pence,
you almost break his heart; and if he breaks your Head, it is less than can
be expected from him. Violences, Frauds, Cheatings, treacheries to God, and his
Country, for lucre: Perverting Justice by Bribery: subverting the Faith, and
confounding Religion by Simonie, and Sacrilege; which he laughs out of
countenance, when he cannot stand the trial of such iniquity: or boldly
asking, What is Sacrilege? What is Simonie? baffles all received Knowledge and
persuasion thereof, by his acute and singular Skepticism, trampling on Reason
and Justice, and Religion all at once. Add hereunto Lying, Perjuries,
Stealings, Rapines, and a benefit raised to himself by depopulations of
Parishes, reducing the well-inhabited Place to one or two great Farms; taking
up a strange Paradox for his Defense, that there are, notwithstanding, never
the fewer People, because Nature will work in an unknown Manner, and Land. How
manifestly has experience taught us what the Prophet Habakkuk denounces
against such Engrossers, Chap. 2. 9. Woe to him that coveteth an evil
covetousness to himself, that he may set his nest on high, etc. For in
truth, I have by me, many Instances of curses upon Persons and Families, who
by such ill ways of advancing themselves, have, in a short time, been utterly
ruined: But I will not trouble this Discourse with them. So as that is happened
to them, which the Psalmist has, Psalm 75. 5. according to the auncienter
Translation: The proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep: and all the men
whose hands are mighty, have found nothing. Great matters they grasped at in
their projectings; but in the conclusion, they were forced to let go what
before they held; and nothing remained. But above all this, men should
seriously consider, there is more guilt in this sin, than is obvious to every
eye, especially having in it the Pearl of Covetousness; and that is no less,
if St. Paul may be believed, than Idolatry. Coloss. 3. 5. Mammon being erected
in the heart, the Temple of God; and preferred before God, and all that are
called Gods: which is the Character of Antichrist.

6. And the consideration of these Evils may more than sufficiently dissuade
the pursuit of these earthly Riches, which make us poor toward God: But does
not Christ the Oracle of God tell us, as we have it, Acts 20. It is better to
give than to receive? And the reason hereof is not obscure: because it makes
us like unto God, who gives unto all men liberally; yea, Psalm. 145. Opens
his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse. And believe we
Solomon the wisest of Men, rather than rely on our own wits natural: he
tells us, that, The Liberal soul shall be made fat. Not unlike to those
Breasts which abound by being drawn: but are dried up and empty, by denying
what they have to afford to others, by Gods and Natures appointment.

7. And there is but one or two main Objections which the Covetous is wont to
allege for his tenaciousnesse, and against Bounty and Charity, especially
toward Public Good. Charity of that nature is much perverted and abused to
evil ends: Which if the truth were plainly known, is not the real reason of
such Persons illiberality; but the love of Money. But be it so: Charitable
deeds are perverted to ill uses; such benefactions made with pious intentions,
shall never be wrested by any abuses, out of the hands of the giver, but his
reward shall be with the Lord, and that an hundred fold. Besides, to whom can
the subtillest Worldling give or leave his Estate so securely as it shall not,
or may not be abused? He himself abused it and himself many times, in getting
it, and keeping it, which, as dung, ought to be spread abroad to make the Soil
fruitful. And does not Riches left to the dear Heirs of our Bodies suffer, and
do more mischief to them than Good? Do they not abuse them in rioting,
Luxury, and Whoredom, and Drunkenness? Who would have thought that the
Covetous Person should be a man of so much mercy as to bring the abuse and
mischief of Wealth home to his own Family, rather than the Church, or State
should be the worse for his freeness? But so experience often teaches us, to
fall out. Whereas by sparing somewhat out of that we enjoy, to Gods Service,
the remainder is sanctified, and by Gods blessing, becomes more durable.
Therefore, O Man of God flee these things, says Saint Paul of Covetousness.
And let the judgment of him who was made Wisdom and Sanctification to us be
preferred before the short reasonings of a worldly wise head, Luke 12. 15. Take
heed, and beware of Covetousness: for a man's life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses: nor indeed the life of his
Family, or Posterity: but Gods Blessing.

SECT. XV. Of the Sin of Luxury, or Uncleanness.
1. BUT flee not only Covetousness that civil Sin, but flee youthful Lusts
also, that open, daring, and dangerous Sin to Body and Soul. For as
Covetousness reigns in the aged; and flourishes most when all things most
decay; So Luxury rages in Youth most of all. Luxury is sometimes taken for
general indulgence to carnal Senses, and the pleasures proceeding from them:
from whence that special Vice must needs become Rampant, which wars against
both Purity of Mind and Chastity of Body: and may be said to be an
inordinate lusting of the Flesh tending to prohibited pollution. When the vain
mind of man following the error of Rehoboam, consulting with the more
youthful and precipitant faculties and inclinations of a man, we turn a deaff
ear to the sober and grave Dictates of Reason and Religion interdicting our
course; letting all loose, and giving the reins out of our hands, permitting
our selves to be hurried down-hill with an easy, and sudden Passion, we know
not, we care not, we consider not, whither: till like the blind Soldiers of
Benhadad King of Syria, our eyes being at length opened, we find our selves
captivated in the City of our Deadly Enemy, the Devil seducing us away.

2. And if this Vice were peculiar to vain Worldlings, it were less to be
feared by sober Persons: but we read of the complaints of such as have
sequestered themselves from the world, that have enclosed themselves in bare
walls, and rude Cells, as well as of them whose Tables are furnished with all
manner of Dainties, and their Parlours wainscoated with Cedar: who are clothed
ruggedly, and fare hardly, and live abstemiously; yea Repentance it self for
such fowl miscarriages, while the mind dwells too long upon the subject,
renewing the subtle and sinful Delectations: Nay, which is most wonderful,
Fastings prescribed against the Lusts of the flesh, shall end contrary to it.
The Spirit of Luxury, says Saint Hierom, boils by Night, breathes forth by
Day, infests in Sleep, molests in business, stupifies Reason, destroys
Advice, disquiets the Mind, urges to fall, insnares the Chaste, burns more by
Use: Pollutes the Temple of God, wastes the substance delivered to us by our
heavenly Father, turns Man into a Beast, and enslaves him with the worst of
Servitudes to his Animal Part.

3. And if we consult ancient Histories, we shall find, that the greatest and
most lamentable subversions of Nations, have been occasioned by immoderate and
unjust lustings. As for instance; the Gauls invaded Italy, took, and sacked
Rome it self, being invited thither first by Aruns Clusimus in revenge against
Leucemon, offering such violence to his Wife. And the exorbitant lusts of
Vortiger the British King, upon the body of Rowenna Daughter to Hengist the
Saxon, brought all the Britains into perpetual Servitude. And the ravishing
of the Wife of Beorn Bokard a Noble Person, by Osbert King of the
Northumbrians, brought in the Danes into this Country; who slew the King in a
Battle. And from the same occasion, the Moors invaded Spain, as might be showed
at large out of the History of that Country. When King Roderick ravishing the
Daughter of Count Julian, he conspired against his King and Country, in
reverence of that injury; and brought in those barbarous Infidells, to the
enslaving and ruining that Country for many years. And why should I tell you of
the Plague brought upon the Israelites? Or of Sampson and Solomon upon
themselves by the same Vice; and David too. Or why should I speak of the
mischiefs done to the very bodies of such Voluptuaries? What infatuations of
the mind? What fears and agonies seize the Adulterer, in the height of
unlawful pleasure, least he should be discovered? What distempers and Diseases
of the Body arrest the Carrier of lusts? Pains in the Head, Gouts in the
Limbs, Dropsies in the whole Body, Fevers in the Blood, and rottenness in
the Bones and very Marrow; so turning the Comedy of such love into Tragical
Notes, and Lamentations, running on this strain principally: So foolish was I
and ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee, Psalm. 73. 22. And, How have I hated
instruction?

4. But lest we flatter our selves with an opinion of Innocence, when this Sin
becomes not openly scandalous; we must know what Solomon says, Prove. 24. 9.
The thoughts of foolishness is sin. And as Christ teaches; He that lusts
with his Eye and Heart after a Woman, commits Adultery with her in his
Heart. And wanton Talk, especially lascivious Songs and Dalliances; and
uncivil, though too common nakednesses in Women: and several other occasions
of temptations are hereby blameable, and are, as Nits to Vermin bred out of
them.

5. But if this filthy Sin, (which fouls the Mouth that names it) in its
ordinary course be so odious, much more the transcendent crimes of Sodomie,
Bestiality, Effeminatenesse, in the sense the Apostle is generally understood,
1 Cor. 6. 9. saying, Be not deceived, neither Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, (that is, abusers of their own bodies alone that
way) nor abusers of themselves with mankind -- shall inherit the Kingdom of
God, or of Christ. And this being said, the sum of all is said.

6. But it being said above, that diverse Men eminent for holiness and
austerities, have not been free from this mortal evil, but groaned under it;
no wonder we, who profess not so great Mortification and Selfedeniall, should
be subject to such infirmities: so that it appears more venial than mortal.
To which my answer is: That though this Sin may have provoked the Holiest to
complain of it, yet never found it such favor with them as to be approved, or
patiently tolerated. For natural Principles in the Righteous are not
extinguished, and the Law of the Flesh does war strongly against the Law of the
mind: but still the godly and spiritual Man maintains the enmity, and keeps
the Field, as it were, against the Arms of the Mighty: and though many wounds
may be received, yet is he not overcome, And if at any time unhappily overcone,
renews the Conflict, and recovers his former station with advantage, by double
guards set about his Soul; and diligence, which re-ingratiates him into the
favor of Allmighty God our heavenly Father; who remembers that we are but
flesh, while we contend to be spiritual. But it is chiefly the captivating the
will by such trials of our strength and constancy, which God dislikes; and a
consent habitual, and unrelenting, and unrepenting yieldings, which put us out
of Gods favor, and distinguishes from the Saints, who perhaps have never been
free from temptation, nor rested satisfied in the servilitie of the Sin. But
for any man to connive at lesser failings in him in this kind, as but wandering
thoughts, affected admiration of Beauties, evil intentions, and inward
concupiscences without execution, and much more, actions impure, is to be
overcome and loose all, unless renewed by Repentance again.

7. Neither ought a man to intermitt acts of austerities, as Cold, Hunger, and
severe treatments outward of the flesh, because sometimes evil events, quite
contrary to his expectation, have happened to him, (the reason whereof may be
better omitted than enquired into) yet most certain it is, that constant
subjugation, (as St. Paul speaks, 1 Corinthians. 9. 27.) or, bringing the body
into subjection, is useful to that end, by the judgment and experience of the
most famous Saints in the Church; contrary to the vain and absurd Doctrines of
modern Directers: who do exhort to the principal work without the proper
means: and so magnify the Grace of God as necessary, and sufficient alone to
effect this, as if it could not consist with it, or might not better be hoped
for by such diligence and circumspection used: And when they can no longer deny
this, fall to reviling them, as if they were inseparable from Superstition, and
opinion of Meriting; with the like folly. For what a miserable shuffling and
evasion is that, and plain injustice, to lay the blame and defects of Persons,
upon the duty performed by them. No doubt therefore, the universal Churches
judgment and practice is much to be preferred before the opinion of modern
and private Apologists for illimited use of sensual gratifications, and
opposers of Bodily exercises and disciplining of the Appetites, even to the
denying of things not in themselves unlawful, as conducing to Chastity.
Though the subjecting of the inward affections and lusts is more noble, more
necessary, more desirable, as that to which the other should tend, and in
which, end. It was the course Saint Hierom writes he took with himself when
he found his flesh to rebel against his spirit in the desert of Bethleem, upon
an apprehension of a beautiful Lady he had seen at Rome, and began to desire.
He cast himself into the Briars (as Gideon used the men of Penuel and Succoth,
Judges 8. 7. 16. who withstood him) and taught his flesh better obedience. The
like to which writes Gregory of Saint Benedict, Dialog. Lib. 2. that he threw
himself amongst Thorns to turn his light cogitations another way.

8. And agreeable to this is that universal Instrument of all Gifts and Graces
descending to us from above, Prayer: and the firm persuasion that from thence,
and by that (not neglecting other means) Chastity may be obtained, according
to the Rule and experience of the wise Man, Ecclesiasticus 8. 21. thus writing;
Nevertheless, when I perceived I could not otherwise obtain her [Wisdome, or
as some render it, Undefilednesse, mentioned before] except God gave her me
(and that was a point of Wisdom also, to know whose gift she was) I prayed
unto the Lord and besought him with my whole heart.

9. Thirdly, It is very requisite to avoid vain and vile communication; which
Saint Paul, (ratifying the opinion of the Gentile Poet) assures us begets evil
manners. And therefore advises farther, Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth: And by the same Rule, should a man let
no corrupt communication enter into his ears; and suffer no light obscene
Books, or Sonnets, or objects of any Creatures tending that way, to draw his
eye to them. For all these, like the Estriches Eggs covered, perhaps for a
time, in the Sand, until the warm Sun shall ripen and enliven them, will
quicken in the mind of man in the heat of temptation, or perhaps will of
themselves, break forth into a temptation, and receive consummation, according
to the Doctrine of Saint James, Chap. 1. A man is drawn away thus and enticed.
Then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin: and sin when it is
finished, brings forth death. And in avoiding evil Books and directly
obscene, let more especial care be had of such Good Books of Modern Casuists:
who, under pretense of perfecter information of Confessor and Penitent, abound
with curious enquiries into all the secrets of Nature, and sinful
concupiscences, exposing them to the view and imaginations of the Reader, and
exciting of unclean Passions. For all these sensible insinuations of unlawful
Lusts, yea acts Lawful to them that use them in a regular way, become Images
in the mind, which the natural man turns to, upon occasion, and falls down
before, worshipping them, and idolizing them to his shame and fall.

10. Fourthly, Let it be considered, what honor God does to the chaste Soul,
and Body, in that he esteems them as his own Temple: Christ and looks upon them
as his own Members in especial manner. And, on the contrary, how ill he takes
transgressings, in this kind. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defiles the
Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is holy, which
Temple ye are, 1 Corinthians. 3. 16, 17. And in another place, with what
indignation does the same Saint Paul (1 Cor. 6. 15.) argue against such
affronts offered to Christ himself, by such practices as these? Know ye not
that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? What Monster of confounded
Kinds did ever match this Prodigious mixture, whereby Christ and an Harlot;
Christ and a Fornicatour are made one? No wonder then, that the Scripture
assures us, Ephesians. 5. 5. that No Whoremonger, or unclean person -- has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of God, and of Christ. And suffices not this to
quench the flames of lust in us, and to repent thoroughly for it?

11. Last of all, Consider we, what a concatenation of other Vices is found too
often in this one, and the reason will be apparent, why it is accounted a
Mother-sin. For though Harlots are seldom fruitful, the sin of Whoredom is.
We hear much spoken of simple Fornication, as minutely peccant, in the opinion
of diverse: But does not that beget baseness of Spirit, and, as Saint Austin
says, lowness of understanding, nothing casting down the wit of man more from
its top and Tower, than such inordinate love of Women? Nothing making a man
more contemptible and ridiculous than that known Vice. But that is not all. For
from hence comes wasting of Estates, as the History of the Prodigal clearly
proves. Hence also proceeds Quarrelling, and Duelling; as it is amongst Dogs
when they follow a Bitch that runs proud: And Murders follow them; and too
often, to avoid the shame of the world, is destroyed with murdering Potions, or
Pills, the fruit of the womb, before it ripens; and which is worse, are not
sensible of that more heinous sin in covering sin, than of uncleanness
contracted; which they ought to be; and therefore seldom repent of it as they
ought to do. But when Nature shall have weathered that Rock, yet open violence
is too often offered to the tender Innocent, in barbarous manner. And when it
comes not to this, yet how do noble and great Persons, many times offending in
this manner, become so vile as to stand in awe of their Foot-boyes, and
Chambermaids, privy to their wickedness, that they may keep their counsel.
So that the fact is dishonest and dishonorable, the pleasure momentarie and
fugitive, the punishment instant and durable, even in this life; and in the
world to come unquenchable, by any thing, but timely and plentiful tears,
here poured out to prevent the same.

SECT. XVI. Of Gluttony, its sinfullnesse and Cure.
1. IT is observed by Saint Hierome, that the Seats of Incontinence and
Intemperance are by nature placed nere together; intimating the nere relation
they bear one to another, and the mutual aid they give to advance one another.
For extravagant Lust must have excessive Diet to maintain it; and excessive
pampering of the Belly, by Drinks and Meats, do naturally tend to
concupiscence. It is the opinion of the Greek Church, (as we read in the
Council of Florence) that the Evil and Apostate Spirits cast down from their
Dignity, missed but a little to assume Bodies; so did they degenerate upon it:
and therefore still covet to possess Bodies, to this day, and to enter into
Swine rather than to want material Habitations. Yet we never read that they
delight in the bodily pleasures that men do offend in. No not when the Devil
tempted Adam and Eve to eat the forbidden fruit, do we read that he so much as
tasted of it himself, though it might have been a notable allurement to Man so
to do also? This Sin of Gluttony therefore is that which soils the Soul of
Man rather than the Devil. And though we call this a beastly sin, yet Beasts
exceed not so much therein as does Man. But it is an unruly, and unreasonable
appetite in man, of eating and drinking: little considering the true use and
ends of such necessary acts ordained by God and Nature, which are the
maintenance of Being, and daily repairing or recruiting the losses, the frail
and mouldering body suffers. But first, Men being prompted by Nature, to eat
and drink, and a pleasure being conjoined with them, least men should omit
what is so necessary, blind and servile Man devotes himself too often to
that, which was appointed to serve his turn. But he that made Fountains and
Rivers of waters for the relief of our thirst, never intended we should throw
our selves into them and be drowned: And he who gave man the understanding to
invent Wines, never intended he should drown himself in a Butt: And he also
that indulged to man about the same time, the use of Flesh, as of the herb of
the Fields and roots of the Earth, and fruits of Trees, never meant we should
never give over inventing new Dishes and Dainties; or be too ravenous of
simpler Diet: but that we should measure both quantity and quality of what we
eat and drink, by the rules of Nature, his holy Word, and certain other
circumstances prudent Persons cannot be ignorant of, unless they choose so to
be

3. For notwithstanding it cannot be precisely determined, what is the proper
proportion of every man's Body, no more than what proportion belongs to every
man's Family, which are greater or lesser; nor how many, or what manner of
Dishes are fit for all men's Tables, yet must Judgment and Reason direct in this
case. The common saying is, That Nature is content with a little, and Religion
with less: yet may that Rule be questioned, if taken so loosely as generally.
For when it is said, Nature is content with a little, we understand thereby,
that Nature may subsist and be preserved with a little; but what, and how
little that is, Nature has not taught us: and I think Religion does not
require we should too anxiously inquire after: much less does it require that
we should eat or drink less than Nature requires. For then it should require
us to destroy Nature, and so to murder our selves leisurely and slily, which
is most of all forbidden by Religion.

4. But neither here ought any man to deceive himself, so as by inconsiderate
indulging himself Meats and Drinks in a preternaturall quantity, kind, or
quality, contract an habit of so doing, which to break off, is next to
destroying of Nature: For this acquired necessity being neither of Gods, or
Natures contrivance or cause, is more culpable than an accidental detriment
arising to the body by endeavoring to reduce it to its true and pristine
State. So that the violence is not offered to it as corrupted or debauched, but
the violence was, to corrupt it so, as to bring it into a necessity of
persisting in excess; by all means to be redressed: former wrie steps, and
wrenchings affected, and wilful making the following lamenesse sinful, though
not wilful.

5. But if we judge of Natures contentedness from the common custom of eating
and drinking to the quieting of natural appetites; so indeed, Religion may be
said to allow less than Nature. For as much as it is an act of self-denial,
to give over eating or drinking before Nature gives over craving. So that it is
a strange plea used by too many softened natures: They cannot Fast, nor indeed
comply with the gentler and lighter Abstinences scarce deserving the names of
Fastings, because they find their stomachs call for supplies accustomed. They
pretend presently, they shall be sick; and perhaps glory in their infirmity;
not considering what a great disparagement it is to any Christian, to have so
brought up his stomach, that in wonted manner, fed it must be. And perhaps in
justification of this unrulie appetite to allege, God has made all things
clean, and all Meats are lawful, being taken with thanksgiving; and such like
mentioned before. But such as these should do very well to consider, what
Saint Paul writes to the Corinthians, 1 Ep. 6. 12. All things are lawful to
me, but all things are not expedient. All things are lawful for me, but I will
not be brought under the power of any. Meats for the belly, and the belly for
meats, but God shall destroy both it and them. Surely, he that must eat in an
uninterrupted course, has brought himself under the power or tyranny of his
belly, a very lamentable servitude; and not Christian liberty.

6. This Sin of Intemperance therefore is incurred several ways, all which
are not observed by some, and by others (I know) not regarded. But the
principal may be these, which I shall here rather touch than handle; having
elsewhere treated on this Subject. One way of offending herein, is the Quantity
we eat or drink: Another is the Quality, when we are studious of Delicacies
and Dainties. A third way is in the manner, when with too much intention of
mind and greediness, we devour, rather than take our ordinary Meals: And
lastly, when we eat unseasonably, against due rule and order, and Christian
prescriptions.

7. For the Quantity, no set Rule can be given, but every man is to be a Law
unto himself, as the Apostle speaks of the Righteous Man: For Gods Word so
frequently enjoining Temperance, does committ the interpretation and
application of that Law unto himself, as best able to judge (unless corrupted
by his Palate) his own capacity, and the exigencie of his nature. Sexes, Ages,
strength, and weakness of nature of diverse persons, and employments laborious
and hard, or light and sedentarie, make great variety in the stomachs and
appetites of men. So that in eating, one must not rashly condemn another,
because he takes a greater portion than himself: neither must he excuse
himself from Gluttony who eats no more than another, the cause making the
equality Arithmeticall, unreasonable. Allwaies provided and observed, that in
eating and drinking, a man has not by unnatural usances, brought upon
himself an unnatural necessity of taking more than his proportion. For in
such cases, he is a glutton by virtue of his first error necessitating the
following; and reformation, if not suddenly, yet gradually must be made by a
true Christian according to the auncienter and commoner Rule of using Gods
creatures to Gods glory, and Natures benefit.

8. And for the Quality, the simpler and more natural, the better it must
needs be; the great natural ends of sustenance, and healthfulnesse, and
usefulness to body and mind, which moderately considered are strong, lusty,
expedite, and active, but tainted with the inventions of Kitchen Philosophers,
are enfeebled and confounded: And the importunity of the delicious Palate
becomes so restless and unsatisfied, that the greatest wits in that Trade can
scarce find out Novelties fast enough to still them. No, though there be such
encouragements to advance Learning in that greasy black Art, that some great
Persons have doubled the Salarie of their Cooks, to that of their Chaplains; So
base an Object was a Cook aunciently amongst the Romans, as Livie tells us,
Lib. 39. that none was his equal in vileness, until true Masculinesse
decayed in Rome: and the Asiatique Army having subdued those Countries,
brought home the infection of deliciousness in Diet, which made Cookery a
noble Science at length; which before was a drudgerie few would be hired to.
But how much more shameful and lamentable is it, that the Gentry and
Nobility too, (some of them) should look upon it as a piece of foreign
breeding, to understand how to make palatable Sauces, and in person to practice
such ignoble and degenerous acts: whereas, if their Tutours the French, had
taught them to mend their old Clothes and Shoes, they had brought back a more
useful, and no less commendable Art; though they were as learned in that Art
of Cookery as was Suitrigall Duke of Lithuania, who (as Aeneas Silvius tells
us) wrote an accurate book of Cookerie; which, wherever he travailed, he would
be sure to give strict charge to his Steward to remember to bring along with
him. What is this but to fall justly under Saint Paul's Censure, Philip. 3. 9.
Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, who mind earthly things.
For as St. Paul says, Romans 16. They that are such serve not the Lord Jesus,
but their own bellies. Both which, i. e. Idol and Idolater, God shall destroy;
nay themselves hasten to destruction by such indulgence, and voluptuousness.
And the reason holds against drinking and eating with affectation and pleasure
more than natural. For both make up Gluttony: and sometimes, one.

9. A third kind is the inordinate manner of eating: when men, with too much
greediness and have, devour rather than eat their Meat: and so become rude and
scandalous, and injurious to Nature it self, not able to dispatch so
suddenly, what is stuffed in so hudlingly; to the prejudice of the body. And,
which is a great disappointment, the Appetite is oppressed, rather than
satisfied. But it is far from my purpose, to insinuate any thing here which may
instruct men to eat or drink to the best advantage. And therefore

10. Lastly, The offense in unseasonnable eating and drinking, were here to be
explained, had I not in the directions above given for the custody of the
outward man, treated of Fasting, and the obligation Christians have, not
always, to measure their liberty herein by the general natures of Meats and
Drinks, nor by their appetites disposing them so to do, against lawful
restraint and order. For such must either be rebellious in their minds against
Lawful Authority, or gluttonous in their lustful part, who contemn all
regulations not of their own devising in this case. Whereas the Apostle plainly
tells us, Romans 14. 20. All things are indeed pure, but it is evil with that
man who eats with offense: Offense then, especially by the contumacious
despising of Authority undoubted, converteth clean Meats into unclean; and
stands in need of this Purgative Doctrine, as much as immoderate Gormandizing.

11. The means of curing this Distemper have been, some of them, touched
before, and therefore now this Summary may suffice. First, Gluttony
comprehending eating and drinking both, is a wasting the Spirits or oppressing
of the mind, the fountain of true ingeniousnesse and Reason. 2. It weakens the
body also, as well as the mind; and that Politic, as well as Personal; men
thereby being effeminated, unhardy, dull, and timorous, but when the phrenzie
of excess heats their brain; when they should be soberest and wisest, they
become brutish. 3. Mispending of precious hours; to trample upon which, they
choose such diversions, more truly called, subversions of themselves: and 4.
Of the good creatures which God having ordained to be received with
thanksgiving and blessing him, are turned to his dishonor, by riotousnesse,
cursing and swearing, and blaspheming, and contentions, and mutual violences
and assassinations. 5. Hereby Men (and Women too of this order) are put upon
unlawful lusts of the flesh: and what not, but Modesty, Humility, Chastity,
Mercifullnesse to the poor, and divine Contemplations, which will not down with
the Gluttonous, nor rise high with the Drunkard. And above all, to avoid this
Rock, steer we our course by the due Compasses of Gods holy Word, which Romans
13. 13. advises, Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envy; But
put on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. And Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be
filled with the Spirit. And let that premonition sink into our hearts, given by
Christ, Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life; and so
that day come upon you unawares. For as our Savior says also, Luke 12. If
that servant say in his heart, My Lord deferreth his coming, and shall begin to
beat the Menservants and Maidens, and to eat and to drink, and to be drunken;
the Lord of that servant will come in a day, when he looks not for him, and
in an hour, when he is not aware; and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint
him his portion with Unbelievers. And the wise Servant will not say within
himself, My Lord deferreth his coming, understanding this to be spoken only of
the coming of Christ at the last and general Judgment, but of his particular
Domes-day; when his life shall be called for by God, and his own beloved sin of
excess shall snatch his Soul from his wretched body for indulging it. How
many Tragical Instances does our Age afford of such who have been confounded
in their own sin, and perished in this pleasure? I shall need to name none of
yesterday, or of this Nation: I would it were not notorious. But two most
eminent and mighty Potentates I may mention, I hope without offense, and not
without sense, or some effect. Alexander the Great his Friends and Flatterers
write that he died of Poison given him at Babylon: but others more severe
tellers of Truth write that Wine, was that Poison excessively taken, and that
Drunkenness killed him, as may be seen in Seneca, Epist. 58. And who so great
a Man in his days, and so victorious as Attilas? who after his many Conquests,
not being able to overcome his Appetite of Wine, was overcome by it to that
degree one day, that he was taken so ill the next night, that he voided blood
at his Mouth, and so died choked with it; As Munster tells us in his
Cosmographie. Let these things then sink into our hearts, and have such
influence upon our lives and manners as to prevent such disorders and
miscarriages. And let all they whose faith is dim-sighted or weak, as to have
no power over them in declaring to them and convincing them of the defilements
of their Souls contracted by these excesses and shameful spewings on their
own glory, as the Prophet Habakkuk aptly expresses it, Chap. 2. 16. be taught,
at length, and convinced by their senses and common experience; what a stain to
their Name, what a wound to their Body, they bring, from which they can never
be purged, or of which cured but by Tears of timely Repentance, and the happy
change of due Renovation: both which will be so much the more difficult, by how
much they are more deferred.

SECT. XVII. Of Slothfullnesse, the last Capital Sin.
1. Slothfulness and affected dullness of Mind and laziness of Body is not
denied to be a Sin by any; but to many, seems so modest, innocent, and
harmless, that they wonder why it should be ranked amongst the most dangerous
and deadly: But, as we before observed, Sins are not to be estimated from their
intrinsic or absolute evil only, but also from the tail they draw after
them, and the brood issuing from them. And thus Slothfullnesse may be inferior
in consequentiall mischiefs, to none. For this numnesse of mind and
indisposition of body to act, extends it self equally to both capacities,
viz. Natural; and Divine, or Religious; it being seldom known, that he, whose
mind is dulled by indulging to ease, is active any ways in Religion. And in
truth, so notorious is it, that Divines treat of it only, or chiefly as to
Religion, which it corrupts, if not totally destroys.

2. For as Labor and honest industry seems to be the first Virtue insinuated
in Scripture and appointed to Man, so may the Vice of Sloth be the very first
of practical Errors, supposing that Pride was the first of Mental Vices. For
we read Genesis, Chap. 2. that there was at first no man to till the ground, v.
5. and we read, v. 8. That God made man so soon as he had made Eden, and put
him therein; surely not to be idle, lest the Earth should be idle too: so that
Action, was a Virtue of Paradise. And so it was afterward, when man turned out
from thence, was to make a Virtue of necessity; and work, to keep him from
adding sin unto sin, and calamity unto calamity. For as Chrysostom well
observes, it was an act of Goodness in God to turn fallen man out of
Paradise, to the wide world: and a blessing to him, to curse the Land, so that
without hard labor, he could not well subsist. For if when Man was master of
so much Reason, and owner of so much Grace given him of God, he fell into
temptations, and from thence into sin; who can imagine but destitute in great
measure of such aids and abilities, he should riot unmeasurably, living in
ease, plenty, spontaneous, and unactive rest; odious, and dangerous.

3. And therefore though my purpose be to oppose Sloth as it relates to
Religion, the Connection being so near and strait between diligence in humane
and divine Affairs, it is necessary to declare the sinfullnesse and
odiousness, and to correct the pravitie of the first, before we can expect any
good event in the latter. For a soft, heavy temper is the original of both;
and a sicklenesse, and weariness in doing any thing long, or of difficulty;
but a certain spiritlesse loying, and lying still; or, as the saying is,
Wandering up and down to see who does nothing, and help them: until all means
used to gratify flesh and blood, and none sufficing, idleness proves more
tedious and tiresome than labor to others: And none groan under the burden and
heat and length of the day by laboring, so much as the slothful and idle
person does under void time, and empty hours. And none brings more distempers
upon his body, by working, nor so many, as the Sluggard by doing nothing.

4. But do I say or suppose that a man awake, and well in his wits, and
limbs, can rest in the Negative, doing nothing? it is hard to be believed. The
Devil will not suffer his Soul to be as Aristotle's Understanding of Infants,
Rasa Tabula, a smooth and eaven Table, or as white Paper, in which nothing is
writ, but is capable of any stamp or impression it pleases the stander by to
make in it: but he will write his mind in it speedily. This is, says Cassian,
Collat. 10. the judgment of the Monastique Fathers of old in Egypt: that the
industrious Monk is tempted with one Devil, but the idle, with innumerable. So
that as the same Author there also tells; it was the custom of Abbot Paul (to
avoid idleness) to burn those effects of his labors which were more than
sufficient to bring in a bare livelihood, that he might never want work, or
become idle.

5. And this he might learn of Saint Paul, Romans 12. 11. who teaches us the
dependence secular labor, in an honest way, has upon Religion, and on the
contrary, saying, Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord. Diligence here in business is set before Fervor in Spirit, and in the
service of God; intimating the usefulness of bodily labor, in disposing to
Divine: Not that all who are ardent pursuers of the world, are proportionably
industrious for Heaven; but that they whose Genius indisposes them to the one,
seldom show any spirit or liveliness in the other. For often it happens that
immoderate care of Earth, stupifies the sense a man ought to have of Heaven.
But if there be no fire on the Smiths Forge, no work good or bad can be wrought
there. So that as Siracides says, Chap. 22. 1, 2. A slothful man is compared
to a filthy stone, and every one will hiss him out to his disgrace. A
slothful man is compared to the filth of a Dunghill, every man that takes it
up will shake his hand. And moderner Doctors of the Jews give this for a
Rule, Whosoever brings up his Son to no employment, teaches him to turn
Robber.

6. But to come closer up to the description and cure of spiritual Sloth. The
general ground of laziness laid, where Nature admonishes to be stirring; no
wonder the Spirits fail a man in things above, and sometimes against Nature.
For this indisposition to Good seizes first the mind, sadding it at the
approaching good Duties: that they must rise from their seat or Bed; that they
must spend so much time about the dry service of their Souls. And though in
their own affairs perhaps, sinfully slothful, yet when such expectation is of
them, that serve God, they must, and ought, they will forget their laziness in
worldly matters, and be stirring then and there, when for shame they must do
something. Then shall Civility in visiting, or entertaining a Friend, be
alleged against the tedious hour or two in Gods service: Nay perhaps, Charity
to visit the sick just at that time, shall be pretended; and Scripture
sometimes shall be alleged as warranting not too rash and unprepared approach
to sacred Offices; when the real reason is, spiritual sloth detaining them
from preparing themselves, and averseness to Good. Which lothnesse to open the
mouth, or bend the knee, or raise the body answerable to the exigence of the
several parts of Gods public Worship amongst many, proceeds from
dead-heartednesse in Religion, and to hide or excuse that, perhaps a reason
taken from Religion, shall be forged; and Conscience shall be alleged, and
simplicity of Evangelicall worship, and the straitest way of going to Christ,
shall be offered; contrary to the general practice of the Catholic
Churches, in the best Ages; and all this while, listlessnesse in the service of
God is at the bottom of all: though I know religious, or more properly,
superstitious Paradoxes have of late obstructed diverse in this way: under whose
protection, slothfullnesse too often shelters it self.

7. Neither does the slothful Soul carry it self with so much ofcitancie in
things made doubtful by the cunning sleights of men, whereby they lie in wait
to disturb Religion, and destroy Charity, but in things out of dispute also:
as when men read the Scriptures, or hear godly Doctrine, and Precepts without
attention; pray without zeal and intension of spirit, Sing without
cheerfullnesse and elevation of mind; live without circumspection; confess
their sins without sorrow and contrition. So that the hedge of vigilance being
broken down, all they that pass by (all sorts of temptations) as Psalm 80.
has it, pluck her: the Boar out of the wood wastes it, and the wild Beast of
the field devours it. For hereby is it made, as it were, a thorow-fare for all
sorts of tempting Spirits. So that, to this, and not to ill-husbandry, may we
believe Solomon to have respect, when he says, Proverbs 24. 30, 31. I went by
the field of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of
understanding: and it was all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered
the face thereof; and the Stone-wall thereof was broken down: whereby is
insinuated the desolations of the Soul occasioned by spiritual carelessness
and sloth.

8. Yet am I not so severe as to impute to this Vice, all the defects we are
subject to here in spiritual things: For not without Gods special permission,
it happens diverse times that faithful and righteous Souls are surprised with
dullness, and aridities in Gods service. But not in the like manner; For in
the Soul tainted with the vice of Sloth, no great trouble or solicitude
befalls the same, but it passes the thing over unconcerned; implying strongly
an affectednesse in the miscarriage: whereas in the Spirit becalmed, as it
were, for want of the Spirit of Grace, great anxiety and discontent affect it;
like as the Ship having lost the Wind, lies beating her self with her Sails.
But they who by general Duty, or special Offices, especially Ecclesiastical
and Sacred, suspend themselves studiously from discharging them painfully and
diligently, because they can live at ease and sit still, and perhaps have some
other to toil for them, let them at least labor hard to bring themselves off
from this imputation of sloth, for I cannot: neither must I accuse them
according to their merits.

9. And to the intent we may better quitt our selves of this burden, let us see
briefly, what may be prescribed against it. First then, let us look up, and
lift up a Prayer unto the Author of all Graces, to send this Grace unto us.
For he has promised what we ask in his Name, and, with great confidence we
hope, for his service, he will grant us: as he did unto Solomon, requesting,
what might make him more serviceable in the place to which he was by God,
called.

10. Another Remedy and more particular, is the consideration of the
unsatiable desire flesh and blood have of Ease, and Liberty, contrary to
divine Exercises: so that yield to them, they become softer and softer, duller
and duller: lother and lother to engage in religious actions, until easy
things become difficult; and difficult things left quite off; and a desolation
be made in the Soul: so that a man may say with David, Psalm. 119. My soul
melts away for very heaviness.

11. Nay, Thirdly, Contrary Maladies will multiply and grow strong against the
Soul, answerable to the description given by some of spiritual sloth, viz. A
grief and sorrow of heart at the apprehension of heavenly Exercises
approaching: such as are Pusillanimity spiritual, afraid of every
inconvenience; wearisomnesse under the accustomed and halfe-constrained
perfourmances, though not frequent; despondencie, and diffidence of any good to
come of such things; and thereupon, arguing against the troublesomnesse of
them, somnolencie in them, and gladness when delivered out of them: after the
manner of the corrupt Jews, Amos 8. 5. When will the new Moon, and Sabbath be
over?

12. Furthermore, it may avail much, to consider seriously what Solomon says,
Prove. 18. 9. He that is slothful in his work is Brother to him that is a great
waster. For like a City without a Watch or Walls, he lies exposed to all
Invaders, and spoilers. And that good which he does is thereby corrupted, his
time, and pains little better than lost; and God provoked to reject his maimed
and lame sacrifice. For as it is usually said, A cold Praise tends to a
disparagement; so a cold Prayer tends much to a denial. It is the effectual
fervent prayer of the Righteous that avails much, as Saint James teaches us.
And so by the Rule of contraries; It is the slothful and cold Prayer that
prevails nothing, or very little.

13. And therefore fifthly, to quit our selves of this stupidnesse of spirit,
it will be necessary to take that contrary and most commendable Virtue of
Christian fortitude, unto us; so rare, and yet so useful against the many
temptations offered to us in this world: and to be clothed with zeal as with a
cloak, as the Prophet speaks, Es. 59. 17. For were not it for the carnal
bashfullnesse that many men show in the cause of Religion and serving of God,
shrinking for fear of the Enemies to it, and that without cause; Enemies to
godly life would not be so audacious as they are: but by the cowardice of the
well-principled and inclined, a Conquest seems to have been made by the adverse
party over the Religious; which consent and courage may easily undo. And not
only the openly irreligious have brought under too much the profession of the
truly religious; but the audaciousnesse of men of erroneous Religion has
gained them respect, when their opinions and practice deserved nothing less.
Yea it is to be lamented, to consider, that Fanaticall Persons having with
wonderful confidence usurped to themselves the advantages of sober and precise
behavior; and many excellent Phrases of Holy Scripture, and communication
becoming the mouths of better Christians, diverse have been so scandalized at
the ill use of them by such, (which in truth has been notorious) that they
can hardly find in their heart, or frame their mouths to such wholesome forms
of words, (which are an Ornament to the mouth of a good Christian) so perverted
by others. It was the comparison indeed of a religious Person living an Age or
two since, Who would not loath to eat an Apple, before knawn by a Swine? so who
will not shrink to take that Phrase into his mouth, which has been abused by
polluted mouths and to scandalous ends. But as they who shoot at God, hurt not
him, but wound themselves, so they who are vulgarly said to corrupt, and abuse
the Scriptures and its holy Dialect, to their own purposes, do not in very
deed defile and abuse that, which, like God the Author, changes not, but
remains the same, but they pollute and wrong themselves. For, as the Apostle to
Titus speaks, Chap. 1. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them
that are defiled, is nothing pure, but even their mind and conscience is
defiled. Wherefore laying aside that vain and fearful modesty which is so
near akin to the sin of Acedia, (as the Greek word is, and more
comprehensively; which we may render, Incuriousnesse, or Oscitancie, or
indisposednesse to Good,) Let us, Brethren (as Saint Paul's words are, Ephesians.
6.) be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might: and then impious, and
vicious men, their own Conscience bearing witness against them, will become
timorous and ashamed. For as Solomon tells us, Prove. 22. 13. It is the
slothful man that says, There is a Lion in the way: that is, great dangers
and many difficulties in the stricter and more faithful service of God; but
the more resolute and diligent find it not so, but that the Yoke of Christ is
easy, and his burden light, and that there is rest for the Soul; as himself
has said.

SECT. XVIII. The Conclusion of this Second Part; with some short advices
relating to what has been said therein.
1. HAving thus treated of the necessity and manner of supernatural
Illumination, and Purgation tending to supernatural Union with God; we hold it
fit to close this Part with the offering of some brief Rules for the better
directing of such who shall be inclined to improve farther, what has been said
before, concerning the purification and preparation of the Soul for a nerer
conjunction with God, by subduing that Sevenheaded Dragon, in the seven
Capital Sins; or those seven Devils, like to them which possed Mary
Magdalene; and which are as the seven Hills upon which the Antichrist every one
carries about him, sits, and tyrannizeth over the Soul.

2. First, That because we are all borne in sin, and even after we are
regenerate in Baptism, do, through the infirmity of the flesh, fall commonly
into sin, that no man therefore allow in himself any known sin whether light,
or heavy; for hereby what was but a sin of infirmity, becomes a presumptuous
sin, and so is accounted by God.

3. Secondly, Some sins of both ranks are with more special care to be
attended to and opposed by us. And such I am wont to instance in which our
Parents, from whom we are immediately descended, were subject to, more than
others; or they who are immediately before them. For undoubted experience
teaches us, that not only what we call Original Sin, but such actual sin as
has strongly possessed them, is often communicated to Children, together with
the temper of their bodies. And also those sins or failings in Parents and
others which have been Examples to us in our minority and Education, are to be
suspected and feared by us. Constant Examples of evil, even disapproved in
others, too often having a great power over us, when (especially) we are
brought into the like circumstances, and the same occasions are offered us of
offending, as was to them.

4. Thirdly, Great inspection and examination is to be had by every man of his
own constitution or natural complexion: For as that Great Physician said, Men's
manners do generally follow their humors abounding in them (and therefore we
commonly call the frequenter and constanter extravagancies of men, their
humors,) so that some are inclined naturally to Choler or Anger, others to
Jocundnesse and Levitie; others to Melancholy and dullness, etc. Which a wise
man and good Christian reflecting upon, and discerning in himself, ought to
apply a proper Remedy unto, and more watchfully to prevent the evil events of
them.

5. Fourthly, A strong hand is to be carried against the powerful and violent
temptation of Fashion, when it becomes Noble, Gallant, or Great, (as vain
persons sometimes speak) against Modesty, Sobriety, Temperance, or Continence:
For such, many are; as must be acknowledged more especially in diversity of
Sexes, which Nature has made: and diversity of Political, and
Ecclesiastical Orders which God has made; And therefore are wisely and justly
distinguished by best Authority: So that by no better arguments can any man
defend indifferency of Habits and outward deportment of the Laiety and
Clergy, than will equally serve for the indifferency of the same to both
Sexes. For what is said against it by Moses his Law, may easily be eluded by
reducing it to a ceremonial or judicial Law.

6. Fifthly, To rebuke, repress, or expel sinful inclinations in our selves,
it is requisite, that we should not rest in the opinion we have of our selves:
which is commonly biassed by self-conceit, self-love, selfe-interest, all
quite contrary to that great Duty of Self-denial; but that we should be so
true and just to our own Souls, as like righteous Judges, to keep one Ear for
what others judge of us, and impartially to give a sentence upon our selves
accordingly, and not sly to that base and bold subterfuge of nonplus'd and
shameless persons, I care not, I care not. For though Malice and ill will may
instigate some one or two, and upon special occasion, to false accusations and
slanders; yet if the opinion be of more, and those not so prejudiced; and
constant, and lasting, in vain do men proclaim their integrity and innocence;
for such judgment of others is much more to be trusted than our own.

7. Sixthly, Appearance of Evil, and Hypocrisy reverst (as I may so speak)
when men seem by outward carriage to be worse than in truth they are, is also
carefully to be avoided, not only because of the sin of scandalizing our
Brethren and causing an erroneous judgment and uncharitable to be entertained;
but because it very often happens, that men fall really into that sin which
they at first only seemed to committ. Therefore it is St. Paul's Rule, Philip.
2. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others: not by curiosity and censoriousnesse, but Charity and conscienti
ous walking without offense to others; and if possible, to prevent sin in
others as well as our selves.

8. Lastly, Every man should have Charity toward his Brother, but no man is
to demean himself so as to stand in need of the charitable judgment of
others. For he that does so, is certainly uncharitable in the first place: and
being really guilty within himself, is most wickedly unjust in demanding that
another should be so charitable as not to think so of him: though there be use
of Charity, even where Crimes are past defense or excuses: but for men to live
conscious to themselves of unrighteousness toward God, and justice toward
men, and then because there may want notorious convictions to demand of
Censurers to judge charitably, is in effect, to require that others should be
religious, and they may be wicked, under the protection of others Piety, and
Charity.

A Prayer for Purity of Spirit.
O Lord God, who is like unto thee amongst the Gods? Who is like unto thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? And what greater
wonder is there than of sons of Men we should be called the Sons of God? and of
Children of wrath, heirs of the Kingdom of God: of lost sheep, be brought back
to the great Shepherd of our Souls: of prodigal and fugitive Sons, be
brought home, and embraced by thee our heavenly Father: making us as well as
requiring us to be holy as thou art holy, raising us from the death of sin to
the life of Righteousness, given us by the Spirit of Grace, which works in
us by the means of Grace ordained by thee to that great end. Let that Spirit
be never wanting in me, let that Grace never be received by me in vain, whereby
I may be sensible of my unworthiness, and insufficiency to any thing that is
good; and at least to have an hunger and thirst after righteousness, that I
may, in thy due time be satisfied: and in the mean time grow and increase in
this desire, and this desire proceed to action, and this action to such
perfection as to overcome and mortify all worldly lusts, and Carnal
affections, purifying my self as he is pure; and taking greater content and
pleasure in casting off, than ever I did in taking on me the burden of sin; and
in purging away all my old sin, than ever I did in contracting those spots and
blemishes which have too much, and too long defiled that pure Spirit thou once
gave me; and defaced that beautiful Image thou once stampedst on me. And let
the pleasure of Repenting be greater to me, than that of offending ever was to
me, though (alas!) it was too great. Lord, nothing is impossible to thee, who
can bring light out of darkness, and strength out of weakness, and out of
stones raise up Children unto Abraham and to thy self: and out of the ruins
of Religion in me, raise up a Temple fit for thy holy Spirit to dwell in.
Descend into, possess, and dwell in my heart by faith, and love of thee: which
may purge out the old leaven, and make me a new lump; and quench all fleshly
Concupiscences which have, or may reign over me, or rage in me. For this
corruptible body presses down my mind musing on high and heavenly things,
and the weight of sin so easily besetteth me, that I cannot run the Race which
is set before me, and the stain of sin pollutes my best actions: Wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death, from this bondage of
corruption? Thy grace, I know, O Lord, is sufficient for me, and thy Son mighty
to save, and that his Office is to save his people from their sins, from their
sins, I say, as well as from the punishment of sin; Let that Day Star at length
arise in my heart and enlighten and warm my mind with love of thee, and let
that breath of new life be inspired into me, enliven my dead body, and re
unite and animate my dry bones, and excite me with new vigor to the
perfourming thy holy will: that so the life I now live may be by the faith of
the Son of God: and being poor in spirit as he was, I may be pure in spirit as
he also was, for theirs is the Kingdom of God, even the Kingdom of Grace
here, and the Kingdom of Glory hereafter, whither, O merciful God and Father,
in thy due time bring me, for thy blessed Sons sake Jesus Christ my Savior.

Amen.
The Third Part. Treating of the UNITIVE WAY OF THE Devout Soul with God.
SECT. I. Of the Nature of true Union with God, and Mystical Theology: and of
the Abuses and due Use thereof.
1. SUCH due preparation being made toward Spiritual Life, in laying aside
every sin so easily besetting us, the remainder of our Christian Race toward
God, and our Union with him are more easily attained: which Union is by Saint
John, called, our fellowship with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1. 3. And this
is it which vulgarly is called also, Perfection: Perfection being here used
for Justification by faith in Christ: and Christ dwelling in us, and such a
measure of assurance of Gods grace and favor which are competible to our
Militant state in this life, and incline God to the acceptance of us to a
future inheritance of Immortality and Glory. And to this, it is not
absolutely necessary that no blemish, imperfection or infirmity should be
incident; but that none such should be found, which either of it self should
tend to corruption, or deserve amputation from the Body of Christ, of which,
such perfection and conjunction make us members.

2. Thus far only, if the phanaticall strains found in Mystical Theology of
contrary Extremes, had proceeded, not only innocence but honor also had
been due unto it. But we find the Modern advancers of it, to have
scandalously corrupted it, by affectation of excesses in Style and big
Language, and facts agreeable to them: whereas Bonaventure writing on that
Subject, thus simply describes it, in his Prologue to it. It is the extension
of love toward God, by the desire of love. And a little after he says, It is
such, whereby the religious Soul leaving humane Wisdom, the curiousness of
unprofitable knowledge, and the sophistry of argumentations and Opinions, by
the Ascent of love rises up to the Fountain of all, by desiring, in which only
she finds truth: insomuch that the simple Laick being in the School of God,
may receive this wisdom from God himself immediately, by the affection of
love; which no natural Philosopher, nor secular Master, nor humane
Intelligence, can attain to. Neither is the description of this Unitive Way
given by Gerson in his Mystical Theology; to be rejected; where, more soberly
than diverse of late days affect to speak; He says, Mystical Divinity is an
experimental Knowledge had of God, by the conjunction with God by spiritual
affection. But we cannot allow of such great swelling words, and ecstaticall
practices answerable thereunto, wrapping men's Souls in a Cloud of real
Ignorance, in the midst of their pursuit of supreme Knowledge; and suffering
them to fall into direct profaneness of words and deeds, while they have a
strong and vain emulation and affectation of sublimest Devotion, and Piety:
which, to pass over the many exorbitancies in this kind, found amongst such
as are known by the name of Phanatiques, a great pretender to Devotion,
Horstius in a Latin Book, which he calls The Paradise of the Soul, has
fallen into, there speaking in this manner, page 59. Truly Lord, if what is
not possible, I were owner of any thing which thou wantedst, I would willingly
yield all to thee, and give it thee. Yea, if I could be God, I would not, for
this only, that thou might be God and have no Peer. Which, with us, is no
better than a piece of fond Devotion, and implicit Blasphemy, proceeding from
an illimited affectation of strange and monstrous expressions, familiar with
such like Mystical Divines; carefully to be avoided and shunned, as the bane
of true and favourie Religion toward God: whereby the Devil sets Christians,
as once he did Christ, on the Pinnacle (as it were) of the Temple, that he may
the more easily cast them down headlong. But the heart of a true Believer being
well-grounded in Faith, and settled in love to God, is capable of some singular
and extraordinary sense of Gods goodness, and the wisdom which comes from
above, with a true spiritual ardour toward God, and desire of Union with him:
which may be said to consist in these three things.

First, A Cleerenesse, then Soundness; lastly, Acquiescence in the Will and
Ways of God. Whereby the Soul having, in some competent manner, escaped the
pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2. cleaves so steadfastly to the Lord, or is
joined to him, as it is, 1 Corin. 6. 17. that it becomes one Spirit; not by
transmutation of nature or substance, but by assimilation in Holiness, and
plenarie subjection of the will of Man to the Will of God: that so God may be
all in all. Which is more corporally expressed by Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5. where
he says of true Believers, We are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of
his Bones: Not by transubstantiation of Natures, but transformation and
renewing of the mind: as is said, Romans 12. 2. So that, as Saint Paul speaks,
Galat. 2. 20. The life which a Christian so transformed out of himself, and
conformed unto Christ, lives, he lives not; but Christ lives in him, by the
faith and love of Christ: a state of Grace bordering nere upon Glory it self.
In which Mystical Language, great care is to be used, least a Believer be so
far drawn away from the solid foundation and edifying knowledge, that his
Religion should end in aerie speculations and notions; and these in bold
denominations given himself. And lastly, Spiritual life or walking with God,
as did Enoch, until a translation be made from hence, nerer to the presence
and fruition of God.

3. Therefore, to prevent Delusions incident to high flyers in Divinity in
this kind, Our speculations must be measured by our love to God reciprocated
upon the sense of Gods love, wherewith he first loved us: And lest, even this
love should prove a fondness, the sincerity of it is to be proved by the
practice of a man's life, answering in Purity and degree, the fervor pretended
of love: Not denying that where such intimate conjunction there is between God
and the Soul, certain tacit and inward signatures thereof are made to it,
invisible to the world; and sensible only to its self; but not so, as therein
to acquiesce without all solicitude: as if such were allreadie in Heaven; but
with constant contentions about these two principal Points.

4. First, How they should continue in that good state to which they have
allreadie attained: which is no otherwise brought to pass than by the means
whereby it was attained; as natural Bodies subsist by the same Elements of
which they do consist. And secondly, because to rest satisfied with what a man
has without design held up of proceeding, is the next way to lose what he
has, and to fall backward, and to decay. It is necessary ever to be pressing
forward, that the Tide may always be rising in grace, least upon wilful
remission and slacknesse, the Soul be, by degrees, left empty and dry. For it
is the Character of Heaven given by Saint John, Revelat. 14. That they rest
from their labors: which belongs not to any, (not the highest) in this life,
that they should cease to do good, until that Sabbath above shall be entered
into, and celebrated. And yet even of the blessed, there, we read, Revelat. 4.
8. That they rest not day and night, to act according to that state, where
there is Union with God indissoluble, and Communion to satiety, without surfeit
on one hand, or weariness on the other. A resemblance whereof is to be
obtained even in this life by those who by diligent attendance on spiritual
Duties here, and denying the world, do (as Gregory says, Hom. 34. on the
Gospells) burn with the flames of lofty Contemplation breathing only with
desire of their Creator, and coveting nothing farther in this world, are
nourished with the sole love of Eternity. They contemn all earthly things,
and in their minds transcend all temporary things. They love and burn: and in
that heat they rest quiet: they burn by loving, and by their speech inflame
others also: and whom by their words they touch they instantly cause to burn
with the love of God. Why therefore may I not call such as these Seraphims,
whose hearts are converted into fire, shining and burning, and withal
illuminating the eyes of men's minds unto heavenly things, and pricking them
with tears, purge away the rust of Vices. This in sum may be said to be the
more perfect state of the Soul here united unto God: of which we are now more
particularly to treat.

SECT. II. That this Union consists chiefly in true knowledge of God, and
Love experimental and reciprocal.
1. THEY who write Scholastically of this Union of the Soul with God in their
Treatises of Mystical Theology, do first speak of it in the Speculative way:
endeavoring to show the difference between it and common Theology; and in
what part of the mind this Science is seated, and such like: which we
purposely here omit; And some more phanatically having learned from Saint
Paul, Ephesians. 5. That Christ is the Husband of the Church; and consequently,
that there is a Mystical Wedlock between it, and every true particular member
of that, and Christ, pursue the Allegory so boldly and indiscreetly, as to
profane that holy Mystery, by carnal resemblances and Scholies, which we
shall avoid. It sufficing that as Saint Paul there says, Great is the
Mystery: and that great Mysteries are not too curiously to be enquired into,
but believed firmly, with endeavors to attain the same; which endeavors must
be grounded upon the proper means conducing thereunto; which most of all
deserve here to be explained.

2. Of these then, the present knowledge of God, according to humane capacity,
must needs be the first step; and that not a knowledge of humane Science, but
rather of Christian faith and experience: which St. Paul, 2 Corinthians. 2. 14.
most aptly and significantly calls, the savor of the knowledge of God, not
only informing, but affecting us, as it were, sensibly, or experimentally.

3. Upon this good beginning is built the desire of God, as of the most
excellent, glorious, and good object of all; that being fullfilled which Isaiah
has, Chap. 26. 8. Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for
thee: the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of thee.
For in truth, God is in himself the most desirable of all things, as he is
the chiefest good of all things, and of whose fulness in that kind, all
things that are good, do partake and become good. So that as it is impossible
any thing should be formed really good but what is really, and more perfectly
such in him; so can we desire nothing but what is most absolutely and perfectly
to be had in, and with him: So that, according to the illumination of the
understanding concerning God and things Divine, will follow an appetite of the
will affected therewith. For natural Philosophy teaches truly, than man has
not Free Will in choosing that which is chiefest Good and ultimate of all; but
without consultation or deliberation, ravished with its allsufficiencie and
plenitude, tends naturally and necessarily to it, as the last end of all,
beyond which there is no passing: and besides it, there is no straying; as
being immense. So that we may suppose Lucifer himself excelling naturally in
perspicacitie and intuitive knowledge, which he had of that absolute Good, was
so far surprised with its splendor and perfection, that contenting not
himself to be near, contemplate, and enjoy it, affected to be that it self by
sacrilegious ambition, and so lost what really he had, and was. So that we may
perceive a necessary conjunction between clear and firm knowledge, and
sincere and fervent love: as there is a Moral (as they call it) necessity of
conjunction between Love, and the thing we so loved.

4. Under Love, (which is the very Unitive Bond of Christ and the Soul) we
comprehend Desire also; which some make one kind of Love, and Complacencie,
another. But Complacencie being rather a Concomitant of Love possessed of its
Object, than any actual appetite, may more properly be termed a satiation and
rest of the Soul. But Love is an act or motion toward somewhat not fully, at
least, enjoyed. And though there may be a full fruition, the heart of man
ceases not to love or desire in some sense: as when that actually and at
present enjoyed, is desired as absent, and in the continuation, for time to
come. For as no man, according to the Philosophy of Saint Paul, hops for
what he has, so neither does he desire what he has; but the desire remaining
after possession, is of the perpetuation, and indeficiencie of the same. As
when Peter and John at the Transfiguration of Christ, beholding and admiring
the Glory, did desire Tabernacles to be erected, in which they might rest
further in the blessed state they were then in. So much more full then as our
knowledge is of God and his Excellencies in Christ, so much more ardent will
be, and so much better settled, our love of them; and consequently our union
more intimate and fixed in them: answerable to which the Schoolmen as well as
Mystical Divines, have found out four degrees of Love divine ( Thom. 1. 2. qu.
28. a. 5. Co.) Liquefaction, Fruition, Languor, and Fervor, which I hold not
fit to be here insisted upon, as being more admirable than profitable. A more
modern Author, and more truly and devoutly, reduces all love of God to
these three Heads: whereof the first comes only through Faith, without
gracious imaginations, or spiritual Knowledge of God; which is in the least
Soul reformed by Faith; and in the lowest degree of Charity; which is good as
sufficing to salvation. The second is that which a Soul feels through faith
and imagination of Jesus in his Manhood: which is better than the former, when
the Imagination is stirred by Grace. For then the spiritual Eye is opened in
beholding of his Humanity. The third is Love that a Soul feels through
spiritual sight of the Godhead, in the Humanity, as it may be seen here, is
the best and most worthy, and that is perfect love. This love a Soul feels
not till it be reformed in feeling: Thus that Author, in the Scale of
Perfection.

5. But I esteem that more useful and easy distinction of Love or Union with
God altogether sufficient for all purposes requisite to a good Christian: For
either we love because by Faith we know and see spiritually, things lovely or
desirable, as God in his Perfections, and Christ in his Mediation active, and
passive, and the holy Spirit in its operations Divine: Or we love because we
find and feel the power of all these in the inward-man, by the sense of the
Love of God first in such sort manifested unto us. For as Saint Austine, Epist.
106. has it (answerable to the grounds laid by Saint John, 1 Epist. 4. 19.)
Faith which works by love, would not work at all, unless the very Love of
God be first shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Spirit, which is given to
us.

SECT. III. Of the excess of Vnitive Love of God, in Ecstasies and Raptures,
with their abuses and uses noted.
1. ALthough the principal design in this Unitive Tractate be not to fill the
Brain with gallant Speculations, and gay Notions of Union with God, yet because
it seems necessary to a competent understanding of the Love, wherewith God
does love us, and of that whereby we love God, to take in the Extent of it, it
will not be amiss to consider the doctrine and use of Ecstasies, and Raptures,
too much famed by some, and no less defamed by others. For as supreme
Illuminations by Faith and Contemplation ordinary do receive their Crown and
summitie by extraordinary Revelations and Visions, God may, and does sometimes
impart to his Servants; so may it be that the top of spiritual Affections and
Love seraphicall, may touch the bottom of extraordinary Ecstasies and Raptures:
which are certain transportations of the Soul above the pitch of common Love,
though sincere, sound, faithful, and saving. For in truth, I scarce read of
any Religion (except we make some factions, Religions) in which instances of
wonderful nature to this purpose, are not found: excepting the Mother faction
of late. For others issuing from them, have gloried much of such elevations and
transportations: And Histories and Relations very credible assure us, that of
old, amongst the Heathen, and at this day amongst the Mahometans, certain
devout Persons in their way, receive (after some Ceremonies used to that end)
supernatural impressions and Inspirations extaticall. And why not? Since it is
very probable that all Religions tending either remotely or immediately to the
worship of a Deity, whereby some honor, at large and blindly, is given unto
the only true God, above what Atheists ascribe to the same; and that according
to the most probable Philosophy about Spirits, there are diverse kinds of them;
some purer, others impurer; some most malicious, and mischievous, others less
noxious; that God the most Wise, just, and infinite dispenser of all things,
and disposer, may give way to Spirits to enter into and cooperate with zealous
Persons in their simple, yet intense devotion to a Deity, and manage them
according to the merits and manner of their Profession: So that in very truth,
faithful and unerring judgment of a sound Religion cannot be made from such
possessions and transportations; but on the contrary rather, that not the
reality, but purity and divinenesse of such Ecstasies are to be estimated from
the reasonableness, truth and holiness of the Religion professed by such
Enthusiasts. Only this may be well granted, that such Persons by such
Enthusiasmes, are competently characterized for select Persons in their
Professions, whether Idolatrous, Heretical, or Orthodox.

2. Or may we not say; as there is one Fire necessary for the Cook to make his
Vessels boil over (for Ecstasies are certain ebullitions of the spirit of a
Man,) and another Fire requisite to the Smith, to temper and fashion his
Metal, and another to the Founder for his service: so several loves giving
several heats, those several heats have several effects upon diverse Subjects
which they work on. Certainly, though true and modest Believers should not live
or carry themselves so toward God, as if they would oblige him to
extraordinary Inspirations or Motions to be granted them, so should the
modestest of all demean themselves in their Religion, as thereby they should be
more susceptible of supererogated Gifts, or measure running over, as the
Gospel speaks, from God. Of which impartments, I do verily believe the
professors of that Faction, who are Enemies to all prescribed disciplining,
shall never be partakers; pretending their Divinity is too spiritual to
trouble themselves with such Exercises, and they must go the nearest way to
Christ, destructive of all bodily reverence, decency, and due veneration:
which consists in select outward forms and fashions distinguishing to the
sense, divine from natural, moral, or civil services, as is most requisite.

3. But as to Ecstasies, of which we now speak, as they are such which God
vouchsafes to cause to the eminently constant and servent in his service and
worship, so may we not argue a certainty of Gods valuing those Vessels he so
fills, as more honorable, or holy than some others, from which he withholds
such gifts: though, where he so conferrs them, and they are not delusions of
idle and Evil Spirits imitating divine, no doubt but there is some good degree
of holiness preceding, not common to all true Believers. For still we must
look on them as gifts to profit withal, and not as Graces, whereby men
actually have profited. And the profit which succeeds thereupon is rather of
others than themselves. For such they are described to be, that in them
sometime the reason is taken away from them who suffer them; and sometime,
their senses. I scarce know what to judge of that saying of Antonie the Great,
undoubtedly eminently devout, whatever Modern Censurers may judge, which
Cassian in Collat. relates, That no man arrives at the perfection of Prayer,
who in Prayer understands what he says: which possibly might give occasion to
moderner Authors to invent such a kind of Prayer which they call
Supramentall: that is, such which is above Intelligence: but this I may presume
to say; that, if any whose Office it is to be the Voice of the People to God in
Public, (who then especially should together with him offer a reasonable
Sacrifice to God) should affect or wilfully fall into such extaticall forms
of speaking that neither he should understand himself, nor should be
understood by others, he must be owing to some other Spirit for such his gifts,
than that of God.

4. And for privation of Senses in Ecstasies, some Instances may be given very
credible, during such translations of mind: which I dare neither rashly
applaud, nor condemn. But whether this was the case of that holy man Elpidius
of whom the Ancients write, I know not; that he was wont to stand whole
Nights in Prayer and praising God in Psalms (not in recitation of Creeds and
Ave Mary's) with such steadfastness, that being once stung with a Scorpion, he
changed not his posture. Which might be ascribed to an holy pertinacie against
sense, not without sense. But if evil Spirits entering into, and possessing
Vessels of dishonor and impious, drown the senses for that time; there is no
incrediblenesse, that the good Spirit of Grace and Peace, may overcome all
sensations external. Was it not so with Saint Paul, when, as we read, 2 Corinthians. 12. he was wrapped up into the third Heaven, whether in the body or out
of the body, he knew not? And it is most apparent that some Epilepticall
distempers, bereave men both of sense and Reason. And it is related to us by
Bodin, Theatr. Naturoe lib. 4. that in Germany, diverse men are wont to cast
themselves by Witchcraft, into Ecstasies in such manner, that for the time, they
feel no pain, by blows, pinchings, or burnings; but returning to their common
senses, they presently feel most grievous torments. And this I rehearse, verily
believing that God by his holy Spirit does elevate some men so extraordinarily
as that they exceed humane order in contemplations and sensations heavenly: and
that evil Spirits may counterfeit notably the same effects in their Servants.
And hereupon I leave these few Rules to all sober, faithful and devout
Christians, tending to the discerning of Spirits good and evil.

5. First, they who pursue the great means ordained of God to arrive at the
height of the Love of God uniting them to God, and causing an acquiescence and
rest in him: so that in effect their reasons and senses natural inconsisting
with such perfection, should be lost in God and in Christ, and they live in the
world undisturbed by it; are laudably and safely extaticall.

6. Secondly, That they who may have surpassed others in the exercise of
Christian Virtues, and the Unitive Way with God, and no ways aim at such
Perfections, or desire them; as, at the best, not making the Soul more good,
but more great rather, and not more dear or acceptable to him, which should be
every prime Christians study and endeavor, may have exaltations of this
nature: which importunately coveted, may provoke God to deliver them over to
delusions of evil Spirits.

7. Thirdly, Seeing counterfeit Ware comes too often under the countenance and
resemblance of what is pure and passing good; the soundness of the faith
professed by such, is not proved by such excesses: but such excesses must be
rather judged by the Law and Testimony of God, as Isaiah speaks Chap. 8. upon
which Faith is grounded, and by which, it is directed. For no otherwise true is
that description of Ecstasies given by that ancient Author called Dionysius
the Areopagite, That Ecstasies are a wisdom putting a man besides himself,
than that suspension, or absorption of natural knowledge and understanding is
occasioned by the dominion of divine Irradiations truly so called. So that
this excess of Light and Love must be it self subject to trial, and that
twofold principally: the one taken from the Antecedent; and the other from the
Consequent Circumstances. For if soberness of believing, and divinenesse of
behaving our selves lead not to these Ecstasies, they are spurious and
dangerous. Again, if such transported minds, thereupon fall into unreasonable,
unjust, or ridiculous actions inconsistent with the gravitie, and purity of
the divine Presence there supposed, it is but reasonable to suspect, the Scene
to be managed by idle Spirits. For Rapts of a Royal stamp, are such as Gerson
describes, An experimental knowledge of God, obtained by a conjunction of
spiritual affection: Which Unitive and experimental knowledge may be had
without the disorder of the natural understanding; and may also dissetle it
so as to depend, for some time, wholly upon Gods supportation and
transportation: and that especially in the estimation of the world, and common
judgments. For thus was Christ judged to be, Mark 3. 21. and that by his own
Friends, besides himself: and Saint Paul also, by Festus, and by some other
Believers; as may be gathered from 2 Corinthians. 5. 13.

SECT. IV. Of the Union of the Soul with God by Divine Contemplation and
Meditation; with some instances of particular Subjects of this latter.
1. WHEN Meditation and Contemplation are distinguished, as sometimes they are;
Contemplation may be said to be directed immediately to God, and the fixing of
the mind and heart on him; and from, and through him, to cast an eye on the
Creatures and the various acts of his Providence, in which he is seen also
with an Evening Light and Knowledge, as he is with a Morning Light (as Saint
Austin was wont to speak) by that immediate Intuition, which yet properly is to
be attained only in Heaven. But Meditation is the consideration of created
things, not so much as they are in themselves, which is the employment of
natural Philosophers, but as they are effects of a Divine and supernatural
Power and designed to the assistance of duller and weaker Eyes, which are not
able to behold the Glory of God but as men do the beauty of the Sun, in
Water. And yet from hence, ascent is made to a faithful and fruitful
apprehension of God himself: where the Soul mounted, as was Peter, James and
John at the transfiguration of Christ, desires to abide and have its residence
for ever.

2. But Grace and Goodness here being in their minority, yea and under
Tutours and Governors, as the Apostle speaks, Galat. 4. 2. We are not to take
possession of the promised and expected Inheritance, in this life: But the
Method hereunto is this, which we find exemplified in David speaking thus,
Psalm 17. I will behold thy face in righteousness here: when I awake I shall
be satisfied with thy likeness. For as Saint Paul also says, 1 Corinthians. 13.
12. 2 Corinthians. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding, as in a glass, the
glory of the Lord, are changed as into the same Image, from glory to glory
even as by the Spirit of the Lord: meaning hereby, that the Spirit of God
concurring with the Glass of Gods Creatures, and his revealed Word, gives us a
true, but a distant and, so, dim representation of God, as through
Perspectives. And these to improve to the best degree and advantage, is the
great business of our present state here; as whereby we are daily wrought to a
conformity to the Image of Christ and God, defaced in us; and return unto his
likeness, and a liking of him: which two are both Unitive of us to God, and
actual Union with him, according to our present capacity. For it is true in
Religion what Philosophy, in her Sphere, teaches: that the Understanding is
made all things, answerable to its Object: the mind of man wonderfully
conforming it self to such things as are brought unto it by the Ear or Eye;
and is in a manner figured by them: as we see that Water admitting any Body
more solid than it self, into it self, gives way to it and receives the shape
thereof within it self: as does the Air also, though not so visibly to our
sense. So the mind of man contemplating and conceiving God and Divine matters,
is formed or conformed to the same, morally; loosing its natural shape and
posture, and propensities: which is thus expressed by Saint Paul, Romans 12. 2.
And be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of
God. For instance, a man hearing and taking pleasure in absurd, riotous, and
obscene Discourses or Books, (as is in part noted before) is conformed
thereunto and corrupted therewith; the Images of things so imbibed or
impressed, being with great difficulty to be removed, and with great facility
and promptitude stirring up, or, at least, yielding to sinful temptations, as
occasion shall be offered agreeably. And so in men's reading of the Histories of
far and unknown Countries, and the strange fruits of the Earth, the motions of
the Air, and temper differing from ours, and the unusual forms of Beasts and
such like Rarities, do beget an inclination in the mind to be present on the
place. Likewise Relations of Battles, wise Stratagems, Valiant and bold Actions
in others, inflame the spirit to an imitation. In like manner, he who converses
much with Religion, its strange and preternaturall Notions, the sublime
Speeches, and heroical Actions of Saints and Martyrs, and especially the
admirable design, and Providence of God in Lost man's Redemption and
Restitution, performed by Christ, cannot choose but find and feel a
disposition in himself, answering the impressions made in his mind of them;
where it is not notoriously pestered with earthly and vicious Habits
prepossessing it; which by the foresaid prescriptions of the Purgative
Exercise, must be first discharged, before any such transformation, as we
speak of, can be hoped for. For no man can attain to any savourinesse or
complacencie in any faculty whatever, until by frequent practice, he becomes a
competent Master of such Science or Art. So that Saint Paul exceeding in these
Exercises himself, and thereupon experimenting the admirable effects of them
in the vehement zeal for Gods glory, ending in Raptures and Visions
Celestial, commends the same Method to his Son Timothy, 1 Epist. 4. 8. in
these words, Till I come, give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine: which are easily applicable to such an attendance, whereupon Christ
with his blessed Spirit, may enter into the Soul to its Illumination,
Purgation and Conjunction with him.

5. And though all the Scriptures, being given of God are profitable for
Instruction and Edification, yet, as the glory of the Celestial Bodies,
differ in degrees; so some Lights in Gods Word produce both greater light and
heat in men, than others do: Whereupon it is expedient that choice be there
made also of such as may be more effectual upon a man: not excluding
inferior points as useless, but insisting upon such as are more honorable
and weighty, and fruitful to be meditated on.

6. And to give some assistance here, to the weaker, in directions and
instances of subjects proper for Meditation, not intending to limit any
strictly to what I here offer; What if we should distribute the Great Work of
God in restoring, and renewing, or recreating the world, brought into ruin and
confusion by the fall of Man, into as many days as it pleased him to take for
creating and forming of the natural and Visible world, at the first? And thus
beginning on Monday, to consider and meditate on the miserable Chaos of
confusion into which all the world was reduced by Man's Apostacy from, and the
several branches of the sin committed thereby against God, with the
aggravations of guilt pertaining thereunto. And how God entertained within
himself, thoughts of reconciliation with Man so undone; and to determine or
decree the same by his Sons becoming Man, and undertaking the great Work of
Mediation. If on Tuesday, a man should observe seriously and contemplate of the
execution of this Decree, by Covenanting a second time with Adam in behalf of
himself and Posterity; this true and proper Covenant of Grace, and the
foundation thereof in promising the Messiah as a Mediator and Redeemer; and
the exceeding love of God in giving his Only Son to be Incarnate to that end.
Thirdly, If on Wednesday we should meditate, how upon this Day, God created
light out of darkness, and the light sprang up to the Righteous; a Light of
Hope and Life, and of help: by which we perform all spiritual Offices and
works, as we do our natural works, by the light of the Sun, daily. And if
the observation be true, and the reason of the Jew given to the Gentile
Philosopher, Why the Sun fails not to shine little or much every Wednesday,
viz. because it was made on that Day, and so shining celebrates its own
Nativitie; much greater reason is there, that we should celebrate the praise of
Gods mercy shining in the face of Jesus Christ to us. If on Thursday, we should
more particularly observe the several Rays of the glorious Body of Grace
falling upon us here on earth: and how that he, who has given his Son thus to
us, will, and does with him give us all things; so that the fat and the sweet
and the plenty of the creatures ordained to man's use are derived to him by
Christ: through whom, as he made the Worlds, he administers, and governs, and
disposes all things in an admirable order and Harmony, filling even the
natural man's heart with food and gladness; which ought to appear and utter it
self in outward acts of gratitude and service: rising up from thence to the
valuation more serious and high of the spiritual Blessings, whereby he
satisfies the hungry and thirsty Soul after Righteousness, and the graces
of the Gospel, conducting to the glory of God. And on Friday, how ample,
noble, and patheticall Meditations may be had on the sufferings and death of
Christ for the sins of the whole world, and the satisfying of Gods wrath due to
man in extremity, by the tearing of his Flesh, and the shedding his Blood,
even to the death of the Cross for us: so fullfilling all Righteousness. And
how reasonable, just, and righteous a thing it is for all true Christians to
suffer for him and themselves all such hardships, of Abstinences, Continences,
Selfe-denialls, and bodily punishments, to be made like unto Christ, and more
capable of the fruits and effects of his Intercession and Redemption. Sixthly,
On Saturday, to consider the Rest of Christ in the Grave; having finished the
several works of our Redemption, as God did that Day the works of Creation,
resting from them: And that we also should rest from such works of Nature
corrupt, which may be called properly Ours; and so fit our selves to live and
die, as that the next Day which we call Sunday, we may be fitted for a blessed
and joyful Resurrection; And being then raised from the death of sin unto the
life of Righteousness, we may keep a perpetual Jubilee of Holiness and
Happiness, elevating our minds in the contemplation of the Power of God, the
glory of Christ raised from the dead, ascended up into Heaven, ever to make
intercession for us, laboring here under several conflicts, until we also
reign together with him. Which future state may well deserve the best and
highest of our thoughts, as that where the imperfecter union of faith and love
we can attain here, shall receive its absolute and most perfect consummation
hereafter.

7. But until that fulness of time, or time of fulness shall come, the
mind of man is wonderfully helped and exalted by the exercise of the
contemplation of God in his beauty, and goodness: which is oftentimes very
effectual upon men, for the quietation and fixing of the unsettled mind, in
great peace and tranquillity from the molestations of this world: though at
the same time there be found no small solicitude how to preserve that
comfortable state unshaken, and the purity thereof undefiled: being, with
Peter, at the glory of Christ's Transfiguration, loath to go down the Mountain
where such manifestations are made.

8. And the Mystery of Godliness in this case is truly wonderful; if a man
considers that not only the way to this conjunction with God is purification
of the Body and Soul from earthly uncleanness; but such Union and Converse
with God does change the Faces, at least; that is, the outward forms of men
not truly fitted or sanctified to such an end. Hence is a resolution in some
measure made, of a doubt seeming difficult to me: Who perceiving heretical and
schismatic, and men of unjust lives to make a fair appearance of good
outward, and retrenching the more scandalous Vices contrary to sound Piety,
could not but wonder how an erroneous faith, and unrighteous and uncharitable
demeanours in a Christian course should attain to so much as a commendable
formalitie of Godliness. For surely the very appearance of holiness, though
there should be nothing more in the case, is in it self laudable. The reason
of all this I take to be, the strange forwardness many such abound with in
pressing, though indirectly into Gods Presence; affecting mountainous phrases,
and phansying themselves intimate with God himself. For as Conspiratours and
Traitors frequenting the Kings Court and Presence, and observing what is
performed of such as do him immediate service, and attend him, can, and do
easily and more artificially comport themselves as prime Subjects; Or (to use
Saint Chrysostom's comparison) As he that shall come into a Drugsters shop
where Aromaticall Spices are pounded, shall, whether he will or not, carry
away upon his Clothes, some of the fragrancies which are there stirring; Or,
lastly, as the Censers of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their Accomplices,
became holy by being brought, though in a wicked manner, into Gods Presence and
devoted to his service; so ill-grounded, and ill-advised Devotion to God does
make some alteration very laudable in men, resembling God himself and his
holiness. So that as sincerity of Intention, purity of Affection, and Actions
innocent and righteous do conduce much to spiritual mindedness, and
contemplation of, and union with God, so do even that preposterous way of
conversing with God, and pressing unduly into Gods Presence, diverse times work
some good effect outwardly, at least, upon men. And were it not that where
Divine Contemplations are orderly performed and faithfully, a real and sound
improvement of Christian Graces and Virtues was also made, and the Soul
became not more like unto God so viewed and enjoyed, it must needs have been an
error in Scholasticall Divines, to prefer the Contemplative Life, or the
Life of Mary; before the Practical, or the Life of Martha serving Christ:
restraining Contemplation to that way had in this world: which beginning on
such low and sensible Subjects as are before recited; may rise to greater
perfection in the more immediate intuition of God himself, and the glory to
be revealed.

SECT. V. Of the Union we have with God in Prayer habitual and actual, as the
proper matter of Worship.
1. FROM the twofold Union with God spoken of, Contemplation or Knowledge, and
Love, proceeds as a necessary consequence of both, Adoration, which consists
in an actual Devotion; and Consecration of the whole man unto God, and an
inanition, or emptying of a man's Soul into the fulness of God, as the
smaller, as well as greater Rivers fall into the Ocean and loose themselves;
the Channel through which they run, remaining the same, and always in those
streams moving. Or when as two intimate Friends of the same judgment, and
equally affectionate one to another, meeting together, after mutual embraces,
fall into Discourses most kind and pleasing one with another: So the foresaid
meeting of the Soul with God begets conference and holy Talk with God in
Prayer. It was not therefore thought sufficient by John the Baptist; to have
procured followers of his Doctrine, nor attenders of his Person; nor by Christ,
to have chosen his Apostles, who should be always near him by profession,
unless he taught them to pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. For
Filiation or Adoption, whereby we have God for our Father, suffices not
without he be our heavenly Father; and under that notion use Invocation of him,
and holy Communication with him by the Ascent of the heart to him in Prayer.

2. And Prayer being of a very comprehensive nature may be considered in its
Habit, which is a general and constant disposition of the mind to God, of
which sort we may understand Saint Paul to speak, 1 Thessalonians 5. 17.
Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray always: and Pray without ceasing: by alienating the
Affections from earthly things, and raising and continuing the same to, and
with God. That so, when ever God by any tacit suggestion shall say to the
Soul, Seek ye my face: an Answer and Act may always be in readiness,
saying, Thy face Lord will I seek. For actual Prayer is the exercise of that
general disposition men have toward God: and differs no more from that than
the Fire covered and the Fire kindled: which latter when it ceases, leaves new
Coals apt to a repetition of the like flames. And thus ascending unto God, and
for the time abiding with him; we are estranged from terrestrial businesses
and cogitations. From which consideration a tolerable reason may be given, why
diverse praying together, in the conclusion are wont to salute one another, as
newly met. For this we are wont to do after a far Journey taken, and a
return: so having been as far as Heaven it self in Prayer, and wholly (as we
ought at least) estranged from things below, we returning take Acquaintance
with our Friends and Brethren: Or perhaps having been so united to God, as in
such cases becomes us, the Center of all Christian Charity whereby we meet
altogether, we testify our Christian Affection thereby increased, with
affectionate Salutations outward.

3. But this is performed as well (that is, as really though not so
edifyingly) in single addresses, as in Society; when a man makes known unto God
that which would not be so proper to have published to others: of which we may
speak by and by. For though, for daily and common Sacrifice, Gods House and
Altar is the most convenient place, yet we may observe that those
extraordinary Revelations and Visions reported in Ancient and inferior
Histories, to be made to the eminent Servants of God, have been obtained
chiefly in private retirements from the Noise and Dust of the World. Elias was
so visited by God in the cleft of a Rock, and Moses in the wide Wilderness
alone, when God gave him the signal of his Presence by the Fire in the Bush.
And David counsels to enter into a man's own heart, and commune with that in
his Chamber; as an excellent expedient to draw God to a friendly conference
with him, an appearance to him, answerable to his exigence. Exceeding capable,
and many times, sensible is the mind so erected to God separated from
businesses of the world, of the sweetness of abstractions of that nature. And
the Trances of Daniel, Peter, and most probably of Paul, befell them in such
retirements without the concurrence of a Congregation, or the Mediation though
not Ministration of Holy Spirits, which we never read in Scripture to be
Intercessours, in any kind, to God, in behalf of the Saints here laboring,
but only Ministers and Delegates of God to perform his pleasure to such as
so wait for him, and call upon him. And as for Saints in Heaven, we never so
much as read in Holy Scripture, that they were sent at any time by God to
minister unto his Servants here on Earth, as Angels have been: neither are we
directed by the Word of God to have any communication with them visible, or
sensible. It must needs therefore be a third Oeconomie of God, as yet
unrevealed, besides that of Moses, or Christ, which assigns us new
intermediate Objects or Vehicles of our Prayers to God, no ways made known by
God; but devised by humane ratiocinations, intruding into things not seen; and
founded on presumptions not known, nor demonstrable, but by such instances and
examples of miraculous Apparitions which may more than suffice to turn the
stomach from swallowing them.

4. But presumption it is, not to go directly in Scripturall Road prescribed
us, to Allmighty God; but to go out of it; neither is it modesty, but rather a
double impudence, to alter the course of our Devotion to God, in importuning
them to solicit for us who never gave us the least intimation or
encouragement so to do, and in not following the direct Precept given by
Christ, as our Great Mediator, and by God himself as our heavenly Lord and
Father. Whence does it appear that God is of more difficult access since the
coming of Christ than he was before? Or when? and how became the privileges of
Gods faithful Children under Christ inferior to them under Moses? Did the
souls of the faithful then make immediate approaches unto God, and claspe him,
and may we not? or in truth, ought we not much rather so to do, as well for
the glory of God, some of which must needs fall short of God, and stick to the
hands that should so offer our worship to God, and that whether those holy
Spirits will or not, (we failing in the purity of our intention, and modesty
and innocence of our expressions so applying our selves) as also for our
comfort and satisfaction, which must needs be more full, the more immediate and
strict our conjunction is with God: our fellowship (as Saint John tells us)
being with the Father and the Son: and that surely will bear us out in all
immediate approaches to God; but scarce allow application to others, which are
only commendable where the bond of civil Charity in this life, the ground of
the exercise of spiritual Offices to one another, is not dissolved, as it is
when we are separated by Death. So that we can only in Christ, (exclusively)
come with that boldness, and access with confidence by the faith of him, as
the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 3. 12. but with suspicions, fears, and doubtings,
until customarinesse has blinded the mind so far that it cannot see afar
off. And then, if it fares with us as it happens to poor Suppliants suing to an
earthly King surrounded with his Guards and Nobles, that they cannot come at
his Majesty, no wonder; unless it could appear that it was any ones appointed
Office, or Office of all, to be Masters of request to God, on our behalf.

SECT. VI. Of the defects incident to the Act of Prayer, and their Remedies.
1. AS there are Guards of Princes whose Office it is to push off with Pikes
and Staffs such as would press into their presence; so Evil Spirits are
always at hand making it their Office to hinder devout Souls coming to God,
by their temptations, and obstructions: and either by wholly putting us off
that we approach not at all; or by pulling us off, engaged; so that we cease in
spirit when we proceed in words and outward appearance; so that we may be said
to draw nigh unto him with our Lips, while our Hearts are far from him: a thing
much disallowed by God, yet not in all alike. For the spirit and mind of Man
are naturally fickle, light, vain, various, musing on many things, and
Dinah-like gadding abroad to see the Daughters of the Land, and visiting
strange Objects, while they should keep home, and mind their Fathers
business. And of the heart, it may be said, what was said of Ruben, Unstable
as waters thou shall not excel. For what powerfullnesse may be expected in
that Prayer which is prepared for God and designed, but falls short of him; as
an Arrow shot from an unbent or half broken Bow. And how unreasonable as well
as unlikely is it, that God should hear us when we scarce hear our selves?
For as when the outward Eye seems to be fixed steadfastly on an Object, the
mind in the mean time carried strongly after another Object, does not see what
is before it, many times; so though in appearance outward, a man seems wholly
bent to Godward, yet his heart being drawn off him to private Objects, which it
more phansies, he speaks in Prayer, not to God but to men or the open Air.
And it must needs be no small derogation from the greatness of God, to be thus
mocked by the world, catching up that by the way which is passing toward him:
and the Sacrifice maimed or blemished by the fingring of Evil Spirits, which
was devoted wholly to God: and at the same time that we have warm affections
toward the world, to set cold Meat before God. So that in this manner supinely
and slothfully to request any thing at Gods hands, must needs be a provocation
to God to deny us rather than to gratify us: It is little better than an
Idol which is set up in the heart which draws the current of Devotion to it
self, intended for God: and such God threatens in Ezechiel to answer by
himself; but not in Mercy, but in Justice. And it was the opinion of an
Ancient and devout Scholar in the School of Christ; that if God should judge a
man for no other thing but his wandering and vain thoughts in praying to him, he
were not able to stand before him.

2. This in truth is the Law of Prayer, and this is the end of praying, that
we should have, and keep our minds erected unto God; and to attain this,
should be the endeavor of all good Christians: But if not only God should be
so extreme to mark what is thus done amiss, but man should be so rigorous to
himself, to judge himself according to his demerits, he might fear and
despair to undertake this sacred Duty. For who can say, (on this side of
Heaven) I am clean from this common Contagion? So vigilant and active is the
Devil; so fugitive and fickle is man's mind naturally; so many Acquaintances
has he in the world that are constantly knocking at his Door (as it were) to
speak with him a little, even while he is busy with God himself, that very
difficult it is, without great circumspection and obstinacy (and to use these
is also very difficult) to attend upon the Lord without distraction, though
but for a season. When Complaint was made to an Ancient Holy Man by a Novice
in severe life, that he was wonderfully infested with idle thoughts in praying
unto God; he willed him to go abroad, and gather the Wind into his Lap: But,
said he, Father I cannot do it. No more, said he, can thou stay thy thoughts
at thy pleasure, from waving and wandering. Which we mention, not for Persons
under pretense of frailty and humane infirmity, to connive at such failings in
themselves, suffering them patiently so to rule, without any Censure or due
sense of such evil. For it is one part of a Christians Military Office in
this life, to war against the Law of his mind thus opposing him: and
accordingly to arm himself for the Encounter, by these, or the like means
and helps in Prayer.

3. First then, it is necessary he should understand what he says to God, and
consequently that the language he uses at such times should be known to him.
For next to, if not altogether impossible it is, that a man should mind that
which was never in his mind, as strange Languages are not. And how can the
heart be actually united to God in it knows not what?

4. Secondly, To avoid alienation of mind in Prayer, it is requisite a man
should be well preadvised of his danger in erring, and thereupon stand more
upon his watch and guard; and especially not give way to strange thoughts,
though civil, modest, yea religious in another kind. For the experience of
diverse have found it to be true, and matter of complaint, that at no other time
a man shall have so many pretty, witty, and often useful cogitations come
into his head, as in the time of Prayer. Better contrivances of worldly affairs
will be then injected than at other times he could hit of. Sometimes some acute
and useful distinction in scholasticall and difficult Points of Divinity. And
perhaps a very plausible notion of praying right, shall fall into his mind
hindering him from actually praying aright: These and such like are mighty
temptations to divert and hold the mind from its more proper Duty. But more
gross and avoidable much are they which are the remains of some evil
affection or passion we generally carry about us, and only formally put by
for the present: which will not be put off so, but as rude Fellows in a Crowd
or great Concourse, where civil distance is to be observed, having heard the
word of some in Authority, saying, Stand off, give back for the present, and
suddenly again press forward among their betters: so idle, and vain, if not
directly evil thoughts being put off for a moment, while we attend Gods
service, suddenly break their bounds, and molest us. These Contingencies (as we
may Civilly call them) ought duly to be considered, and the mind fortified
with great resolutions against the assaults so made: And be well assured
against the appearance of the usefullnesse of some cogitations: that whatever
is not seasonable (as these are not) cannot be reasonable nor religious: And as
for those thoughts which proceed from some lurking Vice covered for the
present, as they are evil at all times, so are they of a double guilt,
interposing in sacred Actions. And the best, no better than golden Apples
thrown in our way, by the Envier of all good Actions, to stop our direct course
to Godward.

5. Another proper means to constancy in the good intended, is, to begin
well, and set out at first with good advice; considering with our selves, what
we do; whose we are; before whom we come; whom we serve; and for what we so
draw nigh unto him; whose Majesty is incomparable, whose seat is in Heaven and
we upon Earth; and that to trifle with him is to arm him against our own
Souls; and pull down a Curse upon our heads instead of a Blessing. But trifle
we do, when with our mouths we worship him, and our hearts are far from him.
But though no man is to allow in himself such deviations, yet where they are
involuntarie, rather than affected, a mitigation of their evil may be in some
degree expected from the first general, and habitual design of offering an
entire Sacrifice to God. A man was by no means, to offer any thing to God
which was maimed, or imperfect: but if he had chose an absolutely perfect
Sheep, Lamb, or Heifer to give to God and it happened to fall lame by the way,
as it was driving to Jerusalem, I know not whether such were refused. A man
must therefore choose and intend the best he can, and if in praying it happens
against his will and desire, to halt by the way, God may accept the same, a man
not approving that accessorie imperfection.

6. A fourth expedient then may be, the obtaining the Spirit of Prayer. And by
the Spirit of Prayer not that presumptuous giftednesse vain men boast of, but
that spiritual Disposition, that habitual Prayer which Saint Paul commends to
us when he said, Pray without ceasing: not requiring that our Tongue should
always be going, but that, as the Prophet speaks, Isaiah 26. 8. The desire
of our soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee. And the heart is
fixed, the heart is fixed, as David's was, Psalm 57. 9. and 108. 1. Upon and
from such a general addiction of the mind to God, do flow a readiness, and
regularnesse in the actual exercise of Prayer toward God, the Mouth speaking,
and the mind moving according to the good stock treasured in the heart.

7. Fifthly, Habitual Piety not alone sufficing to bear a man up in his Duty
herein, frequent reflections upon our selves is very necessary to recover our
selves faultring or tripping in such cases. Some hot mettall'd Jades will set
out too fiercely, but soon flagge in travailing; and must be spurred up and
quickened often to perfourm their Journey as they ought, and so must the fickle
fervor of diverse which endures for a time and fails without fresh
excitations and remembrances.

8. And sixthly, Peradventure care is to be had, that a man be not too anxious
or sollicitous in praying, lest he should not pray as becomes him; and so by
the Artifice of the Devil, a man becomes distracted in his thoughts, lest he
should be distracted. For the mind of man cannot be very intent upon two
things at a time, no more than by his will he can serve two Masters at the same
time. A fault apprehended in a man's self, suddenly condemned, presently
corrected, by applying himself to the true Object, may suffice without such a
long censuring himself, as may hinder rather than farther the action in hand.

9. Lastly, A certain revenge upon a man, and a conscience toward God for
defrauding him of his due service, and himself of the benefit of Prayer by
vain Aberrations, may be useful here, which is this: That upon a sense of such
strayings in his thoughts in time of Prayer, he punishes his Carnal part
desireing to be at liberty, by going over again with that which he once
performed so negligently: For hereby also, having so resolved to do, he
shall be revenged of the Tempter; and cause him to be less busy in molesting
him afterward, finding such evil success in his wiles; and so good effect of
a bad Cause.

SECT. VII. Of the due use of Public and Private Prayer.
1. WHerefore (think we) did God build the spacious and beautiful Temple of
this World; this Universe, which we behold and admire, but to make known the
glory of his Majesty, and that it being known by us, should affect us with
proportionable zeal to celebrate his Praise, all the ways he has taught us,
and all that we can devise; not repugnant to his own prescriptions? They
therefore that would shrink up all Devotions into an House of their own, nay
peradventure into their own breast, and a narrow dark corner of the heart,
judging that altogether sufficient, do in a manner, implicitly lay a slight
upon the Creation of the World by God, as superfluous, seeing be might have
been as great and glorious in himself without that. But the same Spirit, if
not Person that said, Psalm 119. 11. Thy Word have I hid in mine heart -- said
also Psalm 40. 10. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have
declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving
kindness and thy truth from the great Congregation: intimating unto us, that
the stock of Grace inwardly, must not be kept so (as it were) under Lock and
Key, as not to appear publicly to the use and service of him, to whom, as
Money bearing his Image and superscription, it properly belongs. The House of
God so called because it is devoted to his service, is undoubtedly the most
proper place of his Worship; that being like the Treasurie-Chamber of Kings,
and great Princes, into which all Duties are to be paid, and out of which, all
undue favors are to be dispensed. And therefore surely, as greater glory is
given to God by public than by private Worship, so greater Blessings may be
from thence expected. And though common Prayers wherein many agree to glorify
God in private places, is to be preferred before single Devotion: the same
service in Gods House, as more public and exemplarie, must needs be more
acceptable than that of private Places. Christ said indeed, to confound
Hypocrites seeking praise of men: When thou prayest enter into thy Closset and
shut thy Door, etc. never intending to confine men to their Chambers, in
praying: but to cut off ostentation in Prayer; which yet may be avoided in
public Prayers: The Devil therefore envying the glory of God, and the
edification of Christians in faith toward God, and Charity to one another,
and a more powerful access to God, and a more prosperous success of public
Prayers there offered, must needs have a Finger in that sacrilegious doctrine
of detracting from the honor and efficacy of public Prayers, in matching
private with it.

2. They say, God is in all places, that he is: They say, God dwells not in
Temples made with hands: They say, God can hear us in all places, at home as
well as at Church; and in Private as well as in Public. And in saying this
and the like, they say they know not what. For does God dwell in Clossets or
Halls, or Parlours, or Kitchins, and does he not dwell in Temples made with
hands? Is it not said expressly of the Temple, that it is the place where his
Honor dwells, Psalm 26. 8. Psalm 29. 9. And are not there express Promises
fixed there above other places? If it be said, Those things were Jewish, Let
them tell me, if they were not Gentile also; if among all Nations civilized
and professing Religion, and among all Christians, so soon as they were able
and permitted to have Public places, they carried not their Sacrifices to
them, to be tendered to God: and shall private senses of ignorant persons in
the Scriptures presumed upon without knowledge or ground, preponderate all
these? And hereunto (not to repeat here what has elsewhere been more fully
discussed) we may add the Mock which is too often put upon God and Religion by
this Opinion; so that very often God is not worshipped at all in Private, by
diverse who plead for such private Worship: which is securely passed over
uncensur'd, because no man can witness to the contrary. But I may say safely,
no men generally make a greater Conscience of worshipping, in their proper
seasons, in Private, than they who most frequent the Public worship. For
Private worship was only intended for an Auxiliarie and supply of what we
could not perform publicly: which I can scarce think God will accept of,
when it is grounded upon such a false foundation as making Private, equal to
Common Prayer jointly with others; or to such public Prayer which in Gods
House is by private and single Persons made to God, agreeable to the Primitive
practice of Christians, so early as they had such places to pray in, and never
laid down but where an unluckie, and precipitant zeal against a scandalous
Religion, hurried men forward to diverse unwarrantable alterations in Religion,
not in one Church, nor one Age received and practiced.

3. And against this, makes nothing, what Saint Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will
that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands: but teaches how we should
pray; wherever, and whenever we pray; that is, Lifting up holy hands. And
that we should rather pray any where than no where; but not excluding
Prerogatives of some places above others. They write of Lombard, that being
reproached by the Devil for praying in an House of Office, (an unseemly place
for so holy an Action, as a man may think) he answered him; Here, and any where
else I may pray unto my God: which is most true in some cases; but it is not
true therefore that one place is not better than another to pray in, or that
all are alike to God in all respects, saving that of accommodation, for
Company to meet in. But necessity may consecrate any Place, and affected
choice of privacie, when circumstances require public and open worship, may
desecrate, or unhallow any Room; making it unfit to serve God, and the worship
it self unpleasing to God: So that, to me, it is not easy to resolve, whether
the moderner way so much applauded by some, of constancy of Family-meetings in
Prayers to the keeping the Church vacant, and the Doors shut at all times
almost, but when a man scarce dares stay away, have not robbed God of more
glory and worship than they have given him; the exception lying only good,
where there can be no access to the public Place.

4. But I know not what vicious and very blameable modesty has possessed so
many of late days, as to be afraid to be seen, or taken praying: and sundry
devout Persons are startled and shrink to be seen unawares at their Prayers in
Gods House it self: which is the House of Prayer, unless when the Bells
publish the duty at hand, and an Assembly is made professedly, and so likewise
at their domestic and separate Devotion; as if they were taken in a fault, or
some Crime, whereof a man should be ashamed and afraid; some men being more
abashed, seen to do well, than others are, taken in an evil Action. This
cannot be well thought of by God, whose service a man is then engaged in; and
cannot but be an infirmity in men praying. For though a man is not
hypocritically and with no better design than to be noted and praised by men,
to expose studiously himself to the view of others, while he prays, he is no
less obliged not to forbear what place, and time, and just occasion require at
his hands, or otherwise may be expedient, because people see him. For God
says, Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven: and the manifestation of our Adoration
and service, is likewise a manifestation of his honor and glory. And if at
length we could recover and bring into Reputation such lost good Actions as
public Prayer in private Persons, Religion would be more renowned, and many
more than now do, would also fall down, and say; God is in you of a truth,
and so be excited to the same good work, or worship in use.

5. But a known time of Gods Worship being assigned, a sound, entire, tried,
approved Sacrifice and reasonable service of God being appointed, for
Confession, Humiliation, Supplications, Petitions, Deprecations, Intercessions,
Thanksgivings, and Benedictions, as Saint Paul directs, 1 Timothy 2. 1. with
sobriety or good Conscience; to contemn these either ignorantly or
presumptuously, and to foist in private Inventions scarce so good as humane,
all things considered, what amounts this to but a despising of Christ himself,
and a provocation of God to cast the officious zeal of such, as dung upon their
own faces? For how can it be supposed that God should be pleased with that
Oblation obtruded upon him and others, without Authority; which is often put up
without Faith, and never with Charity or Humility convenient? But if our
Prayers themselves offend, how should we hope for pardon of our offenses by
them? That therefore they should have favorable access to God, is necessary
they should be duly qualified themselves; and that such as these Conditions,
here only to be named, be found in them: 1. That we pray in Faith that God is;
and that he is a rewarder of all that call upon him. 2. That we pray in truth,
without any heretical or erroneous Dogmes, or corrupt Opinions of God, of his
Word or holy Worship. 3. Praying in purity of intention; seeking, even when
our Prayers consist of spiritual or temporal benefits to our selvles,
primarily the glory and good will of God. 4. In Purity or holiness of hands;
that is, innocence of life, as David, when he said, I will wash my hands in
innocence, and so will I go to thine Altar; or at least, a dislike of our
guilt and contaminations; making them part of our humiliation and supplications
to God. 5. In Charity toward others, so far as Justice and Piety will
permit. And lastly, In zeal to Gods service, and to our own Souls in so
praying (which is that lifting up the Soul, we so much speak of here) and
leaving it with him to preserve to his greater service and glory, and our
immortal happiness.

SECT. VIII. Of the several sorts of Prayer, viz. Sensible, Mental,
Supramentall: Extemporarie, Formed and fixed: as also, Singing of Psalms.
1. NOw, because there are usually distinguished several kinds of Prayer to
God, as well according to the matter, as manner of putting up our requests to
him, all concurring in this one thing, that the mind and heart should be
thereby united to God and fixed, it will not be amiss to glance at the
principal in this second order, having touched the former from the Apostles
words, 1 Timothy 2. 1. All which relate to the matter of Prayer, and may be
performed in any one of those which great Artists have cast into this
threefold Prayer, viz. Sensible, Mental, and Supramentall. Sensible they make
that which is common to all Christians praying to God in a vocal, sensible
manner to themselves and others. Mental they would have that called, which is
contemplative, and whereby the mind is thoroughly directed to God, not without
affection. For if the Understanding only be erected and directed to God, it
can scarce deserve the name of Prayer to God, as Philosophizing about him;
therefore it is necessary, that affectionatenesse and adherence to God by
love, which are acts of the will also, should be found in all due Prayer: yea
in all Treaters of the nature and use of Prayer; otherwise, acute and learned
men may prescribe better than teach, or affect. A manifest Example we have in
the two great Chieftains amongst Schoolmen. Thomas the Angelical, and
Bonaventure the Seraphicall Doctor, as they call them. Both which have (in
their Opuscula) written Treatises of the Love of God. In which the former
keeping closer than in such a Subject is expedient, to Scholasticall Methods,
and terms of writing, has left but a dry Monument and insipide to a
spiritual Palate, of his gift in that kind: whereas Bonaventure speaking out
of the abundance of the heart, and affection, as the Subject required, rather
than by the rule of humane disquisitions, has much more divinely, commendably,
and profitably, as to practice, treated thereof. And spiritual Doctrine and
devotion toward God seem much to resemble the Notion we generally have of the
nature of Spirits in themselves; which (they say) consists in not being
circumscribed by limits as our Bodies are; but indefinite, and diffusive: very
much like to the body of the Air in which we are enclosed: which is capable of
any figure, but determined to none. In like manner Spiritual Prayer, and the
gifts God bestows upon the Soul, are not to be limited by the lineaments and
parts of humane Methods, which, as it were, fetters the Spirit from expatiating
according to its pleasure, which like the Wind, blows and breaths, and
leads as it lists; and is in very deed, as Phanatiques term it, stinted,
and obstructed by the Arts of Men modelling their Devotion, and not subject
rather to it, and following rather than going before its dictates and impulses.
For however I find many Commentatours ingeniously enough, and acutely
methodizing holy Scripture, and Analyzing it so as if it had been the very
intent and design of the Holy Spirit therein to speak Logically and
methodically, yet could never be so really persuaded: but that holy Men of old
speaking and writing as they were moved by the Spirit, contemned all order and
Methods, but what naturally arose from the bowels of the Subject they treated
of, and the occasion given them: not contradicting or denying liberty to men to
form their matter by outward Methods, as may agree best with the learning,
retaining, and digesting what they find there delivered.

2. And answerable to this, the more Mental a man's Contemplations are, the
less methodicall are they wont to be: So that if there be such a thing as may
be called properly Prayer Supramentall, as Authors speak, it must be more
strange to Order and Method than either of the two other degrees of Prayer:
and be of the nature of Rapts and Ecstasies, of which we have spoken. For by
such purity of intention, and such vehemency of intension, and ardour in
directing a man's mind and heart to God; and, as it were, delivering up his
spirit into his hands, the intellectual faculty may cease: which is that
Absorption spoken of also: and such, that can be approved only from the
goodness and Divinenesse so pored on, and with its luster confounding them
carried away with it. For it is apparent, that Evil Spirits do in like manner
oppress the minds of the Persons devoted to them. And therefore as I cannot
condemn all such excesses mental, or supramentall rather; so can I approve
them no farther than they are consonant to the Law, and the Testimony, and the
Spirit of the Living Prophets; I mean the Church, truly so called, and the
peace and Charity of the same. So that as I cannot but think favorably of
those extravagant passages, and rulelesse, while the Authors of them keep the
peace of the Church, and known principles of Christianity, innovating nothing
in the Faith, but only in their own supramentall Facts, as we may term them;
so can I no ways justify those presumptuous Spirits, who, not having attained
to the true mental Prayer, dare obtrude their vocal and sensible Prayer upon
the spirits of an whole Congregation, and that without any good Authority so to
do.

3. After the extraordinary gift of unprepared Prayer ceased in the Church of
God, together with unprepared preaching of the Gospel, it lay upon the
Governors of the Church to supply that defect in the best manner they could,
by composing and prescribing forms for Public Worship: lest any scandal or
indecencie should disaffect soberer, and more prudent Christians. And when the
Bishop presiding in the Church committed any part of his wide charge to his
Presbyter, we never find that he departed in the Public Worship from what
was in use in the Mother Church, either as to matter or form. Nay, the
principal Pastor of any Diocese never was himself so imperious over his
Flock, as vain men of late days, to offer a new and unknown Office to
Believers every day; or to God, as more spiritual, or acceptable to him: but
aimed at nothing more than a Common, plain, well-known, well-approved and
constant form of sound words, to which all intelligent Christians might safely
and cheerfully give their concurrence, and set to their Seal of Amen. And to
deny liberty to Ministers to offer the Will Worship of their own inventions in
Public, was never looked upon (as they say) as Lycurgus-like to cut up all the
Vines in the Country, lest men should be drunk, but rather cutting down the
wild Vines, whose fruit is ungrateful to judicious Palates, and pernicious to
the community of Christians. Wherein the gift of Prayer consists, we have
touched before: but sure we are, it consists not in the volubility of the
Tongue, readiness of Invention, fluencie of Speech, choice of Divine Phrases,
but in the grace of Prayer, which the same men unhappily would distinguish from
the Gift; which is a certain pure intention, and fervent intension of Spirit
lifted up to God, which may consist with a Prayer used ten thousand times. Not
but that it is very lawful, useful, and almost necessary in some cases, to
utter the fulness of the mind by unprepared words in private Addresses; but
to lay the weight and worth of a Prayer upon the wording of it, is a foul
absurdity: When sudden, surprising, and extraordinary occasions are offered, to
blame is that man who will not strive to use proportionable Addresses to God,
neither staying for a Book, nor the license of his Ordinary. But plying his
heart while it is hot and full, the best manner he can, for his ease and
comfort.

4. And not only in such extraordinary cases as may even extort an Ejaculation
suitable; but out of that common Habit of grace, a man may have attained unto by
Christian diligence, it is most reasonable and pious, he should lift up his
mind frequently unto God in divine Contemplation, Admiration of his Power, and
Wisdom, thankfulness for deliverances and benefits bestowed, imploration of
his mercy and pardon for daily Trespasses he is liable to, and exercising that
Communion that every Good Christian should have with God; and all this not
only in usual and constant Phrases and Forms, (though that be commendable)
but as the Spirit shall give him utterance. All which notwithstanding ought to
be regulated by the rule of Christian modesty, justice, and Charity, so as
not to indulge to private satisfactions herein, to the prejudice of others; nor
to fancy such an Edification to himself which should tend to the dissipation
of the Church of God; that Rule of Saint Paul binding incessantly such as
otherwise would be boundless, Let no man seek his own, but every man another
wealth, 1 Corinthians. 10. 24. meaning rather spiritual, than temporal welfare.
And again, the same Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 14. 12. advises, For as much as ye are
zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edification of the
Church: which whosoever violateth by private affectations in Religion, may be
said to indulge rather to his own carnal humor, how divine soever it may
appear to weaker judgments, than to the edification of himself or others. For
as he that sings with the Congregation ought to lay aside his private Tunes,
though possibly far more excellent than that which is set for all to follow, so
must the singular Devotion of a higher strain than ordinary, complie with the
meaner, to avoid scandal and confusion: as that which may better agree with
the whole Body, than sublimer strains or Tunes. And this is the Case of that
plain and easy recitative way of using the Psalms in our Church, which
requires a cheerful Spirit, without difficulty or tediousness of modulating
the Voice, which for that reason might have been preferred before the more
Artificial and hard, of private men's Invention, had it not pleased men of
design, and unquiet Spirits, to bring it into disgrace, for no other faults
but which are found to be more notorious in that they have introduced in its
stead. From which frowardness of Spirit and superstitious admiration of some
men's persons, to the injurious usage of others, God deliver them, and this
Church, and from the effects of such distempers.

SECT. IX. Of the Union and Communion with God in the Holy Eucharist or Lords
Supper: to which certain Instructions are premised.
1. IT is the opinion of Learned Doctors, that all Orders and degrees
Ecclesiastical are given with design to Consecrate the Eucharist of the Body
and Blood of Christ; which may well be called in question: but that the
Sacrament of the Eucharist is the summitie of the practical Mysteries left us,
and ordained by Christ for our edification, and straitest Union with him, is
not to be denied, after such grounds given us thereof in Scripture, and
assurances thereof from the unisone consent of the Learned and holy Fathers of
the Church, in all Ages; Our own Liturgy teaching us, that if with a penitent
heart, and lively Faith we receive that holy Sacrament, we spiritually eat the
flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood; we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us; we
are one with Christ, and Christ with us: And afterward, that hereby we evermore
dwell in him, and he in us. It must necessarily be therefore, that an intimate
Union is hereby wrought between Christ and the faithful Soul, highly to be
valued, earnestly to be sought after, and diligently and zealously to be
labored for: as that true Bread which came down from Heaven, excelling
infinitely the Mannah which came down from Heaven: that Bread, which perishes
not, but lasts and leads unto Eternal Life; as Christ himself ( John 6.)
testifies.

2. But leaving to others the accurate explication of the Majesty of this
Mystery, and not much employing our selves in the opening this Treasury of
Grace and Mercy, we shall confine our selves to the more practical
consideration, (and that briefly) of the right use of that which is so
effectual to the more strict, full, and perfect Union with God. And to this
end, we shall here first deliver certain fundamental, or at least very
profitable Documents to be received and observed by fruitful Communicants.

2. First then, it must be noted, that the things themselves of which the
Eucharist consists, naturally tend no more to such sublime ends and effects,
than any other things; howbeit several Analogies are, by the ingenious piety
of men alleged to declare the sutablenesse of the Elements to such ends, not
to be despised: but this must in the mean time, be acknowledged, that it was
both in the Liberty and Power of Christ to have chosen what other things he
pleased, to have annexed his Graces unto, had it so pleased him.

3. Secondly, That the two Elements, (for so are they called, not according to
strict signification, whereby there are said to be four Elements in Nature, but
only as they concur to make the Sacramental Body, as they do constitute
the natural bodies) are the Bread and Wine, which were in most common use in
the Country where Christ did celebrate his last Supper; without any special
and precise Obligation of Christians to the very same matter in all points and
circumstances; for we know not infallibly, whether the Bread was purely of one
kind of Grain, and that of Wheat, or whether there were, (as there possibly
might be) some mixture in that body: as it is held there was in the other, the
Wine. For questionless Christ was not anxious himself about that Point,
neither ought we; but only to follow and imitate him as near as we can, by
honest and ordinary endeavors.

4. Thirdly, It is to be considered, that whatever Treasure of Grace and Mercy
is said and believed to be contained in the Eucharist by Gods dignifying and
special replenishing of them with them, are not said so necessarily to flow
from thence that every one should partake of them, who are partakers of the
outward Forms. Neither are they as Pipes or Conduits which run alike to all
men, that come to them, and catch what they let fall: but as by Gods
extraordinary Power and Goodness they have this store of benefits given unto
them, and not of themselves; so, by the same Providence, and Wisdom of God,
are they there dispensed, as it seems good unto him. And it seems good to him
to proportion the benefits of them agreeable to the capacity of the receiver.
I say, Capacity, and not Merits, which should demand, in justice, what is
there contained: but the Condition is there, as the Psalmist has, Open thy
mouth wide and I will fill it: desire earnestly, and prepare thy self duly,
and plenty of Blessings will by virtue of Gods Promise, redound to thee: which
Benefits we shall hereafter touch.

5. Fourthly, The manner of receiving Christ with the Blessings he necessarily
brings with him in this Sacrament, is somewhat differing in outward form, from
that we receive him in by his Holy Word, made known to us, and by Baptism,
wherein we are regenerate and incorporate into the Body of Christ, and that by
Faith too, as in the Eucharist; but agrees in the Inward. For the visible
Instruments of receiving Christ are much different: the Bread and Wine
representing Christ to the Eye; as the Word of God, to the Ear: And the Word of
God taught and believed initiates us by Illumination, and Revelation of the
Mind and Will of God, not attainable in a saving manner, but by that. The
Sacrament of Baptism carries us on from thence to Purgation, For hereby are we
cleansed from all our sins. The Sacrament of the Eucharist perfects and crowns
all these. For as much as all other gifts and graces, upon which we are built,
and in which we stand before God, are by this one revived, quickened, increased
and strengthened. But we do not receive a new doctrine of Faith, nor another
kind of Grace of Faith; nor another Spirit, nor another Christ, nor another
spiritual life in Christ, but the same in substance all, with new advantages.

6. Fifthly, The outward Symboles or Elements of Bread and Wine called the Body
and Blood of Christ, because they both represent and exhibit them to the duly
disposed Soul, are not after Consecration, Christ himself, any more than they
were before: For it is one thing to say what those sensible Objects are, which
we call the Sacrament (though the Sacrament properly so taken, consists
equally of the word Sanctifying, and the Elements sanctified by it) and
another, to say what we receive in the Sacrament, which is really Christ. And
therefore they are idle words and calumnies which men give out, that we receive
not really Christ, or that we believe not that Christ is in the Sacrament,
because we believe not that he is the very Sacrament it self: or that Bread
and Wine are not present in the Sacrament.

7. Sixthly, Whatever is visible, tractable, tasteable in the Eucharist is not
Christ: And if we must not believe our eyes, and the eyes of all men assuring
us that to be Bread and Wine which we behold to be so, then may we not believe
our ears; so that if Christ should tell us that it was his Body, we may as
reasonably deny that he does say what in truth he does say: For the Eye is a
less fallible sense than the Ear, as Philosophers agree. And whereas it is
said; We cannot see substances themselves, but only Accidents, it matters not
whether that Opinion be true or false, being we see as much of those bodies,
and their substances, as of any substance in the world, and no more is needful.

8. Seventhly, The sacred Symboles are called the Body and Blood of Christ,
because we should understand the dignity and efficacy, and strait conjunction
between them and Christ; and Christ and us, who thereby receive him as our Food.

9. Lastly, The means whereby we so receive Christ in this Blessed Sacrament,
is Faith; as is truly and generally said, but not altogether as some may
understand and conceive. For Faith, as in our Sanctification, so in our
Justification does work; and no otherwise does it make us worthy, and happy
Communicants. For it lays the foundation of all our Religion, and becoming
lively by love and Charity, gives life to all our spiritual performances;
and, consequently, renders them effectual to us. So that we must believe first
according to the true Catholic Faith in general; then specially, the nature,
ends and uses of this Sacrament: Lastly, we must have a comfortable persuasion
of the goodness of God in accepting us in the Sacrament, and his dispensations
toward us; but there must also be joined herewith, 1. Discerning the Lords
Body, and that not to be it properly which we see: but that which is invisible,
and spiritually taken; 2. That we judge our selves by examination and
humiliation of our selves, that by rashness of approach, we be not condemned
of the Lord. 3. Invocation of Gods mercy for past sins, and of his assisting
Grace for preventing the like future failings and falls, as we have been
formerly subject to. 4. To have no malice nor notorious hatred in our hearts,
but Charity to all men, especially toward them with whom we communicate. 5.
That we be void of all purpose or design of committing over again any of those
sins which we find in our selves upon due enquity and examination, but
rather have a sincere, (how weak soever it may be) desire and purpose of living
more agreeably to Gods holy Will in all things. 6. That we have a good hope
through Gods Grace (which some miscall Faith), that we shall live according to
our Vow in Baptism, of old made, and there renewed, and ratified: and that
this hope begets a care and conscience of our ways hereafter, lest we by
relapsing into former errors dissolve that happy Union and conjunction
obtained in this Blessed Sacrament, with the Father and the Son.

SECT. X. Of the Difficulties and dangers in receiving the Holy Communion,
which are here discussed.
1. WE are told in the Office of our Church for the celebration of the
Communion, " That as the benefits are great, if with a true penitent heart and
a lively Faith, we receive that Holy Sacrament, so is the danger great if we
receive the same unworthily; for then are we guilty of the body and blood of
our Savior Christ, we eat and drink our own damnation, not considering the
Lords Body: we kindle Gods wrath against us: we provoke him to plague us with
diverse Diseases, and sundry kinds of Death." All which seems to be drawn from
the words of Saint Paul, 1 Corin. 11. ver. 27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord. And ver. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself: not discerning the Lords Body: which Speeches it
behooves straightly to understand aright, lest by violence used in wresting them
to too favorable a sense, we occasion the profanation of those Holy Mysteries
by rudeness and presumption of unbelieving and impenitent comers unto it; or
we so straiten the way to Gods holy Table, that Believers, (and they none of
the worst rank) should be disheartened, and discouraged from approaching to it.
The genuine sense therefore and importance of those Sayings, are faithfully to
be unfolded, for the better informing of the Judgment, and directing and
satisfying the Conscience of the cordial Christian and sincere. For it is most
certain, upon too frequent experience, that an horrible abuse is made of the
opinion of the Holiness of the Sacrament and Doctrine of Saint Paul, and also
of the Church even now recited; and that by worldly and loose men, who
believing in gross the sacredness of the Communion, allege that for a
sufficient cause to excuse themselves from receiving of it, when (God knows)
they have little apprehension either of the Holiness of that, or their
unholinesse or unfitness; pretending more scrupulousness and wariness than
others, and than the Word of God requires absolutely at their hands: though it
is granted, that diverse find themselves so entangled between the
consciousnesse of their own unworthiness, and persuasion of the worthiness of
that, that they are unwillingly obstructed in drawing nigh thus unto Christ so
mercifully offered to them. For whose sake I have prepared these following
instructions, leaving others to be condemned for their falsenesse, and
hypocrisy in sacred things, by their own consciences, and that very judgment,
which is pretended to be feared in so abstaining.

2. First then, It is to be granted and supposed by all ingenuous as well as
pious Christians, that it is in it self incredible, and a great injury done
to the wisdom and goodness of Christ instituting this holy Sacrament, to
imagine that he should so mock the greatest number of true, though weak
Believers, as to ordain such a Sacrament, and to such great ends, and propound
so great benefits, and leave so many gracious and kind invitations and
exhortations to come to him there present and in readiness to satisfy the
hungry Soul with goodness, and to feast him with the fat and sweet of his
own Table; and yet withal, cloth that precious Ordinance with so many severe
circumstances, and clogge it with so many dangerous, difficult, and heavy
Conditions, as very few should dare to come at it, or be the better for it.

3. Secondly, There is to be observed a very great difference between Worthy
Communicating, and due or Fit communicating; and that both these are vulgarly
and Fallaciously contained in that one word, Worthy, which has a double
sense. For he properly is said to be worthy, who is equal in qualifications of
Virtue and Graces, to the worth and merits of that holy Sacrament; and in this
acceptance, no man may be said to be worthy, no not the best prepared, and
holiest man. Another sense of Worthiness is that we called Fitness, whereby,
how unworthy soever a Soul may be of that Sacrament, he may be reputed worthy,
and come acceptably and fruitfully: and so, that wilfully in such cases, to
absent himself may turn to his own perdition more than his coming. For
excepting some monstrous and notorious evils into which a man may fall, and
that when the Communion is instant, so that no competent time nor means remain
to discharge his part in due preparation, (though sudden accidents of that
nature may admit of sudden remorse, and intense Repentance, when time is
denied of more full and through humiliation) then perhaps such excuses may be
tolerable, as unpreparednesse: but when men have timely advice of such ensuing
Solemnity, and have no unavoidable impediments, but wilfully, and necessarily
involve themselves in matters inconsistent with it, and so absent themselves,
neglecting that competent preparation required, then do they shun the Curse of
communicating unworthily, and fall into the condemnation of not preparing
themselves, and contempt of such means of Salvation; as he under the Law that
refused to purge his House of Leaven, and purify himself to eat the
Passe-over.

4. For in this one Evil, many more are contained, such as are frustrating
Gods invitation to Grace and Mercy: a great provocation of men who are of the
same nature with our selves, though greater in Power and Honor. A bereaving
our selves of the benefits there tendered: and an hazarding of the loss of the
fruits of all other means ordained by God to our Salvation. For God requires
that we should put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11, 13. And Saint Paul
likewise, Coloss. 4. 12. exhorts to stand perfect and complete in all the
will of God. And Saint James assures us, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
and yet offend in one point, he shall be guilty of all, James 2. 10.
insinuating sufficiently unto us, that the wilful neglect of one such
material Duty, and violating one so sovereign Ordinance as this, does injury
to all; and provokes God to withdraw his Blessing upon those other Ordinances
we are content to admit of, For he that contemns him in one, contemns the
Author of all: and so cannot reasosonably expect any benefit from Sermons, or
from Public, or private service of God. For no man must trust to his making
compensation to God one way, having wronged him in another, where both may be
performed. And experience teaches this to be true, that none are generally
more rare and remiss in the other parts of Gods Worship, than they who are
careless in this.

3. A manifold Scandal is offered to Fellow Christians; who, upon observing
the neglect of some in this point, entertain suppositions of the little use of
it; and consequently, that the offense in omitting the same is very
inconsiderable, and light; passing it over accordingly: or perhaps, that
receiving that Sacrament belongs chiefly to the Greater, or better sort, and
such as are more at leisure than are they, and not to poor, obscure, and busy
persons, as they are. Furthermore, a Scandal is hereby given to the Brethren
of the same Faith and profession, as if a Member of the Church were fallen away
from them, and found some evil in the Actions sacred. For God does not only
require at our hands that we should truly believe and become lively Members of
Christ's mystical Body, and invisible; but also, Visible; and not only so,
but that so far as lies in us, we should be visible members also of that Body
Visible, and that we should declare the same, and do nothing to give ground or
occasion to believe otherwise of us: which must necessarily be, if we forbear
such necessary and solemn proofs, and indications as this is, even the Greatest
of all: and that, which, as it is Unitive of us to Christ, so is it very
effectual to produce and preserve that bond of Charity, which Christ commands
to be kept up amongst Brethren in Christ.

3. Thirdly, The main pretense and Apology of abstaining from the Communion
taken from its Sacredness, and formidablenesse are grounded upon the foresaid
words of Saint Paul, which therefore to give a faithful and proper sense of,
will be very expedient: which we may attain to two ways chiefly. First, by
rightly understanding the occasion given him to write so severely; above
others. For we find nothing of the like charge given by Christ to his
Disciples, at the first Institution of it; all which came with no other
preparation to it, than was Legal, or Leviticall. Neither have we in holy Writ
any thing afterward, except the words of Saint Paul, about it; who upon gross
corruptions and scandalous, invading openly that holy Sacrament, opportunely
bestirs himself for the vindication of it from such abuses; brings them back
to the first institution of Christ; which was that they should understand, that
to eat this as their own Supper, was to profane it: For Christ at that time had
two Suppers, One Mosaicall, which though it had sacred Rites belonging to it,
did serve to the use of the natural Body, and was to imprint in their memories
a sense of their deliverance from slaughter, with the Firstborn in Egypt, and
from bondage there also. The other was Evangelicall, not given in such
quantity as the other, to nourish the Body, but ceremoniously rather, in such
sort as might give the receiver certain information, and proportionable
affection of the Passion and death of Christ, whose Body was broken, and Blood
shed for the sins of the whole World, much more of true Believers. Which, if
they who received those Elements, did not consider of, so as in them to discern
the Lords Body thereby signified, and his Passion thereby called to
remembrance, and received by the faithful to their edification in faith and
love and comfort, but profanely ventured to take it as common bread; yea to
come to it first stuffed full with their own riotous Suppers, and drunk with
excess of Wine, before; all the world would judge and condemn them for so
doing; and more especially would God be avenged of them, for such affront put
upon him, and those divine Mysteries of his ordaining, and that by sudden
Deaths, or grievous Sicknesses and weaknesses upon their bodies, besides the
evil upon their Souls. Others forbearing to eat and drink at home in their
Houses, kept their stomachs for the good Cheer they were wont to make, and
plentifully to take in Gods House, or the place, and at the time they should
have soberly, modestly, and devoutly partaken of these great Mysteries: which
worthily so incensed the Apostle, as to demand if they had not Houses of their
own to eat and to drink in, but must come into the public place of Worship,
the House of God, and there gluttonize and revell, not considering nor
discerning the Lords Body; to the shame of themselves and Religion. And that
this is the most plain and natural sense of that whole passage of the Apostle,
will clearly appear to every attentive and judicious Reader taking in the
Context. And this St. Chrysostom, than whom none of his time, magnifies more
the Mysteries of the Eucharist, does agree to, in a second Homily he has upon
the Passover, Tom. 5. page 921. telling us, that those Christians so
reprehended by St. Paul, turned the Holy Eucharist into costly junketting,
taking occasion from that to eat and drink to excess.

4. And that this was the opinion of the Primitive Christians, before
Chrysostom's days, that the formidablenesse of the Eucharist was not such, but
it might be approached unto upon lower and easier terms than are taught by
some Persons, appears from the daily Communion in use amongst them, which
could not consist with that daily, solemn, and exact preparation judged now a
days indispensably necessary. All which I here speak, to make good what I said
of a twofold worthiness and unworthiness in receiving the Lords Supper; the
one, which indeed brings damnation with it by contrary Qualities in a
Receiver, to that Ordinance: such as the Corinthians were guilty of, so
reproved by Saint Paul: And another of negative unworthiness, which may be
direct infidelity; which makes men wholly incapable of that Sacrament, which
supposes Baptism and Faith answerable: or a disproportionable Faith, and
knowledge, and repentance, and other qualifications very well becoming that;
which yet does not make any man absolutely incapable of it, or the thing
damnable to him; provided that he comes with some sound and good degree of
preparation, though small and weak; having a pure intention: such as these may
run the hazard of their Souls in affected abstaining, as well as in scandalous
receiving that Holy Supper. For were it so, that we were so pure and clear of
sin about us, and so perfect as some require to a due preparation, we need not
come to the Lords Supper at all.

5. Fourthly, It is a common Allegation against Communicating, that there is a
difference between them and their Neighbors; and thereupon they hold
themselves sufficiently exempted from that Holy Sacrament. But this declining
the Eucharist may no less tend to our condemnation than so coming. For men
ought to use all fair and ordinary means for reconciliation, which wilfully
neglected makes them unfit to pray as well as to communicate. But if they have
used their Christian endeavors to live in peace and Charity, and actually do
what is just and reasonable to all men, and their endeavors are frustrated by
the peevishness, obstinacy, and ill mind of others, men are not thereby
incapable of those Mysteries; another man having no power over my Soul to
render it unworthy of them, nor to prejudice another in his Rights toward God.

SECT. XI. Other Impediments and scruples observed against Communicating,
especially frequently, with proper Remedies.
1. MY Son, says the wise Man, Ecclesiasticus 2. 1. if thou come to serve the
Lord, prepare thy Soul for temptation: So that they who, out of a good
conscience draw nigh unto God, do not come to a state of tranquillity or
security from troubles and disquietings either outward or inward; spiritual
or worldly, but to protection and preservation under such conflicts as happen
to them. For he that is not taken into the military Service of his Prince,
lives more at ease than he that serves under him in his Wars. The Church of
Christ it self is Militant; and therefore if we be sound and true members of
that Body, so must we also be excercised with the like wars, and make it our
business to fulfill the Office we bear: according to the counsel and
exhortation of Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. Thou therefore endure hardness as a
good Soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a
Soldier. And it was the observation of that Ancient and holy Woman
Syncletica, that by how much a Christian Soldier profited in holiness, by so
much stronger were his Adversaries which opposed him. ( Apophtheg. Syncletic.)
And how much greater care a true Christian takes in keeping a good conscience
void of offense toward God and toward man, as did Saint Paul, by so much are
multiplied his fears and scruples, and sense of offense within himself: as in
the ordering of the outward man; none take cold oftener than they who are more
careful than ordinary to keep themselves warm. Upon which Subject of
temptations in its latitude, because I cannot speak here, I confine my self to
those proper to our Subject of due communicating, which are not few, but yet
but few I shall here consider, and those the most common.

2. One general Remedy against this may be that of Luther: who, upon due
esteem had of the holiness of the Lords Supper, and the danger of unworthie
communicating, was so infested with temptations of the Devil, that he could
never rest in quiet for them, until he abruptly and boldly brake through them
all, by bidding defiance in a blunt and slovenly manner to him, (which was no
new thing with him) and so shaking off such scruples, went about the work
without presumption still, or unprofitable delays. For unless a man with
humble courage, sometimes applies himself to that work, he shall like such
Children, who at the least cross, put their Fingers in their Eyes, spend his
time in lamenting and bewailing himself without that confidence in God
becoming him, and duty toward him and himself. For, as I remember the
comparison of an Ancient Ascetique or Secluse to be, that as in Onions taking
off one Coat sphericall, there will presently appear another: so in
temptations, one being withstood, overcome, and removed, another arises to be
taken off also: so that temptations become a disease in some, and therefore
rather to be opposed than humored. Which is not to be applied to them whose
scruples are weighty, or very molesting; and ought to be made known to the
Physician of the Soul, whose Office it is to apply Remedies thereunto. And
especially in the case of the Holy Communion; as by the practice of the holy
Catholic Church we are directed, and particularly by our own, in the
Exhortation appointed at the giving warning to the People of a Communion at
hand.

3. More particularly, Cares of the world, and Crosses in the world are
commonly alleged as justifiable impediments of coming to the Holy Table: which
sometimes is quite otherwise, and should be an argument inducing us to flee to
those powerful means of lightening our burden, and mastering those
temptations which threaten our greater disquiet and mischief. For if coming to
Christ in the ordinary way of Faith, and trust in God, be of that efficacy
which Christ promises, inviting to come unto him, all that are weary and
heavy laden, and he will give rest unto the Soul, as is there intimated; what
may we not 'expect from Christ, when he so comes unto us as in the Eucharist,
with greater plenitude of Graces? And therefore surely they that deal uprightly
with God, and prudently with their own Souls may from hence be stirred up to a
more ardent desire of communicating, rather than shun or avoid it.

4. But in other cases, there may be a difference made. For some sollicitudes
and cumbrances are such as men unwillingly are subject to, which could neither
be foreseen nor prevented; but involuntarily and unexpectedly fall between the
Cupp and the Lips, as the saying is. Such as were sudden and involuntarie
uncleanness happening to a man bent to keep the Passover. And so some
monstrous surprise of sin against God, may well detain a man from pressing upon
the most sacred things, until he has humbled himself, and repented thereof
in some good degree: Or perhaps some sore and sudden consternation of mind,
upon some grievous accident, not suddenly to be overcome, may excuse a man, for
that time: yet with this Proviso, that no man pleases himself or takes content
in such abstaining, but preserves entire his good desire that way, laboring to
remove that obstacle; otherwise, by Postfact, it becomes voluntary, and so
very criminal. But when impediments are directly voluntary, as affected
blindness, and negligence in preparing a man's self, and valuing and approving
our sins, so that we will not be at the trouble or care to part with them; or
project, and modellize worldly affairs, so that we bring encumbrances upon our
selves at such times, that we cannot fit our selves for heavenly things as
becomes us; and then Apologize for our selves that we could not do it; as men
weary themselves with late working on Saturday nights, that they must sleep out
some part of the Morning Service on Sundays, or by worse exercises indispose
themselves to serve God, or design to visit a Friend, or take a Walk, or
entertain Friends, when they should both be serving God; and then say they were
so hindered that they could not do their duty to God at such times and in such
manner as required, what is this else but a professed mocking of God, which
comes to thus much in plain terms; they could not come to God because they
would not; but by devices of their own made it necessary for themselves to
stay away. But where multitude of businesses, by virtue of Occupations
voluntary, lie heavy on a man and obstruct him, he is obliged so to model
worldly affairs, that they may comply better with and obey heavenly: For a Good
man (says the Psalmist) will guide his affairs with discretion, Psalm 112.
which prudence is seen in nothing more than in giving superiority and rule to
things of greatest worth and dignity, over inferior, ordained by God to be
subject, and not to usurp over Diviner, and more heavenly. And this Method
being observed, the diligence we are bound to use, and do use about this holy
Sacrament, may prove an help, by Gods blessing, toward the more easy
management of worldly things also: as the wisdom and Righteousness of Noah
was predicted to give comfort to men concerning the work of their hands,
because of the ground which the Lord had cursed, Genesis 5. 29.

5. It is also objected by diverse against themselves many times, that they
fear they want that Faith, and true Repentance, and fervent Charity which God
requires of such as so solemnly draw near unto him. Which supposing to be
sincere and cordial, (which sundry times is otherwise) the resolution of this
difficulty is not difficult: For where such holy sense of defects is, there
they are very pardonable, and curable. For it is a notable proof of Gods work
in the heart, to be so sensible of a man's imperfections and unworthiness, and
a demonstration of spiritual Life, and such a competent degree of goodness,
as may be, according to Chrysostom's judgment, a tolerable qualification to
receive those holy Mysteries. For what greater or better part of Repentance is
there than humiliation upon such apprehensions, and Aspiration after
Reformation and growth in Grace? And the old Rule and consequence of the
Stoics holds good here also, as well as in the natural man: If thou fear
thou art dead, thou art certainly alive; for were thou not so, thou could not
fear.

6. But notwithstanding very expedient and safe it is, for such conscientiously
scrupulous, to consult with the Officer God has appointed to such ends, as is
said before: and might be more fully declared from the Resemblance and
agreement between the Authority the Leviticall Priest had to discern, judge,
quitt, or bind Persons unclean Mosaically: And from the direct sentence of
Christ himself, concerning the Evangelicall Priests, viz. He that hears you
hears me, and he that hears me, hears (or receives) him that sent me.
And fidelity, taciturnitie, and opinion of fallible men, such as are
Physicians and Lawyers, move men to make known their most important Affairs,
and sometimes shameful Diseases, upon hopes of good counsel, and comfortable
recoverie of health; Why should not men put the like confidence in the
Physician in Ordinary to the Soul? Gods Ministers being under stronger bonds
of fidelity, sincerity and secrecy, than any secular Person in their Sphere:
who incur not any such punishment as do Priests discovering secrets; nor
becoming so odious to God and man for such falsenesse and treachery: and the
necessity and use being no less in Divine than secular Cases.

7. Lastly, As there is a great presumption rashly and without honest
endeavors, to come unto the Communion; so may there be an impediment in the
preparation it self we make, of coming worthily, when men put such great
confidence in their devout preparations as if they might expect an infallible
welcome upon the worth of such their endeavors. Every man indeed ought so to
eat and drink there, as that he may hope to be accepted well by God, but not
upon the account of his preparation, which can amount to no more than to remove
obstacles out of the way; but not so far of it self prevail with God, as to
oblige him to gratify him: but to this nothing is more powerful with God than
Humility, and depending on Gods free grace and mercy, for a fruitful event;
and to have such a pure intention to that sacred Work, and reliance on Gods
Mercy, that he may silence the temptations of the Enemy either to presumption
or pusillanimitie, and despondencie, with that saying of Bernard's answering
the Tempter in like cases: I began not for thee, neither will I give over for
thee.

SECT. XII. A brief recapitulation of what has here passed, with Advices and
directions concerning the interrruption, and recovery of Actual Communion with
God, and Consolations.
1. THUS have we brought the true Believer and Liver from the state of Nature
which is darkness and confusion, unto a state of Illumination and Regeneration
by Baptism, and the Concomitant instructions of Faith imbibed at that time,
when he came out of the womb of the Church, the Font: And from thence, led him
to the higher and stronger acts of the Spiritual Man, consisting in the
Purgation of the Soul so Regenerate, and purifying of it from dead works to
serve the living God, and especially by Selfedeniall and subduing the will of
Nature to the Will of God, and the will of the Flesh to the will of the Spirit:
For as we live in the Spirit, so are we to walk in the Spirit: according to St.
Paul, Galat. 5. 25. For by Baptism, (says the same Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 10.) we
are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained, that we should walk in them: and especially calling all good
Soldiers of Christ Jesus as Joshuah did the chief of the Children of Israel,
to set their feet on the necks of the Canaanitish Princes, to trample upon
those seven Capital Sins, which not only fight against our Souls themselves,
but are leaders on of others to assault and spoil us. And from hence have we
led the Soul to the top of Pisgah, by the Unitive Way of Contemplation, and
Love, and Acquiescence in God, to have a certain foretaste of the fruit of that
Land of Promise we long after and expect, by the conjunction the Soul has
with God: which we find not so extravagant a Notion, straining the simpler
Doctrine of Faith, and Christ to a sense offensive to Ears not thoroughly
opened to the Mysteries of Religion, but a smattering thereof was had by
Ancient Philosophers; as appears by the disquisitions between Porphyrie and
Jamblichus, of the Egyptian Mysteries; where great things are spoken of the
Anagogicall way of conversing with the gods, by elevation of the understanding
through true knowledge of God: and that Theurgicall Union, i. e. (as I
understand his (...)) that divinely operative conjunction, whereby a man has
Communion with God: but all this he swells with, being blinded and carried
away with Egyptian darkness indeed, leading to horrible superstitions to
attain such Perfections: whereas the light of the Gospel and Doctrine of
Christ, with infinite less superstition, and more perspicuitie, purity, and
simplicity conducteth to that Ascent of the Soul, and resting in God which
makes us like unto him, and Perfect as our Father which is in heaven is
perfect, Matthew. 5. with allowances for the infirmities of Flesh and blood, and
mutablenesse we are subject unto: being as St. Peter says, partakers of the
Divine Nature.

2. For though the words of Saint Paul, 2 Corinthians. 2. 14. Now thanks be to God
which always causes us to triumph in Christ, have their true sense; yet
that, I suppose, is of the state of a Christian, which is firm and sure
resting upon this Foundation, The Lord knows who are his: and he will never
leave his chosen ones, until they totally forsake him; if that may be said.
But as to the actual and continual possession by satisfaction in him, and
spiritual sensations, the Christian is mutable here, and that, which not
without great difficulty and industry is for some time attained unto, is in a
short time, and suddenly interrupted and hid from the eyes, to the great
dismaying of the devout Soul: so that great care is to be taken, as well to
hold that comfortable communion with God, as to acquire it; and to recover it
intermitted, as once to have attained it. For as the Sheet let down from Heaven
by the four Corners to Saint Peter, Acts 12. wherein he saw, in a Vision, all
manner of Fare, his Appetite could long for, was as suddenly again taken up
into Heaven; so is it with the delectations which the Spirit feels, let down
from Heaven to its wonderful content; they are suddenly taken away up into
Heaven again. And when we imagine our selves in the third Heaven with Saint
Paul, we unexpectedly feel a Thorn in the flesh to humble us; lest we should
be exalted above measure; For Paradise here would be the greatest temptation to
fall again into sin. So that as we read of Abraham the Elect of God, and taken
by his Providence out of his own Country and Kindred, signifying the state of
Nature to us, was led into the Land of Promise and shown it, but had no
Inheritance in it for the present, no not so much as to set his foot, Acts 7.
So has the religious Soul no footing firm here, though by Faith and
Affection it has before its eyes the promised Possession.

3. It is therefore one principal Rule of rightly using what we have at any
time attained to, in Consolations, (the fruit of Union with God, but not
incessant, or inseparable from it) to understand so much, lest finding our
selves frustrated of our expectations, we call in question the state it self
we are in; and bring unprofitable confusions upon our selves. For as the
Apostle says, Coloss. 3. 3. We are dead, and our life is hid with Christ; When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in
glory. The time will come, but is not yet come, that we should see what is
better now hid and kept with Christ, till such time as the second fulness of
time shall come, and Christ too; when our life will be manifested. It may be
that a loving Father toward an obsequious and dutiful Child, may sometimes
show him the Grand Deed whereby he has settled a great Estate upon him, yea
may carry him out, and show him the Lands, Houses, Mines, and Timber on them,
which he purposes to give him, but none of these are at all necessary to the
main end it self, but only to his encouragement, to persevere in his duty.
No more is necessary to a certainty of Salvation, an assurance of Salvation,
or such extraordinary arguments thereof; as being denied us, we should fall
into despondencie and sluggishnesse of Spirit, or be weak-handed in Gods
service.

4. For secondly; God may hereby have a gracious and wise design, to wean the
fond mind from sensible Delectations, whereby it should take up, short of the
ultimate end of all, God himself; seeking its will and content rather than
Gods; to which the more truly spiritual a man is, so much more he is intent
above all things; and less minds intermediate consolations; which the less
they are contended for, the oftener they happen.

5. Thirdly, The Patience and constancy of the faithful Servant of God by
submission to his fatherly wisdom and pleasure in such Dispensation, is
exercised and manifested. And that he does not serve God, nor follow Christ
merely for the Loaves, which he miraculously feeds some with; but for his own
sake. We all know the beginning, middle, and Conclusion of holy Job's life, how
religious and prosperous he was at the same time, before God: and how miserable
he was, by the same Providence, remaining all that while invincible in his
resolutions of adhering to God, and perserving in his wonted righteousness:
whereby he declared that his Piety was not built upon the fluid Elements of
this World, nor the sensible comforts pertaining to the service of God, but the
intrinsic excellency of Religion it self, carrying its Reward with it. And
so, (as Saint James speaks) we know the end of him and such his patience, and
faith. For so it pleases God himself to give an account of the hardship
brought upon his own People travailing forty years in the desolate
Wilderness, viz. that he might do them good at the latter end: not feasting
them so by the way, that they should not desire to enter into any other rest.
For as we see it is with the Day-labourer, that his Meals are very short in
comparison of his toil; so is it also with the faithfullest Servants of God in
this life, their spiritual refreshments are not comparable to their labor in
working out their salvation with fear and trembling: so that, as Bernard
observes, the Days are rare, and the stays are short, of Consolations.

6. And a fourth reason hereof may be, Gods great design to keep the Soul in
Humility, which might be endangered, by such exaltations; and upon which,
inferior and harder services might be slighted and neglected, as more proper
for Persons not so highly privileged. Or it may be vainly presumed, that such
privileges are granted to the Soul for its extraordinary diligence in Gods
service, which must not be allowed, but looked upon as an overplus of his
favor.

7. Fifthly, The withholding or withdrawing of such delectations in Gods
service, may be to instruct us in the absolute Will of God, to keep times and
seasons in his own Power, which it is not for us to know, as Christ tells his
Disciples, Acts 1. And that the Kingdom of God comes not by observation, or
according to our expectations.

8. But because it is very acceptable to God, that we should in all our
services, give a cheerful Sacrifice to him, which cheerfullnesse is much
advanced by the sense of Gods good will toward us, such a lightness of spirit
is not to be wholly slighted, as it is not too importunately to be sought
after. The means therefore to obtain the same may be, First, The due
observation of the foregoing Rules now mentioned. Secondly, A free submission
of our selves and services to the disposition of the will of God, and
contentedness to persist unalterably in our station, under such Aridities, of
which we know not our selves to be direct occasions; a great motive to incline
God to manifest his favor unto us more fully. Which calls to my mind what I
have been told to have happened in the Court of Charles the First; (For why may
we not illustrate things as well by Modern, as Ancient Examples; and
Domestic as well as Foreign) in which rare and noble divertisements being
prepared for the delight of such as he favored, an inferior person demanded
entrance into the place of such Splendor; but being repulsed by a Noble Person
to whom the power of admission was given, He said; Well, if I must not be
admitted, I know what I will do. Do? said the Noble Man, Why? What will you
do? I will go home (said the other) and go to Bed. Nay then, if you be so
indifferent and well content without it, come in, replied that Lord. So does it
usually happen unto such who cannot but desire to be admitted into the Presence
of God in this way of sensible delectations, and yet with patience and
submission absolute to Gods Will, readily and quietly rest in their ordinary
Duty ordained of God to walk in here, in fullfilling his Will so on Earth, as
it is in Heaven; according to humane ability, where alone is the consummation
of that Union we have but in part here, never to be dissolved or interrupted:
Last of all, Retirement for some time into our private Chambers; and then into
our own selves, by stillnesse and composedness of spirit, and mind, from not
only worldly cogitations, but forcible (as I may so speak) devotions toward
God; becomeing, as it were, Blanks before him, that so he may write his own
will, and in his own way upon the Soul: and having so done, not to intermitt
the wonted Worship of God, whether private, or public: fullfilling what is
said, Lamentations 3. 28. He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has
born it upon him. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.
For it often happens that a great mistake is committed through the
speciousnesse of the condition of serving God, and having him in our Eye, as if
we intended nothing more than a more cheerful and acceptable service, when
love of our selves bears the greatest share in the pursuit of such serenities
of mind and consolations. For the Soul finding an heaviness and weariness
upon it, naturally desires ease and relief, which Religion it self does not
deny or disallow; provided it be pure from Self-love often concerned herein.
And an humble apprehension of our vileness, unworthiness, and unfitness to
entertain Christ in such singular manner, moving one to cry out in the words
and Spirit of Saint Peter, Luke 5. 8. Depart from me for I am a sinful man, O
Lord, may be as great an argument of the profitable and saving Presence of
Christ, as the possession of him in Consolations; and a more ready way to
attain what is really good for us, though not directly craved, in this kind.

A Prayer for true Union with God.
MOST High and Holy Lord God, whom the Heaven of heavens cannot contain; who
dwell on high, and yet humblest thy self to behold the things done in
heaven and earth: yea to dwell with them that are of an humble spirit and
broken heart: and take the simple out of the dust, and liftest the poor out
of the mire to set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his People: even
with thine holy Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect. And to this
end vouchsafest to begin that glorious state, here, by that state of Grace
whereby thou enterest into the Souls of thy Servants and dwell with them,
and art united to them: O most Gracious Father in thy Son Jesus Christ, and
through thy Holy Spirit, be pleased to descend into my heart, and make thy
abode with me, as by thy Son thou have promised; Unite my heart to fear thy
Name: Open the eyes of my understanding that I may see the wondrous things of
thy Law, and with clear and pure Contemplation of thee and things spiritual
and Heavenly, may be so far inflamed with the love of thee and thy Worship,
that all earthly and sensual contents and pleasures may be strange and
unsavourie to me: and that such a spiritual gust may so affect my Soul that I
may refuse all delights and glories not placed in thee and derived from thee,
and tending to thee: which may more firmly oblige and endear me to thee; so
that Nuptial Bond, whereby thou have espoused me to thee and thy Son Jesus
Christ, may never be dissolved: but amidst the many cares, troubles and
temptations which may befall me in this life, I may constantly and faithfully
persevere to serve thee without distraction, and much more alienation from
thee. Thou know, O Lord, that this corruptible body presses down the Soul
musing on heavenly things: thou know, that though our spirit be willing, our
flesh is weak, and yet have taught us, that thy Grace is sufficient for us, and
thy strength is made known in our weakness, as thy mercy is in our
wickedness: wherefore Righteous Father, take possession of this thine House
which thou have chosen to dwell in, vindicate me from the usurpations of sin,
the flesh, the Devil and all worldly vanities apt to deceive me, or draw me
from thee: that so like thy servant Stephen by a strong eye of Faith evermore
steadfastly beholding thee and the glory with thee, I may joy in thee here, and
everlastingly enjoy thee hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
FINIS.

