His Royal Highness William Duke of Gloucester. Printed for M. Gillyflower and
L. Meredith.


THE Royal Politician REPRESENTED IN One Hundred Emblems.

Written in Spanish by Don Diego Saavedra Faxardo, Knight of the Order of St.
Jago, Plenipotentiary Ambassador

To the Cantons of SWITZERLAND, At the Imperial Diet at RATISBON, At the Famous
Treaty of MUNSTER, And of the Supreme Council of State for both the INDIES.

With a large Preface, containing an Account of the Author, his Works, and the
Usefulness thereof.

Done into English from the Original.

By Sir JA. ASTRY.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for Matt. Gylliflower at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall:
And Luke Meredith at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

TO His HIGHNESS THE Most Illustrious Prince, WILLIAM, Duke of Gloucester.
May it please your Highness;
THE Author of the ensuing Work, originally a Spaniard, was in his lifetime,
so highly esteemed for his Learning, Wisdom, and Experience in State Affairs,
that he made no small Figure in the greatest Courts of Europe. Nor has this
Offspring of his Brain met with less favorable Success. For having been
translated into several Languages, and in each often printed, it has been
received with great Applause, and ever been honored with the Protection of
some Illustrious Young Prince.

But Precedent, Royal Sir, is not my only Apology for this Presumption; for
were Saavedra now living, he might see his Theory reduced to Practice by the
best of Kings, in the best of Governments: And though he has indeed given you
excellent Maxims, supported by many eminent Examples, yet are there none so
worthy your Imitation, as those you may continually observe, in the Conduct and
Bravery of that most Excellent Prince, your Heroic Uncle; the whole Series of
whose Life as far surpasses Panegyric, as the Greatness of his Soul abhors
Flattery. And I was the rather induced to attempt this unpolished Version,
knowing that honest Plain-dealing and unbiassed Integrity, the two darling
Mistresses of our Author, could not be unacceptable in a Nation where they are
so generally beloved, and in a Court where they are beyond Precedent, more
peculiarly cherished and maintained.

Your Royal Highness will here find Discourses, which I hope will not only be
divertive to your Youth, but profitable even in your ripest Years; by reviving
those Seeds of Honor and Virtue, which are daily sown by the pious Care and
Example of Your most Illustrious Parents. You may here learn, not only the Duty
of a Prince, but that also of an accomplished Statesman and Loyal Subject: And
if ever it shall please God to make You his Vicegerent, You may from hence
(next to the Holy Scriptures) learn your Duty to him also, by whom Kings Reign,
and Princes decree Justice.

In fine: You have here a Complete System of Religious Politics, which may
guide You through all the Labyrinths of Government in this World, and crown You
with immortality in that to come. But, pardon me, Royal Sir, I presume not by
this Address to think, but that the nicest Strokes of our Author come far short
of Your Highness's blooming Virtue, but as near as Perfection can be copied,
this Work has a Right in Your Royal Highness, it showing not so much what You
should be, as (if we may Judge the ensuing Day by the Glorious Morn) what You
will be, the best of Princes.

But here I beg leave to retire, having already waded out of my Depth, Your
Highness's Praises being a Topic so profound, that in attempting them, I
should only trouble the Stream without hopes of ever plumbing the Bottom. The
main Motives to this Dedication, were those two inherent Passions of Mankind,
especially Writers, Interest and Ambition; the first in Regard to this Work,
which has need of no less a Name, than that of Your Royal Highness to protect
it; the last in respect to my self, having none greater than to subscribe my
self,

Your Highness' s most Faithful and most Obedient Humble Servant, I. A.

The Author to the Reader.
IN the toilsome Leisure of my continual Travels over Germany, and several
other Countries, I composed these Hundred Emblems; wherein you have an Idea of
a Royal Christian Politician, penning them down at vacant Intervals. These I
had meditated on in my Journeys upon the Road, as often as that continual
Intercourse I had by Letters with his Catholic Majesty and his Ministers, and
other public Concerns incumbent on me, gave me Time and Leisure. By Degrees
the Work swelled, and though I was well assured, it came far short of
Perfection, as not being compiled with that continual Application of Thought,
nor with that Accuracy and Labor corrected, as was requisite to have rendered
it agreeable in all its Parts, and an abfolutely perfect Piece; and that it
would be thought Pride in me, to presume to prescribe Precepts to Princes
Praecipere qualis debeat esse princeps, pulchrum quidem, and generosum, and
prope superbum. Plin. Jun* lib. 3. Epist. 18.
: However, the Importunity of my Friends (who have ever great Influence over
me) prevailed upon me to publish it; in which also Self-love had some part, for
we are generally as fond of the Products of our Brain, as of those of Nature. I
write not this, Reader, to excuse my Errors, for that I cannot do sufficiently,
but that I may more easily obtain Pardon of those, who shall consider my Zeal,
in having amidst such a Crowd of Business, Fatigues, and Dangers, compiled this
Book, that if any Benefit might be reap^d from it, it might accrue to my Prince
and Master; and least with me should die the Experience which I have acquired
by a continued Exercise in Bus^ness for Four and thirty Years, which after five
years Study in the University of Salamanca, I have passed in the principal
Courts of Europe, always employed in Public Affairs, having been at Rome at
the Election of two Popes; at the Assembly of the Electoral Princes at
Ratisbone when Ferdinand the Third, the present most August Emperor, was
created King of the Romans; at Eight Diets in Switzerland; and lastly at the
Imperial Diet at Ratisbone, being Plenipotentiary for the most Serene House and
Circle of Burgundy. Wherefore, if any one of these Political Counsels or
Precepts, shall be any ways beneficial to him who is happpily born to govern
both the Old and New World, I believe this Attempt will be excused.

Nor should any one be disgusted at the Use of Emblems, since God himself is
the Author of them. The Brazen-Serpent Numb. 21.
, The Flaming-Bush Exodus 3.
, Gideon's Fleece Judges 6.
, Sampson's Lion Judges 14.
, The Priests Garments Exodus 28.
, The Amors of the kind Spouse Song of Solomon.
, What are they else but Emblems?

It has been my chiefest Endeavor to have the Invention new; whether the
Performance be answerable I know not. There have been many Ingenious Men, who
have wrote upon the same Subject, and it is very obvious for different Persons
to Jump upon the same Thoughts; which has been my Fortune, having afterward
met with in other Authors, those Emblems which I at first thought my own
Invention, which I therefore thought fit wholly to omit, not without Prejudice
to my Design, for my Predecessors have made use of several Figures and Motto's,
which has obliged me to take up with others less proper.

Also some Political Precepts, which though my own, as to the Invention at
least, yet I have found since to be of other, and far more ancient Authority: I
have therefore Inserted the Authors Names in the Margin, that due Honor may be
paid to Antiquity. 'Twas the Happiness of the Wits of former Ages, that they
could engross from their Posterity the Glory of Invention. I have made it my
Design and Care, to Interweave this Web with some Threads of Cornelius Tacitus,
without doubt the most accomplished Master of Princes, and who most judiciously
penetrates their Nature, and the Customs and Intrigues of Courts, as also the
Miscarriages and Success of Governments; with Precepts and Sentences taken from
this Great Man, as with my Hand, I lead the Prince whom I would mould by these
Emblems, that he may without danger, gather Flowers transplanted hither from
another Garden, and purged from the Venom and Thorns which their native Soil
frequently subjects them to, or the rankness of those times produced. In this
Second Edition, I also illustrate the principal Maxims of State, with Proofs
from Holy the Scriptures; for those Politics which are refined in that
Furnace, may be truly called, Silver tried and refined seven times in the Fire
of Truth Psalm 12. 7. The Words of the Lord are pure Words; as Silver tried in
a Furnace of Earth, purified seven times.
. And who would learn of a Heathen, or Impious Person, when the Holy Spirit is
so ready to give Instruction?

In explaining the Emblems, I am not too prolix, that the Reader may not lose
the Satisfaction of discovering their meaning of himself. If by Chance, in my
Discourse, I sprinkle a little Learning, it is not out of Ostentation, but to
enlighten the Prince's Mind, and render the Instruction more agreeable.

The whole Work consists purely of State Maxims and Rules, those being the
fittest Materials for such a Politic Building; however I don't barely propose
them, but intermix them with the whole Discourse, applying them all along to
particular Cases, to avoid the Danger of general Precepts.

It has been also my Endeavor to render the Style polite, but without
Affectation; short too and concise, but not obscure; which in Horace's Judgment
was a difficult Matter Brevis esse laboro obscurus fi^, Hor.
, and of which I have not yet seen an instance in the Castillian Language. I
have however made an Essay toward it, knowing that what is written to Princes
should be neither idly Sententious, nor superfluously Copious. Their time is
precious, and he does not a little obstruct the Public Interest, who with
empty and frivolous Discourse diverts them from Affairs of greater Importance.

I don't so wholly confine my self to the Institution and Direction of Princes,
but that I also descend to Governments, reflect upon their Growth,
Preservation, and Fall; and so to frame a Minister of State, and a prudent
Courtier.

If at any time I am liberal of my Commendations of any, it is to excite
Emulation, not to Flatter, to which I am very averse; for it were a Crime
unpardonable to publish to the whole World, Flatteries, and those too engraven
in Brass, or to make my self guilty of the very same thing, which I so much
reprove and discommend in others.

If I speak the Truth with too much Freedom, it is to be imputed to Ambition,
which is so deeply rooted in Men's minds, that without Fire and Sword it is
incurable. The Doctrine is general; but if any one shall from ^ Resemblance of
Vices, think himself levelled at, or that what is blamed in him is commended in
others, it is not my Fault Tac. 4. ann. Qui ob similitudinem al^ena malefacta
sibi objectari putant.
.

As also when I reprove Princes Actions, or reflect upon Tyrants, or only on
the Nature of Sovereignty, it being no new or unusual thing, for a good Prince
to do ill, when either he is not clearly informed of the Truth, or governed by
ill Counselors.

The same I would have understood of Commonwealths, if in any thing I seem to
dislike them; for either my Reflections are upon what is very usual in
Communities, or at least comprehend not those crowned and well constituted
Republics, whose Government is Generous and Royal.

I have used Examples, both Ancient and Modern; those for their Authority,
these partly as being more persuasive, partly too, because by Reason of
Propinquity of time, the State of Affairs is less altered, and consequently may
with less Danger be imitated, and a Prudent and Politic Judgment may more
safely be formed thereon, which is the principal Advantage of History. Nor is
our Age so barren of virtuous and great Achievements, as not to have furnished
us and our Posterity with good Examples Tac. 4. ^ist.
. Besides, really it were black and envious in us to extol ancient, without the
least regard to modern Actions Ibid.
.

I am well assured, Reader, that Books of this nature which treat of State
Affairs, are like Estafermos.
Statues, which in running at the Quintin, all aim at with their Lances, all
strike. I well know that whoever designs to be an Author, must submit to the
Black Ink, and Press of Detraction, (which I designed to signify by this
Emblem;) but withal I am not ignorant, that the blacker that Ink, with which
the Letters are daubed, and the closer the Press wherewith they are press d,
the fairer afterward, and more conspicuous they appear.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
I Will not endeavor with Rhetorical Flourishes to captivate any Person into a
good Opinion of my Author, or his Work, being sensible I should therein do an
Injury to his Memory, who has so often declared his Aversion to Flattery. I
only desire the Reader to remember always that he was by Birth a Spaniard, and
though Educated in the Church of Rome, was by Profession a Lawyer and
Statesman, who being generally wiser, are less bigoted to the foolish
Principles and Practices of that Religion. However, as I think it on the one
Hand needless to vindicate the Illustrious House of Nassau from his partial
Reflections, (which were modish in the Spanish Court when he wrote The first
Edition that I know of, was at Munster, Anno 1642. which being near six. Year
before the Conclusion of the Peace there, may serve as some Apology for the
Author's Reflections on the Princes of Orange, and other Heroes of the Adverse
Party.
) the whole World being satisfied in the Justice of their Cause, the Heroic
Prosecution thereof, and what Additional Laurels they justly acquired thereby;
so on the other side, I would not be thought to recommend his Religion either
to Prince or People. We too lately escaped the Snare, to be again entangled
with the Knaveries or Fooleries, to say no worse, of the Church or Court of
Rome; and next under God must own our sole Deliverance to a Branch of that
Ancient and Imperial Family, our present Gracious Sovereign.

These Precautions being observed, I humbly presume this Book will be of
excellent Use to all Ingenuous Persons of what Degree or Quality soever. For
though by the Title it seems calculated for the Meridian of Kings and Princes
only, yet it in some measure comprehends all Persons within the Circumference
of their Dominions.

The Statesman and Politician may herein learn what Qualifications they ought
to be endowed with for Negotiations, either at Home, or in Foreign Courts; how
by avoiding the Vices usually attending their High Stations, and embracing the
contrary Virtues, they may render their Actions meritorious to their Prince or
Country.

The Officers and Soldiers of an Army may here without Danger behold the
Methods and Stratagems their Predecessors have used to Conquer their Enemies,
and learn that their greatest Interest consists in good Order and Discipline,
and absolute Obedience to their Superiors, that Vice is as pernicious in a Camp
as a Court, and that Bravery and Virtue in Conjunction merit the greatest
Reward and Affection from their Prince or Country.

The Merchants and Seamen may here behold the vast Advantage, their Profession
is to a Government, and how Ships are the Moveable Poles, on which the
Stability thereof depends.

In fine, all Persons of Learning, Sense, or Reason, may from many excellent
Precepts and eminent Examples contained therein, improve and refine their
Talents to the greatest Advantage imaginable, remembering always my previous
Caution to avoid some few mistaken Aphorisms of his Religion and Country.

Our Celebrated Author, Don Diego Saavedra Faxardo, Knight of the Order of St.
Jago, was Born of a Noble Family of Murcia in Spain. He was the Son of Peter de
Saavedra and Fabiana Faxardo, who was also of Noble Extraction. He was Educated
in the University of Salamanca, in the Profession of the Laws, wherein he
became very Eminent, especially in those Parts thereof which are requisite for
the Accomplishment of an Absolute Politician and Complete Statesman. From
thence he was chosen Secretary to Cardinal Gaspar Borgia, Viceroy of Naples,
and soon after Resident for his Catholic Majesty at Rome; where his Conduct
gained him so great Applause, that he was sent on the same Employ into
Switzerland: After that, he was Plenipotentiary-Ambassador at two Imperial
Diets at Ratisbone; and then commanded to assist Don Gaspar de Bracamont, Count
de Pennecranda, at the famous Treaty of Munster, where he gave signal
Demonstration of his great Experience and Dexterity in the Management of the
most difficult Affairs of State. At his Return he sat in the Supreme Council
for the Government of both the Indies; in which Employ he died at Madrid in the
Year 1648. All that I know more of him, you may find in his own Preface, to
which, for brevity sake I refer you Nic. Antonio's Bibliotheca Scrip. Hispan.
Miraeu^'s Bibliotheca Ecclesiast. Moreri' s Great Dictionary
.

The greatness of his Personal Character and Reputation, and of this Book in
particular, are too well-establish'd in the World to require any Panegyricks on
either; but if the Reader desire to see how this Work was admired by some of
the most Learned of the Age, let him read the Epistles prefixed to the Latin
Version thereof. His Religious Temper more particularly appears in the great
Veneration he always shows for the Holy Scripture, and his apt Application
thereof; and his Politics no less by being so well read in Tacitus, the Great
Master thereof. Were that Excellent Roman now living, he could not but be
pleased, to see the Roughness and Crabbedness of his Style so finely polished,
without Diminution to the profoundness of his Sense and Judgment, in our
English Version; though in the Annotations thereof, he would find himself
Rivald, if not excelled by a Modern Politician. But there is no greater
Argument to prove the general Approbation and kind Reception thereof, than the
various Editions in several Languages, besides the Original, as Latin, French,
Italian, Portugese, and High-German. To enumerate the particular Times and
Places of each Impression would be superfluous, were they all known to us. Let
it suffice to inform you, that the Impression of the Original we chiefly made
use of in this Version, is the Fourth Edition, Printed at Valencia, 1660. as
being the most Correct we could meet with. He wrote also a Book, Entitled,
Corona Gothica, Castellanice, and Austriaca Politicamente Illustrada, Printed
at Madrid, 1650. though, as some say, be died before he had completed it.

And here I cannot but observes how disingenuous (to say no worse) the Italian
and French Translators, or rather Corruptors, of our Author have been,
especially the last, who not content only to omit whole Pages and Sections,
very material to the Purpose, have foisted in their own fulsome Flatteries
instead thereof, basely perverting his very Sense and Meaning, to comply with
the Interest and Ambition of particular Persons or Governments. So dangerous a
Thing is Truth its some Nations. But we have those rather to draw the Copy
after the full Proportion of the Original, being satisfied we have the
Happiness to live in so well Constituted a Government, and under so Excellent a
King, that Truth and Integrity are now become the great Accomplishments of a
Courtier.

Our Aut^or taking occasion so often to mention Alphonsus the Wise, I presume
it will not be thought unnecessary, or be unacceptable to some Readers, to give
a short Account of him. ^He was the Tenth of that Name, King of Leon and
Castile, and was also Surnamed the Astrologer, and succeeded his Father,
Ferdinand the Third, 1252. He made the Astronomical Tables, still Extant, which
are called from his Name, Tabulae Alphonsinae; and it is certainly affirmed,
That he spent 400000 Crow^s in the Composition of them. He refused the Imperial
Crown of Germany, which was offered him after the Rejection of Richard, Duke of
Cornwall, contenting himself only with the Title of Emperor, which some say he
resigned to Pope Gregory the Tenth, whereof he repented, and would have
reassumed the Imperial Title and Arms; but was deterred for fear of an
Excommunication against him. He was successful against the Moors; but at length
dethroned by his own Son Sancho, and died for Grief in Anno 1284. In a great
Sickness, after many Remedies used in vain, he began to read Quint. Curtius's
History of Alexander the Great, which he did with so much Delight, that he
recovered his Health; whereupon he said, Farewell Avieen, Hippocrates, and the
whole Crowd of Doctors, give me my Curtius that has saved my Life. He had read
the Bible fourteen Times, with several Commentaries upon it; he was a great
Astrologer, and after he had deeply considered the Fabric of the World, the
following saying of his, reported by Lipsius, denotes him to have been none of
the most Pious; viz. That if God had advised with him in the Creation, he could
have given him good Counsel^ Mariana Hist. Hisp. Turquet. Roderick Geneb.
Spond. Bzovi^s.
.

By the Great Captain, often also mentioned, is meant Gonzales of Cordova, who
served under Ferdinand and Isabella, in the Conquest of Granada, and was very
famous in his Time.

It may perhaps, according to Custom, be expected we should give some Account
of the present Performance; but that indeed is a very ticklish Point; for to
Commend, or even Justify it would favor of Vanity; and to discover its
Imperfections, would be very disobliging to our Friends, the Booksellers. I
shall therefore in the Words of an Ingenuous and Judicious Author Sir John
Denham^
, desire you to consider, That there are certain Graces and Happinesses,
peculiar to every Language which give Life and Energy to the Words. And
whosoever offers at a Verbal Translation, shall have the Misfortune of that
Young Traveller, who lost his own Language abroad, and brought home no other
instead thereof. For the Grace of the Spanish will be lost by being turned into
English Words; and the Grace of the English by being turned into Spanish
Phrase. However we have endeavored to come as near the Sense of the Original,
as we could, without offering to be Fidi Interpretes, that properly belonging
to those who Translate Matters of Faith, or such Facts of Moment as have
Relation thereunto.

The Reader is desired to take notice that our Author, a all others of his
Religion, makes use of the Vulgar Translation in his Quotations out of the Holy
Scripture, which in many Places is so different from the English Version, that
they are not applicable to the Purpose for which he Quotes them. For Instance
the Seventy eighth Emblem is a Siren or Mermaid, and the Motto, Formosa
Superne. In the beginning thereof, he quotes Isaiah 13. 22. Et Sirenes in
delubris voluptatis, which we Translate, and Dragons in their pleasant Places.
How beautiful they are, unless we do them wrong, I leave you to judge. The
Fifty fifth Emblem, is a Hand holding a Scepter full of Eyes; the Motto, His
Praevide and Provide. He there quotes Jeremiah 1. 11. where the Vulgar has
Virgam vigilantem ego video; the English, I see the Rod of an Almond Tree;
which literally taken, is little to his Purpose, and therefore we leave it in
the Sense he took it. The Word in the Hebrew, is Saked, for an Almond Tree, and
Verse the 12th, Then said the Lord unto me, thou have well seen, for I will
hasten my Word to perform it. The Almond Tree is there mentioned as an Emblem
of Have; the word Saked, an Almond Tree, alluding to Sakad, a Word which
signifies making Haste. Nor is the Allusion frivolous, for Pliny says, Floret
omnium prima Amygdala, mense Januario, Martio vero Poma maturat. Lib. 16. c.
25. Bochartus's Geograph* Sacra. Phaleg, lib. c. 1. Canaan, lib. 1. c. 35.
.

Now, if any Person thinks himself represented herein, and likes not his
Picture, let him consider he sat not for it, and if he finds any Strokes too
Bold, let him not blame the Artist, but amend the Original. As for that little
Popery that is in it, it has been so solidly confuted by many Eminent Divines
of the Church of England, and so ridiculed by others, that I presume, it cannot
have the least Influence on the meanest Protestant of the Nation. In Answer to
what he reflects on some of his Majesty's Heroic Ancestors, (if it may not
rather be called an Encomium) I refer the Reader to that most Excellent and
Unanswerable Apology, wrote by the Prince of Orange himself, and published in
all Languages. And for a Conclusion, accept of the following Epigram, by an
unknown Hand, representing that Illustrious Prince, as Prophetically, speaking
to William the Third, our present Gracious Sovereign.

Nassovius Coeli miratus ab Arce Nepotem
Ad Summum tantis passious ire Decus;
Macte, inquit, sanguis noster; tibi cedimus ultro,
Quandoquidem cedunt Terra Fretumque tibi.
Me Duce parta meis Libertas pristina Belgis,
Orbis Hyperbore^s, te Duce, liber erit.
In English.
When Nassau from the Skies beheld his Son,
With such large Steps the Race of honor Run;
Proceed, my Boy, proceed with joy, said He;
I do, since Earth and Sea submit to thee.
I only to my Country freedom gave,
You will the Northern World from Bondage save.
THE CONTENTS and ORDER OF THE Emblems of the First Part.
The Education of a Prince.
Emb. Page VALOR exerts its self even in the Cradle. I. HINC Labor, and
Virtus, 1 And then Art draws its Drafts as on blank Canvass. II. Ad omnia, 9
Fortifying and adorning the Body with honorable Exercises. III. Robur and
Decus, 19 And the Mind with Liberal Sciences. IV. Non solum Armis, 26 In^till'd
with pleasant Industry V. Cum Delectatione informat, 34 And Adorned with polite
Learning. VI. Politioribus ornantur literae, 38 How a Prince ought to regulate
his Actions. LET him know things as they are in themselves not as represented
by the Passions. VII. AUGET and Minuit, 44 Let his Anger submit to Reason.
VIII. Prae oculis ira, 54 Let him not be moved by Envy which is its own
Executioner. IX. Sui Vindex, 63 And proceeds from Glory and Fame. X. Fama
nocet, 73 Let a Prince be cautious in his Discourse, for from thence his Mind
is known. XI. Ex pulsu noscitur, 80 Let him shadow Lies with Truth. XII.
Excoecat candor, 87 And be assured that his Defects will be the Subject of
Obliquy. XIII. Censurae pater, 94 Which both reproves and am^nds him. XIV.
Detra^it and decorat, 102 Let him value Reputation beyond Life, XV. D^m I^ceam
peream, 110 Comparing his own Actions with those of his Ancestors. XVI. Purpura
juxta purpuram, 116 But not rest satisfied with the Trophies and Glories
derived from them. XVII. Alienis spoliis, 119 Let him own his Scepter from God.
XVIII. A Deo, 12^ And that he must resign it to his Successor. XIX. Viciss^m
traditu^, 132 Knowing that a Crown is but a deceit^ul Good. XX. Fallax bonum,
142 Let him Rus^ and Correct By Laws. XXI. Regit and corrigit. 14^ And
establish his Majesty with Justice and Clemency. XXII. Praesidia Majestatis,
161 Let Reward be the Price of Valor. XXIII. Preti^m Virtutis, 170 Let him
always have Respect to the true Religion. XXIV. Immobilis ad immobile numen,
178 Let him place in that, the Stability and Security of his Empire. XXV. Hic
tutior, 184 And Hopes of Victory. XXVI. In hoc Signo, 189 Not in the false and
Counterfeit. XXVII. Specie Religionis, 195 Let him consult times present, past,
and to come, XXVIII. Quae sint, quae fuerint, quae mox ventura sequantur, 202
And not particular Cases which rarely succeed^. XXIX. Non semper Tripodem, 209
But by the Experience of many who establish Wisdom. XXX. Fulcitur experientiis,
214 This will teach him to maintain his Crown with Reputation. XXXI.
Existimatione nixa, 225 Not to depend on popular Opinion; XXXII. Ne
requaesiveris extra, 234 Nor be discomposed at Change of Fortune. XXXIII.
Semper Idem, 240 To Endure and Hope. XXXIV. Ferend^ and sperand^, 250 To draw
Felicity from Adversity. XXXV. Interclusa respirat, 255 To Sai^ with every
Wind. XXXVI. In contraria ducet, 259 Of two Evils to ^huse the Least. XXXVII.
Minimum eligendum, 266 How a Prince ought to behave himself toward his
Subjects and Strangers. LET him make himself beloved and feared by all Men,
XXXVIII. CUM Blandimento and rigore, 273 Being the Altar to which they flee for
Succor. XXXIX. Omnibus, 279 Let his Ability be the Measure of his Liberality
XL. Quae tribuunt tribuit, 286 Let him avoid Extremes, XLI Ne quid nimis, 291
Mixing Pleasure with Profit. XLII. Omne ^ulit punctum, 299 That he may know how
to reign, let him learn to diss^mble, XLIII. Ut sciat regnare, 303 And not
discover his Designs, XLIV. Nec a quo, nec ad quem, 310 Nor rely too much on
his Majesty. XLV. Non Majestate securus, 316 But think always he may be
deceived, XLVI. Fallimur opinione, 319 By the specious Pretenders to Virtue,
XLVII. Et juvisse nocet, 329 No less than Flatterers. XLVIII. Sub luce lues,
337 How a Prince ought to behave himself toward his Ministers of State. LET
their Authority be only dependent. XLIX. LUMINE Solis, 349 That they may be
always subject to his D^sple^sure as well as Favor. L. Jovi and Fulmini. 3^6
LET his Confidence be always Vigilant. LI. ^IDE and Diffide, ^^ For Evil
Ministers are most dangerous in the highest Posts. LII. Magis quam in terra
noc^^s, 10 Herein they exercise their Ava^ice; LIII. Custodiunt non carpunt, 18
And desire rather to depend o^ themselves than the Prince. LIVE. A se pendet, 23
Counselors are the Eyes of the Sc^pter, LV. His praevide and provide, 29
Secretaries are the Compass. LVI. Qui a secretis ab omnibus, 4^ They are both
Wheels in the Clock of Government, but not the Hand. LVII. Uni reddatur, 49
Then let him give them all sorts of Honor without Prejudice to his own. LVIII.
Sine detrimento lucis si^^, 57 How a Prince ought to behave himself in the
Government of his States and Ki^gdoms. COunsel and Strangth are necessary to
preserve-them. LIX. CUM Art and cum manu, 65 For let him be assured, that if
they increase not they will diminish. LX. Vel ascendit vel descendit, 84 Let
him know well all the Strings of his Government, and take Care that the greater
Strings agree with the less. LXI. M^jora minoribus consonant, 94 Without
discovering the Artifice of their Harmony. LXII. Nulli patet, 100 Let him
consider the Beginning, and End of his Resolutions. LXIII. Consule utrique, 107
Let him be slow in Consultation, and quick in Execution. LXIV. Statu^ and
exequere, 112 Let him correct Errors before they multiply. LXV. Ex uno error^
multi, 116 Let him see that his Country be well Peopled, and breed up Subjects
fi^ for the Magistracy. LXVI. Ex fascibus fasces, 121 Let him not over-burthen
them with Taxes. LXVII. Amputat non excindit, 132 Let him encourage Trade and
Commerce, which are the Poles of Commonwealths, LXVIII. His Polis, 145 Keeping
to himself the Power of War and Peace, by his Sword and his Purse. LXIX. Fer^o
and Auro, 1^^ Let him not divide his State between his Children LXX. Dum
scinditur frangor, 165 Industry overcomes all things. LXXI. Labor omnia vincit,
170 Rest renews Strength LXXII. Vires alit, 176 How a Prince ought to behave
himself, in the internal and external Disorders of his States SEditions are
appeased by C^lerity and Division. LXXIII. COmpress^ quiescunt, 182 War ought
to be (...) taken, to acquire Peace. LXXIV. In fulcrum pacis, 193 H^ who s^ws
Discord reaps Wars. LXXV. Bellum colligit qui discordia^ seminat, 199 Which are
caused by the ill Intentions of Ministers. LXXVI. Intrat lux and exit flamma,
205 And by the Interviews of Princes. LXXVII. Praesentia noce^, 209 Let a
Prince (...) of specious Pretenses. LXXVIII. Formosa superne, 212 Which ought
to be delud^d by others of the same kind. LXXIX. Consilia consiliis
^rustrantur. 219 By being in a Readiness against a Rupt^^^e. LXXX. In arena and
ante arenam, 223 And considering his Strength. LXXXI. Quid valiant vives, 230
Pl^cing his Glory and Bravery in Arms. LXXXII. Decus in armis, 243 For upon the
Exercise of them depends the Preservation of his States. LXXXIII. Qffendunt and
defendunt, 253 Let him act more by Counsel than Force. LXXXIV. Plura consilio
quam vi, 258 Avoiding middle Counsels. LXXXV. Consilia media fugi^da, 262 Let
him personally assist in the Wars of his State. LXXXVI. Rebus adest, 268 Always
remembering, that his Arms flourish most; when God is of his side. LXXXVII.
Auspice Deo, 275 That he ought to adjust his Will to his Divine Decrees.
LXXXVIII. Volentes trahimur, 281 That Concord overcomes all things. LXXXIX.
Concordiae cedunt, 287 That the best Stratagem is Diversion. XC. Disjunctis
viribus, 293 That he ought not to confide in reconciled Friends. XCI. Solidari
non potest, 298 That Protection is generally Pernicious. XCII. Protegunt at
destruunt, 304 That Leagues with Heretics are dangerous. XCIII. Impia foedera,
309 That the Mitre ought to s^ine equally all the World over. XCIV. Librata
refulget. 315 Neutrality neither makes Friends, nor gains Enemies. XCV. Neutri
adhaerendum, 323 How a Prince ought to behave himself in Victories and Treaties
of Peace. IN Victory let him be always mindful of Adversity. XCVI. Memor
adversae, 334 Making use of the Spoils to augment his own Strength. XCVII.
Fortior Spoliis, 343 And concluding Peace under the Shield. XCVIII. Sub Clypeo,
348 For the Pleasures of Peace are the Fruit of War. XCIX. Merces Belli, 354
How a Prince ought to behave himself in his old Age. LET him consider that his
last Actions Crown his Government. C. QUI legitime certaverit, 360 And
Prognosticate what his Successor will be. CI. Futurum indicat, 374 And that he
is equal to the r^st of ^^^kind in the P^ngs of Death. CII. ^udibria Mortis,

OF THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE.
EMBLEM I.
Valor is born, not acquired; it is an intrinsic Quality of the Soul which is
infused with it, and immediately exerts it self: The very Mothers Womb was a
Field of Battle to the Two Brothers, Jacob and Esau And the Children ^^ruggled
together within her, Genesis 25. 22.
. Of Thamar's Twins, one by Nature more daring, when he could not be Born
before his Brother, broke however the Ligature, and thrust out his Hand, as if
he would snatch the Eldership from him And it came to pass when she travailed,
that the one put o^^^ his hand first, Genes. 38. 28.
. A great Soul exerts it self in the Cradle: Hercules Crowned, by the Conquest
of Two Serpen^^, from that day exposing himself to Envy, and making Fortune
truckle to his Virtue. A generous Spirit is conspicuous in the very first
Actions of Nature. The Infa^^^ of Spain, your Highness his Uncle of Blessed
Memory, saw the Battle of Norlinguen almost even before he knew what War was,
and even then knew how to Command with Prudence and Act with Vigor.

Cyrus, a very Boy when Elected King by those of his own Age did in that
Childish Government such Heroic A^^^^^s, as sufficiently manifested his secret
Greatness (...) and Royal Genius, Natures most excellent Pro^^ct^ons are
themselves their own Discoverers. Amid^^ the rude and unrefined mass of Oar,
the Diamond ^^^rkles, and Gold glisters. The Young Lion as soon (...), views
his Paws, and with a haughty Me^, shakes his curled Main ^carce yet dry, as
preparing to Fight. Childish Games, to which Princes are carried by a natural
Impulse, are Signs and prognostics of maturer Actions. Nature is never so much
as a Moment idle, but from the very Birth of it is Offspring is industrious in
a regular Formation of its Mind as well as Body; for this Reason, she has
stamped such an extraordinary Affection upon Parents to excite their D^^^gence
in well Educating their Children; and least they should (which is no unusual
thing) with a strange Nurses Milk, imbibe also her Vicious Practices, the same
Nature, provident in her Distributions, has dispensed as it were a double
Fountain of purer Blood, to supply them with Nourishment for their Young Ones:
But either Idleness, or fear of losing their Beauty, is frequently the occasion
why Mothers (not without considerable Detriment to the Commonwealth) neglect
their Duty, and give the suckling of their Children to others; which Abuse,
since it cannot so easily be remedied, at least great care should be taken in
the Choice of them. Let them be Healthy, of a good Family, and well bred; for
as from the Conception to the Birth the Child is nourished in the Body of its
Mother, so is it from its Birth till it is weaned, by the Nurse's Breast, and
this last Interval being longer than the other, the Child must of Necessity
imbibe more of the Nature of its Nurse than its Mother, Says the Wise King
Alphonso, who prescribed Laws to Heaven and Earth.

The Second Obligation Parents lie under, is the Education of their Children
Have thou Children, instruct them. Eccles. 7. 23.
: there is scarce any Animal will forsake its Young Ones without Direction given
how to provide for themselves. Nor are the Advantages of Education less
considerable than those of Nature, and Children are more ready to embrace their
Parents instructions and bear their Reproofs, than those of others Educat^
siquidem recte a parentibus, per sancto^ and justos mores boni merito ^vadent.
Arist^t. Oecon. lib. 2.
: Those particularly who are nobly born disdain to be governed by their
Inferiors. In a Child's first Procreation, it Received nothing from the Father
but a Body, for God alone is the Author of the Soul, which except the Father
afterward Cultivates and improves by Education Wisdom exal^eth her Children.
Eccles. 4. 12.
, he will scarce deserve the name of a true and absolute Father. Nor is it new
in holy Scripture for a Master to be called Father. For Example, Iubal the
first Teacher of Music He was the Father of all such as handle the harp and
Organ, Genesis 4. 21.
. And who, I pray, is fitter to Teach his Son how to appear with Majesty, how
to keep a Decorum in all things, Maintain his Authority, and govern his
Subjects, than the Prince himself My ^on give me thine heart, and let thine
Eyes observe my ways. Pr^v. 23. 26.
? He only has the full practick Knowledge of Government, which others knows
only in part and by Speculation: Nor without reason did Solomon boast that he
Received great Improvement from his Fathers Instructions For I was my Father's
Son, tender and only beloved of my Mother; he taught me also, and said, Let
thine heart retain my words. Prove. 4. 3.
; however since Fathers sometimes have not themselves the Qualifications
requisite for a good Education of their Children, or at least have not leisure
to take that Trouble upon them, Masters must be looked for of an unblamable
Life and Conversation; eminent withal for Learning and Experience Quarendi
sunt liberis Magistri, quorum and inculpata sit ^ita and mo^e^. Plut. de Educ.
; such as King Alphonso in his Laws describes in these Words. So that for all
these reasons, Kings ought to tak^ great care of their Children, and to choose
them Tutours of a good Family and good Livers, sound both in Mind and Body, and
above all faithful and just, firm to the Interest of their King and Country.
To which I add, that they ought to be Men of Valor and a great Spirit, well
Experienced in Affairs, as well of Peace as War, such was Seneca, whom
therefore Agrippina made Choice of for Nero's Master Vtque Do^itii jueritia
tali Magistro adolesceret; and co^siliis ejusdem ad spem domination^s uteretur.
Tac. 12. Ann.
. It Is impossible, without doubt, for a Man of an abject and mean Spirit to
imprint on a Prince thoughts more sublime than his own. Were an Owl to instruct
an Eagle, she would not teach her to look on the Sun, or soar above lofty
Cedars; her School would be kept altogether in the dark, amidst the lower
Branches. The Master's Image appears in the Scholar, and in him, he in a manner
Represents himself. For no other reason did Pharaoh make Ios^^^ Lord of his
house, and Ruler of all his substance, but to teach his Princes to be like
himself And he made him Lord of his house, and ruler of his substance: To bi^d
his Princes at his pleasure: and teach his Sena^ours wisdom, Psalm. 105. 21, 22.
. Those who have the tuition and government of Princes Sons, ought to be as
careful of their tender years, as Gardiners are of their most delicate Plants,
which even before they appear above ground; they secure with Fences to prevent
their being injured, by treading on, or handling. On the first stroke depends
the Perfection of a Picture, so does a good Education on what the first years
have imbibed, before the passions get strength and refuse to submit to reason
Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides while he is a
Child, least he wax stubborn, and be disobedient to thee, and so bring sorrow
to thine heart. Eccles. 30. 12.
. From a very minute Seed a vast Tree proceeds, which however small a twig at
first, and easily flexible every way, when it is invested with Bark, and has
diffused it self into Branches, stands immovable. The affections in youth are
not much unlike poison, which having once made its passage into the Heart,
leaves the paleness consequent to it incurable. Virtues that improve and
increase with our Age have not only the precedence of others, but excel even
themselves I^ is good for a Man that he bear the Yoke in his Youth, he sits
alone, and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him, Lam. 3. 27, 28.
. Of the four Winged Animals in Ezekiel's Vision, the Eagle, one of that very
number, was carried higher than all those four They four had also the face of
an Eagle. Ezekiel. 1. 10.
, for because she as soon as hatched began to have Wings, the others not till
long after, she not only appeared above them, but her self too. For want of a
suitable consideration of this, I Imagine it is that many persons usually
commit the Care of their Sons as soon as they come into the World, to Women,
who with the idle fear of shadows, agreeable to the genius of their Sex,
enfeeble their minds, and stamp other Effoeminate passions on them, which with
time take deep root Train up thy child in the way he should go: and when he is
old he will not depart from it. Prove. 22. 6.
. To avoid this inconveniency, the Persian Kings Committed theirs to the care of
persons of worth and prudence Nutritur puer non a Muliere n^trice parum
honorifica, verum ab Eunuchis, qui reliquorum circa Reem optimi videantur,
Plur. primo A^cib.
. But above all, Children's natures are to be taken particular notice of, it
being impossible without it to draw a true Scheme of Education.

Now no Age is more proper for it than their infancy, when nature as yet free
from envy and dissimulation I^venes non s^nt maligni moris, sed facilis moris,
propterea quod nondum vi^^^nt (...).
, sincerely discloses it self; when in their Forehead, Eyes, Hands, their
Smiles and other motions of their Body, their passions and inclinations appear
without disguise. The Ambassadors of Bearn having power given them by the
illustrious William of Moncada to Choose which of his Sons for their Prince
they thought fit; upon observation, that Ones hand was Clinched, the others
open, Chose this latter, interpreting it to be a sign of Munificence and
Liberality, as it afterward proved. If an Infant be of a generous and great
Mind, at hearing his own commendations he smooths his Brows, looks pleasantly
and smiles; on the contrary, when discommended, he is concerned, blushes and
casts his Eyes on the ground; if of an undaunted Spirit, he looks stern, is not
terrified with shadows or threats; if Liberal, he despises toys and presents,
or readily parts with them again to others; if revengeful, he continues Angry,
is all in Tears till he have satisfaction; if he be Choleric, the least trifle
puts him in a heat, he lets fall his Brows, looks dogged, and threatens with
his fist; if Affable, with a sweet Smile and alluring Eye, he wins favor and
acceptance; if Melancholy, he avoids Company, delights in solitude, is often
complaining, seldom Laughs, and generally looks sullen; if he be Airy, he
unfolds the Wrinkles of his Forehead, and now gratefully fixing his Eyes seems
to dart a pleasing light, by and by with a kind of Complacency withdrawing
them, and agreeably pleating his brows, betrays the Cheerfulness of his Mind.
Thus does the heart represent the other Virtues also, and vices in the face and
exterior motions of the Body, till more cautious Age has taught it to Conceal
them.

In the very Cradle and Nurse's Arms, the whole court admired in your Highness,
a certain natural pleasantness and grateful Majesty, and indeed that grave
carriage and presence of Mind which appeared in you Highness, when the Two
Kingdoms of Castile and Leon took an Oath of Allegiance to you, exceeded the
ordinary capacity of your years.

I would not have however, these reflections of mine upon infancy be looked
upon as infallible and without exception, for nature sometimes deviates from
her Common Road, and deceives the too curious Enquirer, there are some, who
though vicious in their infancy, when at years of discretion take up and Reform,
which happens perhaps, because one of a great and haughty Spirit despises
Education, and consequently is subdued by his natural passions, while right
reason is too weak to resist them, till that getting strength He acknowledges
its errors and corrects them effectually: 'twas a cruel and barbarous Custom
therefore of the Brachmans, who either killed or exposed their Children after
they were Two Months Old in the Woods, if there appeared in them any tokens of
an ill nature. As inhumane were the Lacedaemonians who threw theirs into the
River Taygetes. Both seemed to make no account of Education, of right reason
and free will which usually correct and regulate natural affections. This also
seems unaccountable, when nature joins some eminent Virtues with the most
enormous Vices in the same person; as too different slips are often grafted
upon two branches, which growing out of the same Root produce different, nay
contrary Fruits, bitter and sweet.

This was Visible in Alcibiades of whom 'twas a question whether he was more
eminent for his Virtues or Vices. And thus Nature works 'ere she has begun to
know her self, but reason afterward and industry correct and polish her
operations.

Lastly since I proposed to my self by these Emblems to give an exact Model of
a Prince from the Cradle to the Tomb, It will not be amiss to accommodate my
rudiments and style to each particular Age, as Plato and Aristotle have done.
At present, I Advise that special Care be taken to render his Arms and Legs
active by Exercise. If by chance any of his Limbs should be crooked they may be
straightned by artificial Instruments Caeterum ne propter teneritatem membra
torqueantur, nationes quibusd^^ artificiosis instr^mentis utebantur. Arist.
lib. 7. Pol. cap. 17.
. Let ^rightful spectacles which may injure the imaginative faculty be kept
from him: Let him not be suffered to look asquint at any thing: Use him
gradually to the sha^pness of the Air, nor should Music be Wanting to quicken
his Spirits now and then: for whatever new thing Children meet with, that it is
they admire, that makes the deepest Impression on their Imagination.

EMBLEM II.
WIth Pencil and Colors Art admirably Expresses every thing. Hence, if
Painting be not Nature, it certainly comes so near it as that often its works
deceive the sight, and are not to be distinguished but by the touch. It cannot,
it is true, animate Bodies, but it frequently draws the Beauty, Motions and
Affections of the Soul. Although indeed it cannot entirely form the Bodies
themselves for want of matter, yet the Pencil so exquisitely describes them on
Canvass, that besides Life there is nothing that you can desire more. Nature I
believe would envy Art if she could possibly do the same, but now she is so
kind, as in many things to use the Assistance of Art; for whatever the Industry
of this can perfect, that Nature does not finish her self. Thus we see man is
born without any manner of knowledge or propriety of speech, instruction and
learning being left to draw the lineaments of Arts and Sciences on his mind as
on a blank Canvass, and Education to Imprint morality thereon, not without
great advantage to humane Society; for hence it comes to pass that by One man's
having Occasion for the Assistance of another, the bonds of gratitude and
affection are strengthened: for Nature has sown the seed of Virtue and
knowledge in all of us, we are equally born to those goods of the mind, which
must be cultivated and quickened by some other hand Omnibus natura fundamenta
dedit, semenque virtutum, omnes ad ista omnia nati sum^s; cum irritator
accessit, ^unc i^^a ^^ni^^ bona, velu^ sopita excitantur. Sen. Epist. 10.
. But it is necessary these measures be taken in the tender years, while the
mind is fitter to Receive all manner of forms, so readily apprehensive of
sciences as to appear rather to remember than first learn them; which Plato
made use of as an argument to prove the immortality of the Soul Ex hoc posse
cog^^s^^ animas immortales esse, atque divinas, quod in pueris mobilia sunt
ingenia, and ad p^^^^piendum facilia. Plat. de A^.
; but if this be negle^^^^ in the first Age, the affections by degrees get
ground, and their depraved inclinations make so deep an impression upon the
will as no Education can efface. The Bear no sooner whelps but licking the
limbs of her deformed Litter while they are soft, perfects and brings them to
shape, whereas if she suffered them to grow firm her pains would be
ineffectual. It was wi^ely done (in my Judgment) of the Kings of Persia to
Commit their Sons in their Infancy to Masters, whose care it should be for the
first seven years of their life to Organize their Bodies: In the second to
strengthen them by using them to fencing and the like Exercises. To these they
after added four select Persons to give the finishing strokes; the first
eminent for Learning, made 'em Scholars; the second a discreet, sober man,
taught them to govern and bridle their appetites; the third a Lover of Equity,
inculcated the Administration of Justice; lastly the fourth eminently Valiant
and Experienced in War^are, instructed them in Mili^ary Discipline, especially
endeavoring by incentives to Honor, to divert their minds from fear and
Cow^ardice. But this good Education is particularly necessa^^y in Princes as
they are the Instruments of Politic happiness and public safety. In others
the neglect of a good Education is only prejudicial to single persons or at
least influences very few: but in a Prince it is not only against his private,
but every ones common interest, whilst some he injures immediately by his
Actions, others by his Example. Man well Educated is the most divine Creature
in the World; If ill, of all animals the most savage Homo rectam nactus
institutionem divinissimum mansuetissimumque animal effici solet; si vero, vel
non sufficienter, vel non been educetur, eorum quae terraprogen^it,
ferocissimum. Plat. lib. 3. de leg.
. What, I pray, can you expect from a Prince who is ill Educated, and has got
the supreme power in his hands? other evils of a Common wealth are of no long
continuance, this never terminates but with the Princes life. Of what
Importance a good and honorable Education is, Philip King of Macedon was
sensible, declaring in his Letters to Aristotle upon the Birth of his Son
Alexander his Obligation to the Gods, not so much for giving him a Son, as that
he was born at a time when he could make use of such a Master, and it is
certainly never convenient to leave nature otherwise good, to her self and her
own operations, since the best is imperfect and requires some external industry
to cultivate it, as indeed do most things necessary for man's well being. The
punishment derived to us by the fault of our first parents being not to enjoy
any thing without labor and the sweat of the Brow, how can you expect a Tree
to bear sweet fruit unless you transplant it, or by grassing it upon stems of a
more refined and generous nature, correct its Wildness. Education improves the
good and instructs the bad Educatio, and institutio commoda, nature as bonas
inducit, and rursum bonae naturae si talem institutionem consequantu^, meliores
adhuc and praestantiores eva^ere s^imus. Plat. Dial. 4 de Leg.
. This was the reason why Trajan became so eminent a Governor, because he
added industry to his natural parts and ha^ the direction of such a Master as
Plutarch. Nor ha^ King Peter surnamed the Cruel, ever proved so barb^rous and
tyrannical had John Alphonso, Duke of Alb^querque, his Tutor, known how to
mollify and break hi^ haughty temper. There Is the same difference in Men^
dispositions as in Metals, some of which are proof against fire, others
dissolve in it; yet all give way to the graving tools, are maleable and
ductile. so there is no humor so rugged but care and correction may have some
effect on. Although I confess Education is not always sufficient of it self to
make men Virtuous, because many times under Purple as among Briars and Woods,
there spring up such monstrous Vices, particularly in persons of a great
Spirit, as prove utterly Incorrigible. What is more obvious than for young men
to be deba^ched by Luxury, Liberty or Flattery in Princes Courts, where
abundance of Vicious affections grow as Thorns, as noxious and unprofitable
weeds upon ill manured Land. Wherefore Except these Courts are well instituted
the care taken in a good Education will be to very little purpose; for they
seem to be like Moulds and accordingly so Form the Prince as themselves are
well or ill disposed, and those Virtues or Vices which have once began to be in
repute in them, their ministers transmit to posterity. A Prince is scarce
Master of his reason when his Courtiers out of flattery Cry up the too great
Liberty of his Parents and Ancestors, recommending to him some great and
renowned Actions of theirs, which have been as it were the propriety of his
Family. Hence also it comes to pass that some particular Customs and
Inclinations are propagated from Father to Son in a continued succession, not
so much by the Native force of their blood, (for neither length of time nor
Mixtures of Marriage are used to Change them) as because they are established
in the Courts where Infancy imbibes them and as it were turns them into nature,
thus among the Romans the Claudii were reputed Proud, the Scipio's Warlike, the
Appii ambitious; as now in Spain the Gusmans are looked upon to be Good Men,
the Mendozas Humane, the Mauriques have the Character of Formidable, the
Toletan's Severe and Grave. The same is Visible in Artificers, when any of a
family have attained an Excellency, they easily transmit it to their Children,
the Spectatours of their Art and to whom they leave their Works and Monuments
of their Labor. To all this may be added, that Flattery mixed with Error
sometimes commends in a Boy for Virtue what by no means deserves that name, as
Lewdness, Ostentation, Insolence, Anger, Revenge and other Vices of the like
nature; some men erroneously persuading themselves that they are tokens of a
great Spirit; which withal induces 'em too eagerly to pursue these, to the
neglect of real Virtues: as a Maid sometimes if she be commended for her free
Carriage or Confidence, applies her self to those rather than Modesty and
Honesty, the principal good Qualities of that Sex. Though indeed young men ought
to be driven from all Vices in general, yet more especially from those which
tend to Laziness or Hatred they being more easily imprinted in their minds
Cuncta igitu^ mala, sed ea maxim quae turpitudinem ^abent vel ^dium parent,
sunt procul a pu^ris removend. Arist. Pol. 7. c. 17.
. Care therefore must be taken that the Prince over-hear no filthy or obscene
expressions, much less should he be suffered to use them himself: We easily
execute what we make familiar to us in discourse, at least something near it
Nam f^cile turpia loquendo, efficitur ut homines his proxima facient: Arist.
Pol. 7. c. 17.
. Wherefore to prevent this Evil the Romans used to Choose out of their
families some grave Ancient Matron to be their Sons Governess, whose whole Care
and Employment was to give them a good Education, in whose presence it was not
allowable to speak a foul word or admit an indecent Action Coram qua neque
dicere fas e at, quod turpe dictu, neque facere quod inhonest^^ fact^
vi^eretur. Quint. dial. de ora^.
. The design of this severe discipline was that their nature being pr^^ served
pure and untainted, they might readily embrace honest professions Quo
disciplina, ac severitas ^o pertimebat, ut sincera and integra, and nullis
pravitatibus detorta uni^scujusque natura toto statim pectore arri^ere^ arts
honestas. Quin^il. Ibid.
. Quintilian laments th^^ neglect of this manner of Education in his time
Children being usually brought up among servan^^ and so learning to imitate
their Vices. Nor, says he, (...) any one of the family concerned what he says
or do^^ before his young Master, since even their parents don^^ so much inure
them to Virtues and Modesty as La^ sciviousness and Libertinism Nec quisquam in
tota domo pensi habet qui^^ coram infant domino, aut dicat aut faciat; quando
etiam ipsi parente^ nec probit^i neque modestiae ^arvulos assue^ac^unt, sed
lasciviae, and liberta^i. Quint. ibid.
. Which to this day is usual in most Princes Courts: nor is there any remedy
for it, but displacing those Vicious Courtie^^ and substituting others of
approved Virtue who may excite the Princes mind to Actions more generous and
such as tend to true honor Neque enim auribus jucunda convenit dicere, sed ex
quo aliquis gloriosus fiat. Eurip. in Hippol.
. When a Cou^^ has once bid adieu to Virtue, it is often Changed but never for
the better, nor does it desire a Prince better than it self. Thus Nero's family
were Favorers o^ Otho, because he was like him P^ona in eu^ au^^ Neronis ut
similem. Tac. 1. Hist.
. But if the Princ^ cannot do this, I think it were more advisable for him to
leave that Court, as we remember James the 1st. King of Arragon did, Mar. H^st.
Hisp.
when he saw himself Tyrannized over by those who educated and confined him as
it were in a prison: nor can I give those Cour^^ any other name, where the
principal aim is to enslave the princes will, and he is not suffered to go this
way or that by choice and at his own pleasure, but is forcibly guided as his
Courtiers please, just as Water (...) conveyed through private Channels for the
sole benefit of the ground through which it passes. To what purpose are good
natural Parts and Education, if the Prince is suffered to see, hear and know no
more than his Attendance think fit? What wonder if Henry the 4th. King of
Castile Mac. Hist His.
proved so negligent and sluggish, so like his Father John the Second in all
things, after he had been Educated among the same Flatterers that occasioned
his Fathers male Administration? Believe me, it is as impossible to form a good
Prince in an ill Court, as to draw a straight Line by a Crooked square: there is
not a wall there which some lascivious hand has not sullied; not a Corner but
Echoes their dissolute Course of Life: all that frequent the Court are so many
Masters and as it were Ideas of the Prince, for by long use and Conversation
each imprint something on him which may either be to his benefit or prejudice;
and the more apt his Nature is to Learn, the sooner and more easily he imbibes
those domestic Customs. I dare affirm that a Prince will be good if his
Ministers are so; bad if they be bad: an instance of this we have in the
Emperor Galba, who when he light upon good Friends and Gentlemen, was governed
by them, and his Conduct unblameable; if they were ill, himself was guilty of
inadvertency Amicorum, libertorumque ubi in b^nos incidisset, sine
reprehensione patiens. si mali f^rent, usque ad culpam igna^us. Tac. 1. Hist.
.

Nor will it suffice to have thus reformed living and animate figures in a
Court, without proceeding also to inanimate: for though the graving Tool and
Pencil are but mute Tongues, yet Experience has taught us they are far more
eloquent and persuasive. What an incitement to Ambition is Alexander the
great's Statue? how strangely do pictures of Jupiter's lewd Amors inflame
Lust? besides, for which our corrupt nature is blameable, Art is usually more
celebrated for these kind of things than Virtuous instructive pieces; At first
indeed the excellency of the workmanship makes those pieces Valuable, but
afterward lascivious persons adorn the Walls with them to please and entertain
the Eyes. There should be no statue or piece of painting allowed, but such as
may Create in the Prince a glorious Emulation Cum autem ne quis talia loquatur
prohibetur, satis intelligitur vetari, ^e turpes, vel picturas vel fabulas
spectet. Arist. 7 Pol. cap. 17.
. The Heroic Achievements of the Ancients are the properest subjects for
Painting, Statuary and Sculpture; those let a Prince look on continually, those
read; for Statues and Pictures are ^ragments of History always before our Eyes.

After the Vices of the Court have been (as far as possible) thus corrected,
and the Princes humor and inclinations well known, let his Master or Tutor
endeavor to lead him to some great undertaking, sowing in his Mind Seeds of
Virtue and honor so secretly, that when they are grown it will be difficult to
judge whether they were the product of Nature or Art. Let them encourage Virtue
with Honor, brand Vice with Infamy and Disgrace, excite Emulation by Example;
these things have a great Effect upon all Tempers, though more on some than
others. Those who are of a Generous disposition, Glory influences most; the
Melancholy, Ignominy; the Choleric, Emulation, the Inconstant, Fear; the
Prudent, Example; which is generally of most efficacy with all, especially that
of Ancestors; for often what the Blood could not, Emulation does perform. It Is
with Children as young trees on which you must Graff a branch (as I may say) of
the same Father, to bring them to perfection. These Grafts are the famous
examples which infuse into Posterity the Virtues of their Ancestors and bear
excellent fruit. That therefore it may be conveyed as it were through all the
Senses into the mind, and take deep Root there, should be the particular
industry of his Instructors, and consequently they are not to be proposed to
the Prince in ordinary Exhortations only or Reproofs, but also in sensible
objects. Sometime let History put him in mind of the great Achievements of his
Ancestors, the glory of which eternized in print may excite him to imitate
them. Sometimes Music (that sweet and wonderful Governess of the passions)
playing their Trophies and Triumphs, will be proper to Raise his Spirits.
Sometimes let him hear Panegyricks recited upon their Life, to encourage and
animate him to an Emulation of their Virtues, now and then reciting them
himself, or with his young Companions Act over their Exploits as upon a stage,
thereby to inflame his mind: for the force and efficacy of the action is by
degrees so imprinted on him that he appears the very same whose person he
represents: Lastly let him play the part of a King amongst them, receive
petitions, give audience, ordain; punish, reward, command or marshal an Army,
besiege Cities and give Battle. In experiments of this nature Cyrus was
educated from a little Boy and became afterward an eminent General. But if
there be any inclinations unbecoming a Prince discernible in his Infancy, he
should have the Company of such as are eminent for the opposite Virtues to
correct the Vices of his Nature; as we see a straight Pole does the Crookedness
of a tender Tree tied to it. Thus if the Prince be covetous, let one naturally
liberal be always at his Elbow; if a Coward, one bold and daring; if timorous,
one resolute and active; if Idle and Lazy, one diligent and industrious: for
those of that Age as they imitate what they see or hear, so they also easily
copy their Companions Customs. To Conclude, in Education of Princes too rough
Reprehension and Chastisement is to be avoided as a kind of Contempt. Too much
Rigor makes men mean spirited; nor is it fit, that he should be servilely
subject to One Man, who ought to Command all. It was well said of King
Alphonsus, Generous Spirits are sooner corrected by words than blows, and love
and respect those most who use them so.

Youth is like a young horse that the Barnacle ^urts, but is easily governed by
the gentler Bit. Besides that men of generous Spirits usually conceive a secret
horror of those things they learnt through fear; on the contrary have an
inclination and desire to try those Vices which in their Childhood were
prohibited them. Affections too much confined (especially such as nature endows
a Prince withal) break out at last into Despair, as Exhalations hard bound
within the Clouds, into Lightning. He that imprudently shuts the gates upon
natural inclinations, is the occasion of their attempting to get through the
Windows. Some allowance is to be made to humane infirmity, which is by some
innocent diversions to be raised to Virtue: this method they took who had the
Care of Nero's Education Quo facilius lubricam Principis aetatem, si ver^tutem
asper nare^ur, voluptatibus concessus, retineret. Tac. 13. ann.
. The Tutor ought to chide the Prince in private, not before Company, least he
rather grow obstinate when he sees his Vices are public. In these two Verses
of Homer is very aptly contained how a Prince ought to be instructed how to
obey: Advise, Command him, and what is good suggest
He will obey when for himself it is best.
Hom. 2. Il.

EMBLEM III.
BY the industry of some ingenious and careful hand one while watering,
another time defending it from the injuries of Wind and ill Weather, the Rose
grows, and as the Bud opens un^olds its little leaves into a circular form: A
flower strangely pretty, but which flatters only the Eyes, and is subject to so
many casualties, that in this its infinite delicacy it is by no means secure.
The very same Sun which saw it bloom, sees it also whither, and that without
any other benefit, than just showing the World its beauty; it brings so many
months* Labor to nothing, nay oftentimes wounds the very hand that planted it;
nor could it be otherwise than that such rank tillage should produce thorns* Of
Coral (a Sea shrub) there is quite another account to be given; for that growing
under Water, and continually tossed by the Violence of Waves and Tempestuous.
Winds becomes so much the harder and more beautiful; nay, then first is it more
illustriously useful, when it has underwent the rage of so many Elements. Such
contrary Effects arise from the different manner of growing of this Shrub, and
that Flower in respect of softness and hardness. The same happens in the
Education of Princes, for they who are brought up so tenderly and closely that
neither the Sun, Wind or other Air can come to them, but that of perfumes,
prove too delicate and little fit for Government; they on the contrary are
strong and able who inure their Bodies to laborious Exercises. It Is also
convenient to use ones self to Cold from our infancy as a thing of great
advantage to health, and that will enable us to undergo Military duties Est
etiam utile s^atim ab ineunte aetate frigoribus assuescere, hoc (...) tum ad
v^letudinem, tum ad munera milita^ia commod^ssimum est. Arist. Pol. 7. cap 17.
. By these Exercises Life is prolonged, by Voluptuousness and Luxury shortened*
a Vessel of Glass formed with a blast of the Mouth, is with a blast broken;
Whereas one of Gold wrought with a hammer resists a hammer. It Is no matter if
he that lives a private and retired Life, be delicate; but one who is to
support a Kingdom, as Atlas the Heavens, upon his shoulders, had need be strong
and robust. A Commonwealth has not occasion for a Prince only for a show, but
in the Field also and in time of War, and in Scripture we find an effeminate
King mentioned as a kind of divine punishment I will give Children to be their
Princes, and B^b^s to rule over them, Isa^. 3. 4.
. The advantage or disadvantage of this different Education was visible in the
Two Kings, John the Second, and Ferdinand the Catholic, one of which had his
at Court, the other in the Camp; that among Women, this among Soldiers; that
entering his Government seemed to sail into a strange Gulf, and leaving the
Helm, committed the guidance of it to his Ministers; this was neither ignorant
of, nor unacquainted with Government; but knew how to Rule even in another's
Dominion, and force Subjects to their Duty; that was contemned, this honored
and esteemed by all; that ruined his Kingdom, this advanced to a Monarchy.
'Twas upon this consideration that King Ferdinand Surnamed the holy, was
desirous to breed his Sons, Alphonso and Ferdinand, Soldiers. And what else was
it rendered the Emperor Charles really great, as well as titularly so? was it
not his continual Travels and indefatigable Labors? Nor had Tiberius any other
thoughts when he designed his Sons Germanicus and Drusus for the Army, chiefly
for these four Reasons; that they might accustom themselves to War; gain the
Soldiers hearts; be free from the Debauchery of the Court; and Lastly that
himself might live in more security when both his Sons commanded his Legions Vt
suesceret, Militi^e, s^udiaque exercitui pararet, si^ul juventutem urban^ luxu
lascivientem medus in castris haber^ Tiberi^s, s^que (...) rebatur, utroque
filio legiones obtinente. Tac. 2. ann.
.

He that lives in a Camp, by the many Experiences he has there, spends his time
to advantage; the Courtier utterly loses his in Riot, Ceremonies and trifling
Diversions. At Court a Prince studies more how to set off his Body than improve
his Mind. And though this latter is rather to be regarded, yet Ornaments of the
Body, and a comely Presence should not be wholly neglected. For those captivate
the Eyes, as this does the Eyes and Soul. God himself seem^d pleased with the
shape and proportion of Saul And when he stood among the people, he was higher
than any of the people from the shoulders upwards, 1 Samuel 10. 22.
. Ethiopians and Indians in some parts choose them Kings, whom the most
Majestic Mien recommends: as the Bees do the biggest among them, and that of
the most shining Color. People Judge of a Prince's Actions by his Presence,
and think him the best who is the Comeliest. Galba's very Age, says Tacitus,
was ridiculed and s^orn'd by those who were used to Nero's blooming Youth Ipsa
^tas Galbae and irrisui and fastidio erat assuetis juventae Neronis, and
Imperatores forma and decore corporis, (ut est mos vulgi) comparantibus. Tac.
1. Hist.
. A handsome face joined with a kind of Majesty increased Vespasian's fame
Augebat famam ipsius decor oris cum quadam Majestate. Tac. 2. Hist.
. Thus Beauty strikes the Eyes, and through them wounding the Soul engages Men's
affections and good opinions: it is a particular privilege of nature, a pleasing
Tyrant over the affections and a certain Sign of a well disposed mind; and though
the holy Spirit for more security advises us not to judge by exteriours, yet do
we seldom find a generous Soul in a deformed body Commend not a Man for his
beauty, neither abhor a man for his outward appearance. Eccles. 11. 2.
.

'Twas a saying of Plato's, that as a Circle cannot be without a Center, so
neither can external Beauty Consist without interior Virtue. King Alphonsus
therefore well advised to have a Prince Married to a handsome Woman, that says
he, the Children may be beautiful as a Prince's ought to be, that they may be
above other men.

The Lacedaemonians fined their King Archiadinus for Marrying a little Woman,
however Wittily he excused himself by saying, of two Evils he had chose the
less. Beauty of the Body is the image of the Soul and picture of Goodness
Species enim corporis simulacrum est men^is, figuraque probitatis. Ambr. 2. de
vir.
. It nevertheless happens sometimes that nature intent upon outward perfections
forgets inward which are more desirable. So it was with Peter the Cruel, whose
savage and rough disposition Nature had concealed under an agreeable Person.
Pride and Ostentation of Beauty easily discompose the Modesty of Virtue; a
Prince therefore should not esteem feminine and affected Charms, which serve
only to inflame another's Lust; but those which usually accompany true Virtue;
for the Soul is not to be adorned with the Beauties of the Body, but this
rather with the Ornaments of the Soul.

A Commonwealth requires a Prince perfect in mind rather than One so in Body;
though twere a great ornament if he were eminent for both. Thus the Palm is
singularly commended, as well for the neatness of its Trunck and Leaves, as for
the pleasant Fruit it bears, and other excellent qualities of it, being a Tree
so useful, that Plutarch says the Babylonians reckoned 360 Virtues in it;
these, I conceive, the Complement of the Celestial Bridegroom points at, Thy
stature is like to a Palm Tree Cant. 7. 7.
. For by these words he would commend not only the beauty of his Spouse's Body,
but the endowments also of her Soul, signified by the Palm as it is an Emblem of
Justice and Fortitude: of Justice because its leaves hang in aequilibrio; of
Fortitude upon the account of the admirable strength of the Boughs, which the
more weight they are loaded with, the more forcibly grow up. It Is further an
Hieroglyphick of Victory, because in the Games and Exercises of the Ancients,
the Victors were crowned with Branches of it. The Cypress was never esteemed at
this Rate, however flourishing and green it always is, lifting its self even up
to heaven in form of an Obelisk: for that its beauty is mere outside without
any good quality inherent in it; it is of a slow growth, bears useless fruit,
bitter leaves, has a strong smell and taste, a thick and melancholy shade. To
what purpose is a Prince of a delicate Body, if he only satisfies the Eyes, and
does not discharge his Duty. There needs no more in him than an agreeable
harmony of parts to show a generous and well disposed mind, into which
afterward Art and Industry may inspire Motion and Vigor, for without that
every Action of a Prince will be dull, and rather cause Ridicule and Contempt
than procure Authority with his Subjects. But sometimes these extraordinary
Endowments of the Mind don't render a Prince amiable, as when the State is
distempered and inclined to Change its Government, which Ferdinand King of
Naples had once Experience of; nay sometimes Virtue her self is unhappy, and a
good Prince often odious; as on the other side his Vices taking, as were those
of Vitellius Studia exe citus raro c^iquam b^^is ar^ibus quaes^ta, perinde ad
fuere quam ^uic per ignaviam. Tac. 3 Hist.
. But for the generality humane Will embraces that which is most perfect; and
it will be therefore a Prince's interest as well in public as private
Exercises, to study by them to supply and perfect Nature, to strengthen himself
in his Youth, to create generous Thoughts in his Mind, and in all things to
please the People: for the Person of a Prince should not only court the Minds
but Eyes too of his Subjects Pers^^^ Principis non solum animis, sed etiam
oculis servire debet ^^vium. Cic. Phil. 8.
, who choose to be governed by him in whom they see most Ornaments of Nature
and Virtue. Our most Catholic King, Your Highness's Father, by the pains he
took and resolution he showed at a Chase, by his Valor and Dexterity in
Military Exercises, his singular Carriage and Vivacity in public Actions, what
vast Reputation did he gain? How beloved by their Subjects, and esteemed by
Foreigners were the Kings Ferdinand the holy, Henry the II, Ferdinand the
Catholic, and the Emperor Charles the Vth. in whom Beauty and a just
Proportion of Body were joined with Industry, Virtue and Valor. But those
Exercises are better learnt by Conversation and in Company, where Emulation
enflames the Mind and awakens Industry. For this reason the Kings of the Goths
Educated the Sons of the Spanish Nobility in their Courts, not only to lay an
Obligation upon those Families, but that their own Sons might have their
Education and learn the Sciences with them. The same those of Macedon used to
do H^c cobors, velut seminari^m Ducum, Praesect^ u^que apud Macedonas fu^. Curt.
, among whom the Court was as it were a seminary of Commanders. Which good
Custom is either utterly forgot, or at least has not been hitherto in Vogue in
the Court of Spain. 'Twere otherwise the properest means in the world to engage
the Hearts of foreign Princes, to institute Seminaries of that Nature, to which
their Sons might travel and be instructed in Arts and Sciences worthy, a
Prince. From which also this advantage would arise, that the King's Sons would
insensibly be accustomed to the Manners and Genius of those Nations, and meet
with a great many among them, who with singular Affection and Gratitude for so
good an Education would return the Obligation with their Service. To this E^d
King Alphonsu^ surnamed the wise, in the Second of his excellent Laws, called
the Partidas, has drawn up a Catalogue of those Arts and Duties it is proper
for Kings Sons to be exercised in.

For all these Exercises nothing renders a Prince so fit as Hunting, for herein
Youth exerts it self, becomes strong and active; that gives occasion to use
Military Arts, to view Ground, measure the time, know when to expect, when
assault and strike, what use to make of Accidents and Statagems. There the
sight of the Blood of wild Beasts, and the trembling Motion of their Limbs as
they expire, purge the Affections, fortify the Mind, and inspir^generous
Thoughts, such as despise Fear and Danger: for the Solitude of a Wood and that
Silence which usually is kept in Hunting raise the Thoughts to glorious Actions
Nam and sylvae solitudo, ipsumque illud silentium quod venationi da^ur, magna
cogitationis incitamenta sunt. Plin. lib. 1. Epist. ad Cor. Tac.
.

Lastly all those Exercises are to be used with that moderation that they
render not the Mind either wild or stupid; for the Mind is no less hardened
with too much Labor, and made as it were callous and insensible, than the
Body. It Is therefore not convenient to fatigue both at the same time, for these
Labors have contrary Effects; that of the Body is a hindrance to the Mind,
that of the Mind to the Body Nam simul mentem and corpus laboribus fatigare non
convenit, quon^am by labores contrariarum rerum efficientes sunt. Labo^ enim
corp^^is menti est impedimento, mentis ^utem corpori. Arist. Pol. 8. C. 4.
.

EMBLEM IV.
KNowledge is necessary in a Governor, in a Subject natural Prudence is
sufficient, nay sometimes mere Ignorance. In the Idea and Contrivance of a
Building the Brain is employed, in the Fabric it self the Hand labors.
Command proceeds from Understanding and is quick-sighted, Obedience is ignorant
generally and blind Praeest autem naturae, qui valet intelligentia praevidere.
Arist. Pol. 1. C^p. 4.
. He is by nature a Commander who is most intelligent. Whereas others are so
either by Succession, Election or Conquest, which depend more upon Fortune than
Reason. Wherefore we shall reckon the Sciences among the politic instruments
of Government: so Justinian; Imperial Majesty, says he, ought to be Armed as
well with Laws as Arms, that the time of peace and War may be equally well
governed Imperatoriam Majestatem no^ solum armis decoratam, s^d etiam legibus
oportet esse armatam, ut u^rumque tempus and belli and pacis recte possit
gubernari. Ju^^. in prooem. Inst.
. This it is you have exhibited in the present Emblem under the figure of a
Cannon levelled for the better aim, by a quadrant, the Emblem of the Laws and
Justice; for this should so manage Peace and War that what is Just be always in
View, and Reason be the mark at which all things be aimed by the medium of
Wisdom and Prudence. It Is related of Alphonsus King of Naples and Arragon, that
being asked upon this Subject, which he was most indebted to, his Arms or
Studies? he made answer: That 'twas from his Books he had learnt Arms and the
Laws of Arms Ex libris se arma, and armorum Iura didi^isse. Panorm. lib. 4.
.

But some one may perhaps think these Ornaments of Learning are more convenient
for the body of a Commonwealth, which the word Majesty seems to import, than
the Prince, who being distracted with Public Business, cannot apply himself to
them; that 'twere sufficient to make Learning flourish, if he entertained and
patronized Men of Ingenuity; which the same Emperor Justinian did, who though
himself utterly illiterate, with the Assistance of Men of the greatest
Learning, whose Conversation he had, got the Reputation of an eminent
Governor. For my part, though I make no difficulty to grant that even men of no
literature may sometimes govern a Commonwealth well, as we have instances in K.
Ferdinand the Catholic, and many others; yet this only holds in those Genius's
that Experience has improved, or at least such as are endowed by Nature with so
acute a Judgment that they can determine any thing without danger of Error
E^si prudentia quosdam impetus a natura suma^ tamen perficienda doctrina est.
Quint. lib. 12. C. 12.
. But though Prudence may have some efforts from Nature, yet it is to be perfected
by Learning; for to know well how to chose what is good, and reject the contrary,
a general knowledge is almost necessary, and a long observation of Examples
both past and present, which is not perfectly to be attained without labor and
study; nothing therefore is so necessary to a Prince as the Light and Ornament
of good Literature; For for want of the knowledge of these things (says K.
Alphonso) a Prince will be obliged to take to his assistance, one who does
understand them; and he may experience what King Solomon said* That he who
entrusts his secret with another, makes himself his slave, whereas he who can
keep it himself, is Master of himself, which is infinitely requisite in a
Prince. For the Office of a King requires a great understanding and that too
illustrated with Learning, for without doubt, says K. Alphonso in the same Law,
no man can acquit himself of an Office of such importance as this, at least
without great understanding and wisdom, whence he who scorns the favors of
Knowledge and Education, will be scorned by God, who is the Author of them.
Other Sciences have been divinely infused into many; none but Solomon was ever
inspired with Politickss. For Tilling ground, Agriculture prescribes certain
Rules; the Art of Taming wild Beasts has also its Methods, but it is easier to
command any Animal than Man, it is necessary therefore that he be endued with an
extraordinary portion of Wisdom who has Men to govern Omni animali facilius
imperabi^ quam homini, ideo sapientissimum esse oportet, qui hominibus regere
ve^it. Xenoph.
. The different Customs and Dispositions of Subjects can^t without considerable
Sagacity, Application and Experience be discovered: and consequently no man
requires Wisdom more than a Prince Null^s est, cu^ sapientia magis conveniat,
quam Principi, cujus doctrina omnibus debet prodesse subditis. Veget.
. It Is that makes Kingdoms happy, Princes feared and reverenced. Then was
Solomon so, when the World became acquainted with his. Knowledge renders a
Prince more formidable than Power Wisd. 5. 26.
. A wise King, says the holy Spirit, is the upholding of the people: But an
unwise King destroys them Eccl. 10. 3
. All which shows how barbarous the Opinion of the Emperor Licinius was, who
cried out upon the Sciences as a public Plague, Philosophers and Orators as
Poison to a Commonwealth; nor does that of the Goths appear less absurd, who
found fault with Athalaricus's Mother for instructing him in good Letters, as
if he was thereby rendered incapable of public Business. Silvius Aeneas had
quite other sentiments of them, when he said they were Silver in the
Commonalty, Gold in the Nobility, and in the Prince Jewels. Alphonso of Naples
upon hearing once a certain King say, That Learning did not become a Prince;
Replied immediately, That Is spoke rather like a Beast, than a man Eam vocem
b^vis esse, non ^ominis. Panorm. lib. 4.
. Well therefore said K. Alphonso lib. 16 c. 5. p. 2.
, That a King ought to be assiduous in Learning the Sciences, for by them he
will learn the Office of a King, and know better how to practice it. Of Julius
Caesar it is related that he would have the Statuary form him, standing upon a
terrestrial Globe with a Sword in one Hand, in the other a Book with this
Motto, Ex utroque Caesar; thereby intimating that as well his Learning as his
Arms was instrumental in getting and preserving to him the Empire. Lewis the
XIth of France did not esteem Learning at this rate; for he would not permit
his Son Charles the 8th. to apply himself to it, because he found himself
thereby so obstinate and opinionative as not to admit the Counsel of any, which
was the reason why Charles proved afterward unfit to govern, and suffered
himself to be led by the Nose by every one, not without great Dishonor to
himself and detriment to his whole Kingdom. Extremes therefore in that as in
all other things are to be avoided, supine Ignorance breeds Contempt and
Derision, besides it is exposed to a thousand Errors; on the other side
excessive Application to Studies distracts the Mind and diverts it from the
Care of Government. The Conversation of the Muse is very pleasant and
agreeable, and no o^^ would without Reluctance exchange it for the Fatig^^ and
Trouble of Audiences and Consultations. Alphon^^ the Wise knew the Causes of
Earthquakes, but could not regulate the Commotions of his Kingdoms; the
Celestial orbs his Ingenuity penetrated, yet knew no^ how to defend the Empire
offered, and Crown haereditary to him. The Sultan of Egypt upon his fam^ sent
Ambassadors to him with very considerable presents, in the mean time almost
all the Cities of Castil^ revolted. Thus it usually happens; Princes too much
addicted to the Studies of Wisdom advance their Reputation among Foreigners,
and lose it with their Subjects. Their Learning is admired by those, to these
sometimes prejudicial; for Men of mean parts are generally better Governors
than men of ingenuity Hebetiores quam acutiores ut plurimum melius Rempub.
administrant. Thucyd. lib. 3.
. A Mind too intent upon Speculation is usually slow in Action, and fearful in
Resolution, for of necessity many different and contrary Reasons must occur to
such a Person, which either wholly take away or obstruct the liberty of his
Judgment. If an Eye looks upon Objects by the Sun's Light reflected, it clearly
and distinctly sees them as they are; whereas if it be fixed directly against
the Sun's Rays, it is so dazzled with too much luster, that it cannot so much as
distinguish the Colors and Figures of them. It happens thus to Wits; those who
too eagerly apply themselves to the Studies of Wisdom and Learning are less fit
for public business. Right Reason never judges better than when free and
disengaged from the Disputations and Subtilties of the Schools; nor without
Reason did the wise K. Solomon call that the worst of Travails which himself
had tried I gave my Heart to search out by Wisdom, concerning all things that
are done under Heaven: This sore Travail has God given to the Sons of Men, to
be exercised with* ^^^les. 1. 13.
. For there are some of the liberal Sciences, which to have a superficial
Knowledge of is commendable, but to make them ones whole Business, and desire
to attain a Perfection in them, very prejudicial Sunt enim quaedam ex
liberalibus scientiis quos usque ad aliquid discere honestius sit, penitus vero
illis tradere atque usque ad extremum persequi velle, valde noxium Arist. lib.
8. Pol.
. Wherefore it is very convenient that prudence moderate a little that desire of
knowledge which is usually most vehement in the best Wits; as we read
Agricola's Mother did, who cooled the heat of her Sons Mind, when in his youth
he seemed to follow the study of Philosophy more eagerly than was allowable for
a Roman and Senator sed in prima juventa studium Philosophiae acrius quam
concessum Romans ^c senat^ri hausisse, ni prudentia matris incensum ac flagrantem
animum coercuisset. Tac. in v^t. Agr.
. As in Vices so in Learning there is excess Retinuitque quod d^fficillimum est
ex sapientia modum. Ibid.
: and this is as hurtful to the mind as those to the Body. It will suffice
therefore for a Prince to taste the Arts and Sciences as 'twere en passant; some
practical knowledge of them will be more for his advantage, particularly those
which relate to the Affairs of Peace and War, taking as much out of them as
will suffice to illustrate his understanding and regulate his Judgment, leaving
the honor of being excellent in them to his Inferiors; let him pass only his
leisure hours in this Noble Exercise as Tacitus says Helvidius Priscus used to
do Ingenium illustre altioribus studiis juvenis admodum dedit, non ut plerique,
ut nomine magnifico orium velaret, sed quo firmior adversu^ fo^tuita Rempub*
^apesseret. Ta^. lib 4. Hist.


This granted, those are not always to be esteemed the best Tutors for Princes,
who are most eminent for Learning and Knowledge, for they are generally too
great Lovers of Retirement and studious Idleness, Strangers to conversation,
Men of no Resolution and very unfit for the management of weighty Affairs. But
those rather who are Learned and Experienced Politicians, who besides the
Sciences can teach a Prince the Art of Government.

The first thing to be instilled into a Prince is the fear of the Lord which is
the beginning of wisdom Psalm. 100. 10.
He who adheres to God is very near the fountain of all Sciences. To know what
is human only, is Ignorance, the daughter of Malice, which is the ruin of
Princes and Commonwealths.

Another necessary qualification in a Prince is Eloquence, that pleasing Tyrant
over the Passions, that sweetly allures Men's Wills to a Submission to its
Commands. That great Prophet Moses knew of what Consequence this was, and
therefore when he was sent into Egypt to conduct the Children of Israel thence,
made this excuse to God that he was slow of speech and of a slow Tongue O my
Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy
Servant: I am but slow of speech, and of a slow tongue. Exodus 4. 10.
. And God took this for a reason, and accordingly to encourage him, promised to
assist his Lips and put into his Mouth the Words he should speak to Pharaoh I
will be in thy mou^h, an^ teach thee what thou shall say. Exodus 4. 12.
. What did not Solomon promise himself from his Eloquence? I shall be admired,
says he, in the sight of great men. When I hold my Tongue they shall bide my
Leisure, and when I speak they shall give good Ear unto me: if I talk much they
shall lay their hands upon their mouth Wisd. 8. 12.
. And certainly if naked eloquence has power so strangely to captivate an
audience, what cannot it do if armed with Regal Power, or clothed with Purple?
a Prince who cannot speak his Mind without the assistance of another (a fault
Nero was first observed to be guilty of Primus ex iis, qui rerum po^iti essent,
Neronem alienae facundi^ eguisse. Tac. 1. Ann.
) is rather a dumb statue, and deserves not the Name of a Prince. History is
the Mistress of Political truth Verissmam disciplinam, ^^ercitationemque ad
politicas actiones, Historiam esse. Polyb. lib. 1.
, than which nothing can better instruct a Prince how to rule his Subjects. For
in that, as in a clear Mirror, appears the Experience of former governments,
the prudence of Predecessors, and the Souls of many Men collected into one
Hominum multorum m^ns in unum collecta. Greg. Naz. ad Nicom*
. History is like a faithful Counselor, always ready and at hand. Of Law the
Prince need only study that part which relates to Government, turning over such
Laws and Constitutions of his Kingdom as were by right Reason dictated or by
Custom approved.

Let him not spend much time in the study of divinity; for how dangerous that
knowledge and power in conjunction is, England has experienced in K. James,
it is enough for a Prince to persevere himself in the faith and have about him
devout and Learned Men able to defend it.

Lastly Judicial Astrology has been the ruin of many Princes; for that desire
of knowing future events is in all Men vehement, especially in Princes, for
they promising to themselves great Authority if they can be looked upon as
equal to the Gods, or do any thing above the common reach of Mankind, follow
these superstitious and odious Arts: nay sometimes arrive to that degree of
madness, to ascribe all things to second causes, and utterly destroy divine
providence by imputing all to chance and divination, whence it happens that
while they attribute more to Chance and Fortune than human Prudence or
Industry, they are too remiss in their Designs and Actions, and oftener advise
with Astrologers than their Counselors.

EMBLEM V.
THE Sciences have bitter Roots, though the Fruit be sweet; for this reason our
Nature at first has an Aversion for them, and no labor appears so harsh as
what must be employed on their first Rudiments: What Pains and Anxiety do they
cost Youth? Upon which account* and because Studies require assiduous
Application, a thing very injurious to Health, and which the Business and
Diversions of the Court don't permit; the Master should be industrious in
inventing several means to qualify this troublesome Institution by disguising
it under some pleasant Game, that the Prince's mind may imbibe what he is to
learn insensibly. For instance, to teach him to read he may use this
contrivance; let there be made four and twenty small Dice, on each of them be
engraven a Letter of the Alphabet, then let some Children play, and he win who
at one Cast throws most Syllables, or an entire Word. These little Victories
and Entertainments will take off much of the difficulty of this Task, for it is
far more hard to play at Cards, which, however Children presently learn. Now,
to teach the Prince to Write in a way as short, I would have the Letters
engraven of a thin Plate, this put upon Paper, and him to go over these Tracts
of Characters, as so many little Furrows, with his Hand and Pen; especially
exercising himself in those Letters of which the rest are framed. Thus, while
he Attributes to his own Wit and Industry, what is only the effect of this
artificial Plate, he will by degrees be more pleased with those Labors. Nor is
skill in Languages less necessary for a Prince; for always to use an
Interpreter, or read only Transactions, is a thing too liable to deceit, or at
least the truth thereby loses much of its Force and Energy: Not to mention that
it cannot but be very hard for a Subject not to be understood by him, from whom
he is to expect Comfort in his Afflictions, to have his Miseries relieved, and
to be gratified for his Services. This moved the Patriarch Joseph, when he was
made Commander over Egypt; before all things to apply himself to learn the
Languages most in use there, and which he did not understand Psa^m 8^. 6.
. What Love and Esteem does at this day, the Emperor Ferdinand the Third's
Skill in Languages procured him, being able to answer every one in his own
Native Idiom; but a Prince is not to be instructed in this by way of Precepts,
for they confound the Memory; but rather great Persons Sons of Foreign
Countries should be taken into his Family, by whose familiar Conversation he
may in a few Months time, and that with a little Pains, and as it were by way
of Diversion, make so great a Proficiency, as to be acquainted with the
Language of each of them.

That he may also know the use of Geography and Cosmography, (without which
Policy is in a manner blind) it were not amiss to furnish and hang his Chamber
with Tapistry so artificial wrought, as to represent a kind of General
Description or Map of the Universe, that is, the Four Quarters of the World,
and most Remarkable Countries, together with the more celebrated Rivers,
Mountains, Cities, and other place of Note. By the same contrivance may the
Lakes be disposed, that he may fancy he sees in them, as in your Sea-Charts,
the Situation of the whole Sea, its Ports and Islands. In Globes and
Mathematical Spheres, he may see the Extent of both Hemispheres, the Motion of
the Heavens, the Sun's Course, its Rising and Setting, the Vicissitude of Days
and Nights, and all this by way of Discourse and Divertisement, leaving the
Mathematicians subtle way of arguing and demonstrating to the Schools. It will
suffice in Geometry, if he know how to Measure distances, take Altitudes and
Depths with Instruments. It Is withal necessary that he learn Fortification, and
accordingly for Instructions sake may raise Forts of Clay, or some such
material, with all sorts of Trenches, Breast-works, Pallisadoes, Bastions, Half
Moons, and other things necessary for the Defense of them; then he may Assault
and play upon them with little Artillery made for that purpose. But to fix
those Figures of Fortification more firmly in his Memory, 'twould be for his
advantage to have the like artificially contrived in Gardens, cut in Myrtle, or
any other Greens, as you see in the present Emblem.

Nor ought a Prince be ignorant how to Marshal an Army; to that end let him
have Soldiers of all sorts, Foot and Horse, Cast in Metal; of these he may
Compose an Army, distribute them into Regiments, Troops; Companies, in
imitation of some Model, which he may have before him for that purpose. Plays
ought always to be in imitation of things to be afterward practiced with more
seriousness I^aque ludi magna ex part imitationes esse debent earum rerum, qu^
se^io postea obeunde. Arist. Pol. 7. c. 17.
. By this means he will insensibly, and without any trouble take to these Arts;
and when the light of Reason is risen in him, be more capable of a perfect
knowledge of them by Conversation of Men of Learning A wise Man will hear, and
will inc^ease Learning; and a Man of understanding shall attain unto wise
Counsel. Prove. 1. 5.
, and such particularly as have been conversant with, and exercised in Affairs
both of Peace and War, who will discover to him the Causes and Effects of each
particular. For the knowledge of those things is at this time more useful,
easier acquired, and fatigues the mind least Eccl. 39. 3.
.

Let no one look on these Exercises to be of no consequence in Education of
Kings and Princes Children; for Experience, the best Mistress, teaches us, That
Boys learn many things of their own accord, which they had not attained by the
Instruction of a Master without much difficulty* Much less should any imagine
that the variety of these methods rather prejudices than promotes Education. If
to tame and master an Horse, so many Instruments are necessary, as the Bit,
Bridle, Rains, Barnacle, and those too of different sorts; if so many Precepts
are needful as have been written upon this Subject, what Care and Industry
shall we think sufficient to form a perfect Prince, who is not only to Command
the ignorant Vulgar, but even the Masters of the Sciences? To govern Men is not
the Gift of Nature, but rather of Experience and Speculation; it seems to be
the Art of Arts, the Science of Sciences, of which never any one will attain
the Perfection Mihi videtur ars artium and scientia scientiarum, nominem*
regere, animal tam varium and multiplex. Greg. Naz. in Apolog.
. I am not ignorant, Sir, the Person your Highness has for a Master, is for the
happiness of our Monarchy, so well furnished with these Arts and Sciences, that
he cannot but in a short time bring your Highness to a considerable Perfection
in them: However these Advertisements, I could not omit pursuing my design in
this Treatise to be beneficial as far as possible, not only to your Highness,
but all other Princes now and hereafter.

EMBLEM VI.
THE heavenly Bridegroom has made use of the Body of this Emblem in the Book of
Canticles to express the Ornaments of his Brides Virtues Thy Belly is like an
heap of Whea^, set about with Lilies, ^ant. 7. 2.
: and the same the Lilies that crowned and perfected the Pillars of Solomon's
Temple, seem to allude to And upon the tops of the Pillars was Lily-work, so
was the Work of the Pillars finished. 1 Kings 7. 22.
, as do those which beautified the Candlestick of the Tabernacle Exodus 25. 31.
. This put me upon designing in the present Emblem, to represent by the Wheat,
the Sciences; by the Lilies, the Arts and polite Learning which they ought to
be graced with. Nor am I without Precedent or Authority, for Procopius long ago
by Ears of Corn understood Disciples Spicae nomine, at ego quidem sentio,
discipulorum caetum intellexit. Procop. in c. 17. Isa.
, as our Bridgroom by Lilies, Eloquence His Lips like Lilies dropping sweet
smelling Myrrh. Cant. 5. 13.
. In effect, what is Polite Learning, but a kind of Crown of the Sciences?
Cassiodorus calls it the Diadem of Princes Diadema eximium impretiabilis
not^^ia literarum, per quam dum veterum providentia discitur, regalis dignitas
augetur. Cassi. 12. Var. 1.
; and the Hebrews used to crown some parts of it with Garlands: And this I take
to be signified by the Poets Laurels. The Hoods, and Girdles, and colored
Silken Tufts, by which the Hebrew Doctors were distinguished. The Sciences
should possess the Center of the Soul; gentile Learning be instead of a
circumference; the knowledge of one, without the Ornaments of the other, is a
kind of ignorance; for it is with the several parts of Learning, as with the
Nine Muses, who joining hands, make a Circle in their Dances. How tiresome a
thing is Philosophy if too severe, and not qualified, and made agreeable by
Polite Literature and Humanity? These are therefore necessary for a Prince to
temper the harshness of Government with their pleasantness; for it is from that
they have the name of Humane. A Prince should not be altogether singular, but
have something common to the rest of Mankind; he should discourse with them of
different sorts of Studies, and that with a courteous and obliging Carriage;
it is not Royal Grandeur which confounds us, but extravagant indiscreet Gravity;
as it is not the Light, but the extreme Dryness of the Sun that dazles our Eyes;
it is therefore very proper that Political Science be decked and embellished with
the Liberal Arts, which cast as great a Luster as Rubies in a Crown, or
Diamonds in a Ring. Nor do such Arts sit amiss upon Majesty, as require the
assistance of the Hand as well as Mind; nor will it in the least derogate from
a Prince's Authority, or obstruct his Management of Public Affairs, to allow
him some intervals of leisure for his Diversion Nec cuiqua^ judici grave, au^es
studiis honestis and voluptatibus concessis impartire. Tac. 14. Ann.
: Thus Mark Anthony took a delight in Painting; Maximilion the Second, in
Sculpture; Theobald, King of Navarre, in Poetry and Music; with which last
Philip the Fourth, the present King of Spain, your Royal Highness's Father,
diverts himself as often as disingaged from the Cares and Concern the Government
of two Worlds oblige him to. In this Exercise the Spartans too instructed their
Youth; and in general all of this Nature are recommended by Plato and
Aristotle, as very beneficial to a Commonwealth. And though it is true, the Mind
should not repose its whole satisfaction in them, Policy however requires a
Prince sometimes to use them, the People being strangely pleased to see their
Prince's thoughts thus diverted, and not always intent on the contriving their
Slavery; 'twas on this account Drusus's Debaucheries were acceptable to the
Romans Nec luxus in juvene adeo displicehat: hoc potius intenderet, diem
^difica^i^nibus, noctem conviviis ^^a^ere^; quam solus and nullis voluptati^us
avocatus, (...) and malas curas exercer^t Tac. 3. Ann.
. There are only two things to be observed in the Use and Exercise of these
Arts; one is, that they are to be practiced not in public but privately, as
the Emperor Alexander Severus used to do, though excelled by none in Music,
whether Vocal or Instrumental. The reason of this is, we are apt to think it a
contemptible sight to see the Hand which bears a Scepter, and Rules a Kingdom,
filled with a Fiddle-stick or a Pencil; which we still look upon to be a
greater fault, if the Prince be of an Age, wherein one would think the care of
the Public ought to take him off these private Pastimes: It being our Nature
not to accuse a Prince of loss of time, if he is idle or does nothing, but
rather blame him for spending it at these Diversions. The other Caution is,
that he lay not out too much time upon them, or be desirous to excel others
Haec tria ad discipl nam spectari ^portet, at medium tenea^ur, ut fieri (...)
ut deceat.
, least he take more pride in this vain excellency than in well-governing the
Commonwealth; a thing Nero was guilty of, who abandoned the Reins of his Empire
for those of a Chariot, and valued himself more upon acting the part of a
Comedian in the Theater than of an Emperor of the World.

This Abuse which Princes sometimes fall into by having a greater Esteem for
these Arts, than the Science of good Government. Virgil elegantly Censures in
these Verses: Let others better Mold the running Mass
Of Metals, and inform the breathing Brass,
And soften into Flesh a marble Face.
Plead better at the Bar, describe the Skies,
And when the Stars descend, and when they rise.
But Rome, it is thine alone, with awful sway,
To rule Mankind, and make the World obey;
Disposing Peace and War thine own Majestic way.
To tame the Proud, the fettered Slave to free,
These are Imperial Arts, and worthy thee.
Dryden's Virg. As for Poetry, though it be a part of Music, Accents and
Rhimes having the same effect in that, as Notes in in this; though that be the
far nobler Exercise of the two; for this is of the Hands, that of the Brain.
The one designed merely to divert, the other to instruct with Diversion;
notwithstanding it seems by no means proper for a Prince; it is strange
Sweetness being a great obstacle to Masculine and Noble Actions; for when the
Mind is once captivated with the Charms of its Thoughts and Conceptions, as the
Nightingal with the Melody of her Voice, it never leaves of, and grows so keen
with Poetical Niceties, that its Edge is soon turned and blunted against the
hard and rugged Troubles it must necessarily meet with in Government Vile autem
exerciti^m putandum est, and Ars, and Discipl^na, quae^ (...) co^pus, aut
animam, aut ment^m liberi hominis ad ^sum, and ^pem vi^tutis inutilem reddant.
Arist. Pol. 8. cap. 2.
. Hence it also follows, That if a Prince takes not the same delight in Ruling
as Composing, he will in all probability least regard this greatest concern,
wholly neglect or abandon it to the care of others; as did John II. King of
Arragon, who squandered away his time in the Study of Poetry, and sent for
Persons eminent for it from the remotest Countries, till his Subjects tired
with his Negligence, put a stop to this useless Diversion of his by an open
Rebellion. Nevertheless, since Poetry is so much in Vogue at Courts, and does
much refine and polish the Mind, a Prince will hardly escape the Charge of
Ignorance, if he have not some smattering in it. He may therefore be allowed
some time for that Study, I mean as much as shall be thought fit to quicken his
Parts, and improve his Judgment; for how many excellent Poems have by this
means come from the Pens of such as have governed in Church and State, with
general Applause and Approbation? There are abundance of Princes given to the
practice of Chemistry, which is indeed a very noble Diversion, and discovers
many wonderful Effects and Secrets of Nature; but for all this, I would advise
a Prince not to meddle with it Be not curious in unnecessary matters; for more
things are showed unto thee, than men understand. Eccl 3. 24.
, for Curiosity will easily lead him from thence to Alchymy; or at least, under
the pretext of Simple Distillation, he will have a fancy to six Mercury, and
make Gold and Silver; things which the most precious of our time is thrown away
upon to no purpose, and certain, wasted for uncertain Treasures. It Is a
Phrenzy, that naught but Death can cure, to make one Experiment after another,
and not consider that it is impossible to find a better Philosopher's Stone,
than a good and prudent Economy. It Is of this, and of Commerce, not of
Chemistry, this Sentence of Solomon is to be understood, [ That nothing is
richer than Wisdom] What is richer than wisdom that works all things? And if
prudence work; who of all that are is a more cunning workman than she? Wisd.
8. 5.
. 'Twas by this kind of Traffic with the Inhabitants of Tarsis and Ophir, the
same Solomon got his vast Riches; for which he had never prepared so many and
great Fleets, exposed to so many and great Hazards at Sea, if he could have
saved the labor with a Crucible. It is likely, that he who could speak well of
all things And he spoke of Trees, from the Cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even
unto the Hysop, that springs out of the Wa^l. 1 Kings 4. 33.
, who was endued by God with a Supernatural Knowledge, should never find out
this Secret also, or actually have used it, had it been feasible? Besides, it is
not credible that God will ever permit it, for thereby in probability an end
would be put to all Commerce, which is maintained by nothing so much, as by a
Species of Money common to all the World, and that made of some scarce and
precious Metal.

EMBLEM VII.
THE Affections are born with us; Reason comes not till many Years after, when
they are already possessed of the Will, and this deluded with a false
appearance of good submits to them, and owns no other Empire but theirs, till
Reason recovering strength by Time and Experience, takes upon it the Right of
Government it had by Nature, and begins to make Head against the Tyranny of our
Appetites. This Light usually rises later in Princes, because the Delicacies of
the Court which they are used to, render their Affections more prevailing;
besides, that their Courtiers strive generally to get their Favor, which they
know, rather depends upon the Will than Reason; hence all use the art of
Flattery, and make it their business to engage that, but cast a Cloud on this.
A Prince ought therefore to be well acquainted with these Arti^ices, and arm
himself not against his own Passions only, but all such Persons as would abuse
them to govern him. This is a great and general Negligence in those who
undertake to form Princes Minds. Useless and unfruitful Weeds which grow among
Corn, we spend time in ^^adicating; yet suffer vicious Passions and
Inclinations, that wage War with Reason, to grow. To cure a Prince's Body, many
Galens are always ready, the Mind often has scarce one Epictetus; though this
is subject to no less Infirmities than the Body, and those so much worse, as
that is more excellent than this. If its countenance were visible, and we could
discover in it its ill and distempered Affections, we should pity the Condition
of many, we at present take for happy Men, whom that feverish Heat of depraved
Appetites so miserably preys upon. If the Hearts of Tyrants could be opened,
one might see Bruises and Wounds Si recludantur tyrannorum mentes, posse aspici
laniatus, and ictus, quando, ut corpora verberibus, ita saevitia, libidine,
malis consultis animus dilaceretur. Tac. 6. Ann.
. Alas! What Tempests of Confusion and Distraction is a Mind in that Condition
racked with? Its Light is all obscured, his Reason so disturbed, that all
things appear to him far different from what they really in themselves are.
Hence proceeds that variety of Judgments and Opinions in the World; hence few
weigh things aright, but pass a different estimate according to the light by
which they see them. For it is with the Affections, as with Tellescopes, which
at one end magnify, at the other diminish Objects. The Crystals are the same,
the Objects nothing altered; this only is the difference, that the visual Rays
falling in^ at one end, are dilated from the Center to the Circumference, and
consequently diffuse themselves and multiply more; whereas at the other end
they are contracted from the Circumference to the Center, and so represent
Objects considerably less: Such is the difference between these two ways of
looking upon things. At the same time (though in different Kingdoms) the two
Infants, James, the Son of James the Second, King of Arragon; and Alphons^ Son
of Dionysio, King of Portugal, had in view the Succession of their Fathers
Crown. But see in how different a manner, the first against his Father's Will
refused to accept; the other contrary to the Laws of Piety, by force of Arms
attempted to snatch it from the Head of his. One considering the vast Cares and
Dangers of Government* bid adieu to the World, and preferred a Monastic Life
as the more quiet and happy; the other looked upon Life without Sovereignty to
be burdensome and unprofitable, and had more respect to his Ambition than the
Law of Nature. This looked upon the Circumference of the Crown which bordered
with Flowers, was an agreeable sight; that considered rather the Point and
Center of it, whence the Lines of Labor and Care are drawn. All Men propose
something that has the appearance of good, as the end of their Actions Omnia
namque ejus, quod speciem boni praefert gratia omnes agunt. Arist. Pol. 1. Cap.
8.
; but because we are deceived in the knowledge of this Good, hence proceeds our
Error. The greatest thing imaginable when in our own Power appears little and
inconsiderable, in others great and magnificent. Our own Faults we are not
sensible of, those of others we easily discover. Other Men's defects seem like
Giants, ours scarce so big as Dwarfs. Nay, further, we know how to new-name
Vices, and give them the Color of Virtue: Ambition we call greatness of Mind;
Cruelty, Justice; Prodigality, Liberality; Rashness, Valor. In short, few can
with Prudence distinguish Honesty from its contrary, what is profitable from the
prejudicial Pauci prudentia, honesta a deterior^bus, uttlia ab noxiis
discernunt. Tac. Lib. 4. Ann.
. It Is thus, we are deceived when we look on things by that end of the
Prospective, which Passions and Inclinations stop. I know nothing but Benefits
that are to be looked upon through both ends; those we receive, ought to appear
great to us; those we confer, little. This was King Henry the Fourth's Custom;
nay, he seldom so much as remembered Kindnesses he had done others; on the
contrary, those he had received, he never let slip out of his Memory, being
always careful the first opportunity to repay them as a Debt. A Prince ought
not to imagine that a Courtesy is, as it were, a Mark of Slavery on the Person
gratified: I should not call that Generosity but Tyranny rather, and a kind of
Traffic for Men's Affections, which the Prince buys at the price of Favors, as
they do Slaves for Money on the Coasts of Guinea. He who does a good Office
should not think he lays an Obligation; he who receives it ought to think
himself obliged. In a word, A Prince should imitate God Almighty, who gives to
all Men liberally, and upbraideth not James 1. 5.
. In undertaking and carrying on Wars; in procuring and establishing Peace; in
Injuries as well offered as received, let him always use the same Crystal of
right Reason, through which he may see every thing equally without disguise or
^allacy. That Indifference and Justice in giving a due Estimate of things,
becomes none more than a Prince, who ought to perform the same Office in his
Kingdom, as the Tongue of a Balance in a pair of Scales, and agreeable thereto
pass a true and sincere Judgment of all things, that his Government may be
just, whose Balance will never hang even, if the Passions have place, or all
things be not weighed in the Scale of right Reason. Upon this account Masters
ought to come with singular Ca^e and Industry to instruct the Prince's Mind,
discovering those Errors of the Will, and the Vanity of its Persuasions, that
free and disengaged from Passion, he may pass an unprejudiced Judgment on every
thing. For, really if we thoroughly examine the fall of so many Empires, so many
Revolutions in States, such a multitude of Kings and Princes deposed and
murdered, we shall find the first Origin of these misfortunes to have been,
the Passions having shaken off their Obedience, and their refusal to submit to
Reason, whose Subjects they are by the Law of Nature. Nor is any thing more
pestilent to a Commonwealth than those irregular Appetites, or the particular
Ends which every one, as he pleases, purposes to himself. I don't hereby
contend to have these Passions wholly razed or extinguished in a Prince, for
without them he would be absolutely incapable of any generous Action; Nature
having not furnished us with Love, Anger, Hope, Fear, and other the like
Affections to no purpose; for though these are not Virtues, they are however
their attendants and means, without which they are neither attainable nor
practicable. It Is the abuse only, and inordinacy of them, I disapprove of;
those are to be corrected, that a Prince's Actions be not guided by Passion,
but his whole Government by Prudence and Policy. Those things which are common
to other Men, are not allowable in a Prince Regum est ita vivere, ut non modo
homini sed ne cupiditati quidem serviant. M. Tull. in Orat. Syll.
. Charles the Fifth, if at any time he would indulge Anger or Indignation, did
it in private and remote from Company, not publicly when he represented the
Person and Majesty of an Emperor; for in this Capacity, a Prince is rather the
Idea of a Governor than a Man, and rather his Peoples than his own Man. Nothing
is then to be determined out of Affection, but all things examined by the Rule
and Standard of Reason; not by his Inclination, but Art. A Prince's Behavior
should be rather Political than Natural; his designs proceed rather from the
Heart of the Commonwealth than his own. Private Persons usually make their own
Interest and Advantage the Measure of their Actions: Princes are to have the
Public Good in view. In a private Man to conceal his Passions, is looked upon
to be a sign of too close and reserved a Temper; in Princes even Policy
sometimes require it. There appeared not the least Symptom of Passion in
Tiberius, when Piso presented himself to him, after having, according to his
order, dispatched Germanicus, which occasioned no small Jealousy in Piso Null^
magis exterritus est, quam quod Tiberium sine miserat^ne, sine ira obstinatum,
^lau^umque vidit, ne quo affectu perumperetur. Tac. 3. Ann.
. He who Commands many, should with many vary his Affections, or if possible
appear free from them (...) est sapere, qui, ubicumque opus sit, ani^^um possis
flectere. Terent.
; endeavor in the same Hour as occasions differ, to seem Severe and Courteous,
Just and Merciful, Liberal and Frugal Tempo^i ap^ari decet. Sen. in M^d.
. Tiberius was a great Master Hand f^cile q^i despexerit illa, in c^gni^^sne
mentem Principis; (...) misouit ^ra and ^lementiae signa. Tac. 3 Ann.
of this Art, whose Mind it was not easy to discover; he knew so well how to
mingle the Symptoms of his Anger and Satisfaction. A good Prince commands
himself, and serves his People; but if he neglect to break, or conceal the
natural Tendency of his Mind, his Actions will be always uniform, whence every
one will presently see the Scope of his Designs, contrary to one of the
principal Maxims of Policy; which for this very reason recommends variety of
Methods in Acting, that the Prince's Designs may not be known. Nor is it by any
means safe for him to let others discover his Nature and Inclinations. For
there is no easier access to his Mind than that, which it is necessary he keep
free and reserved, if he desire to have his Kingdom well-governed. For as soon
as his Ministers have once discovered his Inclination, immediately they flatter
him, and encourage the same in themselves. If in any thing the Prince be
obstinate and opinionative, they are so too, and now nothing but perverseness
governs. But if it shall be at any time the Prince's Interest to court the
Peoples Favor and Applause, let him rather so behave himself, that what the
People like or dislike, he may seem to have a natural Inclination or Aversion
for. Aristotle puts Bashfulness in the number of the Passions, denies it to be
a Moral Virtue, because a fear of Infamy, and therefore seems incompatible with
a great Man, whose Actions being all squared by the Rule of right Reason, he
has nothing to be ashamed of. According to St. Ambrose, however it is a Virtue
which regulates our Actions Pulchra virtus est verecundia, and suavis gratia,
quae non solum in factis, sed etiam in ipsis spectatur sermonibus, ne modum
praetergrediaris lo^uendi, ne quid indecorum sermo resonet tuus. St. Ambros.
; by which I conceive, he means that ingenuous and liberal Shame, or rather
Modesty, which like a Bridle restrains us from the Commission of any
ignominious or unseemly Action, and is a token of a good Genius, and no small
argument that there remain in that mind some Seeds of Virtue, though not yet
deeply rooted. I am apt to believe Aristotle speaks of another vicious and
irregular Bashfulness, which is an obstacle to Virtue; we may say of both, as
of Dew, which falling moderately nourishes and refreshes Corn; but when thick
like small Snow, burns up and kills it. No Virtue can be freely exercised, when
this Passion has once prevailed, nor is any thing more Pernicious to Princes,
for this reason above all, that it has the appearance of Virtue, as if it were
in a Prince a sign of Candor, (and not rather of a mean and abject Spirit) not
to be able to deny, contradict, reprehend, or correct without a Blush. Such as
these straiten themselves too much in their Grandeur, are in a manner afraid of
Shadows; and what is worse, make themselves Slaves to those they ought to
govern. Besides, how unbecoming is it to see in their Faces the color of
Shame, which none but Flatterers, Liars, and in general, all profligate Persons
ought to be stained with, and for them so to forget themselves as to be
governed and cozened by others. Whatever is asked, they voluntarily offer, and
give without any respect to Merit, vanquished merely by Petitions. They readily
subscribe to others Counsels and Opinions, though they don't approve them, and
had rather seem Conquered than Victors; which is the foundation of the most
considerable Miscarriages in a Commonwealth; shamefacedness by no means becomes
Princes, who should always appear with a serene and steady Aspect Quorundam
parum idonea est verecundia rebus civilibus, quae firmam frontem desiderant.
Seneca.
. Princes therefore should make it their whole business to correct this
Passion, and moderate their natural Bashfulness with Valor and Constancy, with
a Resolution not only of Mind, but outward Demeanor to resist Flatteries,
Lies, Frauds, and Malice, that they may correct and amend them, and preserve a
Royal Integrity in their Words as well as Actions. Which the Two Kings, John
the Second, and Henry the Fourth, having neglected to do; what wonder if their
Authority and Crowns were brought into such dangers? Farther, in curing this
Passion, no small Discretion is necessary; for whereas other Vices, like
Thorns, are to be utterly extirpated, this is rather to be pruned, and the
superfluity cut off; that part of Shame left which guards Virtues, and
regulates Men's Manners and Actions; for without this restraint, the Prince's
Mind will be quite unruly; and except he now and then reflects upon Infamy and
Indecency, he will follow the force of his Passions, and precipitate himself;
especially when there is Power to countenance them. If by good Arts modesty is
scarce to be preserved, what will be the consequence if we wholly abandon that
Vix artibus honestis retinetur pudor. Tac. 14. Ann.
? 'Twas then Tiberius gave himself to all manner of Vice and Tyranny, when he
had cast off Shame and Fear, and followed only his own Humor Postremo in
scelera s^^ul ac dedeco^a prorupit, postquam remoto pudore and ^etu, suo tantum
^ngento utebat^r. Tac. 6. Ann.
. Hence Plato said, That Jupiter, if at any time apprehensive of the Ruin of
Mankind, dispatched Mercury for the Earth, to distribute Justice and Modesty
among M^n, by which they might prevent their Destruction. Commiseration and
Pity is a Passion not less dangerous in Princes, than the other; for when it
has once prevailed in the Mind, neither Reason nor Justice perform their
Offices. For out of an extravagant fear of disobliging any by Reprehension or
Correction, they neglect to apply Remedies to their Subjects Crimes, and suffer
many to go unpunished. They are deaf to the Peoples Clamours, nor do Public
Calamities affect them, while at the same time they are sensibly touched with
pity for three or four Men who were the Promoters of them. They feel themselves
disordered at other Men's Crimes; and accordingly for fear of any trouble upon
their account, choose to connive at, or pardon, rather than punish them. This is
a weakness of Judgment, and defect of Prudence, to be remedied with time; but
that with the same Moderation as we mentioned of Bashfulness, that part only of
Commiseration is to be retrenched which so enfeebles the Mind, that it cannot
act with Vigor and Constancy. Reserving that compassionate Affection peculiar
to Princes Principatu^ enim proprium est mise^eri. St. Chrysostom.
where right Reason, without hazarding the public Security, persuades. Both
these Passions, as well that of Bashfulness, as Commiseration, are corrigible,
and to be subdued by some contrary Actions, which may remove that too great
tenderness and imbecility of Mind, and delivering it from those servile Fears,
render it capable of more masculine Actions. If a Prince now and then
endeavors (though in matters of the least consequence) to keep his Mind firm
and resolute, and considers his Power and Quality, he will easily afterward be
able to do the same in Affairs of greater moment. All Is done, if he can but
once acquit himself generously in it, and make himself fear^d and respected.
There remain two other Passions considerably prejudicial to Youth; Fear and
Obstinacy. Fear, when a Prince is so timorous, and in all things diffident of
himself, that he dares neither act nor speak. Never approves any Action of his
own ^ears to appear in public, and Love's rather solitude and retirement. This
proceeds generally from an effeminate and retired Education; as also for want
of Experience, the only Remedy for this Distemper; that is, the Prince should
use himself to give Audience to his Subjects as well as Foreigners; often
appear in Public that he may learn to know Men, and in general all other
things as in themselves they are, not as his Imagination, or Master has painted
them. Let there be always free access to his Apartments for those worthy
Persons, that are his Father's Chamberlains, and all other Courtiers that are
eminent for Valor, Ingenuity, and Experience. Which Custom was observed in
Spain till the time of Philip the Second, who cautious of his Son Charles's
underhand-dealings, abolished that Custom of free Access and Communication, and
so declining one Inconvenience, fell into another equally dangerous to Princes,
for so is it to be too much abstracted from Conversation; for this usually
prompts them to rely too much upon some particular Favorite.

Lastly, Obstinacy arises partly from Fear, partly from natural Slothfulness,
when a Prince will not Act at all, but resolutely rejects all Instructions that
are given him. That Coldness of Mind is to be cured by the Fire of Glory and
Incentives to it, as faults in Horses are usually corrected by the Spur. The
Prince therefore is to be led gradually into the way, and the Progress he makes
to be commended; though at first those Commendations be above his merit, and
only for forms sake.

EMBLEM VIII.
IN the Unicorn Nature has shown a piece of admirable Skill and Providence, in
placing Anger's Weapon exactly between the Eyes. It Is absolutely necessary to
have both Eyes intent upon that Passion, which so imperiously tyrannizes over
our Actions, and the Motions of the Mind. The same Flame that lights it, blinds
it, and it is differenced only by its short continuance from Fury and Madness. A
Man in a Passion is not the same as before, for he is thereby as it were put
beside himself Non desiderat fortitudo advocatam iram. Cicero.
. Valor has no need of it; for what were more silly, than for this to require
Aid from Anger, a thing stable from one inconstant, faithful from one false,
sound from one diseased Quid enim ^^^ltuis est, quam hanc ab i^ acundia petere
praesidium, rem stabilem ab in^erta, fidelem ab infida sanam ab aegra? Senec.
? It Is not this fickle pettish Passion obtains Victories, triumphs over
Enemies, nor is that really Courage that is without Reason provoked. In a word,
no Vice is more unbecoming a Prince, than that; for to be angry, supposes
contempt, or an injury received; nor is any thing so disagreable to his Place
and Office, in as much as nothing so obscures the Judgment which should in a
Governor be serene and clear. A Prince that is exasperated, and passionate upon
any slight occasion, gives his Heart into the Hands of the Person who provokes
him, and is subject to his pleasure. If not a wrinkle in a King's Coat can be
disordered without offense, what will it be if he suffer any one to disturb his
Mind? Anger is a kind of Moth which Purple breeds and nourishes. Pomp engenders
Pride; Pride, Passion; and Impatience is as it were a Propriety of Power. The
Sense of Princes is something too delicate a Looking Glass which the least
breath sullies, a Heaven that with the least Vapor is clouded and breaks out
into Thunder. A Vice that generally seizes great and generous Spirits; as the
Sea, however vast and powerful, is with the least blast of Wind raised into
horrid Disorders and Tempests, with this only difference, that they are of much
longer continuance in Princes Minds than in the Sea; especially if their Honor
be concerned, which they imagine it is impossible to retrieve without Revenge.
What a trifling piece of incivility was that, Sancho, King of Navarre, put upon
Alphonsus the Third, after the Battle of Arcos, in returning without taking
leave of him? Which however this so highly resented, that he could never forget
it, or rest till he had got him out of his Kingdom. The Anger of Princes is
like Gunpowder, which no sooner takes Fire, but has its effect; the Holy
Spirit calls it the Messenger of Death The W^ath of Kings is as Messengers of
Death. Prove. 16. 14.
; and barely on this account 'twere sufficiently reasonable to curb and
restrain it. It Is very indecent for one in Authority to submit to this Passion.
Let Princes remember that nothing is put in their Hands for a Scepter, with
which they can hurt. And if sometimes a naked Sword is carried before Kings,
it is in token of Justice not Revenge; and then it is carried in another's hand
to intimate that between Anger and Execution there ought to intercede a
Command. The public Safety depends on Princes, which will easily be in danger,
if they hearken to so rash a Counselor, as Anger. Who can escape its hands?
For it is like a Thunderbolt when it comes from Supreme Power. And because,
says King Alphonso, Anger is stronger in a King, and more dangerous than in
others; in that he can more readily satisfy it, he ought to be more prepared to
curb and correct it L. 10. tit. p 2.
. If Princes in a Passion could look upon themselves, they would find a
Countenance unbecoming such Majesty, whose Tranquillity and agreeable Harmony,
both of Words and Actions, ought to please rather than terrify, to acquire Love
rather than Fear. A Prince therefore should quench the Heat and Violence of
Anger; if he cannot do so, at least to defer the Fury and Execution of it for
some time: For as the same King Alphonso has said, A King ought to keep in his
Anger till it is over, this will be of great advantage to him, for so he will
be able to judge truly, and act justly in all things L. tit. 5 p. 2.
. The Emperor Theodosius experienced this in himself; and for this reason
enacted a Law, That Capital Punishments should not be executed till thirty Days
after Sentence passed. Which Tiberius had before him decreed, though for only
ten Days, and without giving the Senate power to revoke the Sentence once
pronounced Idque vitae spatium damnatis prorogaretur, sed non senatui libertas
ad poenitendum erat. Tac. 3. Ann.
. Which indeed had been commendable, if his design had been to make room for
Pardon, or give time for a second hearing of the Cause. But Tiberius was a Man
of too much Cruelty and Rigor to give that Indulgence N^que Tiberius interjectu
temporis mitigabatur. Tac. 3. Ann.
It was the Counsel of Athenodorus to Augustus Caesar, to determine nothing in
a Passion till he had repeated the Twenty four Letters of the Greek Alphabet.

Since then, Anger is a short Madness, directly opposite to mature
Deliberation; there is no better Antidote against it than prudent Reflection;
that the Prince be not too hasty in Execution, before he has had Council to
examine a matter thoroughly. King Ahasuerus, when his Queen Vashti refused to
come at his Command, though he had reason to think himself contemned, and
highly resented the Affront, yet would not be revenged till he had first called
a Council, and taken the Advice of his Noblemen Esth. 1. 2.
. To talk of an Injury received, inflames Anger more; hence that of Pythagoras,
Stir not Fire with a Sword, for Motion increases the Flame; nor is there any
more effectual Remedy for Anger than Silence and Solitude. By its self it
insensibly consumes and wears off; whereas the most softning Discourse is often
like the Water Smiths use to make their Fire burn fiercer. Farther, Anger has
its seat in the Ears, or at least keeps watch there; these therefore a Prince
is to secure, that they be not too ready to hear ill Reports, that may enrage
him Let every man be swift to hear, slow to ^^ak, flow to wrath. James 1. 19.
This I imagine was the reason the Statue of Jupiter Cretensis had no Ears,
because they do more mischief to Governors than good. However, I think them
necessary for Princes, provided they be cautious and ruled by Prudence, and let
not themselves be moved at the first hearing of every trifling Story. Anger is
to be commended when kind^ed by Reason, and moderated by Discretion; without
such as that, there can be no Justice Nunc Iras^i ^onven^, justitiae (...).
S^ob. Sermon. 20.
. Too much Indulgence gives license to offend, and makes Obedience bold. To
endure all things with content, is ig^orance, or shows a servile Temper of one
who has a ^ean Opinion of himself. To continue in Anger when it is to punish
Offenses, or make Examples of such as affront Regal Authority is no Vice, but a
Virtue, and by no means derogates from Mildness and Clemency. Was any one more
meek than David Lord remember David and all his Afflictions, Lat. Verse. (...)
suetudinis ejus. Psalm. 131. 1.
, a Man after God'^ own Heart I have found David, the So^ Iesse, a Man after
mine own heart. Acts 13. 22.
? So mild in Vengeance, in Anger so moderate; that when he had Saul, his
greatest Enemy, in his power, was satisfied with cutting off the Skirt of his
Robe, and even that afterward repented of And it (...) to pass afterward that
David's heart smote him, because he had (...) off Readiness Skirt* 1 Samuel 24. 5.
. Nevertheless with severity did he revenge the Injury King Hamm did to his
Ambassadors. David had sent them to comfort the King for the Death of his
Father, but he groundlesly suspecting they came rather to spy out the State of
his Kingdom, sent them away with the one half of their Beards shaved off, and
their Garments obscenely cut off in the middle. David, a Man otherwise very
peaceable, could not brook this Affront, but made War against him, and all the
Cities of his Kingdom which he took, he utterly demolished; and the People that
were therein, (to use the Scripture^ words) he brought forth and put them under
Saws and (...) Harrows of Iron, and under Axes of Iron, and (...) them pass
through the Brick-kiln 2 Samuel 12. 31.
This may see^ to be Cruelty, and an Excess of Anger, to any one^ that knows
not that the Wounds injuries make, (...) fometimes to be so cured, as not so
much as (...) should be left. Artaxerxes threatened Fire and Swo^^ to some
Cities, if they obeyed not an Edict he had pu^^lished, resolving, if they
refused, to make so severe (...) Example of their Contempt and Disobedience, as
should extend to Brutes as well as Men Esth. ^ 24.
. The most (...) God taught us this piece of Policy, when with the (...) most
Rigor, yet without prejudice to his Infinite M^^cy, he punished the Syrians
Army for blasphemou^^ calling him the God of the Hills Because the Syrians have
said, the Lord is the God of the Hills, but he is not God of the Valleys;
therefore will I deliver this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord, 1 Kings 20. 28.
. The Supreme Authority and Power of Princes makes a part of a Commonwealth, so
that they cannot put up Affronts and Injuries at all times.

That Anger too is praiseworthy in Princes, and profitable to a State, which
kindled by Incentives of Glory, elevates the Mind to difficult and noble
Enterprises, for without it nothing extraordinary, nothing great, can be
undertaken, much less perfected and accomplished. That, that is it which
nourishes the Heart of generous Spirits, and raises it above its self to
despise Difficulties. The Academicks called it the Whetstone, Plutarch the
Companion of Virtue. But particularly, in the beginning of his Reign, the
Prince ought to lay aside Anger, and forget past Injuries; as Sancho, Surnamed
the Brave, did when the Succession of the Crown of Castile fell to him. With
Government, a Prince changes as 'twere his Nature, why should he not also his
Affections and Passions? 'Twere an Abuse of Government to take Revenge of one
who already acknowledges himself your Subject. Let the Person offended think he
has Satisfaction in having got Authority over him, who before injured him.
Fortune could not give him a nobler kind of Revenge. So Lewis XII. King of
France, thought, and therefore when some persuaded him to revenge the Injuries
he had received, while Duke of Orleans, he made answer, That it did not become
the King of France to revenge the Quarrels of the Duke of Orleans.

Particular Injuries done to his Person, not Dignity, a Prince ought not to
vindicate with his utmost Power; for though they seem inseparable, yet it is
convenient to make some Distinction between them, least Majesty become odious
and too formidable. To this tended that of Tiberius, when he said, That if Piso
had committed no other Crime, but the rejoicing at Germanicus's Death, and his
grief for it, he would revenge those Injuries done him as a private Person, not
as a Prince, and in a public Capacity Nam si legatus officii terminos,
obsequium erga Imperatorem exuit, ejusdemque morte, etc. luctu meo laetatus
est, odero: seponamque ^ domo mea and privatas inimicitias, non Principis,
ulciscar. Tac. 3. Ann.
. On the other side, those done to his Dignity or Public Station, he ought not
to vindicate as a private Person, so as in a transport of Passion to think his
Honor and Reputation lost, except he have immediate Satisfaction, especially
when it were fitter to be deferred; for Anger should not be a Motion of the
Mind, but of the Public Good and Advantage. King Ferdinand, the Catholic,
undoubtedly had this before him, when the King of Granada refused to pay him
Tribute, as his Ancestors had done; and withal, insolently sent him word, that
they were long since dead; that in his Mints they labored not to Coin Silver
or Gold, but Forge Swords and Lances Marian. Hist. Hisp. lib. 24. cap. 16.
. Ferdinand concealed his Resentment of this Liberty and Arrogance for a time,
and made a Truce with him, deferring Revenge till his Affairs were more quiet
and settled; in which he consulted more the Public Good, than his own
Particular Affections A Fool's wrath is presently known; but a prudent Man
covers shame. Lat. Verse. Injuriam dissimulat. Prove. 12. 16.
. Nor is it less prudent to dissemble Anger, when one has reason to presume,
that a time will come when it will be for our disadvantage to have shown it.
For that reason, King Ferdinand, the Catholic, though highly affronted by the
Grandees of his Kingdom; yet, when he abdicated that of Castile, and retreated
into Arragon, very discreetly concealed that Indignation of Mind, took no
notice of the Injuries he had received, but showed himself friendly and
affectionate to all, as if he then foresaw he should be sometime restored to
his Kingdom, as indeed it afterward happened. A generous Mind hides its
Resentments of Injuries, and strives not by the impetuousness of Anger, but
rather by noble Actions to smother them; the best certainly, and a truly
heroical kind of Revenge. When King Ferdinand, the Holy, besieged Sevil, a
certain Nobleman reproached Garcias Perez de Vargas for wearing a waved Shield,
which was not allowed his Family; he then pretended to take no notice of the
Affront, till the Siege of Triana, where he fought with so much Valor, that he
brought his Shield back stuck with Darts, then returning to his Rival, who was
then in a secure Post, and showing him the Shield, You have reason, says he, to
think much that I wear this Shield, that expose it to so many Dangers; without
doubt no one deserves it beyond your self, who would take so much care to
preserve it. Those ordinarily bear Affronts most patiently, who are the least
subject to give them; nor is it a less Virtue to Conquer this Passion, than an
Enemy. To kindle a Prince's Anger is no less dangerous than to set Fire to a
Mine or Petard; and though it be done in our own behalf, it is prudence to
moderate it, especially if against Persons in Power: for such Angers generally
fall on the Author's own Head. This was the reason the Moors of Toledo took so
much pains to pacify King Alphonso the Sixth's Wrath, against the Archbishop of
that place, and the Queen, who had taken without his Order, their Mosque from
them. From which I draw two Precepts: One is, that Ministers ought, when the
Duty of their place requires them, to tell the Prince of any thing that may
create Distaste or Anger, to represent them in the most softening terms
imaginable Cuncta tamen ad Imperato^em in mallius relata. Tac. 4. Ann.
; for it often happens that an incensed Mind ve^ts its Fury upon the Person who
gave the first Information of the thing, however Innocent he may be, however
good his Design was in doing it. The other is, That they endeavor not only to
moderate Princes Anger, but cover and conceal it handsomely. Those Seraphims
(Ministers of Love) which stood above God in Isaiah's Vision, with two Wings
covered his Face, and with two covered his Feet Isaiah 6. 1.
. Least his angry Countenance should strike such as were guilty of any fault
with such Terror and Despair, that they would wish the Mountains to fall on
them, rather than see the Face of an avenging God Revel. 6. 16.
. The heat of Anger is no soone^ cooled, but Princes are sorry and vexed to
have had any Witnesses of it, or Spectators of its Effect, for both are equally
disagreeable to the Dignity of a King. And God himself for this reason turned
Lot's Wife into a Pillar of Salt Genesis 19. 26.
.

EMBLEM IX.
IT IS to its own damage that Envy opposes the Trophies and Glory of Hercules.
To what end does it attempt to bite his sharp pointed Club, but to make its
Jaws bloody? In short, it is its own avenger. It seems to me like a Sword which
from the same Blood it spills gathers Rust, and by that is afterward eat up.
All other Vices take their rise from some appearance of Good, or from Pleasure;
on the contrary this proceeds from an inward Grief and Dissatisfaction at the
good of another. Other Vices their Punishment follows, this it even preceeds.
Envy sooner exerts its Fury upon its own Bowels Envy is the rottenness of the
Bones, Prove. 14. 30.
, than on the Honor of its Neighbor. It Is the shadow of Virtue; he that would
avoid that, must fly the light of this. The Owl's Sight being by Nature strong
enough to bear the Sun's Rays, is probably the reason other Birds hate and envy
her: Whereas would she be confined to her private Places, and conceal her self
in the darkness of Night, she need not fear their Persecutions. Between Equals
there is seldom Emulation; when one's Fortune, the other's Envy increases. Men
are naturally apt to look with an ill Eye on upstart Happiness, and desire to
reduce the Fortunes of none more than those whom they have once seen upon the
Level with themselves Insita mortalibus natura, recentem aliorum soelicitatem
aegris (...) intr^spicere, modumque f^tunae a nullis magis exigere, quam quos
in (...) videre. Tac. 2. Ann.
. Envy is like the Tare which never seizes Corn till it be considerably grown,
and its Fruit begins to ripen But when the Blade was sprung up, (...) brought
forth Fruit, then appeared the Tares also, Matthew. 13. 2^.
. He must therefore fly Fame, Dignities, and honorable Employments, that would
not be exposed to Envy's Darts. A mean Fortune is least dangerous Ex
mediocritate fortunae pauciora pericula sunt. Tac. 14. (...)
. Regulus in the midst of Nero's Cruelty lived secure, because, says Tacitus,
his Gentility was of a small standing, and his Estate inconsiderable Quia nova
generis claritudine, neque invi^^osis opibus erat. Tac. (...)
; but this fear would be unworthy a generous Beast. Others envying us, shows we
excel them, but to be absolutely free from Envy is a very ill sign. It Is
assuredly better to endure it, than be looked upon by all with indifferency.
Envy is the Sting of Virtue; as the Thorn preserves the Rose, so does that
Virtue. This would easily be neglected, were there none malicious and
detracting. Many has Emulation advanced, many Envy made happy. That Emulation
of Carthage raised the Roman Glory, as that of Francis, King of France, did the
Fame of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. 'Twas Envy gave the Roman, nay, the
Universal Church to Sixtus Quintus, thence came all his fortune. There Is
nothing better in this Case than Scorn, and being always endeavoring to mount
higher till the envious Man's Eyes fail him, and he lose sight of you. The
Shadow of the Earth reaches the Moon, that lowest of the Celestial Orbs, so
near the Elements, and overcasts its Splendour; the higher Planets it does not
in the least injure: The force of the Sun, when at height, scatters and dispels
Clouds. Where Is great Inequality, there is no room for Envy, and consequently
this is the only remedy against it. The more expeditiously a Man advances
himself, the less will he be exposed to Envy. No Smoke comes from a Fire soon
lighted. Whereas, while Merits wrestle, as it were, with one another, Envy
grows and takes up Arms against the Person preferred. Pride and
Superciliousness are things which in good Success provoke Envy, and stir up
hatred. On the other side, Modesty quells it; for no one envies him as happy,
who looks not upon himself as such. For this reason, Saul immediately after his
being anointed King, betook himself to his House; and to show he was not
exalted with Royal Dignity laid aside the Scepter for a time, and set his Hand
to the Plough 1 Samuel 10. 11.
. There^s yet another Remedy, which is not to enlarge one's Fortune at Home,
but in a Foreign Country; for it is very obvious for one, who before knew
another to be of a mean Extraction, but now sees him in a high degree of
Dignity, to envy him this happiness; this Evil insinuates its self more by the
Eyes than Ears Vt effugiamus n^men invid^^e, quod verbum ductum est, a nimis
intuend^ fortunam alte^i^s. C^e. in (...).
. Many eminent Men have declined Honors to avoid being envied. The Consul
Tarquinius voluntarily chose Exile to escape the sight of this Fury. Valerius
Publius set his own Houses on Fire, because their Magnificence procured him
Envy. Fabius abdicated the Consu^ship, saying, Now I hope Envy will cease to
trouble the Fabii Non ^ni^ poterimus utta esse invidia spoliati opibus, and
i^la senatoria patesta^e. Cic. ad At.
. They were however in my opinion in the wrong, for this is rather to put the
Sword in the Enemies hands, and give further occasion to Envy; which when it
has once undertaken to persecute any one, never leaves him, till it has driven
him to the extremity of Misery. The Sun casts no Shadows so long as it is in the
Zenith; but as it declines and comes nearer us, they proportionably increase
and grow longer. In the same manner Envy pursues him with the greater force,
who is near ruin, or begins to fall; and as it generally lodges only in mean
spirited Persons, is always afraid he should raise himself upon his Legs again.
Even after Daniel was thrown among the Lions, Darius thought him not yet secure
enough from those who envied him the King's Favor; and so fearing more Men's
Envy than the Wild Beasts Cruelty, he sealed the Stone which was laid upon the
Lions Den with his own Signet, and with the Signet of his Lords, that no
mischief might be done him That the purpose might not be changed concerning
Daniel. Lat. Verse. Ne quid fieret contra Danielem, Dan. 6. 17.
. Sometimes to avoid Envy, and its Inconveniences, 'twere advisable to embark
those in the same Fortune, whose Emulation may be feared Thus the Remora, which
sticking to the outside of the Ship stops its Course, loses its strength when
taken in Peculi^riter miratum, quo mode adhaerens ^enuisset, nec idem polleret
in navigi^^ recep^us. Plin, lib. 32. c. 1.
.

Envy does not always gnaw lofty Cedars; sometimes she tires her Teeth, and
bloodies her Lips with the lowest Thorns, which Nature her self seems to have
in a manner hated. Insomuch as not to look on even the Miseries and Calamities
of others without Spite and Indignation; whether it be, that her Malice is
wholly mad and unreasonable, or because she cannot endure the Sufferer's
strength of Mind and Constancy, or the Fame Fortune's Injuries usually beget.
There are to be found in the Person of the present Author, many things to make
his Case deservedly deplorable; none, or very few, to render him envied;
nevertheless there are some who envy him these continual Cares and Fatigues,
though little acknowledged or requited. There seems to be something of fatality
in this Emulation against him; it produced it self without any reason, and
often asperses him with things, he had by hearsay from others, before he could
have so much as imagined. Notwithstanding his mind so full of Candor, and
mindful of his Duty, is so far from being disturbed at these things, that he
rather loves that Envy and Indignation, perceiving it to awaken his Courage,
and daily excite it to make a further Progress.

Princes therefore, who are so far in Degree and Dignity superior to others,
ought chiefly to endeavor to despise Envy. He that has not Spirit enough for
that, how will he have enough to be a Prince? To go to subdue it by kindness or
rigor were plain Imprudence. All other Monsters Hercules tamed; against this
neither Force nor Obligations were to any purpose. Nothing can silence the
Peoples Clamours; for whatever Favors you confer, they take for Debts; nay,
always promise themselves greater than they receive. Obloquy and Detraction
ought not to quench in a Prince the desire of Glory, nor deter him from
executing his Enterprises: Dogs bark at the Moon, but she easily despises them,
and proceeds in her Course. The principal Art of Government is to be able to
endure Envy. Envy is not very prejudicial to Monarchies, but rather generally
enflames Virtue, and makes it more illustrious; especially, if the Prince be
Just and Constant, and don^t too easily give credit to Calumnies. But in
Republics, where each Man goes for a part, and can execute the Desires of his
Passions with the help of Friends and Relations; it is very dangerous raising
Difcord and Clandestine Conspiracies, whence afterward arise Civil Wars, which
are the Causes of all Revolutions in States. 'Twas that in former times ruined
Hannibal, and many other great Men; and in this our Age has called in question
the unparallel^d Fidelity of Angelo Baduero that famous Venetian, whom you may
deservedly call the Glory and Ornament of that Commonwealth: A Man so desirous
of, and pas^ionate for the Public Good, that even while under banishment, and
unjustly oppressed, and persecuted by envious Men, he was in all things
strangely sollicitous for the Preservation and Welfare of his Country.

The most Sovereign Remedy against Envy in Republics, is an Equality of all
the Members of them, so as that all Pomp and Ostentation be prohibited; for
nothing so excites Emulation as the Splendour and Plenty of Riches. This made
the Romans take so much care to regulate and reduce the superfluous Expenses of
Feasts, and to divide their Lands and Possessions, that their Citizens might be
all equal in Strength and Estate.

Envy in Princes is very unbecoming their Eminency and Grandeur, as well for
its being the Vice of an Inferior toward his Superiors, as because it must be
but a very inconsiderable Glory which cannot shine without obscuring others. The
Pyramids of Egypt were reckoned among the Seven Wonders of the World for
receiving Light on all sides of them, without casting the least Shade on any
Bodies near Pyramides in Egypto, quarum in suo statu se umbra consume^t, ultra
constructionis spatia nulla pa^te respicitur. Cassiodor. l. 6. Var. Epist. 16.
. It Is a sign of weakness to want that which we envy in others. But nothing is
more unworthy a Prince, than to envy the Excellence and Prudence of his
Ministers, for they are in a manner Parts and Members of him; the Head envies
not the Feet for being so strong as to support the Body, or the Arms, because
they can labor; it glories rather in being furnished with such Instruments
However, self-love sometimes is the reason, that as Princes are Superior to
others in Power, so also they are desirous to surpass them in the Gifts of Mind
and Body. Even the fame of Lucan's Verses was a disturbance to Nero in the
midst of all his Grandeur Lucanum propriae causae accendebant, quod fama^
carminum ejus premebat Nero. Tac. lib. 15. Ann.
. Wherefore those who have to do with Princes, ought to be very cautious, not
to seem to enter into a Dispute with them for Knowledge or Ingenuity; or if at
any time they are by some accident obliged to it, submit rather, and
voluntarily yield them the Victory; this being not only Prudence, but Respect
due to Princes. The Cherubims (those Spirits of Knowledge and Wisdom) which
stood before the Throne of God in Ezekiel's Vision, with singular Modesty
covered their Hands with their Wings And there appeared in the Cherubims, the
form of a Man's hand under their Wings, Ez^k. 10. 8.
. This I wish indeed, that the Prince would be jealous of that Veneration,
which some to get the greater Interest in him too ambitiously demand, and
accordingly moderate a little the excess of those his Favors. Yet, by what
Charm I know not, this love and kindness inchants a Prince's Mind, and blinds
Envy. Saul could not but look upon David with an ill Eye, when he saw his great
Exploits, though done for his Service, more applauded than his own And Saul
eyed David from that day, and forward. 1 Samuel 18. 9.
. Whereas Abasuerus could easily suffer Haman, that great Favorite of his, to
be worshipped and honored by all as a King And all the King's Servants that
were in the (...), b^w'd and reverenced Haman, for the King had so commanded
concerning him. Esth. 3. 2.
. No Envy has more danger in it than that between Noblemen; care should
therefore be taken that Honors and Great Places seem not to be Hereditary to
particular Families, but be transferred from one to another; yet, so as that
the wealthiest of the Nobility be employed in Places that require Pomp and
Expense; the poorer sort in those by which they may raise their Fortune, and
maintain the Splendour of their Birth. There is some Emulation that is glorious,
I mean such as envies the Virtue and Merit of another, but grieves to want them
it self, and endeavors by all the Efforts both of Valor and Wit to acquire
them; this, I say, is commendable; nor is it to be reputed a Vice, but a kind
of spark of Virtue proceeding from a noble and generous Mind. The Honor
Miltiades got by his Victory over the Persians, kindled such Flames in
Themistocles's Breast, as immediately consumed all his Vices; he like another
Man ran about Athens, crying. The Trophies of Miltiades would not let him
Sleep. As long as Vitellius had Competitors, he abstained from Vices; but as
soon as he was without them, both he and his Army abandoned themselves to
Cruelty, Lust, Rapine, and Licentiousness Tum ipse, exercitusque, saevitia,
libidine, rapti in extremos mo^es proruperunt. Tac. 2. Hist.
. This is the Emulation Commonwealths should encourage, by proposing Rewards,
erecting Trophies or Statues; for that is the Soul and Spirit by which they are
preserved, and grow daily more flourishing. And this I take to be the Reason
the Republic of Switzerland takes so little pains to extend its Limits, and
why it produces so few famous Men; though otherwise Nature has been by no means
niggardly of Valor, and Strength of Mind to its Inhabitants; for their
principal Design is to establish a general Equality, which puts a stop to all
Emulation; and consequently all noble and Military Virtues are buried like
burning Coals in Ashes. But though this Emulation among Ministers may seem
useful, yet it is not wholly without Danger, in that the People who suffer no
Man to be without a Rival are variously affected Scientia militiae and rumore
populi, qui neminem sine (...) sinit. Tac. 14. Ann.
; hence, while these favor one, those applaud another, there arises a
Contention between both Parties, and these Factions breed Tumults and
Seditions. Besides that, the heat of Ambition, and desire of advancing
themselves above others, usually puts them upon unlawful Tricks and Artifices;
and that which at first was honorable Emulation, degenerates at length into
Hatred and Envy. Metellus offended that Pompey was nominated to be his
Successor in Farther Spain, and envying the Glory of this Great Commander,
disbanded the Soldiers, weakened the Army, and carelessly neglected all
Provisions. Pompey did afterward the same, when he understood Marcus Pompilius
was to succeed him in the Consulship, and for fear, possibly, the Honor of
Conquering the Numantines might redound to him, made a Peace with them very
dishonorable to the Roman Name. In our own times, Grol was lost upon no other
account but a Dispute that arose among the Officers, that were sent to relieve
it, about Pre-eminence. In short, nothing is so pernicious to Princes, nothing
more needs a Remedy. Nor is here connivance to be admitted, but both are to be
punished, as well he that seems to be Innocent, as the Person in Fault. This
forgiving the occasion; that because he renounced not his Right, and let slip
an opportunity of managing Affairs to advantage. Which Rigor, if it seems to
any one excessive, will be excused, by considering the Emolument of the Public
Good, and of the Example it will leave to Posterity. There Is no great
Resolution without some mixture of Injury. A Subject ought to look upon the
Duty he owes his Prince, before his own Honor; let him demand Satisfaction for
the Injury received afterward, and think he has acquitted himself of his Duty
to his Prince, in having a little while put it up. Patience in such a Case,
shows extraordinary Courage; for a generous Mind ought to prefer the Service of
the King before its own Passions; and lay aside private Feuds when the Public
Interest is concerned Privata odia publicis u^ilitatibus remittere, Tac. 1. Ann.
. Aristides and Themistocles were bitter Enemies, yet being both sent on an
Embassy together, when they came to the City-gate, Aristides said, Let us here,
Themistocles, leave for a little time our private Grudges, and at our return
resume them again. The same did Henry Guzman, Duke of Medina, who though
otherwise an Enemy to Rodrigo Pontre, Marquess of Cadiz, yet out of Love of the
Public Good, went to his Assistance at the Siege of Alhama. But because it is
much easier to prevent these Dangers than remedy them afterward; the Prince
must take care not to put two Ministers of equal Authority in the same Office,
for it is very difficult to make Power and Agreement subsist in the same place
Arduum eodem loco potentiam, and concordiam esse. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Tiberius being to send another Minister into Asia of equal Quality with the
then Governor of that Province, thought that might be of dangerous consequence;
and therefore chose M. Aletus, a Praetor, least their equality might breed
Emulation, and that occasion some Impediment Delectus est M. Aletus e
pretoriis, ne Consulari obtinente Asiam, emulatio inter pares, and ex eo
impedimentum ^riretur. Tac. 2. Ann.
.

EMBLEM X.
THE Faulcon's no sooner let fly, but he strives with his Beak to get off the
little Bells that are hung at his Feet, knowing them to prejudice his Liberty;
for their tingling shrill sound is like a Voice, which with the least motion
raised, presently calls the Faulconer, and so is the occasion that the poor
Bird is brought again to Confinement, how far soever it hid it self in the
thickest Woods. Alas! how many Men has the noise of their Virtues, and brave
Exploits, been mischievous to? How many has Fame brought into Envy and
insupportable Slavery? Nor is great or good Fame less dangerous than bad Nec
minus periculum ex^magna fama quam ex mala. Tac. in Vir. Agr.
. Miltiades had never ended his Days so unhappily in Prison, had his Valor
been concealed and unknown, or moderating his high Spirit, he had been content
with a fortune equal to that of other Athenian Citizens. But the Reputation of
his Victories increasing, and the Eyes of Envy being not able to bear Fame's so
bright Rays, this Republic began to mistrust what merited Esteem and
Recompense; they feared, forsooth, their own Necks might at length be obliged
to bear the Yoke he had put on that of their Enemies; and dreaded more the
future and uncertain Danger of Miltiades's Infidelity, than that present, and
far greater one which threatened them from those, who openly designed the Ruin
and Destruction of their City. Suspicion never admits Reason into its Council,
nor does such fear stand to weigh the Importance of things, or suffer Gratitude
to get the better of it. That Commonwealth chose to let one, though the most
deserving, of its Citizens lie in Prison and Infamy, rather than all the rest
should live in continual Jealousies. The Carthaginians took the Government of
Spain from Sappho, under pretense, indeed, of administering the Commonwealth at
home; but the true Reason was, that they could no longer suffer his Power and
Authority. Thus they banished his Successor, Hanno, who was so eminent for his
Navigations, only because he had more Ingenuity and Industry than they thought
safe for a free People. He was the first Man they ever saw stroke a Lion, and
make it tame, and began to apprehend he would at last subdue them, who had
vanquished the Savage Beasts. Thus Commonwealths are used to recompense
Services and great Actions. No one of the Citizens takes himself in particular
to be honored, or obliged by any good Office is done to the Community; as to
Offenses and Suspicion, every one thinks himself concerned. If any one's to be
rewarded, very few give him their Votes; on the contrary, to find a Man guilty
all are zealous. He that is more excellent than others, is thereby in danger;
for his Zeal for the Public Good accuses their negligence; his Prudence their
Ignorance. Hence it is so dangerous to be serviceable and obsequious to Princes;
hence Virtue and Industry become like Vices, odious. Sallust, who had a
Capacity fit for the most important business, to avoid Envy, feigned himself to
be idle and drowsy Cui vigor animi ingentibus negotiis par suberat, eo magis,
ut invidiam amoliretur, somnum and inertiam ostentabat. Tac. 5. Ann.
. But the worst of all is, that sometimes a Prince is displeased at being
awakened by a vigilant Minister, whom he would rather have as careless as
himself. To remedy this, as there is an Hypocrisy which counterfeits Virtues,
and dissembles Vices; there is need of another to conceal Valor and Excellency
of Mind, and to stop the mouth of Fame. 'Twas undoubtedly nothing but the fear
of Envy made Agricola so careful to hide his, that they who saw in him so much
Humility and Modesty, unless they had otherwise heard of his Fame, could never
guess at his Renown by his Person Viso aspectoque Agricola quaererent famam,
pauci interpretarentur. Tac. in Vit. Agr.
. Time made Germanicus sensible of this inconveniency, but he chose to bear
rather than amend it, when after the Conquest of so many Nations, he erected
indeed a Trophy, but for fear of Fame put not his Name to it Debella^is inter
Rhenum, Albimque nationibus exercitum T^^erit Caesaris ea Monumenta Marti, and
Iovi, and Augusto sacravisse, de se nihil addidit, metu invidiae, an ratus
conscientiam facti esse satis. Tac. 1. Ann.
. St. John concealed his, in the relation of the signal Favor our Savior
showed him at his last Supper Now there was leaning on Jesus's bosom, one of
his Di^ciples whom Jesus loved. John 13. 23.
, which if 'twas not humane Policy, was at least prudent Modesty. Even mere
Dreams about ones own Promotion breeds Envy amongst Brothers. Joseph almost
hazarded his Life, when with more Ingenuity than Discretion, he told his the
Dream he had of the Sheafs of Corn that made obeisance to his that stood
upright among the rest; for the very Shadow of Eminence, nay, the bare
possibility of excelling makes Envy solicitous. Glory is dangerous, as well
because of our own Virtues, as other Men's Vices Agricola simul suis virtutibus,
simul vitiis aliorum in ipsam gloriam praeceps agebatur. Tac. in Vit. Agr.
. Vice is not so feared in Men because it makes them Slaves, as Virtue that
makes them Masters; for Dominion is by nature her self given to it, and this
Republics will not suffer to be lodged in the Person of one, but would have
equally divided among all Virtue is a kind of voluntary tyranny over Minds, has
no less influence on them, than Violence it self, or Compulsion; and indeed, to
excite Republics to Imitation, it is the same thing absolutely whether the
People be induced by Reason or by Force, constrained to obey one only; for the
first Tyranny, the juster it is, the more dangerous and irresistible. This very
thing gave rise to the Ostracism, or Ten Years Banishment, to which Aristides,
among others, was condemned; whose only Crime, was his having the Reputation of
a good and just Man. The Peoples Favor is a very dangerous Friend to Virtue;
for their Applause and Approbation is punished as a fault, as you may see in
the Person of Galerian Nihil ausus, sed nomen insigne, and decora ipsi juventa,
rumore vulgi celebrabantur. Tac. 4. Hist.
. So Germanicus learned by experience, that the Roman Peoples love was fickle
and unfortunate Breves and infaustos populi Romani amores. Tac. 2. Ann.
. Neither Princes nor Commonwealths much desire Ministers of extraordinary
Excellency, but such as have a competent Skill to manage Affairs, and this
reason Tacitus gives why Poppaeus Sabinus was continued Four and twenty Years
in the Government of the most considerable Provinces N^llam ob eximiam artem,
sed quod par negotiis, neque supra erat. Tac. 6. Ann.
. It Is therefore a piece of great Prudence to know how to conceal ones Fame,
and consequently to beware of all Ostentation of Wit, Valor, or Excellency,
and cover all sublime Thoughts, as they say, with Ashes; though I confess, it is
difficult for a noble Mind to confine to the narrow compass of its own Breast,
a Flame that breaks out on all sides, and daily requires new Fuel to increase
it, and make it shine with the greater Luster. But this we may be persuaded to
by the Examples of these Illustrious Heroes, who heretofore from the
Dictatorship returned to the Plough; and of those that after a Triumphant Entry
into the City of Rome by Breaches, because the Gates were not large enough;
that after the Conquest of whole Nations, have retreated to poor despicable
Cottages, whither afterward the Commonwealth has come to find them out. Nor
had that ever brought them so soon into play again had it not seen they were
not ambitious of Honor; for that like a Shadow flies him that pursues it,
follows him that flies it. His Fame and Reputation is greatest, who strives to
conceal it. Rubellius Plautus was thought to deserve the Empire because he
lived retired Omnium ore Rubellius Plautus celebratur, cui nobilitas per matrem
ex Iulia familia, ipse placita majorum c^lebat, habitu severo, ca^^a and
secreta domo, quantoque metu occultior, tanto plus famae adeptus. Tac. 14. Ann.
; but it is not so in Monarchies, where one ascends higher by having begun to
ascend. A Prince has Men of Courage and Bravery in great esteem, Republics
fear them rather; that animates them by Rewards and Presents, these discourage
them by Ingratitude: Nor is fear of their Liberty always the reason of it, but
it is also a pretense to Cloak their Envy and Emulation under. If any one be the
Object of all Men's favor and applause, he is usually suspected and envied;
which rarely happens in Princes, who don't easily envy their Subjects Glory;
but if they do any thing commendable, they attribute it to themselves, as being
the Execution of their Orders. This has been observable in the Emperor Otho
Gloriam in se trahente, tanquam, and ipse foelix bell^, and suis ducibus, and
suis exe^citibus Remp. aux^sset. Tac. 1. Hi^t.
. Prudent Ministers ought therefore to attribute to the Prince the happy
Success of things; taking warning by the Example of Silius, who incurred
Tiberius's Displeasure by boasting that he alone kept the Legions to their
Duty; and using to say often, that Tiberius was indebted to him only for his
Empire: For Caesar thought at this rate his Fortune would be destroyed, and
that he was unable to make return to so great Merit Destrui per haec fortunam
suam, Caesar, imparemque tanto meri^^ rebatur. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Nor was Vespasian displeased with Antonius Primus for any thing, but too
frequently mentioning his own Merits Ni^ius commemorandis quae meruisset. Tac.
4. Hist.
. Agricola was far more prudent, who never magnified his Exploits for his own
Fame, but attributed all his Success to his Superiors Nec Agricola unquam suam
famam gestis exultavit, ad auctorem and ducem, ut Minister, fortunam referebat.
Ita virtute in obsequendo, verecundia in praedicando extra invidiam, nec extra
gloriam erat. Tac. in Vit. Agr.
. Ioab has left an Illustrious Example of this to all Generals; who, when he
had forced any City to Surrender, sent word before to King David to bring up
new Forces, that the Surrender might be ascribed to his Conduct Now therefore
gather the People together, and encamp against the City, and take it, least I
take the City, and it be called after my name. Lat. Verse. Et nomini meo
ascribatur victoria. 2 Samuel 12. 28.
. The Ancient Germans were above others commended for this, who lay under a
strict Obligation, not only to defend and preserve their Prince, but also to
attribute the Glory of their own brave Actions to him Principem suum defendere,
tueri, sua quoqu^ fortia facta gloriae ejus assignare, praecipuum Sacramentum
erat. Tac. lib. de Germ.
. For these reasons a Person is much securer of a Recompense for the Services
he does a Prince, than those done a Commonwealth; and will with more ease get
the Favor of the one than the other Tarda sunt quae in commune expostulantur,
privata^ gratiam statim mereare, statim recipias. Tac. 1. Ann.
. Besides, that there is less danger in offending that than this; for the
Multitude knows not what Connivance, Mercy, or Danger are; it is equally rash
in its Resolutions, whether the thing to be attempted be dangerous or unjust;
for either the Fear or Blame is divided among many, and each Man persuades
himself the danger is not like to fall on his Pate, that the Infamy belongs not
to him Ita trepidi, and utrinque anxii coeunt; nemo privat^^, expedit^
consilio, inter multos, societate culpae tutior. Tac. 2. Hist.
. A Community has no Forehead to blush, as a Prince has, who is with great
reason solicitous for his own Person chiefly, as well as for his Reputation,
and that of his Posterity. All Men flatter a Prince, setting before him the
things that lead to Glory, in Republics few are concerned for the Public
Honor, almost all for Security (...) de^^s publicum curae, plures tuta
disserunt. Tac. 12. Ann.
. A Prince has his Subjects to content, in a Community that care and trouble
ceases; for what it undertakes or does, is by the Common Counsel of all, and so
every one is thought to be concerned in it. And hence I imagine it comes to
pass, that Commonwealths (I mean not such as are in a manner Kingly) are so
unconstant and false in the Observation of Treaties; for that only is just with
them, which seems to be for the Interest of their Preservation, Grandeur, and
the Liberty they so much advance, in which they are extremely Superstitious.
They imagine they worship true Liberty, and with a servile Submission adore
infinite tyrannical Idols. Every one thinks he Commands, and all Obey; they are
all provided with an Antidote against the Poison of Monarchy, and the
Sovereignty of many they greedily and securely swallow; they fear nothing more
than the Tyranny of Foreigners, take no notice of that at home. Liberty is
talked of every where, found no where. All are possessed of it in Imagination,
none in Reality. Let the United Provinces now make a Comparison between the
Liberty they formerly had, and that they enjoy at present, and diligently
examine which of the two has the Advantage; whether they ever underwent the
same Slavery then, suffered those Loses and Taxes they at this day sensibly
experiment. Let the Subjects of some Commonwealths, nay the Magistrates
themselves, in whose Hands the Government is, think whether it were possible
for any Tyrant to enslave them more than those very Persons they have set up to
Assert their Liberty, when there is not one that really enjoys it in his
Actions. They are all miserable Slaves to their own Jealousies; the Magistracy
is its own Tyrant; and it may be truly said of both, that they live without a
Master, but not with Liberty Magis sine Domino, quam in liberate. Tac. 2. Ann.
; for the more they strive to disengage themselves from the Bonds of Slavery,
the faster they are bound with them Sed dum veritati consulitur, libertas
corrumpebatur. Tac. 1. Ann.
.

EMBLEM XI.
THE Tongue is an Instrument, by the help of which the Mind discovers its
Sentiments, for it expresses it self either by that, or by the Pen, which like
a silent Tongue sometimes supplies its place, drawing on Paper the Words which
should have been uttered by the Voice. From both the one, and the other, one
may draw a probable conjecture of a Man's Parts and Capacity. For by Speech,
Wisdom shall be known, and Learning by the Word of the Tongue Eccles. cap 4. 29.
. Hence King Alphonso, the Wise, speaking in his Laws how a Prince ought to
carry himself in his Conversation, what Moderation he should use in speaking;
among other things says, Multiloquy makes their Words unregarded, and if a King
be not a Man of good Sense, his Tongue soon discovers the defect; for as an
Earthen Pot is tried by the Sound, so is a Man's Sense by his Words L 5. ^it.
4. p. 2.
. A Comparison which he seems to have borrowed from this Passage of Persius: --
Sonat vitium percussa malign,
Respondet viridi non cocta fideli^ limo.
Speech is the minds Countenance; by that is discovered whether it be sound or
not Orati^ vultus ani^^ est, si cir^umto^sa est and fucata, and manuf^cta,
o^tendi^ illum non esse (...), and habere aliquid ^racti. Sen Epis^. 115.
. To represent this, I have made use of another nobler Emblem, and more
accommodated to the Subject; it is a Bell, the true Emblem of a Prince; for as
that is hung up in the most eminent place of the City, it times, and regulates
all the Citizens Actions; and if the Metal be not good, or it has any other
fault in it, it is by its Sound presently discerned Vas fictil^ ictu and sono,
h^mo sernione p^o^atu^. Meliss. Sermon 48. Tom. ^. B^bl.
. So a Prince is a kind of general Clock to all his Subjects, who in a great
measure depend, as I may say, upon the Motion of his Words, and by them he
either gets or loses a Reputation, every one giving himself to gue^s at his
Genius, Wit, and Inclinations, by his Discourse. Not a Word escapes his
Hearers, each one makes a deep Impression on their Memory, they are repeated to
others, and exposed to the Censure of all, who usually put various
Constructions upon them, as they think fit. Nay, even, what comes from him in
private and unawares, passes for profound and mysterious, and not for casual
and accidental. It were therefore very proper for them not to be extemporary
but premeditated A Fool travaileth with a Word, as a Woman in labor of ^
Child. Eccles. 19. 11.
, not spoken without a previous Consideration of all the Circumstances of Time,
Place, and Persons. For -- Nescit vox missa reverti, -- as Horace says,
seconded by King Alphonso, For this reason all Men, especially a King, ought to
take great care of his Words before he utters them, for when they are once out
of the Mo^th, there is no Man can recall them L. 1. tit. 4. part. 2.
. Whence may arise very great Inconveniences, for the Words of Kings are the
principal Instruments of Government Where the Word of a King is, there is
power. Eccl. 8. 4.
. Death and Life are in the Power of the Tongue Death and Life are i^ the Power
of the T^ngue. Prove. 18. 21.
; as also the Honor and Ignominy, the Prosperity and Ruin of Subjects. This
made Aristotle, when he sent Callisthenes to Alexander the Great, advise him to
talk little with him, and only upon agreeable Subjects; for that 'twas a
dangerous thing to Treat with one who carried the Power of Life and Death at
his Tongues end. There Is not a Word comes from a Prince's Mouth without a
peculiar Emphasis: Is it about Business, they are Commands; if of Crimes, they
are Sentences; if of Promises, Obligations; by his Words he is either obeyed or
disobeyed. Let Princes therefore take care how they use this Tongue of theirs,
which Nature has not merely by chance fenced and enclosed with, as it were, a
Wall of Teeth; nor is there less need of a Bridle for the Tongue, than for a
Horse Eccl. 28. 29.
. It Is, it is true, one of the least Members of the Body, but it is like the
Rudder of a Ship, on whose Motion the loss or safety of the whole Vessel
depends. The Tongue is placed in a wet place, and so easily slips, unless
stayed by Prudence. Hence that Prayer of David; Set a Watch, O Lord, before my
Mouth, keep the Door of my Lips Psalm 140. 3.
.

For a Prince to condescend to a familiar Conversation with any one, lessens
his Character, prostitutes his Authority, and brings many other Inconveniences
upon him, unless he do it for Information; for every Man desires to have a wise
Prince, and one that understands his Affairs very well; which is next to an
impossibility, for a Prince cannot know all things Neque ^^sse Principem sua
scientia cuncta complecti. Tac 3. Ann.
; and if he answer in the least from the purpose; he shall be presently
condemned for Insufficiency or Negligence. Besides, that Princes Talents and
Endowments very rarely answer the generally received Opinion of them; therefore
to avoid the danger of this, the Roman Emperors chose to Treat with their
Subjects by Notes, and give them Answers in Writing, as well to get time for
Deliberation, as because the Pen is less subject to mistake than the Tongue;
for this cannot handsomely defer an Answer, that can. Sejanus, however great a
Favorite of Tiberius's, conferred only with him by way of Memorial Componit ad
Caesareni codicill^s: mo^is quippe tum erat quamquam praesentem sc^ipto adi^e.
Tac. 4. Ann.
. There are, however, some Affairs which may be better treated of by Word of
Mouth; particularly, when there^s something of danger in leaving ones
Sentiments in another hands, which are a kind of perpetual Evidence, and more
liable to be wrested to different meanings than Words, which as they quickly
pass, and stick not deep in the Memory, are not so easily actionable. But
whether a Prince gives his Answers this, or the other way, he should always
remember, that brevity is the most prudent, and most becoming a Princes Majesty
Multum brevi sermon inest ^rude^tiae Sopn^cl.
. Hence Tacitus gives that Epithet Imperial to Brevity Imperatoria brevit^^e.
Tac* 1. Hist.
. You should use the Tongue as your Sword, that is, not lay your self too open
to your Adversary; he that discloses his whole Mind, exposes himself to Danger.
Concise Discourses have the greatest Efficacy, and leave most room for
Reflection. Nothing's so like a King, as to talk little, and hear much. Nor is
it less requisite for him to know how to be silent, than how to speak. In this,
Men are our Masters. In that, God himself, who always injoyns Silence in his
Mysteries. He resembles the Divinity most, who has learnt to hold his Peace.
Even a fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, and he that shuts his
Lips is esteemed a Man of understanding Pro^. cap. 17.
. The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their
heart Eccles 21. 29*
. This is Prudence to avoid both Extremes, for each has its danger: All to
Talk, or none,
Are distant, and yet neighboring Faults.
Auson. It Is then only convenient to speak, when Silence prejudices either the
Prince or Truth. Majesty by a Nod only sufficiently explains its self. Silence
well-timed, is in Princes great Eloquence; and a grave and modest Carriage are
usually more significantly expressive of one's Thoughts than Words themselves.
But if one's obliged to use these at any time, they ought to be sincere, and
with liberty in thinking becoming a King. Your free Conceptions dress in plain
Words.
Tass. For by too many Asseverations, Oaths, and unnecessary Proofs, they
either quite lose their Credit, or at least are rendered suspicious; they ought
then to be Grave without Moroseness; Graceful without Affectation; of Force
without Roughness; lastly, Common not Vulgar. Even with God, Words well
ordered, seem to have most weight and influence Job 41. 3.
.

But the Tongue and Pen require no where more prudent Moderation than in
Promises, in which Princes either out of a natural Generosity, or to obtain
their Ends with more ease, or to avoid a Danger, are usually extravagant; which
when they cannot perform, they lose their Credit, and procure themselves
Enemies, so that it had been better not to have been so lavish of them. There
have been more Wars occasioned by the Breach of Promises than by Injuries. For
Interest is seldom in these so much concerned as in them. And Princes are
generally moved more by their own Advantage than by Injuries received. To make
large Promises, and not keep them, is interpreted by a Superior, an Affront; by
an Equal, Injustice; by an Inferior, Tyranny Better is it that thou should
no^ vow, t^an that thou should vow and no^ pay. E^cles. 5. 5.
. The Tongue therefore should not be too forward to promise, without assurance
that the Promise can be performed ^e not hasty in thy Tongue, and in thy Deeds
sl^ck and remis^, Eccl. 4. 29.
.

In Threats also, the Tongue easily goes beyond its Limits; for the Heat of
Anger soon puts it in Motion, and when Revenge cannot equal the Passion, of
necessity Prudence; nay, and Supreme Power must l^se not a little of their
Credit. It Is therefore much more advisable to dissemble Injuries, that the
Effects of Satisfaction may be considered before the Prince threatens it. He
that uses Menaces before his Hands, designs either to make them the only
Instruments of his Revenge, or to give his Enemy warning. There Is no more
ter^ible threatening than Silence. If mine is already let o^^, no one is afraid;
those are always more formidable that lie still concealed underground; for the
Effects of the Imagination are usually greater than those of the Senses.

Detraction has in it a great mixture of Envy and Ostentation; it is always
almost of an Inferior toward his Superior, and consequently much below a
Prince, by whose Lips no Man's Honor ought to be brought in question. If he
sees Vices, he should punish them; if other small Defects, correct or connive
at them.

The praise of brave Actions and Services is a part of their Reward; excites
the Person commended to, as it were an Emulation of himself, and is a Spur to
others. However, to commend all Subjects indifferently, is not without danger.
For the Judgment they pass on them being various and uncertain, and that
Praise, a kind of definitive Sentence, time may discover to have been rashly
given; in the mean time, the Prince's Honor will oblige him not to retract
easily what he has once approved. As well therefore for this reason, as not to
give occasion to Envy, great Circumspection is required in praising Persons,
which is also one of the Holy Spirit's Oracles, Judge no one blessed before his
Death Vid. Lat. Verse. Ante mortem ne lauds hominem quenquam. Eccles. 11. 30.
. It was a principal Maxim among the Stoics, to commend no one rashly, because
scarce any thing can be a^firmed with certainty, and we are often deceived in
things that appear to us most praiseworthy.

EMBLEM XII.
THE Heart of Man, Nature, that skilful Architect, has hid in the most retired
part of the Breast; however, least probably, seeing it self thus concealed, and
without Witnesses, it should do any thing against the Law of Reason, she has
withal given Man that native Color or Fire of Blood, for Modesty to inflame
his Countenance withal, and accuse his Heart, if it deviate from Honor in any
thing, or think otherwise than the Tongue speaks, both which ought always to
have the same Motion, and a mutual Agreement in all things. But Malice by
degrees effaces that Mark which is used in Children to show its self. Hence the
Romans well-knowing the importance of Truth for the establishment of Society,
and maintaining Commerce in the Commonwealth; and desiring nothing more than to
preserve the shame of deserting it among Men, hung about their Childrens Neck a
Golden Heart, (which they called Bulla) an Hieroglyphick, says Ausonius,
invented by Pythagoras, to signify the Ingenuity Men ought to profess in
Conversation, and the Sincerity they should observe in Truth, wearing at their
Breast, a Heart uncovered, as it were, and open, the Genuine Emblem of that
Truth. And this we commonly mean, when speaking of a Man of Veracity, we say he
carries his Heart in his Hands, or that he is open-hearted. The same the
Egyptian Priests signified by the Sapphire they put upon their Princes Breasts,
to represent emblematically the same Truth; as their Ministers of Justice also
used to wear about them some Figure of it. Nor should any one imagine, that for
the Prince to be so sincere, and professed a Lover of Truth, would perhaps but
give an occasion to Deceit and Cozenage; for on the contrary, nothing is more
effectual in preventing those Cheats, and driving away Lies, which never dare
look Truth in the face. The same Observation I take that advice of Pythagoras
to allude to, never to speak with one's Back toward the Sun; thereby
intimating that nothing ought to be uttered repugnant to Truth; for a Liar
cannot bear the bright Rays of Truth, signified by the Sun upon a double
account, both because of the Sun's Unity; as for that it disperses Darkness,
and drives away Shades, restoring to all things their true Light and proper
Colors, as the present Emblem shows; where as soon as that Luminary is got
above the Horizon, the Obscurity of Night immediately flies, and the Nocturnal
Birds retire to the Woods dark Coverts, which in that is absence, and favored
by the Silence of Night, use while others sleep, to seek their Prey. What
Confusion is the Owl in, if by chance she comes into the Sun's presence? In
that glittering Light she Staggers to and fro, and is confounded, that Splendour
quite blinds her, and frustrates all her Tricks. Can any one have so much
Subtilty and Craft, but they will presently fail him when he comes before an
ingenuous Prince, and one that is a particular Friend to Sincerity and Truth
Magni praesentia very. Virgil.
?

There Is no force able to penetrate into the Designs of a candid Mind, if that
Candor want not some Retirements for Prudence. Is there any thing more open and
evident to the Eyes of the World, any thing more resplendent, more opposed to
Shadows and Darkness than the Sun? Nevertheless, if any one will look steadfast
upon its Rays, he will discover I know not what Abuses, as 'twere, and
Obscurities of Light, which so darken the Eyes, that what they saw, they cannot
tell. Thus Knavery is blinded with the Light of Truth, and its Foundations
overturned, nor can it find any more a way to delude with its Artifices. It Is a
Victory truly worthy a Prince, to conquer Frauds and Cheats with Ingenuity,
Lies with Truth. To lie is a slavish Vice, and consequently very unbecoming the
generous Mind of Princes, who above all Men should endeavor to render
themselves like God, who is Truth it self Excellent Speech becomes not a Fool;
much less do lying ^ip^ a Prince. Prove. 17. 7.
. Whence Kings, (says King Alphonso) who keep its place upon Earth, and to whom
it particularly belongs to guard it, ought to take special care not to
contradict it by falsity; if a King should once give himself to Lying, he will
not be believed, even when he speaks truth, and will farther give encouragement
to others to follow his Example. This inconveniency Tiberius experimented, who
often pretending to restore Liberty and the Consular Government to the
Commonwealth, and to remit the Management of Affairs to others, caused the
People to mistrust him when he meant really and honestly Ad vana and toties
irrisa revolutus de reddenda Rep^^ utque consules, se^ quis alius, regimen
susci^eret, ^^ro quoque and honesto fidem dempsit. T^c. 4 A^n.
.

The greater Monarchs are, they are the more exposed to Vanity and Lies C^ncta
m^g^is impe^iis objecta^i solitus. T^c. 4. Ann.
. The Rays of a plentiful Fortune easily contract the Clouds of Detraction. In
great Empires all things have the worst Construction put upon them, and are
obnoxious to Reproaches. What open Force cannot do, Calumny by secret Mines
attempts, in which thing he that has the Rule over others, has need of great
Courage, not to change his Course, or suffer himself to be stopped by the
Clamours of Cavillers. This constancy and firmness of Mind has always eminently
appeared in the Kings of Spain, to whom it has been, in a manner, natural to
despise Envy and Calumny; by which means alone, many Clouds of that Nature have
been dispelled, which as Majesty raises, so it also by the force of Truth
dissipates, as the Sun's Heat does Vapors. What infamous Libels, what manifest
Falsities, what forged Stories, what Calumnies have malicious Men often spread
against the Spanish Monarchy? Nor for all this, could that Envy be able to cast
the least Blemish upon its so just Administration of the Kingdoms it is
possessed of in Europe, because that is open to the World, and visible to all.
Among other things, by new contrived Devices, and studied Lies to render its
Government odious, and so make the Rebellious Princes less desirous of a
Reconciliation: I know not what Author, under the Name of the Bishop of Chapa,
has published a Book, wherein he gives a large Account of the Inhumane and
Barbarous Usage the Indians received from the Spaniards; and that those Lies
might have a more easy Credit; the Book was first spread about in Spain, as
Printed at Sevil, afterward Translated into other Languages. An ingenious
Invention indeed, and accute piece of malice, and of more consequence than
perhaps can be believed, for upon some easy Minds it had very ill Effect,
though most of the more prudent so^^ soon discovered the Cheat; in as much as
all those things are abundantly confuted by the extraordinary Zeal for Religion
and Justice, the Spanish Nation always with great Constancy exercises and
maintains all over the World, nor is it unlike its self in the Indies only. I
will not however deny, but at the first Invasion of America, some things happened
not altogether to be approved, but this was only by their fault, who thinking
this Known World too little for their vast Minds, had the boldness by the
Permission, rather than Command, or Choice of their King to try their Fortune
in other Parts, and discover New Countries hitherto unknown, where they found a
barbarous People, Idolatrous to Superstition, more Savage than Beasts, who
brutally lived on Man's Flesh, whose Inhumanity was incorrigible but by force
and utmost rigor. But it was not long before their Catholic Majesty's
provoided a Remedy against these Disorders, for they sent to those Coasts
Commissaries to punish those severely they found had been guilty; and to
maintain entire Justice among the Indians, they gave afterward many Paternal
Orders for their Preservation, of which it was none of the least to exempt them
from those severe Labors they daily underwent in the Mines, and in other
things before the Discovery of those Countries. They sent besides, Divines with
great Zeal to teach them the Mysteries of the Christian Faith; founded
Bishoprics at their own Expenses, and those of the Crown, and maintained
Religious Convents for the benefit of that new planted Church, without
suffering them from the time those vast Countries fell into the Spaniards
hands, even in the absence of their new Masters, to want any any thing which
it is a King's Duty to supply his Subjects withal. In which the Government of
this State, and the Vigilance of its Ministers, may in a manner seem to surpass
that of the Sun it is self, of the Moon and Stars, and the Influence they have
over things below; for but a few hours, in which the Sun's presence lightens
one Hemisphere; the other is in Confusion, while Malice clothes and covers its
self with the Darkness of Night, and under the Mask, as it were, of that
Obscurity commits Murders, Robbe^ies, Adulteries, and every thing that is ill,
the Sun's providence not being able to prevent them, though, indeed, even in
the Night he spreads some Twilight above the Horizon, or in the interim leaves
the performance of his Office to the Moon as his Vicegerent, and the Stars as
his Ministers, and communicates to them the Authority of his Rays. From this
our World, the Kings of Spain govern that other in Justice, Peace, and
Religion, with the same Political Happiness the Kingdoms of Castile enjoy to
their satisfaction. But least the Envious and Enemies of the Spanish Monarchy
should triumph with these their Artifices, and that all the Calumnies of that
Book may be entirely overthrown, let us suppose all those Evils, which Malice
has feigned the Indians to have suffered, to be true; and compare them to what
have been really undergone in our own time in several Wars, as well against
Genoa, as in Germany, Burgundy, and Lorrain, and 'twill appear clearer than
light, that that lie comes far short of the truth of these. What cruel Torments
have Tyrants ever invented against Innocence, which in these our times we have
not seen put in practice, not against inhumane and barbarous People, but
civilized Nations; and those not always Enemies, but even their own Members,
without respect to Propinquity of Blood, or Piety toward their Country? How
often have we seen Auxiliary Forces turn their Weapons upon them that sent
them? Defense been more bloody than open Offense? Protection become immediate
Destruction; Friendship, Hostility? Not a stately Edifice, not a Sacred Place,
has been spared by Fire and Sword: In a little time we have seen an infinite
number of Towns, Forts, and Cities, buried in their own Ashes; and Countries
very populous changed into most Solitary Deserts. Nor yet, could that Thirst of
Humane Blood be quenched or satisfied. 'Twas no new thing then to try Pistols
and Swords upon Men's Breasts, as Bodies of Trees, and that not only in the heat
of Battle, but in cool Blood, 'twas then a very agreeable Spectacle to see the
deformed Looks, and trimbling Limbs of Men exspiring. How often have Men's
Bellies ripped open served for Mangers? Sometimes in those of Women ('it is
dreadful to mention it) their tender Embryo's were mixed with Straw and Oats,
and made Provender for Horses. At the Expense of Life, 'twas tried, how much
Water a Man's Body would hold, or how long one could live without Sustenance.
Nuns were violated, Daughters of good Families dishonored, Wives ravished in
the very sight of their Parents and Husbands. Women, as all other Spoil or
Plunder, were either sold or exchanged for Cows or Horses, and Laborers were
put to Chariots, and compelled to draw them as Horses; and to make them
discover where their Riches lay, hung by the Feet and Members, and thus let
down into hot Furnaces. There Children were barbarously murdered before their
Eyes, that Paternal Affection might in the Grief of these their dearest Pledges
effect what self-love could not oblige them to. In Woods and Forests where Wild
Beasts find refuge, Men could not; for the Blood hounds chased them thence, and
brought them to the Stake. The deepest Lakes we^e not secure from so Ingenious
Covetousness and Rapine; the Effects of these wretched People were raked thence
with Hooks and Nets. Not so much as dead Men's Bones were suffered to rest,
Tombs and Grave-stones were thrown down to search under them for Treasures.
There Is no magical, no devilish Art which they put not in practice to discover
their Money. Many thousand Men perished by Cruelty and Covetousness, not by
their own Baseness, as the Indians, whose Extirpation Divine Justice permitted,
for having been so many Ages Rebels to their Creator. I mention not these
things to accuse any Nation in particular; for I am assured most, if not all,
have acted their Parts in this Barbarous and Inhumane Tragedy; but only to
vindicate that of the Spaniards from Calumny. The sweetest and best framed Mind
is sometimes in danger of transgressing its Limits. It Is the weakness of our
frail Nature, to be subject to commit the most brutish Action, if it want the
Bridle of Religion and Justice.

EMBLEM XIII.
THE Moon supplies the Sun's absence, in presiding over Night; upon the various
Motions, upon the Increase and Decrease of that, depend the Vigor and
Conservation of things here below; and although that is as much more beautiful
as these be obscure, and of themselves weak, as receiving their Being from its
Light; yet there is no one, either upon that account, or for its other
innumerable Benefits, takes much notice of it, even, at the height of its
Splendour. But i^ it be at any time by the Interposition of the Earth Eclipsed,
and discover the defects of its Body, not as before illuminated by the Sun, but
dark and opacous, immediately all Men's Eyes are upon it, all observe it; nay,
this Accident Curiosity long before anticipates, and measures its Steps every
moment. What are Princes, but a kind of Terrestrial Planets and Moons, on which
that Divine Sun of Justice diffuses its Rays for the Government of the Earth?
For if those Stars have Power over things, these have over minds. This I
imagine made the Persian Kings endeavor by a sort of false Rays to imitate the
Form of the Sun and Moon, to make themselves esteemed equal to those Planets.
Sapor, one of them in a Letter to the Emperor Constantius, called himself
Brother to the Sun and Moon Rex Regum Sapor, particeps side^^m, and frater
s^iis, and Lunae, Constantio fra^ri meo sal^t^m. Amm^in. Marcel. lib 4.
. Princes, their Dignity makes conspicuous among other Men, as placed in the
highest Orbs of Power and Empire, and so exposed to all Men's Censures. They are
Coloss^, or vast Statues, whose Parts cannot bear the least Disproportion one to
another, but others Eyes will presently be upon it. They ought therefore to be
very circumspect in their Actions, since they are the Objects of the whole
World's Attention; and though their good ones pass sometimes without Remark,
their Faults will never escape Observation. Curiosity employs a hundred Eyes,
and far more Ears, to penetrate Princes most Secret Thoughts. They seem like
that Stone in Zachariah, upon which were Seven Eyes Zach. 3. 9.
. For which reason, in the highest Grandeur there is least Liberty Qui magno
imperio ^^^diti in excelso ae^a^em agunt, eorumque fact^ (...) mortales novere,
ita maxima fortuna ^^inima licentia est. Salust.
.

The Prince's Hand keeps time in that Musical Consort, which good and prudent
Government makes; if this time be not regular and even, there arises a
Confusion of Voices, and the Harmony is disordered in others, in that all
follow the Motion of that. Hence it is, that States generally resemble their
Princes, and sooner the ill than the good; for as Subjects use so carefully to
observe their Vices, they make an Impression on their Minds, and are easily
afterward imitated out of Flattery. For Vicious Princes not only commit Vices
themselves, but infuse them into their People, and are more blameable for the
Example than the Fault; and experience tells us, that bad Habits commonly do
more mischief than the very best do good; for such is the perverse Inclination
of our Nature, that it rather studies to imitate Vices than Virtues. How Great,
how Excellent, were those of Alexander the Great? Yet, the Emperor Caracalla
strove to resemble him in nothing but that Habit he had of leaning hi^ Head on
his Left Shoulder. Though, indeed, some of a Prince's Vices prejudice himself
only; others affect also the Commonwealth, as Tacitus has observed in Vitellius
and Otho Vitellius ventre, and gula sibi ipsi hostis: Otho luxu, saevitia,
audatia Reipub. exitiosior ducebatur. Tac. 2. Hist.
. Yet they are all extremely prejudicial to Subjects by the Example they give.
Our easy Tempers are biased by Princes Flexibiles in quamcunq^^ partem ducimur
a principibus, atque, ut ita d^cam, sequentes sumus. Plin in Paneg.
; we follow their Example, whether they be Good or Evil, like those Wheels in
Ezekiel's Vision, which in all things exactly followed the Motion of the
Cherubims Ezekiel. 10. 1^.
. Each Action of Princes seems to be a Command to be obeyed by Imitation Ea
conditio principum, ut quicquid facian^, praecipere videantur. Quinci^.
. Subjects imagine they do their Prince an agreeable piece of Service in
imitating his Vices, and seeing these are Masters of the Will; Flattery easily
persuades her self this must be the way to gain it. Thus Tigellinus grew daily
more Bold and Confident, thinking his ill Practices would be less unacceptable,
if he could engage his Prince (Nero) to be his Associate in them Validio^que
indies Tigellin^^, and malas arts quibus pollebat, gratiores ratus, si
principem societate s^eleris obstringeret. Tac. 14. Ann.
. By this means it is the Commonwealth is disordered, and Virtue confounded.
Princes should therefore lead such a Life, so form their Manners, that all may
learn by them to be Virtuous and Honest; which advice they have given them by
King Alphonso, in the Sixth of his Law.

For if Vices extinguish the Lamp of Virtue in a Prince, who ought like a
Beacon to give Light to all, and show them the securest Course to Sail in, he
cannot avoid dashing against Rocks the Vessel of the Commonwealth; it being
impossible for that Government to be well ordered, where the Prince has
abandoned himself to Vice: For, says King Alphonso, the Nature of Vice is such,
that the more a Man uses it, the more he loves it.

The People easily slight and contemn Laws, if they see him that is the very
Soul of them not observe them. Thus, as the Moon's Eclipses prejudice the
Earth, so the Prince's Faults are the Destruction of his Kingdom: For the
Punishment due to them, God Almighty generally inflicts upon the Subjects too,
and that deservedly, for that in following his Example, they make themselves
Accessory to the same Crimes; as it is related in Scripture of the People of
Israel under Jeroboam And the Lord shall give Israel up, because of the Sins of
Ierob^am, who did sin, and made Is^ael to sin. 1 Kings 14. 1^.
.

The bare Shadow of an ill Action, which obscured King Roderigo's Fame, kept
the Liberty of all Spain in Darkness for many Years; wherefore that barbarous
Custom of the Mexicans is in some measure excusable; who at the Inauguration of
a New King, obliged him to take an Oath he would Administer Justice, not
oppress his Subjects; that he would be in War strenuous and valiant: In a word,
that he would Lop. Gamar.
take care the Sun continued his Course, and preserved his Splendour; that the
Clouds should give Rain, and the Rivers Water, and that the Earth should
produce its Fruit plentifully. For the Sun himself obeys a Holy Prince, as
Joshua experienced for a Reward of his Virtue, and the Earth is more than
ordinary Fertile out of Gratitude, in a manner to the Justice of Kings toward
their People. This is what Homer would signify by these Verses: The King, who
takes Religion for his Guide;
Who does for's Subjects wholesome Laws provide;
For him the willing Earth shows all its Stock,
Corn, Wine, and Fruit; for him the teeming Flock
Brings double Births; the Sea opens all its Cells:
Where Justice reigns, their Peace and Plenty dwells.
The goodness of a Year is not to be judged of so much by good Fruit, as the
Justice of the Prince Annum (...) non tam de bonis fructibus, quam de just
reg^^^tibus existimandum. Boethius.
. And it is very much the Opinion of the Vulgar, that those who Govern them, are
the only Cause of their Happiness or Misery; nay, they often impute to the
Prince, even Casualities, as the Roman People did to Tiberius Qui mos vulgo
for^uita ad culp^^ trabentes. Tac. 4. Ann.
.

Let not a Prince persuade himself that his Vice^ will be less censured, for
suffering them to go unpunished in others, or having them in common with the
People, as it is related Witiza did: For though Subjects love Libertinism, they
hate the Author of it; which was the reason it cost him afterward his Life,
being by all Men hated for his scandalous way of living. What we usually
Censure in others as highly Base and Infamous, in our selves we scarce allow to
be Infirmities of Nature. The greatest Defect in our selves we easily connive
at, but in a Looking-Glass cannot suffer the least Spot. Such a one is a Prince,
in whose Person his Subjects have a view of themselves, nor is any thing more
unpleasant to them, than to see him sullied with Vice. Nero was not at all less
infamous for having many Companions in his Debaucheries; however he thought
thereby to avoid Scandal Ratusque dedecus emoliri, si plures (...) dasset* Tac.
14. Ann.
.

Nor should Princes imagine themselves secure from a self-consciousness of
their good Actions; for whenever the People cannot inform themselves of their
Actions, they begin nicely to examine them, and always put the worst
Interpretation upon them; wherefore it is not enough for them to do well, but
necessary, also, that the means they use have no appearance of Evil. And how
will that Man have any thing secret, who cannot be without his own Grandeur, and
a Retinue of Courtiers, nor do any thing alone; whose Liberty draws with it so
many Fetters and Golden Chains, whose noise every one hears? This was signified
in the Person of the High Priest, by those little Bells that hung round the
bottom of his Garment, least he should forget that his Steps were exposed to
all Men's Ears And he compassed him with Pomegranates, and with golden Bells
round about, that there might be a sound, and a noise made, that might be heard
in the Temple. Eccl. 45. 9.
. All the Guards both within and without a Prince's Palace, all the Courtiers
that attend him in his Chamber or Closet, are so many Spies of his Words and
Actions; nay, and very Thoughts, attentively observing all his Gestures, and
the Motions of his Countenance, that discoverer of the Heart. Thus, according
to the Psalmist's Expression, Their Eyes look unto his Hands Psalm. 122. 2.
. But if they observe any failing in a Prince, though they pretend to conceal
it, yet they love to discover it, either to get the Reputation of Persons
discreet, and well acquainted with the Government, or that of Zealots. Here
they look on one another, and no one daring to open his Mouth, they speak most
by their Silence. The Secret boils and bubbles within them, agitated by the
fervent desire they have of revealing it, till at last it overflows His word
was in mine heart as a burning fire sh^t up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not slay, Ier. 20. 9.
. Tongues run to Ears. This Man discloses it to that, having first obliged him
by Oath to Secrecy; that in the same manner to another; so that while no body
knows, it is known to all. Thus, as 'twere in a moment Calumny passes from the
Closet to the Offices, thence to the Streets and Public Places. But what
wonder is it, if this happens among Domestics, when Princes are not assured,
even, of their own faithfulness, however desirous they are to conceal their
Vices and Tyrannies; for their own Conscience accuses them; as it happened to
Tiberius, who could not forbear disclosing to the Senate the Miseries which he
suffered from his Crimes Quippe Tiberium non fortuna, non solitudines
protegebant, qui^ ^ormenta pectoris, su^sque ipse poe^as fateretur. Tac. 1. Ann.
. However, Princes ought not to be discouraged, if by their Industry and
Diligence they seem not to satisfy every one; for that is a thing impossible,
nor will ever Passion, Envy, and the so different Judgment of the Mob concur to
commend him, much less can this our frail Nature in all things act without
Fault and Error. Is any one more careful and sollicitous in giving Light to
this World, any more perfect than that Eye of it, that Prince of Light, the
Sun, who gives Being, Color, and Beauty to all things? Yet notwithstanding the
Splendour of his Rays, Curiosity discovers therein I know not what Spots and
Obscurities. This care of the Prince to regulate his own Life and Actions,
ought to be extended to those also of his Ministers, the Representatives of
him, in as much as both God and Men hold him to be no less obliged to do the
one than the other.^ It Is not the Moon's defect, what it suffers in an Eclipse,
but that of the Earth, which interposes its Shadow betwixt it and the Sun;
nevertheless every one imputes it to the Moon; and this Shadow only is
sufficient to darken its Rays, and create so much prejudice to things here
below. Prince's Vices we only attribute to his depraved Will; but to let Crimes
in his Ministers go unpunished, is esteemed baseness of Mind. The vehemence of
the Passions and Affections is some excuse for our particular faults, but to
indulge them in others, is wholly inexcusable. A Vicious Prince may have
Virtuous Ministers; but if he begin to connive with them, both he and they will
be bad. Hence it sometimes happens, that an ill Prince's Government may be
good, provided he take care others follow not his Example: For that Rigor
suffers not any Action to be mimick'd out of Flattery, nor lets that natural
Inclination of the Will prevail, by which every one loves to resemble Princes
by imitating their Actions. Grant such a Prince bad for himself, he will be
good for the State. To give absolute Liberty to Ministers, is wholly to abandon
the Reins of Government. Wicked Princes are as difficult to be cured as tainted
Lungs; in that Remedies cannot be applied to them. For these consist in hearing
and seeing, both which they are equally averse to; nay, love not that others
should hear or see; at least, their Domestics and Ministers, who rather
applaud. Princes Vices, don't suffer it; but as the Ancients were used to make
a great noise with Brass and Cymbals, while the Moon was in Eclipse Igitur
aeris sono, tubarum, corn^umque conc^n^u strepere, prout ^plendidior,
obscuriorve laetari aut moerere. Tac. 6. Ann.
; so they make it their business with Music, and other Divertisements, to
amuze the Prince's Mind, chiefly to keep his Ears continually employed, least
the Peoples Clamours, or the Voice of Truth, which discovers Cheats, should
reach them: And lastly, that the Prince being plunged in the same Vices with
themselves, there may be none to Reprove and Correct them.

EMBLEM XIV.
There Is scarce any one Instrument can by its self make a Work of Art entirely
perfect. What the Hammer cannot, the File finishes. Yea, faults of the Loom the
Shears (the Body of the present Emblem) correct, and give an additional
neatness and beauty to Cloth. The Censure of others rectifies our Manners;
they would be full of Knots, did not the Tongue clip them off: Those whom the
Law its self cannot Curb or Reform, oftentimes fear of Blame only restrain, that
being the Spur of Virtue, and Bridle to keep it in the right way. Reproofs upon
the obedient Ears of a prudent Prince, are (as Solomon says) like Earrings of
Gold and glittering Pearls Prove. 25. 12.
, wonderfully Ornamental and great Accomplishments to him. There Is no more
mortal Enemy to Vice than Censure, it has far more Efficacy than Exhortation
and Instruction; for Exhortation proposes at a distance future Fame and Glory;
Censure immediately accuses what is Base and Dishonorable, and inflicts
present Punishment, by divulging the Infamy. That incites us to do well; this
not to do ill, and the Mind more easily abstains from what is Ignominious, than
it enterprises a thing Difficult and Honorable. In effect, it is with reason
Honor is reputed to consist in the Opinion of others, that we may dread that
Opinion, and seeing our Actions depend upon each Man's Judgment, make it our
business to satisfy all. Thus, although Murmur be bad in its self, it is however
good for the State; in that there is nothing has more Power and Influence over
Magistrates and Princes. What would not Power dare, did not Blame resist it?
What Crimes would not that fall into, were there no such thing as this? There Is
no better Counselors in the World than Murmurs, for they proceed from
experience of Evils. Could Princes hear them, undoubtedly things would succeed
better. Satyrs and Libels I dare not altogether approve, for they generally
either exceed the bounds of Truth, or give rise to Scandals, Tumults, and
Seditions; however possibly some allowance ought to be made therein, in
consideration of the good Effects they have. Obtrectation is a sign of Liberty
in a Commonwealth, for in that which Tyranny oppresses, it is by no means
tolerated. It Is a happy time when you have liberty to think what you please,
and speak what you think Rara temporum foelicitate, ubi sentire quae velis, and
quae sentias dicere licet. Tac. 1. Hist.
. 'Twould be unjust in him that governs to desire to put a Door upon his
Subjects Lips, and forbid them to complain under the Yoke of their Slavery. Let
them Murmur, let them Revile, while they let us Reign, said Pope Sixtus V. to
those who told him how ill Rome spoke of him. Indeed, not to be concerned or
moved at all by Detraction, were to have cast off all Sentiments of Honor;
than which nothing is worse in a Prince, for he then makes a Pleasure of
Infamy; he ought therefore so to resent them, as thence to learn something, not
with a design of Revenge. How will one be able to put up greater things, who
cannot connive at such inconsiderable Trifles Magnarum rerum curas non
dissimulaturos, qui animum etiam levissimis adverterent. Tac. 13. Ann.
? 'Twas no less Virtue in the Great Captain Gonsalvo of Cordoua.
to suffer the Complaints and Clamours of his Army at the River Garigliano,
than undauntedly to withstand so eminent a Danger. It Is impossible to repress
this License and Liberty of the People. Those Princes are mistaken, who think
by their present Power to extinguish the Memory of the following Age, or
imagine their Majesty is able to gild bad Actions Quo magis socordiam eorum
irride^e libet, qui praesenti potentia, credunt extingui posse etiam sequentis
aevi memoriam. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Not all Nero's Liberality, nor feigned Piety could wash away his Infamy, for
having set the City on Fire Non open humana, non largit^onibus, aut Deum
placamentis decedebat infamia, qui^ jussum incendium crederetur. Tac. 13. Ann.
. Flattery, it is true, can take care that Slanders come not to the Prince's
Ears, but cannot help but there will be Slanderers. A Prince, who forbids his
Actions to be spoke of, renders them suspected; and as the Commonalty are apt
to presume the worst, they are published for bad. Those things are least
aggravated, which are not much valued Vitellius forbad any one to mention his
bad Actions; hence many, who, if they had been at liberty, would have said
otherwise, merely because of the Prohibition, spoke more to his disadvantage
Prohibiti per civitatem sermones, eoque plures, ac si liceret, vera narraturi,
quia vetabantur, atrociora vulgaverunt (...)
. A Prince ought to pass over Commendations and Invectives, so as not to be
tickled with them, nor by these dejected. If Praises please him, and he give
ear to them, every one will try to make himself Master of his Mind by Flattery;
if Murmurers be a disturbance to him, he will decline difficult and glorious
Enterprises, and become sluggish in his Government. To be vainly puffed up at
ones Praises, is a sign of a slender Judgment; to be offended at every thing,
is for private Men. To connive at many things is the part of Princes; to pardon
nothing, that of Tyrants. This, those Great Emperors, Theodosius, Arcadius, and
Honorius, very well knew when they commanded Ruffinus, their Captain of the
Guards, not presently to punish the Peoples Clamours against them; for, said
they, if they proceed from Inconstancy, they are to be despised; if from
Madness or Folly, to be pitied; if from Malice, and a design to injure us, to
be pardoned Quoniam si id ex levitate processerit contemnendum est; si ex
insania, miseratione dighissimum, si ab inj^ria, remittendum. L. unica C. si
quis imperat. Maledi^.
. Once, while the Emperor Charles the V. was at Barcelona, an Accusation was
brought him in Writing against some, who had traduced his Actions, in order to
consult with him about the Sentence to be passed upon them; but he enraged at
the Person who presented it, threw the Paper immediately into the Fire, by
which he then accidentally stood and burnt it. It belongs, I know, to a Prince
to inform himself of all things, but nicely to examine each Word, is unworthy a
generous Breast Omnia scire non omnia exequi. Tac. in Vit. Agr.
. In the Roman Republic, Actions only were punished, not Words Facta
arguebantur, dicta impune erant. Tac. 1. Ann.
. There Is a wide distance between inconsiderately speaking and maliciously
acting Vana a scelestis, dicta a maleficiis differunt. Tac. 3. Ann.
. The Crown would be too Thorny, did the least thing prick it thus. That
Injury, which the Person against whom it was designed, don't look upon as such,
is very little, if at all offensive. It Is too much easiness in the Prince, and
a sign he has a mean Opinion of himself, to be moved at every trifling Report;
and it is an ill Conscience that incites Men to punish Detracters; a Mind pure
and undefiled despises things of that Nature. If the Aspersion be true, the
Prince's Amendment must wipe it off; if false, it will of its self disappear.
For Contempt makes such things wear off; Resentment i^ a seeming acknowledgment
of them Namque spreta exolescunt, si trascare agnita videntur. Tac. 4. Ann.
. The Roman Senate commanded Cremutius's Annals to be burnt; which made the
People more eager and desirous to read them. 'Twas the same with the Scurrilous
Pamphlets of Vejentus, which were eagerly searched for, and frequently read,
while not to be had without danger, but by being licensed, soon forgot
Conquisites lectitatosque donec cum periculo parabantur, (...) licentia habendi
oblivionem attulit. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Curiosity submits to no Judges, fears no Punishment. What is most forbid, it
chiefly engages. The very Prohibition inhances the Value of Satirical Pieces;
and when Men of Wit are punished, their Authority increases Punitis ingeniis
gliscit Authoritas. Tac. 4. Ann.
. No^ have those Kings, who have used such Rigor, procured themselves any
thing but Disgrace, but to the Author's Honor and Esteem Neque aliud externi
Reges, (...) qui eadem saevitia usi sunt, nisi dedecus sibi, atque illis
gloriam peperere. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Now, as it is much for a Prince's advantage to know what Ill others speak of
him, so it is not a little prejudicial to be too ready to hear Defamers: For as
we easily believe what is accused in others to be true; it is very obvious for
the Prince, either to be deceived, make some unjust Resolution, or err in
giving Judgment. This is a thing very dangerous, especially in Courts, where
Envy, and the gaping after Preferment, and the Favor of Princes, are
Whet-stones to Defamation; and Courtiers are usually like those Locusts in the
Revelations, having Men's Faces, but Lions Teeth, with which they gnaw and feed
on Honor as Ears of Corn Rev. 9. 5.
. The Holy Spirit compares their Tongues to a sharp Sword Psalm. 56. 5.
; as also to Arrows that privily strike the Innocent Psalm. 10. 2.
. David destroyed them as Enemies Psalm. 100. 6.
. No Court, where they are tolerated, can be at rest; and their Whispers will
give the Prince no less trouble than Public Affairs. The Remedy is, not to
hear them, setting two Porters at the Ears, Reason and Judgment, that they be
not opened without considerable occasion. A Guard is no less necessary at the
Ears, than the Palace-Gates; and yet Princes are mighty sollicitous about
these, take little or no care about them. He that gives ear too easily to
Detracters, makes them audacious. No one traduces others, but before one who
loves to hear it. It would do well also to bring these Bablers, and the Person
accused, face to face, telling him what they say, that for the future they may
be ashamed to be the Authors of Discord. This, if I mistake not, is meant by
the Holy Spirit in these Words, Hedge thy Ears about with Thorns Eccl. 27. 23.
Lat. Verse.
: That he that should put his Mouth to them, to tell malicious Stories, might
there find his Punishment. The Prince has reason to be jealous of one, who
dares not publicly speak what he is not afraid to whisper Et hanc velim
generalem tibi ^^^stituas regulam, ut omnem qui palam veretur dicere, suspectum
habeas. S. Bern. 1. 4. de Cons. ad Eug. c. 6.
; and although this care may conceal abundance of Truths from the Prince,
which, indeed, it is for his advantage, there being many Domestic things,
'twere better for him to be ignorant of than to know, and the best way to
banish all Defamation in general; yet, when Accusations proceed not from
Malice, but a kind of Zeal to serve the Prince, it is by all means requisite to
hear, and well examine them, looking on them as Informations absolutely
necessary, not only for good Government, but his own Security also. Hence the
Emperor Constantine, in a Law for that purpose, assigns a Reward to those who
would accuse his Ministers and Domestics of any real Crime Si quis est
cujuscunque loci ardinis, dignitatis, qui se in quemcunque Iudicum, Comitium,
Amicorum, and Palatinorum meorum aliquid veraci^er and manifest probare posse
confidit, quod non integre, atque just gessisse videatur, intrepidus, atque
securus (...), interpellet me, ipse audiam omnia, ipse cognoscam, and si fuerit
comprobatum, ipse me vindicabo. L. 4. C. de Accus.
. This is absolutely necessary, that the Prince may know all that passes in his
Palace, at his Council Board, and in the Courts of Judicature, where Fear stops
the Mouth, and the Favors of the Prince conferred by his Ministers make the
Persons gratified dumb, and not dare to discover their Faults, as if, forsooth,
this were to acknowledge the good Office, and to show their Gratitude, which is
rather to be esteemed Disloyalty and Treason: For that Obligation they lie
under to undeceive their Prince, and if they observe his Ministers to be faulty
to inform him, is a natural Obligation of Fidelity, and more binding than any
other. It Is an infinite prejudice for a Prince to distribute his Favors by the
Hands of his Favorites; for these buy, as it were, others a^ the price of
them, who are assisting to the neglect of their Duty, at least approve and
defend it; and thus deluding the Prince, are the reason he continues his
Affection to them. The Ancient Republics very sensible how conducive Satyrs
were to restrain Vice by the fear of Infamy, allowed them upon Public
Theaters; but these from a general Censure of Men's Morals insensibly
degenerated into particular Reflections, not without considerable Injury to the
Honor of some; hence proceeded Factions, and from them popular Insurrections:
For as the Holy Spirit says, a backbiting Tongue disturbs the Peace, and is the
Ruin of whole Families and Cities Curse the whisperer, and double tongued; for
such have destroyed many that were at Peace, Eccles. 28. 13.
. So, least the Correction of Manners should depend on the Malice of the Tongue
or Pen, there were instituted Censors, who by Public Authority took cognizance
of every one's Behavior, and corrected their Vices. That Office was in those
times of great use, and continued long in Vogue, because its Jurisdiction was
upheld by Modesty; however in ours it is impossible to be executed: For Pride
and Libertinism would presently make all the Opposition to it imaginable, as
they now resist the Magistracy, however armed with the best Laws in the World
and Public Authority, and consequently Censors would be ridiculous, not
without great danger to the State; there being nothing more hurtful, nothing
that makes Vice more arrogant and insulting, than for such Remedies to be
applied to it, as Delinquents turn into Contempt and Ridicule. But as the
Office of Censor was introduced for the Reformation of Manners, so was it also
to Register the Goods and Estates of every Citizen, and to take the number of
them; and although that Custom prevailed a long time, both among the Greeks and
Latins, with great Advantage to the Commonwealth, yet at this day 'twould be
very odious and subject to vast Inconveniences; for to know so accurately the
Number and Effects of Subjects, is of no use, but to burden them with more
Taxes and Impositions. That numbering of the People of Israel under King David,
God punished as a most heinous Crime 2 Samuel 24. 10.
: For what is so hard and inhuman, as by publishing and proclaiming every ones
Estate at once, to discover the advantages of Poverty, and expose Riches to
Envy, Avarice, and Rapine. But if in those States, the Office of Censor, could
heretofore be executed without these Inconveniences; 'twas because its being
newly instituted made it generally received and approved, or else because
People were then less proud and assuming, less Rebels to Reason, than in these
our Times Quid enim tam du^um, tamque inhumanum est quam publicatione pompaque
rerum fami^iar^um, and (...) detegi utisitatem, and invidiae exponere aivitia^.
L. 2. C. (...). ^ qui^. quam. pars.
.

EMBLEM XV.
HOW I wish I could read on all Princes Breasts, the Symbol of the present
Emblem, and that as Balls of Fire flying in the Air imitate the Splendour of the
Stars, and shine immediately from their being thrown out of the Hand, till they
turn to Ashes; so in them also (for the Holy Spirit compares them to ^ bright
Fire Eccles. 50. 9.
) would continually burn the desire of Fame Fax mentis honestae gloria.
; nor should they much care, for that Flames wanting Matter to feed on, or that
what burns most fiercely, is withal soonest consumed. For though length of Life
be the common desire of Man and Beast, yet have these no other end than mere
living, but Man of living uprightly. It Is no happiness to live but to know how
to live, nor does he live most, who lives longest, but who lives best; for Life
is not measured by time, but the use that is made on it. He, whose Life like a
Star in the midst of a Cloud, or like the Full Moon, shines upon others with
Rays of Bounty and Munificence in its Season, does undoubtedly live long He was
as the Morning Star in the midst of a Cloud, and as the Moon at the Full.
Eccles. 50. 6.
: As on the contrary, he who lives only to himself, though he lives to a great
Age, lives but little. The Benefits and Improvements which flow from a Prince
upon the State, number the Days of his Life Eccles. 41. 16.
, those who live without them, Oblivion deducts from the Sum The number of
years is hidden to oppressors. Job 15. 20.
. Titus Vespasian, the Emperor, calling to mind once at Supper, that he had
done nothing for any one that Day, pronounced that remarkable and justly
admired Sentence, Friend, I have lost a Day. And it is reported of Peter, King
of Portugal, that he was wont to say, That he deserves not to be a King, who
does not each day bestow some Favor or Benefit upon the State. No Man's Li^^'s
so short, but it affords time enough to execute some glorious Exploit. A brave
Spirit in one Moment resolves, and in few more executes its Resolutions. What
matter's it if he falls in the attempt, if the Memory he left behind raises him
to Life Eternal. It only can be called Life which is bounded by Fame, not that
which consists in Body and Vital Warmth, which no sooner begins, but begins to
die too. Death is naturally equal to all, but is distinguished by the Glory or
Oblivion we leave to Posterity. Who dying makes Renown a Substitute for Life,
lives still. Strange force of Virtue, which even against Nature, makes that
which is of its self fading and perishable, Immortally glorious. Tacitus did
not think Agricola's Life short, though he was snatched away in the prime of
his Years: for his Glory prolonged his Life Quanquam medio in spati^ integrae
aetatis ereptus, quantum ad g^riam longissimum ^evum peregit. ^ac. in Vir.
Agri^.
. Let no one despise or slight Posthumous Fame, for in as much as the Mind
covets it, it is an acknowledgement that one time or other it is to be enjoyed;
but they are in the wrong, who think it sufficient, if they leave it behind
them in Statues, or in Posterity; for in one it is fading, in the other it is none
of theirs. That only is their own which springs from Actions, which if not
extraordinary Merit no Praise; for Fame is the Daughter of Admiration. To be
Born, only to make One in the World, is for the Vulgar Rout; it is for Princes
to appear perspicuously eminent among others. Others study what they think
their own Interest, but the utmost and only aim of Princes should be Glory
Caeteris mortalibus, in eo stare consilia, quid sibi conducere pute^^,
Principum diversam esse sortem, quibus praecipua rerum ad famam di^^genda. Tac.
4. Ann.
. Avarice, and desire of Riches, fill their Breasts; but a Prince should be
inflamed by an Ambition of Fame Argentum quidem, and pecunia est commo^^ omnium
possessio, at honestum, and ex eo laus, and gloria Deorum est (...) eorum, qui
a aiis proximi censentur. Polybius.
. A heavenly Heat inspires our Prince's Veins.
Virg. A generous Spirit knows no mean; 'twill be either Caesar, or no body;
either a shining Star, or a dark Cinder; nor will this, if honorably
extinguished, shine less gloriously on Obelisks, than the other. Nor, indeed, is
that Soul truly great, which, like the best Gunpowder fired, does not
immediately burst the Body that includes it. The Breast is too narrow to
contain a brisk and active Soul. Garci Sancho, King of Navarre, going to engage
the Enemy, trembled all over, yet in the Fight behaved himself bravely and
courageously. His Body dreaded that great Multitude of Enemies, into which his
Courage prepared to carry it. Let it therefore be the whole Aim of a Prince to
live gloriously, that he may be a Light in this World Let your Light so shine
before Men, that they may see your good Works, Matthew. 5. 12.
. All other things will come with ease, but Fame not without Assiduity and
Application Caete^a Principibus statim a^^esse: unum insatiabiliter parandum,
prosperam sui memo^^am. Tac. 4. Ann.
. But if in the beginning of his Reign he loses his Reputation, he will very
difficultly recover it; for what the People once conceive of him, they will
never afterward forget. He, who sets too great a value upon Life, avoids Toils
and Dangers, without which two, Honor can never be attained. This Tacitus
observed in King Marabodo, who quitting his Kingdom, lazily and shamefully
spent his Days in Italy, losing much of his Reputation through a too fond
desire of Life Consenuitque, multum immatata (...). Tac. 2. Ann.
. Let a Prince so stere his Course, be the Sea Calm or Tempestuous, as still to
keep his Eye upon that shining Beacon of Glory; ever and anon calling to mind
(that he may admit, or think of nothing unworthy himself) that History will
publish his Fame, his Exploits and Glorious Achievements to all Ages, and to
all Nations. Princes have no other Superior than God, and Fame; they alone by
the fear of Punishment and Infamy oblige them to Act honorably; for which
reason they often fear Historians more than their Enemies, and are more awed by
the Pen than the Sword. King Balthazar, though he saw only the Hand and Pen, as
yet not knowing what they would write, was so disordered, That he quaked all
over, and the Ioints of his Back were loosened Dan. 5. 6.
. But if they neither regard God nor Glory, nothing Glorious or Honorable can
be expected. For who e're slights Honor, despises Virtue. A generous desire of
Glory avoids the blemish of Vice or Injustice. Nor is there a more Savage Brute
than that Prince, who is neither moved by remorse of Conscience, or desire of
Glory. Nor is there, nevertheless, no danger in Glory; for its brightness often
dazles Princes, and leads them headlong into Rashness and Temerity. That which
seems Honorable and Glorious to them, is Vanity or Folly, sometimes Pride or
Envy, and oftentimes Ambition and mere Tyranny. They propose great matters,
egged on by the Flatteries of their Ministers, who set before them many things
under the appearance of Glory, concealing in the mean time the unjust and
inconvenient Means by which they are to be attained; by which being seduced,
they oftentimes find themselves deluded and ruined.

That Glory is safe which springs from a generous Spirit, and keeps within the
Bounds of Reason and Possibility. Since therefore Honor and Infamy are the
strongest Excitements to good Actions, and that both are by History delivered
down to Posterity; 'twould be convenient by Rewards proposed to excite
Historians to write, and to countenance Typography, the true Treasury of Glory,
where the Rewards of great Actions are deposited to future Ages.

EMBLEM XVI.
IT IS an old saying, Purple is to be judged by Purple; by which the Ancients
signified, that things were then best distinguished, when one was compared with
the other, especially if they were such as could not easily be distinguished by
themselves. Thus Merchants do, who compare Color to Color, that they may show
each other, and that a surer Judgment may be given of both. In the Temple of
Jupiter Capitolinus, there was a Cloak (a Present of some King from Persia) of
such an excellent Grain, that the Robes of the Roman Ladies, nay, even of the
Emperor Aurelian himself, compared with it, looked as faint as Ashes. If your
Royal Highness, when raised to the Crown, would exmine, and know the true worth
of the Royal Purple, expose it not to the false Light of Flatterers and fawning
Knaves, for that will never show you its true Color: Nor rely too much upon
self-love, for that is like an Eye, that sees all things but its self. 'Twill
be therefore necessary, that as Eyes are known by their own Species, like Forms
represented in a Glass; so your Highness would compare the Luster of your
Diadem to that of your Glorious Predecessors, seriously reflecting if any
Virtues shine more bright in theirs than yours, by viewing your self in them as
in a Glass Tanquam in speculo ornare, and comparare vitam tuam ad alienas
virtutes, Plu^arch.
. Let your Highness, I say, compare your own Actions to those of your
Ancestors, and you will easily see the difference between yours and theirs,
that you may either give a true Color to their Actions, or rejoice in the
Worth of your own, if in any thing you happen to have outdone your
Predecessors. Let your Royal Highness therefore please to consider, whether you
Equal your Father in Courage, your Grandfather in Piety; Philip the Second, in
Prudence; Charles the Fifth, in Greatness of Spirit; Philip the First, in
Affability; Ferdinand the Catholic, in Policy; in Liberality, that Alphonso,
who was Nicknamed from his broken Hands; in Justice, King Alphonso the
Eleventh; and lastly, King Ferdinand the Holy, in Religion: And that moreover,
your Highness would be stirred up by a generous Emulation, to a glorious Desire
of imitating these Great Men. Quintus Maximus and Publius Scipio, were used to
say, that when e're they beheld the Images of their Ancestors, their Souls were
fired and excited on to Virtue: Not that they were moved by the mere Wax or
Stone, but that comparing their own Actions to those of others, they could not
rest till they equaled them in Glory and Renown. Elogies inscribed on Tombs,
speak not to the Dead, but to the Living: They are certain Summaries, which for
Memory's sake, the Virtue of the Predecessor leaves to the Successor.
Mattathias said, That by calling to mind the Actions of their Ancestors, his
Sons should acquire present Glory and eternal Renown Call to remembrance what
Acts our Fathers did in their time, so shall ye receive great Honor, and an
everlasting Name, 1 Macc. 2. 52.
. For which Cause also, the High Priests, who were Princes of the People, wore
upon their Breasts the Virtues of the Twelve Patriarchs, their Predecessors,
engraven upon as many Stones And in the four Rows of Stones, was the Glory of
the Fathers graven, Wisd. 8. 24.
. In effect, it becomes a Prince to vie with his Ancestors in Glory, not with
his Inferiors, for it is no praise to excel them, and to be outdone by them,
the greatest Scandal. The Emperor Tiberius observed as Law, all the Sayings and
Exploits of Augustus Qui omnia facta dictaqu^ ejus vice legis observem. Tac. 4.
Ann.
. Moreover, let your Highness compare the Purple you wear at present, to that
you wore formerly; for we are oftentimes desirous to forget what we have been,
for fear of upbraiding our selves with what we are. Let your Highness consider,
whether you are grown better or worse, for we find it often happens, that at
the beginning of their Reigns, Princes minds are gloriously bent upon the
Execution of their Office, in which afterward they grow more remiss. Almost
all begin their Reigns with Great and Glorious Spirits; but at last by degrees,
either they sink under the Weight of Affairs, or grow Effeminate by Luxury and
Ease, with which they easily suffer themselves to be taken, forgetting they are
obliged to keep and preserve their once gotten Glory. This very thing Tacitus
remarks in the Emperor Tiberius, that at last, after a long Experience in
Affairs, he was altered and ruined by the mere force of Government An cum
Tiberius p^st tantam ^erum experient^am vi dominationis convulsus, and (...)
sit. Tac. 6. Ann.
. A long Reign creates Pride, and Pride the hatred of the People; as the same
Author observes in King Vannius Prima Imperii aetate clarus acceptusque
popularibus; mox diuturni^atem, in superbiam mutans, and odio accolarum s^^al
(...) circumventis. Tac. 12. Ann.
. Many begin their Reigns with extraordinary Modesty and Justice, but few
continue so; because their Ministers are Flatterers, by whom they are taught to
Act boldly and unjustly. As it happened to Vespasian, who in the beginning of
his Reign was not so much bent upon Injustice, until by the Indulgence of
Fortune and Advice of Evil Counselors, he learnt it Ipso Vespasiano, inter
initia Imperii ad obtinendas iniquitates han^ perinde obstinato; donec,
indulgentia fortunae, and pra^is Magistris, didicit, ansusque est. Tac. 2. Hist.
.

Let your Highness compare not only your own Virtues and Actions, but those of
your Ancestors with one another, by confronting the Purple of some stained with
Vices, to that of others glossy and shining with great and noble Actions: For
Examples never move us more than when they are confronted one with another. Let
your Highness compare the Royal Robe of King Marian. Hist. Hisp.
Hermenigildus, with that of Peter the Second, King of Arragon; one glittering
with Stars, and died with Blood, which he had gloriously spilt in the War
against Leuvigildus, his Father, who was infected with the Arrian Heresy; the
other trampled under the Feet of Horses in a Battle at Girone, when he brought
Succors to the Albigensians in France.

Let your Highness cast your Eyes back upon past Ages, and you will find Spain
ruined by the licentious Lives of the Kings, Witiza and Roderick, but recovered
again by the Piety and Courage of Pelagius. You Will see Peter deposed, and
killed for his Cruelty; and his Brother, Henry the Second, advanced to the
Crown for his singular Mildness. You Will see the Glorious Infant, Ferdinand,
blessed by Heaven with many Kingdoms, for that he would not accept of that of
his Grandson, King John the Second, although there were those who freely
offered it him: On the other side, the Infant Sancho accused by his own Father of
Disobedience and Ingratude, before Pope Martin the Fourth, for that he would
have usurped the Throne in his lifetime. This Comparison your Highness may
follow as a sure Guide in the Management of your Affairs; for, though by
Discourse and Conversation you may know the Luster and Brightness of Heroic
Exploits, as also the Baseness and Infamy of Ill Actions; yet all these move us
not so much, considered in themselves, as in those Persons, whom they have made
Glorious in the World, or Despicable.

EMBLEM XVII.
A Tree bedecked with Trophies, is still a Trunk as before; those which were an
Honor to others, are but a burden to it. So truly, the glorious Exploits of
Ancestors are but a Shame and Disgrace to the Successor, unless he imitates the
same. Nor does he inherit their Glory, but their Actions only, by an Imitation
of which he will obtain the other. Just as light is reflected from a Diamond,
because it finds substance, but quickly pierces Glass which is thin and
transparent; so if the Successor be Stout and Brave, the Glory of his
Predecessors adds yet a greater Luster and Brightness to him; but if like thin
and paultry Glass, he cannot withstand the Luster, it serves only to discover
his vile and abject Soul. The Actions of Ancestors, which are only Examples to
others, are Laws to the Successor, for the whole Esteem and Prerogative of
Nobility is grounded upon this Supposition, that the Descendants will imitate
the Actions of their Forefathers. He, who vainly boasts of these without
imitating them, only shows the difference between himself and them. No one is
to be blamed for not equalizing the Actions of them to whom he bears no
relation. For this Reason, the Nobility of Rome were wont to place before their
Doors the Statues of the Illustrious Men of their Families, that they might
show to Posterity what Obligation they lie under. Bodislaus the Fourth, King of
Poland, always wore his Father's Picture in Gold about his Neck; and whenever
any Affair of great consequence was to be determined, he put it to his Mouth,
and kissing on it, with Veneration used to say, God grant I may never do any
thing unworthy your Royal Name. How many such Medals of your Heroic Ancestors
might your Highness find? Which would never permit you to act any thing beneath
their Royal Blood; nay, would rather encourage and excite you to outdo them in
glorious Exploits? Now, if this Emulation of Ancestors inflame the Minds of the
Nobility, they certainly deserve the principal Employments in the State. For as
it is likely those should be best who proceed from the best Par est meliores
esse eos qui ex melioribus, Arist.
; as also Presumption and Experience teach, for Eagles hatch Eagles, and Lions
beget Lions. And oft-times self-worth and fear of Infamy stirs up noble
Thoughts in the mind. Yet, I grant that this Rule holds not always good, either
because Nature cannot do what she would Nam ut ex homine hominem, ex belluis
helluam, sic ex bonis bonum generari putant; at hoc qu^dem natura saepe
efficere vult, non tamen potest. Arist. 1. Pol. c. 4.
, or because of ill Education and Effeminacy; or because Men's Souls themselves
are not equally noble and generous, but act differently according to the
Affection of the Body, in which they are as 'twere drowned. There are some too,
who seem only to inherit the Trophies and Glory of their Ancestors, without
their Virtues, and are in all things wholly different from them. Of this we
have an Example in the Eagles themselves, who although they commonly breed
Eagles; yet there are some, who think that Ostriches are a certain Species of
them, though wholly degenerate, having neither the generosity, strength, nor
swiftness of an Eagle; this fine Bird being transformed into a loathsome dull
Animal. It Is scarce credible how prejudicial it is to the Public Good, without
any discretion or regard to Merit, to elect only the Nobility into Public
Offices, as though the Experience and Virtue of Ancestors ran in the Blood to
Posterity. Industry will languish, Virtue will grow sluggish and lazy, if only
grounded upon Nobility, which will look upon Rewards as its just due; nor will
the hopes of obtaining, or the fear of losing them, be a means to make them act
honorably: Which very Argument Tiberius used to the Senate to persuade them
not to assist the Family of M. Hortalus, which though very Ancient, was fallen to
Poverty Langues^et alioqui ind^stria, intendetur socordia, si nullus ex se
metus, aut spes, and securi omnes aliena subsidia expectabant, sibi ignavi,
nobis graves. Tac. 2. Ann.
. In time of Peace, indeed, Men of Great and Noble Families may be well
preferred to Places of the greatest Authority, in which the Splendour and
Reputation of the Family is of great advantage. In Military Offices the case is
altered, for these require activity and strength both of Mind and Body: But if
these are found in the Nobility, though not in altogether so great Perfection
as in others, the Merits of their Ancestors, or the common Esteem and Respect
of Men will easily compensate for the rest, yet can they by no means supply an
entire defect. For this reason Tacitus deservedly ridiculed the Election of
Vitellius, when he was sent to Command the Legions of Lower Germany; not
considering his Incapacity for such an Office, it seemed enough that he was the
Son of Vitellius, who had been for three times Consul Censoris Vitellii ac ter
Consulis filius, id satis ^idebatur. Tac. 1. Hist.
. Tiberius acted not so in the beginning of his Reign, he conferred Honors
respecting both the Nobility of the Family, the Excellency of the Person in the
Art of War; as also his worth in time of Peace, that it might appear he did not
without Reason prefer one before another Mandabatque honores, nobilitatem
majorum, claritudinem ^^^litiae, illustres domi arts, spectando, ut satis
constaret, non alios poti^^es fuisse. Tac. 4. Ann.
. I grant that the Esteem and Authority of Nobility may do much in War; but
it is not that, but Bravery and Industry that routs the Enemy. The Germans
formerly chose their Kings for their Nobility, but their Generals for their
Valor Reges ex nobilitate, Duces ex virtute (...). Tac. de mor. Germ.
. Then Arms flourish when Valor and Virtue are in esteem, and in possession of
the greatest Posts in the Army; in which they may either acquire Nobility, or
enlarge and illustrate that which they have already. The hope of this furnished
past Ages with brave Heroic Generals; but where this is wanting, Art Military
is neglected and slighted; for nothing but the Honor of Preferment in the Army
can recompense the Inconveniences and Perils of War. Nor is it true as some
suppose, that the greatest Respect and Obedience is paid to those of the
noblest Families; for if they are not qualified with these two great Qualities,
Conduct and Valor, all the deference paid to their Blood will be only mere
Ceremony, not real Respect. The Heart values and admires only such a Virtue and
Greatness of Soul, as is the Maker of its own Fortune. Columbus gave Laws to
the Ocean, and Herman Cortez, to the New World; these, though they did not
spring from Illustrious Families, yet did they procure a Nobility for their
Posterity, equal to those of the greatest Rank. The most noted Rivers take
their rise and beginning from the smallest Rivolets, and a little after take
their Name and Glory from the Channel. In War, where Courage and Bravery are
most esteemed, 'twill be expedient to promote those to the highest Honors who
have merited it by noble Exploits, though they are perhaps but of mean
Extraction; yet, in time of Peace, 'twill be very dangerous for a Prince to
commit the Government to mean and worthless Persons; 'twill immediately incense
the Noble and Brave against him for slighting and mistrusting their I^tegrity
Si Remp. gnaris, and non magni pre^ii hominibus committas, stat^^n and nobilium
ac strenuorum iram in te provocabis ob contemptam e^um fidem, and maximis in
rebus damna patiens. Dion. Cassio.
. Which then chiefly happens, when the Subject is not endowed with good Natural
Parts, not when he is cried up and admired by all, the obscurity of Birth being
sufficiently brightned by the excellent Endowments of Mind. We see many, who
seem to be born of themselves, as Tiberius used to say of Curtius Rufus
Videntur (...) ex se nati. Tac. 11. Ann.
. To such as these Claudian's Praise of a good choice of Ministers is well
adapted.

Mirit, not Birth, he does prefer Claud.
;
Nor cares he whence, but what they are.
But if the Nobility be corrupted by Ease and Luxury, 'twere advisable to
reform it by Rewards and Exercise, rather than to institute an entire new set.
Silver and Gold are easily purified and cleaned, but to make Gold out of
Silver, is a vast labor beyond the Art of Chemistry to perform. Henry the
Fourth, was therefore very ill advised by some to ruin all the Grandees of his
Kingdom, and to promote those of mean Fortune. Though the Licentiousness and
Disobedience of the Nobility may sometimes require that it be a little humbled;
for too much Greatness begets Pride, and an Aversion to Subjection and
Obedience Et revocante Nobilitate, cui in pace durius servitium est. Tac. 11.
Ann.
. The weakest always seek Justice and Equity, but the stronger trouble not
themselves with it Nam Imbecilliores semper equum, and justum quaerunt,
potenti^ribus autem id nihil curae. Arist. Pol. 6. C. 2.
; and the People are generally more quiet, when there are no Great Ones to
protect them, and to foment their Innovations Nihil ausuram plebem principibus
amotis. Tac. 1. Ann.
. For this reason, the Laws of Castile don't allow two Great and Noble Families
to incorporate, that so the Estate might be more divided, and that it might not
creat Jealousy and Envy among others Commodum est etiam, ut haereditates non
donatione, sed jure agnationis tradantur, utque ad eundem una, non plures
haereditates perveniant. Arist. Pol. 5. c. 8.
. There are ways under the pretext of Honor and Favor to remedy excess of
Riches, in giving opportunity of employing it to the Service of the Prince and
People. But Prodigality and Luxury are now grown to that height, that there is
no occasion for such means; for all the Nobility are so much straightened by
Debts, and necessary Expenses, that they want means to execute such Thoughts,
or to attempt Innovation. While they would be great beyond what they can, they
become even less than what they are. It Is certain, that the noblest and most
renowned Families are ruined by a desire of Grandeur and Magnificence Dites
elim familiae nobilium, aut claritudine insignes, studio Magnificentiae
prolabehantur. Tac. 3. Ann.
. But as too much Riches are dangerous, so also is extreme Poverty. For when
any of these Great Ones have squandred away their Estates, they presently set
up for Innovation Sed cum ex Primariis aliqui bona dissiparunt, hi res novas
moliuntur. Arist. Pol. 6. c. 12.
.

EMBLEM XVIII.
VIRTUE has given Empire to many, Vice to few. In these the Scepter was a
violent and dangerous Usurpation, in those a just Title and lasting Succession.
Virtue by a certain occult and secret Force, does as 'twere compel Men to love
and admire it. The Elements obey the Heavens for the Perfection and Excellency
of them; so Men too think none worthy the Sovereign Power, but those of
Sovereign Justice and Virtue. For which cause, Cyrus thought no one was fit to
govern, but he who was better than those he governed Non censebat conveni^e
cuiquam Imperti^m qui non melior esset iis quibus imperaret. Xenoph, lib. 8.
. Subjects pay more Reverence to a Prince, in whom they discern more than
ordinary Endowments of Mind; the greater they are, the greater is their Respect
and Esteem, for all believe that to such a Prince, God is more propitious and
ready to assist him in all things, and to direct his Government. It Is this
alone made Joshua's Name celebrated all the World over So the Lord was with
Joshua, and his fame was noised throughout all the Country, Josh. 6. 27.
. All the Actions and Counsels of a good Prince the People receive with Joy,
and through a certain zealous Confidence promise themselves Success from them;
but if it fall out otherwise, they persuade themselves that for some
supernatural and unknown Reasons it is convenient it should be so. For the same
cause among some Nations, the High Priests were Kings Rex enim Dux erat in
be^h, and Iudex, and in iis quae ad cultum Deorum pertinerent, summam potesta^^
habebat. Arist. Pol. 3. 13.
, that the People receiving Holy Ceremonies and Divine Worship from them, might
acknowledge in them a certain more sublime Nature, more allied and familiar to
God himself, which as a Mediatrix they might make use of in their Prayers, and
against which they durst not attempt any thing Minusque insidiantur iis, qui
D^^^ auxiliares habent. Arist. Polit.
. The Crown upon Aaron's Mitre attracted the Eyes and Desires of all He set a
Crown of Gold upon the Mitre, wherein was engraved Holiness, an ornament of
Honor, a safety-work, the desires of the Eyes goodly and beautiful. Eccl. 45.
12.
.

Jacob worshipped Ioseph's Scepter, on the top of which was a Stork, the Emblem
of Piety and Religion And he worshipped leaning upon the top of his Staff. Vid.
La^ Verse. Et adoravit fastigium virgae ejus: Heb. 11. 21.
.

Let none imagine that the time is lost, which a Prince employs in the Exercise
of Goodness and Virtue; nay, God does then chiefly dispose and direct the
Events of things. Ferdinand Antoline was at his Devotions, while Count Garcias
Fernandez fought the Moors at the River Duero, and an Angel in his likeness
supplied his place in the Fight, by which he not only escaped the discredit of
not being at the Battle, but also gained the chiefest Praise of Honor of the
Victory. Something like this is related of that Renowned General, Count Tilly,
that true Christian Joshua, not less Holy and Religious, than Warlike and
Brave, that while he was at Prayers, the Army was drawn up by another in his
shape. The Emperor, Ferdinand the Second, had more Standards and Trophies
presented to him in the time of Divine Service, than many of his Ancestors had
gained from the Enemy Fear ye not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the
Lord, which he will show you to day, Exodus 14. 13.
. The Israelites stood still, and God wrought Wonders for them And the Lord God
of Israel fought for Israel, Josh. 10. 42.
. That Crown, which like Ariadne's shines with refulgent Stars of Virtue, shall
last to Eternity And that turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right, or
to the left; to the end that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his
Children in the midst of Israel, Deuteronomy. 17. 20.
. The Emperor Septimus told his Sons as he was dying, That he left them a firm
and lasting Empire if they were good; if wicked, but of short continuance. King
Ferdinand, who from his great Virtues, was surnamed the Great, did by these
wonderfully increase the Glory of his Kingdom, and established it to Posterity.
His Piety was so great, that when the Body of St. Isidore was carried by Sevil,
he and his Sons, barefoot, carried these Holy Relics from the River Durio,
quite to St. John's Church in the City. For it is God by whom Kings Reign, and
upon whom all their Power and Felicity depends; they could never err, if they
would make him their only Object. The Rays of the Sun never forsake the Moon;
she, as if she knew she received all her Light from the Sun, looks on him
continually, that she may be enlightened by him; which Princes must so imitate,
that they may always have their Eyes fixed upon that Eternal Light, which
affords Light and Motion to the World, and from which Empires take their
increase and decrease, as is intimated in the present Emblem by the Scepter, on
the top of which is the Moon looking toward the Sun, the true Emblem of God,
as well because no other thing comes nearer his Omnipotency; as also, because
that alone gives Light and Being to all.

Which 'cause it solely all Surveys,
Is properly called Sol.
Boet. For there is no Power but from God Romans 13. 1.
. Kings are crowned in his Eternal Mind before they are here on Earth. He, who
gave the Orbs Celestial first motion, gives it also to Empires and Republics.
He, who has appointed a King over Bees, has not left merely to Chance or Humane
Choice, these Second Causes of Princes, who are his Viceroys upon Earth, and
as like him as may be Principes quidem instar deorum esse. Tac. 3. Ann.
, being represented in the Revelations by those Seven Planets, which God held
in his Hand And he had in his right hand seven Stars, Revel. 1. 16.
; upon them he darts his Divine Rays, the Reflection of which gives them the
utmost Power and Authority over their Subjects. Without that Splendour, all
Power, how great soever, is in a manner dark; the Prince who slighting this
Light, shall follow another, an appearance may be of some good, which his own
convenience, not right reason offers, will soon see the Orb of his Power
eclipsed and darkened. What ever avoids the Sun, must necessarily be in
darkness. The Moon, although it finds its self oft'times quite dark, does not
therefore turn away from the Sun, but looks on it with so much the more
eagerness, till at last it is again enlightened by it. Let a Prince hold his
Scepter fixed and steady, having always a regard to Virtue, as well in
Prosperity as Adversity: For the same Divine Sun, which either for Punishment
or Exercise of his Virtues, permitted his decrease, as a recompense of his
Constancy will again promote and increase his greatness. Thus 'twas with the
Emperor, Ferdinand the II. who was often reduced to that extremity of Fortune,
that his Empire and Life too seemed desperate. Yet he was resolved never wholly
to despair, nor to turn his Eyes from that Eternal Sun, the Maker and Governor
of all things, whose Divine Providence freed him from all Perils, and advanced
him far above all his Enemies. Moses's Rod, which was the Emblem of a Scepter,
did Wonders whilst he held it^ in his Hand upright toward Heaven; but as soon
as he cast it upon the Ground, 'twas turned into a venomous Serpent, dreadful
even to Moses himself And he cast it on the ground, and it became a Serpent,
and Moses ^led from before it, Exodus 4. 3.
. Whilst the Scepter, like Jacob's Ladder, touches Heaven, God himself supports
it, and Angels descend to its assistance And he dreamed, and behold, a Ladder
set upon the Earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven; and behold, the Angel^
of God ascending and descending on it. Genesis 18. 13.
. This the Egyptians knew, who on the top of their Scepters were used to
engrave the Head of a Stork, a Religious Bird, and Pious toward its Parents;
but on the bottom, the Foot of a Seahorse, an impious and ungrateful Animal,
which Plots to kill his Father, that he may the more freely enjoy his Mother.
By which Hieroglyphick they meant nothing, but that Princes ought always to
prefer Piety to Impiety. Machiavel would have his Prince to learn this
Hieroglyphick, but in quite another Sense, for he would have Piety and Impiety
placed at each end, that he might turn it as he pleased, and hold that upwards
which tended most to his Preservation and Advantage. For which reason, he
thinks it is not necessary for a Prince to be Virtuous, it is enough if he
pretends to be so; for to be really so, and to act according to the Dictates of
Virtue, would, he says, be pernicious; but that it is most advantageous to be
thought so; for by this means he will be so disposed, as to know how to shift
upon occasion, and so to act in all things as advantage or opportunity shall
require: And this, he says, is principally necessary for Princes new^^ come to
the Crown, who ought to be quick and ready to spread their Sails to every
breath of Fortune, and as necessity requires. Impious and foolish Counsel, that
would insinuate that Virtues need not be real and genuine, but only counterfeit
and imaginary, for how can the Shadow be as effective as the Substance? What
Art or Pains can bring Crystal to that perfection, as it shall equal the
Diamond in luster and brightness? Will Not any one at first sight discover and
laugh at the Cheat. A true Glory takes root and flourishes, tha^ which is not,
falls like Blossoms; nor can any thing be lasting that is counterfeit Vera
gloria radices agit, atque etiam propagatur; ficta (...) celeriter tanquam
flosculi decidunt, neque fimulatum quidquam potest (...) diuturnum. Cic. lib.
2. de Off. cap. 32.
. There Is no Art or Cunning so great, as to make a vicious Inclination appear
truly good and virtuous. For if we so easily fail in real Virtues so agreeable
to our Nature and Inclination, what shall we do in false and imaginary ones?
How will the Subjects, when they discover the Cheat, be able to endure the
Stench of this Sepulchr^ of abominable Vices, without any ornament of Goodness?
How can they turn their Eyes from that inward Wound, when the Patch under which
it lurked being drawn off, it is openly exposed to the sight of all And all our
righte^^^nesses are as filthy rags, Isaiah 64. 6.
? Whence a Prince will be contemptible and ridiculous to his own People at
home, and suspected by Foreigne^ abroad. He will be surely odious to both, for
neither can live securely under him. Nothing renders Tyranny more grievous than
when the Prince dissembles Virtue. For from thence oft-times greater Vices
spring, for this Reason many were afraid of Otho, when he stood Candidate for
the Empire Otho interim, contra (...) omnium, non deliciis, neque desidia
torpescere, dilatae voluptates, diss^^^ lata luxuria, and cuncta ad decorem
imperii composita, eoque plus (...) a^^erebantur fals^ virtutes, and vitia
reditura. Tac. 1. Hist.
. When a Prince is known to be wicked and vicious, it is easy to beware of him,
but not so when he dissembles. Open Vice may be imputed to frailty of Nature;
but pretended Virtue is only Cheat and Design; not accidental, but premeditated
Injustice; so that it is more pernicious than open Vice. As Tacitus remarks in
Sejanus Haud minus noxiae, quoties, parando regno finguntur. Tac. 4. Ann.
, there is no greater Villainy, than under pretense of Virtue to exercise Vice
Extrema est perversitas, cum prorsus jus^^tia vaces, ad id niti, ut (...) bonus
esse videaris. Plat.
. It Is a certain weakness to be openly wicked, but to counterfeit Virtue is
true Villainy. Men more easily dispense with other Vices, but all loath
Hypocrisy; for by them we only deceive our selves, but by this, others too.
Nay, good Actions are despised if artificial, and not the Product of Virtue.
Vitellius did many things to curry favor with the People, but those things
which would have been really acceptable, had they proceeded from a Principle of
Virtue, were (by the memory of his former Course of Life, and because every one
saw that they were feigned and forced) looked upon as base and vile Quae grata
sane and popularia, si a ^^tutibus proficiscerentur; memoria vitae prioris,
indecora, and vilia accipiebantur. Tac. 2. Hist.
. And, pray, who would dissemble Virtue, if it cost the same pains to do so, as
to be really virtuous? If Virtues themselves, by reason of the wickedness of
Manners, have scarce strength and power to subsist, how then should the false
and counterfeit? Who ever puts more confidence in these Tricks than in Divine
Providence, denies that he receives his Crown and Preservation from God, and
that he is the Disposer of Rewards and Punishments. If a Prince's Vices proceed
from Weakness, and not from Affection, it is best to conceal them, that they may
not give ill Examples; for to conceal them on that account, ought not to be
accounted Hypocrisy, or a design to Cheat others, but rather Prudence, and an
Esteem and Respect due to Virtue. There Is no curb or restraint to that Power
which does not veil its Tyrannies with some pretense or other. The Senators
never feared Tiberius, more than when they saw him without Dissimulation
Penetrabat Pavor, and admiratio, callidum olim, and regendis sceleribus
obscurum, huc confidentiae venisse, ut tanquam dimotis parietibus ostenderet
Nepotem sub verbere Centurionis, inter servorum ictus, extrema vitae alimenta
frustra orantem. Tac. 6. Ann.
. Yet Tacitus writes of Piso, that he was cried up by the People for Virtues,
or something resembling them Claro apud vulg^^ ^umore erat per virtutem, aut
species virtutibus ^imiles. Tac. 15. Ann.
. I don't mean by this, that Virtues are the same in a Prince, whether feigned
or real; but that the People are sometimes deceived, and take Hypocrisy for
Virtue. Therefore how much more firm and lasting would Piso's Fame have been,
had it been supported by real and solid Virtues. The same inconveniences arise
if a Prince is possessed of real Virtues, but such as he will easily change for
his convenience; for that cannot be Virtue, which is not a firm and constant
habit of the Mind, nor will it inhabit such a Breast with fears, not upon any
prospect of advantage to turn it into Vice, and join with Villainy. And how can
this ever be convenient for a Prince?

And what Case or Circumstance can require it, especially in these our times,
when Rule and Empire are established upon sure Laws; not depending as in the
Roman's time, upon the Election and Insolence of the Soldiers. No danger can be
so great, that a Prince by prudent Virtue may not avoid without having recourse
to Vice. If at any time a Prince renowned for Virtues be vanquished, it is not
because he was good, but because he knew not enough how to be good. A Just
Prince is not obliged hastily and rashly to confront and oppose Vice, where
there is no prospect of Advantage, but certain and manifest Danger from this
over-diligence; nay, it is a piece of great prudence to permit and suffer that
quietly, which by Opposition cannot be prevented Permittimus, quod nolentes
indulgemus, quia pravam hominum voluntatem ad plexum cohibere non possumus. S.
Chrysostom.
. Let him dissemble the knowledge of their Vices, till he finds a convenient
time to remedy them; and in the mean time reward the Good, and punish the Bad,
and use such other means as prudence shall suggest; but if these are not
sufficient, let him leave it to his Successor, as Tiberius did, when he saw he
could not reform the Manners of his time Non id tempus censurae, nec si quid in
moribus laboret defuturum corrigendi authorem. Tac. 2. Ann.
. For if through fear, a Prince should by doing ill conform himself to the Life
and Manners of ill Men, he would not only not bring them into the way of
Virtue, but would at the same time mislead the Good, so that both would grow
worse; Virtue in a Prince is never dangerous, but rash Zeal and Severity often
is. Villains don't hate a Prince for being good, but, because, for his too
strict Severity they cannot be wicked and lewd. There Is no body but desires a
Just Prince; the worst have need of such a one, that Justice may flourish, by
which they may live not only secure from others, but from one another too. This
Seneca meant, when, that he might persuade Nero from incestuous Conversation
with his Mother, he threatened him that the Incest was divulged by his Mother,
who gloried in it, and the So^diers would not endure so vicious a Prince
Pervulgatum esse incestum, gloriante matre, nec toleraturos milites profani
Principis Imperium. Tac. 14. Ann.
. Nay, so necessary are Virtues to a Prince, that without some Vices themselves
cannot subsist. Nor did S^janus endear himself to Tiberius by other means, than
by mingling Virtues with Vices Corpus illi laborum tolerans, animus audax, sui
obtegens, in alios criminator, justa adulatio, and superbia, palam compositus
pudor, intus summa adipiscendi libido, ejusque causa, modo largitio, and luxus,
saepius industria, and vigilantia. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Such a mixture of Virtues and Vices one might see in Lucinius Mucianus; in
V^spasian also, there were many notable Vices' as well as Virtues Ambigua de
Vespasiano fama. Tac. 1. Hist.
. This is certain, Sejanus's favor with Tiberius had been much more secure;
and Vespasian and Mucian, had been much more accomplished Princes, if
substracting their Vices, their Virtues only had remained Egregium Principatus
temperamentum, si demptis virtutibus utriusque vitiis solae virtutes
miscerentur. Tac. 2. Hist.
. If it be convenient for a Prince to be vicious, that he may distinguish the
good from the bad, 'twill be sufficient only to know how to be so, without
being practically so. Let him therefore be virtuous, but let him be so
circumspect and prudent, that no Cheat or Knavery may escape him, no Villainy but
which he may see through; so by thoroughly observing each Man's Manners, and way
of Life, he may Govern them the better. And in this Sense may their Opinions be
taken, who think that Princes are so much the more secure, by how much they are
more wicked than their Subjects Eo Munitiores Reges censentur, quo illis,
quibus imperitant, nequi^res. Salust.
. This sort of Vice relating to the knowledge of wickedness, is very expedient
to know how to chastise, and also to bear with humane Frailties: Without that
knowledge, severe Virtue is too rigid and dangerous for Government. Whence
it is, that in a Prince manly Virtues are most requisite, such as are
appropriated to Empire, not those monastic Melancholy ones, which make him
timorous, slow, and unsteady in his Resolutions, averse to Humane Conversation,
and more intent upon his own private Perfections than the Government of the
Public. The greatest Perfection in a Prince, is to answer the Obligations laid
upon him by God Almighty.

Machiavel would not have a Prince counterfeit Virtues at certain times only,
but he endeavors also to establish a sort of Policy upon Vice, by showing how
by help of this, the other may be advanced to the highest pitch; and by
asserting that Men are ruined, because they know not how to be wicked; as if
there might be a certain Science to be formed of it. This Doctrine has made
many Princes Tyrants, and ruined them. Men are not ruined, because they know
not how to be wicked, but because wickedness it self cannot long defend its
self; for there is no Villainy so cunning and cautious, as to prevent its self
from being caught at last in its own Snares. What skill can instruct a Man to
keep a sound Judgment in his Vices, whose Sins trouble his Conscience, which
though it is in us, yet by a certain Divine Impulse operates without us, being
both Judge and Executioner of our Actions: whose Tyranny Nero felt after he had
commanded his Mother to be killed, fearing that the Light which gave Life to
others, brought his Death Sed a Caesare profecto demum sceleris magnitudo
intellecta est; reliquo noctis, modo persaepius pavore exurgens, and mentis
in^ps operiebatur, tanquam exitium allaturam. Tac. 14. Ann.
. The most resolved Spirit sometimes hesitates, and is confounded at the sight
of Villainy: So it happened to Sejanus, when he plotted to extinguish the
Family of Tiberius; he was confounded by the greatness of the Crime Sed
magnitud^ facinoris metum, prolationes, diversa interdum consilia adferebat.
Tac. 4. Ann.
. God takes the wise in their own craftiness Job 5. 13.
. Vice is ignorance, opposed to Prudence; it is a Violence that toils to its own
Ruin; it is a dangerous Building which falls upon his Head who built it. No
Judgment is so great as to correct lesser Tyrannies by greater; and to what a
vast Bulk might Men raise it? That very Example of John Pagola of Peru, which
Machiavel makes use of to confirm his Assertion, makes it evident enough how
dangerous it is to walk upon those Precipices, when though he had procured the
Death of Pope Julius the Second, he could by no means accomplish his Villainy.
The same also befell D. Valentine, whom he proposes as an Idea as 'twere to
Princes; for he, that he might upon the Death of Pope Alexander the Sixth,
secure his own Affairs, drank to some of the Cardinals of the contrary Faction
in a Bowl of Poison, but the Cups being by mistake changed, he and Alexander
drank the Poison, upon which the Pope died suddenly, and Valentine was so ill
upon it, that he could not be present at the Conclave, (which mischance all his
cunning could not foresee and prevent) whence it happened too, that whom he
desired was not elected, and he himself lost all that he unjustly possessed in
Romania. Divine Providence does not permit Tyrants to thrive in their Designs
He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise, Job 5. 12.
: It Is Virtue only that has the Power to make God propitious to us, not
wickedness. If any Tyrant has long enjoyed his unjust Usurpations, it is the
effect of some eminent Virtue or Natural Endowment, which hides his Vices, and
makes him obeyed by the People. But Malice ascribes this to tyrannical
Artifices, and from Examples of that Nature, picks out some impious and
erroneous Maxims of State, to the ruin both of Princes and Empires. Besides,
all don't Reign, who have the Scepter in their Hands, or the Crown upon their
Heads; for Divine Justice, though it leaves them the Kingdom, takes away the
Command, by permitting them to be Slaves to their Passions, and their
Ministers, and to be oppressed by Misfortunes and Seditions. So was Samuel's
Prediction to Saul fulfilled, that as a Punishment for having disobeyed God, he
should be no more King Because thou have rejected the Lord, he has also
rejected thee from being King, 1 Samuel 15. 23.
: For though he lived and died King, yet was his Reign but perfect Slavery.

EMBLEM XIX.
IN the Games of Vulcan and Prometheus, several Persons being placed in a Row
employed themselves thus: The first came out with a lighted Torch in his Hand,
which he gave to the second, and he to the third, and so from one to the other;
whence came the Proverb, Cursu lampada trado; applied to those things which
past as 'twere by Succession from one to another. In which Sense Lucretius, Et
quasi cursores vitai Lampada trado. Which he seems to have borrowed from Plato,
when persuading Men to Propagation, he says it is necessary, that Life which Men
received from their Predecessors, they should like a flaming Torch deliver down
to Posterity. Vt vitam, quam ipsi a majoribus, accepissent, vicissim, quasi
t^dam ardentem posteris tradant. Plato.
What else is a Scepter, but such a Torch as this, which passes by Succession
from one to another? What is it therefore that Majesty assumes to its self in
this so short and transitory Greatness? Many things are common to a Prince with
other Men, there is but one thing, and that accidental too, which makes the
difference. All those don't humble his Mind, yet does this single accident puff
him up above others. Let him think that he is a Man, and that he governs Men;
let him consider well that he comes upon this great Theater of the World to act
the part of a Prince; and that he having his discharge, another shall succeed
to those Robes which he shall leave; and that of both of them only this will
remain, that they once were. Lastly, Let him know that these Robes wherewith he
is clothed, are not his own, but the States, which that only lends him, that
he may be a while its Head, and may consult for the Preservation, Increase, and
Prosperity thereof, as we have said before.

When therefore a Prince has once begun to run the Race of this Life, furnished
with the lighted Torch of his State; let it not be his only business to prolong
his Race, for the Goal is already fixed beyond which he cannot go; and who knows
but that he may be now very near it, the Flame being exposed to every blast of
Wind. One single Gale wrenched it from the Hands of King Henry the First, er'e
he was fourteen Years old. Also a fall from a Horse prevented Prince John, Son
of their most Catholic Majesty's from taking hold on it.

Let a Prince consider also the fitness of his hand, the occasion and right,
that he may not rashly grasp at more of these Torches, than either Succession or
lawful Election shall grant him. Had Frederick, Count Palatine, considered
this, he had never lost his Electoral Dignity, his Places, and Titles so
unfortunately, for being ambitious of the Kingdom of Bohemia. And truly
Charles, King of Naples, had ended his Race more successfully, had he been
contented with the Torch of his own Kingdom, and not attempted to grasp at that
of Hungary, where he was therefore poisoned.

Let not a Prince too readily trust his Torch to another, nor suffer any one to
touch it with so great Authority. For Empire admits of no Companion. The Infant
Sancho attempted to snatch this Torch from his Father, King Alphonso the Wise,
by the same Power and Authority which he received from him. Nor were there
wanting Pretenses for the Infant of Portugal, to attempt the same against his
Father, Dionysius.

These Torches of Kingdoms lighted by ill Methods, are commonly soon
extinguished, for no Power acquired by wickedness is lasting. King Garcias
forced his Father, Alphonso, to quit his Kingdom, but could not enjoy the Crown
so gotten above three Years. Fruela the Third, possessed but fourteen Months
the Kingdom which he had attained rather by Force than Election. Violent
Counsels h'an't always their desired Success. Ramon hoped certainly to inherit
the Throne of Navarre, if he could make away with his Brother Sancho; but the
People abhorred him who had conceived such a horrid Villainy, and so offered it
to Sancho, King of Arragon, his Uncle.

Let not a Prince unadvisedly trust his Torch out of his own Hands in his
Lifetime, least, if he should afterward repent, it should befall him, as it
did King Alphonso the Fourth, who having once resigned his Kingdom to his
Brother Ramiro, could never afterward retrieve it, though he desired it.
Ambition while in Possession regards not Justice, having always Arguments and
Pretenses at hand to defend it self. And who will not be moved by the
difference between commanding and obeying.

Though these Torches do pass from Father to Son, yet let Kings remember that
they receive them from God, and that when he pleases they are to Surrender them
to him, that they may know to whose Gift they ought to ascribe them, and how
strict an Account they are to give of them. This King Ferdinand the Great did,
who with his last Breath pronounced these Words, Thine, O Lord, is Power,
Empire is thine; Thou art Supreme King of Kings; all things are under thy
Providence. The Kingdom which from thy Hand I received, unto thee I resign. The
same Words did King Ferdinand the Holy, use at the point of Death.

It Is a glorious, though laborious Race which Heaven has designed for your
Royal Highness, which must be run not with one, but with several Torches of
shining Diadems, which like the Sun, but without ever leaving us in the dark,
will diffuse their extended Light from East to West. Furious Winds rising from
each part of the Horizon, will perhaps threaten them; but since God has lighted
them to preceed the Standard of the Cross, and to give light upon the Holy
Altars of the Church, it may well be hoped that these may shine like that I
will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my
Salvation to the end of the Earth, Isaiah 49. 6.
; especially if your Highness's Faith and Holy Zeal, would by holding them
upright, make their Flame burn more clear and bright, its natural tendency
being toward Heaven; and he who holds them obliquely, will make the Flame its
self feed upon and wast them, but he who turns 'em directly downwards, opposite
to Heaven, will immediately extinguish them; for the Matter which would else
nourish them, will then extinguish them. Let your Highness therefore take care
with these Lights to finish your Course with Glory, and Surrender them bright
and flaming to your Successor, not merely such as you received them, but
illustrated and augmented with new Rays: For God weighs both Kingdoms and Kings
when they begin to Reign, that he may afterward require a just Account from
them; thus he did with King Balthazar Thou art weighed in the balance, and
found wanting, Dan. 5. 27.
. And if Otho thoguht himself obliged to deliver up the Empire to Posterity,
such as he had received it from his Ancestors Vrbi nostrae institutum, and a
Regibus usque ad Principes continuum, and immortalem, sicut a Majoribus
accepimus, sic posteris tradamus. Tac. 1. Hist.
; your Highness must acknowledge no less an Obligation derived to you from your
glorious Predecessors. So the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, resigned his while he
was yet living, to his Son Philip the Second: And though the wickedness of some
cannot attend the end of their Career, for fear of adverse Winds already raised,
as was the Case of Alphonso, King of Naples, who seeing he could not resist
Charles the Eighth of France, surrendered the Crown to his Son Ferdinand, Duke
of Calabria; yet certain it is, that his design was to make a timely Restitution
of his Crown to God, and prepare himself for another, not Temporal but Eternal
one, which once obtained may be securely enjoyed without fear of ever being
lost.

EMBLEM XX.
AMONG the Ceremonies of the Athenians at their Marriages, a certain little
Boy, with a Basket of Bread in his Hand, and a Crown of Thorns upon his Head,
went before the Bridegroom; by which, I believe, they intimated that Matrimony
was not instituted for Pleasure only, but also for Cares and Labors. By the
same (if Emblems will admit Human Figures) might also be meant a Prince. For
what thorny Cares does not he feel, who endeavors to maintain his State in
Justice, Peace, and Plenty. What Difficulties does he experience? What Dangers
is he liable to, who commands other Quam arduum, quam subjectum fortunae
regendi cuncta onus? Tac. 1. Ann.
? His Fatigues should be the Peoples Rest, his Dangers their Security, his
Vigilance their Sleep. But we have here represented the same thing by a Crown,
fine, indeed, and charming to ^ight, but within full of Thorns and Briars; with
this Motto of Seneca the Tragedian. False good! What Cares do hide,
Under the appearance of a gay outside?
Who viewing those Pearls and Diamonds, and those Flowers which adorn a Crown,
would not fancy that the inside was much more fair and beautiful; yet is there
nothing but sharp Thorns, which continually prick and scratch the Head and
Breast? There is not a Pearl in a Crown, but which is Sweat; nor a Ruby, but
which is Blood; nor a Diamond, without some asperity or roughness; it is a
Circumference without a Center of rest, a perpetual Motion of Cares S^rabo.
; for this reason Kings anciently wore a Crown made like a Ship, to represent
its Inconstancy, Trouble, and Dangers Valor. Max.
. This he well knew, who, when a Crown was offered him, laid it down, with
these Words, Let him take thee up, who does not know thee. Instead of Crowns
they at first used Fillets, not as a Badge of Majesty, but only to bind and
preserve the Head Let them set a fair Mi^re upon his Head, Zach. 3. 5.
. So heavy are the Cares of a Crowned Head, that it had need to be fore-arm'd;
for to Reign is nothing but three continual Sighs and Toils, in preserving,
acquiring, and losing. Therefore did the Emperor, Mark Anthony, say, That
Empire was the greatest of Troubles. Princes are born to labors, let them
therefore inure themselves thereto. The Kings of Persia had a Chamberlain, who
waked them betimes in the Morning with these Words, Arise, O King, to look
after the Affairs of your Kingdom. Some Princes nowadays would not endure
such disturbance, for they persuade themselves that Ease, Voluptuousness, and
Vices, are the Rewards of Princes, but that the Shame and Disgrace thereof
belong to others. Whereas some Princes shamefully neglect their Duty, it is
because (as we shall mention elsewhere) they take the Kingdom for their
Inheritance and Propriety, which they may use as they please, and think that
their Authority and Sovereign Power is subject to no Laws, but altogether free
to act as it list; in which Flattery encourages them, insinuating that without
that freedom and liberty of living, a Kingdom would be the worst of Slavery,
more intolerable than the meanest Condition of Subjects. Whence resigning
themselves to Luxury and Pleasure, their Strength and Spirits flag, and
themselves become wholly unfit for Government. Hence, I believe, it is, that
among so many Princes, there are so very few good Governors, not that they want
Natural Parts, for in those they usually exceed others, as being born of better
Blood; but because that through Ease and Luxury they don't make use of them;
nor do their Courtiers suffer it, for they make their Fortunes with more ease
under a negligent than careful Prince. The Remedy against these Inconveniences
consists chiefly in two Things; The first is, That a Prince, should from his
Youth, as soon as he has the use of Reason, be accustomed to the Management of
Affairs, even before the Death of his Predecessor; thus God did with Joshua.
And if in Matters of Concern and Trust, it be not convenient, for Reasons which
I shall show in the last Emblem but one; yet in other things it is, that his
Mind may be diverted from Debauchery. This made the Roman Senate introduce
their Youth to their Consultations. By the benefit of this many Popes Nephews,
though they have been admitted very young to the Administration of Affairs,
have in a few years made experienced Statesmen. The other is, That those that
are near the Prince, should dexterously endeavor to root out of his Mind
certain vain Opinions of his Greatness, and let him know that it is the common
Consent of all that gives Power and Authority to the Scepter, for Nature made
no Kings. That his Purple is an Emblem of Blood, which he should be ready upon
occasion to shed for the People Consula^es fasces, praet^^tum, curulemque
sellam, nihil aliud, quam pompam funeris putent; claris insignibus velut
in^^sis velatos ad most (...) destinari. Live. 2. Hist.
; that it was not given to breed and nourish the Mo^h^ of Vices: That he is
born a Prince by chance; that Virtue only is the proper good of Man; that his
Dominion is Government, not absolute Power, and that his Vassals are Subjects
not Slaves. This Document the Emperor Claudius gave to Meherdatus, King of
Persia Vt non dominationem, and servos, sed rectorem and cives cogitaret. Tac.
12. Ann.
. Let them advise the Prince so to do by those whom he Governs, as he would be
done to were he a Subject; so Gaiba instructed Piso when he adopted him his Son
Cogitare quid ^ut (...) sub alio Principe, aut volueris. Tac. 1. Hist.
. No Prince was ever elected only to be so, but that being so he might be
serviceable to the rest. King Antigonus considering this, advised his Son not
to abuse his Power, not to be proud or use his Subjects ill, Know thou not,
my Son, said he, that our Kingdom is but a noble Slavery An Ignoras, (...) mi,
nostrum Regnum ess^^ n^bilem servitutem?
. Upon this the Woman grounded her Answer to the Emperor Rodolphus, who telling
her he was not at leisure to hear her: Then, says she, you are no more Emperor.
Subjects are not born for the King, but the King for the Subjects. 'Twould be
too hard a Bargain for them to sell all their Liberty to the King, if in return
they could not promise themselves Justice and Protection from him, to which end
they voluntarily submitted themselves to his Command. The Romans in their
Triumphs were crown^d with their own Shields With f^vour will thou compass him
as with a Shield, Psalm 5. (...).
, made into the circular Form of a Crown, whence were introduced the Diadems of
the Saints, who were Victorious against the Common Enemy. A Prince deserves not
a Crown, unless also he use it as a Shield to ward the Strokes of adverse
Fortune from his Subjects. To Reign is rather an Office than a Dignity, an
Authority of a Father over his Children Vt enim gubernatio patrisfamilias est
Regia quaedam potestas domi; ita Regia potestas, est civitatis and gentis unius
aut plurium quasi domestica quaedam gubernatio. Arist. Polit. 3. cap. 11.
; and if the Subjects find not that Fatherly Care and Affection in the Prince,
they owe him no Respect or filial Obedience. King Ferdinand the Holy, looked
upon his Government as an Office, which consisted in protecting his Subjects,
in administering Justice, in chastising Vice, and procuring the Enlargement of
his Territories; not sparing any pains for its Advantage, and according to this
he always acted. Princes are (as we shall observe elsewhere) like Mountains, as
well because they are nearer the Favors of Heaven; as because they should
receive all Injuries of the Weather upon themselves, being Depositaries of Ice
and Snow, which melting, should flow thence, and water and refresh the droughty
Fields and Valleys beneath, and by the Shade of their Bodies defend them from
the scorching: Heat of the Sun For thou have been a strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress; a refuge from the Storm, a shadow from
the hear, Isa. 25. 4.
. For this reason, the Scriptures call Princes Giants There were Giants in the
Earth in those days; the same became mighty Men, Genesis 6. 4.
, for they that are born to sustain the weight of Government, had need be of a
more than ordinary Stature: They are Giants which must undergo Fatigues and
Groans (as Job says) under the Waters Vid. Job 26. 5.
, by which are meant People and Nations And the Waters which thou saw, where
the Whore sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues,
Revel. 17. 15.
. They are the Corners which sustain the whole Fabric of the State Vid. 1 Samuel
14. 38.
. A Prince, who believes he is not born to do this for his Subjects, and does
not prepare himself to shelter them from the Injuries of the Weather, dwindles
from a Mountain to a Valley; nay, it is unlawful for him whom Heaven has
designed to Govern others, to regard his own ease and quiet. Wamba being
elected King of the Goths, and refusing the Crown, a certain Captain with his
drawn Sword threatened to stab him unless he accepted it; Shall you alone, says
he to him, oppose the Will of the whole Nation, and prefer your own Private
Ease to the Public Good? For this reason, the States of Guadalajara would not
suffer King John to resign his Kingdom to his Son Henry, he being too young,
and himself having a Constitution fit for Government. Hence it is evident, That
Princes are a part of the Commonwealth, and that they are in some measure
subject to it, as Instruments of its Preservation, so that their success or
misfortunes respect it; as Tiberius told his Sons It a nati estis ut bona
malaque ves^ra ad Remp. pertineant. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Those who desired David for their King, told him, We are thy Bone and thy
Flesh 2 Samuel 5. 1.
; intimating to him that he must with his own strength support them, and take
upon himself all their Toils and Grievances.

A Prince ought also to be taught while he is young, to tame and govern the
skittish Horse of Government; for should he let him have his Head, he would
fall headlong with him: He should use therefore the Bridle of Reason, the
Reigns of Policy, the Whip of Justice, and the Spurs of Valor, keeping always
fast in the Stirrups of Prudence. He must not execute every thing that comes
into his Mind, but only what is honorable and just, least he should transgress
Piety, Reputation, Modesty, or good Manners Facta quae laedunt pietatem,
existimation^m, verecundiam nostram, and ut generaliter dixe^im, contra bonos
mores fi^^t ^ec facere e^s credendum est. L. 15. F. de Condit. I^stir.
. Let not a Prince imagine that his Power is wholly absolute, but subject by
the public Good and Interest of his State. Not immense, but limited, and
exposed to many Casualties; one blast of Wind dissipated all Philip the
Second's Naval Preparations against England.

Let the Prince also know, that his Authority is not so Sovereign, but that
part of it remains in the Subject, which they either reserved to themselves
from the beginning, or which Common Sense has since granted them for their
defense against any Prince notoriously unjust and tyrannical. Good Princes are
pleased at the Liberty of their Subjects; Tyrants only would be absolute
Quomodo pessimis Imperatoribus sine fine dominationem, ita quamvis egregiis
libertatis modum placere. Tac. 4. Ann.
. The Safety and Preservation of the Kingdom, depends upon the well-tempered
freedom of the People. It Is not that Prince who is most powerful, that is most
secure, but he who is so with reason; nor is he less Sovereign who defends the
just Rights and Privileges of his Subjects. It Is rather prudence to let them
enjoy 'em freely, for they never derogate from the Authority of the Prince, but
when he thinks his Honor affronted, and endeavors wholly to take 'em away.
Let him be content to maintain his Crown by the same means his Ancestors did.
It seems to be this which God would admonish Princes of, (though in another
Sense) by Ezekiel the Prophet Bind the ti^e of thine Head upon thee. Ezekiel. 24.
17.
, when he said, bind the tire of thine Head to thee; if any one shall wear it
too loose, 'twill be very apt to fall off.

EMBLEM XXI.
JUstice is the Center from which the Circumference of a Crown is drawn. If we
could live without one, there would be no need of the other. In former times all
Princes Judges were,
And to see Justice done, was all their Care.
In the first Age there was no need of Punishment, for there were no Crimes;
nor of Rewards, for Virtue and Glory were beloved for their own sakes. But as
the World grew older, Wickedness increased with it, and made Virtue more
reserved, which before lived freely and carelessly in the Fields. When Equality
was laid aside, and Ambition and Force supplied the place of Modesty and Shame,
then Government was also introduced. For Prudence urged by necessity, and
Common Prudence obliged Men to Civil Society, that they might exercise Virtues,
which Reason prompted them to, and make use of Speech which Nature gave them,
that by revealing to one another the Sense of their Minds, they might inform,
assist, and defend each other Sermo vero datus est homini, ad utile and
inutile, ac proinde justum ac injustum declarandum. Arist. Pol. 1. cap. 2.
. Society being thus by common Consent established, there arose at the same
time a certain Supreme Power necessary to the Preservation of its Parts, which
by punishing Vice, and rewarding Virtue, might defend them in Peace and
Justice. And because this Authority could not be diffused through the whole
Body, by reason of the Confusion which would arise in the Execution thereof;
and because 'twas also necessary that some should Command, and the rest Obey,
they quitted their Pretensions to it, conferring it either upon one, few, or
many, which are the three sorts of Government; Monarchy, Aristocracy, and
Democracy. The first of which was Monachy; for originally Men were governed by
one in each Family; afterward they chose from among the People, one, who
excelled others in Goodness and Virtue, whose Hand, as his Authority increased,
they honored with a Scepter, and his Head with a Diadem, as a Badge of the
Power and Sovereignty which they had conferred upon him, which should
principally consist in Justice, by which he should preserve and defend his
Subjects in Peace; so that without that there is no Order of Government Nam
Respub. nulla ^st, ubi leges non te^ent Imperium, Arist. Pol. 4. cap. 4.
, and all Kingly Authority ceases, as it happened in Castile, which was reduced
to the Government of Judges, the Kings being excluded for the Injustice of
Ordonno and Fruela.

This Justice could not be well administered by the mere Law of Nature, without
imminent Danger to the Commonwealth; for since it is defined to be a constant
and perpetual desire of giving to every one their own For Justice is immortal,
Wisd. 1. 15.
, it would be very dangerous if it should depend upon the Opinion and Judgment
of the Prince, and not be written; nor can mere natural Reason, though free
from Affections and Passions, give true Judgment in such variety of Cases as
happen continually. So that 'twas necessary for States to arm themselves with
Laws, deduced from long use and experience, as well Penal as Distributive;
these to punish faults, and those to give every one his own. Penal Laws are
represented by a Sword, the Emblem of Justice, as Trajan intimated, reaching a
Sword to the Captain of his Guards, with these Words, Take this, and if I
govern well, use it for me, if not, against me. Equally sharp on both sides, as
well for the Rich as the Poor; not with one Edge blunt, and the other sharp; to
spare one, and hurt another. Distributive Laws are represented by a Rule*
Square, which measures indifferently the Actions and Rights of all Leg^m scimus
Iusti injustique regulam esse. Seneca.
. By this Rule of Justice things ought to be measured, not this Rule by things,
as the Lesbian Rule was, which being made of Lead, easily adapted it self to
all shapes of the Stone. The Prince ought to give Life and Vigor to both. King
Alphonso the Wise said, That a King was the Heart and Soul of the State. And in
another place he says, That Rex a King is the same with Regula a Rule. Rex a
King, and Lex a Law, differ but in one Letter; and what else is a King but the
Speaking-law, and the Law but a dumb King; so much King that could it exert it
self it should govern alone. Prudence has as it were divided the Power of
Princes, and yet in their Persons it remains whole, yet it has subtly
transferred part thereof to Paper, so that it has left Majesty written and
exposed to the view of all, for the exercise of Justice, so that Justice and
Chastisement, by means of the Law, anticipating Crimes, the Sentence might not
be ascribed to the Will, Passion, or Interest of the Prince, and that he might
avoid the Odium of his Subjects. The Law is an excuse for Rigor, a
discountenancer of Favor, an invisible Arm of the Prince, with which he holds
the Reigns of the Government. There is no better way to make Authority
respected and obeyed; for which reason the Law should be punctually observed,
nor should force be used in any thing which may be decided by Law Nec utendum
imperio, ubi legibus agi possit. Tac. 3. Ann.
. When once a Prince proceeds that way, the Laws will soon lose their force and
efficacy Minui jura quoties gliscat potestas. Tac. 3. Ann.
: Crimes will be reckoned Innocence, and Justice Tyranny The work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever, Isaiah 32. 17.
: Nor is the Power of the Prince a little diminished, for that is ever more
effectual with the Law than without it. It Is the Law that crowns, defends, and
confirms a Prince Inauditi atque defensi tanquam innocents peritant. Tac. 1.
Hist.
, without it there would be no difference between Subjection and Command. True
Policy is founded upon the Law, not upon Arbitrary Sway. They are the true Rule
of Government, the Roads of Policy, by them as by certain Lines the Ship of the
State fails securely; they are the Walls of Civil Power, the Eyes and Soul of
the State, the Fetters of the Mob, and the Bridle (the present Emblem) which
Guides and Curbs it Factae sunt autem leges, ut eorum metu humana coerceatur
audacia, tutaque sit inter improbos innocentia, and in ipsis improbis
reformidato supplicio refraenetur audacia and nocendi facultas. Isid. lib. 2.
Etymol. L. legibus, C. de leg.
. Even Tyranny it self cannot subsist without them.

The Determination of Justice could not be safely committed to the inconstancy
of the Will, which is subject to so many Affections and Passions, and of it
self perfectly blind; but it was necessary that it should be restrained by
certain fixed Decrees and Statutes, founded upon Reason and Prudence, which
should without distinction be Obligatory to all. Such are the Laws which
experience of past Accidents has provided for future ones; and since they cannot
explain themselves, but are mere Bodies which receive Soul, and understanding
from the Judges, with whose Tongues they speak, and by whose Pens they are
explained, and applied to particular Cases, it being impossible to comprehend
all; let a Prince be very careful to whom he commits them; for in them he
entrusts his very Being, and the chief Instruments of Government; but the
choice being once rightly made, let him not hinder the free exercise and
ordinary course thereof, but leave it wholly to the Magistrate; but if Princes
will through Clemency or Arbitrary Power, intermeddle with the Exposition of
the Laws; all this Politic Structure will fall, and those Laws which should
prop and support it, rather cause its ruin. Tyranny is nothing else but an
ignorance and contempt of the Laws, assuming to it self their Power and
Authority. This Rome of old bewailed as the chief cause of its Slavery,
Augustus arrogating to himself the chiefest Offices in the Law, that he might
the better play the Tyrant Insurgere paulatim, munia senatus, Magistratuum,
legum in se trabere. Tac. 1. Ann.
. When Caesar to himself assumed the Laws,
Poor Rome grew soon degenerate and base,
Forgot her War, and slept in servile Peace.
Claud. A Prince in obstructing the Laws encourages Vice, as it happened in the
time of the Emperor Claudius Nam cuncta legum, and Magistratuum mu^ia in se
trahens Princeps, materiam praedandi patefecit. Tac. 11. Ann.
. ^ Multiplicity of Laws are very dangerous to a State, for they destroy one
another; being too numerous they create Confusion and Oblivion, or when they
cannot be observed are despised. A sure sign of a dissolute and corrupt State;
one contradicts another, and makes room for sinister Interpretations, and
different Opinions, whence arise Disputes and Contentions. The greatest part of
the People are taken up in Law, there want Men to manure the Ground; for
Offices and War. A few good support many bad, and many bad lord it over the few
good. The Courts of Judicature are Harbors for Pirates, and Receptacles for
Thieves. Those very Men who should be the Assertors of the Peoples Liberty, are
the heaviest Fetters of their Slavery Deditque jura, queis pace, and Principe
uteremur, acriora ex (...) vincula inditi custodes. Tac. 3. Ann.
. Too many Laws are not less pernicious to a State than Vices Vtque antehac
ftagitiis ita nunc legibus laborabatur. Tac. 3. Ann.
. He who makes many Laws, sets many Traps, in which all must be caught. So
Caligula, when he had a design upon the Innocent, established many Laws,
written in so small a Character, that they could be hardly read. And Claudius
published Twenty in one day, which so puzzled the People, that 'twas more
difficult to know than to observe them. Therefore Aristotle said, That few Laws
were sufficient for the weightest Cases, and that the rest ought to be left to
natural Reason. Nothing is so prejudicial to State as multiplicity of Laws:
Hence God threatened Israel, as a Punishment for their Sins, that he would
multiply their Laws Because Ephraim has made many Altars to Sin, Altars shall
be unto him to Sin. Scriba^ ^i multiplices leges meas, says the Latin Version,
Hos. 8. 11, 12.
. To what purpose is it to make an Addition of new Laws upon every slight
occasion, when there is no case which has not happened before, nor any
inconveniency which has not been already considered of, and by Observation and
Experience provided for? Those which are now introduced into Castile, as new,
may be all found in the Ancient Records. The Observation of these would be much
more agreeable to the People, and would create less Odium to the Prince, than
the Promulgation of other new ones. In those Judgment acquiesces, in these it is
dubious and unsteady; those seem to be founded with care, the Authority of
these is questionable; those may safely be renewed, these cannot be introduced
without danger. To make Experiments of new Medicines is dangerous to Health and
Life; many Herbs before the way of preparing them were known, were Poison.
Better is that State governed, whose Laws, though imperfect, are settled, than
that which is continually changing them. The Ancients to intimate that Laws,
ought to be perpetual, wrote them upon Tables of Brass Vsus ^ris ad
perpetuitatem monumento^um jampridem translatus est tabulis aereis, in quibus
constitutiones publicae inciduntur.
, and God engraved them with his Eternal Finger upon Stone And he gave unto
Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon Mount Sinai, two
Tables of Testimony, Tables of Stone written with the Finger of God.
. For this reason Augustus advised the Senate, that they should preserve their
Laws entire without altering them; for that though they were bad, they were more
beneficial to the State than new ones Positas semel leges constanter servate,
nec ullam earum immutate; nam quae in suo statu eademque ma^^nt, etsi deteriora
sint, tamen utili^ra sunt Reipublicae, his quae per innovationem, vel meliora
indacuntur. Dion. l. 52.
. There is no Kingdom but is provided with Laws sufficient; but care ought to
be taken, least the variety of Interpretations should render them ambiguous and
obscure, and occasion Disputes and Controversies. This ought to be prevented,
which might with ^ase be done in Spain, if some King, upon this account not
less a Restorer than Pelagius, would abbreviate all Processes, and leaving the
Civil Law, would make use only of those of the Kingdom, which are not less
prudent and learned than just and reasonable. This King Recesewind meant, when
in one of his Laws he said, Also King Alphonsus the Wise, commanded his Judges.
This their Majesty's, Ferdinand and Joan, afterward confirmed, as did King
Alarick, who laid severe Penalties upon the Judges for admitting the Pleas of
the Roman Laws. Nor does it a little derogate from Supreme Jurisdiction to be
governed by Foreign Laws. To this I foresee two Objections; first, that if
these Laws were written in Spanish, the Latin Tongue would be lost, and the
Lawyers would apply themselves wholly to the Study and Explanation of them
only; besides, that without the knowledge of the Civil Law, from whence they
are derived, they could not be well understood. The other is, that since the
Civil Law is Common to almost all Europe, according to which causes ought to be
decided, and that the Rights and Privileges of Princes are often to be
determin^d in Foreign Parliaments, and Courts of Judicature; it will be very
necessary to have Men well versed in the said Law. Which inconveniences will be
easily remedied by erecting and indowing some places for Civil Lawyers in the
Universities; as (though upon different Motives) King Ferdinand did.

But if this cannot be effected, the forementioned inconveniences may be thus
remedied; first by prohibiting such a vast number of Books to be imported,
which serve only to clear the Pockets, not the understanding, nor is Printing
any thing else nowadays, but Merchandise and Trade. This variety confounds
the Senses, embarrasses and puzzles the Judgment. 'Twould be more advisable,
where the written Laws are not full enough for the Decision of any Controversy,
to be guided by Reason, that living Law, rather than to grope for Justice in
the obscurity of such diversity of Opinions, equally favorable to each side,
and subject to Subornation and Passion. Next, by shortening the tedious Methods
of the Law, as King Philip the Second designed to do at Milan, when he
consulted with the Senate about that Affair. In which he not only respected the
good of the Subject, but also that in that State, which is the Bullwark of the
Kingdom, there might be more Men of the Sword than the Gown. The same was
attempted by the Emperors, Titus and Vespasian, Charles the Fifth, their
Catholic Majesty's, Peter, King of Portugal, James the first of Arragon, and
Lewis the Eleventh of France; none of them being (...) to effect it, nor can
any one else hope to bring (...) about, since for the reforming the Practice of
the ^^nch, the Judges themselves must be of Counsel, whose Interest it is to
prolong Suits, as it is that of Soldiers to continue War. 'Twas pure necessity
obliged the most Serene Queen Isabel, of her own accord, to make use of this
Remedy, when being at Sevil harrass'd with vexatious Appeals, she commanded all
Suits depending, to be by the assistance of able and learned Men, decided in
her presence, without the noise of the Bar, and that Accumulation of
Informations and Processes, and truly successfully enough as experience has
shown. The Cantons of Switzerland are very prudently governed, because there
are no Lawyers among them; the Witnesses are heard, and without writing down
any thing, except the Judgment, the Causes are immediately decided. A quick
Condemnation is more expedient for Client, than a favorable Judgment after a
tedious dependence. He who commences a Lawsuit nowadays, does as it were
plant a Palm Tree, which he can^t expect to live to gather the Fruit of. In a
State where Suits are long and tedious, the People can never live peaceably and
amicably Non fuerint concordes unquam, aut inter amantes cives, ubi mut^^ (...)
lites judiciales sunt, sed ubi eae brevissimae and paucissimae. Plato.
. Let there therefore be few Counselors, Attorneys, and Sollicitors. How can
that Government be quiet, in which there are so many who get their living by
raising and promoting Feuds and Lawsuits? What hopes of Restitution to the
injured, when there are so many ready to fleece and strip him? Suppose them to
be Persons of Worth and Integrity, yet is Justice never the better administered
for their number; no more than a Disease is better cured by many Physicians.
Nor would it redound to the Common Good, if with the loss of the Public
Tranquillity, and the Estates of the People, there should be made too nice a
scrutiny into every ones Right: A moderate and moral Care is sufficient.

Nor does less damage arrive from an abundance of Penal Laws to prohibit Luxury
in Clothes, and superfluous Expenses; for such Edicts are generally slighted,
and not observed; the same Month in which they are established, they are
abolished. They are like the Responses of the Sibyls, written upon Leaves, and
scattered by the Wind. And if once this disobedience takes place, it makes
Luxury more insolent and secure Tot a majoribus repertae, tot quas divus
Augustus tulit, illae oblivione, hae (quod flagitiosius est) contemptu
abolitae, securtorem luxum fecere. Tac. 3. Ann.
. The Prince's Reputation suffers, when the Remedies which he prescribes are
ineffectual, or not observed. The Edicts of Margaret of Austria, Duchess of
Parma, not being executed, derogated much from her Authority in Flanders.
Therefore it is a question, whether moderate Luxury be not a more tolerable
Inconveniency, than a Prohibition when not obeyed Number coercio plus damni in
Remp. ferret; quam indecorum attrectare, quod non obtineretur, vel retentum
ignominiam and infamiam virorum illustrium posceret. Tac. 3. Ann.
? Or whether it be not better to wink at old and settled Vices, than by feeble
Laws to show that they are stronger than the Prince? If Laws are once broken,
unpunished, there is no restraint or shame beyond. If a Prince would express
these Laws and Edicts about Reformation of Manners in himself, perhaps
Flattery, or the natural Propensity in Inferiors to imitate their Superiors, or
the Subjects their Prince, would be more effectual than the rigor of the Law,
and that without danger to Sovereign Authority. Frugality, which the Sumptuary
Laws could not introduce, the Emperor Vespasian did, only by his Example Sed
praecipuu^ adstricti moris author Vespafianus fuit, antiquo ipse cultu, victuque
obsequium inde in Principem, and aemulandi amor validior, quam poenae ex
legibus, and metus. Tac. 3. Ann.
. The Imitation of the Prince, is a Slavery sweetened by Flattery. It Is easier
for Nature to err in her own Works, said Theodorick, King of the Goths, than
for the Subjects not to observe the Manners of their Prince. In him, as in a
Glass, the People adjust their Actions: -- The Nation follows still,
The Fashions of the Court, and 't always proves,
Example more than Law the People moves.
Claud. Customs are Laws, not written upon Paper, but in the Mind and Memory of
all, and are more grateful when not forced, but a free choice and sort of
liberty; and the same common Consent, which first introduced them, still
observes them so strictly, that it will not permit them to be altered though they
are bad, for common Opinion, by which, after they have been received by their
Ancestors, the People are fully persuaded they are just and reasonable, does
prevail more in this matter than the strongest Arguments; nay, than the
Inconveniences themselves which are found in them. It Is therefore more prudent
to bear with them, than wholly to remove them. A prudent Prince governs his
State without altering its Customs Mos hominum tutissime agere, qui
praesentibus moribus, legibusque etiam si deteriores sint, minimum variantes
Rempub. administrant. Thucid.
. But if they are opposite to Virtue or Religion, they ought to be dexterously
corrected, and the People by degrees prepared to know the reason. King Froila
incurred the odium of many by disannulling the Custom of the Clergy's marrying,
which had been before introduced by Witiza, and confirmed by the Example of the
Greeks.

If the State be not well constituted, and the Peoples minds docil and
corrigible, Laws will be of small use Quid leges sine moribus vanae prosiciunt?
S. Aug.
. Which I believe Solon meant, when being asked what Laws were best; he
answered, those which the People observe. Medicines are of no use where the
Disease is incurable. Lastly, Laws will be insignificant, unless the Prince by
his Life and Example confirm and strengthen them Digna vax^st Majestate
regnantis, legibus allig^tum se pr^fiteri. L. 4. C. de Leg.
. That Law seems pleasant and easy to the People, which the Legislator himself
observes: If you command, and hope to be obeyed,
Observe your self those Laws your self first made.
The People then will due Obedience show,
To you who make Laws, and observe them too.
Claud. The Laws made by Servius Tullius, were not only for the People, but
also for the Prince Quibus etiam Reges obtemperarent. Tac. 3. Ann.
. By them Controversies between the Prince and People ought to be determined:
As Tacitus relates of Tiberius Siquando cum privatis disceptarent, forum and
jus. Tac. 4. Ann.
. Though (said the Emperors, Severus and Antoninus) we are free from the Laws,
yet we live by them. A Prince is not obliged by the strict Letter of the Law,
but by the Reason on which it is grounded, for that is natural and common to
all, not peculiar to Subjects only for their good Government; for in such case
the Observation of the Law belongs to them alone, though 'twill be very
necessary, if the Case will allow, for him to conform himself to them, that so
they may seem the more pleasant to others. This was the meaning of God's
Command to Ezekiel, that he should eat the Roll Eat this Roll, and go speak
un^o the House of Israel; so I opened my Mouth, and he caused me to eat the
Roll, Ezekiel. 3. 1, and 2.
. That others seeing that he had first tasted the Laws, and found them sweet as
Honey, all might imitate him. The Kings of Spain are so subject to the Laws,
that the Treasury in cases of the Royal Patrimony, runs the same fortune with
any other Subject, and in a doubtful case is condemned. So it was enacted by
Philip the Second; and once when his Grandson, Philip the Fourth, your
Highness's Father, was present in Council, upon a Debate of a Case relating to
the Exchequer, neither the Judges wanted Integrity to give it against him, nor
his Majesty Temper to hear it without Resentment. Happy is that State, in which
the Prince's Cause is the worst Quae gloria tua est praecipua, saepe vincitur
Fiscus cujus mala causa nunquam est, nisi sub bono principe. Plin. in Pan.
.

EMBLEM XXII.
THough the Peoples Consent confers the Power of Justice upon Princes, they
receive it immediately from God, as being his Vicars in Temporal Affairs. They
are the Royal Eagles, the Ministers of Jove For he is the Minister of God to
thee for good; but if thou do that which is evil, ^e afraid; for he bears not
the Sword in vain, Romans 13. 4.
, who Administer his Thunder, and supply his place in punishing Vice, and
administering Justice; in which they have need of three Qualities of the Eagle,
sharpness of Sight to inspect Crimes, swiftness of Wing for Execution, and
strength of Talons, that they main't fail therein. The Injury done by a certain
Nobleman to a poor Peasant, though in the remotest Corner of Galicia, could not
escape the quick sight of King Alphonso the Seventh, called Emperor, who
disguising himself, went immediately to punish him with such speed, that he
apprehended him before he knew any thing of his coming. O lively and ardent
Soul of the Law! to be himself Judge and Executioner, to satisfy an Injury done
to a poor Peas^nt, and to punish the unjust Oppression of the Grandee. The same
did King Ferdinand the Catholic, who being at Medina, went privately to
Salamanca, and seized Roderigo Maltonado, who exercised great-Oppressions in
the Castle of Monleon M^r. Hist. of Spain*
. Who would ever transgress the Laws, if he always feared such a surprise? One
such as this would frighten and reform a whole Kingdom. But it is not always
expedient for Majesty it self to imitate such Examples. When the State of the
Kingdom is well settled, when the Courts of Judicature are open, and the fear
of the Law is fresh and lively, it is sufficeint for a Prince to see Justice
administered by his Ministers. But when all is in Confusion, when Obedience
staggers; when the King's Authority is slighted, as 'twas in those times, then
some such sudden and severe Punishment will be seasonable, that the People may
know the Power of their Prince, and understand, that as in a Humane Body, so in
a Kingdom, the Soul of Majesty is all in all, and all in every part. Yet 'twill
be very necessary to moderate this severity, when the Distemper is inveterate,
and the Kingdom confirmed in Vice; for if Virtue should be too severe upon
Vice, and endeavor to reform all at once, 'twould be esteemed rather Cruelty
than Justice. Time must recruit that which time has weakened; to precipitate a
Cure is dangerous, and may make the Prince experience the Rage of the incensed
Multitude. Connivance and Dexterity is often more effectual than force. In this
King Ferdinand the Catholic was excellent; and by this King Peter was
deceived, who relying wholly upon Severity, got the Name of Cruel. Though
Justice be one single Virtue, yet has it various Effects, according to the
difference of time. Sometimes the People wholly reject it, and become more
Insolent; sometimes they acknowledge the damage of their excess, and cooperate
with the Prince to remedy it, and suggest the most severe means against their
own Liberty, by which the Prince acquires the Name of Just without danger.

Let not a Prince remit the Punishment of such Offenses against the Government,
in which few are concerned, but pardon those in which many are involved.
Agrippa being put to Death, in the Isle of Planasia, by the Order of Tiberius,
a certain Slave who was very like him, stealing away his Ashes, pretended that
he was Agrippa; the Romans believed it; the Report spread, and caused a Tumult,
with evident danger of a Civil War. Tiberius caused the Slave to be
apprehended, and put to Death privately, and though many Gentlemen and Senators
of his own Family, were said to have assisted him with Money and Advice Et
quanquam multi ex ejus dom^ equites ac senatores sustentasse opibus, juvisse
consillis, dicerentur. Tac. 2. Ann.
, yet would he suffer none to speak in his behalf. Thus Prudence triumphed over
Cruelty, and by Silence and Connivence he appeased the Disorder.

Let a Prince pardon small Offenses, and punish great ones; sometimes let him
be content with Repentance, which Tacitus commended in Agricola Parvis peccatis
(...), magnis severitatem commendare; nec poena semper, sed saepius p^nitentia
contentus esse. Tac. in Vit. Ag^ic.
. He is not the best Governor who punishes with most Severity, but he who
pardons with such Discretion and Circumspection, as not to give any occasion to
the Delinquents to transgress again. No body commends a Surgeon for cutting
off many Legs and Arms; no body hates a Prince for punishing, provided he does
it with Reluctance and Grief; but him who delights in it, and eagerly carps at
all opportunities of doing it. To punish for Example, and amendment is Mercy;
but to do it through Passion or Avarice is Tyranny. Let not a Prince suffer any
one to think himself so great, and free from the Laws, as to dare to oppose the
Ministers of Justice, and those who represent its Power and Authority, for so
the Pillar of Justice cannot stand secure Hanc P. C. curam sustinet Princeps,
hac omissa sunditus Remp. trahet. Tac. 3. Ann.
, when such boldness once takes place, contempt will by degrees undermine it,
and bring it to the Ground. The chief Foundation of the Spanish Monarchy, and
that which has raised it to such an height, and keeps it so, is the inviolable
Observation of Justice and Rigor, by which its Kings have always taken care to
make it respected and esteemed of all. No Violation of it goes unpunished,
though great be the Dignity and Authority of the Delinquent. A certain Judge at
Corduba, was by the Command of King Ferdinand the Catholic, enquiring into
some Misdemeanor, whom when the Marquess of Puego had arrested, the King so
resented it, that all the Signal Services of that Family of Corduba, could not
hinder him from punishing him very severely; afterward he put himself wholly
into his Majesty's Hands, by the Advice of the Great Captain, who seeing the
heinousness of the Crime, which would not admit of Pardon, wrote to him to cast
himself at the King's Feet, by which he might perhaps expiate his Crime, but if
not he would certainly be ruined Mar, Hist of Spain.
.

Nor ought a Prince only to punish Crimes committed against his own Person, or
during his Reign; but those also which were acted in the last, though the State
were then under the Power of an Enemy. For Presidents of Disobedience and
Contempt of Authority being connived at, or rewarded, are dangerous even to
Successors. Dignity is ever the same, being always espoused to him who
possesses her. Wherefore he defends his own Cause, who takes care of his
Predecessor's Honor, though 'twas not wounded in his time. A Prince ought not
to leave behind him the Memory of one, who has been so impudent as to affront
Authority unpunished; for i^ once Subjects are persuaded that they may raise
their Fortunes, or satisfy their Passions, by the Death or Abuse of the Prince,
none will be able to live secure. The Punishment of Impudence to the
Predecessor, is the security of the Successor, and a warning to all from daring
to attempt the like. For which reason Vitellius put all those to Death, who
petitioned him for Rewards for the Murder of Galba Non honor Galbae, sed
tradito principi^^^ more, munimentum ad praesens, in posterum ultionem. Tac.
Hist. lib. 1.
. Every one is treated as he treats others. Julius Caesar commanding the
Statues of Pompey to be erected, confirmed his own. If Princes should not unite
against Contempt and Treason, Authority and Loyalty would be in danger.

In Cases where the same circumstances concur, a Prince ought not to connive at
some and punish others, for nothing renders them more odious than partiality
Cavendum est ne iisdem de caussis alii plectantur, alii ne appellantur quidem
(...) de Off.
, Whence the Egyptians signified the Equality which should be observed in
Justice, by the Feathers of an Ostrich, which are equal on both sides.

It Is great Prudence in a Prince to find such sorts of Punishments, as will
expiate the Offense, with the least damage to the Delinquent. Certain Noblemen
fomented Disturbances in Galicia; and though they deserved Death, King
Ferdinand the Fourth called them to him, and gave them employs in the Army,
where some of them were punished by the Enemy, others by the Hardships and
Toils of War, and so that Province was reduced to its former Tranquillity.

As in time of Peace, Justice and Mercy are very advantageous, so in War are
Rewards and Punishments; because there the Dangers are so great, as would not
be attempted without great hopes, and nothing but fear could restrain the
Licentiousness of the Soldiers. In so much as without these two things, says
King Alphonso, The Faults which are committed^in War are much more dangerous;
for if Men have so much to do to defend themselves from the Mischief of their
Enemies, how much more have they from that which accrues from their own Faults?
For which reason the Romans inflicted diverse sorts of Infamy and Punishment
upon the Soldiers who failed in their Duty, or in any dangerous Attempt or
Military Affair; whence they were less afraid of the Enemy than the Punishment,
and chose-rather to die bravely in Action, than to lose their Honor or Lives
afterward with perpetual Ignominy and Disgrace. In those times none durst
Desert, because he could not shelter himself in any part of the Empire.
Nowadays Deserters are not only not punished when they return to their own
Country; but sculking from Battle, they March from Milan to Naples, where as if
they had served under some other Prince, they are again listed into his
Majesty's Service, to the great detriment thereof. In which the Viceroys
should follow the Example of the Roman Senate, who after the Battle of Cannae,
though they were in extreme want of Soldiers, could not be induced to redeem
six thousand Prisoners which Hannibal offered them, thinking them not worth
Redemption, who suffered themselves ignominiously to be taken Prisoners, when
they might have died gloriously.

The Errors of Generals committed through ignorance, ought rather to be
connived at than punished, least the fear of being punished or reprimanded
should make them too timorous. Besides the greatest Prudence may be confounded
in Accidents of War, whence they deserve Compassion rather than Punishment.
Varro lost the Battle of Cannae, and at his return the whole Senate went out to
receive him, thanking him for that in such a total Defeat he had not wholly
despaired of Affairs.

When connivence is not convenient, but the Execution of Justice is required,
let it be done with readiness and resolution. He who does it privately and by
stealth, is more like an Assassine than a Prince. He who checks the Authority
which the Crown gives him, either doubts his Power or Merit; from the Prince's
distrust of himself proceeds the Peoples disrespect. Whose Opinion of him is
answerable to what he has of himself. King Alphonso the Wise lost the esteem of
his People, by doing Justice in private. This can be convenient only in
troublesome times, when greater Dangers may be feared, if the People don't see
the Authors of Seditions punished ever they know they are taken. Thus Tiberius
acted for fear of this Inconveniency Nec Tiberius poenam ejus palam ausus, in
secreta palatii part interfici jussit, corpusque clam auferri. Tac. 2. Ann.
. In other Cases let a Prince execute that Office boldly and vigorously, which
he holds in the Name of God and the People; for 'twas Justice that at first
gave him his Scepter, and it is that which must preserve it. It Is the Will of
God, the Harmony of Government, and the Protection of Majesty. If the Laws be
once suffered to be broken unpunished, there will be neither Fear nor Modesty,
and without them no Peace nor Quiet Si prohibita impune transcenderis neque
metus ultra neque pudor est. Tac. 3. Ann.
. Yet let Princes consider that they are like Masters of Families; nay, that
they really are such in respect to their Subjects, and therefore let them
temper Justice with Clemency. They ought to drink the Sins of the People, as
God intimated to St. Peter, by that Vessel of unclean Animals, out of which he
commanded him to eat Wherein were all manner of fourfooted Beasts of the Earth,
and wild Beasts, and creeping Things, and Fowls of the Air; and there came a
Voice unto him, Rise, Peter, kill and eat, Act^ 10. 12, 13.
. A Prince should have the Stomach of an Ostrich, so hot with Mercy as to
digest Iron, and should be also an Eagle with the Thunder of Justice, which by
striking one terrifies all. For if all were to be punished who transgressed,
there would be none left for the Prince to Command, for there is scarce any Man
so just, as not to have one time or other deserved Death Vix enim quisquam adeo
mali expers, ut non aliquam mortem meyeatur. Tac. 2. Ann.
. The Rigor of Justice is not less dangerous to the Crown, Life, and Empires,
than Injustice. Of this King John the Second is an Example, who for his great
Severity became odious to his People: And King Peter the Cruel, lost thereby
his Kingdom and Life too. Let Justice and Mercy walk hand in hand, so linked
together, as if they were Parts of the same Body, yet so that one may be used
without Offense to the other. For this reason God gave not the flaming Sword,
which guarded Paradise, to a Seraphim, which is all Love and Mercy; but to a
Cherubim, a Spirit of Knowledge, who knew better how to temper Justice with
Clemency And he placed at the east end of the Garden of Eden Cherubims, and a
flaming Sword, Genesis 3. 24.
. Nothing is more pernicious than a Prince over-merciful. In the times of Nerva
they used to say, That 'twas more difficult to live under a Prince who bore
with all, than one who bore with nothing. For he is not less Cruel who pardons
all, than he who forgives none, nor is excessive Mercy less prejudicial to the
People than Cruelty Faliciores sunt impr^^i, supplicia luentes, quam si eos
nulla justitiae (...) coerceat. Boet. lib. 4. Phil.
; and sometimes Indulgence and Forbearance does more mischief than the Crime it
self. For wickedness grows bolder, when it can promise it self pardon. 'Twas
the Clemency, or rather Negligence of King Henry the Fourth, that made his
Reign as Bloody as that of King Peter was by his Cruelty. Clemency and
Severity, the one profuse, and the other moderate, make the Prince beloved
Mirumque amorem assecutus etat effuse clementiae, modicus severitate. Tac. 6.
Ann.
. He who can neatly and prudently temper these Virtues, cannot choose but govern
well; nay, his whole Reign will be a tuneful Harmony, like that which proceeds
from a Base and Treble I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto thee, O Lord,
will I sing.
. Heaven produces Corn by the mildness of its Dew, and preserves it by the
rigor of its Frosts and Snows. If God were not merciful, we should fear him,
but not adore him; both these Virtues make him both feared and loved. Therefore
Alphonsus, King of Arragon, used to say, by Justice I oblige the good, the bad
by Clemency. The one compels their Fear, the other engages their Love.
Confidence of pardon makes Subjects arrogant, and excessive Clemency creates
Contempt and Disrespect, and occasions the Ruin of Governments.

EMBLEM XXIII.
THERE are no greater Chemists than Princes, who set a value upon worthless
Trifles in bestowing them upon others as a Reward of Virtue Imperator aliquando
torquibus, murali, and civica donat; quid habet per se pretiosum, quid
pr^texta, quid fasces, quid tribunal, quid currus? nil horum honor est, sed
honoris insigne. Sen. lib. 1. de Ben.
. The Romans invented several sorts of Crowns, as Mural, Civick, and Naval, as
glorious Badges of great and worthy Exploits; these Nature supplied them with
as Grass, Palm, and Bays; of which without any cost they made those Crowns. The
Treasury would not have been sufficient to have rewarded Services, had not that
politic Invention of Crowns been thought on; which being given as public
Testimonies of Val^ur were more valued and esteemed than Gold or Silver. The
Soldiers underwent all Fatigues and Dangers to obtain them. For the same reason
the Kings of Spain founded Military Orders, whose Badges were not only marks of
Nobility, but also of Valor; so that all care ought to be taken to keep up
their Value and Esteem, by bestowing them with great attention and respect to
Merit; for they are so much esteemed as they are tokens of Nobility and
Bravery; but if without distinction they should be promiscuously con^^r'd on
all, they would grow cheap and contempti^^^. And Arminius might well jeer his
Brother Flavius (who followed the Roman Faction) that when he had (...) an Eye
in Battle, he should call to mind the Collar and Crown, the cheap Rewards of
Slavery Irridente Arm^nio vilia servitii praemia. Tac. 2. Ann.
The Romans so well knew of what advantage 'twas to ^^^^erve the Peoples Esteem
for those Rewards, that (...) held a Council about the Qualifications which a
S^^dier ought to be endowed with, to merit a Crown of Oak. In the Badge of the
Order of St. James, (the Figure of this present Emblem) are expressed the
Endowments which ought to be considered ere it is be^^w'd; for the groundwork
is a Scollop-shell, the ^^^duct of the Sea, bred among Waves and Billows, (...)
inured to Fatigues; in its fair Bosom shines the (...), the Emblem of Nobility
and Virtue, as well for (...) Purity, as that it is bred by the Dew of Heaven;
when these are bestowed upon Children, or such who (...) not de^erv'd them by
any signal Service, they are (...) of Favor, not Rewards. Who will endeavor
(...) merit them by Services, if he can obtain them by diligence? They were
instituted for War, not Peace, (...) so ought to be distributed among those
only who (...) signalized themselves therein, or serve d at least four Years in
the Army, and made themselves fit for Preferment Hono^^ augmentum non
ambitione, sed labor ad unumquemque convenit perve^^* L. contra publicam C. de
re milit.
, which doubtless would induce more of the Nobility to apply their minds to
Arms, and the Art of War would flourish more.

This, because the Athenians neglected, they became a Prey to the Macedonians
Tunc vectigal publicum, quo antea milites and remiges aleba^^^^, cum urbano
populo dividi coeptum, quibus rebus effectum est, ut inter (...) graecorum,
sordidum and obscurum antea Macedonum nomen emergeret. Trog. ^. 6.
. Alexander Severus considering the importance of gratifying the Soldiery, as
being the Foundation and Security of the Empire, divided the Contributions
among them; esteeming it a great Crime to squander it away in Luxury, or upon
his Courtiers Aurum and argentum raro cuiquam nisi militi divisit, (...) esse
dicens, us dispensator publicus in delectationes suas and suorum (...), id quod
provinciales dedissent. La^p. in Vit. Alex.
.

Let other Rewards be common to all, who signalize themselves either in War or
Peace; to this end the Scepter was endowed with Riches, Honors, and Offices;
as also with the Power and Authority of Justice that with these it might punish
Offenses; with those reward Virtue and Valor.

Without Rewards and Punishments, Governmen^ would be in Confusion, for they
are the Spirit that maintains and preserves them; without them they cannot
subsist, for the hopes of Reward engage Respect, and the fear of Punishment,
Obedience, even against the natural desire of Liberty. Hence the Ancients
represented Empire by a Whip, as may be seen in some Consular Coins; and 'twas
a Prognostic of the Grandeur of Augustus, who dreaming that Jupiter offered
him a Whip; he interpreted it to be the Roman Empire, which had been erected
and maintained by Rewards and Punishments, Who would refrain from Vice if there
were no Punishments? Who would ^^pose themselves to Dangers, were there no
Rewards? Democritus considering that the World could not be governed without
them, called them Two Gods of the World. They are the Poles of the Orb of Civil
Authority, the two Lights of a State, without which it would be overwhelmed in
foggy darkness: They are the Props of Princes Thrones For the Throne is
established by righteousness, Prove. 16. 12.
. For this reason Ezekiel commanded King Zedekiah to lay down his Crown and
(...) Regalia, as being unworthy of them, in that he could not distribute
Rewards with Justice Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown, etc. Ezekiel. 21.
2^.
. The Prince in acknowledging Merits, acknowledges a Reward due, for they are
Relatives; and if he gives not that, he is unjust. The importance of Rewards
and Punishments was not well considered by the Legislators and Lawyers, who
have been altogether upon Penalties and Punishments, without ever mentioning
Rewards. That wise Legislator of the Partidas considered ^elter of this; for
that he might join one with the ^^her, he entitled it particularly of Rewards.

Since therefore Rewards and Punishments are so necessary for a Prince, that
without this Balance he cannot walk steadily upon the Rope of Government, he
ought well to consider the right use of them. For this rea^^n the Lictors Rods
were bound up; but the Crowns ^eing made of Leaves, which soon fade, were
wrought (...) the Victory; that while those were loosed, and these were
finished, some time might interfere between the Fault and the Punishment,
between the Desert and the Reward, and that the Merit and Demerit might be duly
considered. Rewards inconsiderately given, scarce merit thanks. He soon
repents, who bestows them rashly; nor is Virtue safe from him, who punishes
without Discretion. If the Punishment be extravagant, the People excuse the
Fault, and blame the Severity. If Virtue and Vice be equally rewarded, the one
is disgusted, the other becomes insolent. If in equality of Merit, one is
rewarded above the other, it creates Envy and Ingratitude; for Envy and
Gratitude for the same thing, can never go together; also the method of
dispensing Rewards and Punishments ought to be considered; for Rewards ought
not to be deferred till they grow despicable, as being despaired of; nor
Punishments till they seem not due, as being atoned (...) by length of time, or
as not being now exemplary to others, for as much as the Cause is wholly worn
out of Memory. King Alphonso the Wise, one of your Highness's Progenitors, very
judiciously admonished his Poster^ty, how they ought to behave themselves in
Rewards and Punishments, saying, That we ought to beh^vse our selves with
Moderation, as well in the Good we do, as in the Ill we punish; for that in
both the one and the other we must have regard to the Circumstances of the
Person, Time and Place, and that the World properly speaking is supported but
by the Observation of these two things, Rewarding those that do well, and
Punishing those that do otherwise. Sometimes 'twill be convenient to defer the
distribution of Rewards, that they may not seem due from Justice, and that
those who expect them, flushed with those hopes, may more vigorously perform
their Duty; nor is there any Merchandise cheaper, than that which is bought
with the hopes of Reward. It Is certain Men do more out of hopes than for
Rewards already received. Whence it appears how prejudicial is Succession in
Public Offices and Rewards, which Tiberius considered when he opposed the
Proposal of Gallus, that the Candidates should be named every five Years, who
should succeed in the Lieutenancies of Legions, and the Praetorship; for that
others, for want of hopes, would flag in their Duty and Service Subverti leges,
quae sua spatia exercendae Candidatorum (...), quaerendisque hand potiundis
honoribus statuerint. Tac. 2. Ann.
. In which Tiberius did not only respect the public Detriment, but also that
he should hereby lose the Prerogative of distributing Rewards, in which he
conceived the strength of his Government consisted Hand dubium erat, eam
sententiam altius penetrare, and arcana i^perii te^tari. Tac. 2. Ann.
. And so by a plausible Oration he retained his Authority Atque ita favorabili
in speciem eratione, vim imperii retinuit, Ibid.
. Court Favorites, uncertain of the continuance of their Power, ^^rely remedy
this inconvenience of future Succession, thereby to adjust their own Actions,
to weaken the Prince's Power, and free themselves from the importunity of
Petitioners.

A Prince being as it were the Heart of his State, as King Alphonso said, The
vital Spirits of Riches and Rewards, should by it be imparted to the other
Members, even the re^^otest Parts, though they cannot enjoy his Presence,
should nevertheless participate of his Favors. Princes are seldom moved by
this consideration. They usually Reward those only who are about them, being
overcome either by the importunity of Petitions, or by the flattery of their
Courtiers, or through want of Resolution to refuse them. And so as Rivers only
refresh the Grounds through which they run; so they gratify and reward those
only who are near them, unmindful of the Pains and Perils their Foreign
Ministers undergo to preserve their Authority, and to do that which they
themselves cannot. All Favors are shared among Courtiers and Parasites; those
Services are most valued, which smell of Civet and Pulville, not those which
are smeared with Blood and Dust; those which are seen, not those which are
heard of at a distance; as well because flattery sooner strikes the Eyes than
Ears, as because the Mind is tickled with the vain Glory of present Submissions
and Acknowledgements. For these Reasons CourtServices are sooner rewarded than
Desert, Ambition before Zeal, and Complaisance before Fatigue and Toil. A
Splendour which pays it self.

He, who does Absent Services may perhaps be commended, not rewarded. He will
be for a while fed with vain Hopes and Promises, but will at last die starved
with Despair. The Remedy is coming sometimes to Court, for no Letters or
Memorials are so persuasive as Presence. The Buckets of Pretention are not to
be filled, unless they are dipped into the Court-waters. The Presence of
Princes is as fertile as that of the Sun. All things flourish when that shines,
but fade and wither in its absence. To him who stands under the Tree, the Fruit
drops into his hand. Whence all covet to live at Court, and decline Foreign
Employments, in which the Prince has most need of Ministers. This would be
remedied, if the Bait of Rewards was thrown farther off, if they were bestowed
where deserved, not where they are begged; without need of Petitions or
Importunities. King Theodorick comforted the absent, saying, That from his
Court he observed their Actions, and discerned their Merits Abunde cognoscetur
quisquis fama test laudatur; quapropter longissime constitutum mentis nostrae
oculus serenus inspexit and vidit meri^um. Cassid. lib. 9. cap. 22.
. Pliny said of Trajan, that it was easier for his Eyes to forget the Persons
of the absent, than for his Mind not to remember his Love toward them Facilius
quippe est, ut oculis ejus ^ult^^ absentis, quam animo charitas excidat. Plin.
in Paneg.
. Yet this advice for absent Ministers to repair sometimes to Court, ought not
to be effected, by desiring to be dismissed from their Offices, but still
retaining them, by giving several Reasons to get leave of the Prince to be
sometimes with him; for so they may obtain what they desire, still retaining
that which if they should quit, might be conferred upon another. Many either
dissatisfied with their present Station, or Ambitious of greater, resign it,
and afterward repent, finding their Hopes and Expectations frustrated, for the
Prince looks upon it as a Slighting and Contempt of his Favor. Let no man
presume so much upon his own Person and Parts, as to think the Prince cannot
Live without him. For Princes never want Ministers, and being once Slighted,
they often forget their Chiefest. This I speak to those who canvass for public
Employs, not those who knowing the Vanity of them, choose to live Solitarily
and Retired. Only let them consider, that great Souls form^d for Business,
don't always find in retirement that Ease and Tranqu^lity of Mind, which they
propose, and being once engaged therein, without being able to change their
Resolutions, they live and die miserable.

Modesty in receiving Rewards and Gratuities, is of great use, together with
such a prudent Carriage, as may make them appear Obligations to farther
Services, not to drain the Prince's Liberality, for this obliges him yet more:
As God, when Solomon asked for nothing but an understanding Heart, not only
gave him that, but also Riches and Glory And I have also given thee that which
thou have not asked, both Riches and Honor; so that there shall not be any
among the ^ings like unto thee, in thy days, 1 Kings 3. 13.
. They ought not to be demanded as a Debt, for Virtue is to it self a fair and
large Reward; and though some acknowledgement be due, yet does it depend upon
the Prince's Favor. And all had rather it should be received as their Bounty,
not a just Debt to desert. Whence Princes are more inclined to Reward liberally
small Services, but great ones more sparingly, for they think they shall
receive more acknowledgments from the one, than the other. Whence he who has
received many favors, may expect to receive more, for Bounty once bestowed
causes farther Benefits. For a Prince had rather another should acknowledge
himself his Debtor, than he his, the first being the more honorable. Lewis the
Eleventh, King of France, used to say, That he had more regard for one, who for
small Services had been well rewarded, than for others who for great Services
had received but small Reward. The Emperor Theodorick owning this failure,
confessed, That 'twas from Ambition that Rewards sprouted out, without the
least care of him who planted them, and that it provoked him to give more to
those whom he had once began to favor Amamu^ (...) beneficia germinare, nec
semel praesta^ largitulis collatae fastidium, ma^^sque nos provocant ad
frequens praemium, qui initia nostrae gratiae suscipere ^^ruerunt; novis enim
judicium impenditur, favor autem semel placitis ^xhibetur. Cas. lib. 2. Epist.
2.
. This is visible in Favorites, toward whom Princes Favor and Liberality
seem a kind of Obstinacy.

EMBLEM XXIV.
THough (as we have said before) Justice armed with the Laws, and Rewards, and
Punishments, are the Pillars which support the Structure of the State, ye^ will
these Pillars be in the Air, unless founded upon the Basis of Religion, which
is the Bond of the Laws; for the Jurisdiction of Justice comprehends only
external Acts, legitimately approved of; but don^t extend to priva^e and
internal ones. It has Authority only over the Body, not the Mind; so that
Wickedne^^ would little heed Punishment, when it could privately commit
Injuries, Adulteries, and Rapine; nay, he would make a jest of the Laws, were
there not another invi^sib^e one, menacing within. So necessary is this (...)
in a Government, that some Atheistical Persons estee^ Religion but a mere
Politic Invention; who without ^t would be content with his Poverty and
present Condition? What Trust in Bonds and Covenants? What Integrity in the
Administration of Goods? What Fide^ity in Offices and Employments? What
Security of Life? Few would be enticed by Rewards, if they could obtain the
same thing by private Injustice; few would be charmed with the Beauty of
Virtue, if through hopes of a more lasting Garland than one of Palm, they did
not confine themselves to the strict Rules of Continency. Vices would soon
confound the Order of Government, without the principal end of Happiness, which
consists in Virtue, and in this Foundation and Bulwark of Religion, which
sustains and defends the Civil Power, if the People did not think that there
was another Supreme Tribunal to Judge the Thoughts and Imaginations, whose
Rewards and Punishments will be Eternal. The hope and fear of this being born
in the most barbarous and impious Sinners, do regulate and compose their
Actions. Caligula scoffed at, and ridiculed the Gods; yet, when it Thundered he
was forced to own a Supreme Hand, which had Power to punish him. This Hand all
acknowledge, for there is no Heart which is not touched with that Divine
Magnet. And as the Mariners Needle from a certain natural Sympathy, is in
perpetual Motion, till it stops a^ the Light of that fixed North Star, about
which all the Celestial Orbs are turned, so we cannot live quietly till we
acknowledge and adore that increated North, in which is true rest, and from
whence proceeds the Motion of all things. Who ought to observe this more than a
Prince, who is the Pilot of the State, upon whose care it depends to bring the
S^ip safe into Port? Nor is it enough for him to seem to look at that, while he
keeps his Eyes upon other dark and obscure ones, for so he would lose his
Course, and run the Vessel upon Sands and Rocks, and so make a Wreck. The
People will be divided in Opinions, and thence into Factions, from whence arise
Plots and Seditions, and from them changes in States and Empires Mar. Hist. of
Spain.
. More Princes are ruined by Dissension in Religion than by Arms. For which
reason the Sixth Council of Toledo prudently enacted Council. Tolet. cap. 3.
, That no Prince should come to the Crown before he had first taken an Oath not
to tolerate any one in his Realm who was not a Christian. Spain could never be
at quiet till (...) rejected the Errors of Arius, and wholly embraced the
Catholic Religion, since which the People have lived so happily, that when
King Weterick afterward endeavored to introduce that Sect, he was kill^d in
his very Palace; but notwithstanding many like Examples, there are some who
dare impiously teach Princes to dissemble and counterfeit Religion. He who
dissembles it, does not believe it. And if this Dissimulation be a politic
Artifice to unite Peoples Minds, and to maintain the State, true Religion would
better do it than false, for this is fading, that Eternal. Many Empires founded
upon false Religions, proceeding from Ignorance, God has preserved a long time,
rewarding by that means their Morality, and blind Worship, and barbarous
Sacrifices, with which they fought him; not that they were acceptable to him,
but for the religious Simplicity wherewith they were sometimes offered. But has
never preserved those Empires, which counterfeited Religion more through Malice
and Artifice than Ignorance. St. Isidore, at his Death, foretold the Spaniards,
that if they strayed from the True Religion they should be subdued by their
Enemies; but if they persisted in it, their Grandeur should be raised above all
Nations. Which was verified by the Yoke of the Africans, which began from the
time that Witiza denied Obedience to the Pope, after which liberty of Worship,
and licenciousness of Vice disturbed the Public Peace, and ruined Military
Discipline, which brought heavy Misfortunes upon the King himself, and his
Sons, as well as upon the Kingdom; till being subdued and chastis'd, Spain
acknowledged its Errors, and again found Heaven propitious in that little
handful of Christians, with which Pelagius retired into a Cave in the Mountain
Ausena, called Cav^longa, where the Arrows and Stones of the Moors were
miraculou^ly retorted upon themselves Mar. Hist. of Spain.
. From that the Monarchy began to revive, and rose (though after a long time)
to that greatness, which it at present enjoys, as a Reward of its constancy in
the Catholic Religion.

Since then, Religion is the Soul of Governments, a Prince ought to use all
possible care to preserve it; The first Spirit which Romulus, Numa, Lycurgus,
Solon, Plato, and other Founders, infused into them, was Religion Omnium primam
rem ad multitudinem imperitam efficacissimam Deorum metum injiciendum ratus.
Live.
, for that unites Men's minds more than necessity. The Emperors, Tiberius and
Adrian prohibited all Foreign Religion, and were wholly intent upon the
Preservation of their own: As also Theodosius and Constantine, who established
Laws and Punishments against those who revolted from the Catholic Faith. Their
Majesty's, Ferdinand and Isabella, never tolerated the Exercise of any other
Religion. In which commendable was the Constancy of King Philip the Second, and
his Successors, who could never be induced to compose the Seditions of the
Netherlands by Toleration of Liberty of Conscience, though they might thereby
have retain^d those Provinces, and saved those Immense Treasures which were
expended in the War. They preferred the Honor and Glory of God to their own
Ease and Tranquillity; imitating Flavius Jovianus, who being proclaimed Emperor
by the Army, excused himself, saying, That he was a Christian, and that 'twas
not fit he should Command them who were not so, and would not Consent till all
the Soldiers had promised to turn Christians. Though he might inherit this
pious Constancy from his Ancestors, since the Eighth Council of Toledo mentions
the same thing of King Recefuinthus Ob hoc sui Regni apicem a Deo solidari
praeoptaret, si Catholicae fid^i per euntium turmas acquireret, indignum
reputans Catholicae fidei Principe^ sacrileges imperare. Conci^. Tol. 8. cap.
11.
, Of which Piety your Royal Highness's Father, Philip the Fourth of glorious
Memory, is a signal Example to your Royal Highness. In the beginning of whose
Reign it being argued in Council, whether the Truce should be continued with
the Dutch; and some of his Counselors urging that it was not Policy to begin
War, or any change of Affairs, in the beginning of a Reign; he opposed them,
saying, That he would not have his Name branded with the Infamy of having
maintained one hours Peace with the Enemies of God and his Crown; and so
immediately broke the Truce. For this ardent Zeal and Constancy in the
Catholic Religion, King Recaredus merited the Name of Catholic, (as long
before the Kings of France that of most Christian). In the Third Council of
Toledo, and in that of Barcelona, which Title the Kings Sisebutus and Ervigius
kept, which their Successors afterward lost, till re-assum'd by King Alphonso
the First, to distinguish him from Heretics and Schismatics.

Though it is a King's Duty to maintain Religion in his Realms, and to promote
the Worship of God, as his Vicars in Temporal Affairs, that they may Govern to
his Glory, and their Subjects Safety; yet they ought to know that it is not in
them to decide Controversies in Religion and Divine Worship, for the care of
this belongs directly to the Spiritual Head of the Church, to whom alone Christ
has given this Authority, the Execution, Preservation, and Defense thereof only
is committed to Kings, as that Head shall order and direct. The Priests sharply
checked King Uzziah, and God severely punished him because he offered Incense
And they withstood Vzziah the King, and said unto him, it appertains not unto
thee, Vzziah, to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests, 2 Chro^. 26.
18.
. It Is necessary for the Preservation of the Purity of Religion, that it be the
same in all the Parts of the Christian World. True Worship would soon be lost,
if each Prince might accommodate it to his own Ends and Designs. In those
Provinces and Kingdoms where this has been attempted, there searce remain any
Tracts thereof, so that the poor distracted People are wholly ignorant of the
True Religion. The Spiritualty and Temporalty are two distinct Jurisdictions;
this is adorned by the Authority of the other, and that is maintained by the
others Power. It Is an Heroic Obedience which submits to the Vicar of him who
disposes of Crowns and Scepters. As arbitrary and free from the Laws as Princes
pretend to be, they must still pay Obedience to the Apostolic Decrees, and are
obliged to give force to them, and see them strictly observed in their
Dominions; especially when it is not only expedient for the Spiritual, but also
the Temporal Good, that those Holy Decrees be put in Execution, nor should they
suffer any one to violate them, to the damage and prejudice of their Subjects,
and their Religion.

EMBLEM XXV.
THE Stork builds its Nest upon the Church Steeple, and by the Sanctity of the
Place makes its Succession secure. The Prince who founds his Kingdom upon the
Triangular stone of the Church, renders it strong and lasting. The Athenians
once consulting the Oracle of Delphi, how they might defend themselves against
Xerxes, who with a vast Fleet of twelve Hund^ed Sail, was coming to fall on
them, were answered, That if they could fence their City with a wooden Wall
they should get the better; Themistocles interpreted Apollo's meaning to be,
that all the Citizens should go on Ship board; which done they obtained a
Victory over that prodigious Fleet. The same Success will attend a Prince, who
shall embark his Grandeur in the Ship of the Church; for if this by the
Testimony of another Oracle not fabulous and uncertain, but infallible and
divine, cannot be sunk, neither can that which is embarked in it. For this
reason your Highness's glorious Ancestors, were used to consecrate part of the
Spoils they took in War from their Enemies, to God, as the Lord of Victories
who fought for them, offering for his Worship very considerable Revenues and
Possessions, whence innumerable Foundations and Endowments of Churches,
Cathedrals, and Convents, took their rise; having built in Spain above Seventy
thousand Churches. Of which Samy, the first King of Arragon, alone, built a
Thousand, consecrated to the Blessed Virgin, which his Munificence was amply
rewarded by the many Conquests he made, and Victories he won, having fought
Thirty three Battles, in all which he came off victorious. These pious Works
were like Religious Colonies, rendered by their Spiritual Arms not less
powerful than Military ones; for Artillery make not so great Breaches as
Prayer. The Prayers of the Israelites for seven Days beat down the Walls of
Jericho And the People shouted with a great shout, that the Wall fell down
flat, so that the People went up into the City, every Man strait before him,
and they took the Ci^y, Ios. 6. 20.
. Riches are therefore better reposited in Temples than Treasuries; not only
against extreme necessity, but that as by them Religion flourishes, the State
may with it. The Athenians kept theirs in that of Delphi, as did many other
Nations. What better Guardian than the Sovereign Arbitrator of Kingdoms? Our
Hearts at least will be in the Churches, if our Treasures are there For where
your Treasure is, there will your Heart he also, Mat. 6. 21.
. Wherefore their Council (...) no less impious than imprudent, who under the
^lightest pretense of public Necessity are for pillaging them. He is not
worthy the Protection of Divine Providence, who diffident of God's Power, upon
every accident has his Eye upon the Furniture of his House. When King Ferdinand
the Holy, wanted Money to carry on the Siege of Sevil, and some advised him to
supply the Deficiency of his Exchequer out of the Church-Treasures. He made
answer, I promise my self more from the Prayers and Sacrifices of the Priests,
than from their Riches; which Piety and Confidence, God abundantly recompensed
the very next day by the Surrender of the City. Those Kings, who have done
otherwise, have left severe Examples of their Sacrilegious Presumption.
Gunderick, King of the Vandals, going to Plunder St. Vincent's, fell down dead
as he was entering it. The great Misfortunes of Alphonso, King of Arragon, were
thought to be God's Judgment^ upon him, for having robb^d his Sacred Houses.
Queen Uraca died at the very Door of St. Isidore's at Leo^, the Treasures of
which she had embeziled. Sane^^, King of Arragon, was shot through the Arm with
(...) Arrow, for that he had defil^d his Hands with the Plunder of Churches.
And though, in St. Victorio's a^ Rota, he publicly confessed his Crime, and
with Tears and all imaginable Signs of Contrition, offering R^stitution and
Amendment, yet it pleased God to publish his Offense in his Punishment, as a
war^ing to others. King John the First, was routed and killed a^ the Battle of
Aliubanota, for having made use of the Treasures of the Church of Guadaloup^.
Upon the Surrender of Cajeta to Frederick, King of Naples, the Fren^h loaded
two Ships with the Plunder of the Churches, both which were lost.

But in all these Cases, extreme necessity had not place; for then right.
Reason allows Princes for their Preservation, to make use of such Riches, as
out of ^ pious Liberality themselves have laid up in these Holy Places,
provided it be with a Resolution to restore them when the Prosperity of their
Affairs shall put them in a Capacity. As their Catholic Majesty's, Ferdinand
and Isabella did, having obtain^d a Grant from the Parliament of Medina del
Campo, of the Church-Plate to defray Expenses of War. And the Sacred Canons and
Councils have prescribed certain Cases and Circumstances of Necessity or
Danger, wherein Ecclesiastics are bound to assist the Public with their
Contribut^ons; and certainly 'twould be inexc^^able Ava^^c^ in them not to
regard Common Necessities. They are the most noble and principal Part of a
State; and if for them, or for Religion, others are obliged to expose their
Lives, why not they their Riches? If the State maintains and keeps them, it may
very justly expect a reciprocal Relief from them for its Conservation and
Defense. The People would be di^courag'd from paying Tyths, and other Church
Duties, if in Common Calamities there were none to ease them of extraordinary
Burdens; they will blame their own Piety, and their Zeal and Devotion, for any
new Offerings, Donatives, and Legacies to the Church will slacken. It Is
therefore highly reasonable that the Clergy in Cases of this Nature, aid the
Public with their Revenues, not only for that the danger or benefit equally
respects all; but withal, least the Goods and Estates of the Laity be so
oppressed, that Tillage, and with it Tithes, and other pious Works must fail.
In such cases, Church-Plate shows better in Bars in the Mint, than in Chalices
and Cups in the Vestry.

This Obligation upon the State Ecclesiastical, is more strict in the more
urgent necessities of the S^^nish Kings; for almost all the Foundations and
Endowments of Churches being the Effects of their pious Liberality, ^hey are in
Justice bound mutually to relieve their Patrons in necessity, and oblige them
to continue their Munificence in better times. These, and many other Reasons,
have prevailed with the Apostolic See, to be so liberal to the Kings of Spain,
in granting them the use of the Church goods, to maintain their Wars against
the Infidels. Gregory the Seventh granted Sancho Rami^ez King of Arragon, the
Tithes and Revenues of all the Churches, either newly built or gained from the
Moors, to dispose of as he pleas^d. The same Grant also Pope Urban made to
Peter the First, King of Arragon, his Successors and Grandees of his Kingdom,
excepting the Churches of Residence. Innocent the Third granted the Bull of the
Croisade for the War of Spain, which was called the Holy War; which favor,
Pope Calixt^s afterward in Henry the Fourth's time extended both to the living
and the dead. Gregory the Tenth, gave King Alphonsus the Wise, the third Part
of the Tithes which were designed for Building: This began afterward to be
perpetuated in John the Second's Reign; and Alex^nder the Sixth extended it
also to the Kingdom of Granada. John the Twenty Second, granted the Tithes of
the Church Revenues, and the Croisade to King Alphonsus the Eleventh. Urban the
Fifth, a third Part of the Benefices of Castile to Peter the Cruel. Sixtus the
Fourth, consented to have the Clergy contribute at one time an hundred thousand
Ducates for the War of Granada; which favor several other Popes continued.
Julius the Second, granted Emanuel, King of Portugal, the third Part of the
Revenue which belonged to the Church-Building, and the Tithes of all other
Ecc^esiastical Incomes. These Subsidies ought not to be spent but in
Necessities, and for the Public Uses, to which they were designed. This Queen
Isabella so religiously observed, That seeing Ninety Millions raised by the
Croisade, she immediately commanded they should be employed to the very Uses
prescribed by the Apostolic Bulls. Those Favors will shine more, and produce
better Fruit, when so expended. But Necessities and Danger usually confound all
things, and easily wrest the Popes meaning to what was not intended.

EMBLEM XXVI.
IT was an impious Opinion, that of those who impudently asserted the Heathens
to have had more Courage than the Christians; upon this ground, that their
Superstition strengthened their Minds, and rendered them more fierce and manly
by the dismal sight of so many bloody Victims, as they offered to the Gods in
their Sacrifices; and held them only to be Men of Courage and Magnanimity, who
got the better of other Nations rather by force than reason: Accusing on the
contrary the Institution of our Religion for recommending Humility and
Meekness; Virtue is good for nothing but to make Men mean spirited. What an
impious and unreasonable Opinion this! The spilling of Blood may indeed make
the Mind more barbarous and cruel, more valiant it never can. Fortitude and
Magnanimity enter not at the Eyes, but are born within the Breast; nor are
those the most generous, who are most pleased with the Blood and Slaughter of
Beasts, or who live on Man's Flesh. Our Religion does not contemn Magnanimity,
but rather promotes it, not by proposing to us temporary and corruptible
Rewards, as the Pagan Superstition does, but eternal ones never to have an end.
And if a simple Crown of Laurel, which begins to fade as soon as gathered,
inspired so much Courage then, what will not now that everlasting one of Stars Now
they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an inco^r^ptible, 1 Cor. 9. 25.
? Is it that the Heathens have exposed themselves to greater Dangers than the
Christians? No, for if at any time they assaulted a City, or forced a Camp, it
was under Shields and Targets. Whereas now Christians must make their way
through thick Showers of Bullets, and the Thunder and Lightning of Gunpowder.
It Is a mistake to imagine Humility and Valor incompatible; they are rather so
closely connected, (...) without the former this is impracticable; nor can true
Valor be where there is not Humility, Patience, and in general all other
Virtues. For he only is really Valiant that can subdue his Passions, and is
free from all Perturbation of Mind; a Study the Stoics have bestowed much
labor on, and after them the Christians with greater success. He makes but a
very small progress in it, who suffers himself to be transported with Anger and
Pride. This is truly Heroical to conquer ones Lusts and Appetites. The Mind
where these Conflicts are, is none of the easiest Fields of Battle; he who has
learnt thus much Submission, to bend the Knee to another, will upon occasion
easily despise Danger, and with undaunted Resolution submit his Neck to the Ax.
The Heathen Religion, it is true, has produced many great Commanders, such as
were the Caesar's, Scipios, and abundance of others, but certainly the Christian
has furni^ht us with no less con^iderable ones in the Persons of the Alphonso's
and Ferdi^^^ds of Castile, as well as other Kings of Arragon, Navarre, and
Portugal. What Valor could possibly equal that of the Emperor Charles the
Fifth? What great Generals has Antiquity ever celebrated, which have not been
equaled, if not been surpassed by Gonzal^z F^^dinand of Cordova, Fernan
Cortez, Antony de Lieve, Ferdinand d'Avalos, Marquess of Pescara; Alphonso
d'Avalos, Marquess of Guast; Alexander Farnese, Duke of P^rma; Andr^w d'Oria,
Alphonso d'Alb'ouquerque, Ferdi^^nd Alvarez of Toledo, Duke of Alba; the
Marquisses of Sancta Cruz; the Earl of Fuentes, Marquess Spinola, Le^is
Fa^ardo, and almost infinite others; as well Spainards as others, never
sufficiently to be commended by Fame. To whom may deservedly be applied what
St. Paul said of those Great Captains, Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Ieph^^a, David,
and Samuel, that by Faith they subdued Kingdoms; waxed va^iant in Fight, ^urn'd
to Flight the Armies of the Aliens Heb. 11. 33, 34.
If we will compare the Victories of the Heathens to those of the Christians,
we shall find the latter to have been much the greater. In the Battle of Navas
were killed Two hundred thousand Moors, with the loss only of Twenty five on
our side; finding the Camp so covered with Spears and Darts, that though the
Victors ^taid there two Days, using no other Fuel but the Wood of them; they
could not consume them, even, though they endeavour^d it. There fell more in
the Battle of Salado, with the loss but of Twenty Christians. And in that Naval
Victory, which Don John of Austria obtained over the Turks at Lepanto, there
were no less than an Hundred and eighty Galleys sunk and taken: Which Victories
Christians attribute not to their own Valor, but to the True God whom they
adore. An Heart confiding in God, as effectually stays an Enemy, as a Hand
armed with a Sword, as Judas Machabaeus found So that fighting with their
Hands, and praying to God with their Hearts, they slew no less than Thirty and
five thousand Men, 2 Match. 15. 27.
. It Is God who governs the Hearts, it is he that imparts Courage and Strength,
that grant^ or denies Victories Least thou say in thine Heart, my Power, and
the might of my Hand has gotten me this Victory. But thou shall remember the
Lord thy God; for it is he that has given thee power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.
17, 18.
. He would be an Impostor, and could not be cleared from the Imputation of
Fraud, were he rather assisting to those who adore false Gods, whose Idolatrous
Sacrifices all tend to procure their favor. But if he sometimes also permit
them to be Victorious, it is not to be ascribed to their Devotion, but to other
secret Causes of Divine Providence. In the Thirst which the Roman Army suffered
in the War against the Marcomanni; God could not be appeased with the Prayers
and Sacrifices of the Heathen Legions, but when the Tenth composed of
Christians, at last implored his aid, he sent down plentiful Showers to them,
but to the Enemy Thunder and Lightning, so that they obtained an easy Victory,
whence it was afterward called the Thundering Legion. If that Faith were still,
it would still work the same effects; but whether through want of that, or for
some other secret Ends, God does sometimes permit those to be triumphed over,
who pay him true Adoration; but then the Victory is not a Reward to the
Conqueror, but a Chastisement to the Conquered. Let Princes therefore always
hold in their Hands the Flag of the Cross, signified by that Sword which
Jeremiah gave to Judas Machabaeus to wound his Adversaries withal Take this
Holy Sword, a Gift from God, with which thou shall wound the Adversaries, ^
Match. 15. 16.
, and on their Arms the Buckler of Religion, and continually before their Eyes,
that eternal Fire which went before the Persian Monarchs: An Emblem of that
other incomprehensible Fire from which the Sun receives its Rays. This is the
true Religion which the Soldiers adored, as often as they prostrated themselves
before the Emperor Constantine's Banner: for when the ^^ape of a Cross in the
Heavens made by the Sun's light, with this Inscription, Thou shall Conquer
under this Sign In hoc signo vinces. Eusebius. I. 9. Hist. St. Ambr. Ep. 29.
, seemed to promise him the Victory over Maxe^ti^^, he commanded a Standard to
be made in the same Form with that of the present Emblem, with the Letters X
and P, Ciphers of Christ's Name over it, and the Letters Alpha and Omega, the
Emblem of God, the Beginning and End of all things. This Standard the Emperors
after him made use of, till Julian the Apostate's time Ge^^br. l, 4. Chron.
Anno 1572.
; and Don John of Austria had on all his Colors embroidered a Cross, with this
Motto: With these Arms I have conquered the Turks, and with the same I hope to
overcome Heretics Mar. Hist of Spain.
: King Alphonsus the Great put the Words of Constantine's Cross on another sort
of Ensign, which he afterward offered in the Church of Oviedo: And of those I
have thought fit to make use on, as well as Constanstine's Standard, to form
this Emblem, and to imprint on Princes Minds, that Faith and Assurance, with
which they ought to erect the Standard of Religion against their Enemies. At
the Battle of Navas, a Person made way three times through the thickest of the
Enemy with the Cross of Roderigo, Archbishop of Toledo, though all the Darts
and Arrows of the Moors were aimed at it, and many stuck in the Lance. Angels
are the Guards of this Banner; two Angels upon white Horses, were seen to Fight
in the Front of the Battle of Simaneas, when King Ramiro the Second, vanquished
the Moors; and in that of Clavigio, in time of Ramiro the First; and also in
that of Merida, under King Alphonsus the Ninth, appeared that Divine Light, the
Son of Thunder, St. Iago, Patron of Spain, on a White Steed carrying Colors
distinguished by a Red Cross. No one shall be able to stand before you, (said
Joshua upon his Deathbed) if you put your Hope and Confidence in God Josh. 23.
10.
: Your Sword shall Conquer thousands, for he will fight for you Ibid.
. The Holy Scriptures are full of Instances of this Divine Assistance. God put
the very Stars in array against the Canaanites They fought from Heaven, the
Stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
. Against the Amorites he armed the Elements, and rained great Stones from
Heaven The Lord ca^t down great Stones from Heaven upon them to Azekah, and
they died, Josh, 10. 11.
. Nor did the faithful need any assistance against the Madianites, for the Lord
set every Man's Sword against his Fellow Judge. 7. 22.
. Thus, whoever is God's Enemy, brings Vengeance upon his own head.

EMBLEM XXVII.
WHAT, neither Force, nor a close Siege of many Years could do against Troy,
Fraud at length effected under pretense of Religion, the Graecians conveying
their Arms into the City within the Body of a Wooden Horse, under pretext of a
Vow to Minerva. Neither the clattering noise of the Weapons, nor the Advertency
of the most prudent Citizens, nor the Consideration that it could not be
brought into the City but by a Breach, nor that of its being to continue within
the Walls a considerable time, were sufficient to open the Peoples Eyes, and to
discover the Treachery: Of such Influence is Religion. This Scipio Africanus,
Sylla, Sertorius, Minos, Pisistratus, Lycurgus, and many others, have
advantageously made use of to authorize their Laws, and impose upon the People.
The Phoenicians coming into Spain, built, where Medina Sidonia now stands, a
Temple in the Form of a Fortress dedicated to Hercules, saying, That they were
so commanded in a Dream. The Spaniards believed that to be Devotion which was
Stratagem, that to be Piety which was a Trick, whereby religiously to enslave
and plunder the People. By means of another Temple on the promontory Dianea,
(now Denia) the Inhabitants of the Isle of Zante concealed the Design they had
of bringing Spain under their Subjection. King Sisenand having deposed
Swinth^^^, to secure to himself the Crown, called a Provincial Synod of about
Seventy Bishops, under Color of making new Laws for regulating Ecclesiastical
Discipline which time had corrupted; whereas his chief and re^l Design was to
get Swinthila deposed, and himself enthroned by a Dec^ee of these Fathers, the
better to satisfy the People. Which very Artifice Ervigius made use of to
confirm his Election, and the Abdication of King Wam^^ Malice well knows what
effect Religion has on Men's minds, and therefore makes that the principal
Instrument to execute its Designs, which easily impose upon the simple Vulgar,
who, poor Souls, not being able to penetrate all their ends, believe their only
tendency is to render God propitious, to make him prosper their Temporal
Affairs here, and reward them Eternally hereafter. What nauseous Delusions have
Nations swallowed when gilt with Religion, miserably abandoning themselves to
Superstition? What servile and barbarous Custom has not that introduced, to the
prejudice of Liberty, Life, and Fortune? Let Princes therefore be upon their
Guard, in these times particularly, when Policy puts on the Mask of Piety, and
not easily admit those Stalking-horses of Religion, which have ruined not only
Cities, but whole Countries and Kingdoms. For, if under that Title, Ambition
and Avarice creep in, and the People be oppressed, they will renounce God's
easy Yoke, and will look upon this Natural and Divine Law of Religion to be
nothing but a piece of State Policy; and that Princes under that Veil conceal
their Methods to keep Subjects in Allegiance, and strip them of their Fortunes.
Let Princes therefore thoroughly examine, whether the Novelty introduced be
really upon the account of Religion, or merely a specious pretense to the
prejudice of their Power and Authority, to the detriment of their Subjects, or
the Public Peace; which they may find out by the ends it proposes, by
observing to what such Innovations tend, whether to Interest or Ambition,
whether they conduce to the Spiritual Good or not; or if this cannot be procured
by other means less prejudicial. In such cases an Evil is with less danger
prevented than afterward remedied; and the only means to prevent it, is not to
give place to these Pretexts and Abuses; however, if they be already
introduced, they ought to be corrected with all the mildness imaginable, not
rashly, nor with Violence or extreme Rigor; especially, if the Case fall not
under the Prince's Jurisdiction; but with extraordinary address, having du^
respect to the Persons, under whose Cognizance it falls For the Priest's Lips
should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth, Malach. 2. 7.
, laying before them the truth of the thing, and the ill Consequences and
Inconveniences of it. For if the Secular Prince attempt to do it by force, and
those Abuses should be established into a Custom among the People, they will
interpret this Violence to ^e Impiety in the Prince, and rather obey the
Priests than him: On the other side, if they see the Ecclesiastical and Civil
Power disagree, they will throw off all Obedience, and emboldened by the
declared Will o^ the Prince, they will make an Insurrection against Religion it
self, and be insensibly induc^d to beli^ve, the Inconveniences of these
Contentions extend even to the Substance of Religion, which will easily bring
them to change their Opinions, and that too. And by this means, the Prince
being engaged in Civil Broils and Dissentions with the Clergy, and the People
in new Opinions, all respect for things Sacred will cease, and Errors arise
upon the Eclipse of that Divine Luminary which before enlightened and united
their Minds; which is the scource of the Ruin of many Princes, and of the
Revolutions of States Nullae res multitudinem efficacius regit, quam
superstitio. Curtius.
. Great prudence is requisite to govern the People in such matters, for it is
equally obvious for them to despise them, which is impious; and to be over
credulous in them, which is Superstition; this last most frequently happens, in
that their Ignorance is presently taken with appearances of Devotion, and new
Opinions, before Reason has had time to examine them; wherefore it is very
necessary gradually to remove from them all occasions of Ruin, those
particularly which usually arise from frivolous Disputations about too subtle
Points, such as very little, if at all promote Religion, not suffering them to
be defended or printed; otherwise they will be divided into Factions, and every
one's maintaining his own Opinions with as much Heat and Obstinacy, as if they
were Matter of Faith, may occasion no less Disturbances, than even a difference
of Religions, or a Toleration of them. It was an Apprehension of this made
Tiberius forbid the Books of the Sibyls to be seen, whose Prophecies might
cause Seditions Censuit Asinius Gallus, ut libri Sibyllini adirentur, renuit
Tiberi^s, perinde divina humanaque obtegens. Tac. 1. Ann.
. In the Acts of the Apostles we read, that the Books which contained idle
Curiosities were burnt Many of them also which used curious Arts, brought their
Books together, and burnt them before all Men, Acts 19. 19.
.

An appearance often miserably deludes the Common People, who blindly follow
any Superstitious Devotions with a Submission wholly effeminate, which renders
them Melancholy, Cowardly, and very Slaves to their own Imaginations; which
debase their Spirits, and prompt them to idle away their time in Convents and
Pilgrimages, where oft-times many Abuses and Vices are committed. This is an
Infirmity of the Vulgar, and not a little prejudicial to the Truth of Religion,
and the Public Safety; and unless nipp'd in the Bud, creates great
Inconveniences and Dangers, being a kind of folly that under the appearance of
Good does every thing hand over head, following new Notions of Religion, and
devilish Inventions. Some Submission is requisite, but that without base and
ssavish Bigottry; such I mean as has Virtue in esteem, abhors Vice* and holds
Labor and Obedience to be more agreeable to God and the Prince, than Convents
and Pilgrimages, this Devotion being usually celebrated with Banquets, Balls,
and Plays; like that of the People of Israel at the Consecration of the Molten
Calf And they arose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and
burnt peace offerings; and the People sat down to eat, and to drink, and rose
up to play, Exodus 32. 6.
.

But if the People once begin to be too opinionative in Matters of Religion,
and to introduce any Innovations in it, immediate Remedy must be applied, and
the ill Seed be routed out before it take Root and spread farther, so as to
grow into a Body too powerful for the Prince, against whom they may afterward,
if he refuse to conform to their Opinion, contrive some pernicious Innovation
in the Government Eos vero qui in divinis aliquid innovant, odio habe, and
coerce, non Deorum solum causa (quos tamen qui contemnit, nec aliud sane magni
feceri^) sed quia nova quaedam numina hi tales introducentes, multos impellunt
ad mut^^ionem rerum, unde Conjurationes, Seditiones, Conciliabula existunt, res
profecto minime conducibiles Principatui. Dion.
. And though the Understanding be free, and without destroying its liberty
can^t be constrained to believe, and so it may seem to belong peculiarly to God
Almighty to punish those who have unworthy Sentiments of him Deorum inj^rias
Dii^ curae, Tac. 1. Ann.
; yet, would it be of very ill consequence to commit the Decision of the
sublimest Mysteries of Faith to the blind and ignorant Mob: It Is therefore
infinitely requisite to oblige Subjects to think, as the Ancient Germans did,
that there is more Sanctity and Reverence in believing than knowing things
Divine Sanctius, ac reverentius visum, de actis Deorum credere, quam scire.
Tac. de Mor. Germ.
. What monstrous Errors were a Kingdom obnoxious to, if each man were allowed
to be a Jugde in Matters of Religion? Hence the Romans were so careful in
Prohibiting the Exercise of any new Religion Neque nisi Romani Dei, nec quo
ali^ more, quam parvo colerentur, T. Live.
, and Claudius thought the Foreign Superstitions a sufficient Subject for
complaint to the Senate Quia externae superstitiones valescant, Tac. 11. Ann.
. But if Malice have already got footing, and Punishment be too weak to resist
the Multitude, it is necessary that Discretion perform the part of Fire and
Sword: For obstinacy in Faults sometimes increases by an untimely Application
of Remedies too violent; nor does Reason always surrender to Force. King
Ricaredus by dexterously adapting himself to the times, now dissembling, now
flattering, brought his Subjects to renounce Arianism, and to return to the
Catholic Church.

Great Men have anciently made use of Superstition (as we have before
intimated) to authorize their Laws, animate their People, and keep them in
Subjection and Obedience; to this end they feigned Dreams and Divine
Revelations, and pretended to have private Conference with the Gods; but
although these Artifices extremely influence the simple People, whose
Superstitious Humor is easily affected with things that have an appearance
Supernatural: It Is not however allowable for Princes to delude them with
counterfeit Miracles, and a false show of Religion. Of what use is the Shadow,
where one may enjoy the Light it self? To what purpose those Divine imaginary
Prodigies of Heaven, since it gives, as we see, so many real ones to those who
with a firm Faith and Assurance expect them from Divine Providence? How can an
infinitely Just God give success to these Arts which seem to call in question
his Care and Concern for things here below, that counterfeit his Omnipotence,
and ascribe to him what he is not the Author of? What certainty in Religion can
the People promise themselves, if they see it wrested to serve the particular
Ends of Princes, and that it is nothing but a Veil with which they cover their
Designs, and give Truth the lie? That Policy is certainly very unsafe, that is
cloak'd with Fraud, very weak and tottering, that is supported by contrivance.

EMBLEM XXVIII.
PRudence is the Rule and Measure of Virtues, without that these degenerate
into Vices. Wherefore as other Virtues have theirs in the Appetite, this has
its residence in the Intellect, from thence presiding over them all. Agatho
calls it a great Goddess. This it is which constitutes the three Forms of
Government, Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, and assigns each of them
their Parts conformed to the Subjects Nature, having its Eyes always intent
upon their Preservation as the principal end of Politics. Prudence is the
State's Anchor, the Prince's Compass. Where this Virtue fails, the very Soul of
Government is wanting. ' It Is this, (says King Alphonsus) which makes* see
things as they are, and judge what they may be, making us act therein decently,
without Tumult and Precipitation. It Is the peculiar Virtue of Princes Nam recte
disponere, recteque judicare, qui potest, is est Princeps and imperator. Menand.
, and that which above all others renders a Man complete, which makes Nature so
sparing in her Dispensations of it; having given many great Wit and Capacity,
very few great Prudence; for defect of which, the more eminent Men are in
Dignity, the more dangerous is their Government; for as much as they easily
transgress the limits of Reason, and are ruined; besides, that one of Command
requires a clear Judgment to discern all things as they are in themselves, to
weigh and give each thing its just value. This nice Examination is of very
great consequence in Princes, and as Nature contributes much to it, so does
Observation and Experience more.

The Virtue of Prudence consists of several Parts reducible to these three
Heads; the Memory of past, the Knowledge of present, and the Prospect of future
times. All these differences of time are represented in this Emblem, by a
Serpent, the Emblem of Prudence, upon an Hourglass, which represents Time
present, winding it self about a Scepter, and viewing it self in the two
Glasses of past and future; with this Verse of Virgil, translated from Homer,
including all three, for the Motto: What are, what were, and what shall come to
pass. which Prudence looking into regulates, and composes all its Actions.

These three Times are the Mirror of Government, in which by observing the past
as well as present Errors and Miscarriages, it d^esses and beautifies it self
by private and acquired Experience: Of the former I treat in another place. The
acquired is either attained by Conversation or History. Conversation is very
beneficial, thought something more limited, being apprehended with less
difficulty, abundantly more satisfactory of all Doubts and Questions, and
consequently more improving. History is a general Representation of all the
Ages of the World, and by the benefit of that the Memory recals the Time of our
Ancestors. The faults of those who were, instruct them that now are. Wherefore
it is necessary that the Prince search for true Friends, such as will relate
with sincerity things both past and present: And since they are, as Alphonsus,
King of Naples and Arragon, used to say, Like Histories that neither flatter,
nor conceal, or dissemble the Truth; let him admit them particularly into his
Council, carefully observing the neglects and failings of his Predecessors; by
what Tricks they have been put upon; the Court Artifices; the intestine and
foreign Ills of Kingdoms; and examine whether he be not in danger of the same.
Time is the best Master of Princes. Past Ages are a kind of Hospitals, where
Policy Anatomizes the Carcasses of Monarchies and Commonwealths which once
flourished, thereby the better to cure the Ails of the present. They are the
Sea-Charts, wherein by the Wrecks, or prosperous Navigations of others, Shores
are discovered. Seas sounded, Sands and Rocks found, and all the Lines of
Government marked out; yet, are not all Books good Counselors; for some
advance Knavery and Deceit, which because more practiced than truth, many have
recourse to Who seek Wisdom upon Earth, the Merchants of Merrhan and Theman,
the Authors of Fables, and Searchers out of Understanding; none of these have
known the way of Wisdom, or remember her Paths, Baruch 3. v. 23.
. The most secure are those dictated by Divine Wisdom. Here a Prince has for
all manner of Accidents, a complete System of Politics, and safe Precepts to
govern himself and others by All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and
is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
. For this reason, the Kings of Israel were commanded to have always by them,
the Book of Deuteronomy, and to read some part of it every day And he shall
read therein all the days of his Life, Deuteronomy. 17. 1^.
. It Is God we hear, him we learn of as often as we turn over those Divine
Oracles. The Emperor Alexander Severus, had always near him Persons well versed
in History, to tell him what other Emperors had done in dubious Matters
Praeficiebat rebus literatos, and maxim qui historiam norant, requirans (...)
in talibus causis, quales in disceptatione versabantur, veteres impera^^^
fecissent. Lamp.
.

With this Study of History, your Royal Highness may securely enter the
dangerous Sea of Government, having the experience of things past for a Pilot
to Steer you in the Conduct of those present, both which your Highness ought to
manage, so as to keep your Eyes fixed on Futurity, still looking forwards to
prevent dangers, at least to render them less injurious She knows things of
old, and conje^^^eth aright what is to come, Wisd. 8. 8.
. According to these Aspects of Times, your Highness's Prudence ought to judge
of things to come, not by those of the Planets, which being few in number, and
having their Motions stated and regular, cannot possibly (though there were
some Virtue in them) foretell such variety of Events, as fortune produces, or
freewill prepares. Nor are Speculation and Experience sufficient, whereupon to
ground any certain knowledge of Causes so remote. Let your Highness therefore
be pleased to cast your Eyes on the times past, from Ferdi^^^d the Catholic,
to Philip the Second, and comparing them with those that have passed from
thence till now; consider whether Spain be now as well-peopled, as rich and
plentiful as then; whether Arts and Arms flourish as much; whether Trade and
Husbandry succeed as well; and if your Highness find it to have failed in any
of these particulars, dissect the whole Body, search into its Arteries and
Parts, the sound and entire as well as the distempered; as also into the Causes
of those Infirmities: Consider with your self, whether they do not proceed from
some of those so ordinary ones; from planting Colonies, want of Propagation,
multiplicity of Religious Orders, too many Festivals, Universities, and
Studies, the Discovery of the Indie^, Peace ill managed, War slightly
undertaken, or negligently carried on, from the Cashiering of Officers, the
Rarity of Recompenses, the Oppression of Usury, the Transportation of Money,
the Disproportion of the Coin, or whatever Causes of the like Nature. If your
Highness shall discover the Fountain from whence the Evil proceeds, it will be
no difficult matter to provide a Remedy against it; and from a competent
knowledge of the past and present Times, your Highness will be enabled to make
an estimate of that to come, for there is no new thing under the Sun; the thing
that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done, is that
which shall be done Eccles. 1. 9.
. The Persons are changed not the Scenes, Manners and Customs are always the
same.

After the Conversation of Books, it will be very much for a Prince's
Improvement to have that (...) learned Men, who are daily conversant with them,
and will entertain his Ear with well digested Discourse and Reasonings, the
result of long Premeditation. This gave occasion to that usual saying of John
the Second, King of Portugal, That a Kingdom either found a Prince prudent, or
made him so. That is, the gre^^ School of Government, wherein Ministers of the
greatest Learning and most eminent Experience, whither Domestic or Foreign,
converse with the Princ^ about Affairs. Here one is in constant Exercise, and
has a particular knowledge almost of whatever is transacted in the World. This
School being, more especially necessary for a Prince, teaches him, if not out
(...) Duty, at least for Learning's sake to apply himself (...) Affairs, and
study fully to understand, and go (...) the bottom of them, and not leave them
to the Decision of his Counselors. For by an entire neglect an^ disuse of
Business, the Mind become Savage, an^ conceives an Aversion for it, as an
intolerable weight, and so chooses to leave all to the Care and Industry of
others. And if their Opinion upon any Subject be afterward told him, he is in
the dark, not being able to discern whether they have determined well or ill;
in which Confusion he must necessarily be ashamed of himself, seeing how like a
dumb Idol he is, to whom Adoration is paid, while another renders the Oracles.
For this reason, the Prophet Zachary calls that Prince an Idol, who like a
Shepherd that leaves his Flock, forgets his Duty Woe to the idle Shepherd that
leaves his Flock, Zach. 11. 17.
. He is Statue which represents, but does not exert Majesty. He has a Mouth and
speaks not; Eyes and Ears, but neither sees nor hears They have Mouths, but
they speak not; Eyes have they, but they see not; Ears have they, but they hear
not; Noses have they, but they smell not, Psalm 115. 5.
. And being generally looked upon to be an Idol of Adoration only, not
Miracles, is universally despised as an unprofitable Burden to the Earth We
know that an Idol is nothing i^ the World, 1 Cor. 8. 4.
. Nor will it be easy for him to retrieve his Credit; for Affairs out of which
he might draw some Experience, will glide away like Waters that never return;
and not knowing where the Web of Affairs begins, it is impossible he should
finish it with success.

To avoid these and the like Inconveniences, it is absolutely requisite for the
Prince at the beginning of his Reign to apply himself to the Administration of
Public Affairs, that by use he may gradually learn the Art of Government. For
though they at first seem terrible and difficult, Ambition and the Glory which
may be expected thence, will afterward make them pleasant and delightful. Let
not fear of doing amiss be any obstacle to him, for there is no Prudence so
in^^llible but it may sometimes err. From Errors proceeds Experience, and from
thence the best Maxims of Government. And if at any time he happens to be in
one, let this thought comfort him, that it is sometimes less dangerous to
miscarry himself, than succeed by another; for this the People carp and cavil
at, the former they easily bear with. A Prince's Obligation consists only in
being desirous, and using his utmost endeavors to succeed, admitting
Instruction and Counsel without Pride and Presumption, that Mother of Error and
Ignorance. Power is born with Princes, Wisdom not: If they will but hear, they
will know how to Govern. Solomon owning what a Child he was to judge God's
People, prayed for a docile and understanding Heart Give therefore thy Servant
an understanding heart to judg^ thy People, that I may discern between good and
bad, I Kings 3. 9.
, thinking that sufficient to make him capable of successfully discharging his
Duty. A zealous and well-meaning Prince, God leads as 'twere by the Hand, least
he should at any time make a false Step in the Government of his States.

EMBLEM XXIX.
SOME Fishermen, once in the Island Chios, casting their Nets into the Sea for
Fish, drew out a Tripos, which was a kind of Vessel made for the Service of the
Altar, or (as others will have it) a round three legged Table, an admirable
Work, and of an inestimable Value, not so much for the matter, though it was of
Gold, (...) because of the Artist Vulcan. This kindled Avarice in them, and all
the other Fishers of that Island, who in vain often threw theirs with the same
hopes. How often have the happy Successes of one Prince deceived himself and
others, while they all endeavor to attain ^he same Fortune by the same Means?
it is not so easy to follow another's Steps, or to go ones own over again, so as
to tread always exactly in the same Tracks. ^ small space of time joined with
so great ^ Variety of Accidents effaces the first, and whatsoever impressions
are made afresh, are quite different, and consequently lead not to the same
end. Alexander the Great has had many Followers and Imitators, who although
nothing inferior to him in all Accomplishments, both of Body and Mind, yet
could never arrive to ^o high a pitch of Glory and Success, at least have not
me^ with that Applause To be good is in our Power, but to appear so to others
is not. Fortune sports with us even in Matters of Fame, nor does the same
Success always correspond to the same Action. What befell Saguntum, did also
happen to Estepa, yet of this there scarce remains any Memory. This little
City, forsooth, deserved not so much Glory; for what is scarce taken notice of
in small, in great ones is often highly extolled. The same thing is usual in
Virtues; the same shall create one Prince a good, another an ill Character;
this is the Times and Subjects. If the Nobility be unruly, the Commonalty
dissolute and licentious; the Prince that tries to reduce them to Reason, will
not escape the name of bad. Every Kingdom would have a Prince of its own Stamp.
Whence it is, that though a Prince govern by the same good Methods, as have in
another Government been applauded, yet shall he not be so well received, nor
equally commended, excep^ the Subjects of both alike good.

Hence it is not without danger, for a Prince to b^ wholly guided by Examples, it
being very difficult, i^ not absolutely impossible, that in any one Case th^^
should be an equal Concurrence of all those very Circumstances which are in
another. These Second Caus^^ of the Celestial Orbs turn round continually, and
form each Day new Aspects of Constellations, by which they produce their
Effects, and the Changes o^ Things: And as the Stars once appearing never
retu^^ exactly in the same manner again, so neither have th^^ the like
Operations upon things here below, and by the Variation of some Accidents, the
Successes too (...) varied, in which Chance has sometimes more Effica^ than
Prudence. Others Examples in my Opinion deceive Princes no less than to follow
none at all. Wherefore what has happened to others deserves Con^ideration, to
establish a prudent Policy; not that all its Maxims should be squared by their
Rule, and that exposed to the Hazard and Uncertainty of Casualties. Others
Events are to be an Instruction not a Law Plures aliorum eventis docentur. Tac.
4. Ann.
. Those Examples alone can be imitated with any Assurance, that result from
Causes and Reasons essentially good, and common to the Law of Nature, and that
of Nations, for they are at all times the same. As also those of such Princes
as have preserved themselves in Credit and Honor by Religion, Justice, and
Clemency, and other Virtues and Moral Actions. Yet in these Cases too careful
Attention is required, for Manners* and the Reputation of Virtues often change,
nor is it new or unusual for a Prince to be ruined by the ^ame, that at another
time made him flourish. All these things therefore Prudence ought to consider,
and not put too much Confidence in its self, but consult the various Accidents
that every day happen, not looking upon things to come as certain* however
disc^eet Judgment and Diligence seem to have sea^cht and provided against them.
For Events are not always correspondent to their means, nor do they at a^l
times depend upon the ordinary Connection of Causes, where Humane Counsels
usually take Effect, but on that supe^ior Cause which directs all other. This
makes our Thoughts and Suppositions so uncertain, and the hopes ^ounded thereon
so subject to Disappointment. No one was in all Men's Opinion farther from the
Empire, than Claudius, yet Heaven had then design him for Tiberius's Successor
Quippe fa^^* spe, veneratione potius omnes destinabantur Imper^^, quam quem
fatu^^m Principem for^una in occulto tene^^t. Tac. 3. Ann.
.

This is more common in the E^ection of Popes, wherein humane Industry is very
often baffled. Divine Providence does not always use natural Means, at least
sometimes produces by the same different Effects, drawing straight Lines by a
crooked Rule, so what should have been advantageous, proves frequently
prejudicial to the Prince. The same Pillar of Fire in the Wilderness gave Light
to God's People, and filled the Enemies Camp with Darkness. The greatest Humane
Prudence is oftentimes at a loss; where a Man expected Secu^^ty, he sometimes
finds Ruin, as it happened to Viriatus, who was betrayed and killed by those
very Ambassadors he had sent to the Consul, Servilius. A Misfortune we have
once sustained, we don't easily believe we shall suffer again; but on the
contrary, presently persuade our selves Prosperity will continue, o^ at least
return. This Confidence has been destructive to many in that it disarms
Prudence. This World is a vast Sea of Events, tossed by various and unknown
Causes. Let us not be too much elated, if by chance we bring our Nets to shore
full with the Success of our Wishes; nor on the other side, dejected if they
prove empty; we ought always to cast them, and expect the Consequence with the
same equality of Mind. It Is impossible for that Man to enjoy any Rest, who
promising himself a prosperous Issue of his Design, sees a contrary Event, and
is destitute of a Remedy for it* Misfortunes cannot surprise one that expects
the worst, nor will disappointed Hopes expose him to Ridicule, as they did the
Persians in the War against the Athenians, who had a great while before
furnished themselves with Marble from Paros to inscribe the Victory on, which
their hopes had long ago anticipated; but being afterward overcome, the
Athenians made use of that very Marble to erect to Revenge a Statue, an
everlasting Monument of the Persian Folly. To presume to know things to come,
is in a manner a Rebellion against God, and a foolish Contention with Divine
Wisdom, which has indeed permitted Human Prudence to guess at, but not foretell
things of this Nature, that in this uncertainty of Accidents it may acknowledge
it self more subject to, and dependent on its Creator. This makes Policy so
cautious and provident in its Resolutions, well knowing how short sighted the
grea^est Humane Wisdom is in Futurity, and how ^ncertain those Judgments are,
which are grounded upon Presumption. If Princes could foreseeu future
Contingences, their Councils would not so often miscarry. And this I take to be
the Reason, that as soon as Saul was elected King, God infused into him the
Spirit of Prophecy 1 Samuel 10. 6.
.

From what has been said, may be gathered, that although Antiquity be
venerable, and there be really something Royal in the ways she has opened to
Posterity, for Experience to pass more securely; yet it is visible many are
ruined by time, so that they grow, impassable; and consequently the Prince
ought not to be so diffident of himself, so religiously to tread his Ancestors
Steps, as not upon occasion to venture to go another way of his own.
Innovations are not always dangerous; it is sometimes convenient to introduce
them. Were there no Alterations, the World would never be perfected, which
advances in Wisdom as it does in Age. The most ancient Customs were new. And
what we now see without Example, will be hereafter a Precedent. What we now
follow by Experience, was begun without it. Our Age also may leave many
glorious Inventions for Posterity to imitate; nor is every thing the Ancients
have done the best, no more than all the Moderns do now, will be approved by
After-ages. Many Abuses have descended to us from our Ancestors, and many
severe Savage Customs of the Ancients time has mitigated and changed for the
better.

EMBLEM XXX.
INgenious Rome, that Virtue and Valor might not want Trophies to Honor and
Recompense Conquerors, excite Emulation in Posterity, and give Example to her
other Citizens, invented the Columnae Rostratae, Pillars whereon were hung the
Heads of such Ships, as returned Victorious after long Voyages, thus eternizing
the Memory of Sea Fights; one of which Monuments was raised to the Consul
Duillius, for the signal Victory he obtained over the Carthaginians; as also to
Marcus Aemilius for another. This Trophy gave occasion to the present Emblem,
wherein the strength and firmness of the Pillar represents Wisdom, and the
Heads of the Ships that had run through so many Perils upon the Ocean,
Experience, the Mother of Prudence and Support of that Wisdom. This has things
universal and perpetual for its Object, that particula^ Actions. The one is
acquired by Speculation and Study; the other (which is an Habit of the Mind) by
the Knowledge of Good and Evil, and by Use and Exercise; both jointly make a
perfect Prince, one alone is not sufficient. Whence it easily appears how
dangerous the Government of those is, who are addicted only to the
Contemplation of Sciences, and a Solitary Life, for such want generally Use and
Practice, and so can profit little by their Actions, they being either rash, or
mean and abject; especially if they be trans^orted with Excess of Fear or Zeal.
Their Discourses, indeed, and Writings (wherein more of a speculative than
practical Genius reigns) may be serviceable to the Prince to awaken his Mind,
and furnish him with Matter for Conversation, provided they be seasonably used,
and with Experience. Physic prescribes Remedies for Diseases, which however
the Physician never applies without first examining the Qualities of the
Distemper, the Nature and Constitution of his Patient. Had Hannibal by this
Consideration moderated his barbarous Arrogance, he had not took Phor^io for a
Fool, for teaching the Art of War, when himself was no Soldier; for although
Speculation alone does by no means acquire Practice, it being extremely
difficult for the Hand to Copy accurately all that the Mind has drawn, or for
whatever the Imagination has proposed to be accomplished to the Eyes
Satisfaction; especially when War depends upon such a Variety of Accidents that
Experience her self sometimes know^ not what is to be done. Yet, for all this,
Phormio might have given Hannibal (as great and experienced a General as he
was) such Precepts as would have taught him to correct his treacherous and
subtle Nature, to leave off his Cruelty to conquered Nations, and proud
Carriage to such as had recourse to him for Protection. He undoubtedly had
learnt to make a better Use of the Victory at Cannae, to shun the Debaucheries
of Capua, and gain the Favor of Antioc^us. King Ferdinand the Catholic, used
on some Occasions the Ministry of the Religious; but whether to manage or only
prepare Affairs, I cannot say; or if it was not, perhaps to spare the Expense of
Ambassies, or prevent the Inconveniences usually arising from Disputes between
the Nobility about Precedence. However Secrets are not securely entrusted to
them, they depending more upon the Obedience of their immediate Superiors, than
that of Princes; and if they accidentally die, into their Hands will fall all
private Letters and Papers. Besides, for Neglect of Duty they are not
punishable, and their Example is a Disturbance to Religious Tranquillity, and
the Practices of Policy infect their Candor and Simplicity. They are better
Physicians for Spiritual than Temporal Distempers. Every Sphere has its
peculiar Activity. I don't in the mean time deny that sometimes there are to be
found among them, Persons who have had their Education in Courts, without that
Narrowness of Soul which usually accompanies a monastic and retired Life, Wits
so cultivated by Learning and Observation, that Affairs even of the greatest
Consequence may be safely committed to them, especially such as respect the
Public Quiet, and the Good of Christendom; for Modesty in Conversation, well
ordered Virtues, the Gravity of, and Deference paid to a Religious Habit, are
no small Recommendations in Prince's Courts to gain Audience, and prepare Minds
to receive Impressions.

Experiences drawn from others Misfortunes and Dangers, are indeed happy, but
not so effectually persuasive as our own; the former we see or hear only; these
we sensibly feel too. They are too deeply engraved, as I may say, on our
Breasts to be soon effaced. Shipwrecks descried from Shore, are something more
affecting than another Relation of them; but he who has had the Fortune to
escape them, hangs up his Rudder in the Temple of Experience for ^ perpetual
Memorial of it. So that though a Prince will improve by both, yet his own
private ones he ought most to regard, particularly observing this, that if they
proceed from any fault, Self-love is too apt to excuse them; and that Truth
late or never comes to his Ears to undeceive him, being either stopped in the
Palace-Gates by Malice, or concealed by Flattery, which makes Virtue not dare
to unmask it for fear of bringing it self into Danger, because it belongs not
to it, or at least it sees all would be to no purpose. And thus Princes
ignorant of what neglect they have been guilty, how and where they have done
amiss in their Councils or Actions, cannot correct their Errors, nor by their
Experience prove more cautious and prudent for the future. There ought to be no
Fault committed, no Miscarriage happen in the State, whereof there should not
be present faithful and sincere Information given the Prince. There Is no
Sensation or Pain in any part of the Body, but immediately is carried to the
Heart, as the Prince of Life, where the Soul has its chief Residence, and as
that whose principal Interest it is to preserve the other Members entire. How
happy were it, if Kings well knew what Evils their Kingdoms labored under, we
should not see them so inveterate. Whereas the only thing now aimed at in
Courts, is to divert the Prince's Ears with Music, and such like
Entertainments, that he may not hear his Subjects Complaints, nor say with
Saul, What ail^th the People that they weep 1 Samuel 11. 5.
? And so he is ignorant of their Necessities and Calamities, at least knows
them too late. Though the Adventure of I^nas, whom a great Fish had vomited up
alive, was very fresh; though his Public Cries made a Noise over the whole
City of Nineveh, whose Destruction he threatened within forty Days: yet was the
King the last that heard of it, every Citizen, from the greatest to the least,
having already mourned, and put on sackcloath Jon. 3. 5.
. Who is there has the Courage to tell a Prince the whole Truth, or discover
the Evils that menace him? The whole Army of Bethulia came to Holofernes's Tent
with great C^ies, because the Sun was already risen, yet did not the Office^s
of the Bedchamber dare to awake him, nor call him by his Name Judith 14. 10*
, but made only ^ Noise with their Feet; till when the Evidence of the Danger
obliged them to enter, the Enemy had already cut off his Head and hung it upon
their Walls Ibid.
. Thus it generally happens, the Prince first discovers Faults, when there is
either no Remedy for them, or at least it cannot be applied without great
Difficulty. His Ministers persuade him all things succeed well, which makes him
negligently lose all Experience, and the Instructions of Necessity, the best
Mistress of Prudence. For although Prosperity proceed from Prudence, this does
not from Prosperity. The principal Office of Prudence in Princes, or others
concerned with them, is to teach them to know expe^imentally all Men's Humors,
which are discernible from the Dress, the Looks, the Motions of the Eyes and
Actions, and lastly from the Speech. Marks which God Almighty thought so
necessary to Human Commerce, that he has wrote them visibly upon every one's
Forehead Eccl. 19. 26.
. Without them neither the Prince would know how to Govern, nor Men of Affairs
obtain their Ends. Men's Minds are as various as their Faces Eccl. 19. 27.
; and although Reason be in its self one and the same, the ways reasoning taken
in the research of it, are widely different; and the Delusions of the
Imagination usually are so great, that some Men appear as irrational as the
very Brutes. Wherefore all are not to be treated with in the same Method, but
this must be varied, suitably to the Person's Nature, as they change the Bit
according to the Horse's Mouth. Some Tempers are generous and exalted, with
these Reputation and Honor are most prevaising: Others mean and abject, which
are wholly lead by private Interest and Advantage. Some are bold and
enterprizing, these are to be gently turned from the Precipice: Others slothful
and timorous, which should be so lead by Business, that they may see the Vanity
of Danger. Some are naturally servile, these Threats and Fear of Punishment has
more Influence on than Entreaties: Others arr^gant, and are tamed by Authority,
being by compliance ruined. One is full of Fire, and so quick at Business, that
with the same Expedition he dispatches it, he immediately repents; this Man
it is hard giving Counsel to: Another is slow and irresolute, whom time must
teach at his own cost. Some are ignorant and stupid, these are not to be
convinced by subtle and refined Arguments, but palpable Demonstrations. Others
sceptically dispute every thing, and are guilty of an Excess of Subtilty, these
must be abandoned to themselves, to fly as Hawks till they be ^ired, then
called to the Lure of Reason, and the Bus^ness in hand. Some refuse all Men's
Counsel, are wholly guided by their own; to these you are not to give any, but
so point as it were to them, and give such Hints in a large Discourse upon the
Matter, that they may of themselves light on them, which will make them
approved as their own Offspring, and ac^ordingly executed; others know neither
how to act nor resolve without Counsel, with such as these all the Persuasion
in the World is to no purpose, so the Business which should have passed through
their hands may be better transacted with their Counselors.

The same Variety which is visible in Dispositions, is found also in Affairs;
some are easy at first, but afterward increase as Rivers by the Affluence of
Rivule^s, as it were of diverse Inconveniences and Difficulties, these are
overcome by Expedition in not giving time to their Increase. Others on the
contrary, like the Winds rise in Storms, but end calmly, which require Pa^ience
and Constancy. The Enterprise of some is full of Uncertainty and Danger, in
that when one least thinks the Depth of Difficulties appears, here one must
proceed with Caution and Courage, with Care, and a Mind provided to encounter
any Accident. Some require Secrecy, these are to be carried on by Mines, that
the happy Success may break out before one can perceive it: Others cannot be
obtained but at certain Times, in these you ought to have all the Means ready
immediately to hoist Sail upon the first favorable Blast of Wind. Some take
Root gradually; and demand Time to come to Maturity; here the Seed of Diligence
is to be Sowed and the Fruit waited for: Others except they succeed presently
never do at all, which must be taken by Assault, by employing all Methods at
once. Some are so delicate and brittle, that like Glasses they are with a Blast
formed and broken, these are to be tenderly handled: the Difficulty of others
is inhanced by being too much desired and pursued, here the Arts of Lovers are
useful, whose Passions are inflamed by Slight and Disdain. In a word the
Management of a few Affairs demands Precipitation; in more Force prevails; in
many Patience, and in almost all Reason and Interest. Importunity has spoiled
abundance of Affairs, but it has also furthered many, as St. Jerome said of the
Woman of Canaan Quod precibus non potuit t^dio impetravit. D. Hieron.
. Men are no less weary of refusing than granting. Opportunity is the thing
contributes most to the good Management of Affairs; he who knows how to use
this shall scarce ever Miscarry. The Husbandman that is well acquainted with
the Nature of his Soil, and knows the proper Seed-time, may expect a plentiful
Harvest. There Is a time when all things are granted, another wherein all are
denied, according as the Mind shall be disposed, in which you may easily see
the Increase and Decrease of Business, for being lopped like Tre^s in a proper
Month, they sprout out the more. Some Address in proposing and persuading by
Honesty, Profit, and Ease; Prudence in the Choice of Means, and some other
natural Endowments infinitely conduce to the Succefs of Affairs, provided those
Gifts of Nature be accompanied with a discreet kind of Complaisance and natural
Grace that captivates the Mind; for some Men's Looks and Behavior are so
disagreeable and ungenteel, that they even show one how to refuse their
Petitions; but although these Means ^oyned with good Judgment and Industry have
a strange Effect on Business; yet too much Confidence ought not to be put in
them, not yet should they be despaired of. Light Affairs sometimes breed great
Difficulties; and on the other side, the lightest Causes often obstruct the
most weighty. The greatest Prudence is sometimes blind in a Matter as clear as
the Sun; Divine Providence that has already long ago determined in his eternal
Decree, what shall become of every thing, being thus pleased to sport with
Humane Affairs.

From this Variety of Capacities and Affairs; appears of how much Concern it is
to the Prince, to make Choice of Ministers fit to manage them, each Man being
no more capable of all manner of Business, than every Instrument useful for all
Works. Persons of a violent Temper, the Cowardly and Dif^ident, the Rough and
Unpleasant in Conversatio^, who can never serve the times, nor adapt themselves
to others Natures and Customs, rather spoil Affairs than compose them; are
readier at making, than reconciling Enemies, fitter to be Informers than
Mediators. Affairs require Persons of very different Qualities to Administer
them. That Man is above all the most proper, who in his Air and Words discovers
a Soul of Candor and Veracity, whose private Person procures him Love and
Esteem; in whom Jealousy and Cunning are from Art not Nature, who can keep them
in the most secret Place of his Breast when they require Concealment; who
proposes with Sweetness, hears with Patience, replies with Force, dissembles
with Discretion, urges with Attention; who obliges by Liberality, persuades by
Reason, and convinces by Experience; who in a word designs prudently, and
executes effectually. It was with these Ministers, King Ferdinand the Catholic
was able to succeed in all his Enterprises. The good Choice of these is of no
le^s Consequence, than the Conservation and Enlargement of any State, for as
much as all depends upon their Administration; more Kingdoms having been
destroyed by their Ignorance than by that of Princes. Let this therefore be
your Highness's chiefest Care to examine diligently all the Qualities of your
Subjects, and after having given them any Place, look now and then into their
Actions, and not be presently taken with, and deluded by the Draught of their
Memoirs. There being very few Ministers, who in them draw themselves to the
Life? In Effect, who will be so candid, so much a Stranger to self-love, as to
confess what good he has neglected to do, what Evil to prevent? It will be much
if he with Sincerity relate what he has actually done; some using to write to
the Prince not what they have done or said, but what they ought to do or say.
They have thought of, and designed every thing ^^fore-hand: they foresaw, nay,
and executed all-Affairs enter their Closets like misshapen Logs, but
immediately come out again, as from some Statuaries Shop, exquisite Figures;
it is there they are varnished, gi^^ed, and painted, to beautify them, and
enhance their Value. There Judgments are formed, and abundance of Preventions
devised ever after the Success; there they are more powerful than God himself;
make the past Time present, and the present past, by changing the Date of their
Actions, as they see convenient. They are Ministers who transact Affairs in
Imagination only; Men that court Applause, and steal Rewards by their false
Letters: Whence proceed the greatest Inconveniences in the World, in that the
Prince's Privy Counselors being directed by those Intelligences and Advices,
if they are false, the Orders and Resolutions founded upon them will
necessarily be so too. The Holy Scripture teaches us how Ministers, and
particularly Ambassadors are obliged punctually to execute their Commissions;
for we see in that Hazael had from Benhadad, King of Syria to consult the
Prophet Elisha about his Disease, he changed not one word, nor dared so much as
to speak in the Third Person 2 Kings 8. 9.
.

Ministers of extraordinary Experience are sometimes dangerous, either for that
the Prince puts too much Confidence in them, or because biassed by Self-love,
or presuming upon their own Abilities, they seldom think thoroughly of Affairs,
and born as 'twere to overcome the most violent Tempests, despise the small
Storms of Inconveniences and Difficulties, whereby they evidently expose
themselves to Danger. Those are in some Cases much safer, who (...) yet Novices
in Navigation keep close to the Shore. Though both together compose the best
Counsels; in that the Experience of those is qualified by the Timorousness and
Caution of these; in Debates between the Phlegmatic and Choleric, the Bold and
Circumspect, the Quick and Slow, there results a wholesome Composition of
Opinions, as there does in Bodies from the contrariety of Humors.

EMBLEM XXXI.
A Pillar supports it self, balanced by its own weight. If it once leans on
either side, it presently falls, and that the sooner the heavier it is. Thus
Empires stand, and are preserved by their own Authority and Repute; when they
begin to lose that, they begin to fall; nor is any Earthly Power sufficient to
strengthen and prop them Nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile ac fl^xum est,
quam famae potentiae, non sua vi ni^a. Tac. 13. Ann.
. Let no one trust too much to a straight Pillar, when it inclines never so
little, the weakest Hand promotes its Ruin; that very leaning I know not how
inviting to push it; but when falling, the strongest is unable to uphold it.
One single Action sometimes overthrows the best established Reputation which a
great many cannot erect again. For scarce any Stain can so thoroughly be washed
out, but some sign of it will remain, nor any Opinion in Men's Minds that can be
entirely effaced. Dress the Infamy as carefully as possible, it will still
leave some Scars. Wherefore, if the Crown stand not fixed and firm upon this
perpendicular Pillar of Reputation, it will soon fall to the Ground. Alphonso
the Fifth, King of Arragon, by his Credit not only preserved his own Kingdom,
but conquered that of Naples. At the same time John the Second, King of
Castile, for his mean Spirit was so far the Contempt of his Subjects, that he
admitted what Laws they thought fit to impose. The Provinces which under Julius
Caesar and Augustus, Princes of great Esteem, were Firm and Loyal, rebelled in
the Reign of Galba, a Man slothful, and universally despised Melius Divo Iulio,
Divoque Augusto notos eorum animos Galbam, and infracta tributa, hostiles
Spiritus induisse. Tac. 4. Hist.
. Royal Blood and Large Dominions are insufficient to maintain Reputation,
where private Virtue and Magnanimity are wanting; as it is not the Frame of a
Glass, but its Intrinsic Excellency makes it valuable, Regal Majesty has not
more Force than Respect, which usually arises from Admiration and Fear, and
from these Obedience and Subjection, without which the Princes Dignity cannot
long maintain it self, being founded upon the Opinion of others; and the Royal
Purple will be rather a Mark of Derision, than Eminence and Majesty, as was
visible in Henry the Fourth. It is the Spirits and Native Heat that keep the
Body upright; the Legs alone would not be a sufficient Basis. And what is
Reputation, but a kind of fine Spirit kindled in all Men's Opinions, which
raises and supports the Scepter. Let the Prince therefore take all possible
care that his Actions may be such as will nourish and foment these Spirits. The
Parthians grounded their Petition upon Reputation, when they asked Tiberius to
send as of his own accord, one of Phraates's Sons to Rome Nomine tantum, and
auctore opus, ut sponte Caesaris, ut genus Arsacis, ripam apud Euphratis
cerneretur. Tac. 6. Ann.
.

This Repute and Authority has yet greater Influence in War, where Fear is of
more Efficacy than the Sword, and Opinion than Strength, whether of Mind or
Body, and therefore to be taken no less Notice of than Force of Arms. This made
Suetonius Paulinus very prudently advise Otho to endeavor always to keep the
Roman Senate on his side, whose Authority could never be wholly Darkened, though
it might be sometimes Eclipsed Nunquam obscura, nomina, etsi aliquando
obumbrentur. Tac. 2. Hist.
. This also made many Countries submit to it, and seek its Protection Erat
grande momentum, in nomine Vrbis, and praetextu senatus. Tac. 1. Hist.
, in the Differences that were between those Great Generals, Caesar and Pompey,
each his principal Aim was to Conquer rather the Reputation than Arms of his
Rival; well knowing that Minds and Forces follow more the noise of Fame, than
that of the Drum. King Philip the Second was eminently skilful in this Art of
preserving Reputation; having by it from his Cabinet so managed the Reigns of
both Worlds, that he always had them at Command.

Nay, even when the Ruin of States is apparent, it is better (...) suffer them,
than ones Credit to be destroyed, for without this it is impossible to
re-establish them. For which Reason, though the Republic of Venice saw it self
lost in that violent Storm of the League of Cambray, yet that most Prudent and
Valiant Senate thought it better to show their Constancy on that Occasion, than
to betray any Cowardice by using dishonorable Means. Desire of Dominion makes
Princes mean. For want of this Consideration, Otho with stretched out Hands
seemed to adore the People, he embraced every one, and showed all the
servileness imaginable to gain them to his Party, and so procured the Empire by
those means which declared him unworthy of it Nec d^erat Otho protendens manus
adorare vulgum, jacere oscula, and omnia serviliter pro dominatione. Tac. 1.
Hist.
. Even in Indigence and Necessity it is not fit to use means violent and
inglorious, or seek the Assistance of Foreigners; for both are dangerous, and
neither seek to relieve want; nay, Reputation is the better Remedy for it. One
Man is as rich in Opinion, as another in the abundance of hid Treasures. The
Old Romans were undoubtedly persuaded so, when in several occasions of
Adversity, the Provinces offering them Money and Corn, they returned Thanks,
but would not accept them. Two Legions having been cast away at Sea, to recruit
the Loss, Gaul, Spain, and Italy, sent Money, Horses, and Arms; Germanicus
commended their Affection, and accepted only of the Horses and Arms, but not
the Money Caeterum ad supplenda exercitus damna, certavere Gallia, Hispania,
Italia, quod cuique promp^um, arma, equos, au^um ^fferentes, quorum laud^to
studio Germanicus, armis modo and equis ad bellum sumptis, propria pecunia
militem juvit. Tac. 1. Ann.
. In two other Presents made the Roman Senate, of Golden Cups of great Value,
in time of extraordinary Necessity, the first time thanks were given the
Ambassadors for their Care and Magnificence, and the Cup of least value
accepted Legatis gratiae actae pro magnificentia cu^aque, Patera quae minimi
ponderis fuit accepta. Live. l. 22.
. The other, Thanks were returned, but the Presents rejected Gratiae actae,
^^rum non acceptum. Live. 22.
.

The Authority and Reputation of a Prince proceeds from several Causes; some of
which respect his Person, others his State. The former sort are either of Body
or Mind: Of the Body, as if it be of a suitable Frame, and a Disposition
capable of maintai^ning Majesty; though the natural Defects of Body are often
supplied by Virtues of Mind. Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, had no small
Imperfections of Body; yet his great and generous Soul, his lively Wit, his
Complaisance, and other Courtly Accomplishments made him admired by all. A
grave and austere Carriage make him pass for a Prince, who without that would
be but very contemptible; yet this Air ought to be tempered with Courtesy and
good Humor, that Authority may be supported without incurring Hatred, or the
Character of Arrogant; a thing Tacitus commends in Germanicus Visuque and
auditu juxta venerabilis, cum magnitudinem, and gravi^atem summae fortunae
re^ineret invidiam and a^^ogantiam e^^ugeret. Tac. 2. Ann.
. The Riches and Splendour of Apparel is another thing, procures Admiration and
Authority: for the Vulgar are taken with these Outsides, and Mankind admits the
Eyes no less than the Understanding into its Counsel. Whence Alphonso the Wise,
very well said, That Clothes contribute much to make M^n known for either Noble
or Base; and the Ancient Sages obliged their Princes to Cloths of Gold, and
Silk, and beset with Jewels, that they might be known at sight without inquiry.
When King Ahasuerus gave Audience, he wore Royal Apparel, and shone in Gold and
precious Stones Hest. 15. 9.
. It was on this account God commanded Moses to make Holy Garments for Aaron,
his Brother, for Glory and for Beauty Exodus 28. 2.
. And he accordingly made them of Purple, embroidered with Gold, and adorned
with other things of great value Ibid.
, which his Successors wore after him; and at this day the Popes do, though
with greater Prudence, and less Expense. And indeed, if his Holiness be an Arm
of God upon the Earth; if the Voice of his Censures be like that of the
Almighty's Thunder Job 40. 4.
, it is but just (whatever Impiety cavils) that as God covers himself with Light
Psalm 103. 2.
, the Garment of Heaven, so she should be deck^d with Earthly Pomp, and carried
upon Men's Shoulders Job 40. 5.
. The same has place in Princes, who are God's Vicegerents in Temporals Psalm
81. 6.
.

Large and sumptuous Palaces magnificently furnished Eccl. 2. 4.
, a Noble and Eminent Family Prove. 22. 29.
, Guards of Nations of approved Fidelity Job 25. 2.
, the Splendour and Grandeur of a Court, and other Public Ostentations do also
set out a Prince's Power to the best advantage, and give an additional Majesty.
Illustrious Titles of States Conquered or Hereditary, which are attributed to
him, are also Manifestations of his Eminency. Thus, Isaiah, by diverse Names and
Titles declares the Majesty of the Supreme Creator, and Prince of all things
Isaiah 9. 6.
. By these therefore your Highness is to study to enhance the Luster of your
Royal Person, provided however they be not ascribed out of Levity or Flattery,
but from an universal Applause founded upon Virtue and true Valor, such as
were those of your Highness's Ancestors, Ferdinand the Holy, Alphonso the
Great, Sancho the Brave, James the Warlike, Alphonso the Noble, and many others.

The Excellency of Virtues, and in general all natural Perfections requisite in
a good Governor, procure a Prince Esteem and Authority. One alone that shall
shine in him, whether it respect Peace or War; abundantly supplies the defect
of all others, as if he apply himself to Business, though not with absolute
sufficiency; for to leave all to the Care of Ministers infinitely diminishes
the Force of Majesty. This was Sallust's Counsel to Livia Neve Tiberius vim
principatus resolveret, cuncta ad senatum vocando. Tac. 1. Ann.
. Any one Resolution the Prince shall have taken very opportunely without
another Advice: One Resentment, and to have once shown the Extent of his
Power, though upon the slightest Occasion, make him feared and respected; as
does Constancy of Mind in both Fortunes, for the People look upon it as
supernatural, not to be puffed up by Prosperity, or by Adversity dejected; they
believe there is something more than Humane in such a Prince.

Equality in Actions is another thing that greatly advances a Prince's
Character, it being a sign of a serene and prudent Judgment, if he dispense his
Favors, or revenge Injuries out of Season, he will indeed be feared, but not
esteemed; as Vitellius experienced Vite^^um subitis offensis, aut intempestivis
blanditiis mutabilem contemnebant metue^antque. Tac. 2. Hist.
.

Farther to maintain Reputation, Prudence not to attempt what cannot be
obtained, very much contributes. For so his Power will seem infinite, if the
Prince engage in no War wherein he cannot Conquer, or demand nothing of his
Subjects but what is just and feasible, not giving the least ground for
Disobedience. To enterprise, and not accomplish, is in a Prince inglorious; in
Subjects rash.

Princes are valued at the same Rate they set upon themselves. For although
Honor consists in the esteem of others; yet this is generally formed out of a
preconceiv'd Opinion of every one, which (at least if prudent) is greater or
less, according as the Mind gathers strength from the Valor it finds in it
self, or loses it, if without Merit. The greatest Souls are most aspiring
Optimus quisque mortalium altissima cupere. Tac. 4. Ann.
; the Cowardly dare attempt nothing, judging themselves unworthy the least
Honor. Nor is this always a virtuous Humility and Modesty in this sort of Men,
but a baseness of Mind, which renders them deservedly contemptible to every
one, while they pretend they aim at nothing higher, because they are sensible
of their want of Merit. Blaesus almost seemed unworthy the Empire, merely for
refusing the offer of it Ade^ non Principatus appetens, ut parum effageret ne
dignus crederetur. Tac. 3. Hist.
. Unhappy is that State, whose Head thinks himself undeserving the Title of
Prince, or who presumes he Merits more; the first is meanness of Spirit; this
latter is accounted Tyranny.

In these Endowments of the Mind, Chance also has place; for a Prince happens
often, even with them to be despised, when Prudence is unhappy, or Events
answer not Designs. Some Governments, good in themselves, are notwithstanding
so unfortunate, that nothing succeeds under them; which is not always the Fault
of Humane Providence, but the Divine so ordains, when the particular Ends of
this Inferior Government, agree not with those that Superior and Universal one
proposes.

This I add withal, that all these good Qualities of Mind and Body, are not
sufficient to maintain the Prince's Reputation, if his Family be dissolute; it
is on that depends all his Authority, nor is any thing more difficult, than a
regular Management of a Family. It usually seems easier to Govern a whole
Country than one House; either because a Prince intent on greater things is
negligent of this, or Self-love is an Obstacle, or for want of Courage, or out
of a natural Slothfulness, or at least, because his Attendants so blind his
Eyes, that his Judgment cannot apply Remedies. It was none of the least
Commendations of Agricola, that he had curbed his own Family, never suffering
his Domestics to intermeddle with Public Affairs Primum domum suam coercuit,
quod plerisque haud minus arduum (...), quam Provinciam regere; nihil per
liber^os, servosque publicae rei. Tac. in Vir. Agr.
. Galba was a good Emperor, but an ill Master of his Palace, no less Vices
reigning there than in that of Nero Iam afferebant cuncta venalia praepotentes
liber^i servorum manus sub^tis avidae tanquam apud senem festinantes. Tac. 1.
Hist.
. Tiberius, among other things, was commended for having modest Servants. No
Government can be well instituted, where Courtiers Command, and Rob, or
Prostitute its Authority by their P^ide and Vices Modesta servitia. Tac. 4. Ann.
. If they are good, they make the Prince the same; if wicked, he though really
otherwise, will appear so too. From them the Prince's Actions have their value,
on them depends his good or ill Character; in as much as others Virtues and
Vices are wont to be imputed to him. If his Domestics are prudent, they
conceal his Faults; nay, as much as possible vindicate every Action of his, and
by extolling, render them more illustrious; they relate them with a Grace that
challenges Admiration. Whatever comes from the Prince into Public, is great in
the Peoples Eyes. Princes in their Palaces are like other Men, but Respect
makes them imagined greater, and their Retirement from common Conversation
covers their Sloth and Weakness: Whereas, if their Servants are guilty of
Imprudence or Infidelity, the People by them, as through Chinks discover it,
and quit that Veneration they before had for them.

The Prince's Reputation redounds from that of the State, if this be provided
with good Laws and Magistrates; if Justice be observed, and one Religion
maintained therein; if it pay due Respect and Obedience to Majesty; if Care be
taken of Corn and Plenty, if Arts and Arms flourish, and one may in all things
see a constant Order and Harmony proceeding from the Prince's Hands; and
lastly, if the States Happiness depends upon the Prince himself: For if that
can be enjoyed without this, they will soon despise him. The Laborers in Egypt
regard not the Skies Aratores in Aegypto Coelum no^ suspiciunt. Pli^.
, for the Nile by its Inundations watering and making their Land fertile, they
have no need of Clouds.

EMBLEM XXXII.
THE Oyster conceives by the Dew of Heaven, and in its purest Womb, the Pearl,
that most beautiful Embryo is born. No one would imagine its exquisite
Delicacy, to see so course and unpolished an outside. It is thus, the Senses
are usually deceived in their Censure of Exterior Actions, when they judge only
by the outward appearance of things, without searching the inside. Truth
depends not upon Opinion: Let the Prince despise that, if he be sensible he act
agreeable to Reason. He will never dare enterprise any thing difficult or
extraordinary, if Fear prompts him to consult the Sentiments of the Mob. In
himself he should look for himself, not in others. The Art of Government
suffers not it self to be disturbed by those thin Shadows of Reputation. The
King has the greatest, who knows perfectly how to manage Affairs both of Peace
and War. The Honor of Subjects the least thing blemishes, whereas that of
Kings is inseparable from ^e Public Good; this continuing, that increases,
^^ling, it perishes. Besides, Government would be too d^ngerous, had it no
better Foundation than the Laws of Reputation, instituted by the giddy Rabble.
Contempt of such is Courage and Steddiness in a Prince, whose Sovereign Law is
the Peoples Safety. Tiberius hereto^ore gloried in having shown himself
fearless of Affronts and Scandal for the Public Benefit Offensionem pro
utilitate publica non pavidum. Tac. 4. Ann.
. A great and lively Soul is nothing afraid of the uncertain Ru^ours of the
Multitude and Common Fame. He who ^^spises this imaginary, will thereby obtain
real and ^^lid Glory. This Fabius Maximus well knew, when ^e preferred the
Public Safety before the Clamours and Complaints of the People, accusing his
Delays; (...) did also the Great Captain in the Captivity of Duke Valentin,
who, though he had surrendered, and intrust^d himself to his safe Conduct; yet
for some fresh (...) he was informed he had laid against his Catholic Majesty,
kept him Prisoner, thinking the Dangers his liberty might cause more to be
respected, than the Aspersions were thrown upon him for the Breach of (...)
Parole; from which, at that time, it seemed by no means proper for him
publicly to clear himself. King S^^cho the Brave, was a Prince renowned and
warlike; (...) Deaf to the Calumnies of his Subjects, he declined the Battle of
Xeres Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. It Is better for a Prince to be ^^red by his Enemies as Prudent, than as Rash
and Precipitous.

My Design by this Discourse is not to make the Prince a very Slave to the
Commonwealth, so that for ^^y Reason, or upon the least appearance of its
Inte^^st, he should break his Word, or run Counter to all Treaties and
Agreements: For such a Violation can neither be of any advantage to him, nor
his State, but will be rather the Ruin of both; what is dishonest being never
long secure: A remarkable Instance of which we have in the Kingdom of Arragon,
which has been so often embroiled, tossed with so many Storms of Calamities and
eminent Miseries, because Peter the Fourth, as well in times of Peace as War,
had more regard to Interest, than Credit and Renown. Interest and Honor should
walk hand in hand, and the same pace; nor c^^ I be reconciled to this Opinion,
That nothing is glorio^s but what is safe, and that whatever is done to
maintain Dominion is honorable Nihil gloriosum nisi tutum, and omnia
retinendae dominationis (...). Sallust.
. For what is base, can never be a good means to preserve it; nor if it were,
will it be therefore the more honorable or excusable. My Design is only to
raise the Prince's Mind above the Vulgar Opinion, and arm him with Constancy to
withstand the vain Murmurs of the Multitude; that he may know how to temporize,
to dissemble Injuries, to lay aside Kingly Gravity, to despise empty Fame,
having his Eyes fixed upon that which is true and well-grounded. In a word, to
take Counsel from the time and necessity, if the Conservation of his State
require it, and not suffer himself to be deluded with vain Shadows of Honor,
esteeming that more than the Public Good. A Fault blamed in King Henry the
Fourth, who refused to take their Advice, who persuaded him to apprehend John
Pachico, Marquess of Villena, the Author of the Troubles and Commotions among
the Grandees of the Kingdom: Saying he had made him a promise of a safe Passage
to Madrid, which he ought not to violate. A frivolous Excuse, to prefer an idle
Proof of Faith and Clemency to his own Life, and the Public Safety, especially
toward one, who would abuse this his Favor to Plot against his Royal Person,
which was the source of great Calamities to the King, and his whole Kingdom.
Tiberius was not at all moved, that some blamed him for making so long a stay
at the (...) of Caprea, and neither went to aid the Gauls, of whom a great part
were already lost; nor to appease the legions in Germany Tanto impensius in
sccuritatem compositus, neque loco, neque (...), sed ut s^litum per illos d^es
egit. Tac. 3. Ann.
. Prudent Constancy hears, but does not much regard the Sentiments of the
ignorant Multitude; knowing if things succeed well, Murmur will afterward turn
to greater Glory, and sensibly va^ish of it self. The Army distrusted Readiness
Election, and in Derision said, How shall this Man save us 1 Samuel 10. 27.
? Saul however took no notice of those Words, but made as if he did not hear
them, (nor indeed should Princes hear every thing) and the Soldiers, condemning
afterward their Crime, recanted, nay, and made diligent search for the Author
of that Abuse to put him to Death 1 Samuel 11. 12.
. It had not been prudent in Saul to expose (...) Election, by discovering his
knowledge of the Peo^^es Dissatisfaction. What Levity were it in a Tra^eller to
be stopped by the importunate Noise of every Grasshopper? To be guided in ones
Resolutions by the ^^^ting Mob were folly Non ex rumore statuendum. Tac. 3. Ann
; to fear them, and re^oke what has been once resolved, base and infamous.
Scarce any Council would be secure, did it depend upon the Multitude, who are
incapable of penetrating ^ll the Motives upon which the Prince Acts, nor is it
(...) to make them public; for that were to give them the Authority of the
Scepter. All the Peoples Power (...) included in the Person of the Prince. It
is his part to Act, theirs to Obey, with a firm Persuasion of the Equity and
Reasonableness of his Commands. If every (...) bad liberty to ask Reasons of
what is enjoined, there ^^uld be an end of Obedience and Empire Si ubi
jubeantur, quaerere singulis (...); pereunte obsequio, e^^am (...) interci^it,
Tac. 1. Hist.
. It Is as necessary for a Subject to be ignorant of these things, (...) to know
others. The Sovereign Jurisdiction of things God has given to Princes, to
Subjects is left the Glory of Obedience. The only thing required of a Prince,
is to acquit himself of his Duty in his Resolutions and Decrees; if the Success
prove not answerable to his desire, he ought not to be discouraged; for it is
sufficient that he has done nothing imprudently; the very best Counsel is weak
and liable to abundance of Accidents. The greater a Monarchy is, the more
exposed it is to the unhappy Casualties, which Chance brings with it, or Humane
Understanding is unable to foresee and prevent. Gross Bodies usually labor
under great Distempers. Did not the Prince prosecute Affairs notwithstanding
all Obloquy and Detraction, with Courage and Constancy, he would lead but an
unhappy Life. If he at any time chance to err, Courage is necessary, least he
be dashed, and become for the future slow and irresolute. That Prince, who upon
no grounds suspects all he does will be disapproved of, contracts too much the
Limits of his Power, and subjects himself to a thousand Terrors of Imagination,
which generally arise from some private superstitious Persuasion, or Excess of
Melancholy. These Inconveniences David seems to have acknowledged, when he
prayed God to take away the Reproach which he feared Psalm 118. 39.
. Let the Prince therefore arm himself with Constancy to resist any Events, and
the Opinions of the Vulgar, and show his Valor in the Defense of the true and
real Reputation of his Person and Arms, seeing the lo^s or stain of this brings
the whole Empire into danger. King Ferdinand the Catholic, very well
understood this, when he advised his Father, John the Second, King of Arragon,
to adapt himself to the Times and Necessity, and endeavor to secure his Crown
by gaining the Hearts of the Marquess of Villena, and Alphonso Carillo,
Archbishop of Toledo Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. He did indeed all honorable means to effect it; but could never be obliged
basely to bend his Regal Authority to the Fury and Violence of his Subjects,
thinking there to be more Danger in this, than Advantage in gaining their
Affe^^ions. Time is the best Master of these Arts, and such ^one may come as
will make even mean Actions Heroic, and impute even base and servile
Submission to Fortitude. It Is an honorable and lawful End enobles them.
Tacitus accuses Vitellius for, being Nero's Ass^ciate in his Debaucheries
without any Necessity, which had made it very excusable, but out of mere Luxury
and Lasciviousness Sectari cantantem solitus, non necessitate, qua
honestissimus quisq^e, sed i^ Luxu and sagina mancipatus emptusque. Tac. 2.
Hist.
. To submit to Necessity, requires no less Resolution than to overcome it; and
what is sometimes thought Baseness, is a desire of Honor, as when to prevent
the loss of this, or at least to preserve it, Injuries are put up for a time.
He that immediately runs to Revenge, suffers himself to be led more by Passion
than Honor. Anger, it is true, has Satisfaction, but the Ignominy becomes more
notorious and public. How often has Bloodshed been a kind of Rubric inscribed
with Injuries? How often have we seen in the Offenders gashed Face, the
offended Person's Infamy written in Scars, as in so many Letters? Honor has
been more frequently lost by Revenge than Dissimulation; this brings Oblivion,
that Remembrance; and we more value a Person that has prudently taken an
Affront, than one who has rashly revenged one. He, who makes a true and prudent
Estimate of the price of his Honor, weighs it against Revenge, which the
former with the Addition of a Grain of public Esteem, out-weighs by much.

Although it is my Advice, that the Prince value not popular Discourse; this,
however, I would have limited to the Cases mentioned, that is, when it is
compensated by the Public Good, or obstructs the Execution of any great
Designs, which the People don^t comprehend, at least not well understand: For
the Success and Honor of the thing recovers afterward the lost Reputation
with Interest. It will in the mean time be Prudence in the Prince at all times,
as much as possible, to conform his Actions to the Inclinations of the People;
their Approbation working almost the same Effect with real Glory; they both
consist in Men's Imagination, and the popular Voice, though false, sometimes
gains so much Credit, that neither Time, nor any contrary Action can ever after
efface it.

EMBLEM XXXIII.
WHAT an entire Glass represents, the same when broken, each part of it
exhibits. Thus the Lion views himself in both Pieces of that of the present
Emblem, that Symbol of Fortitude and generous Constancy, which a Prince in all
Accidents ought to maintain: In as much as he is a Public Mirror, wherein the
whole World views it self, as King Alphonso the Wise has well observed,
speaking of Kings Actions, and how they ought to be regulated. Whether
therefore Success preserve, or Misfortunes break him, he should ever appear
with one Countenance; which indeed in Prosperity is of some difficulty,
considering how apt the Passions are to break forth of themselves, and that
Reason vanishes with Glory. However, a truly noble Mind suffers not it self to
be transported, even, by the highest Happiness, as one might see in Vespasian,
who though he was by the unanimous Consent of all saluted Emperor, was yet
neither Proud nor Arrogant In ipso nihil tumidum, arrog^^s, aut in rebus novis
novum fuit. Tac. 2. Hist.
, nor could the Alteration of Affairs work any in him. That Man, who with his
Fortune changes his Mind, confesses he did not deserve it Frons privata manet,
non se meruisse fatetur, Qui crevisse putat. Cla^d.
.

This modest Assurance was eminent too in Piso, who when adopted by Galba,
looked so serene and unconcerned, as if it had been in his Power to be Emperor,
and not depending upon the Will of another Nullum turbati, aut exultantis animi
m^tum prodidisse, ^ermo erga ^^rem, Imperatoremque reverens: de se moderatus,
^hil in vultu. ha^^qe mutatum, quasi imperare posset magis quam veilet. Tac. 1.
Hist.
. Valor also is wont to be endangered by adverse Accidents, in that they
generally find Men unprepared, there being scarce one who seriously thinks of
all the Calamities incident to him. Which makes them surprise many unawares,
and is the reason the Mind is then in so much Confusion, which proceeds either
from excessive Dotage on those Happinesses it falls short of, or from fear of
loss of Life; the desire of prolonging which is ingrafted in every Man's
Nature. Let others harbor those Passions, yet in a Prince's Breast they ought
never to be entertained; whose Duty it is to Govern equally in both Fortunes,
and to keep always a pleasant composed Countenance and undaunted Speech. Thus
Otho appeared to his Friends, even after the loss of his Empire, endeavoring
to stop their unreasonable Tears Vlacidus ore, intrepidus verbis, intempestivas
suo^rum lathry^^ ^^ercens. Tac. 2. Hist.
. In that bloody Fight at Navas of Toulo^^^, King Alphonso the Ninth, continued
in the Heat of the Engagement with the same Calmness of Mind and Looks. No
Accident was ever able to disclose the Passion of King Ferdinand the Catholic.
Being once struck by a mad Fellow of Barcelona, he seemed to be nothing
disordered, only gave Command he should be seized. The Emperor, Charles the
Fifth, at the Siege of Ingolstadt, changed neither his Looks nor Station,
though the continual Fire of the Enemies Guns had tore his Tent in Pieces, and
cut off some by his side. With no less Constancy the King of Hungary, (now the
most August Emperor) and his Highness, Ferdinand the Infant, (both glorious
Rivals of Charles's Courage and Achievements) stood undaunted at the Battle of
Norlinguen, not the least terrified by the Death of a Colonel, who was killed
by a Cannon-shot very near them. Nor should I omit here the Example of
Maximilli^^ Duke of Bavaria, and Elector of the Empire; the same, who was
famous for the numerous Victories he obtained at the Head of the Catholic
League. He was not puffed up with them, nor suffered afterward his great Soul
to be broken by the contrary Success, though he saw his States ruined, and the
King of Sweden, and Frederick, Count Palatine, in his Palace of Monaca, (a
Fabric worthy so great a Prince) and though he found the Duke of Frizeland as
much his Enemy as the other two.

Let Envy, and the fickleness of Times, divide and dash into never so many
pieces, the Glass of tates, yet in every of them, however small, Majesty will
remain entire. Whoever is born to a Scepter, ought not to be changed at any
Event or Accident whatever, nor think any so grievous and insupportable* as for
it to ab^^don himself, and dissemble the Person he bears. King Peter, even,
when he fell into the Hands of his Brother, and deadly Enemy, concealed not who
he was, may, when it was questioned, if it were he or not, he cried out aloud,
It is I, it is I. This very Constancy in preserving a Grandeur and Majesty in
misfortunes, (...) sometimes the best and only Remedy against them; as it was
with Porus, King of the Indies, who being taken Prisoner by Alexander the
Great, and demanded how he would be treated: Made answer, Like a King. And when
Alexander asked him, whether he desired nothing more: He replied, That Word
comprehends all. Which Heroic Answer so affected Alexander, that he not only
restored his Kingdom, but gave him other Countries besides. To yield to
Adversity, is as it were to side with it. Valor in the Conquered pleases the
Victor, either because it renders his Triumph more glorious, or because such is
the intrinsic Energy of Virtue. The Mind is not subject to Violence, nor has
Fortune any Power over it. The Emperor, Charles the Fifth, used severe Threats
to John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, to oblige him to Surrender the Duchy of
Wirtemburg. To which his Answer was, His Imperial Majesty may indeed do what he
pleases with my Body, (...) shall never be able to strike fear into this
Breast. Which he really showed on another occasion of much greater Danger; for
it happened, as he was playing at Chess with Ernest, Duke of Brunswick, he
heard Sen^^nce of Death was passed upon him, which he received with no more
Trouble, than if the News had not concerned him, but cheerfully bid the Duke
play on; which generous Carriage wiped off, in some measure, the Infamy of
Rebellion, and procured him Glory. One great Action even upon a forced Death,
leaves a Luster and Repute to Life. As has in our own time ^appned: Rodrigo
Calderon, Marquess de Sievigl^sias, or ^^ven Churches, whose truly Christian
Valor and He^^ick Constancy, were the whole World's Admiration, in so much as
to turn Envy and Hatred, things com^^on to one of his Fortune, into Pity and
Commenda^^^. None are delivered from violent Casualties by Timorousness, nor
does Confusion any way lessen Danger, whereas Resolution either overcomes, or
at least renders it illustrious. The People gather what Peril they are in from
the Princes Countenance, as Mariners do the danger of the Tempest from that of
their Pilot. For that Reason ought he to appear equally serene in Prosperity
and Adversity, least Fear dash, or Pride exalt him, and others be able to judge
of the State of Affairs. This made Tiberius take so much care to hide every
unsuccessful Accident Haec audita, quanquam abstrusum, and tristissima quoque
maxi^^ occultantem Tiberium pertule^unt. Tac. 1. Ann.
. All is in Disorder and Confusion, when in the Princes Face, as that of
Heaven, the Tempests which threaten the Commons are discernible. To change
Color at every Breath of Fortune, betrays a light Judgment and mean Spirit.
Constancy, and an even Look, inspire Subjects with Courage, strike Enemies with
Admiration. All Men fix their Eyes upon the Prince, and if they see Fear there,
they fear. Thus 'twas with those who were at Otho's Table Simul Oth^^ vultum
intn^eri, atque eve^t inclinatis ad suspicionem mentibus, cum ti^^ ret Otho
timebatur. Tac. 1. Hist.
. Besides, there can be no Fidelity where Fear and Distrust find Entertainment
Fides metu infracta. Tac. 3. (...)
. Which, however, I would have understood of those Cases, wherein it is
convenient to dissemble Dangers, and conceal Calamities; for in others to join
in public Expressions of Sadness, don't ill become the Prince, as that which
manifests his Love to his Subjects, and engages their Hearts. The Emperor,
Charles the Fifth, put himself in Mourning, and expressed his Sorrow for the
Sacking of Rome. David upon the news of the Death of Saul and Jonathan, took
hold of his Clothes, and rent them 2 Samuel 1. 11.
. The same did Joshua for the loss received by the Men of Ai; And he fell to
the Earth before the Ark of the Lord Jos. 7. 6.
. And indeed, what can be more just, than in a common Calamity thus to submit
to God; it is a kind of Rebellion willingly to receive Good only at God's Hands,
and not Evil also Job 2. 10.
. He that is humble under Correction, moves to Pardon.

Here it may be disputed, whether this Steddiness of Mind be commendable in an
Inferior, when he needs the Aid of the more Potent; the Solution of which Doubt
requires a peculiar Distinction. He, who is under Oppression, and craves
another Assistance, should not do it with too much Cringing and Solicitude,
least he make his Fortune desperate, there being no Prince, who out of pure
Compassion will reach his Hand to a Man fallen, or undertake the Defense of one
that has already abandoned all hopes of himself and his Affairs. Pompey's Cause
lost not a little in the Opinion of Ptolomy, when he saw so much Submission in
his Ambassadors. The King of the Cherusci showed much more Courage, when upon
the loss of his Kingdom, thinking it his Interest to procure the Favor of
Tiberius, He wrote to him not like a Fugitive or Beggar, but as one who
remembered his former Fortune Non ut profugus aut supplex, sed ex memoria
prioris fortunae. Tac. 2. Ann.
. Nor is the Example of Mithridates les Illustrious, who being overthrown by
Eunon, is said, with a Resolution truly Royal, to have thus bespoke him,
Mithri^ates so many Years sought by the Romans by Sea and Land, here
voluntarily Surrenders himself, do what you please with the Offspring of the
great Achemenes, the only thing my Enemies cannot deprive me of Mithridates
terra marique per tot annos Romany quaesitis, sponte adsum; utere, ut voles,
prole magni Achemeis, quod mihi solum hosts non abstulerunt. Tac. 12. Ann.
. Which Words prevailed with Eunon to intercede with the Emperor Claudius in
his behalf M^ta^^^e rerum, and prece haud degenerare permotus. Tac. 12. Ann.
. Let him, who has faithfully served his Prince, speak boldly if he find
himself injured; as Herman Cortez did to Charles the Fifth; and Segestes to
Germanicus Simul Segestes ipse ingens visu, and memor ia bonae societatis
impavidus; verba ejus in hunc modum fuere.
. In other Cases prudence should examine Necessity, Time, and the Things
themselves, having attentive Respect to the following Maxims. That a Superior
takes boldness in an Inferior for an Affront, imagining he aspires to be his
equal, or disparages him; and on the other side, is very apt to slight one he
sees too abject and submissive. It was for this reason, Tiberius nominated none
to be Senators, but such as were of a servile Nature, and though such Persons
were necessary for his Service, yet could be not endure that Baseness of Mind
Etiam illum, qui libertatem publicam nollet, tam projectae servi^ntium
patientiae cedebat. Tac. 3. Ann.
. Thus we see Princes are competent Judges of every ones natural Vigor and
Alacrity, and are apt to put Affronts upon those whom they know will take them.
Vitellius had not took the liberty to keep Valerius Maximus so long from the
Consulate, which Galba had conferred on him, but that he thought his meek
Temper would not resent the Injury Nulla offensa, sed mit^^ and injuriam
segniter laturum. Tac. 2. Hist.
. For this reason a resolute kind of Modesty, and a modest Courage will be
highly requisite in a Prince, who, if he must of Necessity be ruined, had
better be so with a Mind great and noble, than base and degenerous. This Marcus
Hortalus considered, when Tiberius refused to assist him in the extremest
Necessity Avitae nobilitatis eti^^ inter angustias fortunae retinens. Tac. 2.
Ann.
.

When the more powerful denies another the Honor due to him, (especially in
Public Actions) it is more advisable to snatch, and as I may say, steal, than
dispute them. He that doubts distrusts his Merit; the Dissembler tacitly owns
his want of it, and Modesty is afterward but laughed at. He, who handsomely
assumes the Preference due to him, easily preserves it afterward. Thus it
happened once to the German Ambassadors, who seeing those of such Nations as
surpassed in Valor and constant Alliance with the Romans, seated among the
Senators in Pompey's Theater, said, No Men in the World were preferable to the
Germans for Arms and Fidelity Nul' os mortalium armis, and fide ante Germanos
esse. Tac 13. Ann.
, and immediately took Place with the Senators, every one being taken with
their generous Freedom and noble Emulation Quod comiter a visentibus exceptum,
quasi impetus antiqui, and bona ^mulatione. Tac. 13. Ann.
.

As to Favors and Gratuities, which depend wholly upon the Prince's pleasure,
although they seem due to Merit or Virtue, the Subject ought not to murmur if
they be not conferred upon him: On the contrary, rather give thanks under some
honest Pretext, following the Example of some Officers, who were displaced in
Vitellius's time Actaeque insuper Vitell^ gratiae, consuetudine servitii. Tac.
2. Hist.
. For a discreet Courtier usually lets acknowledgments close all his Discourse
with the Prince. This piece of Prudence Seneca showed after his Conference with
Nero, about the Crimes laid to his Charge Seneca (qui finis omnium cum
dominante sermonum) gratias agit. Tac. 14. Ann.
. He that complains, declares he has been ill used; and Princes have very
little Confidence in one they think dissatisfied; all of them affecting to be
like God in that, of whom we never complain in our Affliction, nay, we rather
give thanks for them.

In Accusations also Constancy is of very great Consequence; he that gives way
to them, makes himself a Criminal. The Innocent Person, who disowns his
Actions, does in a manner plead guilty. A good Conscience armed with Truth,
triumphs over Envy: If that be degenerate and resist not the Stream of
Misfortunes, their Waves will overwhelm him, as a River by the force of its
Current throws down the weaker Trees, whereas the deeply rooted stand
immovable. All Sej^nus's Favorites fell with his Fortune; Marcus Terentius
alone, who courageously acknowledge he had courted and esteem^d his Friendship,
as that which procured him the Emperor Tiberius ^ Favor, was acquitted
Constantia orationis, and quia repertus erat qui efferret quae omnes animo
agitabant, etc. Tac. 6. Ann.
; and all other Evidences either banished or executed. In some Cases this firm
assurance is absolutely necessary, that Innocence defend not it self by
Excuses, for fear of betraying Timorousness; nor good Services be taken Notice
of, least they be thought to be upbraided. Thus Agrippina did when accused of
having procured Plautus the Empire Vbi nihil pro innocentia, quasi diffideret,
nec beneficiis, quasi exprobraret, disseruit. Tac. 3. Ann.
.

Nor should the Prince's Person only be a Looking-Glass to his Subjects, but he
is to show himself such by his State also, which is as it were his Picture, and
so in that no less than his own Person, Religion, Justice, Clemency, and all
other Imperial Virtues ought to be conspicuous. And in as much as Councils,
Seats of Justice, and Courts of Chancery, are Parts of this Glass, in them the
same Qualities should be found as are in the whole; nay, in all particular
Ministers who represent it; for it very much lessens the Prince's Reputation to
appear favorable to every Pretender to dismiss them with fair Promises, and
give Encouragement to their Hopes; and on the other side, put off his
Counselors, and other Ministers, to deter them by rough Usage from pursuing
their Petitions. An Artifice that will soon discover it self to be unworthy a
Generous and Royal Breast. The Minister is a piece of public Coin, stamped
with the Prince's Image, which, except it be of good Allay, and represent him
to the Life, will be refused as Counterfeit Praefectus nisi formam suam
referat, mali fati instar subditis efficitur. Them. Orat. 17.
. If the Head, which Governs, be of Gold, the Hands also which serve should be
so too; as were those of the Spouse in the Holy Scripture Cant. 5. 11, 14.
.

Farther, Ambassadors are also principal Parts of this Glass, as Persons in
whom the Prince's Authority is lodged. And certainly it would infinitely
prejudice the Public Faith to have his Words and Veracity not found in these:
And as they are the Lieutenants of his Power and Courage, so ought they on all
Occasions to manifest them, as if the Prince were present in Person. Thus did
Anthony Fonseca, after he had proposed to Charles the Eighth, in his Catholic
Majestys Name, that the Kingdom of Naples should not be invaded, till it had
been judicially determined whose Title was best, and saw it came to nothing;
with singular freedom of Mind he openly declared his King had now satisfied his
Conscience; that he was at liberty to take which side he thought most just, and
immediately in the presence of the King and Council, broke the Treaties of
Peace before made between the two Crowns. As the Minister is to be furnished
with his Prince's Maxims, so also should he be with his Majesty, Valor and
Magnanimity.

EMBLEM XXXIV.
WHoever looks on the Thorns and Prickles of the Rose^ Tree, will hardly be
persuaded a Daughter so beautiful as the Rose could proceed from so deformed a
Mother. One had need be endued with a great Measure of Faith to water it, and
wait till it be clothed with Verdure, and blossom into that wonderful pomp of
Flowers, of so delicate a Smell. Yet by Patience and long Expectation, we at
length find the labor not lost, nor that Care ill employed which has produced
such Beauty and Fragrancy. The first Branches of Virtue are harsh and thorny to
our depraved Nature, but after some time, its Flower of all other, the most
beautiful begins to Bloom. Let not the first sight of things discourage a
Prince, for the outside of very few in Government are pleasant; they all seem
full of Thorns and Difficulties, but Experience has found many easy which
appeared much otherwise to Sloth. The Prince therefore should not be
disheartened; for in lightly yielding to them, he will be overcome by his own
Apprehension rather than any thing real. Let him endure with Courage and Hope,
with Patience and Perseverance, still keeping the means in his Hand. He that
hopes has a good and faithful Companion on his side, I mean Time. Whence Philip
the Second used to say, I and Time against any two. Precipitation is the effect
of Madness, and generally the occasion of great Perils. Theobald, Earl of
Champagne, put his Succession to the Crown of Navarre, very much in Question,
by not having patience to wait for his Uncle, King Sancho's Death, but
underhand conspiring with the Nobles to possess himself of the Kingdom in his
Lifetime; for this put Sancho upon adopting James the First of Arrag^n, his
Heir. Patience obtains many Trophies. This was Scipio's Excellency, who though
he had infinite occasions of Displeasure, was yet so patient, as never to let ^
passionate Word fall from him Vt nullum ferox verbum excideret. Tit. live.
, which thing gave sucess to all his Designs. He that suffers with Expectation,
vanquishes the slights of Fortune, and obliges her to take his Part, that
Confidence among all her Vicissi^^des like Flattery winning upon her. Columbus,
not without great hazard, exposes himself to the Ocean's uncertain Waves, in
quest of new Countries. Neither H^rcule's Ne plus ultra, at Caspe and Abyla,
nor the Mountains of Waters, that seem to oppose his Enterprise deter him from
it; he by Sailing tells the Sun's Steps, and steals from the Year its Days,
from the Days their Hours; his Needle wants the Pole, his Charts the lines, his
Companions patience; all things conspire against him, but his Hope and Patience
rub through all Difficulties, till at length a new World recompenses his
invincible Constancy. Ferendum and Sperandum, was a saying of Empedocles, and
afterward the Emperor Macrinus's Motto, whence that of this Emblem is
borrowed. Some Dangers are more easy to surmount than avoid: As Agathocles well
knew, when being beaten, and besieged in Syracuse, he did not basely Surrender
to the Enemy, but leaving a sufficient Body of Men for the Defense of the City,
marched with the rest of his Army against Carthage, and he who could not be
victorious in one War, by this means obtained a double Triumph. Rashness
frequently overcomes a Danger, and despising it often confounds an Enemy. When
Hannibal saw the Romans after the Battle of Cannae send Succors into Spain, he
began to fear their Power and Strength. No one ought to trust Prosperity too
much, or despair in Adversity. Fortune lies between both, as ready to advance
as depress. Let the Prince therefore keep in the one, and the other, a
Constancy and Strength of Mind, prepared to encounter any Accident, and not
suffer the Threats of the greatest Tempest to disturb him: For sometimes the
Waves have cast a Man out of one Ship that is to be wrecked, into another that
is to be saved. A great and generous Soul Heaven it self favors. Let not the
Prince rashly despair for another Dangers, or those which Chance brings with
it. He that observes the Wind shall not sow, and he that regards the Clouds
shall not reap Eccl. 11. 4.
. Let him not imagine he obliges any one by his Afflictions. Tears are
Womanish, nor is Fortune appeased with such Sacrifices. A great Soul endeavors
to give it self Satisfaction or Comfort by some heroic and generous Action:
Thus Agricola, when he heard of his Son's Death, took not the Accident as
generally Men do, ambitiously; nor in Tears like Women; but by War diverted his
Grief Quem casum, neque, ut plerique fortium virorum, ambitiose, neque per
lamenta rursus, ac terrorem multebrem tuli^, and in lustu, bellum inter remedia
erat. Tac. in Vit. Agr.
. To be wholly insensible, is either Vainglory, or Excess of Consternation.

In suing for Offices and Honors, the Design of this Emblem is very useful. He
that can bear and hope, knows how to get the better of his Fortune. Whereas one
that impatient of delay, thinks it base to be beholding and submit, shall be
despised and abandoned by the whole World. To look on it as a point of Honor
not to obey any, is the way to command none. The means are to be measured by
the end; if in obtaining this there be more Honor got, than is lost by them,
certainly they ought to be used. Impatience of Sufferings we take for
Generosity of Mind, when it is imprudent Haughtiness. Honor once attained, the
Tracks made in ascending them, presently wear out. To endure much in order to
Advancement, is not base Degeneracy, but extraordinary Strength of a Mind
elevated and aspiring. Some Tempers there are which cannot abide to wait, that
would have all things ended in a Moment; desiring now to exceed their Equals,
by and by their Superiors, and in a little while, even their own Hopes. These
hurried by this Violence of Ambition despise the most secure means as slow, and
choose to employ the shortest, though most hazardous. But it usually fares with
them, as with Buildings raised in haste, before the Materials have had time to
dry and settle, which immediately fall down again.

The Masterpiece of Government consists in hoping and enduring, in that these
are the only means to do things in time, without which nothing can possibly
come to maturity. Trees that at the Springs first warmth bear Flowers, soon
lose them for not waiting till the Winters cold was quite gone. He, who would
ripen Affairs with the Hand, cannot have the Satisfaction of tasting the Fruit
of them. Impatience is the cause of Miscarriages and Dangers Prove. 14. 17.
; it creates Peri^s, which by being uneasy under, and too hasty to escape, we
augment. Therefore for those Evils, as well Internal as External, which have by
our negligence been increased in the Commonwealth, it is better to let them take
their Course, and be sensibly cured by Time, than precipitate a Remedy, wherein
there is more Danger. If before we could not foresee and prevent; at least let
us learn to bear them after: They are increased by Opposition. A Danger
concealed or not taken notice of, thereby becomes public, and lays greater
Impediments in his way, who thought to stop it. Fear imprudently armed against
a Superior Power, does but find it Exercise, and render it more powerful by the
Addition of its own Spoils. This Method Cerealis took to compose the Minds of
those of Treves, least they should take up Arms against the Romans, saying, A
Fabric, as that was, which had been the Product of Eight hundred years Success
and Industry, could not be pulled down, but its Ruin must of necessity bury the
Authors of it Octogentorum annorum fortuna, disciplinaque, compages haec
coal^^; quae convelli sine excidio convellentium non potest. Tac. 4. Hist.
. Many things would not succeed so ill, did not our Fear and Imagination act
with too much Precipitation. Apprehension and Jealousy of Tyranny, when once
discovered, make it begin to be really, though it were not before. Whence in
such like Cases, it is a piece of no less Courage to know how to dissemble, than
to be too rash in remedying. The former is the genuine Effect of Prudence, this
generally the Result of Fear.

EMBLEM XXXV.
THE closer the Breath is pressed in a Trumpet, with the greater Harmony and
Variety it goes out of it; thus it is with Virtue, which is never more clear and
harmonious than when suppressed by Malice Multorum improbitate depressa veritas
emergit, and innocentiae desens^ interclusa respirat. Cicero.
. The Flame of Valor is apt to die, if the Wind of Adversity don't revive it;
that awakens the Mind, and makes it look about for means to amend it.
Happiness, like the Rose, grows out of Thorns and Miseries. Alphonso the Fifth,
King of Arragon, was vanquish^d and taken in a Sea Fight with the Genoeze; and
that, which in all probability was like to retard his Expedition against the
Kingdom of Naples, was the very thing that furthered it with greater Happiness
and Power; for by making a League with Philip, Duke of Milan, who retained him
Prisoner, he obtained both his Liberty, and Forces for the Conquest of that
Kingdom. Necessity compelled him to get his Host of his side; for in
Prosperity, indeed, every one lives to himself alone, but in Adversity for
himself and others. Those disclose the Passions of the Mind, otherwise
forgetful of it self: Whereas, by this it learns Caution, and arms it self with
Virtues, as means to attain real and lasting Happiness Secundae res acrioribus
flimulis animum exploravit; quia miseri^ toler antur, felicitate corrumpimur.
Tac. 1. Hist.
. Whence it is not a little easier to escape bad, than be continued in good
Fortune. In Prison first appeared Alphonso's extraordinary Endowments and
Ornaments of Mind, which till then had lain hid; and the Duke of Milan charmed
with them, was ambitious of his Friendship, and laid these Obligations upon
him. He obtained more by losing the Victory, than he could have expected had he
been Victor. Fortune sports between Extremes, and takes delight in showing her
Power, in skipping from one to another. There is no Virtue but will shine in
Adversity, as no Star but sparkles with greatest Luster in the darkest Night.
Then the weight shows the Palm's Strength when this is raised higher under it.
The Rose preserves its Leaves longer fresh among Nettles than Flowers. Did not
Virtue exert it self in Adversity too; it would not deserve Victories or
Truimphs. It Is its Property to Conquer by suffering. Whence it evidently
appears, how impious the Error (confuted by us in another place) of those is,
who advise the Prince not to be bigoted to Virtue, but to comply with Vice
when necessity shall require; a time in which he ought more particularly to
approve himself constant in it, with greater hopes of Success: As it usually
happned to the Emperor, Ferdinand the Second of Blessed Memory; who in his
greatest Dangers would resolutely affirm, He Would rather lose the Empire, and all
he had, and with his whole Family beg from Door to Door, than to commit an
unjust thing to maintain his Grandeur. Words truly worthy so Pious a Prince,
whose exemplary Piety and Faith were so acceptable to God Almighty, that he
vouchsafed to take the Imperial Scepter, and perform his Office here on Earth,
giving him several signal and miraculous Victories. In the greatest Dangers and
Distresses, when all hope failed, and humane Prudence and Valor were destitute
of means, he always came off with most Success and greatest Triumph. The Roman
Emperors of old lived in Affluence of Peace, and all manner of Delights, yet
were tyrannized over by their own Passions, and racked by a thousand Fears. But
this Pious Hero found Repose and Tranquillity of Mind amidst the raging
Tempests, which the Fury of Rebels raised against his Empire, and most August
House The just sings amidst Misfortunes, and the wicked Man weeps in his
Impiety. Thus the fiery Furnace was as a Choire to the three Children Dan. 3.
50.
. Miseries and Hardships are attended with great Advantages; they correct the
Prince's Pride, and reduce him to Reason; with what fury does the Wind
sometimes storm? How arrogantly does the Sea swell and rage, its foaming
Billows like Mountains threatening Heaven and Earth! And yet a small Shower
composes and calms it. Thus Misfortunes raining from Heaven allay the Prince's
Pride and Presumption. They make a just Governor of a Tyrant, of a Prince
careless and negligent of his Affairs, one careful and circumspect. For, then
even Necessity obliges him to take Care of his People, to esteem Nobility,
honor Valor, do Justice, and respect Religion. Power is never in greater
Danger than when all things flow prosperously. For Cares being then laid aside,
too much Security is apt to stifle Counsel and Prudence. Ease and Idleness has
been the Ruin of more Princes than Labor. It Is with them as with Bodies, which
are kept in Vigor by Motion, without which they languish and decay. Whence it
appears farther, how erroneous we are in our Judgments of Good and Evil, scarce
ever knowing what is most for our Advantage. Adversity we look on as Rigor and
Cha^fisement, when it is really Warning and Instruction. The Present of
Earrings and a Sheep, which Job's Friends and Relations made him, seems to
intimate, that he should endure all things with a patient, even Temper Job 42.
12.
, and that those Afflictions were precious Admonitions of God whispered in his
Ear. God's afflicting us sometimes is wonderful Mercy, and on the contrary his
Recompenses are Punishments; for by these he clears, as it were, the Bill of
our Debts, and by paying for some of our Merits, remains Creditor to our
Offenses; whereas by afflicting us, he at once pays himself, and excites us to
Amendment.

EMBLEM XXXVI.
THE expert and prudent Seaman is not always carried at the Pleasure of the
Wind, but rather by (...) Benefit of it, so disposes the Sails of his Ship,
that (...) arrives at the desired Port, and with the same Wind (...) at which
he pleases of two opposite Shores, with^^ endangering his Voyage.

But when the Heaven's calm; by the help of Sails and (...) he out strips even
the Wind it self. With no less (...) and Diligence the Prince ought to Steer
the Vessel of (...) State in the tempestuous Sea of his Reign, so atten^^vely
observing all Storms that he may with Prudence and Valor make use of the same
in their time and place. He is a Pilot, to whose Conduct the Life and Safety of
all is committed; nor is any Ship more hazardous than a Crown exposed to so
many Winds of Ambition, so many Rocks of Enemies, and Storms of People. King
Sancho the Brave needed all his Industry to arm himself against Fortune, and
secure the Right of his Crown. Almost the whole Science of Politics consists
in knowing how to discern Times, and make use of them: A Storm sometimes
bringing a Ship sooner into Harbor than a Calm. He, who can break the force of
ill Fortune, renders it favorable; and one that knowing a Danger yields to it,
and gives it time, at length surmounts it. When the Sailor finds there is no
contending with the Billows, he strikes Sail and abandons himself to them; and
because his Resistance would rather add force to the Wind, uses some narrow
Creek to rest his Ship in, and shelter it from the Waves. Something must be
granted Dangers, if one would escape them. James the First, King of Arragon,
was sensible of the Aversion his Nobl^s and People had to him, and that it was
by no means convenient to increase their Fury by an untimely Opposition, but
rather to give it time to sink of it self; as Rivers do, whose Waters in a
Tempest swell and overflow their Banks, voluntarily suffered himself to be
played upon, and as it were imprisoned, till he restored all things to their
former Calmness and Tranquillity, and reinstated himself in the Throne. The same
discreet Moderation Queen Mary used, when by siding with the Grandees, and
satisfying their Ambition, she preserved the Crown of Castile, during the
Minority of her Son. Ferdinand the Fourth Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. Did the Sailor think it a dishonor to yield to a Storm, and were resolved
with Sails and Oars to withstand it, his Ruin would be inevitable. Constancy
consists not in unseasonable struggling, b^^ in hoping, and so enduring Danger,
without letting Fortune get the upper hand of one. In such Cases the Glory is
to escape safe. What seems Baseness of Mind in them, is afterward Magnanimity
crowned with Success. When King Alphonso the Wise, saw himself deprived of his
Kingdom, putting his whole Confidence in the King of Morocco's Assistance, made
no difficulty to beg of Alphonso de Guzman, Governor of St. Lucar de Barameda,
who upon some Disgust had retired to that Prince's Court, that forgetting all
former Injuries, and remembering their ancient Amity, and his Nobility, he would
stand his Friend, and endeavor to be an Instrument of that King's supplying
him with Men and Money. Which Letters are to this Day kept in that most
Illustrious and Ancient House.

Nevertheless Kings ought not to yield to their Subjects violence, unless in
Cases of Extremity, for he very little consults his Authority, who debases
himself by too much Condescension. The dishonorable Terms King Ferdinand the
Holy, constrained by his Nonage, made the House of Zara, no way appeased them.
Nor could Isabella reclaim Alphonso Carillo, Bishop of Toledo, though she
honored him with a Visit at Alcala. I confess in desperate Cases, prudence is
wont to try all ways that Chance can render possible. It is great Courage and
Strength of Reason, on Occasions of that Nature to restrain the Spirits, and
weigh the present Necessity, and greatness of the Danger against such means as
may contribute more to the State's Preservation. No one was ever more Jealous
of his Grandeu^ than Tiberius, yet he dissembled the Boldn^s^ of Lentulus
Germanicus, who having the Command of the German Legions, was so audacious as
to write to him with Threats, not to send him a Successor, covenanting as
'twere to let his Prince enjoy the Empire, provided he were continued in his
Province Reputante Tiberio, publicum sibi ^dium, extremam aetatem, magisque
fama, quam vi stare res sua^. Tac. 6. Ann.
; and he, who could not put up the Emulation of his Sons, took this slight
patiently. Not but he knew the ill Consequence of letting such Disobedience go
unpunished, but if he opposed it, he considered he should incurr the public
Odium; that he was now in Years, and in a State where his Affairs depended more
upon Reputation than Strength. Subjects would be little beholding to the Valor
of the Prince who governs them, if he should presently in ill Fortune submit to
Necessity; and on the other side as little to his Prudence, if when that
Fortune cannot be overcome, he will however withstand it. Courage should be
moderated by Prudence and Address, and what cannot be effected by Strength,
should be the Work of Art and Industry. It Is no less glorious to avoid than to
surmount a Danger. To fly it always is Sloth; to expect, Ignorance or Surprise;
to despair Cowardice. Men of Courage make Head against Fortune her self. The
Prince^s Duty and End is not lightly to contest with his State upon the
Billows, but to conduct it to the Haven of Preservation and Safety. That is
esteemed valiant Wisdom, which draws Benefit out of Adversity; as also, that
which by struggling compasses its Ends sooner. Kings, the Masters of Times and
Things, are always followed, never led by them. There Is no Building, but whose
Ruins, with what Addition Industry is wont to make, may Erect a more stately
Fabric: Nor any State so entirely abandoned by Fortune, that Valor cannot
preserve, and even advance, provided it consult Prudence upon Events, and know
how to make right use of them, or at least to turn them to its Advantage.
Ferdinand the Catholic, and Lewis the Twelfth of France, had divided between
them the Kingdom of Naples; and the great Captain knowing the Circle of a Crown
to have but one Center, and that Empire admits of no Companion, endeavored
immediately to get his Master's Share into his Hands; that in Cafe of after
Disputes, which he foresaw would arise between those two Kings, he might be the
more at leisure, and use them afterward to disposses the King of France of his
Part, as in Effect it happned. Accidents, it is true, have some force; but we
increase or diminish them according to our Carriage under them. Our Ignorance
gives Divinity and Power to Fortune, in that we lightly resign our selves to
her Vicissitudes. Did we change our Customs and Measures as often as she does the
Times, she would not be so powerful, nor we so subject to her Empire. The Make
of our Clothes we alter with the Mode, but neglect our Mind and Manners. What
Wind does not the skilful Pilot make serviceable to his Voyage? As that veres
he trims his Sails, and thus all conduce to the end he proposes. We refuse to
shake off the ill Habits of our Nature, either out of Self-love or Imprudence,
and afterward lay the fault on Casualty. We grow desperate before we seek to
remedy our Misfortunes, and through Obstinacy or Inadvertency, let Despair get
the Ascendant over us. We cannot in Adversity lay aside that Pride, Anger,
Vainglory, Detraction, and those other Vices which Prosperity bred in us; nor
are without great difficulty induced to acknowledge them that have brought us
into that unhappy Condition. Every moment in every Affair, with whomsoever of
his Subjects the Prince shall have to do, he ought to differ from himself and
change his Nature. Nor does this require any extraordinary Knowledge, but a
certain Disposition only, and Capacity to adapt ones self to all Contingences,
and Prudence to foresee them.

Now, as we are lost in Adversity for want of furling the Sails of our
Passions, and submitting to it for a time; so also do we bring Destruction upon
our selves and Princes, when we indiscreetly and conceitedly go about to
measure their Interest, Passions, and Inclinations, by our own Natures and
Advantages: It being impossible for a Minister of a liberal Temper to exert his
Generosity under a Covetous, Griping Prince; or one Valiant and Active with one
Slothful and Cowardly. Our Motions should be regulated by the Activity of the
Prince's Sphere. This was a fault in Corbulo, who serving Claudius, a
pusilanimous, mean-spirited Prince, made many rash Attempts, by which he could
not but be disagreeable to him Cur hostem concitet? adversa in Remp. casura;
sin prospere egisset, formidolos^m paci virum insignem, and ignavo principi
praegravem. Tac. 2. Ann.
. In some Ministers an imprudent Zeal is the cause of this Error; in others,
which is most frequent, Self-love and Vainglory, which makes them desirous to
appear prudent in the Eyes of the World, and show their Ability, as if,
forsooth, by their means alone the Prince succeeded; but that whatever he
undertakes by himself, or others, is faulty; and thus under Color of Zeal they
pub^ish the Government's Defects, and discredit their Prince: Artifices which
generally the Minister himself feels the Effect of afterward by the loss of
his Prince's Favor. He that consults his Interest, and would establish his
Fortune, must with all possible speed fly such Affectations, as odious to the
Prince and whole World; he should be more serviceable in Deed than in Word; he
should conform to the Prince's Nature and Condition, reducing him to Reason,
and his Duty, under Color of Service, with Humility and a quiet Industry,
without Noise and Arrogance Tac. 3. Ann.
. It is the ruin of Valor and Virtue to be too nice Observers of Constancy,
and to think that their whole Reputation depends upon it; for in the mean time
others more various, who can transform themselves into any Shape, and suit
theirs to the Prince's Nature, carry away the Gratuities and Preferments.

But these are not to be used with Aleto's Design, to deceive; but to prevent
being unadvisedly ruined at Court, or to render one more serviceable to the
Prince, for the^e are some of such a Make, that it is absolutely necessary for
the Minister to put on their Nature; and as I may say, to creep into them, to
make them move and act; as Men, who neither will be directed by others Counsel,
nor can dispatch their own Neque alients consilis regi, neque sua expedire.
Tac. 3. Hist.
. And consequently not always what is most expedient is to be advised a Prince,
but what he is in Duty obliged to execute. Those courageous Counsels which were
given Vitellius, though the best in the World, were useless because he wanted
Resolution to put them in Practice Surdae ad fortia consilia Vitellio aures.
Tac. 3. Hist.
; he was usually deaf to them. Ministers are as it were the Prince's Sails.
Now, if they are large, and the Prince a shallow Vessel, if they are always
loosed without Consideration of the Burden of the Boat, they will certainly
overset it.

EMBLEM XXXVII.
THAT the Prince may not escape the Storm without full Instructions in all
Accidents that ill Fortune can throw him into; this Device represents the
choice of the lesser Evil, when the greater are inevitable. Thus the Pilot,
when he has^ lost all hopes of being saved by Opposition, or Compliance with
the Tempest, endeavors to make the Land, and run his Ship ashore; where, if he
lose his Ship, yet he saves his Life and Merchandise. It was very commendable
in the Romans, that when they could not oppose Fortune, they provided for their
own Security. The Prince's Valor consists not only in resisting, but withal in
weighing Dangers, and submitting to the less, when the greater is insuperable.
For as it is the part of Prudence to prevent, so it is of Courage and Constancy
(...) bear patiently what is not in the power of Prudence to decline, a thing
Alphonso the Sixth was a great Ma^^r of; a Prince modest in Prosperity, valiant
in Ad^^sity, never unprepared for any Accident. It Is a Vainglory of a Prince,
who with more Temerity (...) Valor, chooses rather to die in the greater
Dan^er, than escape in the lesser. He consults more his own Fame than the
Public Safety; or rather wants Courage to despise the Opinions of the
Multitude, who inconsiderately, and without any knowledge of the Accidents,
condemn prudent Resolutions; and when in Danger, are against having recourse to
Remed^^s so dangerous and violent. That sometimes looks like Courage is
Cowardice; where presence of Mind is wanting to hope in danger, the Confusion
of Fear casts us into it. When Prudence and Fortitude go hand in hand, then
Consideration takes place; and if it find not safety in the lesser, is not
afraid to encounter the greater Danger. It Is a base weakness to die with fear.
There is no Valor like what necessity inspires. It Is commonly the last Remedy
in desperate cases, neither to hope nor quite despair. Thus a Ship not daring
to ^^^st the Shore, abandons it self to the wide Sea, and by the force of its
Billows escapes. One Peril is ordi^^rily the Remedy of another. Upon this, I
conceive, was grounded the Counsel some gave Galba in a Con^^^racy against him,
to oppose the first fury of it Proinde intuta quae indecora; vel si cadere
necesse sit, occurrendu^ (...), Tac. 1. Hist.
. Garcias Gomez defended the Fort of Xerez, (which he was Governor of in the
time of Alphonso the Wise) and although he saw all his Men killed or wounded,
would not Surrender, nor accept the Terms, though ^^nourable, which the Moors
offered him; for having little Confidence in them, he chose rather to die
gloriously in the Arms of his Fidelity, than those of his ^nemies; and what in
all appearance was like to cost him his Life, in a wonderful manner charmed his
Enemies, who admiring his Bravery and Resolution, by a Hook drew him out of the
Citadel alive, using him with great Civility, and carefully dressing the Wounds
he had received during the Siege Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. Such is the force of Valor, that it captivates even Enemies. Courage has
given life to more than Fear. I know not what Divinity attends and rescues it
from Dangers. When Ferdinand, the Holy, besieged Sevil, Garcias Perez de
Vargas, a Citizen of Toledo, with another, being separated from their Company,
were passing along the River Guadalquivir, when on a sudden they spy seven
Moorish Horse making toward them: His Comerade advises him to retire, but
Garcias not to incurr the ^gnomity of Cowardice by a dishonorable Flight,
pulls down the Vizer of his Helmet, brandishes his Sword, and advances by
himself: The Moors knowing his' Person, and admiring his Resolution, let him
pass without attacking him. Thus his Heroic Valor saved him; for had he fled
with his Companion, the Enemy had in all probability pursued and took him
Prisoner. It requires a Mind free and disengaged to examine Dangers; first in
the Report, and afterward in the Quality of them: In the Rumor, because those
are generally esteemed greatest which are farthest off. The People hear and
tremble at them, and seditiously spread and increase them, rejoicing at their
own Misfortunes because unusual, or out of Disaffection to the present
Government. It is therefore the Prince's part to appear firm, and to disperse
such idle Apprehensions. As upon those Reports which were spread in the time of
Tiberius, of the Revolt of the Provinces of France, Spain, and Germany, he
never betrayed the least discomposure, nor changed his Residence, nor way of
living, as well knowing the levity of such Reports Tanto impensius in
securitatem compositus, neque loco, neque vultu mutato, sed ut solitum per
illos dies egit; alti^^dine animi, an competerat, modica esse and v^lgatis
leviora? Tac. 3. Hist.
. If once a Prince surrender to Fear, he will be ever after incapable of
resolving. For then prudent Counsels and popular Rumors will be received with
equal credit. As they were by Vitellius in the Civil War with Vespasian Quia in
metu consilia prudentium, and vulgi rumor juxta audiun^^ Ibid.
. Dangers imminent appear greatest, being clothed by Fear with horror, and by
Presence magnified; and we by endeavoring to escape them, fall into others
abundantly greater, which though they seem at a distance, we afterward find
too near. It Is idle to imagine we can avert them by interposing a little time.
Many have vanished by being resisted, on the contrary, Opposition has encreas^d
others, and they have proved real, which were only imaginary. As it happened to
the Syrians Army before Samaria 2 Kings 6. 7.
. Fear of danger has destroyed more than Danger it self. What vain Apprehension
can do? We have within these few Years seen at a public Bull-fight at Madrid,
when a sudden Bruit being rais^d of some danger in the place where they
fought, struck Confusion and Terror into all, though not one knew the Reason.
The confused Flight of some increased the Consternation, and because none would
stay to know the certainty, many ran into the Jaws of Death by the same way
they took to escape it; and the Consequence had been much worse, had not the
Constancy of Philip the Fourth, whom every ones Eyes were upon, unmoved at the
Commotion and Rumor, raised the trembling Spirits of his Subjects, except the
Prince in Dangers and Misfortunes of this Nature, can repress the Peoples
fears, Counsels are confounded, all Command, and none Obey.

To be too cautious in avoiding Dangers, is sometimes the utter Ruin of States.
Frederick, Count Palati^e, had not lost his, and his Electorate, had not fear
after his Defeat given Wings to him to abandon all: For he might easily have
retired to Prague, or some other place, with the Remnant of his Forces, and
compounded with the Emperor, so by making choice of the lesser Evil have
escaped the greater.

We are oftentimes deluded by fear so disguised, that we take it for Prudence,
and Constancy for Ra^^ness. We sometimes boggle, and are at a stand what to
resolve, and in the interim the Danger steals on us. All things are not to be
feared, nor is Deliberation always required, for between Prudence and
Precipitation, Valor often designs noble Actions. The Great Captain having
entered the River Garillan with his Army, was reduced to such Streights, that
his Soldiers mutined and deserted; and when his Office^ advised him to Retreat,
he answered, This I have resolved with my self, rather to gain Ground, though
(...) enough for a Grave, than give back a step, might I live an hundred Years.
An Heroic Sentence, worthy the Courage and Prudence of so Great a Man. H^ well
knew, that without Rashness there was no hope^, in the Case he then was; but
weighing the Dang^^ against the Credit of his Arms, the only support of (...)
Faction in the Kingdom, which entirely depended upon the Success of that
Expedition, he chose rather to put all to the risque of one Battle, and
maintain his Repute, than to lose by degrees with dishonou^^ How often for want
of a timely Incision have we (...) Wounds fester and spread.

Some Dangers vanish of themselves, others are increased by negligence, and
wast Kingdoms insensibly^ and make them perish as it were by a Consumption^
Some are unknown; of these one cannot be too Ca^tious, for that they surprise
before a Remedy can be provided. Others are known but slighted, by these
negligence, and too much confidence are usually su^ferers. No Danger, though
never so inconsiderable should be despised, for Time, and other Accidents often
augment them, and Valor consists not so much in ^^nquishing, as in diverting
Dangers. To live in sight ^^ereof, is as bad as to suffer them Nemo mortalium
juxta viperam secures somnos sapit, quae etsi non percutiat certe solicitat;
tutius est perire non posse, quam juxta pericul^m (...) periisse. Sanct. Hier.
.

Nor is the Confidence we put in another's Clemency less treacherous, when to
decline one Danger we fall into a greater, as when we surrender our selves at
Discretion to an Enemy; we consider in him only the generosity of Pardon, not
the force of Revenge or Ambition; we measure his Compassion by our Grief and
Affliction, and are apt to persuade our selves that we can move him to relieve
us. When James the Third, King of Majorca, was too weak for his Brother-in-Law,
Peter the Fourth of Arragon, who upon I know not what pretense would dispossess
him of his Dominions; he put himself into his Hands, thinking this Submission
would obtain what his Arms could not; but that King was more influenced by
Ambition than Clemency, so that he deprived him of his Kingdom and Title. Thus
Dangers deceive us, and we find that to be the greater, which we chose as the
lesser. There can be no assurance in Counsel grounded on Principles that depend
on another pleasure. We deceive our selves in supposing others will act
nothing but what is agreeable to Religion, Justice, Relation, or Friendship, or
but what is consistent with their Honor and Interest. Not considering that Men
are not always guided by their Advantage or Duty, but rather by their private
Passions and Sentiments; and consequently their Actions are not only to be
examined by the Rule of Reason, but also by that of Malice, and the Experience
of the ordinary Injustices and Tyrannies of the World.

Dangers are a Prince's best Masters. The past teach (...) to remedy the
present, and prevent the future: Those of others are, it is true, instructing,
but they are easily forgot. Our own leave in the Soul some Marks and Scars of
the losses sustained, as that which has once wounded the Imagination does fear.
Let not then contempt or forgetfulness ever erase them, especially when having
escap^d a Danger, we fancy the same will never return, or if it does, will not
annoy us; for though some one Circumstance, which is very unlikely to happen a
second time, may remove Dangers, yet other succeeding new ones make them
unavoidable.

EMBLEM XXXVIII.
FROM Nature, this universal Commonwealth of things, and Empire of mixed Bodies,
derive their Original, the supreme Government of which she lays claim to; and
for the more firm establishment, and more secure maintaining of it, has made
her self so loved by them, that the Elements, even in the midst of their
contrariety with an admirable consent, conspire to preserve it. All things
would be soon dissolved, did they hate Nature their Princess and Sovereign, who
with mutual ties of Love and Benevolence, as with the fastest knot, unites
them. It is this Love which holds the Earth in Aequilibrio, and makes the Orbs
of Heaven whirl round it. Let this Monarchy of things created, founded in their
first Being, be a Lesson to defend their Persons and Subjects by affection, the
most faithful guard they can have about them Corporis custodiam tutissimam
esse putatam in virtute amicorum, tum in benevolentia civium esse collocatam.
Isocr. ad Nic.
.

Claud. Not Guards, nor Groves of Pikes defend like Love. This is the only
impregnable Fort Salvum Principem in aperto clementia praestabit, vivum erit
inexpugnabile monument ^n amor civium. Sen. de Clem. lib. 1 ca. 19.
. For which reason the Bees elect a King without a Sting, for he has no need of
Arms, who is beloved by his Subjects. Nature would by no means have it in his
power to hurt, whose duty it is to govern, least he become odious, and promote
his own ruin. The greatest and most absolute power a Prince can have (says K.
Alphonso) is when he loves his People, and they reciprocally love him. The body
defends the Head, upon account of the Love it bears it, in consideration, that
this directs and preserves it: else would it not hold up its arm toward the
threatening blow. Who would expose himself to Hazards, except he had a Love for
his Prince? Who protect and defend his Crown? The whole Kingdom of Castile
sided with the Infant Henry, against K. Peter the Cruel, because the one was
beloved by all, the other as universally hated. The first Principle of the ruin
of Kingdoms, and all the Revolutions in States is Hatred. The Kings Ordonno and
Fruela the Second were so abominated by their Subjects, that the very name of
King became odious; Castile was reduced into a Commonwealth, and the Government
divided between two Judges, one of which administered affairs of Peace, the
other those of War Mar. hist. Hisp.
. Portugal never took up Arms against its Kings, nor revolted from its
obedience; the reason is, it bears a sincere affection toward them; and if at
any time it has excluded one and admitted another, 'twas, because one was
beloved, the other for Maladministration hated. It was the advice of James
the First of Arragon to Alphonso the Wise, to seek rather the Love than Fear of
his Subjects, and to ingratiate himself with the Clergy and Commons, that he
might be the better able to grapple with the Nobility; which Counsel if he had
followed, he had never lost the Crown. Nero no sooner ceased to be loved, than
Conspiracies were formed against him, a thing which Subrius Flavius upbraided
him with to his face Nec quisquam tibi fidelior militum ^uit, dum amari
meruisti, odisse ^aepi postquam parricida Matris and Uxo^is, auriga, histrio,
and incendiar^us extitisti. Tac. 15. ann.
. A King's Power and Majesty consist not in his own Person, but in the
Affection and good Will of his Subjects. If they be disaffected, who will
oppose his Enemies? It Is Preservation makes the people want a King, but that
can never be expected from one, who makes himself hated. The Arragonians
prudently foresaw this, when having called to the Crown Peter Altharez Lord of
Borgia, from whom the most ancient and illustrious Family of the Dukes of
Gandia is descended, they afterward repented, and would not have him for their
King, because they saw he used them with Austerity and Rigor, even before his
Election. Contrary to what Ferdinand the First, King of Arragon did, who by
Love and Benevolence, engaged the hearts of all in that Kingdom, as also in
Castile during his Reign there. We have seen many Princes ruined by Fear, none
ever by Love. If therefore a Prince would be formidable, let it be to his
Enemies, but let him endeavor to be beloved by his Subjects; without which,
though he come victorious over them, he will at last fall by the hands of
these. As it befell Bardanus King of Persia Clarit^^ine paucos inter senatum
Regum, siperinde amorem inter populares, quam metum apud hosts quaesivisset.
Tac. 11. ann.
. Love and Respect may be joined, but not Love and servile Fear. He who is
feared is hated, and he who is hated is by no means secure.

Quem metuunt, oderunt.
Quem quisque odit periisse expedit.
Enn. He who is feared by many, also fears many. And what greater misfortune is
there, than to command those who obey through Fear, and govern Bodies rather
than Minds? The difference between the just Prince and the Tyrant is, That one
uses Arms to maintain his Subjects in Peace, the other to protect himself
against them. If the strength and power of a Prince hated, be small, he is much
exposed to danger from his Subjects; if great, yet much more. For the greater
their fear is, the more sollicitous are they to provide for their Security, as
apprehending his cruelty will increase with his Grandeur, as in Bardanus King
of Persia, whose Glory made him more severe and insupportable to his Subjects
I^geus gloria, atque eo f^rocior, and subjectis intolerantior, Tac. 11. ann.
. If not for fear of danger, at least in gratitude, a Prince should avoid being
terrible to those by whom he reigns. Whence that was a very unworthy saying of
Caligula, Let them hate me, so they fear me; as if the security of Empire
consisted in Fear: Whereas no power can be lasting where fear bears the sway.
And though Seneca said, He knows not how to govern, who is too fearful of
Hatred; Fear defends Kingdoms: It Is a Tyrannick Maxim, or is to be understood
of that vain Fear which sometimes Princes are in of offending others, even when
their Commands are just, which doubtless is dangerous, and not a little
derogatory from their Authority. He can never reign, who wants Constancy and
Courage to despise the Hatred of ill men, to preserve the good. Nor is
Caligula's Sentence justified by that of the Emperor Tiberius; Let them hate
me, so they approve me. For no action of a person hated is ever approved.
Hatred blames all, and puts the worst Construction on every thing. When once a
Prince is hated, his good actions as well as bad are interpreted against him.
It seems necessary for a Tyrant to keep his Subjects in awe, in as much as his
Empire being violent, must be supported by violent means, there wanting those
two Obligations of Nature and voluntary Subjection, which, as Alphonso the Wise
says, are the greatest Debts a man can owe his Lord. And the Tyrant sensible,
that without these bands it is impossible there should be real Love between him
and his Subjects, endeavors by force to make Fear effect what ought to proceed
from natural Affection; and as his disturbed Conscience fears Cruelty against
it self, it exercises it upon others Wisd. 17. 11.
. But the lamentable examples of all Tyrants abundantly show how short-lived
this method is. For though we see the Empires of the Turks, Muscovites and
Tartars have been continued for many Ages by Fear alone, yet these barbarous
Nations ought not to be made a Precedent: Their Manners are so savage, that
they seem to have more of the Brute than the Man, being commonly led more by
Punishment than reason, and consequently by that only can be kept in
subjection, as Brutes are not tamed but by Force and Fear. Yet generous Spirits
suffer not themselves to be compelled or cheated into Obedience, but are
induced thereto by sincerity and reason. For, says King Alphonso, our people
being loyal and courageous, their Loyalty ought to be maintained by truth, and
their Courage by right and justice.

There is usually 'twixt the Prince and his Subjects such a kind of inclination
and natural Sympathy, as renders him amiable without any more care; for a
Prince who deserved Hatred is sometimes loved, and on the contrary one hated
who merited Love. And though eminent Virtues and Accomplishments of Mind and
Body are wont of themselves to challenge Love, yet they have not always this
effect, unless accompained with an agreeable kind of Humor, a sweet, obliging
Air, which through the Eyes, as Windows of the Mind, shows the inward Goodness,
and engages men's Affections. Besides that, accidents which could not be
prevented, or some sinister apprehension may so break this Love and good Will
between the Prince and Subject, that it can never after be reunited; yet much
may be done in that case by skill and address, in knowing how to govern to the
satisfaction of the Nobles and Commons, avoiding giving them any occasion of
displeasure, and behaving himself in all particulars, so as to create a good
opinion of his Government. But since the means whereby the Affections of
Subjects may be procured, are every where scattered through this Book, I shall
only say here in general, that nothing contributes more to the obtaining it,
than Religion, Justice and Liberality.

But because without some Species of Fear, Love would be soon turned to
Contempt, and the edge of Regal Authority blunted Timore Princeps ^ciem
authoritatis suae non patitur hebescere. Cic. 1. Ca^.
, it is highly requisite, that Subjects entertain such an awe as arises from
Respect and Veneration, not tha^ which is the result of danger from Injustice
and Tyranny. So necessary it is for a Prince to make himself feared by not
suffering Indignities, maintaining Justice, and abhorring Vice, that without
such an awe in Subjects, 'twould be impossible to be long secure: For all
naturally desire Liberty, and the inferior part of man rebels against Reason,
and is incorrigible but by Fear. The Prince must therefore tame his Subjects as
the Horse-courser breaks his Colt, (the figure of the present Emblem) who with
the same hand strokes and curries him and threatens him with the Whip. Both the
Rod and the Manna were kept in the Ark of the Tabernacle, to intimate, as I
imagine, that Rigor and Clemency should be joined in the Prince's person. God's
Rod and Staff comforted David; for if that wounded, this supported him Ps. 22.
4. Exodus 19.
. When God gave the Law of the Decalogue to the Israelites on Mount Sinai, he
at once terrified them with Thunder and Lightning, and pleasing, allured them
with Heavenly Music; both the one and the other is necessary to preserve a
Love and Veneration in Subjects. Let this therefore be the Prince's Study, to
make himself at once loved and feared: loved, as the Protector of his People;
feared, as the Soul of the Law, upon which all their Lives and Estates depend:
loved for his Rewards, feared for his Punishments: loved for his Goodness,
feared for his Authority: loved as a Promoter of Peace, feared as Arbiter of
War. So that the good in loving him may find cause to fear: the Bad in fearing
him may find something to love in him. This Fear is as necessary to the
preservation of the Scepter, as that which proceeds from the Pride, Injustice,
and Tyranny of the Prince, is prejudicial and dangerous to it, in leading to
Despair Ita agere in subjectis, ut magi^ vereantur severitatem, quam ut
saevitiam ejus detestentur. Colum.
. The one procures his Liberty with the Prince's Ruin; God breaking the Staff
of the wicked, and the Scepter of such as rule with too much severity Isa. 14.
5, 6.
. Whereas the other by conforming himself to Reason, studies to avoid his Anger
and Punishment. This Fear is of the same brood with Love. For there can be no
Love without fear of losing the Object loved, and care to continue in its
favor. But since it is not so much in the Prince's power to beget Love as Fear,
it is better for him to ground his security on this than that alone, which as
the product of the Will is various and inconstant; nor is any artificial
Flattery, any forced Complaisance sufficient to gain the Hearts of all. That
Prince I take for a great Governor, who alive is feared, and dead, loved by
his Subjects; as Ferdinand the Catholic was, for if he be not loved, 'twill
suffice that he is esteemed and feared.

EMBLEM XXXIX.
THere is an ancient Medal to be seen, upon the Reverse of which is engraven a
flash of Lightning upon an Altar, to signify, that a Prince's severity ought
to yield to Prayers: an Emblem offensive to the Eyes, the Lightning of
Punishment being represented so lively and so near to Pardon, that fear may be
apt to dash all hope in the goodness of the Altar. And though it be fit
sometimes, that the looks of the Prince before whom the criminal bends, should
at once represent the Terror of Justice, and Mildness of Mercy; yet this is not
always proper, for that were contrary to the advice of the H. Spirit, who would
have Life and Clemency shine in a King's Countenance Prove. 16. 15.
. In this Emblem therefore, instead of the Lightning I have placed upon the
Altar the Golden Fleece, introduced by Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy, not to
signify, as many imagine, the fabulous Fleece of Colchos, but that of Gideon,
which for a token of Victory was moistened with the Dew of Heaven, when all the
Country about it was dry Jud. 6. 37.
. A Symbol whereby Meekness and Humility is expressed, as the same is signified
by that immaculate Lamb the Son of God, offered for the World's Salvation. The
Prince is a Victim devoted to Fatigues and Dangers for the common good of his
Subjects. A precious Fleece, rich in Dew and other Blessings of Heaven. Here
they ought at all times to find wherewithal to quench their Thirst, to redress
their Grievances; let him be always affable, always sincere and benign toward
them, which will be more effectual than severity. Upon the sight of Alexander's
pleasing Looks, the Conspirators immediately threw down their Arms. The
serenity of Augustus tied the hands of the Gaul, who went to throw him down a
Precipice in the Alps. The modest and sweet Temper of King Ordonno the first
strangely won the Hearts of his Subjects. Sancho the Third was called the
Desired, not so much for the shortness of his Life, as for his Affability. And
the Arragonians received Ferdinand the Infant, King Martin's Nephew to the
Crown, upon a liking they took to his obliging Demeanor. Modesty and good
Humor all must love. Obedience is sufficiently heavy and odious of it self;
let not the Prince add Rigor to it; for that is a File, wherewith natural
Liberty generally cuts the chains of Slavery. If Princes in Adversity think
Complaisance and Humanity to be used for a remedy, why should it not as well in
Prosperity for a Preservative? The benign Aspect of the Prince gains a pleasing
Empire over men's minds; it is a dissimulation of Sovereignty.

By Complacency, I do not here mean that which is so vulgar, that it begets
Contempt, but which has so agreeable a mixture of Gravity and Authority, as
leaves room for Love, but a Love attended with respect: for where this is
wanting, that is apt to turn too familiar and aspire to an Equality. And if the
august part of Majesty be not maintained, there will be no difference between
the Prince and Subject Comitas facile faustum omne atterit, and in familiari
consuetudine agree custodias illud opinionis augustum. Herod. lib. 1.
. Some ornament of the Person (as has been before hinted) and a well tempered
Gravity is requisite to support the Royal Dignity; for I can by no means
approve of a Prince's making himself so familiar with every one, that it may be
said of him as it was of Agricola, who was so plain in his dress, so
condescending and familiar, that many sought his Fame in his person, but few
found it Cultu modi^us, se^mone facilis; adeo ut plerique, quibus magnos viros
per ambitionem astimare mos est, viso aspectoque Agricola, quaererent famam,
pauci interpretarentur. Tac. in vit. Agr.
. For what is common, no one admires, and respect is the genuine effect of
admiration. Some grave severity must appear in the Prince's face, and something
extraordinary in his Carriage and Royal Port to show supreme power; but this
severity should be so qualified by Sweetness, that jointly they may beget Love
and Reverence in the Subject, not Fear Et videri velle non asperum, sed cum
gravitate honestum, and talem, ut eum non timeant obvii, sed magis revereantur.
Arist. Pol. lib. 5. c. 11.
. The Sword has been often drawn in France against the Regal Majesty, for being
too familiar. Affability must not diminish Authority, nor Severity Love; a
thing Tacitus admired in Agricola, Nec illi quod rarissimum est, aut facilitas
authoritatem* aut severitas amorem diminuit. Tac. in vit. Agr.
and commended in the Emperor Titus, who appeared affable to his Soldiers
without derogating from his Authority as General Atque ipse, ut super fortunam
crederetur, decorum se, promptumque armis ostentabat, comitate and alloquiis
officia provocans, ac plerumque i^ opere, in agmine, in gregario militi mixtus,
incorrupto ducis honor. Tac. 5. hist.
. Let the Prince compose his Looks, that they may at once assert Authority and
invite Love; let him appear grave, not austere; animate, not drive into
Despair: looking always with a graceful, agreeable Smile, using words
complaisant, and gravely courteous. Some think themselves no Princes, except
they show something irregular in their Expressions, Looks and Port, contrary to
the common way of other men: so ignorant Statuaries think the art and
perfection of a Coloss, consists in having bloated Cheeks, blubber Lips,
lowering Brows and squint Eyes.

True Greatness does not consist in mighty State, Claud.

In lofty Mein and Words, or haughty Gate.
King A^asuerus was of so terrible an Aspect, that Queen Hester coming into his
presence fell into a Swoon H^sther 15. 11.
, and had not recovered, but that the King, his Spirit being changed by a
divine Impression Ibid.
, held out the Scepter Ibid.
, to show her it was but a piece of gilded Wood, and himself a Man, not a
Vision as she imagined Ibid.
. If Majesty too severe and disorderly could produce this Effect in a Queen,
what will it in a private person oppressed with Poverty and Affliction? The
Holy Scriptures call a Prince Physician Isai. 3. 7.
, and Father Eccl. 4. 10.
, and neither this cures nor that governs with Inhumanity.

But if upon occasion, the Prince frowns upon a Subject, let his Reprimands
begin with an Encomium on his Virtues, afterward laying before him the
Deformity of his Crime, and thus strike him with a generous Fear, in as much as
the shadow of Vice is most conspicuous when opposed to the light of Virtue;
care also should be taken, that the reproof be not so harsh and public, that
the Subject losing his Reputation, shall withal, lose all hopes of retrieving
it, and so obstinately persist in his fault. Let Anger therefore and Mildness,
Punishment and Rewards be so intermixed, as in the Golden Fleece, the Steels
and Flints are knit together, and between them Flames of Fire, to signify that
the Prince's Heart should resemble the Fire-stone or Flint, which keeps the
sparks of its Anger shut up, least they should hurt any one rashly; yet in such
a manner, that if it happen to be struck by Injury or Contempt, it immediately
breaks out into fire of Revenge and Justice, yet those not so quick in
execution, but it has the Dew of the Fleece at hand to extinguish, at least to
moderate them. God said to Ezekiel, as Adamant and Flint have I made thy
forehead Ezekiel. 3. 9.
, signifying by that the constancy of Justice, and by this the fire of Piety.
But if the Prince cannot break his rough and savage Nature, let him at least
keep an obliging Family to supply his place, giving a courteous reception to
all Business and Petitions. A Prince is often beloved or hated upon account of
his Servants; they very much cloak their Master's roughness, if they have the
skill to moderate it, or to excuse it by their Affability and Discretion.

Some Nations hide the Royal Majesty behind Veils and Curtains when he gives
Audience, without exposing him to the people. A Custom inhumane to the Prince,
severe and cruel to the Subjects, who usually find comfort in their Prince's
presence, if not in his hands. This Retreat may make the Prince more feared,
but never more beloved. It Is through the Eyes and Ears that Love strikes the
Heart. What we neither see nor hear, we cannot love. A Prince who refuses the
sight and speech of his Subjects, refuses to hear their Necessities and to
remedy them; the Tongue is an easy instrument, that ought to reconcile the
Minds of all: let not the Prince make it harsh and dis-agreeable. King John the
First, because he was short, and had an impediment in his Speech, lost the
Portuguese in his Pretension to that Crown, upon the death of King Peter.

It Is not sufficient for the Prince to dispatch business by Memorials and
Petitions, for by them the Sentiments are not so well expressed. They not being
attended with Sighs and other moving Actions, they are but dry Tears, and have
not that force upon the Prince.

The doors of Temples are always open, so also should be those of Palaces; for
Princes are God's Vicegerents, and the Altars (as we have said) which the
people fly to in their Afflictions and Calamities. 'Twould be a scandalous
thing for a Soldier to find it more easy to charge through a Squadron of
Pikes, than to come to the presence through the midst of Swiss and Dutch
Guards, who, like armed Hedg-hogs, are neither gained by Prayers nor Civility.
Let people come to me, says the Emperor Rodolphus, for I am not Emperor to be
shut up in a box. This retirement makes the mind savage Etiam fera animalia si
clausa teneas, virtutis obliviscuntur. Tac. 4. Hist.
. Attention to Government, and Communication soften the temper and render it
easy. Princes, like Hawks, are tamed by the assiduity of Affairs, and by
familiarity with Men. The Kingdom of Leon rebelled against King Ramirez the
Third, for his difficulty of Access. King Ferdinand the Holy was denied to
none, and every one had admittance even to his most private Apartment: The
Kings Alphonso the Twelfth, and Henry the Third, gave public Audience three
times a Week, as did also their Catholic Majesty's, Ferdinand and Isabella
Mar. hist. Hisp.
. Nature has put doors to the Eyes and Tongue, but has left the Ears open, that
they may be ready to hear at all times. Let not a Prince then stop 'em, but
hearken favorably to those that would speak to him. Let him comfort either by
Reward or Hope, for that is one kind of satisfaction which supports Merit. Let
him not always use set Forms and general Answers; for those which are given to
all satisfy none, nor is it a small trouble to the Petitioner to receive an
answer that he knew before: Let him not always hear, let him ask sometimes
Eccl. 23. 12.
, for he who does not enquire, will never be well informed. Let him thoroughly
know the state of affairs, and let his Audiences be instructive, not merely
ceremonial; as were those of Ferdinand the Holy, Alphonso King (...) Arragon,
King Ferdinand the Catholic, and the Empe^^^ Charles the Fifth, by which they
were beloved and re^^ected by their Subjects, and esteemed by Strangers. As ^^e
Audience should be easy, so it ought also to be speedy; ^^r the delay of a
benefit diminishes the Obligation. Though there are some affairs of that Nature,
that it is better to let time undeceive them, than either the Prince or his
Mini^^^rs. For all had rather be entertained with Hope, than be dispatched with
Despair, which in prudent Courts is ^ound, not given.

I don't approve of the Prince's exposing himself in the Streets and public
Places, for the People; it is true, admire him the first time, observe him the
second, and slight him the third Continuus aspectus minus verendos magnos
homines ipsa societate f^it. Live.
. That which is not seen is respected most Arcebantur conspectu, quo
venerationis plus inesset. Tac. 4. hist.
, and the Eyes often despise what the opinion esteemed. It Is not convenient the
people should know whether the chain of their Slavery be of Iron or of Gold,
passing judgment upon the parts and qualifications of the Prince. We respect
that most which is farthest distant Cui major e l^nginquo reverenti^. Tac. ^.
ann.
. Some Nations take the Prince's Affability and Complaisance for a Vice. Others
dislike his reservedness, and would have him mild and courteous, as the
Portuguese and the French. The Extremes in one and the other are always
dangerous, and he will be best able to moderate them, who in his Actions and
Government, remembers that he is both Prince and Man.

EMBLEM XL.
THE Scriptures call Princes Mountains, and the rest of Mankind, Hills and
Valleys Ye Mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God, (...) says the
Lord God to the Mountains, and to the Hills, to the Rivers, and to the Valleys,
Ezekiel. 6. 3.
. This comp^rison comprehends the great Affinity between them; for Mountains
are Princes of the Earth, as being near^^ Heaven, and superior to the other
works of Nature, as also for their Liberality, by which from their own generou^
Bowels, they supply with continual Streams the droughty Plains and Valleys
beneath, clothing them with Flowers and Verdure, this being the true property
of Princes. By this virtue more than any is a Prince allied to God, who (...)
ever giving to all plentifully ^ames 1. 5.
; it is this renders obedience more prompt, for a Present from him who could
command, forces Obligation. Subjection is agreeable when it is beneficial. King
Charles of Navarre, called the Noble, gained the Love of all by his Liberality.
King Henry the Second did thereby wipe out the Murder of his Brother King
Peter, and established his Right to the Crown. What cannot a liberal Prince do?
What cannot a golden Scepter oblige to? Even Tyranny Prove. 19. 6.
is connived at and born with, when the Prince knows how to give, especially
when it gains the Applause of the people, by supplying the public Necessities,
and rewarding persons of Merit. This virtue, in my opinion, maintained Tiberius
in the Empire, for this he always practiced Quam virtutem diu retinuit, cum
caeteras (...). Tac. 1. ann.
. But there is nothing more pernicious to a Prince, than Liberality and
Goodness (for they usually go together) if not used with Moderation.
Liberality, says King Alphonso the Wise, becomes all men of power, but
principally a King, when he uses it to purpose, and as he should. Garcias
Sancho, King of Navarr, lost his Subjects affections, by the same Liberality
with which he hoped to have gained them; for to maintain it, he oppressed them
with Taxes and Impositions. Prodigality is little distant from Rapine or
Tyranny; for when the Treasury is drained by Ambition, it must of necessity be
recruited by ill and indirect means Ac velut perfringere aerarium: (...) si
(...) exhauserimus, per scelera supplendum ^rit. Tac. 2. ann.
. He who gives more than he is able, says Alphonso the Wise, is not liberal but
prodigal; and when his own stock fails, he will be obliged to make use of
others; so that if on one side he ^^kes Friends by what he gives, he on
the other side makes E^^mies by what he takes away. Diego d' Arias, Treasurer to
King Henry the Fourth, least he should fall into this incon^enience,
represented to him the Extravagance of his Liberality, and that 'twas
convenient, that his Retinue should be reduced to a lesser number, and that the
Salaries allowed to such as did not actually serve, or were any ways
incapacitated, might be taken off: to whom the King made this Answer, I too,
were I Arias, should more respect my Money th^n my Liberality; you say well as
to your self, but as for me, I Will act as becomes a King, without fear of
poverty, or exposing my self to the necessity of raising new Taxes. It Is the
duty of a King to give, and to measure his Authority by the public Good, not
his own particular, which is the true fruit of Riches. To some we give because
they are good, to others, that they may (...) be bad. Words truly worthy a
King, if he had been guided by these considerations, but his gifts were always
excessive and without order, without the least regard to the Merit of the
Party, as his Brother-in-law King Ferdinand observed in one of his Laws,
saying, That he gave Rewards for Show not for Merit. Whence we may observe the
circumspection a Prince ought to observe in his Liberality, for fear of giving
occasion to his Subjects to acknowledge his Authority* only to receive from
him, not to obey him. An extravagant Subject ruins only himself. But a Prince,
himself and State too. The Treasury would be soon at an ebb, if the Prince
should be extravagantly liberal, without considering, that they are the
Magazines for public Necessities. The Mountains don't squander away the Snow
which the Vapors of the Fields and Valleys heap upon its top, but on the
contrary, preserve it against Summer, and then in gentle Streams returns it
upon the same grounds it was attracted from. They don't descend all at once,
for so they would not answer their design, and would be slighted as useless,
for Liberality is the greatest Enemy to Liberality; nor do they immediately mix
with the Rivers leaving the Plains and Valleys dry, as Princes usually do, who
give to the Rich what ought to be distributed among the Poor, and drain the
thirsty sands to supply the brimfull Lakes, which have no need of it. It Is a
great fault to gain the favor of the Rich at the expense of the poor; and by
vain extravagance to oppress the body of the State, whose ruin is always
promoted by the pride and vanity of a few. The people cannot brook to see that
power vainly squandered away, which ought to be employed to the preservation of
them, and the Prince's dignity. The rewards of a Prodigal are not esteemed,
because they are common, and proceed from the vice of Extravagance, not the
virtue of Liberality, and by giving all to a few he offends many; that which is
given to some particular ones, being wanted in general by all. He who gives
without care or choice, enriches indeed, but rewards not: to give to those who
deserve, it is necessary to be sparing to others. So that a Prince ought to use
great Prudence and Judgment in the Distribution of Rewards Psalm. 98. 4.
. For when they are well distributed, though they fall on but few, they affect
many. The Scriptures command all Offerings to be made with Salt, which is the
same as Prudence Levit. 2. 14. Eccl. 35. 11.
, equally distant from Prodigality and Avarice. But because a Prince ought to
be generous to all, let him imitate Aurora, which, as it passes, always leaves
something, though but Dew and Flowers. Nay often satisfies only with its Beauty
and Pleasantness. Let him give to all, but with such Moderation, that without
putting it out of his power to give more, he may content them. Some by
Presents, some by Words, and some by Affability Eccl. 35. 11.
; for oftentimes the Eyes give more than the Hands. Liberality is the only
Virtue, which should be sometimes in the opinion of others, more than in the
person of the Prince; Experience teaching us, that it is sufficient that he
express some Demonstrations, with such Address, that he may be generally
esteemed liberal; so that he must avoid Refusals, for it is a great trouble to
receive them from a Prince. What he cannot give to day, he may give to morrow;
and if he cannot, it is better to let time discover it than to tell it himself.
He who refuses, either does not distinguish Merit, or shows his want of Power
or Will, and neither of these Declarations become a Prince, whose Power and
Grandeur the Petitioner acknowledges.

Let a Prince be generous in the Reward of Virtue, but let it be with Offices
and Employments, and other Revenues already allotted to Liberality, not with
the Crown-Rents, and Treasury reserved for greater uses. King Ferdinand the
Catholic was very liberal, but not to the Prejudice of the Crown. He was (at
his first coming to the Crown) slow in the Distribution of Offices, the better
to gain men's minds, and to reward those who had followed his Party. He knew
with great Prudence to mingle Liberality with Frugality. Of which he has not
only left us an Example but also a Law, in these words: Kings ought not to be
so generous and bountiful, as that it may be termed Extravagance; for this
virtue of Liberality ought to be used with order and measure, without Detriment
to the Crown and Royal Dignity L. 3. tit. 10. lib. 5. Recop.
. To lay up the better to employ, is not Avarice, but premeditated Liberality.
To give inconsiderately, is either Vanity or Folly. By this Parsimony King
Alphonso the Wise raised the Monarchy, and lost the Crown by his profuse
Extravagance; one of the principal Complaints the Kingdom made against him,
was, That he had given the Empress Marth^ thirty thousand Marks of Silver, to
redeem her Husband Baldwin, whom the Sultan of Egypt retained Prisoner; in
which he was more vain than prudent. King Henry the Second found the damage of
having weakened the power of his Crown by his too great Bounty, and therefore
revoked it by his last Will. Time and Opportunity ought to guide Princes in
their Liberality; sometimes it ought to be moderated, when the Expenses of War,
and the public Necessities are great, and to be applied to avert Dangers, and
to facilitate Designs; in which he saves most, who spends most: for he who
gives by little and little, spends his Money, without attaining his end. War is
avoided, and Victory and Peace purchased by Liberality Prove. 22. 9.
.

The Prodigality of a Prince may be corrected by committing the management of
his Treasures to thrifty frugal Ministers, as may his Avarice by generous ones.
It Is necessary sometimes to let a Prince see the sum of his Liberality; for
Grants are made sometimes without consideration; and if the Prince kept an
account of his Expenses he would doubtless moderate them; and it is not always
Liberality to grant Gratuities, for Avarice is often vanquished by Importunity,
or sometimes weary with contending, grants them through Despair.

It Is natural to all Princes to give to those who have most; I know not whether
through Fear or Esteem of Power. This that great Courtier Joseph well
understood, when calling his Father and Brothers into Egypt, and offering them
in Pharaoh's name all the Good of that Kingdom Genesis 45. 18.
, he bid them bring with them all the Riches and Goods that they had Ibid. ver.
20.
; knowing, that if they came rich, the King would be more liberal to them; so
that he who expects Bounty from a Prince, must not represent to him his Poverty
and Misery. There are no more ready means to have, than to have Luke 19. 26.
.

EMBLEM XLI.
THE Motto of this Emblem has been famous to all Antiquity. Some attribute it
to Bias, to Pythagoras, Thales and Homer; but I think it is more reasonably
ascribed to the Delphick Oracles, for it seems rather a Divine than Humane
Sentence, fit to be engraven on all the Crowns, Sceptres, and Rings of Princes.
To this is reduced the whole Science of Government, which consists in avoiding
Extremes, and loves the middle, where Virtue keeps its Sphere. 'Twas asked
Socrates, Which was the properest Virtue for a young Man, and he answered,
Nothing to Excess, by which he comprehended all. To this Motto the body of the
present Emblem seems well suited; Corn laid by the violence of unseasonable
Rain, when gentle Dews were sufficient Magni animi est magna contemnere,
prudentis est mediocria malle, quam nimia; ista enim utilia sunt: illa quod
superfluunt nocent. Sic s^^ getem nimia sternit ubertas, sic Rami onere
franguntur, sic ad maturita^em non pervenit nimi^ foecunditas, Sen. Epist. 39.
. Honors by being too great suit ill with Subjects, and rather disgrace than
adorn them. There are some favors so out of season, that they pass for
Injuries; What avails it for the Prince to do a benefit, if by his austere
Looks and rugged Words, he seems, as 'twere, to throw it at one, or does it so
unseasonably, that it does no kindness. The Benefit and Favor is lost, and the
hand abhorred that gave it. Which made King Alphonso the Wise say, That Rewards
should be given so ^ propos, that they may be beneficial to the Receiver L. 1.
tit. 21. p. 2.
.

As there are errors in Excess of Rewards and Favors, so there is also in
Punishments. Such an exact Rigor better becomes a Minister of Justice than a
Prince; he is not at his Liberty, but the Prince has the Keys of the Law in his
own hand. It Is not Justice which is too severe, nor Mercy which is not
moderate, and so of other Virtues.

The same Moderation a Prince out to observe in the arts of Peace and War, so
guiding the Chariot of the Government, as they did in the Games of old, that
the Wheels may not touch the Goals, for so they would be broken; the art of the
ancient Racers consisted, in measuring the distance so exactly, as to pass as
near as possible, without touching either end.

What a Prince ought to take most care of, is the Moderation of his Passions,
governing them with such Prudence, that he may neither desire, hope, love or
fear with too much Ardour and Violence, raised by the Will not by Reason. The
desires of private persons may be easily accomplished, but those of Princes
not, for those are proportioned to their conditions, and these are usually
greater than the force of their Grandeur, tending always to Extremes. Almost
all Princes either ruin themselves, or run into great inconveniences, through
Excess of Ambition, man's desire being unlimited, and the possibility of things
very narrow, it rarely happens that the first are measured by the latter, or
that there is any Justice between them. Hence Princes seek pretenses to rob
their Neighbors, nay their greatest Friends, aspiring ever at the enlargement
of their State, without measuring their bodies with their Strength, and their
Government with Humane Capacity, which cannot maintain all that may be
acquired. The Grandeur of Empires lies upon their own Shoulders, and are always
ready to fall; oppressed with their own weight. Let Princes therefore endeavor
to maintain their States, which either Succession or Election has given them;
and if any just occasion shall offer of enlarging them, let them make use of it
a God's name, but with such caution, as the Event shall show to Prudence.

Ambition is not less dangerous in the Excess of its Fears than of its Desires,
especially in that which is acquired by Violence. Fear suggests no means which
are not immediately made use of for its preservation. There is none of the line
of the party wronged, or any one who has the least pretension to the State,
though never so remote, but is feared. Tyranny usually proposes nothing less
than a general ruin. Thus Mucianus practiced, killing the Son of Vitellius
Mansuram discordiam ^btendens, ^i semina belli restrinxisset. Tac. ^. ann.
. The same also is taugh^ in the School of Machiavell, whose Scholars
forgetting the Example of David, who sought out Readiness Relations, that they
might partake of his Mercy 2 Samuel 9. 3.
, follow that of some Tyrants, as if all were not ruined by these pernicious
practices; and if any one has been preserved (as we shall observe) 'twas by
changing them for the better. Most Kingdoms are augmented by Usurpation, and
afterward maintained by Justice, and legitimated by time. Extreme violence is
extreme danger. Cyrus invaded Lydia, and dispossessed King Croesus. But had he
had any of our Politicians, they would have advised him, for his greater
Security, to have taken him off. Yet Cyrus restored him one City, by which he
might support his Royal Dignity; and it is certain, he had provoked the Hatred
and Arms of all Greece, if he had showed himself cruel Hec clementia non minus
utilis victori quam victo fuit. Tac. 2. hist.
. Tyranny is equally hateful to God and Man; nor are there wanting in such
cases, some mild means, by which the mind may be diverted, from shedding Blood,
from breaking the Line of Succession, from diminishing, or transferring the
greatness of States, and taking off those who may aspire to the Crown; which
had they been observed in Portugal, that people had never revolted.

When the danger is so evident, that it obliges to Defense and natural
Preservation, the Prince ought to strike at the Root, that it may not sprout
again, keeping a watchful Eye upon it, least it should happen, as it did to
the Philistin Princes, who having cut off Sampson's hair, wherein lay all his
Strength, began to ridicule him, not considering that it might grow again, as
it afterward did Judge* 16. 21.
, when he pulled the Temple upon their Heads Ibid.
, killing more Enemies dying than he had done living Ibid.
.

Inordinate Ambition moreover persuades the Oppression of the liberty of the
people, the humbling of the Nobility, the weakening of the potent and rich, and
the reduction of all to the Royal Prerogative, thinking that the more absolute,
the more firm it is; and that the lower the people are reduced, the higher its
Glory rises; an error by which Flattery gains the Hearts of Princes, and leads
them into great dangers. It Is Modesty that preserves Empires, so correcting the
Prince's Ambition, that it may maintain it within the bounds of Reason, the
power of his Dignity, the honor of the Nobility, and the liberty of the
people, for no Monarchy is lasting which is not mixed, that is composed of
Aristocracy and Democracy Quae ex pluribus constat resp melior est Arist. 2
Pol. c. ^.
. Absolute Power is Tyranny. Whoever promotes that promotes his own ruin. A
Prince ought not to govern as the Lord, but as the Father, the Protector and
Governor of his States Huc enim sunt omnia reducenda, ut iis qui sub imperio
sunt, non Tyrannum, sed patrem-familias, aut regem agere videatur, etc. Arist.
Pol. 5. c. 11.
.

These disorders of Ambition proceed from a long use and abuse of Dominion,
which covets all for it self; in which it is necessary Princes should conquer
themselves, and submit to reason, however difficult the attempt appear; for
many can conquer others, few themselves. This Victory is of Force, that of
Reason. It Is not Valor to conquer in Battle, but to subdue the Passions.
Obedience and Necessity make Subjects humble and modest; Superiority and Power
render Princes proud; Pride has destroyed more Kingdoms than the Sword; more
Princes have ruined themselves than have been undone by others. The remedy
consists in the Prince's knowledge of himself, by retiring within himself, and
considering, that though the Scepter distinguishes him from his Subjects, they
much exceed him in endowments of Mind, more noble than his Grandeur. That if
Reason might take place, the most accomplished man would be King. That the hand
with which he governs the World, is of ^lay, and Subject to the Leprosy, and
all other human Miseries, as God gave Moses to understand Exodus 4. 6.
, that knowing his own Miseries, he might pity those of others Hebr. 5. 2.
. That a Crown is a very unsafe Possession, for between the utmost height, and
the lowest fall, there is no Interposition Quod regnum est, cui parata non sit
ruina, and proculcatio, and dominus, and car^fex? Nec ista intervallis divisa,
^ed hor^e momentum interest inter soli^m, and aliena genua. Senec.
. That he depends upon the Will of others, since if they would not obey, he
would be but like other men. The greater the Prince shall be, the more he ought
to esteem this Modesty, since God himself does not disdain it Modestia fama,
quae neque summis mortalium spernenda est, and a diis aestimatur. Tac. 15. ann.
. Modesty which hides Greatness under it, is like rich Enamel upon Gold, which
gives it the greater Value and Esteem. Tiberius had no Artifice more cunning,
than to appear modest to gain Esteem. He severely reprehended those who called
his Occupations Divine, and him Lord Acer^eque increpuit eos qui divina^
occupationes, ipsumque Dominum dixerunt. Tac. 2. ann.
. When he went into the Courts of Justice, he would not suffer the President to
quit his seat, but sat down upon one corner of the Bench Assid^bat in corn^
Tribunalis. Tac. 1. ann.
. He who is gotten to the highest step among men, cannot rise but by stooping.
Let all Princes learn Modesty of the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, who was so
familiar and affable to all, that he made himself loved rather than reverenced.
In him Goodness and Modesty were conspicuous, and Majesty found but by
Attention: He was not the Imperial Eagle with a sharp Beak, and bare Talons,
threatening all, but the tender Pelican, continually digging his own Intrails to
feed his people as his own young. It cost him no pains to humble his Grandeur,
and make himself equal to others. He was not the Master but Father of the
World, and the excess of Modesty often causes Contempt, to the ruin of Princes,
to him it created more Respect, and obliged all Nations to his Service and
Defense. See the force of true Goodness, and of a great Soul, which triumphs
over it self, and is superior to Fortune! He has left us in the present
Emperor his Son, the lively Portraicture of all these qualities, with which he
steals the Hearts both of Friends and Enemies. There is no virtue more
agreeable to a Prince than Modesty, all others would be foolish in him, if that
did not adjust his Looks and Actions, not permitting them to exceed themselves.

In Government it is very convenient not to touch upon Extremes, for too great
Condescension is not less prejudicial than a haughty Grandeur. Monastic
Communities may perhaps suffer the Rigor of Obedience, but not popular ones.
Such rigid Discipline may keep a few in awe, but not many. Civil Happiness
consists in virtue, which consists in the middle, as does civil L^fe and the
Government of States, for the nature of Empire is such, that the people may
take it away, without being ruined by too much License, or rendered obstinate
by too much Rigor. In Government we ought not to consider what should be, but
what may be Non ^nim solum respublica, quae optima sit, considerari debet, sed
etiam quae constitui possit, praeterea quae facilior and cunctis civitatibus
communior habeatur. Arist. lib. 4 Pol. 6. c. 2.
. Even God adapts himself to human Frailty.

Between these Extremes also the body of the Commonwealth should be
constituted, care being taken that there may not be too great difference in the
conditions of the Citizens; for excess or inequality of Riches or Nobility, if
it be much, creates in some Pride, and in others Envy, and from thence proceed
Enmity and Seditions Praeterea seditiones (...) modo propter fortunarum, sed
etiam propter honorum inaequalitatem existunt. Arist. lib. 2. c. 5.
. For there can be no Friendship or civil Agreement among them who are so
unequal in their Conditions and Fortunes, for all hate equality, and covet
more, either to govern as Lords, or obey as Slaves Sed jam haec consuetudo in
civitatibus invaluit, ut homines, aequalitatem odio hab^ant, and malint, aut
imperio potiri, aut si victi fuerint, imperio subesse. Arist. lib. 4. Pol. c.
11.
. Some too haughty contemn the Laws, and despise Obedience; Others too servile,
know not how to bear it, and have neither Fear of Infamy nor Punishment, hence
there would become a Community of Lords and Slaves, but without respect between
themselves, since neither would know how to measure themselves by their own
condition. Those of the lowest quality pretend to be as those of higher. Those
who are equal or superior in one thing, think they are in all. Those who have
the advantage in all, cannot contain themselves, and despising every one would
proudly lord it over them, without Obedience to him who commands, or adapting
themselves to the Constitutions and Customs of the State, whence proceeds its
ruin and conversion into other Forms Nam qui virtute praestant, iniquo animo
sibi indigniores aequari paterentur: quamobrem sape conspira^e, and seditio^es
commovere notantur. Arist. Pol. 2. c. 5.
, for all sigh and are uneasy under it. And though it be impossible entirely
to remedy this contention in States, because of the difference of condition of
the parts of which they consist, yet are they preserved if it be moderate, and
ruined if excessive. As it happens in the four Humors of the Body, though the
Blood be the most noble, and the Choler the most potent, yet do they mutually
preserve one another, while there is no great Inequality between them; so that
State will continue long, which consists of moderate parts, and not much
unequal between themselves. 'Twas the extravagant Riches of some of the
Citizens which caused the ruin of the State of Florence, and is at present the
cause of the troubles of Genoua. Because in Venice they are better divided, it
has continued so many Ages, and if there happen any danger or inconvenience in
the Government, it is through the too great poverty of some of its Magistrates.
If any Republic has been preserved for all these disorders and excess of its
parts, it is through the Prudence and Industry of the Governor, who keeps it in
its Devoir, by the fear of the Laws, and other discreet means, such as not to
wrong any one, nor violate the Privileges and Conveniences of the Poor, to
employ the great ones in the Administration, and in Offices; in fine not to
oppress, but rather to encourage the hope of those who are of an high and
enterprising Spirit. But this will continue no longer than it has prudent
Governors; and because States cannot be sufficiently provided for by these
temporal Remedies, which depend upon chance, it is necessary in their first
Institution, to provide means to correct these Excesses, before they happen.

EMBLEM XLII.
I Am indebted, for the body of this Emblem, to the Civility of the present
Pope Urban the VIIIth. his Holiness having been pleased to show me upon a
precious Stone, engraven in the time of the Romans, two Bees drawing a Plough,
which was found in his time; a Presage of the rise of his noble and ancient
Family, his Arms being joined to the triumphant Yoke of the Church. Which upon
Reflection put me in mind of a Prodigy of King Wamb^, when being anointed by
the Archbishop of Toledo, there was seen to spring from his head a Be, which
flew straight toward Heaven, prognosticating the sweetness of his Government:
from whence I infer, that the Ancients would show by this Emblem, how necessary
'twas to mingle, Profit with Pleasure, the art of making Honey, with that of
Agricultura. For a Motto to which, I thought the beginning of that Verse of
Horace would not be amiss.

Omne tu^it punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.
Hor. Who mixes gain with Sport gains er'y point.
In this consists the main art of Government; this was the first piece of
Policy in the world; this the ancient Philosophy taught us, ^eigning that
Orpheus made Beasts follow him, and that the very Stones danced to Amphion's
Harp, with which he built the Walls of the City of Thebes, to signify that the
mild instruction of those great persons were sufficient to reduce men, not less
savage than Brutes, and more insensible than Stones, to the Harmony of the
Laws, and civil Society Silvest^es homines sacer interpresque Deorum, Cadibus
and foedo victu deterruit Orpheus, Dictus ab hoc lenire Tigres, etc.
.

These Arts all States have used to instruct the people, mingling Instruction
with Sport and public Games. All Greece flocked to Mount Olympus, to be
present at the Olympian, Pythian, Nemaean and Isthmian Games; some out of
curiosity to see them, others to obtain the proposed Rewards, and upon this
occasion they exercised their Strength, sacrificed to the Gods, and treated of
the most important affairs of the Government of those Provinces. Comedies and
Tragedies were also invented to purge the Affections. The Gladiators of the
Romans, and the Bull-fights of the Spaniards, (who also are diverted with
terrible and desperate Enterprises) were to confirm the Mind that it might not
be daunted at the sight neither of Blood nor Death. Wrestling, Tilting,
Horse-races Juego de las Cannas.
, and other such Sports, are so many Schools in which Arts military are
learned, and the Mind at the same time recreated and diverted. The people must
be drawn by Flattery and Mildness, to the Conveniences and Designs of the
Prince; they are like a Horse which being gently stroak'd into Temper takes the
Bitt, and afterward submits to Burdens and the Lash. They cannot bear too much
Rigor, or too much Gentleness. Excess of Liberty is as dangerous to them as
Excess of Slavery Imperaturus es hominibus, qui nec totam servitutem pati
possunt, nec totam libertatem. Tac. 1. hist.
. Princes who have wanted this consideration have felt the rage of the incensed
Multitude. Inveterate distempers are not always to be cured by the Knife and
Fire. They require soothing Medicines, and when there is need of bitter Pills,
they should be well gilt, to deceive the Sight and Taste. It Is not necessary
that the people should know the Ingredients of the Prince's Resolutions and
Counsels, it is sufficient that they swallow them upon any Pretext.

The Dangers and Hardships of War are sweetened by the mildness of the Prince.
Thus Germanicus to keep the Ger^^^ Legions in obedience, and more ready for
Battle, used to visit the wounded Soldiers, and taking notice of their Wounds,
commend their Actions, gaining some by hope, others by good words, and so made
them eager to fight Circumire saucios, facta singulorum extollere, vulnera
intuens, alium spe, alium gloria, cunctos alloquio and (...), sibique and
praelio firmabat. Tac. 1. ann.
.

This goodness alone is not effectual, there is need also of some eminent
Virtue in the Commander, that if he be beloved for that he may be respected for
this. Many times a Prince is beloved for his extraordinary goodness, and
despised for his Insufficiency. Respect proceeds not from Love, but Admiration.
He obliges all, who having courage to make himself feared, makes himself
beloved; who knowing how to execute Justice, knows also to be merciful.
Goodness is often interpreted Softness and Ignorance, in him who has no other
Virtues to recommend him. These are of such force in a Prince, that they soften
his Se^erity and Rigor, being recompensed by them. Even great Vices are
excused, or at least connived at in him who is Master also of great Virtues.

In Negotiations it is very convenient to mingle Sweetness with Gravity, and
Jests with Truth, provided it be a propos, without Offense to good Manners, nor
the Gravity of the Subject, in which the Emperor Tiberius was well skilled
Tiberius tamen lu^ibria ser^is permiscere solitus. Tac. 6. ann.
. There Is none can endure a melancholy roughness, a look always set to
business, a grave Speech and a formal Behavior. It Is Prudence sometimes to mix
a little folly in Counsels Mis^^ stultitiam consiliis brevem.
, when it is well applied it is Wisdom Eccl. 10. 1.
. A happy thought and a word in season gains peoples Minds, and most difficult
Affairs to the end proposed, and sometimes discovers the Intention, deceives
Malice, diverts Offense, and prevents a positive Answer where it is not
convenient.

We ought also in Negotiations to mingle the advantage of those whom we would
persuade, showing them that it is their interest as well ours; for all are moved
by self-interest, few by Obligation and Glory. Sejanus, to incite Drusus to the
Murder of his Brother Nero, set before him the hopes of the Empire. The skill
of a prudent Minister consists in facilitating affairs with others interests,
disposing the Treaty so, that theirs and his own Prince's may seem to be the
same. To desire to negotiate affairs by self-interest only, is to bring water
in broken pipes; where one receives it from another, all receive Assistance and
Advantage.

EMBLEM XLIII.
ALL things as well animate as inanimate are Leaves of this great Book of the
World, the Work of Nature, wherein divine Wisdom has written all Sciences, to
teach and instruct us how to act. There is no moral Virtue, which is not found
in Animals. Practick Prudence is born in them; in us it is not acquired but by
Instruction and Experience. We may learn from them without Confusion and Shame
of our Ignorance, for he who informs them, the same is Author of all things.
But to put on their Nature, or desire to imitate them in acting like them
irrationally, hurried by the Appetite of our Affections and Passions. would be
giving an affront to Reason, the proper Gift of Man, by which he is
distinguished from other Animals, and merits the command over them. They for
want of Reason are without Justice, each aiming at nothing but its own
Preservation, without respecting Injuries done to others. Man justifies his
Actions, and measures them by Equity, doing nothing to others, which he would
not have done unto himself. Whence may be inferred how impious and inhuman is
the design of Machiavel, who forms his Prince upon another Supposition, of the
Nature of the Lion and the Fox, that what he cannot attain by reason he may by
force and fraud, in which he was instructed by Lysander General of the
Lacedaemonians, who advised a Prince, that where the Lion's skin failed, he
should put on that of the Fox, making use of his Tricks and Artifices. This
Doctrine is of long standing. Polybius reprehends it in his own and the
foregoing Ages Quo Leonis pellis attingere non potest, principi assumendam
Vulpinam. Plut.
. In this King Saul may be a Lesson to all Fuit, cui in tractandis negotiis
dolus malus placeret, quem Regi convenire sane nemo dixerit, etsi non desunt,
qui id tam crebr^ ^su hodie doli mali, necessarium eum esse dicant ad publicam
rerum administrationem. Polyb. 13. hist.
. This Maxim has increased in time, there being no Injustice nor Indecency, but
appears honorable to Policy, provided it be in order to Dominion Nihil
gloriosum nisi tutum, and omni^ retinendae dominationis honesta. Sal.
, thinking that Prince lives precariously, who is tied up to Law and Justice
Ubicunque tantam honesta dominanti licet, praecario regnatur. Sen. in Trag*
Thyest.
. Whence they regard not Breach of Treaties, Faith, or Religion it self, when
for the Preservation or Augmentation of Empire. Upon these false foundations
Duke Valentine endeavored to raise his Fortune, but before he had finished it,
it fell with that violence upon him, that the very Fragments and Ruins of it
were lost. How can that last which is founded upon Deceit and Lies? How can
that subsist which is violent? What force can there be in Contracts, if the
Prince, who should be their security, is himself the first that breaks them?
Who will put any confidence in him? How can his Empire stand, who trusts more
to his own Artifices than to divine Providence. Nor for all this, would I have
a Prince so mild, as never to use force, nor so candid and sincere, as not to
know how to dissemble, nor provide against Deceit, for so he would live exposed
to Malice, and be played upon by all. My design in this Emblem is, that he
should be endued with Valor, but not with that brutish and irrational Courage
of Beasts, but that which is attended by Justice, signified by the Lyon's Skin,
the Emblem of Valor, and therefore dedicated to Hercules. Sometimes it is
necessary for a Prince to cover his Face with a Frown, and to oppose Fraud. He
should not always appear mild. There are occasions when he must put on the
Lion's Skin, that his Subjects and Enemies may see his Claws; and that he may
be thought so severe, that Fraud may not have the boldness to attack him with
Flattery, which way it uses to tame the minds of Princes. This, it seems the
Egyptians would intimate, by putting a Lion's Skin upon their Prince's head.
There is no Respect nor Reverence, where there is no fear. The People
perceiving their Prince cannot be angry, and that nothing can alter his mild
Temper, always despise him; but this Severity need not immediately come to
Execution. It Is not necessary for a Prince to be really angry, but only to
appear so. The Lion without discomposing himself, or thinking of hurting any
other Animals, with his very Looks infuses dread into all; such is the
Majestic force of his Eyes A Lion which is the strongest among Beasts, and
turns not away for any. Prove. 30. 30.
. But because it is convenient sometimes to gild force with craft, and
indignation with mildness, to dissemble a little, and accommodate himself to
the times and persons: therefore in the present Devise, the Lion's head is not
crowned with the little tricks of the Fox, which are mean and base, and below
the Generosity and Magnanimity of a Prince, but with Serpents, the Emblem of
careful and prudent Majesty, and in the sacred Writs the Hieroglyfick of
Prudence, for their cunning in defending their heads, in stopping their Ears
against all Enchantments, and in other things only tending to their own
preservation, not the prejudice of others. For the same reason, and the like
accidents, I have made use of these words as a Motto to the present Devise,
that he may know how to reign, taken from the Motto of Lewis the Eleventh King
of France, who knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to reign. In which the
whole art of Government is briefly comprehended; but there is need of great
Prudence and Circumspection, least this Power should turn to Tyranny, and this
Policy to Fraud: These Mediums nearly bordering upon Vices. Iustus Lipsius
defining Fraud in matters of Policy, says, it is shrewd Counsel, deviating from
Virtue and the Laws, for the good of the King and Kingdom; by which avoiding
the Extremes of Machiavel, and finding also, that it is impossible for a Prince
to govern without some Fraud and cunning, he advises a little, tolerates
Mediocrity, but forbids Extremes; bounds very dangerous to a Prince. For who
can exactly describe them? there ought not to be such Rocks so near politic
Navigation. The malice of Power, and ambition of Rule, act sufficiently in
many; if Fraud be vicious, it is vicious in its least parts, and therefore
unworthy of a Prince. The worth and dignity of the Royal Purple, disdains the
least ^spot. The minutest Atom is visible, and blemishes the Rays of these
terrestrial Suns. And how can it be suffered that his actions should deviate
from Virtue and the Laws, who is the very Soul thereof? There is no Fraud
without a mixture of malice and falsehood, both opposite to Royal Magnanimity;
though Plato says, That Falsehood is superfluous in the Gods, they having no
need on it, but not in Princes who have great occasion for it, and that
therefore it may be allowed them sometimes. That which is unlawful ought not
to be allowed, nor ought we to make use of means in their own nature wicked, to
obtain just and honorable ends. Dissimulation and Cunning are then only
lawful, when they don't drive to Knavery, and prejudice the Authority and
Reputation of the Prince; in which case I don't esteem them as Vices but
Prudence, or the Daughters thereof, being both advantageous and necessary to a
Commander: which would be, if Prudence respecting its own preservation, would
make use of Fraud according to the different circumstances of time, place, and
persons, so as the Heart and Tongue, the Mind and Words may ever agree. That
Dissimulation ought to be avoided, which with fraudulent intentions belyes the
things designed. That which would make another understand that which is not,
not that which would make him not understand that which is For this end one may
sometimes use indifferent and equivocating words, not with a design to cheat,
but to secure ones self, and prevent being cheated, and for other lawful ends.
Thus we see the Master of truth himself pretended to his Disciples, who were
going to the City Emmaus, that he was going farther And he made as though he
would have gone farther. Luke 24. 28.
. The counterfeit folly of David before King Ac^is And he changed his behavior
before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scr^bbled on the doors
of the gate, and let his Spittle fall down upon his Bea^^, 1 Samuel 21. 13.
; the pretended Sacrifice of Samuel And the Lord said, take a Heifer with thee
and say, I am come to sacrifice to the Lord, 1 Samuel 16. 2.
; the Kids skins fitted to Jacob's hands And he put the skins of the Kids of
the Goats upon his (...), and (...) the smooth of his neck, (...) 27. 16.
, were all lawful Dissimulations, the intent not being to cheat, but only to
hide another design, nor are they the less allowable, because one foresees that
another will thereby be deceived, for that knowledge proceeds not from malice,
but a kind of caution.

And these arts and practices are then chiefly to be made use of, when we treat
with designing and crafty Princes; for in such case, Distrust, Cunning,
Hypocrisy, ambiguous Replies, prudent Equivocation, least a Prince should be
ins^ared, and give occasion for others Plots and Machinations, defending
himself with these arts, and not offending or violating his public Faith, what
is this but being upon his Guard? That Ingenuity is foolish, which frankly
discovers its secret Sentiments; and the State would be in danger without some
caution. It Is a dangerous sincerity to speak truth always, since secrecy is the
chief instrument of Government. Whatever Prince intrusts a secret to another,
at the same time intrusts his Scepter too: It does not become a Prince to lie,
but it does to be silent, or to conceal truth; not to trust or confide in any
one rashly, but to be wary and circumspect, that he may not be cheated. This
caution is extremely necessary for a Prince, without which he would be exposed
to many and great dangers. He who knows and sees most, believes and trusts
least, because either Speculation, or Practice and Experience renders him
cautious. Let a Prince's mind therefore be sincere and pure; yet skilled in the
arts and practices of others. Experience will show in what cases it becomes a
Prince to use these arts, that is, when he shall observe that the Malice and
Stratagems of those with whom he deals requires it.

In all other actions a Prince ought to discover a Royal Candor, sometimes even
to those who would deceive him; for if they interpret it favorably, their
designs are broken and begin to flag: besides no Fraud is so generous as Truth,
of which, if they can be sure, they make him Master of the most private secrets
of their Souls, without arming themselves with the like practices for the
future. What Nets are not spread, and what Stratagems contrived for the Cunning
and Subtilty of the Fox? who ever set snares for the tame innocence of the
Swallow?

Those Princes whom the world admires for their Prudence and Conduct cannot make
use of this art; for none will believe that their actions are guided by chance
or sincerity; the demonstrations of their truth are taken for counterfeit: In
them Caution is accounted Malice; Prudence, Dissimulation; and Circumspection,
Deceit. Some charge his Catholic Majesty with these Vices, because that by the
natural Vivacity of his Judgment, and his continual experience in War and
Peace, he was well acquainted with the treacherous dealing, unsincerity of the
times, defending himself with so great Prudence, that his Enemies were either
taken in their own Snares, or wholly broken by Counsel and Time. For this
reason some Princes feign Sincerity and Modesty, the better to palliate their
intentions, or that Malice may not so easily trace them. So Domitian did Simul
simplicitatis, ac modestiae imagine conditus, studiumque literarum, and amorem
carminum simulans, qu^ velaret animum. Tac. 4. hist.
. A Prince who would be thought wise in all things, is for that reason not so.
To know how to be ignorant seasonably is the greatest Prudence: there is nothing
more advantageous, nothing more difficult than to be wise with Moderation: this
Tacitus commends in Agricola Retinuitque quod difficillimum est, ex sapientia
modum. Tac in vit. Agr.
. All conspire against the most knowing, either through Envy, or to defend
their own ignorance; or perhaps, because they suspect that which they cannot
comprehend. Saul seeing that David was too wise, he began to be cautious of him
Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of
him, 1. Sam. 18. 15.
.

Other Princes appear diverted in their actions, that they may be thought to
act casually and without design. But such is the Malice of Policy now a days,
that it not only penetrates those arts, but cavils too at the most plain
sincerity, to the great prejudice of Truth and Public Tranquillity. There being
nothing that is interpreted rightly; and Truth consisting in one point, and
those in the circumference, from whence Malice may take aim, being infinite,
they fall into great errors, who will wrest from another words and actions a
different sense from what they appear; and interpreting others Designs in the
worst sense, cause both parties to arm themselves, and so to live in continual
Distrust and Jealousy of each other. He who is most ingenious in these
Suspicions is farthest from Truth; for by the acuteness of his wit he
penetrates farther than what is generally comprehended; and we are often
positive of that in others which is only a deceit of our own imagination. So to
a Sailor the Rocks seem to run, when it is only the Ship that is in motion. The
shadows of Policy are usually greater than the Body it self, and some times
this is neglected, and this made use of, so that there often arises greater
Damage from the prevention, than could arrive from the thing feared. How often
has a Prince, through a groundless Jealousy, declared War against him who
never thought of offending him? and both taking arms, that which was at first
but a slight and illgrounded presumption, ends in a bloody War: it is the same
with such, as with ill built Ships, which the more they sally from side to
side, are the sooner lost. I don't blame Diffidence, when it is the Daughter of
Prudence, as we said elsewhere; but a total defect of good faith, without
which, neither Friendship, Society nor Covenants can be lasting. The Law of
Nations would be invalid, and all things would be exposed to Fraud and Deceit.
All things are not acted with an ill intention. The greatest Tyrant sometimes
proposes just and honorable ends.

EMBLEM XLIV.
UNcertain and dubious is the motion of the Serpent winding it self first one
way then another, with such uncertainty, that its very body knows not where it
will erect its head. You Would think it made this way, and immediately it moves
contrary, without leaving any tract of its passage, nor can the intention of
its motion be discovered But can not tell whence it comes, and whither it
goes. Ioh. 3. 8.
. So occult should be the Counsels and Designs of Princes. None ought to know
whither they tend; they should imitate God the great Governor of all things,
whose ways are past finding out And who is able to discover his ways? Eccl. 16.
19.
: for which reason the Seraphim covered his feet with his wings And with twain
he covered his feet, Isai. 6. 2.
. Princes ought so carefully to conceal their designs, that their Ministers
themselves should not penetrate them; nay, that they should be the first that
should believe otherwise and be deceived, thereby the more naturally and
effectually, without the danger of Dissimulation, which is easily discovered to
confirm and secure their real intentions, instilling the same error into
others, that so it may pass current, and be believed on all sides. Thus
Tiberius did, when some murmured that he did not go to pacify the mutinous
Legions in Hungary and Germany, he pretended he would go with all speed, by
which deceiving the prudent, he deceived also the People and Provinces Primo
prudentes, dein vulgum, diutissime Provincias fefellit. Tac. 1. ann.
. The same also did King Philip the Second, who concealed his designs from his
own Ambassadors, pretending others, when 'twas convenient for them to believe
them, and persuade others to do so. A Prince can by no means use these arts, if
his ingenuity be not so cautious and circumspect, as not to discover the real
motions of his mind by his manner of Government, and let his Rivals and Enemies
penetrate his heart and thoughts; that he may slip out of their hands, when
they think they have him secure. This method by which another is deceived is
rather a sort of self defense than malice, where it is used according to
reason, as the greatest Heroes have always done. What necessity is there of
discovering the heart, which nature has on purpose hidden within the breast?
even in the most slight and frivolous affairs, it is pernicious to divulge them,
because it gives occasion by way of discourse to discover farther. Yet though
the heart be hid within the breast, its ails and distempers are discovered by
the Arteries. Execution loses its force, not without loss of the reputation of
a Prince's prudence, if he divulges his designs to the people. Secret and
unknown designs threaten all, and distract and puzzle an Enemy. Secrecy in War
is more necessary than in other Affairs. Few Enterprises unseasonably detected
succeed well. How is he surpised who receives the Wound before he sees the
Weapon; he who will not stir till he hears the clashing of Arms!

This I would have understood of Wars against Infidels, not of those between
Christians, which ought to be proclaimed, that there may be time for
satisfaction, by which the effusion of Blood may be avoided, this being
required to render a War lawful and just. In this the Romans were to be
commended, who instituted a College of twenty Priests whom they called Heralds,
whose business it was to proclaim War, to make Peace, and to establish
Alliances: These were also Judges in such cases, and took care that the party
injured should receive satisfaction, appointing a term of thirty ^ three days
for an amicable composition; in which time, if the disputes were not ended,
they declared War by throwing a Spear into the Enemies Country Et baculum
intorquens emittit in auras, Principium pugnae. Virg.
, from which day commenced acts of Hostility and Incursions. Of these
declarations there are diverse examples in the Scriptures. Iephtha being chosen
Prince of the Israelites, did not take up Arms against the Ammonites, before,
by Ambassadors, he had inquired into the reason which moved them to the War And
Iephtha sent Messengers unto the King of the Children of Ammon, saying, What
have thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my Land?
Judge. 11. 12.
. The method of our times is not so humane and generous. We experience the
effects of War before we know the cause thereof. An unexpected and sudden
Invasion makes the Injury the greater, and renders the minds of the parties
implacable, this generally springs hence, that they take up arms not to
satisfy Injuries, or atone for Damages received, but only from a blind
Ambition to enlarge their Dominions: in which, without respect to Religion,
Consanguinity or Friendship, they trample upon the most sacred Laws of Nature
and Nations.

If a Prince suspects any of Infidelity, let him not immediately change the
serenity of his Looks, or show any sign of his suspicion, but rather by new
Flattery and Honors endeavor to confirm their Minds and oblige them to
Fidelity. Rigor is not always the best and safest remedy. Branches lopt off
die, and revive not again. Thus Marcellus connived at Lucius Bancus of Nola, a
very rich, and withal very factious person, and though he well knew he sided
with Hannibal, he called him to him, told him, how his Virtue and Valor were
esteemed by all, particularly by the Roman Generals, who were Witnesses of his
Bravery at the Battle of Cannae: he honored him with words, supported with
hopes and promises; gave him at all times free access to his presence, and by
this courteous usage so obliged him, that from that time the Roman State had
not a more faithful Friend than he. This Dissimulation requires great care and
prudence, for if the Offender should mistrust it, he would interpret it a
design to bring him to Punishment, and so would sooner fire his Mines, or
endeavor to preserve himself by other violent means. Which is chiefly to be
feared in Tumults and Crimes of the Multitude. Thus Fabius Valens, though he
would not punish the Authors of a certain Commotion, yet did he permit some of
them to be tried Ne dissimulans suspectior foret. Tac. 2. hist.
. But since it is very difficult to purge the mind of Treason once conceived,
and since such crimes ought not to go unpunished, it is then only fit to
connive, when greater danger attends the declaration, or the number of
Offenders makes the punishment impracticable. This Julius Caesar considered,
when he commanded some Letters from Pompey to the Roman Nobility against him,
which he had intercepted, to be burnt unopen'd, thinking 'twas the mildest
method of pardoning, not to know the crime. A piece of true Generosity and
singular Prudence, since 'twas impossible to punish all, not to oblige himself
to the inconveniences of connivance. Those of mean condition may be made
examples, and the great ones connived at, till a more convenient opportunity.
But where the Delinquents may be punished without danger, it is safer, by
punishing them, to consult self-security, than to trust to Dissimulation; for
this often emboldens great Spirits. Hannibal plotted to poison the Carthaginian
Senate, and upon the discovery of the Treason, the Senators thought it
sufficient to make a Law to regulate the Excels and Expenses of Feasts, which
gave Hannibal occasion to plot afresh against them.

That Art and Cunning most becomes a Prince, and that Dissimulation is most
allowable and necessary, which so composes and forms the Looks, Words and
Actions toward him whom it would deceive, as that he may not mistrust that his
designs are discovered: for by that means there will be time to search farther
into them, and either to punish or elude them, while the party is not so
sollicitous in the concealment of them; but if he once find himself betrayed,
he begins to tremble, and thinks himself not secure, till he has put his
designs in execution. This obliged Agrippina to pretend not to understand the
Murder which her Son Nero designed her Solum insidiarum remedium esse si non
intelligerentur. Tac. 14. ann.
. This Dissimulation or feigned Simplicity is very necessary for Ministers who
^erve cunning and defigning Princes, who make it their care to conceal their
intentions; in this Tiberius was a great Master Consulto ambiguns. Tac. 13. ann.
. The same artifice the Roman Senate used, when the same Tiberius, after the
death of Augustus, let them know, to try their thoughts, that he would not
accept of the Empire, it being a burden too heavy for him; they by a studied
ignorance and forced tears begged he would please to accept it, all being
afraid to seem to understand his meaning Quibus usus metus si intelligere
viderentur Tac. 1. ann.
. Unjust Princes hate those who they think understand their ill practices, and
take them for Enemies. They claim an absolute Authority over men's minds, not
subject to another understanding, they will have their Subjects Intellects at
as much command as their Bodies, esteeming it part of their duty and respect
not to understand their designs Intelligebantur arts: sed pars obsequii (...)
ne deprehenderentur. Tac. 4. hist.
. Wherefore it is disallowable and dangerous to pry into the privacies and
secret thoughts of Princes Abditos Principis sensus, and (...) quid occultius
parat exquir^re illicitum, anceps, nec ideo assequare. Tac. 6. ann.
. Tiberius complaining that he was in danger from some of the Roman Senators,
Asinius Gallus desired to know who they were, that they might be brought to
Justice, which Tiberius took very ill, that he should desire to know what he
had a mind to conceal Eo aegrius accepit recludi quae premeret. Tac. 4. ann.
. Germanicus acted more prudently, who though he well understood Tiberius's
meaning, and that he was recalled from Germany, only to stop the progress of
his Glory, readily obeyed without seeming to understand Haud ^^^^ctatus est
ultra Germanicus; quanquam fingi ea seque per invidiam ^^rto jam decori
abstrahi intelligeret. Tac. 2. ann.
. Since Princes commands cannot be declined, it is prudence to obey them
cheerfully, pretending ignorance of the motives, to avoid danger. Thus
Archelaus, though he knew he was called to Rome by Tiberius's Mother through
Craft and Treachery, yet he dissembled it, and fearing violence if he should be
thought to understand it, made what have he could thither Si intelligere
videretur, vim metuens, in urbem properat. Tac. 2. ann.
. And this Dissimulation is yet more necessary in the Errors and Vices of
Princes, for they esteem them as enemies, who are acquainted therewith. In the
Banquet at which Germanicus was poisoned, some ran for it, but the more prudent
fat still looking upon Nero, that they might not be thought to mistrust the
Murder, but rather to believe that it was natural Tr^pida^^^ a
circumsedentibus, diffugiunt imprudentes, at quibus altior intellectus,
resistunt defixi, and Neronem intuentes. Tac. 13. ann.
.

EMBLEM XLV.
THE Lion, the body of this devise, was among the Egyptians the Emblem of
Vigilance, and used to be set in the Frontispieces and Porches of their
Temples. Hence Alexander the Great was engraven upon his Coin with a Lion's
skin upon his head, to intimate that he was not less careful and vigilant than
valiant; for if at any time affairs required that he should not spend much time
in sleep, he was used to lie with his arm out of bed, holding a Silver ball in
his hand, that if he should fall asleep, that falling into a brass Basin set
underneath for that purpose, might waken him. He had never conquered the world,
had he been sleepy and lazy, he ought not to snore away his time, who has the
Government of People committed to him Non decet ignavum tota producere somnum
N^cte virum, sub consilio, sub nomine cujus
T^t populi degunt, cui rerum cura, fidesque
Credita summarum est.

. Thus the Lion knowing himself to be King of Beasts, sleeps but little, or if
he does, it is with his Eyes open: he does not confide so much in his Empire,
nor rely so much on his Majesty, as not to think it necessary to seem to be
awake even while he sleeps. The Senses do indeed require rest sometimes, but
even then it is necessary Princes should be thought to be awake. A sleeping King
differs not from another man: This Passion he ought to conceal from Friends as
well as Enemies; he may sleep, provided others think him waking. Let him not
depend so much upon his Authority and Power, as to shut his Eyes to Care and
Circumspection. It Is a cunning Dissimulation in the Lion to sleep with his Eyes
open, not with a design to deceive, but only to hide his sleepiness. And if any
one designing against him be deceived, finding him awake whom he thought he had
seen sleeping, it is his own fault not the Lion's. Nor is this pretense below
the greatness of his Mind, no more than that other piece of cunning, of
smoothing over the Tract of his feet with his Tail to deceive the Huntsmen.
There is no Fortress secure unless guarded by Vigilance. The greater the Prince
is, the greater care he ought to be crowned with, not with the Sincerity of
innocent Doves, but the prudence of subtle Serpents. For as when the Lion
enters the Field, the other Beasts lay aside their natural Enmity, and give
over fighting, and with joint force combine against him, so among men all arm
and unite against the strongest. Nothing is more pernicious to the Kingdom of
England, than the greatness of the Dutch, for they take from them the Dominion
of the Seas; nothing more prejudicial to France, than the Grandeur of those
same Rebels, who once breaking down the Dikes opposed by Spain, would, like an
Inundation soon overwhelm the Kingdom of France, as King Henry the Fourth
wisely observed: and yet what weighed more with both these two Crowns than
their danger, their hatred, I mean, and fear of the Spanish Monarchy, raised
that people to that Grandeur and Power, which upon alteration of affairs they
may fear against themselves. We are more sollicitous and careful to avert
present dangers than future ones, though these are often greater. Fear
obstructs the Senses, nor permits the Mind to survey things at a distance. A
groundless Fear is often of more force than the greatest reason of State. The
power of Spain in Italy is a preservative against the distempers of the Genoese
liberty; the same also preserves the Dukedom of Tuscany, augments the Spiritual
Empire of the Church, maintains the Authority of the House of Austria, and
secures the Venetians from the Tyranny of the Turks; yet I know not whether the
Ministers of these Princes will acknowledge this, or act conformable to this
their Interest. Such Jealousies as are not guided by reason, work their own
ruin. They who thought they should be safe in disarming the Emperor Ferdinand
the Second, sound afterward that they had need of those arms which they had
caused him to disband. Many Provinces, which for Reasons of State sought the
ruin of the Roman Empire lost their own liberty with its ruin.

Let not a Prince put much confidence in exterior respect and ceremony, for
it is all feigned, and far from what it appears to be; Complaisance is Flattery;
Adoration, Fear; Respect, Force; and Friendship, Necessity. The good opinion
which a Prince conceives of others, they make use of to circumvent and betray
him. All watch his motions, to make a prey of him; all strive to overcome him
by Stratagem whom they cannot by force; few or none act sincerely with him; for
he who is feared, seldom hears truth; and therefore he ought not to sleep in
confidence of his own power. Let him oppose Stratagem with Stratagem, and Power
with Power. A generous mind closely and cautiously prevents, or courageously
resists dangers.

But though in the present Emblem we allow of the arts of Dissimulation, nay
and think them necessary with the aforesaid restrictions, yet does it more
become the Ministers than the Princes themselves, for in them there is a
certain occult Divinity which is offended at that care: Dissimulation is
usually the Daughter of Fear and Ambition, neither of which ought to be
discovered in a Prince. The conveniences of Dissimulation he ought to supply by
silence and reservedness. A Prince is more beloved for being prudent and wary,
provided he act with a Royal Sincerity. All hate Artifice, and on the contrary,
a natural and open freedom is agreeable to all, as Tacitus remarks in Petronius
Dicta factaque ejus quanto solutiora, and quandam sui negligentia^
praeferentia, tanto gratius in speciem simplicitatis accipiebantur. Tac. 16.
ann.
.

EMBLEM XLVI.
AN Oar under Water appears crooked and broken, which is caused by the
refraction of Species: so in many things our opinion deceives us. For this
reason the Sceptick Philosophers doubted of all things, and durst affirm
nothing for certain. A wary piece of Modesty and prudent Distruct of humane
Judgment, and not without ground: for to a certain knowledge of things, there
are required two dispositions, that which is to know, and that which is to be
known; the first is the Understanding, which uses the external and internal
Senses to form Imaginations; the external are variously changed according to
the abundance or defect of humors. The internal are also subject to changes,
either from the same cause, or from the different Affections of the Organs.
Whence proceed such different Opinions and Judgments, one judging differently
of the same things from another, and both with equal uncertainty; for things
change their shape and color with their places, by being near or at a
distance, or because none are purely simple, or because of natural Mixtures and
Species which interpose between them and the Senses; so that we cannot affirm
things are so and so, but that they seem such, forming an Opinion not certain
Knowledge. Plato found a yet greater incertainty in them, when he considered
that there was nothing of so pure and perfect nature as God; and that in this
life we could have no perfect knowledge of any thing, but saw only things
present, and those too, Reflections and Shadows of others, so that 'twas
impossible to reduce them to a Science. Not that I would have a Prince a
Sceptick, for he who doubts all determines nothing; nor is there any thing more
pernicious to Government, than Hesitation in resolving and executing. I only
advise that he would not be too positive in his opinions, but believe that he
may easily be deceived in his Judgment, either through Affection, or Passion,
or false Information, or Flattery and Insinuation, or because he don't care to
hear truth which prescribes bounds to his Authority and Will, or because of the
uncertainty of our own apprehension; or lastly, because few things are really
what they appear, especially in Policy, which is now adays nothing but the art
of cheating, or not being cheated; wherefore they ought to be viewed in
different lights, and a Prince ought carefully to consider and weigh them not
slightly to pass them over, least he should give credit to appearances and
groundless Stories.

These Cheats and politic Tricks cannot be well known, unless the nature of man
be also known; for the knowledge of him is absolutely necessary for a Prince,
that he may know how to govern and beware of him. For though Government be an
invention of men, it is in no danger but from them; for Man has no greater Enemy
than Man. The Eagle hurts not the Eagle, nor the Serpent the Serpent; but man
is continually plotting against his own kind. The Dens of Beasts are open and
unguarded, but three of the four Elements are not sufficient for the guard of
Cities, viz. Earth cast up into Walls and Entrenchments, Water confined to
Ditches, and Fire enclosed in Artillery. That some may sleep, the rest must
watch. What instruments are there not invented against Life, as if it were not
of it self short enough, and subject to the infirmities of Nature; and tho^ the
Seeds of all Virtues and Vices are in man as their proper Subject; it is with
this difference, that those cannot grow and increase without the Dew of
celestial and supernatural Grace; but these do spontaneously bud out and
flourish, which is the effect and punishment of man's first Sin; and as we
always suffer our selves to be led by our Inclinations and Passions, which
hurry us to ill, and as there is not the same danger in Virtue as in Vices, we
therefore will lay before a Prince a short description of depraved human Nature.

Man is then the most inconstant Animal in the Creation; pernicious both to
himself and others; Changes with his Age, Fortune, Interest and Passion; nor
does the Sea vary so often as his condition. He is deluded by empty appearances,
and through self-conceit persists in his Error. Revenge and Cruelty he esteems
praiseworthy and honorable. Is well versed in Hypocris^e, and can dissemble
his Passions a great while. With Words, Laughter and Tears he conceals his
Thoughts. Veils his Designs with Religion. Confirms and maintains Lies with
Oaths. Is a Slave to Hope and Fear. Favors make him ungrateful. Dominion
proud. Constraint vile and abject. Law fearful. Benefits he inscribes on Wax;
Injuries received on Marble; and those he offers on Brass. He is subject to
Love* not out of Charity, but an appearance of good. A mere Slave to Anger. In
Adversity prostrate and cringing. In Prosperity arrogant and proud. What he
commends in himself* and affects, he wants; calls himself a true Friend, but
knows not what Friendship means. Slights his own and covets others goods. The
more he has, the more he desires. The good Fortune and Prosperity of others
kills him with Envy Under show of Friendship, he is the greatest Enemy. Loves
the Rigor of Justice in others, but hates it in himself.

This is a description of humane nature in general, nor are all these Vices in
one person, but dispersed in several. And though a Prince think that some one
is wholly free from them, let him not therefore be less cautious of him, for
there is no certainty in the Judgment which is made of the condition and nature
of men. Vice often puts on the Mask of Virtue, the better to deceive, and the
best of men may be deficient sometimes, either through human frailty, or the
inconstancy of the times, or necessity, or interest, or appearance of public
or private good, or oversight, or want of knowledge; whence it happens that
the good are not less dangerous than the bad; and in case of doubt, it is more
prudent for a Prince to avoid the danger, remembering (not to offend, but to
defend) that, as Ezekiel said, Briars and Thorns are with him, and he dwells
among Scorpions Ezekiel. 2. 6.
, whose Tails are always ready to strike Semper cauda in ictu est, nulloque
momento meditari cessat, ne quan^o desit occasioni. Plin. lib. 11. c. 25.
Such generally are Courtiers, they all advance their own pretensions by
deluding the Prince, or by removing his best and most deserving Favorites, by
means of his own power. How often have waves of Envy and Jealousy been
interposed between the Eyes of the Prince, and the Minister's actions, making
those appear crooked and disloyal which are drawn by the rule of Justice and
his Service. Thus Virtue suffers, the Prince loses a good Minister, and Malice
triumphs in its Practices; which that he may practically know, and not suffer
Innocence to be wronged, I will here set down the most usual.

There are some Courtiers so subtle and cunning, that while they seem to excuse
their Rival's faults, they then most accuse them. So Augustus reprehended the
Vices of Tiberius Q^anqua^ (...) or^^t^one, quaedam de habitu, cultuque and
institutis ejus fecer^t^ quae velut excusand^ exprobraret. Tac. 1 ann.
.

Others there are, who to cover their Malice, and gain credit under pretense of
Goodness, begin under the title of Friendship, with the praises of him whom
they would remove, extolling some little insignificant Service, and at the same
time by a feigned zeal for the Princes interest, which they pretend to prefer
before all Friendship and Relation, gradually discover his faults, which may
procure his Disgrace or loss of Place. But if their Ambition and Malice cannot
procure this, they at least establish their own Reputation by carping at their
Friends faults, and gain themselves Glory by his infamy Unde amico infamiam
parat, inde gloriam sibi re^ipere. Tac. 1. ann.
. Alphonso the Wise King of Naples was well acquainted with all these
practices; wherefore when he heard one full of the praises of his Enemy;
Observe, says he, the Artifice of that man, and you will find that the drift of
these commendations is only to do him more mischief. And so it fell out, when
he had for six Months endeavored to gain credit to his intentions, that he
might afterward the sooner be believed in what he should say against him.
Mines are always sprung at a distance from the Walls where they are to do
execution. Those Friends who praise you are worse than Enemies who murmur at
you Pessimum ini^icorum genus, ^^udantes. Tac. in vit. Agric.
. Others, that they may cheat more securely, praise in public, and in private
scandalize Secr^tis cum criminationibus infa^^n^verat, ignarum, and quo cautius
dec^peretur, palam laudat^^^. Tac. 1. hist.
.

Nor is their subtilty less malicious, who so adorn their Calumnies, that they
look like praises; as Aleto did in T^sso.

Gran fabro di calumny adorn in modi
Novi, che sono accuse e payen lodi.
These the Psalmist meant, when he said, They were turned aside like a
deceitful bow Psalm. 78. 57.
.

Or as Hosea the Prophet says, like a deceitful bow, which (...) at one place
and hits another Hos. 7. 16.
.

Some extol their Rivals to that degree, that It may Plainly appear they don't
speak seriously and really, as was observed in Tiberius when he praised
Germanicus Multaque de virtute ejus memoravit, magis in speciem verbis ad^rnata
quam ut penitus sentire crederetur. Tac. 1. ann.
.

Others make use of these commendations to raise their Enemy to such posts as
may at last ruin them, or at least procure their removal from Court, though to
his greater advantage; which I believe was among others, the reason why
Ruigomez caused Ferdinand Duke of Alba to be sent into Flanders, when those
Provinces revolted. With the same int ntion Macian praised Anthony in the
Senate, and pro^pos'd for him the Government of the Neither Spain Igitur
Mucianus quia propalam opprimi Antonius nequibat, multis in senatu laudil^s
cumulatum s^cretis promissis onerat, Citerierem Hispaiam ostenta^s discessu
Cluvii Rufi vacuam. Tac. 4. hist.
; and to facilitate it, he divided his Offices and Honors among his Friends.
It Is scarce credible, how liberal Envy is, when it would remove him who
eclipses its Glory or obstructs its Rise: it is a wave which drives him who
cannot swim, upon the Shore of Fortune.

Sometimes Commendations are used with a design of creating Envy to the party
praised; a strange way of striking, with others Vices. Many endeavor to
introduce their own Creatures with such Artifice, as no one can penetrate their
designs; and to that end, they first carp at some trivial faults committed by
others in the same Offices, then praise and cry up others as more fit for those
places, and sometimes they entertain them as if they had no knowledge of them,
as Lacon did Piso, that he might be adopted by Galba Sed callide ut ignotum
(...) Tac. 1. ann.
.

Others, the better to conceal their Passion, lay their Plots at a distance,
and instill their hatred gradually into the Prince's Mind, that being at last
full, he may burst upon their Enemies. These means Sejanus used to alienate the
Mind of Tiberius from Germanicus Odia in longum jacens, quae reconderet.
auct^que prom^r^t. Tac. 1. ann
And these the Holy Spirit seems to condemn under the Metaphor of plowing Lies
Devise not (Lat. noli arare) a lie against thy Brothers* Eccl 7. 13.
Which is the same as sowing Tares in the Mind, that they may afterward reap
the fruit of Wickedness Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye
have eaten the fruit of Lies, Hos. 10. 13.


Some, not with less cunning, first deceive those Ministers in whom the Prince
has most confidence, by insinuating into them some Falsehoods, which they
afterward imprint in the Prince. This was the art of that lying Spirit of the
Prophet Micaiah, which proposed to deceive King Achab, by being in the Mouth of
all his Prophets, and God permitted it as the most effectual means And he said,
I will go forth and be a Lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets, 1 Kin.
22. 22.


There are others, who make advantage of the injuries the Prince has received,
and persuade him to revenge, either that they may themselves be thereby
revenged of their Enemies, or else cause him to be turned out of Favor and
Trust. By this Artifice John Pacheco persuaded King Henry the IVth. to
apprehend Alphonso Fonseca Archbishop of Sevil, and afterward advised him
privately to provide for his own safety.

These are the usual practices of Courts, and though they are often discovered,
yet they never want Patrons, nay, there are those who will suffer themselves to
be cheated twice; whence we often see barefaced Impostors remain at Court so
long; an effect of the weakness of our depraved Nature, which is more taken
with Lies than Truth. We are more apt to admire the Picture of a Horse than a
real one, that being but a Lie of the other. What is Rhetoric with all its
Tropes and Figures, but a kind of Falsehood and Cheat? From all which we may
see, how much danger there is of a Prince's being deceived in his opinion,
unless he with great application and diligence examine things, suspending his
belief, until he not only sees the things themselves, but also as it were,
feels them, those especially which he has only by hearsay. For the Breath of
Flattery, and the Winds of Hatred and Envy enter at the Ears, and raise the
Passions and Affections of the Mind, before there can be any Certainty of the
truth of the thing. 'Twould therefore be very convenient for a Prince to have
his Ears near his Thoughts and Reason. As are the Owl's (for that reason
perhaps sacred to Minerva) upon the top of its head, the Chamber of the Senses,
all of which we have need of in hearing, least our ears should deceive us. Let
a Prince therefore take great care thereof, for when the ears are once free
from affections, and reason sits there as judge, every thing is well examined;
all things relating to Government depend upon the relation of others: therefore
what Aristotle said of Bees seems improbable; that is, that they are deaf; for
that would be a great inconveniency for that prudent and politic little
Animal, since those two Senses, Hearing and Seeing, are the Instruments through
which we draw Wisdom and Experience; both these we have need of to prevent our
being deceived by Passion, Nature or Inclination. The prepossessed Moabites
thought the Waters upon which the Sun shone, were Blood And they rose up early
in the Morning, and the Sun shone upon the Waters, and the Moabites saw the
water on the other side as red as Blood, 2 Kings 3. 22.
. The same noise of the people, to the Ears of Warlike Joshua, seemed their
Shoots to Battle; and to those of gentle Moses a Harmony of Music And Ioshu^
heard the noise of the people, as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a
noise of war in the camp. And he said, it is not the voice of them that shout
for Mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but
the noise of them that sing, do I hear, Exodus 32. 17, 18.
. For which cause, God, though omniscient, would verify with his Eyes what he
had heard of Sodom and Gomorrha I will go down now, and see whether they have
done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not,
I will know, Genesis 18. 21.
. When therefore a Prince shall have seen, heard, and felt things, he cannot be
deceived, or if he be, 'twill not be his fault. From all which we may see how
ill contrived was that image of the Thebans, by which they expressed the
qualifications of their Princes, for it had ears, but no Eyes, these being full
as necessary as those: the Ears to know things, and the Eyes to believe them,
in which the Eyes are most trusty, for truth is no farther distant from a Lie
than the Eyes from the Ears.

Nor has a Prince need of less diligence and attention in discussing the
Counsels and Proposals of his Ministers, before he puts them in execution; such
as concern raising Money, regulating the Government, and other matters relating
to Peace and War, for their usual aim is their own particular interest, and
effects don't always correspond to our expectations. Ingenuity often approves
Counsels which Experience afterward rejects. Yet is it imprudence wholly to
slight them, for the success of one only makes amends for the vanity of the
rest. Spain had never obtained the Empire of the new world, if their Catholic
Majesty's had not gave more credit to Columbus than other Princes. Yet to be
over credulous or confident to act whatever is proposed, is either Levity or
Folly. First, The condition of the Proposer is to be considered, his Experience
in the matter; what end he may have in deceiving; what interest if he succeeds;
also the means and time by which he thinks to accomplish it: Nero, for want of
these considerations, was much disappointed about a Treasure which one told him
he had found in Africa Non authoris, non ipsius negotii side satis spectata,
nec missis visoribus per quos nosceret an vera ass^rerentur. Tac. 16. ann.
. Many Projects at first seem considerable, which prove at last vain and
useless. Many seem light and frivolous, from whence result great advantages.
Many which have been successfully experienced in small matters, in affairs of
greater moment succeed not. Many seem easy to reason, which are difficult in
the operation. Many are prejudicial at first, and advantageous afterward, and
so on the contrary; and many have different effects from what were at first
proposed.

The lazy and blind Vulgar don't know truth, unless they light on it by chance,
for they foolishly form opinions of things before Reason foresees the
inconveniences, and promise themselves a more certain knowledge from the
success, the guide of the ignorant, and so if any one should go about to argue
these people out of their opinions he would lose his time and pains. There are
no better means, than to make them see and feel their Errors; so startling
Horses use to be whipped and spurred to make them go forwards to see the vanity
of the shadow which frightened them. This means Pacuvius used to appease the
people of Capua, who rose against the Senate: he first shut all the Senators by
their own consent, into a certain Hall; then calls the people together, tells
them, that if they have a mind to take off or punish the Senators, now is their
time, for they are locked up without Arms; but withal tells them, it would be
necessary to take them one by one, and immediately to elect another in the room
of him whom they took off, for that without those heads the State could not
subsist a Moment. He puts all their Names in a Pot, draws out one, and asks the
people what they would have done with him; they all cry out, let him die; then
he advises them to elect another; this confounds them, and they don't know who
to propose; and so a second and third time they could not agree upon their
choice. At last their confusion taught them, that 'twas better to bear with an
ill already experienced, than to attempt a remedy, and so they immediately
commanded the Senators to be released. The people is very furious in its
opinions, and it is often, especially upon any imminent danger, a piece of great
management in a Prince to govern it with his own hand, keeping pace with it in
its ignorance. The people are often reduced to their duty, by laying before
them the incoveniences which have happened in the like cases; for they are more
moved by Example than Reason Plebei^ ingenia exemplis ^agis quam ratione
capiuntur. Macrob.
.

EMBLEM XLVII.
EVEN Virtues have their Dangers; they should be always in a Prince's Mind, but
not always in exercise. Public interest ought to dictate when and where to use
them. Used without Prudence, they either become Vices, or are not less hurtful
than them. In a private person they respect only him; in a Prince both him and
the State too. They ought to suit with the common interest of all, not with
that of particular persons. Civil Science prescribes certain limits to the
Virtue of him who commands and him who obeys. Justice is not in the power of
the Minister, but ought always to be directed by the Laws. In the Prince, who
is the Soul thereof, it has certain considerations, which respect the
Government in common. In the Subject Commiseration can never be excessive; in a
Prince it is often dangerous. To demonstrate this in the present Emblem, I have
made use of that method, which according to Sanaz^ro and Garcilazo, the
Shepherds used to catch Crows. Which shows Princes with how much circumspection
they ought to interest themselves in the misfortunes and dangers of others.
They fastened a Crow by the Pinions of its Wings to the ground, this seeing
others fly by, would, by making a grievous noise, excite them to pity, and come
down to its assistance. Cercavanla, i alguna mas piadosa
Del mal ageno de la companera.
Quae del fnyo a visada, o timerosa, etc.
For that which was fastened to the ground, catches hold of another with its
Claws, thereby to free it self, and that again of another, which the same
Compassion brought to their assistance; so that for the sake of one another,
they are all caught. In which something may be attributed to the Novelty of the
accident, for sometimes that appears Compassion which is only a motion of
natural Inquietude. I allow the Eyes and Heart to be moved with Compassion, at
the Misfortunes and Complaints of foreign Princes. But not to arm upon every
slight occasion for their Defense. For a private person to expose himself to
dangers to serve his Friend, is brave and commendable, but in a Prince
blameable, if he hazzards the public safety for the service of a Foreigner,
without good grounds and reasons of State; nor are those of Consanguinity or
private Friendship sufficient. For a Prince is born more for his Subjects than
his Relations and Friends; he may indeed assist them, but without incurring any
damage or danger. When assistance renders the danger so common, that the ruin
of one draws after it that of the other, there is no tie of Obligation or Piety
can excuse it: but when interests are so interwoven and united, that one must
follow the fate of the other, who-ever assists in that case acts his own cause;
and it is more prudence (as we have said) to oppose dangers in a foreign State
than to expect them at home. Also when it is the public interest to assist the
oppressed; the Prince who is most potent, is, without doubt, obliged to it. For
between Princes Justice cannot have recourse to the common Tribunals; it is in
the Authority and Power of the strongest, that it finds Refuge. In such case
'twould be a kind of Tyranny to be an idle Spectator only, and give way to that
Policy which aims to imbroil other Princes, that themselves may be more secure
through their dissensions, and raise their own fortunes upon the ruin of
others, for such as these the supreme Judge of the intentions severely punishes.

These cases require great Prudence, to weigh the engagement with the interest,
least we should* entangle our selves in others Misfortunes, and make their
danger ours, for we must not afterward expect the same return. Spain pitied
the Misfortunes of the Empire, and assisted it with its Blood and Treasures,
from whence proceeded the Invasions which France made in Italy, Flanders,
Burgundy and Spain, the whole War lying at present upon this Monarchy, yet
will not some in Germany acknowledge this, or believe that it is for their sakes.

Experience therefore in our own and others Misfortunes ought to make us more
cautious in our Commiseration and Assistance. How often, by assisting the
Misfortunes of our Friends, have we lost both our selves and him, being
afterward ungrateful for the benefit! How often have these incurred the
hatred of a Prince by those very means by which they have endeavored to served
him. Germanicus was adopted by Tiberius, appointed to succeed him in the
Empire, and so faithful in his Service, that he took it as an affront, that
the Legions should offer him the Empire Quas^ scelere contaminaretur. Tac. 1.
ann.
, and when they pressed him to it would have stabbed himself At ille moriturum
potius quam fidem exueret, clamitans, ferrum a latere diripuit, elatumque
deferebat in pectus. Id. ibid.
; and the more faithfully he behaved himself, the less grateful he was to
Tiberius. His care in appeasing the Legions with Donatives was distasteful Sed
quod largiendis pecuniis and mission^ ^estinata favorem militum quaefivisset,
belli^a quoque Germanici gloria aug^batur. Id. ibid.
. His Piety in gathering and burying the Relicts of Var^s's Army, he
interpreted Ambition Quod Tiberio haud probatum. Id. ibid.
. The Compassion of his Wife Agrippina in clothing the Soldiers, seemed a
desire of rule Id S^berit animum altius penetravit. Id. ibid.
. In a word, all Germanicus's actions were misinterpreted Cuncta Germanici in
deterius trahenti. Id. Ibid.
. Germanicus knew this Hatred, and that he was called upon pretense of Honor,
from his true Glory in Germany, and endeavored to oblige him more by Obedience
and Observance Quanto sum spei propi^r, tanto impensi^s pro Tiber^o niti. Id.
ibid.
; but this made him still more odious, till Gratitude, oppressed by the weight
of Obligation, he sent him to the Eastern Provinces Novisq^e provinc^is
impositum, dolo simul and cafibus objectaret. Tac. 2. ann.
, where he caused him to be poisoned by Piso, rejoicing in the death of him,
who was the support of his Empire Na^ G^rmanici mortem inter prospera ducebat.
Tac. 4. ann.
Some Princes are Idols, whose Eyes are, (as Jeremiah says) blinded with the
dust of those who enter in to worship them Their eyes be full of dust, through
the feet of them that come in. Baruc. 6. 17.
. They acknowledge no Services, and what is worse, will not be convinced of them,
nor that their liberty is subject to desert, and therefore take great care to
disengage themselves from it. Him who has performed signal Services they charge
with some Crime or other, that his pretension to reward being reduced to a
defense, he may take his Pardon for a sufficient Recompense. They seem
dis-satisfied with those very Services which they inwardly approve; to avoid
being obliged, or they attribute them to their own orders, and sometimes that
very thing which they desired and commanded to be done, they repent of
afterward, and are angry with him who facilitated it, as if he had done it
from his own motive. The Heart of a King is unsearchable Prove. 25. 3.
. It Is a deep Sea which is to day boisterous and raging, from the same cause
which made it yesterday calm and serene. The Goods of Fortune and Mind, and
also Riches and Honors, they sometimes e^^eem meritorious, sometimes injurious
and criminal Nobilitas, opes, omissi g^stique honores pro crimine and ob
virtutes certissimum exitium. Tac. 1. hist.
.

The most officious diligence often displeases them. That of Uzza^ to God, in
putting forth his arm to support the falling Ark, cost him his life And Uzzah
put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook
it And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and God smote him there
for his error, and there he died by the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6. 6.
. Princes usually recompense negligence rather than care, and reward the least
Services with greatest Honors. To be obliged they reckon servile and mean, and
choose Ingratitude rather than Acknowledgment. The prompt zeal and liberality of
Iunius Blaesus toward the Emperor Vitellius got him his Hatred instead of
Thanks Lugdune^sis Galliae rector, genere illustris, largus animo, and par
opibus, circumdaret Principi ministeria* comitaretur liberaliter, (...) ipso
ingratus quamvis, odium Vitellius humilibus blanditiis velaret. Tic. 2. hist.
. The renowned Roger of Catalo^ia, being at Constantinople to assist Fadricus
King of Sicily, was recalled by the Emperor Andronicus to defend the Empire; he
did things beyond belief; with a small number of his valiant Catalonians; he
repelled the Turks, and when he expected a reward for his Services, the
Emperor upon some slight pretense, put him to death. And very often some
frivolous pretense is more regarded than the greatest Services; for Gratitude
is esteemed a burden to the mind, but Revenge discharges the Bile. There is
this Misfortune in the Service of Princes, that no man knows when he obliges or
disobliges them And no man knows either Love or Hatred, by all that is before
them, E^^l. 9. 1.
. And if we would form any method of Policy from the light of History, and the
Misfortunes which we incur through our over^officiousness, we had need
distinguish between Virtues, that we may know how to use them, by considering
that though they are all in us as their proper Subject, yet do they not all
operate within us. Some are practiced externally, others internally. These are
Fortitude, Patience, Modesty, Humility, Religion, among which, some are only so
far for us, that those external ones contribute no more thereto, than the
security of humane Society, and an esteem for their own Excellence, as are
Humility, Modesty, and Humanity. So that the more perfect these Virtues are,
the more they work upon the Minds and Approbation of others, provided we can
keep a Decorum. Other of those Virtues, though they are internal, yet their
Operation depends upon external Actions, as Valor and Magnanimity. In these
there is no danger, if they be governed by Prudence, which prescribes time and
manner to all Virtues. For excessive and imprudent reservedness usually
obstructs our interest; we losing our selves under a Notion of Reputation and
Glory, while those who suit themselves to the Times, Necessity and Fla^tery,
obtain the Rewards and Commendations. In the exercise of those Virtues which
respect the good of others, such as Liberality and Compassion, there is always
some danger, because neither the Rewards of Princes, nor the acknowledgments of
Friends are answerable to them; we persuade our selves that our Services will
be acceptable, and that to assist our Misfortunes, they will reciprocally
expose their own Lives and Fortunes. Into this error we are led by our own
Sense of Gratitude, which often makes us heedless of our own ruin, to satisfy
for Obligations received. But if we fall into any Calamity they withdraw and
desert us. There were but three of Job's Friends who visited him in his
Afflictions, and they too by God's Command Now when Job's three Friends heard
of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own
place, V. Lat. v^nerunt sicut locutus est dominus ad eos, Job 2. 9.
: nor did they assist him but with Words and severe Advice, which he had need
of all his Patience to bear. But after God again smiled upon Job, and began to
heap on him Riches in abundance, then came flocking to him, not only his
Brethren and Relations, but those too who knew him not but by sight, and sat
down at Table with him, that they might partake of his Prosperity Then came
there unto him all his Brethren, and all his Sisters, and all that had been of
his acquaintance before, and did eat Bread with him in his house, Job 4^. 11.
.

This error, under pretense of mutual assistance and obligation has been the
ruin of many, who have reaped naught but Ingratitude and Hatred from their
benefits and kindnesses, and created Enemies of those who before were their
Friends, so that they die friendless and miserable. The Holy Spirit has
cautioned us of this: My Son, says he, if thou be surety for thy Friend, if
thou have stricken thy hand with a stranger; thou art snared with the words of
thy mouth, thou art taken with thine own words Prove. 6. 1.
. He advises us to deliver our selves from the hand of a Friend, as a Roe from
the hand of the Hunter, and as a Bird from the hand of the Fowler Ibid.
. Do good but look about ye, is a Spanish Proverb drawn from Experience. Those
are not subject to these Misfortunes who live only to themselves, nor suffer
themselves to be moved by Compassion or Charity, to assist the calamities of
others, being deaf to their Tears and Groans, avoiding all occasions of
intermedling with them, whence they live free from cares and troubles, and if
they gain not new Friends, they however keep those they have; not being
esteemed for the good they do, but for the ill they don't do, this being in
them accounted Prudence. Besides we naturally esteem them most, who have least
need of us, who without being beholden to us, live content with their own.
Whence considering the usual custom of Mankind, it may perhaps seem advisable
to be an idle Spectator of others Calamities, and minding only our own
interests, not to engage our selves in their dangers and troubles. But this
policy would be against our duty as Christians, Charity, and generous Virtues,
which gives us a nearer access to God. This would dissolve all civil Society,
which wholly consists in the mutual assistance of one another. Virtue needs no
outward acknowledgments; being to it self a fair reward. Nay, it is then most
perfect and glorious, when it expects the least return; for it is a kind of
Avarice to do good in hopes of a Retaliation, which if not obtained creates a
lasting resentment. Let us therefore be guided by the consideration of what we
owe our selves, and also by the example of God Almighty, who bestows his
Blessings even on the Ungrateful. Yet it is Prudence to have respect to the
time when and where acknowledgments may be expected, for it is too hard for a
man, after great Expenses, great Hazards and Hardships undergone for another,
to meet with nothing but Ingratitude in return. To him who understands the
nature and usual ways of Mankind, this will not seem at all new; but
foreknowing it, will ward the blow, and avoid being hurt.

We should also well consider, whether it be really our Friend's interest for
us to undertake his assistance: for sometimes we do him an injury by our
diligence, because it is either unseasonable or imprudent, by which we ruin both
our selves and him too. This officiousness Thraseas checked in Rusticus
Arulenus, though in his own behalf, knowing that kindness would be prejudicial
to the Intercessor, and of no advantage to the criminal Ne vana, and reo non
profitura, intercessori exitiosa inciperet. Tac. 16 ann.
.

Nor is it less imprudent and dangerous to be over zealous for the public good
and welfare of the Prince, then especially, when without obligation of duty, or
certain prospect of remedy, we intermeddle with their concerns to our own
apparent ruin. I don't mean, that we should be insensible at the sight of
others sufferings, or that for our own ease and quiet we should basely truckle
to the Times and Tyranny. But that we should not foolishly ruin our selves, and
that we should follow the example of Lucius Piso, who in difficult and
deplorable times, knew how to preserve himself with such Prudence, that he was
never the Author of any servile proposition, and upon absolute necessity, did
it with great Moderation Nullius servilis sententiae sponte author, and quoties
necessitas ingrueret, sapi^nter moderans. Tac. 6. ann.
. Oftentimes we are forward in giving our advice in things which don't concern
us, persuaded that therein consists the remedy of the public ills: not
considering how easily we are deceived with a conceit of our own opinions,
without particular knowledge of the motives upon which Princes act. Nothing is
more dangerous than to advise; even he who is obliged in duty to it, ought to
avoid it if not asked; for Advice is judged by the event, and that depends upon
future accidents, which no Prudence can foresee, and that which falls out ill
is attributed to the Counselor, but not that which succeeds well.

EMBLEM XLVIII.
HOW are Princes armed against foreign Enemies! and how unprovided against
domestic ones! who follow them even through the midst of their Guards, yet do
they take no notice of them. These are Flatterers and Parasites; nor is there
less danger from their Fawns than from an Enemy's Sword. Flattery has ruined
more Princes than force. What Royal Purple has not this Moth eaten? What
Scepter has not this Worm gnawed? It insinuates it self into the tallest
Cedars, and preying upon the root soon brings them to the ground. It Is a damage
not discerned, but by entire ruin; the effect is sooner seen than the cause.
It Is a false Silkworm which inhabits the gilded Roofs of Palaces. The present
Emblem compares it to a Lizzard, with a gay sta^ry back and poisoned Breast. It
appears to the Prince under the shining Cloak of Zeal, the better to conceal
its pernicious designs Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter, Isai. 5. 20.
. Let a Prince know, that all brightness does not denote the Excellence of the
Subject; for in the Scripture it is a sign of a Leprosy When a man shall have
in the skin of his Flesh, a rising, a scab, or bright spot, Levit. 13. 2.
; and rotten wood gives a kind of light in the dark. There are some glimmerings
of good, even in the blackest Soul. Sometimes in the very bowels of Severity,
the Assertor of Liberty, and Opposer of the Prince. Flattery basely discovers
it self; as when Valerius Mesalla proposed the administering the Oath of
Allegiance to Tiberius each year, and being asked by whose order he did it, he
replied, That 'twas from his own proper motive; for that in all matters of
public concern, he would follow the Dictates of his own reason, even though he
should offend by it Sponte dixisse, Respondit; neque in its quae and remp.
pertinerent, consilio nisi su^ ^surum, vel cum periculo offensionis, ea sola
species adulandi supererat. Tac. 1. ann.
. Not unlike this, was that of Ateius, who when Lucius Ennius was accused of
having destroyed the Silver Statue of Tiberius, to make house Plate on, and
Tiberius being willing to wave the Accusation, openly opposed it, saying, That
the Senators ought not to be deprived of the power of judging, nor should such
a Crime go unpunished; that he might indeed forgive his own Grievances, but
should not be prodigal of the Injuries done the State Palam aspernante Atieo
Capitone quasi per libertatem. N^^ enim debere eripi patribus vim statuendi,
neque tantum maleficium impune habendum; sane lentius in suo dolor esset;
reipub. dolores ne largiretur. Tac. 3. ann.
.

The Lizzard changes its skin every year, so also does Flattery, as often, I
mean, as the Prince changes his mind. The Ministers of King Alphonso the Tenth,
advised him to Divorce Queen Violante, for Barrenness, arguing, that the
Marriage was void, which they afterward declared valid, and persuaded the King
to retake her to his Bed Mar. hist. Hisp.


There is no Animal more cunning than the Lizzard, whence the Lawyers call all
false practice Crimen Stellionatus. Who uses more cheats than the Flatterer,
imposing upon the Will, the noblest faculty of man; so much above the other
Senses, that without it the rest would be enslaved.

The Lizzard does not kill him whom it wounds, but only benumbs him, and puts
him, as it were, beside himself, by raising diverse passions in him. The proper
quality of a Flatterer, who with specious pretenses charms the Eyes and Ears of
Princes, and put them so beside themselves, that they cannot search the truth of
things. The Lizzard is so inveterate against man, that when it casts its skin,
it eats it up, least it should be useful in the cure of the Falling Sickness.
A Flatterer desires a Prince may not recover from his errors; for Disabuse is
the Son of Truth, which is an utter Enemy to Flattery. Flatterers envy the
prosperity of Princes, and hate them as those who by their power, and a certain
necessity oblige them to the Slavery of Dissimulation and Flattery, and force
them to speak one thing and think another.

A Prince has need of great Prudence to distinguish Flattery: for it consists
in Praise, which he will find from those who are far from that Vice. This is
the difference that a Flatterer promiscuously commends all, honorable or base,
good or bad; but the other only that which is just and good. When therefore a
Prince sees things attributed to him which are due to others, or which are mere
accidents O my People, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the
way of thy paths, Isa. 3. 12.
; frivolous things commended and extolled which don't deserve it, such as tend
more to pleasure than Reputation. Such as avert his mind from the toil of
affairs, such as respect more his own advantage than the public interest, and
that the person who so commends these things, does not rightly govern himself,
that he does not show any concern or readiness to admonish him, when he commits
any thing below his Person and Majesty; nay, that he excuses his Errors, and
regards more his own Interest than his Service, that he never seems offended at
any thing, that he may he always near him, that he does not associate with
those who are zealous Patriots and lovers of their Country. That he praises
those whom he thinks agreeable to him, and whom, if he would, he cannot turn
out of favor, that when he finds himself fixed therein, makes it his business
to gain the esteem of others, by attributing all good success to himself, and
by accusing the Prince in that he did not follow his Counsel; that to gain
credit, he brags that he reprehended his Errors, when in private he excused
commended and approved. Such a one as this a Prince may well mark for a
Flatterer, whom he ought to avoid as the most venomous Poison, and directly
opposite to that sincere Love with which he ought to be served Elanditiae
pessimum very affectus venenum; sua cuique utilitas. Tac. 1. hist.
.

But though these marks are plain enough, yet is self Conceit generally so
blind, as not to discern Flattery, but suffer it self to be coax'd with its own
Praises, which exercise an agreeable Tyranny over the Senses, so that there is
no Flattery so gross, which it does not believe its due. Sometimes this happens
from a remiss and negligent Goodness, which not duly considering the
inconveniences of Flattery, bears it, and interprets it Submission and Zeal.
This was the fault of Ferdinand King of Galicia, who was hated of his Subjects
for listening too much to Flatterers. And King Alphonso the Ninth, for the same
reason, did not a little obscure the Glory of his other Virtues and Exploits.
Let Princes therefore believe, that they may be so deceived either through
Self-conceit, or their natural Goodness, that though there be sufficient tokens
to distinguish Flattery, which that they may know and avoid, I would advise
them to read History, and observe by what Tricks and Cheats their Ancestors
were cajoled, and what Losses they have incurred thereby, and then consider,
whether or no they are not served in the same manner. One time only, when King
Ahasuerus could not sleep, and commanded the Chronicles to be read to him, he
presently learned from thence what never any one durst tell him, the Designs
and Tyranny of his Favorite Haman, and the faithful Services of Mordecat:
those hid hitherto by Dissimulation and Flattery, these stifled through Malice,
by which being disabus'd, he punished the one and rewarded the other. Yet even
in this they ought to beware of Flattery, wherefore let them read themselves;
for perhaps if another reads, he will either pass over those cases which should
instruct them, or change some Sentences and Words. O unhappy State of Majesty,
which cannot be sure of the truth even of Books, which are esteemed the
faithfullest Friends of Mankind.

A Prince ought also to get a sight of all Libels which are published against
him: for though Malice dictate them, yet Truth writes them, and he will find
therein what his Courtiers conceal, and gather Prudence and Instruction from
his Infamy. Tiberius seeing how he had been cheated, in not discovering the
practices of Sejanus in time, caused to be published the Will of Fulcinius
Trius, which was a Satyr upon him, that he might see, though to his shame, the
Truths which Flattery had concealed from him Quae ab haeredibus occultata,
recitari Tiberius jussit: patientiam libert at is alienae ostentans, and
contemptor suae infamiae, an scelerum Sejani dici nescius, mox quodam modo
dicta vulgari malebat, veritatisqui cui officit adulatio, per probra saltem
gnarus fieri. T^c. 6. ann.
.

Let not a Prince always view his own actions in the glass of those that are
about him, but rather let him consult Strangers, zealous Men, and such as are
of strict Lives and Conversation, and observe if they all agree in one opinion:
for the variable and inconstant glasses of Flattery never represent things as
they really are, but as the Prince would have them. And it is better to be
corrected by the wi^e, than cheated by the Flattery of Fools It is better to
hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the Song of Fools, Eccl. 7.
6.
. To this end it is necessary sometimes to consult one, sometimes another,
making them lay aside Modesty and Fear, by letting them know the obligation
they are under to speak Truth. Even Samuel durst not freely tell what God
commanded him, to Eli the High Priest And Samuel feared to show Eli the Vision,
1 Samuel 3. 15.
, until he entreated him And he said, What is the thing that the Lord has said
unto thee? I pray thee hide it not from me, Ibid.
.

Let a Prince sometimes view himself in the glass of the people, in which the
least spot immediately appears, for the Mob cannot dissemble. Lewis the Fourth
of France, would, disguised, mix himself with the Crowd, and hear what they
said of his Actions and Government. He that would find Truth, must seek her in
the Streets. Lewis the Eleventh of France used to complain, that he wanted one
piece of Furniture in his Palace, which was Truth. Which is too modest and
plain to live in Courts, being confounded in the presence of Kings. For this
reason Saul disguised himself when he went to consult the Witch of Endor, that
she might answer him with more freedom; and he did this himself without
trusting to another And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and
he went, 1 Samuel 28. 8.
. Jeroboam also observed the same method, when he sent his Wife to Ahijah to
enquire about their sick Child. He commanded her to disguise her self, that he
might not know her, least if he should, he might either give her no answer at
all, or not tell her truth 1 King 14. 2.
. Since then Truth is not to be found in the Palaces of Princes, she must be
traced out elsewhere; it is the honor of a King to search out a matter Prove.
25. 2.
. King Philip the Second had a Favorite, whom he loved extremely, who used to
inform him of whatever was said of him as well within as without the Court.
It Is observable, that though the discourses of the people in the absence of the
Prince, be true, yet when they come to his ears they are so softened, and gilded
with Flattery, that they rather encourage, and blindly make him pursue his
Vices, persuading him that his actions are highly approved by all. No
Government was more tyrannical than that of Tiberius; no Favorite more hated
than Sejanus; yet when they were at Caprea, the Senate earnestly begged, that
they would please to let them see them Cr^brisque precibus efflagit abant,
visendi sui copiam facerent. Tac. 4. ann.
. Nero was so miserably deceived by the Flattery of the people, that he
believed they could not bear his absence from Rome, though for never so small a
time, and that his presence comforted them in their Adversity Vidisse civium
moestos vultus, audire secretas quarimonias, quod tantum aditurus esset iter,
cujus ne modicos quidem egressus tolerarent, sueti adversum fortuit a aspectu
Principis ref^veri.
; though he was really so odious, that the Senate and Nobility were in doubt,
whether he was more cruel in his Absence than his Presence Senatus and Primat^^
in incerto erant. procul, an coram atrocior haberetur. Tac. 15. ann.
.

There are other ways to know Flattery, but few Princes care to make use of
them, it being so agreeable to their inclinations and nature; and so we see
Coiners punished, but not Flatterers, though the last are most guilty; these
gild and counterfeit our Money, those our Vices, putting them off even to our
selves for Virtues. This is a great fault, which is still decry'd, yet still
maintained in the Courts of Princes; where Truth appears not without danger,
especially with haughty and passionate Princes Contumacius loqui non est tutum
apud aures superbas, and offensioni proniores. Tac. 4. ann.
. Bernardo de Cabrera lost his life for his friendly advice in some affairs to
Peter the IVth of Arragon, notwithstanding his signal Services, and his having
been his Tutor. He who advises or informs another, seems to accuse his Actions
and Judgment, which Princes will not endure; for they think he don't sufficiently
respect them, who talks to them freely. Gutierrez Fernandez of Toledo with an
honest and well-meaning Sincerity, told King Peter the Cruel, what he thought
of his Government, and advised him to moderate his Severity; which meritorious
Advice the King took for such a crime, that he caused him to be beheaded for it
Mar. hist. Hisp.
. A Prince looks upon him as his Judge, who observes his Actions, nor can he
endure him who finds fault with them. The danger is in admonishing a Prince
what he should do, not what he would do Nam suadere Principi quod oporteat,
multi laboris, and periculi. Tac. 1. hist.
: which is the reason Truth is so timorous, and Flattery so audacious. But if
any Prince would be so generous, as to think it base and mean to be coax'd by
Flattery, and look upon it as a contempt for others to pretend to impose upon
him, by false praises, and speak more of his Grandeur than his Person Etiam ego
and tu simplicissime inter nos hodie loquimur, caeteri libe^tius cum fortuna*
quam nobiscum. Tac. 1. hist.
, he would soon be rid of this sort of cattle by arming himself with severity;
for none will dare attempt a stanch and severe Prince, who fathoms the truth of
things, and has learnt to contemn vain Honors. Tiberius with the same
composure of countenance, heard the freedom of Piso, and the Flattery of Gallus
Audiente h^c Tiberio, ac silente. Tac. 2. ann.
. And though he dissembled so well, he knew the Flattery, as he did that of
Ateius Capito, considering their Thoughts, not their Words Intellexit haec
Tiberius, ut erant magis, quam ^t dicebantur. Tac. 3. ann.
. Let a Prince also publicly gratify those who shall be so ingenuous as to
tell him Truth. Thus Clisthenes the Tyrant of Sicily did, who erected a Statue
to one of his Counselors, who contradicted his Triumph, by which he
wonderfully gained the hearts of his Subjects, and encouraged his other
Counselors to speak their Sentiments more freely. King Alphonso the Twelfth,
being once advising about an affair of great moment, with his Sword in his
right hand, and his Scepter in his left, spoke to this effect: Come, says he,
speak all your minds freely, and frankly advise me what you think for the glory
of this Sword, and the advantage of this Scepter Mar. hist. Hisp.
. Happy that Kingdom, in which Counsel is neither embarrass'd by Respect, nor
awed by Fear! All men know the baseness of Flattery, but they know too the
inconveniences of Truth, and see more danger from this than that. Who would
not speak with more sincerity and zeal to Princes, were they all of the same
temper with John the Second King of Portugal, who when one petitioned for some
vacant Office, replied, That he had long since promised it to a faithful
Servant, who never spoke to please, but to serve him and the State Mar. hist.
Hisp.
. But this generous Sincerity is very rarely to be found; Princes being usually
of King Achab's mind, who calling a council of Prophets, would have Micah
excluded, because, says he, he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil 1
Kings 22. 8.
. For this reason, Ministers often run great Risques, who through zeal are too
forward in telling their Thoughts of future dangers, that they may be
seasonably prevented. For Princes had rather not know them than fear them;
their ears are prepared for the soft Harmony of Music, but cannot bear the
jarring sounds of impending dangers. Whence they chose for their Counselors
and Confidents, such as will tell them nothing but what they approve of After
their own Lusts they shall heap to themselves teachers, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
, and not what God inspires as the Prophet Micah did And Mi^ah said, as the
Lord lives, even what my God says, that will I speak, 2 Chronicles. 18. 13.
. What wonder then, if without the light of Truth they lose their way and are
lost?

Would these Tell-truths be guided by Prudence, doubtless a Prince would more
value Truth, than vain and empty Flattery; but there are few who use it
seasonably; or with that Modesty and Address that is requisite. For all that
are free are morose, and offend Princes with the asperity of their Looks,
especially when armed with Truth; for some Virtues are odious, such as
obstinate Severity, and a Spirit not to be gained by favors. For Princes think
themselves slighted, when they see those measures, which are usually taken to
obtain their favor are contemned, thinking he who does not study to acquire
them, neither acknowledges himself their Subject, nor has occasion for them.
The Superior uses the Lancet or incision Knife of Truth, to cure the
distempers of the inferior, but this only a caustic, which without pain
benumbs, and wears away the parts infected in the Superior. To be troublesome
with unseasonable and improper Truths, is rather Malice than Zeal, rather
Sauciness that Admonition. God himself uses singular Prudence and Caution in
revealing them; for though he might have told Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar their
future Calamities by Joseph and Daniel; yet he chose rather to do it by Dream,
when the Senses were ^ull'd and Majesty buried in Sleep, and even then not
clearly, but by Figures and Hieroglyphics, that there might be some time
allowed for their Interpretation, to avoid sudden Terror and Consternation, as
also the danger of the Ministers, should they unasked declare such things Genesis
41. 22. and Dan. 4 2.
. It Is sufficient, if the Minister can make the Prince understand them; which
if he can effect by signs, let him not use words. Yet are there some so
imprudent, that they glory in bold Truths, and are fond to be the bearers, nay
sometimes the inventers of ill News. Let these learn of what befell King
Balshazzar, to whom the hand that pronounced his death upon the Wall, was not
wholly visible, but only the fingers appeared, and but the ends of them
neither; so that it could not in the least be discovered, who guided them; nor
this by day light but by night, writing that decretory Sentence by
Candlelight, upon the Wall in such Characters, as required some time to be
understood. While therefore the intention is good, and accompanied by Prudence,
'twill be easy to walk a secure and middle path, between the Slavery of
Flattery and the Arrogance of Truth; for all Truths may be spoken, provided it
be with discretion, by proposing only the amendment of those to whom they are
directed. Thus the discretion and address of Agricola mollified the stern
humor of Domitian Moderatione tamen prudentiaque Agricolae leniebatur, quia
non contumacia neque inani jactatione libertatis famam, fatumque provocabat.
Tac. in vit. Agric.
. He who with his Services and Modesty mingles Valor and Industry, may live
safe under the worst of Princes Posse etiam sub malis Principibus magnos viros
esse. Tac in vit. Agric.
; and gain more Reputation, than those, who by being too ambitious of Glory, do
foolishly ruin themselves, without any advantage to the State; by this
circumspection M. Lepidus turned to his advantage many dangerous Flatteries,
and preserved the favor of Tiberius Nam pleraque ab saevis adulationibus
aliorum in melius flexit: neque tamen temperamenti egebat, cum ^ quabili
authoritate, and gratia apud Tiber^um viguerit. Tac. 4. an.
. Thrasea Paetus's going out of the Senate, to avoid being present at the
Votes, which to flatter Tiberius, they were making against the Memory of
Agrippina, was pernicious to the Senate, and dangerous to himself, without
giving any foundation to the peoples Liberty, as he proposed Thrasea Paetus
silentio vel brevi ass^nsu pri^res adulationes transmittere solitus, exiit, tum
Senatu, ac sibi causam periculi fecit, caeteris libertatis initium non
praebuit. Tac. 14. ann.
.

Truth is yet more dangerous in those, who avoiding Flattery, to seem free and
plain, carp at the actions and failures of Princes, with sharp Jests, which
stick long by the great ones, especially where they are grounded upon Truth
Tiberius acerbis facetiis irridere solitus, quarum apud pr^potentes in longum
memoria est. Tac. 5. ann.
: As Vestinus found by Nero, who put him to death for reprehending his Vices
with too much freedom Saepe asperis facetiis illusus, quae ubi multum ex vero
traxere, acrem sui memoriam relinqunt. Tac. 15. ann.
. To speak Truth only to publish the faults of the Government, is a kind of
freedom which looks like Advice, but is Reflection; it appears Zeal but is
Malice. And this I look upon as not less pernicious than Flattery it self. For
if one be an odious Slavery, the other is a false kind of Liberty. Hence the
wisest Princes dread freedom as much as Flattery, neither being safe, and
therefore the extremes of both are to be avoided; which was observed in the
time of Tiberius Unde angusta and lubrica oration sub Principe qui libertatem
metuebat, adulationem oderat. Tac. 2. ann.
Yet it is certain, there ought to be some allowance for Flattery, thereby to
introduce Truth; for not to flatter in somethings, is to accuse in every thing;
and in a corrupt Government, there is as much to be feared from too much as too
little Flattery Quae moribus corru^ ptis, perinde anceps, si nulla, and ubi
nimia est. Tac. 4. ann.
. The State would be in a desperate condition, and the Prince inhuman and
barbarous, if neither Truth nor Flattery durst approach him. He would be like
an Adder, if he should be deaf to that Flattery which would persuade him to
what is glorious and honorable Psalm 57. 6.
. With such as these God threatened the people of Jerusalem by the Prophet
Jeremiah; I will send Serpents among you, Cockatrices which will not be
charmed, and they shall bite you Jer. 8. 17.
. That Mind is wild and savage, which a gentle and modest Flattery cannot sooth
into good Temper, and Compliance with its wholesome Advice. Truth being of it
self something bitter, we must sweeten the brim of the Cup, that Princes may
drink with more pleasure: They will not hear it if it be dry, nay are often worse
for it. The more Tiberius's Cruelty was exclaimed against, the more severe and
bloody he grew Caesar objectam sibi adversus reos inclementiam, eo pervicacius
amplexus est. Tac. 4. ann.
. It Is of use sometimes to commend some famous actions in them, as if they had
actually done them, that they may be thereby prompted to put them in execution;
or to be extravagant in the commendation of Valor or other Virtues, that they
may be the more eager to follow them. This enflames the mind more to honor
than Flattery. These means, says Tacitus, the Roman Senate used to Nero in the
beginning of his Reign Magnis patrum laudibus, ut juvenilis animus levium
quoque rerum gloria sublatus, majores continuaret. Tac. 13. ann.
. It Is of very ill consequence to commend Vices under the name of Virtues; for
this is encouraging Princes to commit greater. Nero seeing his Severity taken
for Justice, became a perfect Tyrant Postquam cuncta scelerum pro egregiis
^^cipi videt, exturbat Octaviam. Tac. 14. ann.
. We ill consult our own Liberty, Fortunes and Lives, in endeavoring to extend
the unjust power of Princes beyond their due bounds, by administering them means
to satisfy their Ambition and Lusts. Scarce any Prince would be bad, were not
his Ministers Flatterers. They gain that favor by public Mischief, which they
cannot merit by their Virtues. Prodigious Villainy! For a momentary favor, which
they are very often disappointed of too, or rather ruined with, to betray their
Country and promote Tyranny! What wonder, if God chastises Subjects for the
faults of Princes, if they are the cause of them, while Princes act all by
their Ministers, who teach them several ways of burthening their Subjects with
Taxes, of oppressing the Nobility, and turning the Government into Tyranny, by
violating Privileges, Laws and Customs, and so are at last their own
Executioners.

EMBLEM XLIX.
MANY reasons make me doubt, whether the chance of birth has any part of the
favor or hatred of Princes; or whether our Conduct and Prudence, can, without
ambition and peril, find a secure path, between a froward Obstinacy, and a
despicable Slavery. There seems to be a certain occult force, which, if it does
not compel, does at least move our Will, and incline it to one more than
another: and if in the Senses and natural Appetites there is a Sympathy and
Antipathy to things, why not in the Affections and Passions? They may perhaps,
have more power and force over the Appetite than the Will, because that is more
a Rebel to Free Will than this, but it cannot be denied, but that the
inclination too is of great force, being generally attended by reason,
especially when Art and Prudence know how to adapt themselves to the humor of
the Prince. We see in all things as well animate as inanimate, a secret
Correspondence and Friendship, whose chains are easier broken than parted.
Neither the injuries nor adversities which King John the Second suffered for
his affection to Alvarez de Luna, nor the apparent danger of the latter, could
dissolve that firm bond of Friendship with which their Souls were united. And
though this inclination be not natural, yet gratitude for past Services, or the
extraordinary merits of the Subject usually produce it. Virtue is of it self
amiable, and grateful to the Will. 'T would be barbarous to oblige a Prince to
balance his affections with indifferency to all, for they proceed from the
heart by the Eyes and Hands: what stanch severity can always resist the charms
of favor? How reserved was Philip the Second? Yet had he not one but many
particular Favorites. God himself had some whom he peculiarly favored, giving
them power to stop the course of the Sun and Moon And he said in the sight of
Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou Moon, in the valley of
Ajalon, Jos. 10. 12.
; The Lord obeying the voice of man The Lord harkened to the voice of man, for
the Lord fought for Israel, Ibid
. And why (as King Peter observed) is particular Friendship allowed to private
persons and not to Princes? Many are the troubles of Government, to alleviate
which, 'twill be necessary to have some one near you in whom you can put a more
particular Confidence. There are many difficulties in it, which are not to be
surmounted by one. The burden of a Crown is too weighty and cumbersome for one
to bear, the strongest yield to it, and, as Job says, bend under it. For this
reason, though God was assistant to Moses, and supplied him with ability and
instructions to administer his Office, yet he commanded to make use of the
elders in the Government of his people, that they might help to bear the
burden And they shall bear the ^urthen of the people with thee, that thou bear
it not thy self alone, N^^b. 11. 17.
. And Ieth^o his Father-in-Law, thought the burden greater than he was able to
bear For this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thy
self alone, Exodus 18. 18.
. Alexander took Parmeno to his assistance; David, Joab; Solomon, Zadock;
Darius, Daniel; by whose directions they succeeded in their affairs. No Prince
is so prudent and discreet, as of himself to know all things, nor so careful
and diligent, as to manage all affairs alone. Which natural impotency obliged
Princes to erect Courts and Counsels, and to create Presidents, Governors, and
Viceroys, in whom the power and authority of Princes might reside. For alone
(says King Alphonso the Wise) they cannot penetrate and examine all things, but
have need of the assistance of others, in whom they can confide, who should use
the power which they receive in performing those things which Princes cannot do
themselves L. 3. tit. 1. p. 2.
. And if Princes use the assistance of Ministers abroad, why should he not in
the more private affairs of his Cabinet? It Is necessary he should have some one
near him, whom he may deliberate with about the Advice and Counsel which is
given him. That he may with him compare his own Scruples and Propositions, and
be by him instructed. Whom, in fine, he may safely trust to expedite and
execute Affairs Solatium curarum frequenter sibi adhibent maturi P^eges, and
hinc meliores aestimantur, si soli omnia non praesumunt. Cassiod lib 8. epist.
9.
. Would it not be worse, if embarrass'd with such weighty cares, he should
communicate himself to none? Besides, it is absolutely necessary that the Prince
should have some assistant, who, disengaged from all other business, should be
as a Mediator between him and his people: Otherwise it would be* impossible for
him to hear and satisfy all, nor would it suit with his Majesty. For this
reason, the Israelites besought Moses that he would speak to God for them, for
they themselves were afraid of his Presence Exodus 20. 19.
. And Absalom, that he might render David odious to the people, urged that he
had no Ministers about him to receive the complaints of the distressed Thy
matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed of the King to hear
thee, 2 Samuel 15. 3.
. The Zeal and Prudence of a Favorite may with ease rectify the defects of
Government, and the inclinations of Princes Qui in regiae familiaritatis
sacrarium admittuntur multa facere possunt, and dicere, quibus paupcrum
necessita, sublevetur, faveatur religio, fiat aequitas, Ecclesia dilatetur.
Petr. Blis. Epist. 150.
. Agricola by his prudent address, reclaimed Domitian, and though Sejanus was
bad, Tiberius was worse, when without him he followed his own inclinations
Obtectis libidinibus, dam Sejanum dilexit, timuitve: postremo in scelera simul
at dedecora prorupit, postquam remoto pudore, and metu, su^ tantum ingenio
utebatur. Tac. 6. ann.
. And truly by such Favorites God-often saves a whole Kingdom, as he did Syria
by Naaman, and Egypt by Joseph 2 Kings 5. 1
. Since then it is necessary that the weight of Government should be divided;
it is natural in the choice of such an assistant to be guided in some measure by
inclination, or some secret Sympathy in the persons of each; which choice, if
it be founded upon desert, can be no ways dangerous; nay, it is requisite that
the humor of the party whom the Prince takes to assist him, should be chosen
to him The question is. Whether one or many should be chosen to this Office; if
many equally favored and respected, Emulation will arise, and their Counsels
will thwart one another to the detriment of the State. So that it seems more
agreeable to natural order, that affairs should be committed to one alone, who
should supervise the rest, and by whom affairs should come digested and
methodized to the Prince, who should only substitute him to his cares and
trouble, not his power and authority, in his Counsels not his Rewards. The Sun
alone imparts Light to the whole world, and when he sets, he leaves not many
but only one Vicegerent, the Moon, with a Luster much greater than that of the
other Stars, who seem but as so many inferior Ministers to assist her. Yet
neither this nor those shine with their own, but borrowed Light, which the
Earth acknowledges received from the Sun. Nor does this favor misbecome
Majesty, when a Prince devolves part of the burden of Affairs upon his
Favorite, so as to preserve the sovereign power and authority to himself: for
this is not favor but employment, not so much an obligation, as a
communication of trouble; nor is this so much to be envied, if Princes would be
so prudent, as to give it another name; as President of the Council, or
Chancellor; as the Magistrates called Praefecti at Rome, incurred no Envy,
though they were second Caesar's.

The felicity of Subjects consists not in the Prince's being like a loadstone,
attractive of Iron and not of Gold, but in his knowledge in choosing such a
Minister as will attribute whatever is great and commendable to him; and take
all the Reflections and Odium of the people upon himself; one whose mind is
wholly bent upon the public good; who manages affairs without Ambition; hears
without Disdain and debates without Passion; whose Resolves and Determinations
have no respect to self-interest. In a word, whose whole aim is the service and
advantage of his Country, not himself, or the preservation of his Master's
favor. By this rule one may know whether this Familiarity proceed from pure
Zeal or Tyranny. Princes ought to take great care in the choice of such a
Minister, endeavoring not to be biased by Affection or fansifull Inclination,
but by rare and excellent Qualifications and Merits, for sometimes such
Friendship is not the result of deliberation but accident; it is not favor but
diligence: Courts usually erect and adore some Idol which they deify, and treat
with Royal Splendour and Magnificence; they worship it upon their Knees, burn
Tapers, and offer Incense to it, imploring its assistance with Prayers and Vows
And so the multitude, allured by the grace of the work, took him now for a God,
which a little before was but honored as a man, Wisd 14. 20.
. As industry can change the course of Rivers, and turn them another way; so it
often happens that those who have business at Court, not regarding the Prince,
the true channel of aff^irs, apply themselves to the Favorite, whose arts do,
by this, so secure the Prince's favor, that he can never disengage himself
from it. No Prince was more cautious, none more free than Tiberius, yet was he
subject to his Favorite Sejanus Tiberium variis artibus devinxit, adeo ut
obscurum adversus alios, sibi uni incautuin intectumque efficere^.
. In which case it is difficult to say, whether such favor be human choice, or
some superior power, for the greater good or ill of the Commonwealth: The Holy
Spirit says, it is a particular judgment of God Prove. 29. ^6
. Tacitus attributes the favor and fall of Sejanus to the anger of the Gods
for the ruin of the Empire N^^ tam sol^rtia (quippe iisdem artibus victus est)
(...) pari ex^tio vigu^t ^^^iditque. Tac. 4. ann.
. A misfortune scarce avoidable, when this favor falls upon a person of great
quality, as it usually does in Courts where the chief of the Nobility are
Ministers. For he who is once possessed of it, will, by the pre-eminence of his
Birth and Grandeur of his Family endeavor what he can to preserve it, nor will
he easily suffer himself to be supplanted by any one: As was seen in John
Alphonso Robles, in the time of King John the Second M^r. (...) lib. 20. l. 25.
. The heart of a Prince is never safe in the power of a Subject, whose Nobility
and Authority make him too much respected by others. Though this inconveniency
is lessened, when this favor falls upon some great man who is truly zealous
and intent upon his Prince's Service, and the honor and welfare of his
Country, for then the people's Envy and Odium will not be so great, and the
orders which are dispatched through the hands of such a one will be the more
readily observed; yet it is always highly necessary, if a Prince could balance
his favor between his own Authority and the Merits of his Favorite, to commit
only that part of the administration to him, which he cannot manage himself;
for should he commit it wholly to him, he would experience the same misfortunes
with King Ahasuerus, when he entrusted Hamon with the Government of his people
Esth. 3. 11.
. Let him not give by another's hand what he can dispose of with his own; nor
borrow others Eyes, when he can see with his own. As to what is done in Courts
of Justice and Counc^ls, let him afterward consult the Presidents and
Secretaries, from whose relations he may receive a just account of the affairs
therein transacted; and his Resolutions will be more concise and ready, when he
confers with those by whom the aff^irs ^ave been managed. This method the Popes
and Emper^^ ^se, as did also the Kings of Spain ^ill Philip the Second, who
being an excellent Penman, introduced the custom of taking debates and
consultations in writing, which afterward prevailing, gave rise to private
favor: for the Kings being embrass'd with such a vast number of writings were
obliged to communicate them to some one, and this must of necessity be a
Favorite. On such a one let a Prince bestow more peculiar marks of favor and
benevolence. For he who merits his favor and shares his trouble, ought to have
Pre-eminence above others. The shadow of St. Peter worked Miracles Acts 5. 15.
. What wonder then, if a Prince's Favorite, who is but his shadow, acts with
more Authority than others? Nevertheless, some favors should be reserved for
others; nor should those other be so great, as to exceed the condition of a
Subject, and make him equal to the Prince, so as to have Court made to him as
Co-partner in the Empire, and to draw the whole body of affairs after him,
which derogates much from the Authority and Esteem of the Prince. A Favorite
should act as the shadow not the Substance. In this the Kings of Castile, who,
in times past, had Favorites, run^ great Risques; for as the power of the
Kings being then not so large, how little soever they granted, it endangered
the whole Kingdom; as it befell King Sancho the Strong, for his favor to Lopez
de Hara; King Alphonso the Eleventh, for his to Count Alvaro Osorio; King John
the Second, and King Henry the Fourth, for theirs to Alvaro de Luna, and John
Pacheco. The whole point of Favouritism consists in the Prince's knowing how
much he ought to allow his Favorite, and he how much he ought to receive from
his Prince. Whatever exceeds this rule, creates (as we shall mention anon)
Jealousy, Envy and Danger Sed uterque mensuram implevimus and tu quantum
princeps tribuere amico posses, and ego quantum amicus a principe acci^pere:
caetera invidiam a^gent. Tac. 14. ann.
.

EMBLEM L.
THE Mountain looks down with disdain upon the other works of Nature, and
proudly rises above them, so as to have communication with the Skies. Let not
the Valleys envy it this Glory, for though it be nearer the favors of Heaven,
it is also more exposed to the strokes of its. Thunder too. About its head
Clouds gather, and Storms prepare their rage, and upon it they first exert it.
It Is the same in Offices and Employments more immediately under Princes. The
Activity of their power is most offensive to those who are nearest it. Their
Conversation is as venomous as that of a Viper Eccles. 9. 13.
. Whoever walks among them, walks among Snares, and the Arms of his offended
Enemies Ibid.
. The favor and disdain of Princes are so immediate, that nothing intervenes.
Their Love knows no Moderation; when turned to Hatred, it leaps from one
extreme to the other, from Fire to Frost. The same instant sees them love and
hate, with the effects of Thunder, which while the noise is heard, or the flash
seen, reduces the bodies to Ashes. The favor of Princes is like flame,
extinguished with the same ease 'twas lighted. Nay some have thought it
absolutely fatal to those on whom it falls Fato potenti^ raro sempiternae. Tac.
3. ann.
. And many examples as well past as present, are sufficient evidences of it; we
have fresh instances of the sudden falls of the most exalted Favorites. The
Duke of Lerma in Spain; the Marshal D' Ancre in France; The Duke of Buckingham
in England; John Olden Barnvelt in Holland; Cardinal Clesel in Germany; at Rome
Cardinal Nazaret; yet may this be ascribed to diverse causes, either because the
Prince having given all that he could, or the Favorite obtained all he
desired, he was mounted to the highest step, and so must of necessity descend
An satius capis, ^ut illos cum omnia tribuerunt; Aut hos, cum jam nihil
reliquum est quod capiant? Tac. 3. ann.
. But suppose there be moderation in the favors of the one, and the ambition
of the other; yet what constancy can there be in the minds of Princes, which
the more vehement they are, are the more subject to variety and contradiction?
who can fix the affections of him whose Senses see double, and is like the
first matter, not resting in one form, but pleased with variety. Who can
preserve that favor which is liable to so many chances and turns of Humor?
Who can behave himself with so nice integrity, as to maintain the Prince's good
opinion of him with the people? The Eyes of all are upon the Favorite. The
Prince's Friends think him an Usurper of their Rewards, his Enemies that he
incenses the Prince farther against them. These, if they return to their duty,
must make the disgrace of the Favorite one of the conditions; those if they
forsake it, lay all the blame upon him. Ambition and Envy are always in Arms,
intent upon every occasion to ruin him. The people are so embittered against
him, that they impute even natural misfortunes, and the Prince's Vices, all to
him. Bernardo de Cabrera lost his head for the Tyrannies of mPeter the Fourth,
King of Arragon, whose Favorite he was. By the same means that a person
endeavors to gain the favor of the Prince, he incurs the Odium of the
Subjects; so that it was truly said by that great Man, Alphonso de Albuquerque,
Governor of the E^st-Indies, that a Minister in obliging his Prince, offended
the People: and if he endeavor to gratify the People, he disobliges the
Prince.

If this favor be only founded upon exterior Adoration, fomented by
Court-Artifices, it is violent and momentary, and the Prince will endeavor to
free himself from this imposed involuntary Slavery.

If it proceed from a natural propensity of the Mind, it is very subject to
second Causes, and is effaced by time or the ingratitude of the Subject, when
he forgets from whence he took his rise Wisd. 15. 11.
.

If a person's Mein and Carriage do, as it were, ravish the Prince's favor, it
either soon fades, or is only superficial, as in common Friendship.

If it be from some qualifications of Mind greater than those of the Prince,
whenever he knows it, there is an end of his ^avour, for none can endure in
another Pre-eminency in (...) Valor, which is usually esteemed above Power and
Authority.

If it be from assiduity and care in business, diligence is not less dangerous
than negligence; for success does not always correspond to means, because of
the diversity of accidents; and Princes will be disappointed in nothing that
they wish and desire. Success is attributed to chance, or to the fortune of the
Prince, and not to the prudence of the Favorite Haec est conditio Regum, ut
casus tantum adversos hominibus tribuant, sccundos fortunae suae. Aemil. Prob
, but misca^^iages to him alone, though the fault be another, for all are
willing to father Success, but Misfortunes are laid at ^nother's door Prospera
om^es sibi vendicant, adversa uni (...) Tac. in vit. Agric.
, that is to the Favorite. Even Casualties are imputed to him, as the falling
of the Amphitheatre, and the burning of Mount Caelius were to Sejanus
Feralemque annum fer^bant, and omnibus adversis susceptum Principi consilium
absentia, qui mos vulgo ad culpam fortuita trahentes. Tac. 4. ann.
. Nor do they only accuse him in affairs of his own management, but also in
those of others, or in those accidents that depend upon the Prince's Will and
Nature. Thus Seneca was blamed for that Nero would have drowned his Mother Ergo
non jam Nero cujus immanitas omnium qu^stus anteibat, sed adverso rumore,
Seneca erat, quod oratione tali confessionem scripsisset. Tac. 14. ann.
. Men cannot imagine a wickedness so strange as was not believed of Sejanus Sed
quia Sejanus ^acinorum ommum repertor habebatur, ex nimia charitate in eum
Caesaris, and caeterorum in utrumque odio quamvis fabulosa and immania
credebantur. Tac 4. ann.
. There is no natural death, of a great Minister or Relation of the Prince, but
is immediately reflected upon the Favorite. As was that of Prince Philip
Emanuel, Son to Charles Duke of Savoy, to the Duke of Lerma.

If this favor proceeds from Obligation, and from signal Services performed,
the Prince will by degrees grow weary of the burden, and his Love will turn
into Hate, because he looks upon him as a Creditor, and being unable to pay
him, he seeks pretenses to break with him, and so strike off the Debt Nam
beneficia eo usque laeta sunt dum videntur exsolvi posse; ubi multum
antevene^e, pro gratia odium redditur. Ibid.
. Acknowledgment is a kind of Slavery. For he who obliges another, makes
himself his superior, which is inconsistent with the Sovereignty of a Prince,
whose power is diminished, if it be not greater than the obligation: and
Princes being oppressed with the weight of Gratitude and Obligation, become
notoriously ungrateful, that they may discharge themselves from them Quidam
quo plus deb^nt, magis oderunt. Leve as alienum debit^rem facit, grave
inimicum. Sen. Ep. 19.
. The Emperor Adrian put Titian to death, who had been his Tutor from a Boy,
and to whom he owed his Empire: Not to mention that the fatigues of many years
are effaced by one oversight; Princes being more apt to punish a slight
offense, than to reward signal Services. If they are honorable, they create
Emulation and Envy in the Prince himself, for whose Service they are performed,
for some are more angry with those who have served them successfully and
gloriously, than with those who have been more remiss and less successful, of
this humor was Philip of Macedon Quem ita gloriae cupidum esse dicunt
familiares, ut omnia clara ^acinora sua esse videri cupit, and magis indignatur
Ducibus and Praefectis, qui prospere, and laudabiliter aliquid gesserint, quam
iis qui infeliciter and ignave. Demost.
; a Vice which his Son Alexander inherited Suae demptum gloriae existimans
quicquid cessisset alien^. Curt.
; and was visible in James the First of Arragon, who when Don Blasco de Alagon
had taken Morella, he thought he had gotten more Glory than he in that
Expedition, and therefore took from him that City, and gave him in exchange
that of Sagasto. The Victories of Agricola made Domitian jealous, seeing that
the fame of a private man exceeded his Id sibi maxim formidolosum, privati
hominis nomen supra Principis attolli. Tac. in vit. Agric.
. So that in the most glorious and successful Exploits there is the greatest
danger.

If favor springs from the prompt obedience of the Favorite to the Will of
the Prince, it makes the Government incur the above mentioned inconveniences
of Flattery, and soon ruins both the Prince and Favorite; Obedience is as
dangerous as disobedience; for if the command succeeds, it is ascribed to the
Prince, if not, to the Favorite. If this command be not obeyed, it is then the
reason why it succeeded not. If it be unjust, he dares not make that his
excuse, lest he offend the Prince; if he obey, the ^ault is all laid upon him;
and the Prince, that he may not seem the Author of the mischief, permits him to
suffer either in the opinion of the People; or in the hands of the Judge. Thus
Tiberius served Piso after he had by his command poisoned Germanicus, whose
cause he referred to the Senate Integram causam ad Senatum remisit. Tac. 6. ann.
; and coming to Rome, he behaved himself as if he knew nothing of the matter,
leaving him confounded to see him so unconcerned and reserved, without either
pity or anger Nullo magis exterritus est, quam quod Tiberium sine miseratione,
sine ira obstinatum, clausumque vidit, ne quo affectu perrumperetur. Tac. 3.
ann.
.

If this favor falls upon a man of small Qualifications and Merit, he will
sink under the weight of affairs; for without a brave and vigorous mind,
without a quick and piercing Wit, the favor of Princes cannot be long
maintained.

If it proceeds from a resemblance and conformity of Virtues, when the Prince
bids adieu to them the other is at an end. For he will hate the Favorite, as
one who accuses his change Wisd 2. 15.
, and whom he cannot make use of in the prosecution of his Vices.

If a Prince loves a Favorite, for that he makes use of him as an instrument
to execute his vicious designs and inclinations with; whatever ills do thence
arise, either to the King's Person, or to the Government, all fall upon him;
and the Prince with ease clears himself by disgracing him; or else hates him as
a witness of his Vices, whose presence does, as it were, upbraid him with his
crimes. For the same reason Nero disgraced Anicetus the Murderer of Agrippina
Levi post admiss^m scelus gratia, dein graviore odio, quia malorum facinorum
ministri quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur. Tac. 14. ann.
; so Tiberius discharged those Ministers who had assisted his Cruelty, and made
use of others Qui scelerum ministros ut perverti ab aliis nolebat, ita
plerumque satiatus, and oblatis in eandem operam recentibus, veteres and
praegraves adfl^xit. Tac. 4 ann.
. The Odium of the Death, and the favor of him who commands it, end both with
the execution, and the Prince thinks he sufficiently clears himself in
punishing the crime, as Plancina found Ut odium and gratia desiere, ju^ valuit.
Tac. 6. ann.
.

If this favor proceed from the communication of important Secrets, he is in
danger from them, for they are Vipers in the breast of the Favorite, which
gnaw his Entrails till they eat their way out, for either levity or ambition of
seeming a man in favor, reveals them, or they are discovered by another, or by
discourse, which are equally pernicious to the Favorite. But though this
should not happen, the Prince will be willing to free himself from the care of
having entrusted them, by tearing open the bag in which they are hid: as many
Secrets so many dangers Isa. 24. 16. vid. lat. verse.
.

Nor is the danger less, if this favor proceeds from the Favorites being
conscious of the Prince's Cowardice and Baseness; for such favor is rather
fear than inclination, nor will a Prince endure, that his honor should depend
upon another's silence, or that there should be one who inwardly should despise
him.

If this favor be but small, it cannot resist the fury of Envy, but is blown
down by every blast, like a tree not firmly rooted.

If it be great, it creates Envy and Fear in the Prince himself, and so makes
him careful to free himself from it; as when we have pil'd Stones upon Stones,
we at last fear lest the heap which we have raised, should fall upon our own
heads, and so push them over the other way. The Prince sees the Statue which he
erected shades his own Grandeur, and so pulls it down again. I may venture to
say, that Princes seem to delight to show their power, as well in pulling down
those images as in erecting them; for their power being limited, cannot seem
immense, unless it return to the center from which it proceeded, or keep in a
circle.

These are the rocks against which, if the ship of favor strike, it is lost, so
much the surer, by how much the more sail it makes. But if any one escape, it is
either because it recovered port in time, or that it ran first upon the shore
of Eternity. Is there then any Pilot so skillful as to know how to manage the
helm of favor, and to sail in so very dangerous a Gulf? What prudence, what
art can save him? What Chemist can fix this Mercury of Princes Affections?
especially, when favor founded upon eminent merit cannot resist Envy and the
Machinations of so many as conspire its ruin. Neither the Kings Darius nor
Achis could defend their favor to Daniel and David, against the hatred of the
Princes and Guards Dan. 6 4.
; but were forced for their satisfaction, to banish one, and throw the other
into a Den of Lions, though they were well assured of their Integrity and
Innocence 1 S^m. 20. 6.
. Though no prudence nor attention be sufficent to prevent those accidents
which depend not upon the Favorite, yet may he do much in things which depend
upon him, and at least will be unblameable if he fall into disgrace. Which
consideration obliged me here to mark out to him the usual causes of his ruin,
arising from his own imprudence and the malice of others, that being forewarned
he may avoid them. If we would attentively consider the Maxims and Actions of
former Favorites, and especially of Sejanus, we shall find, that most of them
fell, because they could not continue those good methods by which they at first
obtained the Prince's savor. All to merit it, and gain the applause of the
people, enter into favor zealous, humble, courteous, and officious, giving
counsel for the Glory of the Prince, and Preservation of his Grandeur, the
method by which Sejanus ingratiated himself Quia Sejanus, incipiente adhuc
potentia, bonis consiliis no^escere volebat. Tac. 4. ann.
, but being once masters of this favor, they loose the Helm which before
guided them, and believe they have no more occasion for it in their Voyage, but
can sail securely with the gale of the Prince's favor.

At first they are diligent to appear wholly disengaged from their own affairs,
and only intent upon the Prince's interest, preferring his service even to
their own Lives and Fortunes; whence the Prince, persuaded that he has got in
this person a faithful associate in his labors, loves him and extolls him
everywhere; as Tiberius did Sejanus to the Senate and People Ut soci^m laborum
non modo in sermonibus, sed apud patres and populum celebraret. Tac 4. ann.
.

They endeavor farther by some generous and heroic action to prove their
fidelity to the Prince and win his heart. Thus Sejanus ingratiated himself with
Tiberius, by sustaining with his own hands and head, the weight of a Precipice
which would else have fallen upon Tiberius, causing him thereby to put more
confidence in his Friendship and Constancy Praebuitque ipsi materiam, cur
amicitiae, ^^stanti aeque (...) magis fideret. Ibid.
.

Which good opinion of a Favorites fidelity, if a Prince once imbibes, he
easily fancies himself secure of it for the future, and willingly takes his
advice though never so pernicious, putting more confidence in him than in
himself; as Tiberius did after that action Major ex e^, and quanquam exitiosa
suaderet, ut non sui anxius, c^m fide audiebatur Ibid.
. And hence proceed very great mischiefs. For he is blinded by this
pre-conceiv'd opinion, nay, and himself promotes his Favourite's Credit and
Reputation, by permitting extraordinary Honors to be paid him, as Tiberius
did, hanging Sej^nus's picture in the Theaters and public Places Colique per
theatr^ and fora effigies ejus, interque principia legionum sineret. Ibid.
. This whisper passes immediately from one to another, whence is raised a new
Idol, like that of Aaron out of the Earrings Exodus 32. 4.
, for either there would be no favor, or at least, 'twould be but of short
continuance, without the applause of the people: This Honor creates Arrogance
and Avarice to support it, the usual Vices of the great ones Avaritiam and
arrogantiam, praecipua validiorum vitia. Tac. 1. hist.
. The Favorite forgets himself, and those good qualities which made him at
first esteemed, by degrees fade, Prosperity insensibly disclosing those Vices
which Policy had a while concealed. So it happened to Antonius Primus, in whom
Prosperity discovered Pride, Avarice, and other ill qualities which were before
unknown Felicitas in tali ingenio, avaritiam, superbiam, caeter^que occulta
mala patef^cit Tac. 3. hist
. Grandeur disturbs the reason, and makes the Favorite aspire to things above
him; thus Sejanus offered marriage to Livia At Sejanus nimia fortuna socors,
and muliebri insuper cupidine incensus, promissum matrimonium, flagitante
Livia, componit ad Caesarios codicillos. Tac. 14 ann.
. He manages affairs not as a Minister, but a companion (which was Mucian's
great fault) Mucianus cum expedita manu, socium magis imperii quam ministrum
agens. Tac. 4. ann.
; and would have the Prince but a bare name, reserving all the authority to
himself Vim principis amplecti, ^omen remittere. Tac. 4 hist.
. Nor dares any say to him what Bathsheba said to David, And now be^old
Adonijah reigns, and now, my Lord the King, thou know it not 1 Kings 1. 18.
. And it is the Favourite's whole aim to exceed the Prince in those qual^ties
which are proper to Royalty, that he may be esteemed beyond him; which way
Absalom made use of to disgrace King David, affecting affability and a
readiness to hear the Subjects Complaints; by which he stole the hearts of the
people 2 Samuel 15. 6.
. A Favorite does not think himself such, unless his Servants, Relations and
Friends participate of his Authority, and so for his security he con^errs the
chief Offices of State upon them, and so cuts the Nerves of Envy. With this
design Sejanus preferred his own Creatures Neque S^natorio ambitu abstin^bat,
clientes suos konoribus aut provinc^is ornando. Tac. 4. ann.
. And because this power derogates from the Authority of the Princes of the
Blood, who always oppose favor, not being able to bro^k that it should be more
esteemed than Birth, and that the Prince should suffer himself to be governed
by a Subject, on whom they must depend, (a danger which Sejanus experienced in
the Family of Tiberius C^terum pl^na C^sarum domus, juvenis filius, nepotes
adulti m^ram capitis ad^erebant. Tac. 4. ann.
. The Favorite breeds discontent between them and the Prince. Thus Sejanus
informed Tiberius, that Agrippina conspired against him, and Agrippina that
Tiberius designed to poison her Imm^ssis qui per speciem amiciti^ monerent,
paratum ei venenum, vitandas s^ceri epul^s. Tac. 4. ann.
.

If the Favorite succeeds in any thing of this nature it emboldens him to
proceed farther. After the death of Drusus, Sejanus had a design to cut off the
whole Family of Germanic^s. So that the Favorite being blinded with passion
and excess of power, scorns private Artifices, and acts openly against the
Prince's Relations, as Sejanus did against Agrippina and Nero. None dare warn
him of the danger of his actions, for all tremble at the Majesty of his
presence, as the Israelites did at that of Moses, when he came from conversing
with God Exodus 34. 30.
And as he sees himself as much respected as the Prince, he conspires against
him Esth 16. ^.
, and oppresses his Subjects, knowing he cannot gain their good Will; which
makes them in Despair, doubt, whether his Avarice and Cruelty would not be
less, were he really their Prince, than now when not being so, he treats them
as Slaves and Strangers. Which Otho considered in a Favorite of Galba Minore
avaritia, aut licentia grassatus esset Vinius s^ ipse imperasse^, nunt and
subjectos nos habuit tanquam suos, and viles ut alienos. Tac. 1. hist.
.

All attempts of this kind augment the danger, for Envy increases, and Malice
arms against the Favorite, who thinking he cannot overcome it, but by some
greater, applies all the means that Emulation of favor, more furious than that
of Love, can suggest. And since the security of his favor depends upon the
constancy of the Prince's Will, he endeavors to oblige him, by pleasures and
voluptuousness, the main instruments of favor, which Vitellius's Courtiers
made use of to preserve his Unum ad potentiam iter prodigis epulis, and sumptu,
ganeaque sati^re inexpl^biles Vitellii libidines. Tac. 2. hist.
. And least the Prince should give credit to any, he makes him di^fident of
all, the good especially, for them he fears most. By this artifice Vatinius
Optimi cujusque criminatione eousque valuit, ut gratia, pecunia, vi nocendi,
etiam malos praemineret. Tac. 15. ann.
, and Sejanus ingratiated themselves Sui obtegens in alios criminator. Tac. 4.
ann.
.

The Favorite considering, that nothing is more opposite to favor than the
capacity of the Prince, makes it his whole endeavor, to keep him from knowing,
understanding, seeing or hearing any thing, or having any one about him to
inform him. He procures his aversion to business and fatigue, by filling his
mind with the diversions of Huntting, Plays, and Banquets, that his Senses
being diverted, neither his Eyes may inspect Transactions, nor his Ears hear
the Murmurs and Complaints of his people. Thus in the Sacrifices of the Idol
Moloch, the Priests made a noise with Drums and Trumpets, to drown the Cries
and Groans of the dying Infants. Sometimes by a farther fetch, he embarasses
and confounds him with Affairs and Papers, on purpose to tire him quickly, so
we ride Colts in a boggy ground to break them, and make them sooner take the
Bit. To which end he persuades him to assist at Audiences, by which being
wholly wearied, he may commit the management of all to the Favorite, thinking
it sufficient to have an account of affairs from him. Whence (as Jeremiah said
of the Babylonish Idols) the Prince is nothing but what the Favorite pleases
Baruch 6. 46.
.

He would not have Affairs go smoothly and with success, for any one can sail
in a Calm, but he wishes that the Sea may run high, and that the State may be
so tossed by the Waves, that the Prince may be afraid to put his hand to the
Helm, and so have more need of him. And then to stop at all Avenues to Truth,
and remain sole manager of Affairs beyond the reach of Envy, he draws him from
Court to some Retreat among his own Creatures. So Sejanus persuaded Tiberius to
retire from Rome Ac ne assiduos in domum caetus arcendo, infringeret potentiam,
aut recept^ndo facultatem criminantibus praeberet; huc ^lexit, ut T^berium ad
vitam procul Roma amoenis locis degendam, impelleret: mult^ quippe provideb^t.
Sua in manu aditus, literarumque magna ex part se arbitrum fore* cum per
milites comm^arent: mox Caesarem vigente jam ^en^cta se^r^toque loci mollitum
munia imperii facilius transmissurum: and mi^ui ibi invidiam, adempta
salutantum turba, sublatisque m^nibus vera po^entia augere. Tac. 4. ann.
.

All these Arts redound much to the prejudice of the State, and the Princes
reputation, and he who hawks after a Prince's favor by these means, does him
more injury than one who openly offends him Plura saepe peccantur dum (...),
quam cum (...). Tac. 15. ann.
. For an offense is given by one fault, but favor is not acquired under many,
and these always derogate from the Honor of the Prince, and are opposite to
the public Welfare. A State suffers much upon the sudden death of its Prince,
but this grievance is soon remedied in his Successor, which cannot be, when the
Prince is by these arts rendered unserviceable to the Government, this
misfortune must continue as long as he lives, to the utmost Detriment of the
Commonwealth. And as it is daily more and more felt, it creates Discontent and
Murmurs among all, who find that this favor is not voluntary but violent, not
choice but force, and many grounding their fortune upon his disgrace, he being
an impediment to their promotion; these, I say, being always armed against him,
it is impossible but that at last they should find an opportunity to displace
him, or that the Prince should not at last perceive the trick, and that all the
Envy and Odium conceived against the Favorite falls upon him, as Tiberius at
last found Perque invidi^m tui, me qu^que incusant. T^c. 4. ann.
: and then the Prince beginning to open his Eyes, at the same time begins to
fear the power which he has given his Favorite; which made Tacitus doubt
whether Tiberius more loved or feared Sejanus Dum Sejanum dilexit timuitve.
Ibid.
; and as before his favor raised him, so now his hate procures his ruin.

This is the critical point of favor, in which all are in danger, for neither
can the Prince dissemble his dis satisfaction, nor the Favorite remain
constant in his Disgrace, whence both being disgusted the bond of Amity is
broken. The Prince regards the Favorite as unworthy his favor, and he him as
ungrateful for his Services, and believing that the Prince cannot be without
him, and that he must shortly recall him, he wi^hdraws a while from Court, and
gives occasion to another to intermeddle in Affairs, and foment the new raised
disgusts, whence in a short time the favor is turned into hatred, the
impatience of the Favorite hastening his ruin. The report of his Disgrace
spreads, and all grow insolent and insult over him, it being now not in the
power of the Prince himself to assist him. His Relations and Friends
foreseeing his fall, and the danger which threatens them, fear lest they too
should be involved in the ruin Quidam male alacres, quibus infanstae amicitie
gravis exitus imminebat. Tac. 4. ann.
. As a lofty Tree falling crushes all that grow under the shadow of its
Branches; nay these are the chief promoters of his fall, that they may get out
of danger themselves, all joining, some as Friends, some as Enemies, to push
down this falling Wall Psalm. 61. 4.
. The Prince ashamed of himself, strives to free himself from this Subjection,
and to regain his credit, by making the Favorite the principal cause of all
miscarriages, so that he is caught in his own Snares without being able to free
himself, as Sejanus was N^n tam s^le^tia, quippe iisdem artibus victus est.
Tac. 4. ann.
, and the more he strives to disengage himself, the more he hastens his ruin:
For when Favor once sickens it must die, there being no Medicine can recover
it.

From all that has been said we may evidently see, that the greatest danger in
Favor is in the methods which Ambition takes to preserve it; it being the same
with Favorites, as with People who are too curious about their Health, who
thinking to preserve it by abundance of Physic, rather destroy it and shorten
their days. And as in Distempers of the Body there is no better remedy than
Abstinence, leaving the rest to Nature, so when Favor begins to sicken, the
best Advice is not to tamper too much with Medicines, but to serve his Prince
with sincerity and integrity, without affection or interest, leaving the
Operation to Merit and Truth, more durable than Artifice; and using only some
Preservatives, such as respect the Favorite, the Prince or his Ministers, or
the Court, or the People, or Strangers.

As to the Favorite, he should preserve the same state of Modesty, and
Affability that his fortune found him in. He should clear his Looks from the
dazzling Beams of Favor, as Moses did when he spoke to the People, after he
came from communing with God Exodus 34. 35.
. Daniel, though he was a Favorite to many Kings, waited with the rest in the
Anti-Chambers Dan. 2. 49.
. Let him refuse those Honors, which either belong to the Prince, or exceed
the Sphere of a Minister, and if any would offer them, let him advertise both
himself and him, that he is only a Servant to the Prince, to whom alone those
Honors are due: so the Angel informed St. John when he would have worshipped
him Revel. 19. 1^.
. Let him not make his Prince's Favor the means whereby to execute his Lusts
and Passions. Let him hear with Patience, and answer calmly Eccles, 12. 9.
, let him not affect others Favor, nor fear their Displeasure* nor conceal his
Favor, nor covet Sovereign Power, nor arm against Envy, nor provide against
Emulation, for in these Precautions are very dangerous Let him fear God and
Infamy.

The Favorite is also in danger from his Family and Relations, for though the
Prince and People do approve of his Actions, it don't thence follow, that they
must also those of his Domestics and Relations, whose Disorders, Indiscretion,
Pride, Avarice, and Ambition render him odious and ruin him. Let him not
deceive himself by thinking, that his own Creatures are the support and
strength of his Favor, for he who depends on many, is in danger of many, and
therefore it is better to keep them within remembrance of their former
Condition, and far from the management of Affairs, that others may see they
hold no part in the Government, nor his Favor, or that they are preferred
merely for being his Servants. But if they are persons of Worth and Merit, I
would not that their being the Favorites Servants and Relations should
prejudice them. Christ has taught us this Point, giving to his Relations the
Dignity of forerunner and Apostle, but not that of Teacher of Nations, and that
of the Pontificate, which were due to the Faith of St. Peter, and the Learning
of St. Paul.

With the Prince let him observe these Maxims. Let him always presuppose, that
his Favor or Affection is very subject to change, and if any such change
should happen, he enquire not into the Cause thereof, nor pretend to take
notice of it, that the Prince may not suspect him, nor his Rivals hope his
Fall, for he is in danger of it when he but thinks of it. Let him not build his
Favor upon the inclination and fancy of the Prince, but upon his own Merit;
for if the Gold of Favor be not well tempered with that Allay, it can never
endure the Hammer of Emulation. Let him love more the Dignity than the person
of a Prince. Let him moderate his Zeal by Prudence, and guide his understanding
by that of the Prince, for none can suffer a a Rival in Sense. Let him think
himself his Subject not his Companion, and being a Creature, let him not
pretend to equal his Creator ^ccles. 2. 12.
; let him esteem it honorable, and glorious to ruin himself to augment his
Grandeur. Let him advise with a modest, agreeable and sincere Freedom Prove. 22.
11.
, without fear of Danger or Ambition of being accounted zealous and stanch in
his Opinion. Let him make no Affair his own, nor think his Reputation concerned
in its Success, nor be disgusted that his Sentiments are rejected, or that
being admitted they were afterward altered, for such Attempts are very
dangerous.

In Debates and Resolutions, let him be neither so hot as to flame, nor so cold
as to freeze, but keep a moderate pace according to time and opportunity. Let
him be more intent upon his Duty than his Favor, but without Affectation or
vain Glory, for he who serves only for Reputation, robs the Prince of his Luke
17. 10.
. Let his Silence be a propos, and his words close and ready upon occasion,
which quality King Theodorick commended in one of his Favorites Sub Genii
nostri luce intrepidus quidem, sed reverenter astabat, opportun^ tacitus,
necessary copiosus, Cass. lib. ^. Ep. 3.
. Let him prefer his Princes Service to his own interest, nay let them be both
one. Let him pay due Veneration to the Royal Family, esteeming their Friendship
his greatest Security, without fomenting Differences between them and the
Prince, for Blood is easily reconciled to the ruin of the Favorite. Let him
take care that the Prince has always good Servants, and faithful Ministers
about him, and let him instruct him faithfully in the Art of Government. Let
him neither shut his Eyes, nor stop his Ears, but rather take care that he see,
touch and feel all things himself. Let him discreetly inform him of his Errors
and Failures, without fear of offense, if necessity requires. For though his
Favor may sicken for a time, 'twill recover again when he finds his Error, as
it happened to Daniel with the Kings of Babylon Prove. 28 23.
. When the Prince resolves or determines any thing through Heat or Passion, he
should endeavor to bend not break those Resolutions, waiting while time and
the inconveniences thereof convince him of his Error. Let him not prevent his
hearing Peoples Complaints, and Satyrs, for when they fall upon Innocence, they
are as Grains of Salt that preserve Favor, and Admonitions not to err or to
amend. Let him ascribe successful Actions to the Prince, but t^ke miscarriages
upon himself. Let him always think his ruin sure and certain, waiting for it
with Constancy, and a free and disinteress'd mind, without being over
sollicitous to establish his Favor, for he falls soonest from a Precipice who
fears it most. The reflection of the danger disturbs the Brain, and we grow
giddy with looking from an height. Whatever Favorites have been thus giddy
have certainly fell, when those who have not been so sollicitous have passed
secure Prove. 10. 9.
. Among the Ministers of State, let him behave himself rather as a Companion
than a Master, rather as a Defender than Accuser Eccles. 32. 1.
. Let him encourage the Good, and endeavor to reform the Bad. Let him not
interpose his Authority in their Preferments or Removals; and leave to them
their own business. Let him not alter the Course of Counsels in Consultations,
nor deny any access to the Prince. If the Prince would have him confer with
him, let him declare his Sentiments frankly, without any other Design than to
consult for the best.

The Court is the most dangerous Rock of Favor, and yet all use it to
establish and confirm it; there is not a stone in it but would strive to fall,
if in falling it might crush the Statue of the Favorite, which is as brittle
as that of Nebuchadnezar, by reason of the diversity of Metals that composed
it. Not one Courtier is a true Friend to the Favorite; if he chooses some he
incurs the Hatred and Envy of the rest* If he introduces them, he is in danger
of being supplanted; if he does not he makes them his Enemies. It Is therefor
the safest way to walk with indifference to all, and not to intermeddle in the
Affairs of any one, but endeavor to satisfy all, and (if possible) rather to
promote than hinder them in their Pretensions and Interest. If any one shall
have insinuated himself into the Prince's Favor, 'twill be the best way to
keep him there; for he who wrestles with another to throw him down usually
falls with him, and opposition confirms Favor. More Favorites have been ruined
by striving to displace others, than by advancing them. Let him slight
Accusations, or Commendations to the Prince, and leave them to Fortune.

Favor is very subject to the People, for if they disapprove the Favorite,
the Prince can never support him against the common Cry; or if he Attempts it,
the People usually turn his Judges and Executioners, we having seen a great
many fall by their hands. If the People love him to excess he is in danger from
thence, for that creates Jealousy and Envy in others, nay in the Prince
himself, whence the Peoples Loves are generally short and unlucky Breves and
infaustos populi Romani amores. Tac. 2. ann.
. And so that the Favorite may walk safe between these two Extremes, he must
avoid all occasions of public Applause and Acclamations. Let him only
endeavor to procure to himself a good Esteem, by Piety, Liberality,
Complaisance and Affability, making it his Care to see Justice duly
administered, that there may be plenty of all things, that the public Peace be
not disturbed in his time; that Privileges be not violated, nor Novelties
introduced into the Government; but above all that there be no Disputes in
matters of Religion, nor difference among the Clergy: For he will soon feel the
Peoples Rage, if he once incur the name of impious.

Foreigners who want this natural Love for the Prince, depend more upon the
Favorite than him, whence they pay him most Respect, that they may by his
means accomplish their Designs, to the great dishonor of the Prince, and
prejudice of his States. Nay, they often prove the ruin of the Favorite,
unless he abundantly satisfy them in their Desires and Requests; wherefore he
ought to beware of their Respect, and refuse the incense and worth of
Foreigners, letting them who would pay him those Honors know, that he is only
the Curtain before the Image, and that it is the Prince that works the Miracles.

Ambassadors usually affect the Friendship of the Favorite, as the most
effectual means to accomplish their Affairs, and judging that the disorders
which result from Favor, will be of Service to them, they endeavor to foment
it, being often introduced thereto by the Favorite himself, and as they take
occasion to commend them in Audiences, and seem at first sight free from
Interest and Emulation, it has often very good Effect, yet for all this they
are dangerous Friends; for the Favorite cannot preserve their Friendship
without great Detriment to the Prince and State. And if in consideration of his
Duty, he does not abundantly satisfy them, they are utter Enemies and leave no
stone unturned to ruin him. It Is therefore safest not to be more engaged to
them than the Princes Service will permit. Endeavoring only to gain the
Reputation abroad of a sincere and affable Person, and one who would rather
preserve the good Correspondences and Alliances of his Prince, than break 'em.

A timely Application of these Preservatives may perhaps prevent a Favorites
fall, but when he has once incurred the Odium and Envy of the people, these are
looked upon as Tricks and Artifices, and more endanger him. As it happened to
Seneca who took no method to prevent his Death, but endeavoring to moderate
his Favor, when he found himself persecuted Instituta prioris potentiae
commutat, pro^ibet coetus salutantium, v^tat comitantes, rarus per Urbem, quasi
valetudine infe^sa, aut sapientiae studiis do^^ (...). T^c. 14. ann.
.

If notwithstanding the Observation of all these Cautions, the Favorite shall
fall into Disgrace, his fall will be Glorious, he having lived without the
little Fears, and the shameful Care of preserving his Favor by methods below a
generous Spirit, a torment much worse than the disgrace it self. If there be
any thing valuable in a Princes Favor, it is only the Glory of having merited
his Esteem; the Continuation of which is full of Cares and Dangers. And he is
happiest, who soonest and with most Reputation quits it.

I have described, Royal Sir, the Practices of Favorites, but not how a Prince
ought to comport himself toward them, not supposing that he ought to have any,
for though he must be allowed to have more inclination to one than another, yet
not so as to devolve all his Authority upon one person, from whom the people
must expect Orders, Rewards and Punishments; for such Favor is properly an
Alienation from the Crown, and dangerous to the Government, even when Favor
succeeds in the Election of the Subject, for neither will the people so readily
obey, nor so awfully respect the Favorite as the Prince, nor is he so much
concerned for the welfare of the State, nor is he so immediately under the care
of God as the Prince: So that though many of your Royal Highness's Ancestors
have had Favorites, who with much care and zeal (as we see at present) have
endeavored to Act with the greatest Integrity, yet have their attempts met
with answerable Success. Let not your Royal Highness be deceived by the example
of France, whose Territories we see indeed much enlarged by the Counsels of a
Favorite, but not without detriment to the Kingdom, and prejudice to the Royal
Prerogative. Whoever shall duly consider the Persecution of the Queen Mother,
and Duke of Orleans; the Blood of Monmorency spilt, that of the Prior of
Vendosme, of Paul Reny, and of Monsieur de Macraints, the Imprisonment of the
Duke of Bulloign, the Exactions and Oppressions of the Subjects, the Usurpation
of the Du^chy of Lorrain, the Leagues made with the Dutch, Protestants and
Swedes, the Design upon Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, the Peace made at Mouzon
without the knowledge of the Allies, the Curb imposed upon the Valtoline and
Grisons, the Succors sent to Scotland, and the English Parliament, the Sieges
of Fontarabie, St. Omer, Thionville, Fornavent and Catelet, the loss of so many
Soldiers at Lovain, Tarragone, Perpignan, Sa^e, Valence upon the Po, Imbree and
la R^que, the retaking Air and the Bass. He, I say, who shall consider these
things, will find that all his measures were grounded upon Violence, and that
his Favor was founded upon force; that the Sword so daring against the Persons
of Kings, has been timo^ous and cowardly against this Minister, that Fortune
has favored his Temerity, that he has succeeded by the same means he should
have failed, whereas we have lost by the same methods we should have gained; a
sure Sign that God prospered this Favorite for the Exercise of Christianity,
and for our Chastisement, forestalling our Prudence, and confounding our
Valor. Kingdoms destined to Ruin, fall by the same means they should be
supported; thus the entrance into the Adriatic created Distrust, the
Protection of Mantua Jealousy, the opposition at Nivers Wars, the Diversion,
Expense, the Army in Alsace Rivals, the War for Spain Rebellions. At the Siege
of Casal we lost an opportunity of putting an end to the War; the Counsel of
Secretary Passiers to Prince Thomas, hindered the relief of Turin and triumph
over France. The same thing happed at Air, for a foolish piece of Formality,
the News that was brought of the Siege of Arras made them omit the Care of
relieving it. For a vain Scruple D' Amvilliers was not succored, through
Cowardice or Treachery, Chapelle surrendered. O Providence Divine! Whither tend
such variety of Accidents, so different from their Causes? It Is not by chance
that the Government of Europe is put into the hands of Favorites. God grant
Success may answer the public Prayers.

The End of the First Volume.
His Royal Highness William Duke of Gloucester.

Printed for M. Gilliflower and L. Meredith.



THE Royal Politician REPRESENTED IN One Hundred Emblems.

Written in Spanish by Don Diego Saavedra Faxardo, Knight of the Order of St.
Iago, Plenipotentiary Ambassador

To the Cantons of SWITZERLAND, At the Imperial Diet at RATISBON, At the Famous
Treaty of MUNSTER, And of the Supreme Council of State for both of INDIES.

With a large Preface, containing an Account of the Author, his Works, and the
Usefulness thereof.

Done into English from the Original.

By Sir IA. ASTRY.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed for Mat^. Gylliflower at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall:
And Luke Meredith at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

OF THE EDUCATION OF A PRINCE.
EMBLEM LI.
THERE is nothing better or more advantageous to Mankind than prudent
Diffidence; it is the Guard and Preservation of our Lives and Fortunes, our own
Security obliges us to it; without it there would be no Caution, without which
no Safety; that Prince governs best who trusts fewest, there is but one
Confidence safe, which is not to depend upon the Will of another. For who can
secure himself of Man's heart, hid in the privatest corner of the Breast, whose
Secrets the Tongue dissembles, the Eyes and all the Motions of the Body
contradict Eccles. 13. 31.
. It Is a Gulf rolling with the Tempests of different Affections, a Sea full of
hidden Rocks which no Chart can discover. What Prudence must the Needle be
touched with for a Prince to sail by, through such dangerous and difficult Seas
The heart is deceitful above all things, an^ desperately wicked: Who can know
it? Ierem. 17. 9.
. How well should he know the Winds? when to furl and loose the Sails of
Confidence? In this consists the chiefest Art of Government; it is in this that
a Princes danger chiefly consists, either through want of Experience in
Affairs, or Knowledge of his Subjects, none of them appearing ill to him. For
in his Presence all compose their Actions, and adjust their Looks: Their set
Speeches sound nothing but Love, Zeal and Fidelity, and their Attendance
nothing but Respect and Obedience; Discontent, Hatred and Ambition being hid in
the heart; which made one say, a Prince should trust no Body; but both extremes
are equally to be avoided Utrumq^ in viti^ est, and. omnib^is credere, and.
nulli. Seneca.
. To trust none is the Suspicion of a Tyrant, to trust all the easiness of an
imprudent Prince. Confidence is not less important to a Prince than Distrust:
The one is worthy a sincere and Royal Breast, the other is very necessary in
the Art of Government, as an Instrument by which Policy works its Ends. The
Difficulty consists in knowing how rightly to use one and to other, so that
neither a too credulous Confidence expose you to Infidelity and Dangers, or a
too suspicious Distrust provoke Hatred, or make the Prince by reason of this
Diffidence incapble o^ treating with any one: He should not measure all things
by Confidence, nor all by Distrust. If a Prince will trus^ none, who can serve
him without evident Dangers? It Is a^ great a misfortune to lose a faithful
Minister upon vain and groundless Suspicions, as by a too easy Credulity to
trus^ those who are not so. Let a Prince confide, but at the same time suspect
that he may be cheated; this Suspicion ought not to retard the Course of his
Actions, but only to be a Caution to him: if he was without Suspicion he would
be too careless. Suspicion is a cautionary Security, a due weighing of Matters;
he who doubts nothing can never know the Truth. Let him give Credit as if he
believed, and distrust as if he believed not. Confidence and Diffidence being
thus governed by Prudence and Reason, work Miracles. Let the Prince therefore
be well advised in the Affairs which he treats of, in the Alliances which he
ratifies, in the Peaces which he concludes, and in all other Treaties in
general which concern the Government; and when he Signs them let his hand be
full of Eyes, (as in the prefent Emblem) that he may see what he does. The Bawd
in Plautus valued not the Promises of the Lover when she said, Our hands are
full of eyes, what they see they believe; and elsewhere she calls the Day quick
sighted, in which she never traded but for the Ready. Blind are Resolves made
by Confidence: Pythagoras's Motto was, Not to shake hands with every Body.
Credulity to all is very dangerous; let a Prince therefore consider well before
he ingages himself, thinking always that his Friends as well as his Enemies
design to cheat him, one more, the other less; one to rob him of his
Territories and Riches, the other only to reconcile himself to his Favor and
Good Will. This Pre-supposition should not be derived from Fraud, and Villainy
giving him the Liberty to forfeit his Word and Promise, which would utterly
confound the public Faith, and be a great Blot in his Reputation; this Caution
should be nothing but a prudent Circumspection and piece of Policy. That
Diffidence the Daughter of Suspicion is then blameable in a Prince, when it is
frivolous and vicious, which immediately discovers its Effects and proceeds to
Execution, not that Circumspect and general Distrust, which equally regards
all, without particularizing upon any one, until the Circumstances well
examined shall dictate otherwise, and perhaps you may not sufficiently confide
in any one, whom you may nevertheless have a good Opinion of, for this is not a
particular distrusting of him, but a general Caution of Prudence; there are
Forts in the very middle of Kingdoms, in which there are Garrisons kept, as if
on the Enemies Frontiers. This Caution is convenient, and reflects not upon the
Subjects Fidelity. A Prince may confide in his Relations, Allies, Subjects and
Ministers, yet this Confidence should not be so remiss, as to lull him asleep,
and make him careless of all Accidents, by which Ambition, Interest, or Hatred
usually pervert Fidelity; breaking the strongest Bars of the Law of Nature and
Nations; when a Prince had rather choose to suffer, than live in the continual
Alarms of so many Cautions; and rather let things run on, than remedy the
Inconveniences which may happen. He makes his Ministers wicked and sometimes
treacherous, for they imputing his Indulgence to Incapability despise and
slight him, and each Reigns absolutely in that part of the Government which is
allotted him. But when the Prince is vigilant, and if he does confide in any
does it not without Caution; when he is always so prepared, that Treachery
shall never find him unprovided; when he condemns not without hearing; and
reprehends not but to preserve Fidelity, when it is in danger, he may wear his
Crown in safety. King Ferdinand the Catholic had no reason to suspect the
Fidelity of the great Captain Gon^alez Fernandez of Cordov^. Mar. Hist. Hisp.
; nevertheless he kept those people near him who should diligently pry into his
Actions, that he knowing how narrowly he was watched, might Act with the more
Caution. This was not properly an Action of distrust but prudence. For all this
he must take care that this Suspicion be not groundless and frivolous, as was
that of the same King Ferdinand to the same great Captain; for though after the
loss of the Battle of Ravenna, he wanted him for the management of Affairs in
Italy, he would not make use of him when he saw with what eagerness all the
people strove to serve and fight under him; and so endeavored by al^ the means
he could to assure himself of Duke Valentine, (...) that suspecting an
experimented Fidelity, he exposed himself to one suspected: So over jealous
Spirits to avoid one Danger fall into a greater; though sometimes the refusal
of the Services of such great Men, may be rather a Princes Envy or Ingratitude,
than Jealousy or Suspicion. It may be also that this wise Prince, thought it
not convenient to make use of a Man whom he knew to be discontented; a Prince
must expect little Fidelity from a person of whom he has once shown a Distrust.
The more ingenious and generous a Spirit is, the more it resents the Suspicion
of its Fidelity, and so more easily quits it, which made Getulius make bold to
write to Tiberius, That he was Loyal, and unless suspected, would remain so
Sibi fidem integram, and. si nullis infidiis peteretur, mansuram. Tac. 6. ann.
. A Prince ought to learn by the experience of his own Accidents as well as
others, how far he ought to confide in his Subjects. Amongst the Cautions which
King Henry the II. left his Son Don John, there was this, That he should
continue the Rewards given to those, who had followed his party against King
Peter their natural Lord, but that he should not put so much Confidence in
them, as not to have an Eye upon 'em, that in Offices and Places of Trust he
should make use of those, who adhered to their Master King Peter like true and
faithful Subjects, and oblige 'em to make amends for past Offenses by future
Services; but that he should not put any Confidence in the Neuters, who had
shown themselves more addicted to self Interest than the public Good. Traitors
are odious even to those whom they serve by their Treason Quippe proditores,
etiam iis, quos anteponunt, invisunt. Tac. 1. ann.
, and the Loyal are esteemed by those against whom they are so; upon this
ground Otho trusted Celsus, who had faithfully served Galba Mansitque Celso
velut fat alit^r etiam pro Othone fides integr^ and. infelix. Tac. 1. Hist.
.

It Is not good to raise a Minister all at once to great Places, for it makes
other envy him and hate the Prince, they taking this sudden Promotion as an
Argument of his Levity. There is no Minister so modest, as not to be affronted,
nor so zealous as to continue in his Devoir, when he sees another so unjustly
preferred. For one that is satisfied many are discontented; and when the
Ministers are disgusted it is impossible the Government should go well: Such
Elections are nothing else but abortive Births; and Fidelity takes deeper root,
when it sees that Offices and Employments are the reward of faithful Services:
the Prince has in the mean while time to make Trial of his Minister, first in
places of small Trust least it should cost him too dear, afterward in places
of greater Importance He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful
also in much, Luke 16. 10.
, let him examine before he employs him in Affairs of Peace or War, what is the
most likely to shake his Fidelity, what his Birth is, what his Reputation and
Fortune; this Circumspection is particularly necessary in places of Trust,
which are as 'twere the Keys and Security of Governments.

Augustus would not permit any Senator or Roman Knight to enter Egypt without
his special Order, because that Province was the Grainary of the Empire, and
that he who made himself Master of that had the other at Command: for the same
reason Tiberius sharply reprehended Germanicus for going into Alexandria
without his leave Acerrime increpuit, quod contra institutum Augusti, non
sponte Principis Alexandriam introisset. Tac. 2. ann.
, but for the greater Security, and the better to keep the Minister in
obedience, 'twould be convenient to allow a little more Authority to the
Magistracy of the Province, for there are no Curbs stronger than that, nor more
ready to oppose the Faults of the Governor.

Mean and abject Spirits, such as have no Ambition of Glory, or thirst for
Preferments, are fit for no Employ. The chief Quality which God found in
Ioshuah, to introduce him into the management of Affairs, was that he had a
great Spirit Numb. 27. 18.
. But yet the Courage should not be so great, as to repine at his being born a
Subject, and not be contented with his Condition; for the Loyalty of such is in
great Danger, because they aspire always to the highest step, which if they
attain not, it is either for want of Power, or Wit, besides they soon flag in
their Zeal for the Public, and Obedience to their Prince.

Great Spirits are not less dangerous at least, if they are not docile and
modest for being very positive and conceited of their own Opinions, they are
apt to slight Commands, and believe that all should be governed at their
Pleasure. A person is as troublesome for his good Qualifications, as for his
having none at all; for there is no satisfying him, who presumes too much upon
his Merit: Tiberius never desired great Virtues in Offices of Trust, and hated
Vices too; for from one he feared Danger to himself, from to other Scandal to
the Government Neque enim imminentes virtutes sectabatur, and rursus vitia
oderat; ex optimis periculum sibi, a pessimis dedecus publicum metuebat. Tac.
1. ann.
.

Nor are those fit for Ministers who are rich and of great Families, for having
no need of the Prince, and flowing in plenty of all things, they will not expose
themselves to Perils and Toils, nor can, nor will they be under Command Qui in
affluentia fortunae, virium, opum, and amicorum, a^lioruamque talium constituti
sunt, Reginaeque ob^dire norunt. Arist. 4. Pol. c. 11.
. Whence Sosibius Britannicus used to say, Princes cannot endure Riches in the
Commons Auri vim, atque opes Principibus infensas. Tac. 11. ann.
.

When a Prince shall have made Choice of a Minister with all due
Circumspection, let him seemingly put an entire Confidence in him, but always
keep an Eye upon his Actions and Intelligences, and if they are any ways
suspicious, let him be removed to another Post, where he will want opportunity
to make a party to execute his ill Designs; for there is more prudence and
kindness in preventing a Crime, than in forgiving it when committed; if
Germanicus's Victory, and the Soldiers Applause pleased Tiberius on one hand,
on to other they made him jealous and uneasy Nuntiata ea Tiberium laetitia
curaque affecere. Tac. 1. ann.
. And understanding the Commotions in the East, he was glad of a Pretense ea
expose him to Dangers, by making him Governor of those Provinces Ut to specie
Germanicum suetis Legionibus abstraheret, nov^sque Provineiis impositum, dolo
simul and casibus objectaret. Tac. 2. ann.
. Now if any Minister is to be removed, it should be done under the pretense of
Honor, and before the Reasons are known, with such prudence as may not give him
Reason to mistrust the Princes disgust: for as fear of being cheated is the way
to be cheated; so Suspicion of Loyalty makes Traitors; for which Reason
Tiberius having a mind to recall Germanicus to Rome, did it under a pretense of
a Triumph which he designed him Acrius modestiam ejus aggreditur, alterum
Consulatum offerend^. Tac. 2. ann.
; offering him other Preferments, of which Princes are very liberal, when they
would free themselves from their Jealousies.

If a Subject once loses the Respect he owes his Prince, after Confidence will
never secure him. Sancbo the first King of Leon pardoned Count Gonzalo, for
having taken up Arms against him, endeavoring to reconcile him by his Favors,
but those by which he thought to have obliged him, only gave him opportunity to
poison him.

When Princes are concerned with one another, there is no Obligation of
Friendship or Affinity, a sufficient Reason for their trusting each other; Don
Ferdinand the great King of Castile, and his Brother Garcias of Navarre were at
difference; he as he lay sick at Nacar had a design to seize his Brother who
came to pay him a Visit; but his Design not succeeding, he had a mind to
dissemble his Intent by visiting his Brother, who caused him to be apprehended
Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. Revenge and State Policy is of greater Force than Friendship, or
Consanguinity. The same befell Don Garcias King of Galicia, for having trusted
his Brother Alonso King of Castile: the most irreconcilable falling out, is
that between Relations and dearest Friends Difficiles fratrum dissentiones, and
qui valde am^nt, valde edio habent. Arist. 7. Pol. c. 6.
, and perfect Hatred is the result of perfect Love; from all which we may
infer, how difficult a thing it is for a Prince to trust himself in the hands of
his Enemies, it cost the King of Granada his Life for going, though with a Pass
port to ask assistance from King Peter the Cruel. Lewis Forza Duke of Milan,
was more cautious, refusing an Interview with the King of France, unless in the
midst of a River, or upon a broken Bridge. A true piece of Italian Policy, not
to trust where they have once showed a Jealousy, for which Reason the Italians
were much admired at the Interview between the great Captain and King Ferdinand
the Catholic, as also at that between the same King, and the King of France
his Enemy. In some Cases Confidence is more safe and necessary to gain peoples
Affections than Distrust. Don Alonso VI. having lost his Kingdom of Leon, lived
retired at the Court of the King of Toledo, who was a Moor, when upon the Death
of Don Sancho his Sates recalled him to his Throne, with the greatest privacy
imaginable, fearing lest if it should come to be known by the Moors, they might
retain him by force; he like a prudent and grateful Prince discovered the whole
Affair; this Confidence so obliged the Barbarian King, who before understood
the Intrigue and designed to seize him, that he not only let him go free, but
also furnished him with Money for his Voyage: See the power of Gratitude which
disarms even the most savage Spirits. Mar. Hist. Hisp.
.

Distrusts between Princes cannot be cured by Satisfactions or Excuses, but by
their contrary; if time will not heal them, diligence never will: these are a kind
of wounds which the Probe and the Hand does but more exulcerate; and a sort of
apparent Jealousies, which are an Introduction to Infidelity.

EMBLEM LII.
THE Scorpion translated to the Skies, and placed among the Constellations
loses not its Malignity, which is greater, by how much more its Power and
venomous Influences are extended over things below. Let Princes therefore well
consider the Qualifications of those Subjects, whom they raise to places of
Trust, for there Vices always thrive; nay, Virtue it self is often in danger,
for the Will being armed with Power, bids defiance to Reason, and often gets
the better; if Virtue have not resolution enough without being dazzled with the
splendor of Riches and Prosperity to resist it. If Promotion makes the good
bad, 'twill make the bad worse. And if Vice notwithstanding the Punishments and
Infamy that attend it find so many followers, what will it do when backed with
Favor and Preferments. And if Vice be the ready way to Preferment, who will
seek it through the rugged Road of Virtue? That is inherent to our Natures, but
this must be acquired by Industry. The first forces Rewards, the other expects
'em with Patience, and we find the Appetite much better pleased by its own
Violence than Merit; and being impatient had rather depend upon its own
Industry, than attend the Pleasure and Will of another; to reward the bad, by
promoting them to places of Authority, is, to check the virtuous and encourage
the vicious. A private Knave while he is private can do no great matter of
mischief, it is but an inconsiderable number of private Men, on whom he can
exercise his Villainy; but promoted to places of Trust, his Villainy reaches
all, being himself Minister of Justice, and having the whole Body of Government
at his disposal Nam qui maguam potestatem habent, etiam si ipsi nullius pretii
sint, multum nocent. Arist. 1. Pol. cap. 9.
; Villains ought not to be put into places where they have power to exercise
their Villainy, Nature foreseeing this inconvenience, has given venomous
Animals neither feet nor wings, that they may do less mischief? He who
furnished Villains with either designs it should either run or fly. But Princes
nevertheless usually make use of the bad rather than the good, the former
seeming generally more cunning For the Children of this world are in their
Generation, wiser than the Children of light, Luke 16. 8.
; but they are mistaken, for Vice is not Wisdom, and he can have no true
Judgment who has no Virtue; for which reason Don Alonso King of Arragon and
Naples, commended the prudence of the Romaus, in building the Temple of Honor
within that of Virtue, that to go into that you must necessarily pass through
this, esteeming him not worthy of Honor, who was not a follower of Virtue; and
that he should not arrive to Offices and Preferment, who entered not at the
Porch of Virtue: Without this how can a Minister be serviceable to the
Government? Among a crowd of Vices what room is there for Prudence, Justice,
Clemency, Valor, and other Virtues absolutely necessary for a Commander? How
will the Subject observe those proper to him, if he wants the example of the
Minister, whose Actions he observes carefully, and imitates through Flattery?
The people have a respect for a just Minister, and imagine that he cannot err;
on the contrary, they never approve and commend the Actions of one who is not
so. Demosthenes spoke very well one day in the Spartan Senate, but because the
people looked upon him as a vicious person, they rejected his Counsel.
Whereupon it was ordered by the Ephori, that a person whom they had a better
Opinion of should propose the same thing, that it might be received and
executed: this good Opinion of the people is so necessary, that though the
Minister be a person of Integrity, the Government is not safe in his hands, if
the people mis-inform'd think him otherwise. Henry the Vth. King of England,
for this reason at his coming to the Crown, removed from him all those who had
been his Companions in his younger days, and turned out all Ministers, putting
in their places Men of worth, and such as were agreeable to the people; one can
impute the Success and Victories of Theodorick, to nothing but his good Choice
of Ministers, having no other for his Counselors than Prelates of the
strictest Virtues. Ministers are as it were the Picture of Majesty, which since
it cannot appear every where is represented by them; who ought therefore to be
as like him as possible in Life and Conversation, since the Prince cannot of
himself exercise in all places, the Authority which he has received by common
Consent, he ought to take great Care how he shares it amongst his Ministers.
For he who is not born a Prince, when he sees himself decked with Majesty, will
take Pride in showing it, by exercising his Authority and Passions Regiae
potentiae Ministri. quos delectat superbiae suae longum spectaculum; minusque
se judicant posse, nisi diu, multumque singulis, quid possint ^ftendant. Seneca.
. And here may the Question be decided; which Nation is in the better
Condition, that where the Prince is good, and the Ministers bad, or that where
the Prince is bad, and the Ministers good [for that may happen according to
Tacitus] Posse etiam sub mal^s Principibus magnos vires esse. Tac. in vit. Agr.
for necessity obliging a Prince to substitute his Power to several Ministers,
if they are bad they will do more Damage to a Nation, than the Prince be he
never so good can advantage it; for they will abuse his Goodness, and under
pretense of public Good, will turn it to their own private interest and
advantage. A bad Prince may be reformed by many good Ministers, but not many
bad Ministers by a good Prince.

Some imagine a Princes hands are bound, and his Liberty infringed, when he has
good Ministers, and that the more vicious the Subjects are, the safer he lives
among 'em; a ridiculous and senseless Fancy, for Virtue is the only thing that
keeps Nations in obedience and quiet, and Nations are never more quiet and firm
than when at home, private people live justly and innocently, and Justice and
Clemency flourish abroad; it is easy to govern the good. Without Virtue the
Laws lose their force; the love of Liberty reigns, and the aversion to
Government increases, whence proceed the change of States, and fall of Princes.
It Is necessary then that they have virtuous Ministers, who should advise them
with Zeal and Affection, and introduce Virtue into the Nation by their Example,
and by the integrity of their Lives. Tiberius held the extremes of both Virtue
and Vice equally dangerous to a Minister, and chose one between both, as we
said elsewhere, but this is properly the fear of a Tyrant; if a virtuous
Minister be good, one more virtuous is better.

But it is not sufficient for his Ministers to be endued with excellent Virtues,
if those necessary Endowments, and Ornaments of experience, which the
management of Affairs requires are not eminently visible in him: Africa still
mourns and shows upon the sooty Faces of its Inhabitants, the rashness of
Phoebus [if we may use the Philosophy and Morality of the Ancients] in lending
his Chariot to his Son Phaeton, an unexperienced Youth, and one who did not in
the least merit such Promotion; and this is the Danger all Elections carry with
'em which are made at a jump, and not gradually, by which Experience teaches
'em to know the people, and to rise by degrees.

Tiberius though a Tyrant never advanced his Nephews without this Caution, and
particularly Drusus, whom he would not make a Tribune till after eight years
Experience Neque nunc propere, s^d per octo annos capto experimento. Tac. 3.
ann.
. Preferment to an unexperienced person is Favor, but to one of Experience a
just Reward. Yet is not Experience in all things, as neither all Virtues
requisite for every Office; but only those who regard each in particular, for
that which is proper and requisite for one is not always for others: Experience
of the Sea is useless in Affairs at Land, and it does not follow, that he who
knows how to manage a House or ride a Horse, can also marshal an Army Nam unum
opus ab uno optim^ perficitur, quod ut fiat, munus est Legumlatoris providere,
nec jubere, ut tibia canat quisquam, and idem Gale^^s confici^t. Arist. 2. Pol.
cap. 9
. In this Lewis Forza Duke of Milan was mistaken, when he committed the Conduct
of his Army against the King of France to Galeaze St. Severin, who was very
dexterous in managing Horses, but understood little of Affairs of War.
Mottathias made a more prudent Choice when seeing himself near his End, he
chose for General Judas Macchabee, a robust Man, and well versed in Arms, and
for his Counselor his Brother Simeon a Man of Judgment and Experience 1 Macch.
a 65.
. In this we have seen great Errors, in changing the reins and administration
of Governments. These are different in Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Some
respect Justice, others Plenty, some War, others Peace; yet though they are so
different in themselves, there is nevertheless a certain Faculty or civil
Virtue, which unites 'em, and makes them all tend one way, to the Preservation
of the State: each aiming at this by means proportioned to the Office he is in.
This civil Virtue is different according to the several Forms of Government,
which differ according to the means, and methods of governing, for which reason
a Man may be a good Citizen, but not a good Minister, for it is not sufficient
that he be endu'd with several moral Virtues, unless he has also civil ones,
and this natural Disposition so proper to Administration and Government.

It Is therefore necessary for a Prince to know the Nature and Inclinations of
his Subjects, that he may better know how to employ 'em, for upon this good
Choice all the Actions of his Government depend. The Genius of Herman Cortez,
was particularly proper for the Conquest of India; that of Gonzalez Fernandez
of Cordova for the War of Noples; and if they had been exchanged, and the first
sent against the French, and the latter against the Indians, doubtless they had
not been so successful. Nature has not given Man a like Qualifications for all
things; but only one excellence for one Office, whether it be Frugality, or
Prudence, and it is certain, Instruments do most Service when they are made use
of by one, not by many. For this reason, Aristotle blamed the Carthagians, for
that among them one person officiated in many places, there being no Man fit
for all Sic enim optime instrument a profici^nt, si eorum singula, non inultis,
sed uni deserviant. Arist. lib. 1. Pol. cap. 1.
. Nor is it possible [as the Emperor Justinian remark'd] Nec sit concessum
cuiquam duobus assistere Magistratibus, and utriusque Iudicii curam peragere,
nec facile cre^endum duabus necessariis rebus, unum suff^cere. L. F. de Asses
to mind two, without forgetting one or to other. A Nation is much better
governed, when in that as in a Ship every Man knows his Birth; for though
perhaps a Man may be found capable of all Affairs, it does not follow, that
they shall be all assigned him. That great Copper Vessel for Sacrifices called
for its largeness a Sea, and supported by 12 Oxen before the Altar of the
Temple of Solomon ^ Chron. c. 4. 5.
contained 3000 measures, yet they never put in above 2000 1 Kings 7. 26.
. It Is by no means convenient to accumulate all Offices and Preferments upon
one person, to the Envy and Dissatisfaction of all; but whether for want of
Knowledge of persons, or for that they will not take the pains to look for fit
Men, it usually happens that Princes employ one, or at most a very few of those
who are about them: In all Affairs, whence Promotions and Rewards are scarce,
and so Emulation grows cold, and all things move slowly.

For the same Reason it is not good for two persons to be employed about the
same Affair, for that makes it confused like a Picture drawn by two hands, the
methods of Painters being always different, one is quick, the to other slow,
one loves Lights, the to other is more for Shades. Besides this, it is
impossible two should agree in the same Conditions, Counsels and Methods, or
that they should not disagree to the great Detriment of the Negotiation and
Prince too. These second Causes have each their distinct Office and separate
Operations. For my part I think it more advisable to commit an Office to one
person less capable, than to two though more sufficient; since therefore the
good Election is a thing so necessary, and its Success so difficult, it is not
advisable for Princes to rely too much upon their own Judgments. Pope Paul
the III. and King Ferdinand the Catholic first consulted the people, suffering
it as if carelessly to be published before they made their Choice; the Emperor
Alexander Severus, proposed his Choice to all, that each person as if he were
interested in it, might freely declare his thoughts of his Capacity, or
Incapacity Ubi aliquos voluisset, vel Rectores Provinciis dare, vel Praepositos
facere, vel Procurat^res, id est, rationales ordinare, nomina eorum proponebat,
and Lamp. in vit. Alex. Sev.
. Though the peoples Approbation is not always to be depended on: Sometimes
it is in the right, sometimes it is in the wrong Haud semper errat famae,
aliquando and eligit. Tac. in vit. Agr.
; it is often deceived in Men's Natures and hidden Vices. Moreover Industry,
Self-interest, or Malice, and Emulation spread this Report among the Mob,
either in their Favor or otherwise. Nor is a Ministers behaving himself well
in small Offices sufficient to recommend him to greater, for Preferment makes
some more vigorous and active, others careless and lazy Non ex rumore
statuendum multos in Provinciis, contra quem spes, aut metus de illis fuerit,
egisse, excitari quosdam ad meliora Magnitudine r^rum, hebescore alios. Tac. 3.
ann.
: much safer was the Diligence of King Philip the II. who carefully observed
his Nurseries, and took particular notice what Plants were like to bear, when
transpanted into the civil or Ecclesiastical Government, and had private
Informations of their Behavior in their Youth, before Ambition could disguise
their Vices, whether they grew straight and upright, or crooked; and had
certain Characters of the Virtues and Vices of the chief of his Subjects;
whence he never made an ill Choice, and in his time flourished Persons truly
valuable; especially in Ecclesiastical Preferments, for he thought it better to
make Choice of such as he knew would not deserve Punishment, than to punish
them afterward Officiis ac administrat ^onibus, potius non peccaturos, quam
damnare cum peccassent. Tac. in vit. Agr.
. Happy is that Kingdom where there is no room for Ambition, Petitions,
Prayers, nor Attendance, and where even concealed Virtue has no need of a
Petition, or Recommendation to be known to the Prince, who of himself knows the
Merits of his Subjects; this was formerly spoken in Tiberius's Commendation
Quia sine Ambitione, aut proximorum Precibus, ignotos etiam, ac ultro accitos
M^nificentia juver at. Tac. 4. ann.
. An auricular Commendation depends upon others, but an ocular one not; that
may be deceived, this rot; that only informs the mind, this both informs and
moves too; nay, as 'twere forces to Punishment or Rewards.

Some Countries have chosen their Ministers by Lots, which in some Cases is not
improper, to decline Envy, and avoid Contention and Emulation, often the
grounds of Tumults and Seditions. But when a fit person is to be chosen for the
Administration of Justice, or Command of the Army, upon whom the Government and
public Safety is to depend, a matter of that Concern, ought not to be decided
by the uncertainty of Chance, but to pass the Trial of a due Election For the
Lot or Dye weigh's not Qualifications, Desert, and Reputation, as Counsels do,
where all things are examined by weight and measure Sort and. urna mores non
disecrni: suffragia and existimationem senafus reperta, ut an eujusque vitam,
famamque penitrarent. Tac. 4. Hist.
, and though all Counsels are usually guided by Interest, a Prince may make a
good Choice, if he takes Care privately to inform himself of the Parties
Qualifications and Virtues, as also the ends which his Counselors propose in
promoting them. For when a Prince blindly approves all Proposals, these
abovementioned Inconveniences will attend; but when his Counselors see that
he examines them, and that he does not always admit the Persons proposed, but
chooses others more sufficient, they will advise with greater Care and
Deliberation.

EMBLEM LIII.
THE Thebans represented the Integrity of Ministers, especially those of
Justice, by a Statue without hands: for when they are shut they are the Emblem
of Avarice, when open its Instruments. This Garden represents the same thing,
by these Statues without Arms, which are at the corners of each Walk, like
those in the Walks at Rome; nor are there any better Guards than these; for
they have eyes to watch the Flowers, but want Arms to gather them; if all
Ministers were like these Statues, the Exchequer would be more secure, and
Nations better governed, especially Commonwealths, whose Revenues are looked
upon as common, every Magistrate believing it no Crime to make his fortune out
of them; one accuses the other to excuse himself, and all wink at one another,
and this Vice being like Fire, which with the same matter that should quench it
is nourished and burns fierce Eccles. 5. 9.
, so they the more they get, the more they desire Eccles. 14. 9.
, and Avarice once glutted with the public Treasure, then Attacks private
persons, whence they wholly confound the principal end of Society which is
common Perservation. Where Avarice reigns, Peace and Quiet is banished; all
things are in disorder and confusion; nothing but Jars, Seditions and Civil
Wars, the Forms of Government are changed, and Empires run to Ruin, as most
have been lost upon this account. Avarice drove the Phoenicians out of Spain
Mar. Hist. Hisp.
* that made the Oracle of Apollo foretell the downfall of the Commonwealth of
Sparta. God warned Moses to choose persons into places of Trust who hated
Covetousness Exodus 18. 21.
. It Is impossible that State should be governed well whose Ministers are
covetous; for how can he who Plunders every Body rightly administer Justice?
How will he procure Plenty, whose whole Gain is starving others? How can he
love the Kingdom, who thinks of nothink but robbing on it? How can he whose mind
runs upon nothing but filling his Chests, mind Affairs of State? How will he
endeavor to merit Rewards, who is his own Play Master? Nothing succeeds well
when Self-interest manages. For Interest is preferred before Duty or Honor.
Nothing great or glorious is enterpriz'd without a desire of Glory, which a
mean, abject, covetous Spirit has no value for. There is scarce any Crime but
proceeds from Avarice or Ambition Pl^raque eor^m quae h^mines injuste faciunt,
per Ambitionem and Ava^i^^am commit tuntur. Aristo^. 2. Pol. cap. 7.
. Nothing makes Rebels sooner than the fraud and corruption of the Ministers.
They are first moved by their particular Damages, then by the common Injustice,
then by Envy against those who commit it, and so by Hatred to the Prince that
suffers it; if he knows it not, they accuse him of Incapacity; if he tolerates
it, they say he is remiss and negligent; if he permits it, he is an Accomplice;
if he wishes it to the end, that the Authors being glutted like Spunges, he may
take occasion to squeeze 'em afterward, he is a Tyrant. O unhappy Prince and
State, wherein the Ministers don't thrive but by their Ruin. Nor would I have
Ministers so nice, as to (...) ^e^sents in general; it is incivility to receive
none; many, S^^^dness; all, Covetousness.

Avarice in Princes is the ruin of States Prove. 29. 4.
, for the people cannot bear to see their Estates in danger, in the hands of him
whom they choose to preserve 'em; so that seeing this pretended Defender of his
Country, the first that Arms himself against it, they straight look out for
another: In short, what can a Subject hope for from a covetous Prince? For this
Vice even Children hate their Parents. Where there is no Prospect of Interest,
there is no Love nor Obedience; that Government is Tyrannick which respects
Self-interest, more than the public Good. King Alphonso, the Wise, for this
Reason said: That a King ought not to covet abundance of Riches only to fill
his Treasury, and not do good with them; for it is impossible but he who does
so, must use indirect means to gain 'em, which is beneath the Dignity of a
Prince L. 4. tit. 3. p. 2.
; the Holy Writ compares a covetous Prince who unjustly usurps his Subjects
Estates to a roaring Lion, and a hungry Bear Prove. 28. 15.
, and his Actions to a Spiders Web which perishes with it, or to a
Vineyard-Keeper's Arbor, which lasts but a little while Job 27. 18.
; that which is ill got is soon spent How like Spiders are some Princes, who
spin their Web from their own Bowels, griping and draining their Subjects to
make their own fortune from the Rock, and weave Nets which soon break and
deceive their hopes Job 8. 14.
.

There are several Remedies against this Vice, the best are those which prevent
it; for if once Nature is tainted with it, it is very Difficulty cured; it is our
last shift. If Princes are naturally Lovers of Money, they should be kept from
seeing or feeling it, as much as possible, for Avarice like Love enters at the
Eyes, and it is more easy to order a Payment than to make it ones self. The
Ministers of the Treasury too should be generous, and not prompt the Prince to
enrich himself by sordid and unworthy Methods; to prevent also Avarice in the
Ministers, Care should be taken that Offices and Places be not bought and sold,
as the Emperor Commodus observed, for he who buys 'em sells 'em too; this the
Emperor Severus knew, as also Lewis XII. of France, who used this Remedy, but
has been since ill observed by his Successors. It seems to be the Law of
Nations, that a Province, the Command of which is bought, should be plundered,
and that Judgment should be given to the highest bidder at the Court of
Justice, which is not to be approached but by Golden steps Provincias spoliari,
and nummarium tribunal, audita utrinque licitatione, alteri addici non mirum
quando quae emerit vendere gentium jus est. Sen. lib. 1. c. 9. de ben.
. Castile to this Day finds the misfortune of these Methods in the Governments
of their Cities, because they are all sold, against a Statute made by common
Consent, in the time of Don John II. that they should be for Life, and given to
none but whom the Kings should nominate.

It Is necessary besides to settle a competent Salary upon each Office, such as
the incumbent may live handsomely upon; this was the Method of Don Alonso IX*
giving sufficient Salaries to his Judges, and severely punishing those whom he
found guilty of Bribery. The same was practiced by their Catholic Majesty's,
Ferdinand and Isabella, who reduced Lawyers Fees to a certainty Mar. Hist. Hisp.
.

Magistrates should not be suffered to Traffic or Merchandise Sed caput est in
omni Rep. ut legibus, and omni alia ratione provisum sit, ne qu^^ facultas
quaestus faciendi Magistratibus relinqu^tur. Arist. Pol. 5. c. ^.
, for they will never give good Counsel, which they see is against their Gain.
Besides the people is better satisfied with the Honor and Preferment which are
conferred on others, provided they have the Gain and Profit, but they are
incensed and apt to rebel when they see themselves robbed of both Tunc utrumque
ei molestum est, quod nec honorum particeps sit^ and quod a quaestibus
submoveatur. Ibid.
. And to this Cause the Feuds between the Nobility and Commonalty of Genoua may
be attributed. Offices ought not to be given to poor and needy Persons, for
their Poverty exposes 'em too much to Corruption and Bribery. In an Election in
the Roman Senate for a Governor of Spain, the Dispute lay between Sulpicius
Galba and Aurelius Cotta, Scipio being asked his Opinion replied, He liked
neither, one for having nothing, and the other for that he had never enough.

The Athenians always Elected rich Magistrates, and Aristotle gives this Reason
for it, that it is impossible for a poor one to govern justly or peaceably Quasi
impossible ^it, qui egenus existat, eum been Magistratum gerere, aut quietem
optare. Arist. Pol. 2. c. 9.
? It Is true, in Spain we have had several able Statesmen, who came poor into
Office and went poor out.

Ministers who have a great Family are very burdensome to their Provinces; for
though they are Men of Integrity themselves, yet their Retinue may not be so,
the Roman Senate for this Reason would not suffer them to carry their Wives
into their Governments Haud enim frustra placitum olim, ne foeminae in S^cios
aut gentes externas traherentur. Tac. 3. ann.
; and the Kings of Persia generally preferred Eunuchs to the greatest places of
Trust Hest. 1. 11.
, because being free from the trouble of Wives, and Cares of providing* for
Children, they might be more careful of, and less chargeable to the Public.
Those who are too much addicted to Self-interest, and a desire of raising their
Fortunes, are very dangerous in public Offices. For though some do strive to
raise themselves by Merit and Renown, yet they generally think it the surest
way to do it by Riches, without waiting Rewards and Gratuities from the Prince,
who is usually most sparing to him, who deserves most. Lucullus the Consul whom
Want made covetous, and Avarice cruel, brought an unjust War upon Spain only to
enrich himself.

Residents in Courts after Employments are over, is a very effectual Remedy,
because of the fear not only of losing this ill gotten Wealth, but also of
Punishment, in the Severity of which there should be no Favor, nor should it
be bought off by resounding; as Sergius Galba the Praetor did at Rome, when he
was accused of Treachery to the Portugueze. If all the Chairs of Justice were
covered with the Skins of corrupt Judges, as Cambyses King of Persia ordered,
and since him Roger of Sicily, certainly Justice and Integrity would be more
strictly observed.

EMBLEM LIVE.
LIBERTY is natural to Men; obedience forced; that is Arbitrary, this guided by
Reason, these are Contraries, and continually jarring against one another;
whence proceed Rebellions and Treasons against the Prince, and as no Government
can consist, unless some commanded and others obeyed Naturam duas necessarias
res, easdem salutares human^ generi comparasse, ut alii cum Imperio essent,
al^i ei subjicerentur, nihilque quod citra haec, nec (...) quidem queat spatio
perdurare. Dion. lib. 14.
; every one would be Head, and depend on none but himself, which being
impossible, he imagines his Liberty consists in changing the form of
Government: and this is the greatest misfortune that can befall States, and is
often the chief Cause of their Ruin, wherefore it is highly necessary to use
such methods, as that this Lust after Liberty, and this humane Ambition being
removed far from the immediate Administration, should be kept under by reason,
and the force of Government; so that this supreme Authority which is the
Princes Property should be granted to none else, for he exposes Loyalty to
evident Danger; who grants any one a Power too absolute. The Royal Crown put
upon a Subjects Head, though but in jest, will make him proud and think himself
above what he is. The mind of a Subject should not experience this Royal
Grandeur and Glory of reigning, for afterward abusing it he usurps it, and
that it may not return to him from whom he had it, he Plots and contrives his
Ruin; the Divine Writ in one Chapter gives us Examples of Kings put to Death
by the hands of their Subjects, for having raised them too high. Solomon for
all his Wisdom fell into this misfortune and ran the same Risque, for having
made Jeroboam President of all the Customs of the House of Joseph 1 Kin. 11. 28.
, and we read that he had the Impudence to lift up his hand against his King 1
Kin. 11. 26.
. Let Princes then take it for a Maxim of State, not to promote one too much
above others, or if they are obliged to it, let it not be one but several, that
they may Balance one another and mutually keep each other in their Devoir, by a
reciprocal Examination of one another Actions and Designs Est autem omnis
Monarchiae cautio communis, neminem facere nimis magnum, aut certe plusquam
unum facere: ipsi enim inter se, quid quisque agat observant. Arist. 5. Pol. c.
11.
. The Emperor Ferdinand II. did not sufficiently observe this piece of Policy,
when he gave the absolute Command of his Armies, and Provinces to the Duke of
Fridland, whence sprang so many misfortunes, and amongst the rest the loss of
that great Man, which was merely the effect of too much Power. Let not Princes
be deceived by the Example of Pharaoh, who committed all his Power into the
hands of Joseph, who preserved his Kingdom Genesis 41. 40.
; for Joseph was the Emblem of Christ, and there are very few Ioseph's to be
found now adays. Each would depend upon himself, and not upon the Body; which
this present Emblem represents, by a Branch encircled with a wicker Basket
filled with Earth, such as Gardiners use, where it by degrees takes root, and
so being cut off insensibly, becomes a Tree independent of the Stock, without
the least respect to its Greatness. This Example shows the Danger in making
Governments of Provinces perpetual, for Ambition having once taken root, claims
'em as its Property, he who is so accustomed to command, will afterward scarce
be brought to obey. France shows us many Examples of this written in its own
Blood. Even God's Ministers in the Kingdom of Heaven are liable to slip Job 4.
18.
, the Perpetuity of great Offices is an Alienation from the Crown; the Scepter
will be useless and of no force, and will stand in awe of that very Power it
has been so prodigal of: Liberality will want a Dowry, and Virtue a Reward. The
Minister becomes a Tyrant in the Government which he is sure of for Life; that
Prince whom he sees preserves his Authority, he respects as his Master, but him
who does not he despises, and at last rebels against him. Therefore Julius
Caesar limited the Pretorship to one Year, and the Consulship to two.

And the Emperor Charles V. advised his Son Philip II. not to continue
Ministers in Office too long, especially in places Military, to give the
greatest to persons of mean Fortune, and Embassy's to the rich, thereby to
weaken 'em. The Bravery of the great Captain in Italy, made King Ferdinand the
Catholic suspect him, so that he recalled him, and if he did not then wholly
mistrust him, at least he would no longer hazard his Loyalty, by the
Continuation of the Vice-Royship of Naples. And though that great Politician
Tiberius continued Ministers in Posts all their Lifetime, but this was upon
such Tyrannick Considerations, as ought not to enter into the Thoughts of a
prudent and just Prince Id morum Tiberii suit, continuare Imperia, ac plerosque
ad fine^ vitae in eisdem exercitibus, aut Iurisdictionibus habere. Tac. 5. ann.
. Princes ought therefore to take advice from Nature, the Mistress of true
Politics; who does not allow its Celestial Ministers of light a perpetual
Authority, and Government of the World, but certain fixed Seasons, as we may see
in the Motion and Reigns of the Planets, that they may not lose the right of
disposing of 'em, and to prevent, the usurping her Authority and Power; besides
she considers, that the Earth would be ruined, if it should always be governed
by the Melancholy of Saturn, or the heat and fury of Mars, or the severity of
Jupiter, or the subtilty of Mercury, or the levity of Venus, or the inconstancy
of the Moon.

In removals of this Nature great Care ought to be taken, that Ministers should
not take it to be a slur upon their Reputation, to be removed from greater to
lesser Places, for since there are not many, that Minister would be of no use,
who when he has been employed in the highest, would refuse to Officiate in
lower Places; and though Reason requires that Rewards should be equal to
Deserts; yet in this Point the Subjects reason should be guided by the Princes
interest, when his Service, or the public Advantage is in the Case; [not that
he ought to be put into any inferior Post, out of Contempt or Disgrace] for so
the importance of the Negotiation makes amends for the meannes^ of the Office.

If any Offices may be continued long, they are Embassies^ for their Business
is only to intercede, not Command; not to give Orders, but to negotiate; at
their Departure all Acquaintance with their native Country dies, and all
Intimacy with the Prince with whom they negotiate and his Ministers cease.
Forts and Garrisons, which are as it were the Keys of the Kingdom, should be at
the immediate Power and Disposal of the Prince; King Sancho was ill advised,
when by reason of the Minority of his Son Don Alonso III. he ordered those of
the Nobility, who were Governors of Cities to remain till his Son was fifteen
years old, which occasioned many grievous Calamities to that Kingdom. As for
other Offices let 'em be but for a time, for their too long continuance makes
the Ministers proud, and endangers their Loyalty: This Tiberius knew though he
did not practice Superbire homines etiam annua designatione: quid si honorem
per quinquennium agitent? Tac. 2. ann.
. Virtue is tired by Industry and Expectation; yet should not Offices be of too
short continuance, so as the Minister can reap no benefit or experience in 'em,
or so as to make him too ravenous like Hawks in Norway, because of the
shortness of the day; but in troublesome and dangerous times, public Offices
and places of Trust ought to be continued longer, least they should upon
removal be conferred upon raw, unexperienced Persons. So Augustus did upon the
defeat of Quintilius Varus. But this Doctrine of Ministers being continued in
Offices but for a time, must not be understood of those supreme Offices of the
Princes Counsel, or of Justice. But on the contrary, they ought to be fixed and
continued, because of the advantage of their Experience and Knowledge of
Affairs depending.

These kinds of Offices are in Governments like the Poles in the Heavens, about
which the lesser Orbs move, so that if they should be changed or removed, the
whole Universe would be endangered by the disorder of its natural Motions.
Solon knew this Inconveniency in the four hundred Senators, which were yearly
Elected by Lot at Athens, and therefore he established a Senate of Sixty worthy
Men who were called Areopagites, and while this continued the Republic
flourished. It Is moreover very dangerous to commit the Government of Kingdoms
during the Minority, to persons who have any Pretentio^s thereto, though never
so unjust; so it fell out in Arragon, by the Imprudence of those who committed
the Government to Sancho Duke of Roussillon, until King James I. came to age.
Those Persons who have no manner of Pretention to the Crown, either by Birth,
or any other Cause, often thirst after it; how much more then those, who in
Pictures and Images see their Ancestors brows incircled with it?

This Age as well as the passed gives us many deplorable Examples of Relations,
who have treacherously usurped Kingdoms which they were entrusted with. Those
of the Royal Blood are more prone to Tyranny, in that they never want means to
accomplish their Designs. Few can be perswad'd of the Justice of that Law,
which prefers Birth to Virtue; and every one thinks he better deserves a Crown,
than another, and if this Reason should be of force in any one, he is in danger
from his Favorites, who hoping to participate of his Grandeur, strive to
procure it by violent means, and to raise Jealousies amongst his Relations. If
King Philip had any Jealousy of Don John of Austria they flowed from this
Spring. A glorious Example of this Policy we find in the Infant Ferdinand
refusing the Crown, which was the Right of his Nephew Don John II. by which
generous Recusance of that Crown on Earth he merited many more in Heaven. The
generous Loyalty which the Infants of that Name have paid the Kings of their
Race, is of an ancient Date. Nor do we find less in this present Infant toward
the present King, whose Respect and Obedience is more like that of a Subject
than of a Brother. The heavenly Spheres pay not a more ready Obedience to the
first mover, than his Highness does to his Majestys Will. O truly Noble Prince,
whose glorious Birth, though the greatest in the World, is yet the least of his
Excellencies, the Effect of Divine Providence, that in a time of such
troublesome and tedious Wars, which strained the very Axle-tree and Poles of
the Government, to raise us up an Atlas to support it by his Valor, Conduct
and Prudence.

EMBLEM LV.
ARISTOTLE the better to instruct Alexander the Great, in the Qualities of
Counselors compared them to Eyes; which comparison Don Alonso the Wise makes
use of in his Books of Laws. Nor is this thought new, for the Kings of Persia
and Babylon called 'em their Eyes, their Ears and their Hands, according to the
Offices in which they officiated: The seven Spirits God's Ministers sent all
over the Earth, were the Eyes of a Lamb without spot or blemish Apoc. 5. 6.
. A Prince who ought to see and comprehend so many Affairs, should be all Eyes
and all Ears Superior debet esse totus men's, etc totus oculus. S. Antioc. Hom.
5.
, and because he cannot be so, he must make use of the Eyes and Ears of other.
Whence there is no Prince, though never so prudent and intelligent, but ha^
occasion for Ministers and to make use of them as his Eyes, Ears and Hands Nam
Principes ac Reges nunc quoque multos sibi oculos, multas a^res, multas item
manus atque pedes faciunt. Arist. Pol. 5. c. 12
. This is not of small advantage to him* if he knows how to make a right use
on it, for by thi^ means he sees with every Body's eyes, hears with their Ears*
and takes advise from them all H^^ enim ratione, and omnium oculis cernet, and
omnium auribus audiet, and omnium denique consiliis in unum tendentibus
consultabit. Sines. ad Arcad
. The Egyptians mean^ this by the Eye which they placed upon their Scepter*
for Counsels are the Eyes by which we inspect Futurity Consilium oculus
futurorum. Arist. lib. 6. de Regim.
. This Jeremiah seemed to allude to, when he said, Virga^ vigilantem ego video
^erem: 1* 11. Vid. Version. Vulgar.
. For this Reason, in this present Emblem you see a Scepter full of Eyes, to
give the Prince to understand, that he ought to inspect all Affairs of the
Government by his Ministers; nor is it to be wondered at, that we place the
Ministers in the Scepter, for formerly their Names were engrave on the Crowns
of the Emperors and Kings of Spain, nor without Reason, for they shine
brighter than the Diadems themselves.

This Emblem of Eyes sufficiently shows the Qualifications that a Minister
ought to be endued with. For as the Sight extends to all things far and near,
so should the active Spirit of the Counselor inspect all things present, past
and future, that he may make a right Judgment of things, and give a true
Opinion of all Affairs, which cannot be done without much Reading, great
Experience, and a continual Commerce with foreign Countries: For if the
Counselors ben't perfectly versed in the Princes Nature, and the Manners and
Genius of the people, they will ruin both themselves and the Government Morum,
animor^mque Provincie nisi s^^gneri qui de ea consulant, perdant se, and
R^mpub. Cicero.
. And to know this requires use; for the Eyes don't know things which they have
never seen; he who has had Experience and Knowledge of things, will readily
find Expedients and Remedies Eccles. 3. 4.
.

There is such a correspondence between the Eyes and Heart, that the Affections
of the one immediately strikes the other, when this is sad they weep, when this
glad they smile; if the Counselor has not a particular Esteem for his Prince,
he will take but little care of his Affairs, and is therefore very little to be
trusted, so said King Alphonso the Wise: L. 5. tit. 9. p. 2.
That Councillors ought to be the Princes true Friends, otherwise he would be
in great Danger, for those who hate a Person will never advise him cordially.

The Eye will not suffer the Finger to touch its inside, but upon its approach
immediately sculks within the Lids; how wise and learned soever the Minister is
in his Counsels, if he is easy and free of his Secerts, if he suffers his
Finger to probe his Heart, he will be more prejudicial to the Princers Affairs
than one who understands nothing, Counsels are worth nothing when revealed, and
there is more danger in good Resolves unseasonably discovered, than in ill ones
executed with Secrecy; let a Minister therefore avoid Discourse with those who
are not entrusted with the same Secret. Let him shut his Heart against those
who would dive into it: for in discoursing of Affairs the Design is easily
discovered, with the Maxims by which the Prince governs. The Lips are the
windows of the Heart, the opening of which discovers all within.

The Eyes are so pure and free from Avarice; that they will not admit the least
Atom, and if by chance any thing, though never so little gets in, it obstructs
their Sight, or at least makes them see things double, and different from what
they are; the Minister who receives Presents will be blinded with the dust of
them, so as not to be able to discern things rightly, but only as Self-interest
shall represent 'em.

Though the Eyes are two, yet they see but one and the same thing, they both
agree in the truth of the Species which they receive, and in transmitting them
to the sense by the Optic Nerves which are united, that they may not enter
severally and deceive it. If the Ministers don't unanimously agree in advising
for the best, without being divided in their Sentiments by love and hate, or
any other reason* the Prince will be always in doubt or confusion, without
knowing which Counsel is best. And this inconvenience falls out when one
Minister thinks he sees and understands more than another, or when he has not
Judgment enough to distinguish which is best Eccles. 8. 20
. or when he is biased by his own Passions or desire of Revenge. But a
Minister should be free from all these, so as to have no other Purpose or
Design than the Service of his Prince: Such a Minister [says Alphonso the Wise]
is called in Latin Patricius, being as it were a Father to the Prince, which
Title is taken from the resemblance it bears to the natural Father, for every
Father is naturally inclined to advise his Son in all things for his advantage
and Honor; so he who governs the Prince by his Counsels, ought to love him and
advise him with Sincerity, preferring his Honor and Interest above all things,
not respecting the Love or Hatred, Interest or Prejudice, that may ensue, and
all this without Flattery, not minding whether he be good or bad; like a Father
in instructing his Child L. 7. tit. 1. p. 4.
. Nature has divided the Jurisdiction of the Eyes by a Line interposed, not but
that they both agree in Operation, assisting one another with a Zeal so mutual,
that if one turns to one side, the the other does so too, that they may have a
more certain Cognizance of things, neither regarding whether they be within
their Sphere or not, the same Agreement is absolutely necessary amongst
Ministers, whose Zeal should be so universal, that they should not only regard
those things which their Office obliges 'em to, but also those that belong to
others; there is no Member, but for the preservation of the whole Body, sends
its Blood and Spirits to the assistance of that which is out of order. For a
Minister to be an idle Spectator of another Calamities shows malice, envy and
want of respect to the Prince. This proceeds often from a love of Self-interest
and Glory; or least he should by assisting his Friend endanger his own
Reputation, or else that he may flourish more upon his Friends misfortune. Such
Ministers only serve themselves not the Prince. Whence proceed Divisions in the
State, Army and Revenue, by which many good opportunities are lost, many Towns,
Castles and Provinces ruined; Ministers should mutually communicate their
Designs and Actions, as the Cherubims did their wings in the Temple of Solomon
2 Chronicles. 3. 12.
.

As u^eful as Eyes are to the Body, Nature has given it but two, because more
would breed confusion and obstruct the Susception of things: It Is the same in
Counselors, for when there are too many, Consultations are retarded, Secrets
revealed, and Truth confounded, for their Votes are only counted not duly
weighed, and the greater number carries it; and thence proceed generally all
misfortunes in Commonwealths. The multitude is always blind and thoughtless;
and the wisest Senate, if composed of too many, will have a mixture of the
Ignorance of the vulgar. A few Planets give more light than many Stars, and the
multitude thereof in the Via Lactea darken one another by the refraction of
their own Light, so that it is darker there than in any other part of the Sky.
Two great a number makes Liberty saucy and stubborn, and difficult to be
reduced to the Princes Will Populi Im^erium juxta libertatem: paucorum
Dominatio Regi^ l^bidini proprior est. Tac. 6. ann.
. As it often happens in Parliaments and general Assemblies; let therefore the
Prince have just so many Ministers as are sufficient to govern his State,
carrying himself indifferently to them all, not being ruled wholly by one, for
he cannot see so well with one as with all; thus Xenophon said when using the
same comparison, he called the Ministers of the Kings of Persia their Eyes and
Ears Hinc factum est, ut vulgo jactarunt Per^arum Regem multos h^bere e^ules,
auresque multas: quod si quis putet unum oculum expetendum Regi, eum egregie
falli certum est, unus enim and pa^ca videat, and pa^ca (...); Xenoph. lib. 4.
Cyri.
; such a Minister would usurp all the Dignity and Majesty of the Prince to
himself, for that the Prince is obliged to see with his Eyes Et Majestas qui
(...) imperium habere apud Ministrum sol^t; Regi, aut Principi (...)
relinquitur. Plutarch.
Princes are generally so taken with some one Minister, that with him they
negotiate all manner of Affairs, though he be never so great a Stranger to
them; hence proceed so many Errors in their Resolutions, for neither can Men
of Learning give proper advise in Military Affairs, nor Soldiers in those
which relate to Peace; upon which Consideration the Emperor Severus advised
with every one in those matters which particularly belonged to them Unde si de
jure tractaretur, in consilium solos doctos adhibebat, ^^vero de re militari,
milites veteres, and senes ac been meritos and locorum peritos. Lamp. in Vit.
Alex.
.

By all these Qualities of the Eyes the Body is governed, without 'em it cannot
move one step securely; 'twill be the same in the Government which wants good
Ministers. Without these Eyes the Scepter would be blind, for there is no
Prince so wise as to be able to decide all Affairs himself: L. 1. tit. 9. p. 2.
Since Royalty [says K. Alphonsus] admits of no Companion, nor has occasion for
any, it is necessary for the Prince to have about him Persons of Integrity and
Wisdom, who may upon all Emergencies advise and assist him. But if any Prince
imagines his own Eyes so good as to believe he can see all things without the
assistance of others, he is more vain than prudent, and will stumble each step
of his Administration Si de sua uni^^ sententia omnia geret, superbum hunc
judicabo, magis quam prudente^ Livius.
. Joshua though he communicated with (...)* received Instructions from him; and
particularly for the taking the City Nai, he advised with his old Captains
about it Jos. 8. 10.
. King Assuerus's Ministers never departed from his side, and he maturely
advised with them about all Affairs, a Custom which Kings always observed Hest.
1. 13.
. Only by Pride comes Contention, but with the well advised is Wisdom Prove.
13. (...)
Nature has qualified no Man sufficiently to manage a Government though never
(...) little by himself, it being impossible for one to know so much as many
Nemo solus sapit. Plaut.
. And though one quick-sighted can see further than many others, for they are
not like number^* which are multiplied by themselves, and make one great Sum,
it must be understood of things at a distance, not of those in a near
Circumference, for then many Eyes discover more than one Prove. 11. 12.
, provided the number be not so great as to create Confusion; one person has
but one Argument, for he cannot have many at the same time, and being fond with
that will go no further. In Counsels the Prince hears all, and following the
best renounces his own Opinion, and perceives the Inconveniences of those,
which proceed from Passion or Interest. For this Reason Don John II. of Arragon
writing to his Sons their Catholic Majesty's, upon his Death bed, he advised
them to do nothing without the Counsel of virtuous and discreet Ministers. It Is
necessary, that these Eyes of Ministers should preceed each step of the
Administration, and mark out the way Prove. 4. 25.
. The Emperor Antoninus Sirnam'd the Philosopher the wisest Prince of (...)
time, had for his Counselors Scaev^la, Mutlanus, Ulpianus and Marcellus, all
persons of exquisite Merit, and when their Counsel seemed better than his own,
he with ease ^quitted it and sided with them; it is fitter says he, for me to
follow the advice of so many worthy Friends, than for them to follow mine. A
wise Man hearkeneth unto Counsel Prove. 12. 15.
. An ignorant Prince who will be advised, will succeed better in his Affairs,
than an understanding one who depends too much upon his own Opinions. Let not a
Prince's Pride suggest^ to him, that he divides the Honor of the Success, in
taking the advice of his Ministers; for it is as commendable to submit himself
to be advised by others, as to succeed in any thing of his own management.

Homer. ^
Be advised, O King, and governed in your turn. This taking advice, is a
particular mark of a Prince's Authority; it is the Inferiors Duty to give
advice, and the Superiors to receive it. There is nothing more becoming
Royalty, nothing more necessary than Consultation and Execution. It Is an Action
[said King Alphonsus XI. in the Parliament of Madrid] worthy the Royal
Grandeur, to have always, according to his commendable Custom, worthy
Counselors about him, and to take advice of them in all things; for if every
private Man's Duty be to have good Counselors, how much more is it incumbent
upon a Prince? Every Fool can give advice, but he must be a Man of Prudence who
resolves well Prove. 13. 16.
. And there is no Diminution of the Honor of a Prince, who knows how to take
advice and make a good Choice: whatever shall be well Enacted by the assistance
of your Counsels, said the Emperor Theodosius in one of his Laws, will redound
to the Honor of the Empire and my own Glory Been enim quod cum vestro consilio
fuerit ^^^dinatum, id ad beatitudinem nostri imperii, and ad nostram Gloriam
red^^^dare. L. Humanum, c. de Leg.
. The Victories of Scipio Africanus proceeded from the Counsels of Laelius,
whence they said in Rome, Laelius wrote the Play, and Scipio Acted it. Yet did
not this obscure the Luster of his Glory, nor was the Honor of Scipio's
Exploits attributed to Laelius, it is necessary that the Prince should know how
to Act the Play himself, and that the Minister should not be both Poet and
Actor too. For though a Prince's Ministers are his Eyes, yet he should not be
so stark blind, as not to see at all without them, for this would be to govern
by Guess, and he would incur the contempt and disrespect of his Subjects;
Lucius Torquatus being chosen Consul the third time, desired to be excused for
the weakness of his Eyes, saying, 'Twas a shame that the Government, and the
Estates of the Citizens should be committed to one, who must be forced to see
with other Men Eyes indignum esse, Rempub, and f^^tunas civium ei committi qui
alienis oculis uti crederetur. Tit. Li^* lib. 26.
. King Ferdinand the Catholic used to say, That Ambassadors were a Prince's
Eyes; but that he would be very unfortunate who should see with no other: That
great Politician did not wholly rely upon his Ministers; see with them indeed
he did, but as we do with Spectacles, by applying 'em to his own Eyes. When the
Ministers find that the Administration of Affairs is wholly in their Power,
they will wrest it to their own private Ends, and their Ambition increasing
they divide into Factions, every one arrogates (...) himself that share of
power and authority, that the Prince through his Laziness and Insufficiency has
granted him. All things are in disorder and confusion; if the Ministers aim to
be any thing more than Perspectives, by which the Prince discovers the Horizon
of Affairs, and takes those Resolutions and Counsels which he likes best,
Nature has given him Eyes, and if God governs his Heart Prove. 21. 1.
, he directs also his Sight, and makes it more clear and quick than his
Ministers. King Philip II. retired sometimes into himself, to meditate upon the
Affairs of his Government, and after having fervently recommended himself to
God; he resolved upon the first method that offered it self, though against the
Opinion of all his Ministers, and this generally succeeded. Counselors cannot
always be at the Princes Elbow, for the state of Affairs and the urgency of
Opportunity requires sometimes, that their Resolutions be quick and ready Non
omnia consilia cuncti^ praesentibus tractari, aut occasionum velocitas patitur.
Tac. 1. Hist.
. Orders are not respected and obeyed, when it appears that he gives them not,
but receives them himself: It Is a presumptuous Rashness to conclude all without
ever taking Advice, and a stupid Slavery to Act nothing without it. He who
Commands should have the Liberty of changing, mending, and rejecting whatever
his Ministers propose to him. It Is sometimes convenient to hide from 'em
certain Mysteries, and to deceive them, as the same Philip, did who differently
reported to his Council the Negotiations of his Ambassadors, when he had a
mind to draw 'em to his own Resolutions, or thought it convenient to conceal
certain Circumstances from them. A Council of State should be like a Colossus,
that the Prince standing upon its Shoulders may see farther than it. The
Thebans did not desire Princes so foresighted, as one may guess by the manner
of Painting them with their E^rs open, and their Eyes shut, signifying that
they ought blindly to execute all the Resolutions of the Senate: but this was
not the Emblem of an absolute Prince, but only of a Prince of a Commonwealth,
whose Power is so circumscribed that it is sufficient for him to hear, for the
Power of seeing what is to be done, it reserved for the Senate. This is nothing
but a dark shadow of Majesty, and an empty appearance of Authority. His Power
is nothing but a reflection of that of the Senate, and so he has no need of
Eyes, who cannot go where he pleases.

But though it is convenient for a Prince to preserve this Liberty in Counsels,
yet he ought not to be so vain as for fear of being thought to want their
Advice, to reject whatever they pro^^^e; for so he would incur very great
Inconveni^ncies: As Pettus did according to Tacitus Ne (...) sententi^ indig^^s
videretur, i^ diversa ac deterior^ (...). Tac. 11. ann.
.

If 'twere possible Kings should have Kings for their Counselors, that (...)
Counsels might not deviate from (...) A^thority and Honor of (...); a Prince
sometimes (...) beneath himself (...) Instigation of an abject (...). But since
this is impossible they (...) choose (...) ^^unsellours, as though they are not
Princes by Birth, are so in grea^ness of Mind and Generosity.

In Spain there are several Councils instituted, with a great deal of Prudence;
for the Government of Kingdoms and Provinces, and for all the most important
Affairs of the Kingdom* yet ought not all Care to be rejected, by confidently
relying upon this happy Constitution, for no Government is so strongly fenced,
but that its Foundations in time wear away, or are unsens^bly undermined by
Malice or Abuse. It Is not sufficient for each distinct part to be well
governed, if they don't sometimes all unite, to treat as well of themselves in
particular, as of the whole Body in general. For this Reason we have in
Convents or religious Orders, Provincial and general Chapters, and in the
Government of the Church, Councils. For the same Reason every ten years there
is held at Madrid a General Council consisting of two Counselors, of each
particular Council, and of two Deputies of each Province, to consult for the
Preservation not only of each part, but of the whole Kingdom. For if these
Kingdoms were not so renewed, they would grow old and at last die. This
Assembly will unite the parts of the Monarchy, and make 'em agree among
themselves, to the mutual assistance of each other. For this Reason the
Councils of Toledo were assembled, where not only Matters of Religion, but also
those of State were treated of.

All these Qualities of Eyes ought also to be found in Confessors to Princes,
who are their Counselors, Judges, and spiritual Physicians: these Offices
require Men of Zeal and entire Affection for the Service of God, and their
Prince; Persons who have Sense to judge well, prudence to advise, Liberty to
reprehend, and Courage to undeceive, by setting before his Eyes, though at the
hazard of his Favor, the Disgusts of his Subjects, and the Danger of his
Kingdom, without smearing over the crazed and falling Wall with untempered
Mortar Ezekiel. 13. 10.
. Some Princes use Confessors only for Conscience sake, others make use of them
as Counselors of State: I shall not pretend to examine into the Reason of
these two Methods; I only say, it is thought convenient in Spain, to admit the
King's Confessor into his Council, as well to give his assistance in matters of
Conscience, as also that being as it were a sharer in the management of
Affairs, he may correct the Prince, if in any thing he is deficient in his
Devoir. For some know the Faults that they are guilty of as Men, but not those
which they commit as Princes, though those are greater which belong to their
Office than those which respect only their person. No^ only the Confessors
ought to assist in Council, but also Bishops, or other Ecclesiastics, who by
their Authority and Learning may be very serviceable, and so the two Arms, the
Temporalty and Spiritualty will more firmly unite, for the Defense and
Preservation of the Body of the Government. The Gothic Kings used to advise
about all weighty Affairs, with Prelates who were to that purpose assembled in
the Councils of Toledo.

What we have said about Confessors should be understood also of Preachers, who
are the Trumpets of Truth Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet, Is^ 58. 1.
, the Interpreters between God and Men For every High Priest taken from among
Men, is ordained for Men in things appertaining to God, Heb. 5. 1.
, in whose mouth God has put his word Behold I have put my words in thy mouth,
Ierem. 1. 9.
, the Prince ought to carry himself with great Circumspection toward them,
they being the Channels by which wholesome or poisonous Doctrines are delivered
to the people; the Mobb wholly depends upon 'em, they being the most proper
Instruments either to raise or appease them, as has been seen in the Revolts of
Catal^nia and Portugal. Their Zeal for declaiming against Vice, often gives 'em
occasion to reflect upon those in Authority, which the people eagerly swallow,
through their natural Aversion to the Ministers; whence proceeds Contempt of
Authority, and the Peoples disgust, which is the occasion of Seditions and
Tumults; especially when the Princes faults are reflected on, it is necessary
therefore, that these Reprimands should be general, without pointing at persons
when the Scandal is not public, or Holy Admonitions, or other Circumstances
have been ineffectual. God so modestly in the Apocalypse reprehended the
Bishops, that he seems almost to ^latter them I know thy Works, and Charity,
and Service, and Faith, and thy Patience, and thy Works; and the last to be
more than the first. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee. Revel.
2. 19.
; Christ never reflected upon any person from the Pulpit, his Reprehensions
were general, and if at any time he descended to particulars 'twas not as
Preacher, but as King. That should by no means be heard from the Pulpit, which
is dissolute and punishable in the Streets, in which Zeal is often mistaken,
either because it is extravagant, or blinded with the Applause of the Giddy
Mobb, which eagerly crowds to hear the Prince or Magistracy reflected upon.

EMBLEM LVI.
THE Office of a Secretary depends upon the understanding, not the Pen; if it
all lay in neatly cutting a Letter Printers would be the best Secretaries. His
Duty is to consult, propose and bring matters to Perfection, he is the right
hand of the Princes Will, his Instrument of Government, the Finger by which he
points out his Resolutions; and as King Alphonsus says, The second Officer of
the Household, at least of those who are of the Cabinet; for as the Confessor is
Mediator between God and the King, so is the Secretary between the King his
Subjects L. 4. tit. 9. p. 2.
. Discreet and prudent Consultations in Councils will be of small Effect, if he
who should methodize them should fail in his part; the Ministers give their
Opinions, and the Prince declares his Sentiments by his Secretary, and a word
now and then aptly applied, changes the Face of Affairs, as in a Picture, a
small shade or a stroke of the Pencil, either spoils it, or gives more Life to
it; the Council forms the Idea of the Building, the Secretary draws the Plan
thereof, which if it be irregular, the Super-structure must of necessity be so
too. The better to represent this, you see in the present Emblem his Pen is a
pair of Compasses, because his Business is not only to write, but also to
measure the Resolves, and to set out fit times and opportunities for the
Execution of 'em, that they may neither be too soon nor too late: this Office
is so united to that of the Prince, that if the trouble of Affairs would
permit, it should by no means be committed to another, for if it is not a part
of Majesty, it is at least a certain Reflection of it; this I believe Cicero
meant, when he advised the then Pro-consul of Asia thus, Let your Ring [which
you must construe Secretary] be not as any other piece of Goods, but as your
own self, not a Minister of another's Will, but a Witness of your own; each
other Minister is the Kings Representative but in one Office, but the Secretary
in all Sit annullus tuus, non ut vas aliquod, sed tanquam ipse tu; no^ Minister
alien^ voluntatis, sed t^stis tuae. Cicer. Epist. 1. ad Quint. fratrem.
. It suffices others to know what belongs to their particular Places, but he
must have a perfect Knowledge, a general and particular Intelligence of
Practices, and Arts, as well of Peace as War. If they err it is but in some one
particular; but this reaches all in general, yet so privately, that the
mis-carriage is imputed to the Council; as the ignorance of the Physician is to
the Malignity of the Distemper; some Affairs may be negotiated with bad
Ministers, but not with an ignorant Secretary. He is the Stomach, in which
Affairs are digested, and if they come thence crude and ill concocted, the Life
of the Government will be sickly and short; cast your Eyes back upon Pastimes,
and you will find that never any Government has been well managed without good
Secretaries. What signifies the Princes careful Resolves, if the Secretary
knows not how to apply them, by judiciously considering, and prudently
observing certain Circumstances on which Affairs always depend. If he wants
Discretion and Judgment, his written Rules and Instructions are of small use,
for there is scarce any Affair for which you can find an exact Precedent. For
time and other accidents alter the very Nature and Form of all things.
Apothecaries have different Medicines prescribed by several Physicians, for
several Diseases; but they would be notoriously mistaken, if they should ignorantly
apply them without a due Knowledge of the Causes whence they proceed, as also
of the Constitution of the sick Person, the time, and other Circumstances;
which Experience, Reason, and Speculation shall dictate. The same Affair should
be differently prescribed to a Phlegmatic and Choleric Minister, differently
to a timorous and bold one. The Secretary ought to instruct each how he should
behave himself. What are Secretaries Offices, but certain Schools for the
Education of able Statesmen? From what Practice and Experience teaches them,
they learn the true Art of Government. There they observe what Counsels have
succeeded, what mis-carried. From all which appears the necessity of choosing
such for Secretaries, as are endu'd with good natural parts. Those great
Ministers or Secretaries of God, which we call Evangelists, were represented in
the Apocalypse, by four winged Animals, full of Eyes both within and without,
signifying by their Wings, their Expedition and Execution, their Knowledge of
all things by their external Eyes, and their Contemplation by their internal
ones Revel. 4. 8.
. Being so busy that they never rested night or day Ibid.
, so intent upon their Duty, that their wings were always stretched upwards
Ezekiel. 1. 11.
, so conformed and united to the Holy Spirit in all things, that they never
parted from it Ezekiel. 1. 12.
.

To make a good Choice of a Secretary, 'twould be convenient for Princes to
train up such persons as by their natural Qualifications and perfect Knowledge
of the Latin Tongue seem fit for it, under their Ambassadors, or chief
Ministers, making Trial of them in several Posts beyond Sea; and afterward let
them call 'em to the Secretaries Office at Court, where they may serve, and
capacitate themselves for Secretaries of State, High Treasurer, and the like,
upon whose Knowledge and Experience, the Success and good management of Affairs
very much depend. By this means the ill Choice which Ministers of State usually
make of their Secretaries would be avoided, for they employ only them, who have
served 'em formerly, and who are usually most unfit for that Office, being
chosen commonly more from the neatness of their Handwriting than their
Understanding. Whence it falls out, that a good Minister who has a careless
ignorant Secretary, is more prejudicial to the Princes Affairs, than a bad
Minister whose Secretary is discreet and careful; besides the Secretary being
chosen by the Prince himself, on whom he solely depends, will make the Minister
more vigilant and attentive in the performance of his Office; King Alphonso
well knowing of what importance it was to have a good Secretary, said, That a
King ought to make Choice of for that Charge, a person well born and well bred,
of good Sense, good Temper, and good Manners; who can read and write Latin, as
well as his vulgar Tongue L. 4. ti^ 9. p. 2.
. King Alphonso seems to thing it not sufficient that he can read it, but that
he must readily speak it too; for this is absolutely necessary for him, who is
to treat with all Nations. Especially at present, now the Spanish Monarchy is
extended over so many foreign Kingdoms, and Provinces, because o^ the frequent
Correspondence in Latin.

The most essential thing in a Secretary is Secrecy, whence his Name is
derived, that he may upon hearing it be put in mind of his Duty. The Tongue and
the Pen are the most dangerous Instruments of the heart, by these it is usually
exposed, either through Levity, or Vanity, to be thought the Repositories of
very important Secrets, by discovering them, either by discourse or writing, to
those from whom they should conceal 'em: So that he is not fit for the Charge
of a Secretary, who cannot modestly hear others, rather than talk himself,
without changing the Air of his Face at any thing; for oft-times the Secrets of
the heart are discovered thereby.

EMBLEM LVII.
THE wheels of a Clock perform their Office with such silence, that their
Motions can neither be heard nor perceived, and though the whole Contrivance
depends upon them, yet do they not attribute to themselves the Honor of it,
but lend to the hand its Motion, which alone distinguishes and points out the
hours, and is esteemed by all, the only Rule and Measure of time. This mutual
Correspondence and Agreement should be between the Prince and his Counselors;
for it is highly convenient to have them: for [as King Alphonsus the Wise said]
Though Emperors and Kings are great persons, yet can neither of them by
themselves do more than a single Man; L. 12. ti^. 1. p. 2.
and the Government of a Nation requires many, but them so modest as not to
attribute their successful Resolutions to their own Counsel, but to the
Princes; let 'em share the Trouble but not the Power; let 'em be Ministers not
Companions; let 'em know that the Prince can govern without them, but not they
without him. Where a Prince can show his Authority and Greatness without the
assistance of others, let him do it. In Egypt where the heat of the Sun is
more powerful than in other parts, it breeds Animals without any assistance; if
a Prince does nothing without Advice, he is more like a Client than a Prince.
The force of Government is lost, unless the Sum of Affairs be reduced to one
Neve Tiberius vim Principatus resolveret, ^unc^a ad senatum vocando, eam
conditionem esse ^mperan^^, ut non aliter ratio const^t, quam si uni reddatur.
Tac. 1 ann.
; Monarchy is distinguished from other methods of Government in that one only
Commands, and the rest obey, and if the Prince shall permit several to rule,
'twill not be a Monarchy but an Aristocracy, there is no Command where all are
Masters. The Holy Spirit takes this for a punishment of the Sins of the people
For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof Prove. 28. 2.
, and on the contrary a Blessing when only one Commands And I will set up one
Sheph^rd over them. Ez^^. 34. ^3.
, when the Ministers shall find a Prince so careless as to let others Reign,
they usurp to themselves what Authority they can. Pride and Emulation grows
among them, every one tears a slip from the Royal Robe, so that at last it
remains a mere Ragg. The people confounded between so many Masters, no longer
acknowledge their true and lawful one, and so begin to despise and contemn the
Government. For they believe nothing can be well done, but what they think the
Prince does of himself, whence they prepare a Remedy by force. Histories
furnish us with deplorable Examples of this, in the Deposition and Death of
Garcias King of Galaecia, who would not be so much as the Index to point out
the Motion of the Government; but left all to the management of a particular
Favorite of his, who was afterward killed with him. We find Sancho King of
Portugal deposed, because his Queen, and a few other Scoundrel Servants had the
whole management of Affairs; the same thing be^el King Henry IV. for being so
easy as to Sign all Dispatches which his Ministers brought him* without ever
reading or knowing the Contents of 'em. The Prince exposes himself to all
manner of Inconveniences, who without perusal or consideration, agrees to
whatever others desire him: for upon him as upon soft Wax every one makes what
impression he pleases; so it was with the Emperor Claudius Nihil arduum
videbat^r in ani^o Principis, (...) non judiciu^, non odium erat nisi indita
and j^ssa. Tac. 12. ann.
. God placed the Government upon the Princes own Shoulders, not upon his
Ministers Is^^. 9. 6
; as Samuel intimated to Saul, at the Entertainment when he anointed him King,
when he on purpose ordered the Cook to set by for him a shoulder of Meat And
the Cook to^k up the Shoulder, etc. 1 Samuel 9. 24.
. Yet would I not have a Prince like a Camel merely to bear Burdens; but his
Shoulders should be full of Eyes, like the Animals in Ezekiel's Vision, Ezekiel.
1. 18. lm LXX.
that they may see and know what they bear: Elisha called Elias the Chariot and
Horsemen of Israel, because he sustained and managed the Government 2 Kings 2
12.
. He does not deserve the name of Prince, who cannot of himself give Orders and
contradict 'em, as is visible in Vitellius, who not being capable of commanding
nor punishing, was no longer Emperor, but only the cause of War Ips^ n^q^e
jub^nd^, neque vi^an^i pot^ns, non jam Imperator, sed tantum (...). T^c 1. H^st.
; wherefore a Prince should not only perform the part of the hand in the Clock
of the Government, but that also of the Pe^dulum, which regulates the Motions
of the Wheels: In short, upon that depends the whole Art of Government? Not
that I would have a Prince perform the Office of a Judge, Counselor or
President, for his Dignity is far above it Non Aedilis, aut Praetoris, aut
Consulis Parts sustineo, majus aliquod, and excelsius a Principe postulatur.
Tac. 3. Hist.
, if he applied himself so to all Business, he would want time for Affairs of
greater moment. He ought, says King Alphonso, to have Understanding, Loyal, and
Trusty Persons to assist him, and serve him faithfully in all things, as well
to advise him as to administer Justice to his People; for he cannot of himself
duly weigh and examine all things, so that he has need of some in whom he can
confide. He should use them as the Instruments of Government, and let them
operate; yet so as he may inspect what they do, with a superior Direction,
more or less immediate or assistant, as the importance of Affairs requires.
Those things which properly belong to the Ministers, let the Ministers perform.
Those which are peculiar to the Princes Office, let him only manage. For which
Reason Tiberius checked the Senate for leaving the whole Burden of Affairs to
him Et proximi Senatus die, Tiberius castigatis per literas oblique Patribus,
quod cunct^ curarum ad Principem rejicerent. Tac. 3. ann.
, the weighty thoughts of Princes, ought not to be disturbed by ^rivolous
Consultations, when without any offense to their Majesty, they may be decided
by the Ministers. Wherefore Sanguinius advised the Roman Senate, not to trouble
the Emperor with such Matters, as without molesting him were in their Power to
remedy Sanguinius Maximus e Consularibus oravit Senatum ne curas Imperatoris
conquisitis insuper acerbitatibus augerent, sufficere ipsum statuendis
remediis. Tac. 6. ann.
. But if a Prince relying upon the Prudence and Integrity of a Minister, shall
entrust him with the management of any Affair, let him leave it wholly to him.
After God had made Adam Lord of the whole Earth, he brings all the Animals
which he had created, that he might give 'em names Genesis 2. 19.
, God would not so much as reserve that to himself. For the like Reason a
Prince ought to leave ordinary Cares and Troubles to others: for the Head
intermeddles not with the business of the Hands and Feet, nor does the Pilot
intermeddle with the common Sailers Duty, but sitting in the Stern does more
with the gentle Motion of his hand, in guiding the Boat, than all the other
with their Toil and Labor.

But if a Prince either by reason of his Minority or old Age, or any other
natural defect, be incapable of attending the direction of Affairs, let him
choose an Assistant. For it is much better to govern well by another, than ill
by himself. The first years of Nero's Reign were happy, because he took Advice
from good Councillors; but when he took the management of all into his own
hands he ruined himself. King Philip II. finding that Age and Infirmities had
rendered him unfit to govern, chose certain trusty and experienced Ministers
for his Assistants. Yet even when necessity urges, a Prince ought not wholly to
omit the Care of Affairs, be his Ministers never so prudent and faithful, for
the Body politic resembles the natural, in which if the Heat be deficient, no
Remedy, no Art, nor Industry can preserve its Life. The Prince is the Soul of
the Government wherefore to keep that alive, it is necessary that this should
assist the Members and Organs; if he cannot absolutely do this, let him seem to
see and hear all things, with such Assiduity, that they may be attributed to
his Disposal and Judgment; the Princes Presence though it has no other Effect,
at least influences the Ministers, and makes 'em more careful and Assiduous. To
know only that all Orders come through his hands, gives them Authority, though
he never alter nor see 'em; what will it do then if he shall particularly
examine, and being privately instructed, shall correct and reprehend his
Ministers faults? If he do this but once, they will be ever after fearful and
cautious, they will imagine that he actually sees, or inspects all things. Let
them treat in Councils not only of Affairs of State, but also of what worthy
Persons, they should promote to Offices and Preferments; but let his hand
confirm their Resolutions, let it be that which bestows all Rewards and
Gratuities, not suffering as in a Sun-Dial his shadow, I mean his Ministers and
Favorites* to point 'em out, and publish them, and ^o cause them to be
ascribed to them; for by this he would lose his Esteem, Affairs their
Authority, Rewards their Acceptance; and the Prince is slighted by those whom
he (...) most obliged; for which Reason Tiberius when he saw the Senate
inclined to reward M. Hortalus, vigorously oppos^ it Inclinatio Senatus
incitamentum Tiberio fuit, quo promptius (...) saretur. Tac. 2. ann.
. And sharply checked Iunius Gallio, for proposing Gratuities to the Praetorian
Soldiers, giving him to understand that it was only the Emperors Prerogative
Violenter increpuit, velut coram rogit^^ quid illi cum militibus, quos, neque
dicta Imperatoris, neque pr^mia, (...) ab imperatore accipere par ^sset. Tac.
6. ann.
; so (...) Prince is not respected because he is a Prince, but because as such
he Commands, Rewards, and Punishes. If any piece of Severity is to be
committed, or any rigorous Punishment to be inflicted, let it be done by the
hands of hi^ Ministers, but let the Prince conceal his own as much (...)
possible. Let the Peoples Indignation, and the Odium (...) Severity, and
Punishment fall upon them, not him Et honores ipse (...) se tribuere, p^nas
autem per ali^s Magistratus, and judices irrog^^ Arist. lib. 5 Pol. c. 11.
* The Ancients said of Jupiter, that of himself he darte^ forth none but benign
Rays, without hurting any one, bu^ only to show his Power, but that malign ones
were by the Council of the Gods; let the Ministers be thought sever^ and cruel,
the Prince tender and merciful; it is their (...) to accuse and condemn, his to
forgive and pardon. Em^nuel King of Portugal thanked a certain person, who
fou^^ an Argument to sa^e a Criminal. Also John III. King (...) Portugal being
present at the Trial of a Criminal, whe^^ the Judges were equally divided, and
his Opinion asked (...) decide the matter spoke to this Effect, You, says he,
(...) having condemned this Man have done Justice, and could wish you had been
all of the same Opinion; (...) I am for acquitting him, least any should say,
that (...) Kings Vote alone took away a Subjects Life. The Princ^ is made for
the Subjects preservation, and he ought to (...) no one to Death, but for the
sake of that.

The hand of a Clock has no effect upon the Wheels, but permits them to do
their Duty, and only denotes their Motion, so the Emperor Charles V. was of
Opinion, a Prince ought to behave himself toward his Council, to let them
alone in their Debates without intermeddling with 'em; this Precept he left to
his Son Philip the II. A Princes Presence obstructs their Freedom, and gives
opportunity for Flattery, and though in Matters of greater moment, the Prince's
Presence seems very convenient, in that he cannot be so thoroughly informed by
reading, as by hearing their Debates, for by this he will learn much, and begin
to love Business, and be instructed in the Qualifications, and Designs of his
Councillors, a Prince ought to be extremely cautious in declaring his Opinion,
least either Flattery, Respect, or Fear should make it received. For this
Reason Piso, when Marcellus was accused for taking down the Head of Augustus's
Statue, and putting his own up; being asked his Opinion by Tiberius, What Is
your Sentiment, Sir, said he, if you speak first I know what to follow, but if
last I am afraid least I should imprudently think otherwise Quo lo^o cens^bis
Caesa^? Si pri^us, habeo quod sequor: si post omnes, vereor ne imprudens
dissentiam. Tac 1. ann.
For the same Reason 'twas a prudent Order of the same Emperor, that his Son
Drusus should not Vote first in the Senate, least others should think
themselves obliged to follow his Opinion Exemit etian^ Drusum Consule^
designatum dicendae primo loco sententiae, quod alii ci^ile reb^ntur, ne (...)
fieret. Tac. 3. ann.
. This is a thing of ill Consequence; is it less inconvenient not to declare
his mind at all, for so that Counsel which seems best may with more Secrecy be
executed. Henry King of Portugal proposed matters with so much Discretion in
his Council, that it could not be discovered, either by his Words or Looks,
which way he inclined; whence came the Custom of Presidents and Viceroys, not
giving their Votes in Council, which is an anci^nt Practice, and was used by
the Etolians.

But in a matter in which the Prince desires rather their Approbation than
Advice, he may open his mind and declare his Opinion, for he will find they
will generally ^ide with him either through a desire to please, or because we
naturally incline to follow our Superior.

In Affairs of War, especially when the Prince is involv'^ therein, his
Presence in Council is of more importance, (...) well for the abovementioned
Reasons, as that he thereby animates them, and that their prudent Resolves may
be pu^ in speedy Execution, and least while they are brought to him the
opportunity be slipped. He must know that some Minis^ers desire to be thought
vigorous and active, rathe^ than discreet, and so in the Princes Presence o^t^n
are the Authors of rash Counsel, not that they would be the persons that should
execute them, nay they have a particular aversion to all Danger, as it was with
those who advised Vitellius to take up Arms Sed quod in cjusmodi rebus accidit,
consili^m ab omnibus dat^^ est, periculum pauci sensere.
.

It Is a common Question among Politicians, whether (...) no a Prince himself
should not assist in the Courts of Justice; it is a too weighty Employ, and
would take up (...) much of that time which is necessary for Affairs of State
and the Administration of the Government. Though Tib^rius after he had assisted
in the Senate, went to the Court^ of Judicature Nec patrum cognitionibus
satiatus, Iudiciis adsidebat in co^nu tribunalis. Tac. 1. ann.
. King Ferdinand the Holy was often present in those Courts, where he heard and
defended the Poor, and protected the weak from the strong. K. Alphon^^ the Wise
ordained, that the King himself should undertake the Causes of Widows and
Orphans, For though, says he, he is obliged in general to defend his Subjects,
yet ought he particularly to assist them, because they are more helpless than
others L. 20. tit. 23. p. 3.
. Solomon's great Judgment in the Decision of Causes got him the general Esteem
of all And all Israel h^ard of the Judgment which the King had judged, and they
feared the King: for they saw that the Wisdom of God was in him to do ^udgment,
1 Kin. 3. 28
; the Israelites desired a King, who as in other Nations might be Judge over
them Now make us a King to judge us like all the Nations, 1 Samuel 8. 5.
; the Presence of the King makes Judges just, and his Power only can defend the
poor A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, sca^^ereth away all evil
with his Eyes, Prove. 20. 8.
; the chief Reason why God chose David King was, because he who had freed his
Flocks from the jaws of the Lion Psalm 9. 14.
, best knew how to protect the Impotent from the powerful 1 Samuel 17. 31.
: so grateful and acceptable is this Care to God, that for that only he
promises to blot out all the rest of his Sins, and make them as white as Snow
Isa. 1. 17.
. Wherefore I cannot deny that this is the main part of a Prince's Duty, yet I
think he fulfils it, if he chooses Persons of Integrity for his Ministers of
Justice, and takes Care that they justly and uprightly perform their Offices.
'Twill suffice sometimes in the most important Cases, I mean such as may be
oppressed by Power, to be present at their giving their Opinions, so as to make
the Judges always in fear, least he should be in some corner of the Court and
hear all that is said and done. For which Reason all the Judges live in the
Royal Palace at Madrid; and in the Courts where they sit, there are windows,
from whence his Majesty uses to hear all that passes. The same is usual in the
Turks Divan, where when the Bassa's meet to treat about Affairs, he hears them
when he pleases, from a window covered with Sarcenet.

And this Harmony of the Clock, and the mutual Agreement between the Wheels,
and the Hand which points the hours is evidentl^ visible in the Government of
the Kingdom of Spain, which is so well constituted, that those Kingdoms and
Provinces which Nature has dis-joyn'd, she unites by the prudence of her
Government Each has its particular Court at Madrid, C^stile, Arragon, P^rtugal,
Italy, the Netherlands and the Indies, to which there is but one President,
they take Cognizance of all Affairs, whether of Justice or Rewards belonging to
any of these Kingdoms or Provinces. And their Debates are brought to the King
who orders what he thinks fit, so that the Councils are as 'twere the Wheels,
and his Majesty the Index; or they the Optic Nerves, by which visible Species
are transmitted to the Prince, and the King the common Sense which discerns and
Judges them. The Affairs of the Kingdom being so disposed and presented to his
Majesty, all is managed with that ease and prudence, that for above a hundred
years since it began to flourish; there has happened no considerable
mis-carriage, which is almost incredible, in such a dis-united Body.

The Roman Empire was more succinct, and yet it almost continually felt
Convulsions and Disorders, an undeniable Proof that ours is better founded than
their's, and governed by Men of greater Judgment, Prudence and Integrity. Since
then the Sum of all Affairs should be reduced to the Prince, he should not
only be a Father to the Republic in Love, but Economy too, nor should he think
it sufficient to have Counselors, and Ministers to manage his Affairs, but he
should also keep by him a certain private Memoir of them, by which he should be
guided in all things; as Merchants keep their Accounts in a particular Book for
that purpose, such a Book as this the Emperor August^s kept. In which he took
an account of the Revenue, of the number of the Citizens and Auxiliaries in his
Service, also o^ the Fleets, Kingdoms, Provinces, Tributes, Taxes, and
Gratuities, all which he wrote with his own hand Opes publicae continebantur,
quantum civium, sociorumque in ^^mis, quot Classes, Regna, Provinciae, Tributa
and Necessitates, ac Largiti^nes, quae cuncta sua manu perscripserat Augustus.
Tac. 1. ann.
; the Memory is the Treasury of Experience, but is very short and weak without
the assistance of the Pen to strengthen and perpetuate it upon Paper. He Will
find a great advantage, who for Memory's sake takes an account of all Actions
good or ill, in his Book; which Diligence if your Royal Highness when settled
upon the Throne shall neglect, and think it beneath your Grandeur to stoop to,
and that your Presence is sufficient without this troublesome Assiduity,
leaving that to your Ministers, I dare aver^ from the excellent Constitution,
and order of this Government, both in its Courts and Counsels, your Highness
might finish your Course without any considerable Danger; but you would be no
more than the hand to the Clock, wholly governed by the Wh^els, nor would there
appear any thing conspicuous or glorious in your whole Reign; as there will, if
[which God grant] your Highness imitating Augustus, shall make your Remarks
upon each Kingdom distinctly, with an Addition of all Garrisoned Towns, also of
all persons famous for War or Peace, with their Qualifications, Characters,
Services and the like; particularly inserting all A^fairs of great Concern,
what has been their Issue, in what they succeeded, in what failed, and several
other Observations, which are instructive in the Art of Government. Hence
proceeds the Harmony in the Order of the Jesuits, which all so much admire, for
every three years the General has a particular Account of all things that have
passed, together with a private List of those of the Order; who because they
may in time alter their Nature and Manners these Catalogues are renewed every
Year; besides, he has particular Informations every Year of what ever in
necessary for him to know. By which they always succeed in their Elections, by
suiting the Capacity of the Person to the Office, not the Office to the Person.
And if Princes had such Characters of things and persons, they would not be so
often deceived in their Resolves and Counsels; they would be better instructed
in the Art of Government, and need not depend wholly upon their Ministers; and
these would serve the Prince with more Care and Circumspection, when they knew
that he understood and took notice of all things; and so these gross Faults
which we see at present, I mean, in not timely providing Necessaries for Peace
and War, would never be committed; in a word, the fear of this Catalogue would
make Virtue flourish, and Vice perish; nor would these short Memoirs breed any
confusion, especially if some were made by the Princes own hands, and others by
his chief Ministers, who are persons of Understanding, and whom he can trust to
do it sincerely and carefully; wherefore if as Cicero says, this Knowledge is
necessary for a Senator Est senatori necessarium nosse Rempub. quam late
p^tet, quid habeat Militum, quid valeat aerarium, quo^ socios Resp. habeat,
quos amicos, quos ^ipendiarios, qua quisque sit lege, condition, foedere, etc.
Cicero.
, who is but a small Member of the Government, how much more is it for a Prince
on whom depends the universal welfare of his State? And if Philip King of
Macedon, caused the Articles of the Roman League to be read over to him twice
every day, why should a Prince disdain to read in one Book, an Epitome of the
whole Body of his Empire, viewing in that as in a Map, all the parts of which
it consists?

EMBLEM LVIII.
HONOR is one of the chiefest Instruments in the Art of Government; if it were
not the Offspring of Glory, I should think it a politic Invention; it is the
Prop of Empires; without it none could stand long; a Prince without it wants a
Guard for his Virtues, the Spur of Renown, and Bond, which makes him to be
loved and respected; a Thirst for Riches is Tyrannick, but for Honor Royal
Velle pecuniis excellere Tyrannicum, H^noribus vero magis Regium. Arist. Po^.
lib. 5.
; nor is Honor less requisite in the Subject than the Prince; for without that
the Laws would not be able to keep the people in their Devoir, it being
certain, that they are more restrained by the fear of Infamy than punishment.
The Economy of Government would soon be ruined, were not Obedience, Loyalty,
Integrity and such like Virtues in esteem. Ambition for Honor preserves the
Authority of the Laws, to attain it we inure our selves to Labor and Virtue.
That Government is in as much danger where all would be Slaves, as that in
which a^l would be Masters. A Nation too abject and base, is a prey to every
Invader, and soon forgets its Duty to its lawful Prince; but that which is of a
more lofty Spirit, and which sets a value upon Honor, slights all Toils and
Perils; nay, even despises its own Ruin, to remain firm in its Obedience and
Loyalty; what Wars, Calamities and Devastations by Fire and Sword, has not the
Duchy of Burgundy felt for preserving their Faith and Allegiance to his
Catholic Majesty, neither the Tyranny and Barbarity of their Enemies, nor the
infection of the Elements, though all seemed to conspire against them, could
shake their Constancy. They might indeed take from those Loyal Subjects, their
Estates, their Country, and their Lives, but not their sincere Faith, and
generous Loyalty to their lawful Prince.

The usual Remedies against intestine Disorders, is to make the People
strangers to Honor and Reputation, which piece of Policy is used in China,
which is in no danger but from its own Subjects: but in other Kingdoms which
are exposed to Invasions, Glory and Renown is absolutely necessary for the
Subjects, that they may have Courage to repulse an Enemy; ^or where there is no
Honor, there is no Valor. That Prince is not truly Great, who does not
command great Spirits, nor can he ever without such make himself formidable, or
enlarge his Territories. The Subject's Honor obliges them to procure the
Prince's, for upon his Grandeur depends their's. The very shadow and empty
appearance of Honor, makes 'em assiduous in Labors, and valiant in Dangers.
What Treasures could make sufficient Compensation for the Estates, and Blood
which Subjects squander away for the Prince's Will and Fancy; were it not for
this public Coin of Honor, wherewith every one pays himself in his own
Opinion? It Is the best Price of worthy and brave Exploits, the cheapest Reward
that Princes could have found, so that if not for their own Grandeur, they
ought at least for their Convenience and Interest, maintain it among their
Subjects; by either taking no notice of, or lightly punishing the Faults which
they commit to defend it, and on the contrary, by encouraging with Rewards and
public Acknowledgments, such Actions as are generous and honorable. But they
should beware of giving the least Encouragement to that vain fantastical Honor
so much in Vogue, which depends upon peoples Fancies, not true Virtue, thence
proceed Disputes among the Ministers about Precedence, to the prejudice of the
Public, and the Prince's Service: Hence Duels, Affronts, and Murders; and
from these come Tumults and Seditions. This makes Obedience stagger, and
defiles it with the Prince's blood; for if once the Subject shall be persuaded
in his own Opinion, or by the common Cry, that he is a Tyrant and not fit to
live, he soon contrives his Death, to obtain the Honor of Assertor of his
Countrey's Liberty Itaque Monarchas, non ut sibi vendicent Monarchiam,
invadunt, s^d ut famam and gloriam adipiscantur. Arist. Pol. 5. cap. 10.
. It should therefore be the Princes Care to abolish this Superstition of false
Honor, and to promote the Worship of the true.

Let not a Prince disdain to honor Merit, either in Subjects or Strangers, for
this does not derogate from the Prince's Honor, no more than the light of a
Torch is diminished by the lighting of another by it; for which Reason Ennius
compares the Charity of a person, who instructs a wandering Traveller in his
way, to a Flame.

He who to a wandering Man his way has shown,
Lights to others Torch and never hurts his own Ennius.

From whence proceeds Cicero's Advice, that whatever kindness can be done
another without Detriment to ones self, let it be done even to a Stranger Ut
quicquid sine detrimento accommodari possit id tribuatur velignoto. Cicero.
. From both these Sentences the present Emblem is taken; a lighted Candle in a
Candlestick, the Emblem of Divinity, and supreme Authority, at which two others
are lighted, to signify that a Prince may bestow Honor upon those who deserve
it without Detriment to his own. His Honor, is borrowed, not his own, who is
afraid of wanting it, when he confers it on others. Springs continually flow,
and are never empty. The Fund of Honor in Princes is inexhaustible, be they
never so profuse: All respect them as the only Magazines of Honors, from
whence every one expects his share; so the Earth with its Vapors refreshes the
Air, which returns them in Dew upon the Earth again. And this mutual
Correspondence between the Prince and his Subjects, King Alphonso the Wise
knew, when he said, that these in Honoring him, honored themselves, because
from him they expect Honor and Preferment; where this mutual Honor is, there
Affairs flourish in Peace and War, and the Government is established. Nor does
a Prince show his Majesty more in any thing, than in the Honors he confers.
All natural Bodies the more noble they are, are the more generous and free of
their Virtues and Gifts. To give Riches is humane, but the distribution of
Honor belongs to God or his Vicegerents. In these Maxims I would perfectly
instruct your Highness, especially in that of honoring the Nobility, who are
the main support of Monarchy.

Let your Highness hearken to your glorious Predecessor, King Alphonso the
Wise, who in laying down Maxims for his Successors, speaks to this Effect:
Furthermore he ought to respect and honor the Nobility for their Riches, and
for that they are an Honor to his State; and he should respect and honor the
Gentry, as being his Guard and the Bulwark of his Kingdom.

Without Rewards Services flag, but rewarded they flourish, and make the
Kingdom glorious Under an ungrateful King never any great Action was a^chieved,
nor any glorious Example transmitted to Posterity. Those three brave Soldiers,
who broke through the Enemies Squadrons and fetched water from the Cistern,
scarce did any thing else remarkable, because David did not gratify them. A
Prince by once rewarding the Merits of a Family, binds them to his Service for
ever. The Nobility is as much urged to Glory, by the noble Exploits of their
Ancestors, and by Honors with which they were rewarded, as by those which they
themselves expect; 'twas upon this Account that your Royal Highnesses
Predecessors bestowed eternal marks of Honor upon the Services of some great
Families of Spain. So King John II. rewarded those of the Counts Ribadeo, by
permitting them to eat at the King's Table upon Tw^lfth-day, and to have the
same Coat which his Majesty wore that day; his Catholic Majesty granted the
same Honor to the Marquess of Cadiz. And ordered, that they should have the
Coat which he wore upon the Feast of the Blessed Virgin: to the Marquesses of
Moya, he gave the Cup which the Kings should drink out of upon St. Lucia's Day;
to the Earls of Roca, of the Family of Vera, and to all of that House a Grant
for each, to exempt thirty persons from all Taxes; the same King Ferdinand,
when he met the King of France at Savona, invited the great Captain Gonsalvo to
Table with him, at whose house also he staid at his Entry into Naples; and what
wonder since he owed him his Kingdom and all Spain, its Glory and Success Mar.
Hist. Hisp.
? Of him might well be said, what Tacitus says of another brave and valiant
General. In his Body was all the beauty of the Cherus^i; and whatever was done
with Success was the result of his Counsel Illo in corpore decus own
Cheruscorum, illius consilia gesta, quae prosper^ ce^id^rint testa^atur. Tac.
2. ann.
. The Valor and Conduct of one Minister is often the Foundation and Rise of a
Kingdom That which is founded in America is owing to Herman Cortez, and the
Pizarrs. The single Valor and Industry of the Marquess of Aytona, kept the
Netherlands from revolting upon the Death of the Infanta Isabella, and some of
our present Ministers have been the chief Instruments in preserving the Empire
in the House of Austria, and of the Tranquillity which Italy has so long
enjoyed, whose great Rewards have been a spark to kindle a glorious Emulation
in others. By recompencing one Service you purchase many more; it is a noble
Usury which enriches Princes, and enlarges and secures their Estates; the
Ottoman Empire flourishes, because it encourages and prefers Valor in
whomsoever it is conspicuous. The Fabric of the Spanish Monarchy arrived at
this Perfection, because King Ferdinand the Catholic, and after him Charles V.
and Philip II. knew how to hew out, and proportion the Stones to its bigness.
Princes complain of this Age of being barren, and not productive of such great
Spirits, not considering that the Reason is that they don't look for them, or
if they do find them, that they don't give them sufficient Encouragement, but
only promote those who are about them, which depends more upon Chance than
Choice. Nature always produces some great Genius's, but Princes don't always
make use of them. How many excellent Genius's and great Spirits are born and
die in Obscurity, who if they had been employed and exercised in Business, had
been the Admiration of Mankind: Ossat had died Chaplain of St. Lewis in Rome,
without the Glory of having done so many signal Services to France, had not
Henry IV. of France observing his great Abilities procured him a Cardinals Hat.
If a Prince suffers a great Soul to herd with the common Rout, he will live and
die like one of them, without performing any thing remarkable or glorious.
Christ went up to the Mountain Tabur with three of his Disciples only, leaving
the rest with the multitude, upon which their Faith immediately cooled Nam quod
Domino in monte demorante, and ipsis cum turba resid^ tibus quid^m tepor eorum
fidem retardaverat. Hilar. cap. 7. Sup. Matthew
, so that they could not cure a posses^ person And I brought him to thy
Disciples and they could not cu^ him, Matthew. 17. 15.
. Great Spirits do not flourish nor Blossom, unless they are watered by the Dew
of Favor. That Prince therefore, who shall sow Honors shall reap able
Statesmen. But he ought to sow them in Season, and to have them always ready
upon all Occasions; for then they are rarely t^ be found. In this Princes are
usually careless while they li^^ in Peace and Quiet, thinking they shall never
have need o^ them.

Nor should a Prince honor and prefer only his Nobility and Ministers, but
also all others of his Subjects, whose Actions shall be meritorious. As King
Alphonso prudently advises in his Laws, where he says, that a Prince ought to
honor Virtue wheresoever he finds it, though it be in the very meanest of his
Subjects.

A Prince ought to be very cautious in the Distribution of Honors, considering
the time and weighing the Qualifications of the persons, that they may be
exactly adapted to their Merit. For that distinguishes Dignities, as the
intrinsic worth of a Diamond makes it more valuable; if Honors were all
equal, they would be less valued; it is a kind of Tyranny not to reward Desert,
and nothing more incenses the People than it; a whole Government is disordered
by the unequal Distribution of Preferments, Rewards above Desert are a Scandal
to the receiver, and an Affront to those who deserve better. One is gratified;
many offended. To gratify all alike is ^o reward none. Virtue thrives not by
equality, nor will Valor ever attempt any considerable Action, without the
hopes of some particular Reward. A Statue erected for one, affects many with a
glorious Desire of obtaining the same Honor. In a word, Honor suited to a
persons Merit, is a Spur to him, an Encouragement to others, and a means to
preserve Obedience in the people.

But though nothing more firmly settles, or more gloriously adorns a Prince's
Throne than Distribution of Honors, yet ought he diligently to take Care, not
to Grant away those which are proper to his own Dignity, and distinguish him
from others: For they are not like Flames which passing to another Subject,
still remains entire in its own; but all such which he shall confer on others,
will no more shine in him, so that Majesty will be obscured, nor will any make
their Applications to him, but to them to whom he has granted such Honors;
Tiberius would not permit even his Mother Livia to receive those particular
Honors which the Senate designed because he thought 'twould diminish his
Authority Caeterum anxius invidia, and mulieb^e fastigium in diminutionem sui
^ccipiens, ne lictorem qui^^em ei decern^ (...) Tac. 1. ann.
. Even Ceremonies which were introduced either by Chance or Flattery, and are
now peculiar to the Prince, he ought not to make common to others. For though
they are vain and empty, they mark out the Borders of Majesty to Respect and
Veneration. Tiberius was disgusted, that the same public Prayers were made for
Nero and Drusus which were made for him, though they were his Sons and
Successors in the Empire Tum vero aequari adolescentes senectae suae, uis
hoenter indoluit. Tac. 4. ann.
; the Honor of Princes vanishes, when made common by promiscuous Flattery
Vanescit Augusti honor, si promis^ noribus vulg^tur. Tac. 4. ann.
; sometimes though, as when Ministers do personate the Prince in his absence,
the same Honors and Ceremonies are to be paid them, as are due to the Prince
if present; as we fee in Viceroys and Courts of Supreme Authority, which like
Stars shine in the Suns absence; but not in his Presence, for then those marks
of Honor are paid to the Royal Dignity represented in the Ministers, who are
as it were the Pictures of Majesty, and the reflection of Supreme Authority.

EMBLEM LIX.
NATURE, the provident Disposer of all things, has divided Countries from one
another, and hedged 'em in sometimes with Mountains like ^ast Walls, sometimes
entrenched 'em about with deep Rivers, and sometimes with the Ocean it self,
that she ^ight put a stop to the Designs of humane Ambition; for ^he same
Reason she has constituted different Climates, Na^ures, Languages, and Customs,
that in this great Diversity of Nations, each might live amicably, and in Unity
among themselves, not easily giving way to the Power and Tyran^y of Invaders.
Yet are not all these bars and fences of Nature, able to check this insatiable
Desire of Rule; for Ambition is so great and so deeply rooted in Man's heart,
that it thinks the five Zones too narrow for it. Alexander, ^hey say wept, that
he had no more Worlds to Conquer. All the Blessings of Life, nay Life it self,
for all our natural Inclinations to preserve it, are all slighted for a moments
Reign. Humaya going to invade the Kingdom o^ Cordova, some of his Friends
di^swaded him from it, urging the danger of the Attempt: Call me King to day,
say^ he, and to morrow kill me; there is no Passion in Man more blind and
dangerous than this. This has cost many their Lives, as well as Estates, which
they would have there by enlarged. A certain Prince of Tartary usually drank
ou^ of a Cup on which was engraven the Head of a Prince o^ Muscovy, who in
invading his Kingdom lost his own, wit^ his Life; about the edge of which was
this Inscription: This Prince by coveting mine, lost his own.

Almost the same thing befell King Sancho, who would have robbed his Brothers of
the Kingdoms, which their Father King Ferdinand had divided between 'em.
Ambition is in danger, when it but puts its Arm out of its Territories like the
Snail which runs a Risque whenever it peeps out o^ its shell Test^dinem, ubi
collecta in suum tegmen est, tutam ad omnes (...) esse, ubi exerit parts
aliquas, quodcunque nudavit obnoxium at que i^ mum habere Cic
. And though Tyridates said, That it is for private Men to maintain their own,
but for Kings to invad^ others Et sua retinere privatae domus, alienis ce^^^
Regiam laudem esse. Tac. 15. ann.
; yet this is only then; when reason and pruden^^ advise it, and when Power has
no other Tribunal than that o^ Arms; for whoever unjustly robs another of his
Kingdom gives others opportunity and right to do the same to him first let a
Prince consider the Danger of his own, before (...) thinks of invading
another's Kingdom Suam quisque fortunam in (...) ^^lio habeat, cum de ^lieno
deliberat. Curtius.
: for which Reason the Emperor Rodolphus I. used to say, 'Twas bett^^ to
govern well than to enlarge a Kingdom; if King ^phonso the Wise had took this
Advice, he had never pursu^ his Pretentions to the Empire, to the so evident
peril his own Kingdom; so that the comparison of Alphonso Ki^^ of Naples was
very applicable to him: That such ambit^ous Princes were like Gamesters, who
cheated by a vain hope of winning, lose even what they had. To defend ^his
State is a Prince's Duty, but to invade another's is ^erely Arbitrary. Ambition
hurries Men to new and dangerous Attempts Quibus nova and ancipitia praecolere
avida, and plerumque fallax (...) est. Tac. 14. ann.
; and the more it has the more it co^ets. It increases with Empire Vetus, and
jampridem insita Mortalibus (...) cupido, cum imperii Magnitudine adolevit
erupitque. Tac. 2* (...)
. Opportunities, and the easiness of the means charm Princes Eyes and Hearts,
and hinder them from understanding, that they ought not to covet all that they
can obtain; a generous mind should be regulated by Reason and Prudence; he is
not safest who ^ossesses most, but he who possesses most lawfully. Too great an
extent of Power, creates Emulation and Envy, and ^ncreases Danger. For they arm
and unite against the ^trongest, as the Kings of Spain did against Alphonso
III. whose Greatness and Prosperity they suspected. For which Reason it is more
desirable to have Power well grounded and ^stablish'd, than to exercise it; for
there is as much Danger ^n maintaining as in procuring it. Were there no
foreign Enemies, affluence of Plenty would sufficiently enervate it; ^s the
Grandeur of old Rome found Et quae ab exiguis profecta initiis ^o ^reverit, ut
j^m Magni^^ine laboraret sua. Live. lib. 1.
, which Augustus ^oreseeing, proposed to Remedy it by prescribing Bounds to ^
Addideratque consilium coercendi in^^ terminos imperii. Tac. 1 ann.
, which the Emperor Adrian afterward effected. Let a Prince bridle his
Felicity and he will Reign well I^pone felicitati tu^ fraena, faci^^ reges.
Curti^,
. It Is no difficult matter for Injustice and Tyranny, if armed with Power, to
raise and extend Kingdoms; the Difficulty ^ in the preservation thereof, it
being a harder matter to Govern well than to Conquer Fa^ilius est qu^dam
vincere quam tenere. Curt.
.

For in Arms usually Fortune takes place, but Government depends on Prudence
Fortunam (...) invenies quam retineas Publ.
. Success enters the gate without being called, by Merit or Industry, but it is
Pru^ence only that keeps her there. Alphonso the Wise gave this Reason, why
'twas less difficult to get, than to ma^^tain when got; Because the
preservation depends upon Judgment; but the Acquisition upon Chance. Ho^
Fortune with both hands, or she will slip from you Fortunam tuam pressis manibus
tene, lubrica. Curtius:
A Hedgehog [from whence I took this Emblem] is fou^ with ease, but to hold it
requires Prudence; that is, yo^ must apply your hand so as gradually to smooth
down (...) thorny Bristles, which when erected resemble a Squadr^ of Pikes.
Claud. Armed with her self she does securely go,
Her self, the Quiver, Arrow, and the Bow.
Scarce were the Arms of Spain retired from the Netherland^ in the time of Don
John of Austria, when those of the R^bels entered. 'Twas an easy matter for
the King of Fr^^ against the Laws of God and Man to seize upon the Dutch^ of
Lorrain, but to maintain it now, he finds it expensive a^ dangerous; so he is
obliged always to keep an armed ha^ upon it, and the Causes which occur in the
Acquisition do^ always in the Preservation.

But if it is once settled, time will help to fix it; whence happens, that
sometimes one person may easily maintain Government which was not raised, but
by the great To^ and Perils of many.

Wherefore since it is a Prince's chief Duty to preserve (...) States, I will
here subjoyn the means which it may be do^ by, whether they descend by
Succession, or are acquir'd^ Conquest or Election. I first premise the general
Caus^ which usually concur in attaining and maintaining the and those are God;
that is, when he assists us with Religi^ and Justice; Opportunity, when a
concurrence of Causes pen the way to Grandeur; and Prudence, either in maki^^
these Opportunities, or in using them when offered. The are other Instruments
common to the Art of Governme^^ as Valor, the Prince's Assiduity and Prudence,
the Peop^^ Esteem, Respect and Love for him; the Reputation of ^ Crown, the
force of Arms, Unity in Religion, a due Administration of Justice, the
Authority of the Laws, the Distribution of Rewards; the Severity of
Punishments; the Integrity of the Magistracy; the good Election of Ministers;
the Preservation of Privileges and Customs; the Education of Youth; the Modesty
of the Nobility; the Purity of the Coin; the Increase of Trade and Arts; the
Peoples Obedience; Concord, Plenty, and public Riches.

By these means all States are maintained, and though the Government of each
requires great Care and Attention, yet do those which descend lineally from
Father to Son require ^east; for Sovereign Power and Obedience being become
habitual, and as it were natural to the Subjects, they forget that it was of
their own Institution, not an original Pro^riety. No one dares deny him Respect
and Veneration, whom he has owned for his Lord from his Birth; all are ^w'd by
fear of Punishment from the Successor, for Crimes which they shall commit in
the present Reign: The Sub^ects easily bear and wink at his Failures. The very
Tide of Affairs, which long Custom and Experience has con^in'd to a Channel,
secures him, though he be incapacitated for Government, provided he be of an
easy docile Nature, and one that will Act for the best in all things, and can
^ake Choice of good Ministers, or should happen on them ^y Chance.

But those States which descend by an indirect Line, or ^y Marriage; a Prince
ought to manage with particular Care and Circumspection, especially at the
beginning of is Reign; in this those Princes run great Risques, who through ^o
much Zeal, or too fond a Desire of Glory, reverse the ^ctions and Institutions
of their Predecessors, introducing ^ovelties of their own, without that due
Moderation and ^rudence which is necessary even in changing 'em into better;
for Plato's Opinion that all change is dangerous except ^om bad, must not be
understood of Governments, which (...) great Risques unless remedied by
degrees, according to (...) Order of Nature, which does not leap from one
ex^eam to the other; but interposes the Temperature of the ^ring and Autumn,
between the Extremities of the Winters cold, and Summers heat: A sudden and
violent chang^ is troublesome and doubtful; that which is slow and gr^dual is
always more easy Anceps and operosa nimis est mutatio, quae subito and cum
qu^^ violentia suscipitur; facilior autem quae sensim and paulatim de. li^^
fit. Arist. 6. Pol.
. It Is dangerous in sailing to shift the Sails upon a contrary mind, because
they mu^ on a sudden be changed from one side of the Ship to the other.
Wherefore it is requisite for a Prince at the begi^ning of his Reign, to observe
the methods of the last, (...) king Care to reform it by Degrees with that
easiness a^ moderation, that the People shall find themselves on t'othe^ side
without knowing how they got over. Tiberius du^ not at the beginning of his
Reign abolish the public Sport^ introduced by Augustus Sed populum per tot
annos molliter habi^ nondum audebat ad duriora vertere. Tac. 1. ann.
. Galba reigned but a f^^ Months, because immediately upon coming to the Thron^
he began to punish past Crimes, to moderate extravaga^ Donatives, and to curb
the Licentiousness and Insole^ which the People had been so used to in Nero's
time (...) veterem disciplinam, atque ita quatuordecim annis a Nerone (...), ut
haud minus vitia Principis amarent, quam olim virtutes (...) rabantur. Tac.
Hist. 1.
that they as much loved their Princes Vices, as former they esteemed their
Virtues. The same befell the Empero^ Pertin^x, for designing to reform the
Militia, enerva^^ under the Luxurious Reign of Commodus. Lewis XI* Ki^^ of
France fell into the same Error, for that he began (...) Reign with the severe
Punishment of some of his princip^ Nobility. The Excellence of a new Government
ought (...) be Benignity; since too much Rigor and Severity is (...) Vice of
an old one.

What dare not old Kings do? The softest Chai^,
Of Kingdoms is in a new Princes Reign.
To settle a Government is a work of time, for it is troublesome to reform, as
to new model one Non minus negotii est Remp. (...) quam ab initi^ ^onstituere.
Arist. 4. Pol. cap. 1.
; for (...) reason David excused himself from punishing Ioab for the Murder of
Abner, as being weak and newly anointed King 2 S^m. 3. 39.
; that is, he feared by too much Severity, he should make his new gotten
Government odious. Rehoboam had never ruined himself had he considered this,
when by the Counsel of the young Men, he answered the People of Israel, who
desired he would treat 'em with less Severity than his Father had done; My
Father made your Yoke heavy, and I will add to your Yoke; my Father also
chastised you with Whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions 1 Kings 12. 14.
. There is nothing more serviceable to a Prince at his entrance upon the
Government, than to signalize himself by some glorious Exploits, for Reputation
once got is not immediately lost; for which Reason Domitius Corbulo, when he
was sent into Armenia took particular Care to raise his Reputation Ubi famae
inserviret, (...) in novis c^ptis validissima est. Tac. 13. ann.
. The same Agricola did in his Government of Britain, knowing that the
Reputation of his first Actions would bias all the rest Non ignarus instandum
fa^^ae, and prout prima ^essissent, fore universa. Tac. in vit. Agr.


The comparison which the People make between the past and present
Administration is always of ill consequence, when they don't find in this the
same Felicity they did in the other, or don't perceive the same Parts and
Qualifications in the present Prince, as in his Predecessor; let him therefore
take Care as much can be, that there be no difference; but that the same hand
may seem to hold the Reins. But if the Prince, either cannot, or knows not how
to adjust his Actions to the Peoples humor as his Predecessor did, let him
more particularly avoid occasion, which may breed Comparisons. Which was the
reason that Tiberius was never present at public Shows, fearing that his rough
melancholy Temper, compared to the complaisant Gaiety of Augustus, would be
offensive to the People Cur abstinuerit Spectaculo ipse, vary trahebant; ali^
taedio caetus, ^^id^m tristitia ingenii, and met^ comparationis, quia Augustu^
comi^er ^^^fuisset. Tac. 1. ann.
. Wherefore as soon as a Prince comes to the Helm of Affairs he should
diligently enquire, what things were distasteful in the past Reign, that he may
avoid them; this was Nero's Maxim at his Accession to the Throne, prescribing
it as a Plan of his future Government, sedulously declining those things which
had lately bred Disgust Tum formam futuri Principatus pr^scripsit, ca maxim
declin^^, querum recens flagrabat invidia. Tac. 13. ann.
.

Let a Prince also adjust his Actions to the Customs of the Country, and
methods of his Predecessor, for even the Virtues of the Successor which are
new, and such a^ the Predecessor and the Nation in general were unacquainted
with, the People look upon as Vices and loath 'em. The Parthians demanded Vono
for their King, a Person endu'd with the Gentile Accomplishments of Rome (where
he had been as Hostage) but those Virtues lost him the Affections of his
People, who regarded them as nothing but new Vices Sed prompti adius, obvia
comitas, ignotae Parthis Vertutes, nova vitia. Tac. 2. ann.
; they were disgusted, that he did not give his mind to Horses and Hunting, as
his Predecessors did; and on the contrary they all loved Nero, because he
accommodated himself to their Customs Quod hic prima ab infantia instituta. and
cultum Armeniorum (...) latus, venatu, epulis, and quae alia barbari celebrant
proceres, plebem^^ juxta devinxerat. Tac. 2. ann.
. And if this difference of Manners in the Princes Person produces these
Effects, how much greater will the Alteration of the Customs and Ways of the
People create? But if Correction be necessary, it must be applied with such
Moderation, as may neither make the Prince seem severe nor remiss, but when the
negligence of the Predecessor was very great, and the People require a Remedy,
then the Activity and Diligence of the Successor is very opportune; as was
visible in the first Years of your Royal Highnesses renowned Father

It Is a generous piece of Justice, for a Prince to begin his Reign with
pardoning all offenses against himself, and punishing those committed against
others; nothing gai^^ People's esteem and respect more than this Novum Imperium
inchoanti^^ utilis clementia. Tac. 4. Hist.
. As the Emperors Vesp^si^ and Titus found, as also Charles VII. King of
France. Upon this Consideration Witiza remitted the Banishment of those whom
his Father had condemned, and caused their Trials to be burnt, by this great
means the better to secure the Crown upon his Head.

Though these Acts are highly requisite, yet the main Point is the gaining the
Love and Obedience of the Subjects; which two Kings of Arragon were absolute
Masters of Mar. Hist. Hisp.
: One was King Alphonso I who going to take Possession of the Kingdom of
Castile for his Wife Terraca, behaved himself with great Complaisance and
Affability to all; he heard Causes, and administered Justi^e himself; he
protected Widows and Orphans, relieved the Poor, honored and reward'd the
Nobility according to their Desert, preferred Virtue, and made the Kingdom
plentiful and populous, which acquired him the Affections of all. The other was
Alphonso V. King of Naples, who made himself extremely beloved by the People,
by his care and prudence in Affairs, by a due Disposal of Rewards and
Punishments, by Liberality, Complaisance and Easiness of Access, by his Love
for the public Welfare, and by so exact a Conformation to the Manners and
Customs of the Kingdom, that he seemed a natural, not a foreign Prince. Those
Kings who have their Residence among their Subjects, may gain their hearts more
easily, than those who reside in distant Provinces, for if their Loyalty does
not grow quite cold, it is at most but Lukewarm, and nothing but the Excellence
of the Constitution can preserve its heat; that is by providing able Ministers,
and by severely punishing their Faults, especially those which they commit
against Justice, and the Reputation and Estates of others, all the Comfort
absent Subjects have is that if the Prince be good, they shall feel the Effect
of it as well as if present, but if otherwise, they should be least under the
Lash of his Tyranny Laudatorum Principum usu^ ex aequo, quamvis prout
agentibus, s^vi proximis ingr^nt. Tac. 4. Hist.
. But because such Kingdoms love Novelty and Change and require the Presence of
the Prince himself to govern them; the Confidence which he puts in them, should
be armed and senced from all Accidents, using the same means which we
prescribed for the preservation of a Conquered Kingdom? Elective Kingdoms which
are obtained by Favor are also maintained by the same, though this very rarely
continues long. And though all new Empires begin with Applause, yet in this
it is but short and soon over; amidst the very Acclamations, when Saul was
anointed King, the People began to distrust and slight him, though he was
chosen by God himself 1 Samuel 10. 27.
. But there are Ways by which the person Elected, may preserve the Peoples good
Opinion of him, that is to say, by maintaining those Virtues and
Qualifications, which made him at first thought worthy of the Crown; for Men
usually change their Manners with their Fortunes. Tiberius had a very good
Character and Reputation, while he was a private Person and lived under
Augustus Egregium vita, famaque quoad privatus, vel in imperiis sub Augusto
fuit. Tac. 6. ann.
; as also had Galba; let him be Courteous and obliging to all Major privato
visus, dum privatus fuit. Tac. 1. Hist.
. Grateful and Liberal to those who Elected him; civil to those who gave their
Votes against him; let him be a zealous Lover of his Country. And a vigorous
Assertor of its Laws and Privileges; let his Council be composed of the Natives
of the Country, employing them alone in Offices and places of Trust, not
admitting Foreigners and Relations; let him maintain his Family with modesty;
let him temper Majesty with Consideration, and Justice with Clemency; let him
so govern as if his Kingdom came by Descent, which he should transmit to his
Posterity, not as if it were Elective, fleecing it of what he can during his
Reign; according to the Poet. A short Reign never spares the People Non parcit
populis Regnum breve. Statius.
: For it is very difficult to be moderate in Grandeur which must die with us
Difficilius est temperare felicitati, qua te non putes di^ us^rum. Tac. 2. ann.
.

The Prince ought moreover to be peaceable, not an Invader of others: for
Elective Kingdoms fear such a Master, whose mind is bent upon Conquering
others; but they love him who is only careful in preserving his own, as we see
in Poland, for it is evident that all Kingdoms were at first Elective, and that
'twas only Ambition of enlarging them by invading their Neighbors, by which so
many have lost that Liberty, which they would have taken from others. Nor is it
possible, that among so many Casualties and Dangers of Election, this
Enlargement of States should be lasting, for those very Arms which make those
additional Conquests, will reduce them to Hereditary Kingdoms; which was Si
immensum Imperii corpus stare, ac librari sine rectore posset, dignus eram a
quo Respub. inciperet. Tac. 1. Hist.
Galba's excuse for not converting the Empire into a Commonwealth. Elective
Monarchies love Liberty, and so ought not to be governed without it, and since
Election is the Scale in which they weight it, the Prince should always stand
on that side, for if he gives the least Suspicion that he intends to make the
Crown Hereditary, he will certainly lose it.

In States acquired by Conquest, there is more difficulty in attaining than
preserving them, for they are like wild Colts, in which the main Trouble is
backing them, for afterward they willingly take the Bitt, and submit to the
burden. Fear and Flattery open the way to Dominion; the first Asc^nt of which
is steep and difficult Prima dominandi spes in arduo; ubi sis ingressus, adsunt
studia and Ministri. Tac. 4. ann.
, but once settled you want neither Partisans nor Ministers; yet since these
Services are generally forced and counterfeit, they easily revolt when they
have opportunity, and are therefore to be entertained and cherished with great
Care, especially at first, since from the first Actions we easily Judge of the
future Government; as Vitellius experienced, who grew hateful and odious to
all, for the Death of Dolabella Magna cum invidia novi Principatus, cuju^ ^oc
primum specimen nosce^atur. Tac. 2. Hist.
. And though Piso said, that a Kingdom acquired by ill Practices could never be
maintained by good ones Nemo enim unquam imperium flagitio quaesitum, bonis
artibus exercuit. Tac. 1. Hist.
, yet King Sancho did this way establish his doubtful Title to the Kingdom,
which he got by Conquest. Princes are soon ruined by striving to preserve that
by Force which they got so. This pernicious piece of Policy has been the ruin
of all Tyrants, and if any one has preserved himself; it is because he changed
his Tyranny into Benevolence, and his Cruelty into Clemency: Vice cannot
subsist long unless Virtue be its substitute; Ambition unjust in acquiring at
first, must change into Zeal for the public Good to maintain it self. Subjects
love their Prince for the public, and their private Interests, and when they
succeed in both, their Fear soon changes into Reverence, and their Hatred into
Respect: but Care must be taken that this Reformation of Vices, which are now
publicly known, be not so sudden nor affected, as to proceed from Design not
Nature, whose Operations are slow and methodical, so Otho thought; that a
sudden Modesty, or affected Gravity could not preserve the Empire which he had
attained by Villainy Simul reputans non posse Principatum scelere quaesitum,
subita modestia and prisca gravitate retineri. Tac. 1. Hist.
. The People are more apprehensive of such Changes than of Vices themselves;
for they suspect greater mischief at the Bottom. Feigned Virtue is worse than
Vice; for this is executed under the shape of the other.

Augustus was an admirable Pattern of Prudence and Valor, in raising and
supporting his Empire, which all Princes ought to Copy. At nineteen years of
Age he showed himself worthy of the Empire, by sustaining the Civil Nono decimo
Caesar Octavianus civilia bella sustinuit. Tac. 13. ann.
Wars. From which time he began to raise his Fortunes. Empires are not obtained
by deserving, but by having merited them. One Victory proclaimed him Emperor
Mansisse, C^s^re Augusto victore, Imperium. Tac. 1. Hist.
, because he knew how to make use of Opportunity and Prudence; of Opportunity
in triumphing over Anthony and Lepidus Lepidi atque Antonii arma in Augustum
cessere. Tac. 1. ann.
, of Prudence in not entering by open Force, every one was weary of Civil Wars
Cuncta discordiis civilibus fess^. Ibid.
, the Empire was naked and defenseless Nulla jam public^ arma. Ibid.
, all the most Courageous being taken off, by the Wars or Proscriptions Nullo
adversante cum ferocissimi per acies out proscriptione cecidissent. Ibid.
. The Provinces were disgusted at the Government of the Senate, and showed
their Inclination to change it Neque Provincia illum rerum statum abnueb^nt,
suspecto Senatus populique Imperio, ^ob certamina, potentiam and avaritiam
magistratuum. Ibid.
; Dissentions and civil Discords, obliged 'em to apply the usual Remedy of
turning Aristocracy into Monarchy Non aliter discordantis patriae remedium
suisse quam ut ab uno regeretur. Ibid.
. All these Concurrents managed by Prudence, facilitated his Access to the
Empire; which by the same Conduct he maintained, he obliged the Mobb, by
defending them by the Authority of a Tribune Ad tuendam plebem tribunitio jure
contentam. Ibid.
; and to avoid giving Disgust, he neither took upon him the name of a King, nor
Dictator, but only that of Prince Non Regno tamen neque Dictatura, sed
Principis nomine constitutam Remp. Ibid.
. He continued the Titles of the Magistrates, he engaged the Soldiery by
Gratuities; the People by Plenty, and all in general by the sweets of Peace, by
Affability, Civility and Clemency eadem Magistratibus vocabula, militem donis
populum annona, cunctos dulcedine ^tii pellexit. Ibid.
. He was courteous even to his Rivals, Anthony and Lepidus Multa Antonio and
multa Lepido concessit. Ibid.
, and reward^d those with Honors and Riches, who had been zealous in his
Service Quanto quis servitio promptior, opibus and honoribus extollebatur. Ibid.
. He very rarely was severe, and then not through Passion, but to procure the
public Quiet Pauca admodum vi tractata, quo caeteris quies esset. Ibid.
. He captivat'd the minds of all, by a ready and copious Eloquence, very
becoming his Dignity Augusto prompta ac profluens, quae decerat Principem,
eloqu^ntia fuit Tac. 15. ann.
; he used Justice among his Subjects, and Modesty to his Allies Ius apud cives,
modestiam apud socios Ibid. 3. ann.
; he showed his Integrity, in punishing the Debauching of his Daughter and
Neice Oh impudicitiam filiae and neptis, quas^urbe d^puli^, Tac. 3. ann.
. He took Care to preserve noble Families, as is visible in his Bounty to
Marcus Hortalus In lect^s a Divo Augusto liberalitate decies sestertium duc^re
u^orem, ^e clarissima familia extingueretur.
. He severely punished the Authors of Libels upon any of the Nobility Primus
Augustus cognitionem, ^e famosis libellis, specie legis ejus tractavit etc.
Tac. 1. ann.
, and slighted, those upon himself and Government Sed ipse Divus Julius, ipse
Divus Augustus and tulere ea, and reliquere Tac. 4. ann.
. He very much adorned and beautified the City of Rome Urbem ipsam magnifico
ornatu. Tac. 1. ann.
. He fixed the Bounds of the Empire, keeping a Book of his Revenues and
Expenses M^ri oceano, aut a^nibus longi^quis septum imperium. Tac. 1. ann.
He erected a Military Treasury, and so disposed his Forces, that his Armies,
Fleets and Provinces might as it were take hands Regiones, Provincias, Classes,
cuncta inter so co^^exa. Ibid.
: These good Qualities made the Romans chose the present Government which was
secure and safe, rather than run the Risque and uncertainty of the Past Novis
ex rebus aucti tuta and pr^^^ntia quam vet^ra and periculosa mallent. Ibid.
; Hence they first became fond with Tyranny. I don't relate all these Arts with
a Design to instruct Tyranny, but that Tyrants may be these ways reform, by
joining these to the Fear, which Force and Oppression have created. For that
which is gained by the Sword must be preserved by it. For which Reason in such
States, it is requisite to erect Castles and Forts, but so contrived as they
may not seem a curb to the Peoples Liberty, but a Protection against foreign
Invasions, Garrisons appointed for their Safety not to keep 'em in awe, for
this always makes 'em desperate. The Spaniards were so offended, that the
Emperor Constans should commit the Guard of the Pyrenaean Hills to Foreigners,
that they invited (though to their great Detriment) the Vandals, Alans, Swedes,
and other Nations into Spain. Confidence makes Subjects Loyal, which made the
Scipio's give the Celtiberi^ns leave to march under the same Colors, and lodge
in the same Tents with the Romans. Also Augustus's Life Guard were Spaniards of
the Colaguritan Legion. Let a Prince endeavor gradually to transplant into his
conquered Provinces, the Customs, Genius and Language of the conquering Nation,
as they did in Spain, in those Colonies which were founded in the time of
Augustus, this they are easily brought to, being inclined to imitate their
Conquerours, flattering them by accommodating themselves, to their Manners and
Genius, and esteeming their Privileges, and Honors more than their own. For
which Reason the Romans gave their Friends and Confederates the Title of
Citizens, thereby to preserve their Fidelity. The Emperor Vespasian to oblige
the Spaniards granted them all the Privileges of Italy. Acquired Provinces if
they are used like Strangers, never forget their Enmity; this was the Reason,
why the Emperor Claudius gave the Dignity of Roman Citizens to Galli^ Comata,
saying, that the Laced aemonians and Athenians were ruined by nothing, but by
using their conquered Nations as Foreigners, but that their Founder Romulus
acted with more Prudence, who in the same day saw his Enemies, his
Fellow-Citizens Quid aliud exitio Lacedaemoniis and Atheniensibus fuit,
quamquam armis pollerent, nisi quod victos pro alienigenis arcebant? Et
conditor noster R^mulus tantum s^pientia valuit, ut plerosque populos, eodem
die hosts, deind^ cives habuit. Tac. 2. ann.
. By these and such like means, foreign Government becomes natural, after
continuance of time has fixed and settled it, and blotted out the Memory of
former Liberty. Spain in its Restoration slighted this Policy. Esteeming more
the Preservation of its Nobility, than to debase it with the Blood of Africa,
and so would not share any of its Privileges, and Honors with this conquered
People, whence though united in one Body, they kept their own Customs, and
Language, together with such an indelible Hatred, and Treachery that they were
forced, that they might free themselves from them, to drive 'em quite out, and
to deprive themselves of so many Subjects, so useful in Agriculture; which made
all the world wonder at their Policy, in preferring the Splendor of their
Nobility, to their advantage and interest, and their Religion to humane
Prudence.

In changing one form of Government into another, such Skill should be used
that the People may not perceive the change, and regret the loss of the former.
It was at the Expulsion of Kings at Rome, where all things, as well Sacred and
Profane were managed with that Prudence, that the People did not perceive the
want of those Kings, who had before the Care and management of both, and
afterward when the Commonwealth was turned into an Empire, the Magistrates
retained the same Titles Eadem Magistratuum vocabula. Tac. 1. ann.
, and the same order of the Senate remained, with a show of their ancient
Liberty Sed Tiborius vim Principatus, sibi firmans, imaginem antiquitatis
senatui praebebat. Tac. 3. ann.
, and 'twas this established the Empire. The Dukes of Tuscany did the same in
the Dukedom of Florence. The Emperor Augustus was a great Master of this
Policy: Disposing things by Degrees, executing some out of hand, and remitting
others to another opportunity, fearing he should not succeed in endeavoring to
do all together Non omnia statim, uti decretum erat, executus est, veritus, ne
parum succederet si simul homines transfer and invertere vellet, sed qu^dam
extempore disposuit, quaedam rejicit in tempus. Dion.
. But Samuel was more worthy of admiration, in changing as he did the
Government and Policy of the people of God, without giving any one occasion of
Complaint Eccles. 46. 16.
. The very shadows of Liberty should be so dissipated, that they should
insensibly disappear as Dominion takes Root; this Agricola judged the best way
to manage Britain Idque adversus Britanniam pro^iturum, si Romana ubique arma,
and velut e conspectu libertas tolleretur. Tac. in vit. Agric.
.

There is no Force more mild and effectual in maintaining and preserving
acquired Provinces than Liberality. Men have worshipped and attributed
Divinity, even to things Inanimate, which they have received any benefit from;
they are easily gained by Interest; nor do they much care what hand holds the
Scepter, whether Foreign or Natural, provided it be Liberal; they who suffer
themselves to be obliged by Benefits received, and afterward prove false, can
never do the Prince any great damage by their Designs against him, for no Body
will take the part of an ungrateful Person. For this Reason Scipio upon the
taking of Carthage, ordered all their Goods to be restored to the Inhabitants;
and Sertorius gained the Affections of the Spaniards by moderating their Taxes,
and constituting a Senate in Spain like that at Rome, and King Ervigius the
better to secure his Throne, lessened the Imposts which were laid upon his
Subjects, and forgave all that was due to his Treasury. The Romans in their
conquered Provinces lessened their Taxes, to make their Dominion seem the more
easy Quaedam ex Regiis tributis diminuta, qu^ mitius Romans Imperi^^ speraretur.
Tac. 2. ann.
; for Subjects can better brook Slavery it self, than Avarice in their
Commanders, as the Romans found in the Rebellion of the Frisians Pa^em exu^re,
nostrae magis avaritiae, quam obsequii impatientes. Tac. 4. ann.
. A Prince ought therefore to be very cautious of oppressing his new acquired
Provinces with Taxes, but especially of introducing those which are used in
other parts; for such an Introduction is odious: The Cappadocians revolted,
because Archelaus would have introduced Taxes among them, after the Roman
Fashion Quid (...), in modum defer Census, pati tributa adigebatur. Tac. 4.
ann.
.

Modesty is also necessary to the preservation of acquired Kingdoms; the
Senators were more disgusted at Caesar's not rising up when they entered the
Senate, than at the loss of their Liberty. Which Tiberius observing, carried
himself reservedly and modestly toward them Verba fuere pauca, and s^^su
permodesto. Tac. 1. ann.
; the People take more notice of Accidents than the substance of Things, and
sometimes for frivolous empty Punctilio's of Honor Princes lose their Esteem,
and become odious to 'em. Sejanus thought 'twas better to slight the empty
shadows of Grandeur, and to augment real Prower Et minus sibi invidiam, adempta
salutantium turb^, sublatisque inanibus^, vera potentia aug^ri. Tac. 4. ann.
. The Romans valued not vain Ceremonies, but were intent upon the increase and
preservation of their Empire Apud qu^s vis imperii valet, inania
transmit^untur. Tac. 15. ann.
: For which Reason Tiberius like a prudent Politician, was a vigorous contemner
of Honor Validus alioqui spernendis Honoribus. Tac. 4. ann*
. Nor would he ever permit the farther Spain to erect Temples to him, nor admit
of the Title of Father of his Country Nomen Patris Patriae Tiberi^^ a popul^
saepius ingestum, repudi^ vit. Tac. 1. ann.
, well knowing the Danger of inordinate Ambition, when exposed to the View of
every one C^ncta mortalium incerta, quantoque plus ad^^tus sere^, tant^ se
magis in lubrico dictitans. Tac. 1. ann.
. For the same Reason of State the Dukes of Florence, demean themselves with
great Civility to their Subjects not permitting them to stop, to pay their
Respects when they pass by, as is usual at Rome. After that Castile had refused
Obedience to Kings, they banished those high sounding Titles, calling their
Governors only Judges, that they might be the better received by the People.
By the same Prudence and Moderation; Don Ferdinand the Catholic refused the
name of King [after the Death of the Queen] and would be called only Governor
of Castile. Some States in Italy which aspire to Royal Dignity, will I believe
at last (pray God I may be mistaken) find the ill Consequences of their having
left their former Modesty, for Italy will not be able to support itself, when
she shall see so many Crowned Heads within her Territories. It Is less
inconvenient to extend the limits of any State, than to alter the Form of its
interior Greatness; either through the jealousy of the Nobility, or the
Contempt of the Commons, for about those they are both mighty Captious; from
the inequality of Communities proceeded common Government; in which not to
admit Sovereignty is the means to preserve their Freedom; but if the Seeds of
Royalty are once sown, they will produce the Desire of Monarchy, which puts an
end to their Liberty In a word, it is Peace alone (as we shall show elsewhere)
that preserves a^quir'd Kingdoms; provided that Peace be cautious and armed.
For so it gives opportunity to Possession, to settle its Government, and
justify its Title, without the trouble of War which confounds all Right, and
gives opportunit^ to turbulent uneasy Spirits, and robs the Commander o^ his
Authority. Wherefore a Prince ought not only to endeavor to procure Peace, to
his new Kingdoms, but also to the neighboring Provinces; for the same sparks
of Fire easily catch, and the fury of Arms soon embroils those that are near
them. This was the Reason that King Philip III. took up Arms against Emanuel*
Duke of Savoy, when he would have taken Monferrat from the Duke of Mantua, his
Majesty endeavoring to decide those Pretentions by Justice, not Force, nor
would he suffer the Ambition of one person to disturb the Quiet of all Italy.
The same Danger is at present to be feared, unless these Animosities which have
put so many Princes in Arms, be accommodated; for the Sword once drawn, either
revenge thinks of satisfaction for Affronts received, or Justice of recovering
her Right, or Ambition of extending its Dominions, or Mars himself of trying
his Strength. I conclude this Discourse with four Verses of Tasso, in which he
very judiciously, and concisely comprehends the true Grounds, upon which any
new Kingdom should be established.

EMBLEM LX.
AN Arrow sent from a Bow, either mounts or falls, without suspending in the
Air; like time present, which is so imperceptible, that it no sooner is, but is
past: Or like Angles in a Circle, where the acut^ becomes obtuse, without ever
forming a right Angle. The first point of the Arrows consistence is the first
of its Declination; the higher it mounts, the nearer it is to its fall. All
things when they arrive at their highest Pitch, mu^^ necessarily decline:
Hippocrates observed this in human^ Bodies, that when they are past thriving,
they immediately begin to decay Nec enim in melius verti, nec diu sistere
valent, reliquum est, ^t (...) deterius dilabantur. Hippoc.
. Nothing in Nature is Permanent; the Heavens themselves never rest, no more do
their Effect^ which they imprint on things below; for which Reason Socrates
attributed all changes of Government to them Qui causam esse tradit, quod nihil
perpetuo maneat* sed omnia motu qu^dam orbicular: mutentur. Arist. 5. Pol.
. Monarchies differ not from Animals and Vegetables, they are born, live and
die like them, nor have they any time of Consistence, so that their falls are
natural Naturales esse convers^^^es Rerumpub. Cic. lib. 2. de nar. Deor.
. In not increasing they decrease. There is no interval in the fall of the
highest Fortune; when it once begins to fall it is impossible to stop it; it is
more difficult for the Majesty of Princes to fall from the highest Pitch to the
middlemost, than from thence to the lowest Degree Regum majestatem dissi^ilius
a summo fastigio ad medium detra^i, quam a mediis ad ima prae^ipitari. Livius.
. But all Kingdoms don't rise and fall by the same Degrees; when they are got
up to the highest Point, they fall with more speed than they rose Fati maligna,
perpetuaque in ommbus rebus Lex est, ^t ad summum perducta, rursus ad infimum
velocius quidem quam ascen^erunt, relabantur. Seneca.
. Alexander was twelve years in raising his Kingdom, which decayed in a very
small time, being rent and divided at first into four, and afterward into more
Principalities. The Causes of the Rise and Fall of States are many; those who
attribute them to Motion, or the power of the Stars, or the number of Plato, or
Climacterick years, deny Providence the care of Sublunary things. He who has
designed to make the World, will not disdain to govern it: Nay to create, and
not take care of the World, would be disapproving his own work. If God
vouchsafed himself to paint the Peacocks Tail, and the Butterflies Wings, shall
we think he will commit to Chance the management of Empires and Monarchies,
upon which depend the Happiness or Ruin of Mankind, for whom all things were
created? 'Twould be impious to believe it, and to attribute the Success of
things to our own Counsels, the highest Arrogance. By him Kings Reign, and with
his own Hands he disposes of Scepters, and though in their Preservation he give
their free Course to those natural Inclinations, which were either born with
us, or imprinted in us by some other influence, without giving any check or
restraint to Free Will; yet does God himself order and dispose them (...) that
no Government was ever ruined, without the interv^ning of some humane Folly and
Bindness Ego ita comperi omma Regna Civit^tes* Nationesque usque eo prosp^^
imperium habu^sse, dum apud eos vera consilia valuerunt; ubicunque Gr^^ Timor
Voluptas ^a corrupt^re, post paulo imm^nut^ opes, deinde (...) in perium,
postreme servitus imposita est. Sallust.
. I cannot for^bear thinking that Empires would be pepetual, if Prince^ would
accommodate their Will to their Pow^^, their Power to their Reason, and their
Reason to Accidents.

Since then Prudence and humane Counsel have their (...) in the falls of
Empires, we may easily find the Causes ther^ of; which are either general or
particular; general which comprehend all Kingdoms, whether acquired by
Succession Election or Conquest, and are many, but may be redu^^ to four
Principal ones, from whence proceed the rest; (...) in the Horizon of the
World, from the four Cardi^^ Winds proceed many collateral ones. These Causes
are R^^ligion, Honor, Life and Estate; for the Conservation (...) which Civil
Society was first instituted, and the People ^^^came subject to the Government
of one, a few, or many and whenever they find themselves oppres'd in any one
(...) these four, they rebel and change the Form of the Govern^ment. We will
therefore touch upon these, with as mu^^ brevity as the Subject will admit.

Though Religion, as we said before, be the strong^ Bond of Governments, yet is
it that which disunites th^^ most, and reduces them into many Forms, when it is
(...) universal, for those who are of different Opinions (...) God, never live
in Unity among themselves. If they ^^^gree and quarrel about trivial Customs
and Manners, (...) much more will they about their Affection and Loya^ due to
the Creator of all things, and furious Zeal of ^^^derstanding things of such
importance. Liberty of C^^^science is the ruin of any State. Those who disagree
matters of Religion, are to one another (as the Holy S^^rit says) Pricks in
their Eyes, and Thorns in their Sides Numb. 33. 5.
The Duty of Subjects, and the greater Ties of Friendship, and Relation are
loosed, and broken upon account of Religion. King Witeric was put to Death by
his own Subjects, for endeavoring to introduce Arianism, the same befell Witiza
for altering the Rites and Ceremonies of Divine Worship. Galicia rebelled
against King Froilus for the abuse of the Marriage of the Clergy: As soon as
Dive sity of Religions was introduced among the Dutch, they rebelled against
their lawful King and Master.

So Honor, as it is the Defense and Preservation of States, and the chief Spur
to Loyalty, so it also disturbs them to clear it self from Affronts, Contempt
and Injuries, the People preferring Honor before Life and Fortune Honor quoque
quant^^ valeat, and quomodo sit causa seditionis (...) est Arist. 5. Pol. c. 3.
. Count Julian invited the Moors into Spain, because he suspected that King
Roderick had violated the Honor of his Daughter Cava; the Nobles of Castile
took up Arms against Alphonsus III. for that he would infringe their
Privileges, and oblige 'em to pay Taxes; as did the Subjects of Ramires III.
King of Leon, for his severe and servile usage of them. For Affronts received
by the People always provoke to Revenge upon the Prince Et multae
conspirationes, and invasio^s in Monarchas propter pudendas contumelias, in
corpus illatas fact^ sunt. Arist. 5. Pol. l. 10.
; and Contempt creates Seditions Prop^er contemp^um etiam seditiones
conspirat^^^qu^ f^^n^ A^^st. 5. Pol. c. 3.
. And this either, when the Prince contemns the People, or the People the
Prince, which is when they don't find him fitly qualified, thinking it base to
obey one who knows not to Command, and make himself respected, and takes no
Care of the Government. So the People of Arragon served their King John I. the
same thing befell John II. of ^astile for his insufficiency, Henry IV. for his
Vices, and Alphonso V. of Portugal, for suffering himself to be governed by
others Nor do Subjects take it as ^ less Injury and Contempt, for the Prince to
make Foreigners his chief Ministers, and to dispose of all Dignities and
Preferment among them: for (as King Henry said) That is declaring plainly, that
his own native Subjects are insufficient and unworthy L. 14. tit. 3. lib. 2.
recop.
. This was the cause of the Commotions of Castile, in the time of the Emperor
Charles V. The same thing happens upon an unequal Distribution of Honors, for
that Men of great Spirits cannot brook Non multitudo qu^dem gravit^ fert
inaequalitatem patrimoniorum, praestantes autem honorum inaequalitatem. Arist.
lib. 2. Po^. c. 5.
; and take it as an Affront, that Men of le^^ Desert are preferred before them
Nam homines tum quod ipsi inhonorati fiunt inovent seditiones, tum quod alios
videant in honor. Arist. 5. Pol. 3.
.

The greatest Disease of a Government is Incontinence and Lust in the
Governors; hence proceed Seditions and Revolutions of States, for that
violates the Honor of many, and is severely punished by God. One such Action
buried Spain in ashes for many Ages; the same called down great Plagues upon
Egypt Genesis 12. 17.
. And David suffered great Troubles, both in his own Person, and in his
Posterity 2 Samuel 12. 10.
, who were continually persecuted and destroyed by the Sword.

There is danger in those States, where many are excluded from Offices; for
they are all so many Enemies Cum enim multitudo in^pum est in civitate,
eademque ab honoribus exclusa, necesse est eam civitatem plenam hostium Reipub
Arist. lib. 3. Pol. c. 7.
* no Man is so stupid as not to desire Honor* and take it ill to be deprived
of it Honori incumbit, tam ignarus quam bonus. Arist. 2. Pol. 5.
. Those States also are subject to the same Inconveniency, in which the
Magistracy is divided among a set number of the Nobility, all the rest being
excluded.

The third Cause of the Revolutions and Troubles of States is the desire of
preserving Life, that is, when the Subjects think the Prince so Lazy, and
Cowardly as that he cannot preserve and defend them; or else when they hate him
for his Severity, as they did King Alphonso III. or for his Cruelty, as they
did King Peter; or for his Injustice and Tyranny, which endangers all their
Lives, as they did King Ordonius, for the ill usage and Murder of the Counts
of Castile, whence proceeded the Change of his State Mar. Hist. Hisp.
.

The last is, Estates, that is when a Prince idly squanders away his Subjects
Fortunes; which occasioned Garcias King of Galicia, to lose both Kingdom and
Life too; or when he extravagantly spends his Revenues, which was Ramon's
Pretense for killing ^ his Brother-in-Law, Sancho King of Navarre; or when he
is very covetous, as was King Alphonso; or when through his ill management, the
State suffers by Scarcity, or when the Price of things rises, or Trade fails,
which rendered the same Alphonso so odious; or when the Coin is bad, as 'twas
in the time of Peter II. King o^ Arragon, and in many other Kings Reigns; or
when Places of Profit, or Riches are unequally despos'd of. For Envy and
Necessity take up Arms against the Rich and so raise Commotions Insuper
seditiones oriuntur, non solum ob patrimoniorum, verum etiam ob honorum
inaequalitatem. Arist. lib. 2. Pol. 5.
. This also happens from the Maladministration of Justice, from the
quartering of Soldiers, and from other Burdens, which oppress the Subjects
Estates and Goods.

Besides these general Causes, there are others particular to the three
Distinctions which I made of Kingdoms, in the last Emblem, which may be
inferred from what I proposed for their Preservation; for the Knowledge of
preserving a State, implys the Knowledge of what will ruin it, and so on the
contrary Sed illud primum omnium dubitar^ non potest, quin cognitis iis quae
Reipub interitum important, ea quoque quae salutem afferunt, intelligantur.
Arist. lib. 5. pol. cap. 8.
; for all this I cannot but enlarge a little, though I run a Risque of
repeating what has been already said.

Hereditary States are usually ruined, for want of Care and Diligence in the
Successor, especially when they are considerable; for then their Greatness
makes him secure and negligent, careless of all Danger, and dubious in his
Councels. In Execution timorous, least he should disturb the Quiet he injoys;
he takes no Care to prevent misfortunes, but thinks it sufficient if he can
remedy them; not considering that this latter is more chargeable and less
effectual (...) diora sunt remedia quam mala. Tac. in vit. Agr.
. He thinks Bravery too dangerous; and in procuring Peace by certain idle and
uncertain means, he brings a War upon himself, and so ruins himself by the very
means he used for his Preservation. This is the misfortune of Monarchies, that
in taking Repose they find ruin, endeavoring to stop they fall, and ceasing to
labor they grow feeble. Ezekiel aptly represents all this in his Vision of the
four winged Animals, which are the Emblems of Princes and Monarchies: Which
when they went I heard the noise of their Wings, like the noise of great
Waters, as the Voice of the Almighty, the Voice Speech as the noise of an Host
Ezekiel. 1. 24.
; when they stood they let down their Wings. But it is not necessary to a
Prince's Preservation to be always making new Conquests, for this would be
endless, and run into Tyranny and Injustice; a State may easily maint^in it
self within the Circumference of its own Circle, provided it preserves its
Activity and Vigor, and those Arts by which it at first acquired its Gra^deur;
running water preserve their Purity, but once standing they taint; yet is it
not necessary, that they should be always running; it suffices that they keep a
Motion within themselves, like Lakes moved only by the Winds; so Monarchies in
which Discipline flourishes, and which are fenced against all Accidents, are of
long continuance, though they make no Excursions; for without War Arts Military
may be exercised; so Cassius in time of Peace caused all the old Military
Discipline to be observed Attamen quantum sine bello dabatur, revocare priscum
morem, exercitare Legiones cura provisus agere, p^rinde acsi hostis ingrueret.
Tac. 12. ann.
. A Prince for want of Exercise of his Arms, should not grow wholly enervate by
the Sloth and Laziness of Peace; but should then enterpize some glorious
Action, that may preserve his Reputation. Augustus during the Repose of his
Empire, suffered not his fiery Soul to be extinguished by the ashes of
Idleness, for when he wanted what to do as Man, he employed himself as God,
studying the Motion of the Spheres, correcting the Months, and prescribing Laws
to time. To this end Philip II. Erected that admirable Fabric of the Escurial;
in which he aimed to outdo Nature her self in Art, and to show the whole World
the greatness of his Soul, and of his Piety.

But Hereditary Kingdoms are also in Danger, when the Successor forgetting the
Laws and Institutions of his Ance^^ors, thinks that the Subjects Duty, and
Subjection is from Nature, and not remembering that his Grandeur is derived from
them, he looks upon 'em as Slaves, and is more bent upon his own Interest, than
the public Good, his Administration being turned into Tyranny Aliae ^yrannides
ex Regibus, qui moribus institutisque majorum violatis, imperia magis
concupierunt. Arist. Pol. 5. cap. 10.
. Whence the People conceive a disrespect to the Prince, and an Odium and
abhorrence of his Person and Action, by which the reciprocal Union between the
King and People is broken Nam si (...) volentibus imperet, protinus desinit
^sse Reg^um. Arist. 5. Pol. cap. 10.
; since one obeys, and the other commands by the mutual Benefit they receive, one
in the Splendor and Grandeur of his Government, the other in the Happiness of
being well governed; without this reciprocal Bond, Heredi^ary Kingdoms would go
to ruin, or at least suffer a Change; for the Prince seeing himself despised
and slighted by all, is in perpetual Fear, from which fear proceeds Cruelty,
and from that Tyranny; which the Nobles not being able to bear, conspire
against him, and by the assistance of the People dethrone him: Whence it comes
that the People looking upon them as the Restorers of their Liberty, offer them
the Government, and thus Aristocracy is introduced; but even this soon falls
into the Inconveniences of Monarchy; for as their Children succeed, the
Magistracy and Government becomes Hereditary, and they abuse them, and convert
them to their own Interest, whence the People finding themselves oppressed by
them, wrest their Power from 'em, and will set up for Governors themselves, as
if their Liberty was greater in a Democracy, in which it being impossible to
preserve Equality, Insolence, and Injustice rule, from whence proceed Seditions
and Tumults, and thence Confusion, which obliges 'em to choose some one Person
to command 'em, and so the Government becomes once again Monarchical. This
Circle usually States run, in which they very often wholly lose their Liberty,
when some Potent Neighbor makes use of the opportunity of their Commotions, to
conquer and enslave them.

Elective Kingdoms, or at least the Peoples Affections for the Prince are lost;
when the Actions of the Elected Prince correspond not to the Opinion which had
been once conceived of him; for many appear capable of Government, before they
come to it, as Galba did Omnium consensu c^pax imperii, ^isi imperasset. Tac.
1. Hist.
; those who voted not for the Election are in continual Danger and Fear, which
makes them desire and contrive a Change. Those who assisted him with their
Votes, promise themselves such a share of his Favor, that finding themselves
disappointed in their Hopes, they fall into disgust and complaint; it being
impossible for the Prince to satisfy all. Or whether it be that humane
Gratitude is tired with the coutinual sight of its Benefactors, and looks upon
them as so many Creditors. Subjects used to frequent Elections are always fond
of them, and still fanc^ the new Prince will be better; those who have the
Privilege of voting take it to heart, that their Power in which their Honor
consists should lie so long dormant and useless. The Prince Elected on the other
hand, proud of his Power endeavors to extend it, and so break the Oaths and
Covenants of his Election, and despising the Natives of the Country, if he be
a Foreigner, admits only his own Countrymen into Offices, and endeavors only
the Preferment of his own Family, by which he incurs the hatred of his Subjects
and his own ruin: For few Nations can endure the Command of Strangers. Jeremiah
told this as sad Tidings to Jerusalem Jerem. 1. 16.
.

Kingdoms acquired by Conquest are also soon lost, for Luxury enervates the
Strength and Vigor of the mind; Felicity disturbs Counsels, and misleads
Princes from those ways by which they attained their Grandeur; they obtained it
by Valor, Clemency and Reputation, and they lose it by Laziness, Severity and
Contempt. Which changing the Government, changes also the Affection and
Obedience of the Subject Illud clarum te^tatumque exemplis est, quod homines
felicitatem assequantur be^ignitate in alios, and bona de se opinione, iidem
cum adepti, qu^e voluerant, ad injurias and impotenti^n in imperiis dilabuntur,
fit meritissimo, ut una cum imperantium mutatione, ^psi sub^iti se and affectus
mutent Polyb.
; the Reason why the Carthagenians were expelled Spain was, that they did not
know that States should be maintained by the same Arts they were acquired by;
which usually the Conquerours of Provinces are more observant, than their
Successors, for they employ all their Courage and Wit, in attaining and
preserving them, but Succession makes these negligent and careless. Whence it is
an Observation, that those who acquire Kingdoms usually keep 'em, and those who
receive them lose them Qui occuparunt imperia, eo^um plerique eadem
retinu^runt, qui vero tradita ab aliis accepere, hi statim fer^ omnes
amiserunt. Arist. 5. Pol. 9.
. The Holy Spirit says, that Kingdoms pass from one Nation to another, because
of Injustice, Injuries and Deceit Eccles. 1. 8.
.

I conclude the present Discourse with two Cautions, first that the
Preservation of States does not always depend on their being far from the
Causes of their Ruin, but sometimes on their being near them Conservantur etiam
Respub. non solum, qui^ procu^ sunt ab iis, ^uae interitum aff^runt, sed etiam,
quia prope sunt, nam Timor intentiore cur^ R^i^ab, consul^re c^gis. Arist. 5.
pol. cap. 8.
* for Fear creates Care and Diligence; the other is, that (...) in the Person
of the Prince, or in the Body of the State, the least ill should be taken most
Care of, for they increase insensibly, without being perceived till they are
past Remedy Ibid.
. A small Worm destroys the tallest Cedar; the little Remora stops the Course
of a Ship under sail; frivolous Losses caused the Ruin of the Roman Empire. A
slight disorder of Body is often more dangerous than a real Sickness, for that
is not minded, this diligently taken Care of: We immediately apply Medicines to
a Fever, but never heed a Cold, from which the greatest Distempers proceed.

EMBLEM LXI.
AN Harp Forms a complete Aristocracy, composed of Monarchy and Democracy;
understanding Presides, several Fingers govern, and many Strings obey, not with
a particular, but general and common Harmony, so that the Disproportion between
the great and little ones don't spoil the Tune. One may justly compare to a a
Harp every Republic, in which long Practice and Experience, have appointed who
shall command, and who obey; in which they have established Laws, elected
Magistrates, distinguished Offices, prescribed set Rules and Methods of
Government, and instituted in each part of the Republic, such Customs and Laws
as are most conformable and consentaneous to its Nature. This makes the first
Institutions durable, and not easy to be changed. This Harp of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths being thus fitted up, and all the Strings tuned and disposed in
Order, though any one should ^ansie he could better tune any one of them, he
ought to have a better opinion of the Prudence and Judgment of his Ancestors,
whom long Practice, and dear bought Experience had instructed: for some Ways
and Methods of Government, though they have some Inconveniences are yet better
born with than altered. A prudent Prince tunes the strings in the same Order
they stand in, not changing them without time or other accidents have so
discomposed them, that they cannot perform the Office they were first designed
for, wherefore a Prince should perfectly understand this Harp of his Empire,
and the Grace and Majesty that attends it, and be thoroughly versed in the
Nature, Qualities, and Genius's of the Nobility and Commons, which are its main
Strings. For as King Alphonso says in one of his Laws: A King's greatest Care
should be to know Men, for since it is them he has to do with, an exact Knowledge
of them is absolutely necessary L. 13. tit. 5. p. 2.
. In this consists the principal Art of Government.

To know his Subjects is a King's best Art Ma^^.
. Those who have most applied themselves to this Study have governed with most
Success. Many take this Harp in their hand, but few can finger it with
Judgment, few understand its Nature, and can touch it agreeably. Let therefore
a Prince know, that a Kingdom is nothing but an Union of many Cities and
People; and a joint Consent to the Command of some one, and the Obedience of
the rest, which Consent, Ambition and Force introduced. Concord at first
raised, and Concord preserves it. Justice and Clemency keep it alive; it is the
Care of others Safety; its Spirit consists in Unity of Religion; its Increase,
Preservation or Ruin depends upon the Parts of which it is composed. It admits
of no Companion; is exposed to all Dangers. In it more than any thing* Fortune
shows her Inconstancy. It Is liable to Envy and Emulation; it is in more danger
in Prosperity than Adversity; for then it lives in Security, which creates
Pride, from whence proceeds its Ruin; when young it is weak, and when old
decrepid; it is as much in danger in continual Peace as in War. It falls of its
self, when not exercised by foreign Arms, and when it once begins to fall it
cannot stop it self; there is no Interval between its highest Elevation, and
its Ruin. Emulation sometimes raises it, and sometimes oppresses it. If it be
small it cannot defend it self, if great it cannot govern it self, it is better
governed by Art than Force; it is fond of Novelties though they are its bane,
Virtue is its Health, and Vice its Sickness. Labor raises it, and Idleness is
its Ruin; it is fortified by Forts and Alliances, and established by Laws, the
Magistracy is its Heart, Counsel its Eyes, Arms its Hands, and Riches its Feet.

This Harp is attended with a certain Majesty, which is a Harmony springing
from the strings of the People, and approved by Heaven 1 Kings 2. 24.
. An Emblem of Power, and Splendor of supreme Jurisdiction; a certain Force
which draws Authority and Obedience to it; the Safeguard and Preservation of
the Government. Opinion and Fame give it Life; Love, Security; Fear, Authority;
Ostentation, Greatness; Ceremony, Reverence; Severity, Respect; Pomp, Esteem;
in Retirement the more venerable; it is in danger of Contempt and Hate. It
neither bears Equality nor Division, for it consists in Admiration and Unity;
it is constant in either Fortune; Respect strengthens it; Arms and the Laws
maintain it; it lasts not in Pride, nor falls in Humility* It lives by Prudence
and Beneficence, and dies by Force and Vice.

The strings of a Harp are the People, which are naturally monstrous, different
from themselves, inconstant and various; governed by outward appearances,
without searching to the bottom of things; they take Counsel of Report, so void
of means and reason, that they cannot distinguish Truth from Falsehood, always
prone to mischief. The same minute of two contrary Affections, by which they
are always guided not by Reason; by Violence not Prudence, by the shadow not
the reality. Only to be tamed by Punishment. Their Flatteries are an awkward
medly of Truth and Falsity; they know no Medium; they love or hate to Excess;
are extremely Complaisant, or extremely Insolent; either fear or frighten; and
when they fear, are most contemptible. Small Dangers at hand terrify them
strangely, but great ones at a distance, they are unconcerned at. If a Servant
slavish, if a Master haughty; know not what Liberty is themselves, and will not
suffer it in others. Bold and courageous in Words, but cowardly and base in
Action. They rise upon the least occasion, and are soon composed. Do not lead,
but follow; bear themselves the same to all; are sooner forced than persuaded.
In Success arrogant and impious, in Adversity timorous and superstitious; as
prone to Cruelty as Mercy. Equally blind in their Favors as their
Persecutions; they abuse Clemency by Licenciousness, and rebel against strict
Discipline; if they once shall attack the Rich, neither Reason nor Shame will
reclaim them. They raise and are fond of Stories, and by their own Credulity
enlarge them; they follow the Advice of the many, not the wise few* they
attribute ill Success to the Malice of the Magistracy, and common Calamities to
the Prince's f^ult. Nothing makes them more supple and obedient than Plenty of
Provisions, for upon that their Care and Thoughts are fixed. Interest and
Dishonor soon put them in Commotion. Laden they fall, lightened they kick
back; they love hot and rash Spirits, and an ambitious and turbulent way of
Government; they are never content with the present State of Affairs, but are
always greedy of Change. A servile Imitator of the Virtues and Vices of those
in Authority. They Envy the Rich and Wealthy, and plot against them; are mighty
fond of Plays and Shows, nor is there any other way, than that to gain their
Favor. Superstitious in Religion, paying more respect to the Priests than
their Principles. These are the chief Qualities and Affections of the Mob. But
a Prince may be satisfied that there is no Community, or Council, though never
so great and grave, and of Select Persons, in which there is not something of
the vulgar, and which does not in many things resemble the Popularity? The
Court makes another part of the strings of this Harp; which if a Prince cannot
touch with great Prudence and Dexterity, the whole Harmony of Government is
spoiled; wherefore that he many know to tune them well, it is necessary he
should know their Nature.

The Court is presumptuous and inconstant, changing its Color, Camelion like,
each moment according as the Wind of Prosperity or Adversity blows; though it
all speaks one Language, yet all don't alike understand it; it Worships and
Adores ^he rising Prince, but slights him when declining toward his West; it
censures and carps at his Actions, and yet imitates them; it hawks after his
Favor, with the Nets of Flattery; ever bent upon Ambition and Selfinterest; it
lives by Lies and hates Truth. Easily swallow^ Vice, but Virtue not without
Difficulty; loves Change and Novelty; fears every thing, and distrusts all.
Haughty and arrogant in Authority, servile and cringing in Obedience. Envys
even it self as well as others; wonderful cunning and dissembling, in
concealing its Designs; it veils its Hatred with Smile and Ceremony. Praises,
and commends in public, and defames privately. Is its own Enemy, fantastical
in its Appearance, and unperforming in its Promises.

This Instrument of Government being known, and the Qualities and Sound of each
string, the Prince ought to touch 'em with that Dexterity, that they may all
sound Harmoniously without jarring; in which he ought to keep time and measure,
and not favor one String more than another, in those which are to make the
Consort, and wholly forget others; for in this Instrument of the Government all
have their proper Functions, though they are unequal and easily jarr, which
Discord is very dangerous, when he shall grant too great Authority to the
Magistracy; or too much Favor the Commons, and slight the Nobility; or
Administer to some, and not to others; or confound Offices Military with Civil,
or does not well know to sustain his Majesty by Authority; his Kingdom by Love;
the Court by Gravity; the Nobility by Honor, the People by Plenty Justice by
Equality; the Laws by Fear; Arms by Rewards; Power by Frugality; War by Riches,
and Peace by Reputation; every one of these Instruments are different, both in
their Nature, and the Disposition of the Strings, which are the Subjects; and
so should be managed and played upon by different ways, and a different hand;
one Kingdom is like a Harp, which not only requires the softness of the Fingers
ends, but also the hardness of the Nails too. Another is more like an Organ,
which requires both Hands to express the Harmony of the Pipes. The third is so
delicate, like a Guitarre, that it will not bear the Fingers, but must be touched
with a fine Quill, to make it exert its Harmony. A Prince ought therefore to be
well versed in the Knowledge of these Instruments, and their Strings, to keep
'em always in Tune, and to take Care not to strain too hard upon the Notes of
Severity or Avarice (as St. Chrysostom observed in God himself) Neque nervum
intendit, neque remittit ultra modum, ne harmi^^iae consensum laedat. Chrysostom.
for even the best String when too much strained, if it does not break, at
least spoils the Sweetness of the Consort.

EMBLEM LXII.
THE ingenuous and industrious Be cautiously conceals the Art by which it
makes its Combs. They are all busy, and none can find out their Economy and
method of Government. And if any one more curious than ordinary shall endeavor
to inspect it, by means of a Glass Hive, they soon plaster it over with Wax,
that they may have no Spies, nor Witnesses of their Domestic Transactions. O
prudent Commonwealth, Mistress of the World! Thou had long since extended thy
Empire over all Animals, had Nature furnished thee with Strength equal to thy
Prudence. Let all others come to thee to learn the importance of Silence and
Secrecy, in the management of Affairs; and the Danger of discovering the
Artifice and Maxims of Government, Negotiations and Treaties, Counsels and
Resolutions, the Ails and inward Infirmities of States; if Drusus the Tribune
had duly considered this Prudence of Bees, when a Builder promised him to make
the Windows of his house, so that no Body should look in, he had not given him
this Answer: Rather, says he, so contrive my House if you can, that all may see
what I do Tu vero, inquit, siquid in te artis est, it a compone do^num meam, ut
quicquid again, ab omnibus perspici possit. Vell. Pat lib. 2.
; this was a piece of Pride of an open ingenuous Spirit, or the confidence of a
private Person, not of a public Minister, or a Prince, in whose* Court there
should be some Retirements, where they may unseen treat and deliberate of
Affairs. Counsel is like a Mystery, to be communicated but to few Judith. 2. 2.
. Ancient Rome erected Altars to the God (whom they called Consus) who presided
over Counsels, but they were Subterraneous ones, to intimate, that Counsels
ought to be private; by the benefit of which Secrecy it grew to that Greatness,
and maintained it self so long; For Silence is the best and strongest Bond of
Government Taciturnitas optimum atque tutissimum rerum administrandarum
Vinculum Val. Max. l. 2. c. 2.
. Their Senate was so close and trusty, that never any of their Debates were
published; there was not one for many Ages who discovered 'em. They had all
Ears to hear, but none Tongues to divulge. I question whether the same may be
said of present Governments. That which was yesterday debat'd in Council, is to
day the Subject of Women's Chat; who with ease (notwithstanding the Prophet
Micah, Micah. 7. 5.
coaks them out of their Husbands, and so tell 'em again to others; as it was
in that Secret, which M^ximus told his Wife Marti^ Quod Maximum uxori Martlae
aperuisse, illam Liviae. Tac. 1. ann.
, and she to Livia. By these Channels, those Secrets soon come to the Ears of
foreign Ambassadors, whose inquisitiveness nothing scapes. They are public
Spies, and Plummets that always search the bottom; prudent are those
Governments, which allow them not continual Residence. They are more
prejudicial, than beneficial to the public Peace, and they oft'ner breed
Disturbances than promote Tranquillity. They are ever making Glass Hives, that
they may treacherously inspect the Deliberations of Councils. Let a Prince
therefore attentively endeavor to stop all those Crevises, through which
inquisitive Curiosity may pry into his Concerns. For if any Enemy penetrates
them, he easily prevents and frustrates them. As Germanicus did, who understood
all the Designs of his Enemies Nihil ex iis Caesari incognitum; consilia,
locos, prompta multa noverat, astusque hostium in perniciem ipsis vertebat.
Tac. 2. ann.
. This was the Reason of the Advice which Sallust gave Livia, that the Secrets
of the Family, nor the Counsels of Friends, nor the Ministry of the Militia,
should by no means be divulged Ni arcana domus, ne consilia amicorum, ne
ministeri^ militum vulgarentur. Tac. 1. ann.
. Sampson in discovering wherein his Strength lay to Dali^h Jud. 16. ^
, gave his Enemies opportunity of robbing him of it Ibid.
. Private Designs strike a Fear upon all, and create a Veneration for the
Prince; and though at first they are not well grounded, yet may a prudent
Judgment afterward find means to make them Successful. The Respect and Esteem
which we have for Princes and Commonwealths, would all be lost, if their
private Consultations were made public. They are carved Giants, which seem
tall and vast to the Eye, and which frighten more than hurt, but if that Fear
shall approach nearer, 'twill find them governed and framed by Men of no higher
Statu^e than themselves. States which are close in their Counsels, and Actions
are respected, but otherwise despised by all Prove. 20. 5.
. How smooth and pleasant does a deep River glide along; and how rough and
uncouth that, which discovers the Pebbles and Weeds at the bottom! None dare
wade that, but this every one skips over. Those things which Opinion magnifies,
the Eye shows less. Reverence proceeds from distance Major e longinquis
reverentia. Tac. 1. ann.
. For this Reason, God when he conferred with Moses upon Mount Sinai, about the
Laws and Government of his People, he veiled its Top not only with Fire, but
also with a thick Cloud Exodus 19. 6.
, least any one should treacherously observe them; he also Commanded upon pain
of Death, that none should approach the very Foot of the Mountain Exodus 19. 12.
. If God himself, is so cautious in his Commands and Consultations, what then
should Man be, whose wisest Counsels are Ignorance? When their Resolutions are
published in due time, they seem elaborate and composed with profound Judgment;
they show the Majesty and Prudence of the Prince, and we believe there are
Reasons and Considerations which we cannot comprehend; nay we many times imagine
some, that the Ministers never so much as thought of. But if we were to hear
the Debates, Grounds, and Reasons of their Resolves, we should perhaps
deservedly ridicule them. As upon the Stage the Actors appear, Gay and
Splendid, and move the Respect of all; but behind the Scenes is despicable
Misery and Confusion. It Is yet more dangerous to entrust the Mysteries of
Government to Foreigners, these King Henry II. ever suspected L. 4. tit. 3.
lib. 1. Re^op.
. And though perhaps many would be true, yet the safest way is, not to admit
any of 'em to the management of Affairs, especially those of the Treasury;
chiefly when they are not Subjects, or of equal Capacity. Least they should
dive into the Maxims of the Government N^ ali^ni Regni, quod non convenit,
scrutentur arcana. L. M^rcato^es C de Commer.
; it is our unhappy Temper to slight and contemn our own, and admire all foreign
Commodities. We think there is no Courage, Knowledge, or Prudence but is
imported, not regarding the Advice of the Holy Spirit: Admit not a Stranger
within thy Door, for he will raise a Whirlwind against thee, and at last turn
thee out of thy own Dwelling.

If a Prince would have his Counsels kept secret and close, let him himself set
a good Example of Prudence and Taciturnity. Let him imitate Q. M^tellus, who we
are told used to say, That if his Shirt knew his Thoughts, he would order it to
be burnt. Let him diligently endeavor to conceal his Mind; for he who is
Master of his Thoughts, has already the main Instrument of Government. This
Tiberius knew, who even in Matters which he had no Design to conceal, either
naturally, or through use, always spoke intricately and obscurely; but then
most of all, when 'twas discoursed of his succeeding Augustus Tib^rioque etiam
in rebus, quas non occuleret, seu natura, sive adsuetudine suspensa semper,
obscur^ semper: tunc vero nitenti ut sensus suos abderet Tac. 1. ann.
. Secrets are not to be communicated to all Ministers, though they are never so
faithful; but only to those to whom they some way belong, or those from whom
they cannot be concealed without greater Damage. Christ when he desired to have
one of his Miracles private, made only three of his Apostles privy to it,
thinking it not safe to entrust it to them all Luke 8. 51.
. The keeping of a Secret requires great Care; for though we can be Silence,
yet it is not in our Power to Command the interior Passions Si tam in nostra
potestate esset oblivisci quam tacere. Tac. in vit. Agric.
, or to suppress that quick Motion of the Blood, which betrays the Secrets of
the heart, by the Face and Eyes Psalm. 54. 16.
. The Mind being like the finest Paper, which discovers on the other side what
is written within; so Britannicus's Death appeared in Agrippina's Face, though
she did what she could to stifle it At Agrippinae is Pavor, ea consternatio
mentis* quamvis vultu premeretur emi^uit. Tac. 13. ann.
. Augustus and Tiberius knew this, and because they doubted they could not
enough dissemble their Joy for Germanicus his Death, durst not appear in
public Anne omnium oculis vultum eorum scrutantibus salli inteliigerentur.
Tac. 3. ann.
. The Tongue is not the only blabb of the Secrets of the Heart; Man has many as
great Tell-tales as that about him; as Love, which being a Fire gives light to,
and discovers the darkest Designs: Anger which froths and boils over; fear of
Punishment; violence of Sorrow; Self-interest, Honor or Infamy; Vainglory of
our own Thoughts, which prompts us to disclose them before they are put into
Execution. In short, the weakness of the Mind, either from Wine, or any other
Accident. No caution can deceive these natural Spies. Nay, the more Care is
taken to blind them, the sooner they discover the Secret. As it befell Sevinus
in a Conspiracy, which he was concerned in, who discovered his Care and Concern
through all his pretended Joy Atque ipse moestus and magnae cogitationis
manisestus erat, quamvis laetitiam vagis sermonibus simularet. Tac. 1^. ann.
, and though long use may in time correct Nature, and make it more retentive,
as Octavia, who though very young could hide her Grief and other Affections
Octavia quoque quamvis rudibus annis omnes affectus abscondere didicerat. Tac.
13. ann.
; and Nero who beside his natural Propensity* had almost an acquired Faculty of
disguising his Hate with false Flatteries Factus Natura, and consuetudine
exercitu^, vel^re odium fallacibus blanditiis. Tac. 14. ann.
; yet Art cannot be so vigilant and attentive, as not sometimes to forget it
self, and give Nature its free Course, especially when urged and provoked by
designing Malice; which is done many ways, which I will here describe, that the
Prince may beware of them, and not suffer any one to fathom his private
Sentiments.

Malice then sometimes touches the peccant Humor, that it may exert and
declare it self Eccles. 22. 24.
. So Sejanus Egged on Agrippina's Relations to incense her haughty Spirit, that
she might be urged to discover her desire of Reigning, and so give Tiberius
occasion to suspect her Agrippinae quoque proximi inliciebantur pravis
sermonibus tumidos Spiritus perstimulare. Tac. 4. ann.
.

Injuries and Affronts also do the same, being the Keys of the Heart. As close
and reserved as Tiberius was in his Thoughts, he could not contain himself when
Agrippina affronted him Audita haec raram occulti pectoris vocem elicuit
correptamque Graeco versu admonuit, ideo laedi quia non regnaret. Tac. 4. ann.
.

He who concealing his real Sentiments pretends contrary ones, will soon
discover peoples thoughts of them; with which Artifice the Emperor Tiberius
used to fathom the Thoughts of the Senate, making a show as if he would not
accept of the Empire Postea cognitum est ad introspiciendas etiam procerum
v^luntates, inductam dubita^ionem. Tac. 1. ann.
.

There is yet another piece of Cunning, which insinuates (...) or discommending
that, (...) bottom of, (...) be of the Party to gain Credit, and induce the
other to disclose his Sentiments. This way Latiaris by commending Germanicus,
pitying Agrippina's misfortune, and accusing Sejanus, so ingratiated himself
with Sabinus, that he discovered to him his Aversion to Sejanus Tac. 4. ann.
.

Many Questions asked at a time, are like so many Bullets discharged at once,
which no Caution can avoid, and which disarm the most retentive Breast; as were
those of Tiberius, to Piso's Son Crebris interrogationibus exquirit, qualem
Piso diem supre^^^ Noctemque exegisset, atque illo pleraque sapienter, quaedam
inconsultius resp^^dente. Tac. 3. ann.
; the Mind is also confounded by sudden and unexpected Questions; as Tiberius
on^^ found, by those of Asinius Gallus Perculsus improvisa interrogatione
paululum reticuit. Tac. 1. ann.
, when though he had taken time to answer, yet he could not hide his Concern
so, but that Afinius took notice of it Etenim Vultu offensionem conjectaverat.
Ibid.
.

The Authority of the Prince, and the Veneration due to Majesty, are means to
discover Truth, and sometimes more than Truth; as Tiberius found, as often as
he examined the Criminals himself Non temperante Tiberio quin premeret voce;
Vultu, ^o quod ipse ^reberrime interrogabat: neque* refellere aut eludere
dabatur; ac saepe etiam confitendum erat ne frustra quesivisset. Tac. 3. ann.
.

By Discourse and Talk, which some can promote with great Dexterity, the Mind
is discovered; as by joining the several pieces of a torn Letter, you may read
the Sense of it, and by this method the Conspirators against Nero, knew that
Fenius Rufus was of their Party Crebr^ ipsius sermne fact^ fides. Tac. 15. ann.
.

From all which a Prince may infer, how difficult a matter it is to keep a
Secret, and if it is safe within our own Breasts, it is much less so, when
committed to others; wherefore it should without absolute necessity be
entrusted to none; it is like a Mine, which if it has too many Vents the force
of the Powder is lost, and it proves ineffectual, but if there is a necessity
of a Prince's communicating his Secrets to his Ministers, and he seeing 'em
divulged would know by whom, let him feign several important Secrets, and
commit one to each, and by that which he hears of first, he will find who was
Tardy before. Let not these Cautions seem frivolous for from very small Causes,
great Commotions often proceed Tac. 4. ann.
. The most Potent Empires are in danger of being sapp'd by the Sea, if its
Curiosity could find but the least Chink to enter at When this Worm has once
found the Root of the Secret, it soon brings the tallest Tree to the ground.

EMBLEM LXIII.
IN all Affairs the Beginnings and Ends ought mutually to correspond; the Form
should be perfect, and not easily to be changed. The Potter does not give his
Wheel so much Liberty, nor use his hand so carelessly, as to form a different
Pot from what he began. Let any undertaking be uniform and agreeable to its
self.

Ld. Roscom. Hor. Art Poet.
When you begin with so much Pomp and Show,
Why is the End so little and so low?
Be what you will, so you be still the same.
There is nothing more pernicious than this, inequality of Actions and
Government, when the Beginnings don't answer the Ends. He makes himself
ridiculous to all, who begins his Reign with Care and Diligence, and afterward
grows negligent and careless. It had been better always to have kept the same
Pace though dull and slow, the Commendation which the beginning of his Reign
merited accuses the end. Galba lost his Reputation, for that, at the beginning
of his Empire he promised to reform the Militia, and afterward admitted
Persons wholly desertless Nec enim ad hanc forman caetera erant. Tac. 1. ann.
. Many Princes seem very good, and are very bad. Many Talk and Discourse
prudently, and Act without Discretion. Others promise much, and perform little;
some are very valiant in Peace, and mere Cowards in War; others undertake every
thing and do nothing. This Disagreement is much below the Majesty of a Prince,
in whom a firm Constancy should appear in all his Words and Actions. The People
can never be firm in their Obedience to a Prince, who staggers thus himself.
Wherefore he should attentively consider, before he concludes any thing,
whether in the Executions of his Counsels, the middle will be answerable to the
Beginning and End; as Godfrey advises.

Let him who does at great Begin^^^g^ ^m, Tass. cant. 1.

Make the Thread even; and both Ends the same.
The Web of Government, though never so finely wrought, cannot be good and strong
unless it be even. Nor is it sufficient to know, how to enter upon an Affair,
but it is expedient too, to know how to end it. By the Head and Stern of a Ship,
the Ancients represented perfect Counsel, duly weighed from the beginning to
the end Mihi prora and puppis, ut Gr^ecorum proverbium est, fuit a me tui
dimittendi ut rations meas explicares; Prora itaque and Pupp^ summam consilii
nostri significamus; propterea quod a prora and puppi, tanquam a capite, and
calce pendeat totan^vis. Cicero.
. Whence I took the Figure of this present Emblem, representing prudent
Counsel, careful of its Beginning and End; by a Ship moored between two
Anchors, one a Head, and the other a Stern, to preserve it from the violence of
Tempests; only one at the Bow would be of small effect, if the Wind blowing
hard a Stern, should drive her upon the Rocks.

There are three things requisite in Resolutions, Prudence to deliberate,
Diligence to dispose, and Constancy to proceed. All the heat and toil about the
beginning of Affairs would be insignificant, if (as it usually is) we are
careless about the end Acribus ut ferme tali^ initiis, incuri^so fine. Tac. 1.
ann.
; it is at each end that Prudence ought to cast Anchor. But since Prudence only
regards things present and past, not future, upon which all Affairs depend;
it is necessary by Discourse and Reason, to conjecture and foresee what such and
such means should produce; to make use of Deliberation and Counsel; which are
as the Wise Alphonso says, The best Foresight a Man can have in dubious
Matters. And in those there is three things to be considered, the Probability,
Justice, and Profit of the thing proposed; and also the Capacity and Experience
of the Minister, who gives the Counsels; whether he be moved by Interest or
private Ends; whether he offers himself to the Danger, what are the
Difficulties of the Enterprise, and upon whom the Blame and Honor of the event
will fall Omnes qui Magnarum rerum consilia suscipiunt, astimare debent, an
quod inchoatur Reip. utile, ipsis glorios^m. aut pr^mptum effectu, aut certe
non ^rduum sit, simul ipse qui ^uadet considerandus est adjiciatne consilio
periculum suum: Et si fortuna coeptis fuerit cu^ s^mmum decus acquiratur. Tac.
2. Hist.
. These Cautions premised, and the Matter stated, such means ought to be
applys'd, as are conformable to the above mentioned Qualities; for nothing will
be just and beneficial, which shall be attained by indirect or extravagant
means: In this also should be considered, four Distinctions of time, which
occur in all Affairs, but especially in Diseases of States, as well as those of
humane Bodies, and these are the Beginning, the Growth, or Progress, the
Consistence, and Declension; by which, and a timely Application of proper
means, the desired End is easily obtained; as on the contrary, by transposing
these Methods, it is retarded; (...) the Course of a Ship would be, if the
Rudder were changed to the Head; the Art consists in selecting means proper to
the Ends designed, using sometimes these, and sometimes tho^^ those being not
less useful and assistant which are omitted than those which are applied; as in
a Consort of Voices, where some cease while others Sing, and yet all equally
make the Harmony. Affairs will not move of themselves, tho their good
Disposition, and Justice, or common Interest seem to drive 'em, and if not
guided by Judgment, they certainly miscarry Nam saepe honest^s rerum causas, ni
judicium adhibeas, pernic^^^ exitus c^nsequuntur. Tac. 1. Hist
; few Princes would Err, if they governed with Assiduity and Circumspection;
but either they tire, or else despise these Arts, and will obstinately
accomplish their Designs by their own methods. This is the way of stubborn
Ignorance, but Prudence uses other means. What Force cannot subdue, is easily
obtained by Dexterity, adapted to time and circumstance. So Caecinus, when he
could neither by Prayers, nor by Threats stop the Flight of the German Legions
possessed by a vain Fear, he at last threw himself in the Gate way, and by the
Horror, they conceived of trampling over their Generals Body, stopped them
Projectus in limine portae, miseratione demum, quia per corpus Legati eundum
erat, clausit viam. Tac. 2. an.
. The same thing Pompey did in another Case; one single word spoken to Purpose
has gained the Victory. Ferdinando Gonsalez Count of Castile, having drawn up
his Army against the Moors, a certain Person putting Spurs to his Horse, rode
out of his Rank toward the Enemy, and immediately the Earth opened and
swallowed him, the whole Army was in a Consternation at it, but the Count
turning to 'em: Courage Gentlemen, says he, If the Earth cannot bear us, much
less will our Enemies, and instantly joining Battle he gained the Victory. That
which happened at the Battle of Cirniola is not less remarkable; an Italian
thinking the Spaniards were routed, set Fire to two Wagons of Powder, the
great Captain Gonsalvo readily and cheerfully animated them with these words:
Courage my Friends, these are the Bone-Fires for our Victory; which the Event
proved Mar. Hist. Hisp.
; so much it imports a Minister to have a quick ready Wit, and address to make
use of Opportunities, and by proper means to turn Misfortunes to his Advantage.

If after the Election of good Ministers, and the Application of proper means,
Events don't answer the Prince's Desire, let him not be discouraged, but rather
show his Constancy; for Resolutions should not be measured by Chance, but
Prudence. Casualties which cannot be foreseen, or prevented, accuse not the
Action; and to blame a Man for doing his endeavor is Impudence. This usually
befalls Princes, who either want Judgment or Courage; who being oppressed by
ill Success, and as it were beside themselves, give themselves up to
Melancholy, and lose that time in vain Reflections upon what has happened,
which should be employed in remedying it, quarrelling with themselves, that
they did not take another method Eccles. 22. 24.
; and laying all the Fault upon him who was the Author of this, not considering
whether 'twas grounded upon Reason or no. Whence it is that Ministers are afraid
of declaring their Opinions, and let slip many Opportunities, without
advertising the Prince thereof, for fear of exposing their Favor and
Reputation to the uncertainty of Casualties. These Inconveniences a Prince
ought most industriously to avoid, by persisting constant in Adversity, and
excusing their Ministers, when they are not notoriously to blame, that they may
more readily and courageously assist him in overcoming them. And though there are
palpable Errors in some Resolves and Executions, yet he ought to bear it
calmly; for what is once done, as we say, cannot be undone* we ought to reflect
upon past Actions, for Instruction not Affliction; it requires as much Courage,
to pass by Faults, as to encounter Dangers; there is no Empire free from 'em.
He who is too timorous cannot resolve, and oftentimes Irresolution is worse
than Error it self. Business requires a quick and ready Genius; if each
particular should take up his whole time, many must of necessity be neglected,
to the utmost Detriment of the Parties concerned, and of the Government in
general.

EMBLEM LXIV.
THE Ancients in War made use of certain Chariots armed with Scythes, which
moved and executed at the same time; the Wheels and Scythes being both governed
by the same Motion; those were no sooner whirled about, but these did
Execution, with equal Speed and Effect, and are therefore in the present
Figure, the Emblem of speedy Execution; as those fiery Wheels in the Throne of
God, signified the Activity of his Power, and the Quickness of his Operation
Dan. 7. 9.
. Let Prudence (as we said before) choose a fit time for Consultation, but let
its Resolves, and Executions have such a mutual Correspondence, as they may
both seem to move together, without any interposed Delay. For Consultation and
Execution should join hands, that they may assist each other in the Production
of the desired Effects Priusquam incipias, censulito, and ubi cons^lueris
mature facto opus ^st: ita utrumque per se indigens alter al^^^ius auxilio
viget. Sallust.
. The Emperor Charles V. used to say, That delay was the Soul of Counsel, and
speed that of Execution, and that both joined together were the Quintessence of
a Princes Prudence. King Ferdinand the Catholic had not been so successful in
his undertakings, had he not maturely weighed, and speedily executed his
Resolutions. Were a Prince endued with both these Virtues, he would never want
Success, which is ever the Daughter of opportunity, which once past is not to
be recalled. One minute brings us great Advantage, or great Detriment,
wherefore Demosthenes blamed the Athenians, for spending too much time in
Preparations, saying that Opportunities would not wait their Delays. If the
Counsel be advantageous, that time which is spent in Delay deducts from its
Advantage. There is no room for Delay in Counsels which are not valuable, but
in their Effects Nullus cun^^ationi (...) est in eo co^^^lie, quod non p^test
laudari, nisi peractum, Tac. 1. Hist
. Counsel is an Embryo, and unless Execution which is the Soul thereof gives it
Life, it dies. It Is the Product of the Understanding, and an Act of practick
Prudence, which if it exert not it self but remains in Contemplation, it is
nothing but a vain Imagination and Fancy. Resolution, says Aristotle, should be
executed with haste, but deliberated with leisure. James I. King of England,
advised his Son to be prudent and cautious in his Deliberations, firm and
constant, in his Resolutions, and prompt and resolute in his Executions; for
that, for this last Nature had supplied the Hands and Feet with so many Joints
and such ready Motion. Delay is base and mean* but speed great and Royal.
Barbaris (...); statim exequi regium videtur* Tac. 6 ann.
. This Vice of Delay is very frequent in great Kingdoms, and proceeds from
their too great Confidence of their Power, as was visible in the Emperor Otho
Quo plus virium ac roboris, e fiducia tarditas inerat, Tac. 2. Hist
. As also from the unweildiness of the Wheels, upon which its Grandeur is
carried, and least the Prince should run the Risque of losing what he already
has, he lives content within the Bounds of his own Empire. That which is really
Laziness and Sloth is called Wisdom, as was that of the Emperor Galba Et motus
temporum obtinuit, ut quod segnities erat, sapienti^ voca^etur. Tac. 1. Hist
. Empires in their Infancy acquire Strength and Vigor by dispatch, whilst the
Blood boyls, and the Spirits of Glory and Ambition are active. The Roman State
throve by Action and Bravery, not by those Dilatory Counsels which Cowards call
Cautions Agendo, audendoque res Romana crevit, (...) hic signibus consiliis,
quae timidi ^^uta voc^nt. Tit. Live.
. But after they are at their full growth, their very Majesty and Authority
supports 'em long, though that Vigor and heat of Glory, and Ambition be
extinguished, as the Sea keeps its Motion for a considerable time after the
Wind ceases. When therefore Empires are in this Vigor, I don't so much
disapprove of these tedious Deliberations. For so they gain more time to enjoy
quietly what they have gotten: too speedy Resolutions being often attended with
Danger. In this Sense that of Tacitus is to be understood, that Power is better
preserved by cautious than rash Counsels Potenti^^ cautis, quam acrioribus
consiliis tutius haberi. Tac. 11. ann.
. But when this Age decays, and the Esteem and Authority of the Empire begins
to Flag, other methods ought to be used, Counsels should be speedy, and other
means applied to recover its former Vigor, before decrepid old Age comes on,
and renders it irrecoverable; this difference of Ages is not considerable in
small States, but they should always be ready to spread their Sails to every
favorable Wind, which sits sometimes this way, sometimes that. As in the
Circumference of the Horizon, the Winds rule alternatively upon the Earth; the
Goths and other Nothern Nations, had formerly very favorable Winds, of which
they made so good use, loosing all their Sails, that they penetrated even to
Hercules's Pillars, the then utmost limits of the World; but this Wind ceasing
another succeeded more favorable to other Empires.

Constancy in executing Resolutions, whether they are the Prince's own, or
given him by others, is always of great Importance. For want of this Paetus
could not triumph over the Parthians Eludi Parthus tractu belli poterat, si
Paeto aut in suis, ^ut in (...) consiliis constantia fuisset. Tac. 15. ann.
. All eager and fiery Spirits quickly resolve, and soon repent, they are hot at
the beginning, but cold in the end of Affairs; they aim at all, but bring
nothing to Perfection; they are like the Animal called Calipes, which mo^es
with great haste, but advances not a Foot in an hour. The management of all
Affairs requires Conduct and Valor, one to form and the other to execute them;
to a resolved and brave Spirit nothing is difficult; but he who is scrupulous,
and timorous, meets with a world of Difficulty, and loses many lucky
Opportunities. Great Men are long in their Deliberations, and jealous of what
may happen, but once resolved they Act with Vigor and Confidence Vir ea
ratione fiet (...): si in deliberando quidem cunctetur, and praetim^^t quicquid
potest (...), in agendo autem ^^nfidat. Herod.
, without which the Courage sails, and not applying convenient means, wholly
desists from the Enterprise.

There are few Affairs which cannot he accomplished by Wit, or which time, and
Opportunity cannot facilitate; wherefore it is not proper wholly to confound
them, but to preserve 'em entire. Crystal once broken cannot be rejoined, and
so Affairs; be the Tempest never so great, ^tis safer to keep some Sail abroad,
than to fu^l all. Most Affairs die by being despaired of.

'Ti^ also highly conducive, that he who is to execute Orders, should first
approve them, otherwise he will not ^hink 'em necessary, or else find
Difficulties in them, and so ^ot apply himself to them as he ought, not caring
whether they succeed or no. That Minister is most proper to exe^ute who first
gave the Counsel. For his Honor and Re^utation (...) concerned in its Success.

EMBLEM LXV.
A Stone cast in a Pond creates such a continual Series of Waves, that they at
last become innumerable, and wholly disturb that transparent Element, and calm
Looking-Glass; from which the Species of things which were before distinctly
represented, appear now in Disorder and Confusion. It Is the same with the Mind,
in which from one Error proceeds many, so that the Judgment being confounded
and blinded, and the Waves of Passion raised, the Understanding cannot perceive
the truth of things represented, but striving to remedy the first Error falls
into another, and thence into a third, which at length become infinite, and the
further they are from the first the greater they are, like Waves that are most
distant from the Stone that caused 'em. The Reason of this is, That the
Beginning is said to be half of the whole, so that a small Error in the
Beginning correspond to the other Parts In principio enim peccatur; principium
autem dicitur dimidium t^tius, itaque parvum in Principio erratum correspondens
est ad alias parts. Arist. pol. lib. 2. cap. 4.
. Wherefore great Care of the first Error should be taken, for from thence all
others proceed Cum fieri non possit, ut si in primo, atque principio peccatum
fu^rit, non ad extremum malum aliquod evadat. Arist. pol. 5. cap. 2.
. This is visible in M^smissa, who being checked by Scipio for marrying
Sophonisba, thought to remedy that Fault by a far greater, in poisoning her.
King Witiza by his Vices obscured the Glory of the Beginning of his Reign, and
that the number of the Mistresses he kept might not seem scandalous, he allowed
all his Subjects the same Liberty; nay, and made a Law for impowering the
Clergy to marry; and at last finding his Errors contradictory to Religion, he
denied the Pope's Authority, and thence incurred the Odium of the whole
Kingdom, wherefore to prevent their rebelling he demolished the Fortifications
of most Cities and Castles, and so laid all Spain open to the Incursions of the
Moors Marian. Hist. Hisp. lib. 6. cap. 19.
, and all these Faults proceeding, as you see, at last occasioned his Death.
The same Series of Crimes is visible in Duke Valentine: He endeavored to build
his own Fortune upon the Ruin of others, to which End he omitted no sort of
Tyranny, one piece of Cruelty being followed by a greater Ferox scelerum, and
quia prima provenerant, volutare secum, quonam modo Germa^i liberos
perverteret. Tac. 4. ann.
, which at last cost him his State and Life too, proving himself an unfortunate
Scholar, and Machiavel, a pernicious Master.

The Faults of Princes are Difficulty corrected; for that they usually affect
many; or sometimes because of Obstinacy or Ignorance. Great Spirits which are
often more ingenuous and tractable than others, easily acknowledge their
Errors, and being convinced of them, study to amend them, pulling down the ill
built Edifice Stone by Stone, to rebuild it with more firm and durable
Materials. The Motto of the Emperor Philip III. was, Be not ashamed to alter
that which was ill began. He who returns by the same way he went, will find his
mistake, and soon recover the right Road; Repentance would be afterward
insignificant.

To own you, have at last your Error found Claud.
,
Is of small use, when once the Ship's aground.
Policy is a certain Chain, in which if one Link be broken, the whole is
useless, unless soon solder'd: A Prince who knows the Danger of his
Resolutions, yet still persists in them, is a greater Lover of his own Opinion,
than his Country; esteeming an empty shadow of Glory more than Truth; and
while he would be thought constant, he is stubborn and perverse, it is the
general Vice of Sovereign Power, to think it beneath 'em to retire when they
have once advanced.

-- He thinks it Brave Seneca.

Who grasps the Scepter in his Royal Hand
Not to retreat --
Though the Emperor Charles V. was better advised, who having Signed a Grant,
which he was afterward informed was illegal and disallowable, ordered it to
(...) brought him, and immediately tore it: I had rather, say^ he, tear my
writing than my Soul. To know ones ^^rours, and still to persist in them is
tyrannick Obstinacy; but to defend them^upon pretense of Honor, is to resolve
to Sin on, and to encourage Ignorance and Folly, it is gilding Iron with Gold,
which soon wears of, and the Iron appea^^ in its rusty Hue. An Error corrected
makes us more ca^tious for the future, and to commit Faults sometimes is a
means to prevent greater. So small is our Capacity, that we are to be
instructed by our very Faults, and are taught by them how to Act discreetly.
It Is certain, that the be^ Laws and Examples proceed from others Crimes Usu
probatum est P. C. leges egregias, ^^^pta honesta, apud bonos ex delictis
aliorum gigni, Tac. 15. ann.
. The most prudent State committed many miscarriages, before it arrived to
Perfection. God alone could complete the Fabric of this World without Error,
and yet even he did afterward in a manner repent him, that he had made Man
Genesis 6. 6.
. We are sometimes more indebted to our miscarriages, than to our Success; for
those instruct us, but these are only the Seeds of Pride and Vanity. The
Patriarchs Instruct not on^y the Wise, but the Sinful Instruunt Patriarch^, non
solum docentes, sed etiam errantes. A^b lib. (...) de A^^. C. 6.
, it is the Shades give light to a Picture, to them we owe the Excellency of
that Art.

Error does not always proceed from Imprudence, time and other accidents are
often the occasion of it. For that which was at first convenient, is afterward
prejudicial. The greatest Prudence cannot give Counsel, which will be proper at
all times; which makes it necessary to alter Resolutions, and repeal Laws and
Statutes, especially when there is an apparent Advantage Non d^bet
reprehensibile judicari, si secundam varietatem temporum, Statu^a qundoque
varientur humana, p^s^^t^m came urg^ns N^^^ssitas, vel evidens utilitas id
exposuit. Cap. non deber de Cons. and A^^.
; or Danger, or when the Prince finds himself mis-inform'd of Matters, upon
which such Resolutions were grounded.

This was the Reason King Ah^suerus gave for recalling the Sentence, which he
had pronounced against the People of God, upon the unjust Accusation of Haman
Hest. 16. 9.
. In these and the like Cases, it is not levity of Mind, but Prudence to alter
Counsels and Resolutions, nor can it be called Inconstancy, but a firm Zeal to
be guided by Reason in all things, as the Weathercock is by the Wind; and the
Needle by the North Pole. The Physician varies his Medicines according to the
Accidents, having Respect to nothing, but the recovery of his Patient. The
different Diseases which States labor under, require different methods of
Cure. Let a Prince then think it a Credit to review, and correct his Decrees,
and his Errors too, without being ashamed of 'em to commit 'em might be
Inadvertency; but to amend is Prudence; Obstinacy is ever a certain Sign of
Folly. Yet 'twill be Prudence to make this Alteration with such Address and
Dexterity, that the People may not perceive it: for they ignorant and foolish
as they are, call Mistake want of Prudence, and Amendment, Levity.

But though I advise a Prince to correct his Errors, yet I would not be
understood of all in general; for some are so small and insignificant, that the
Danger of being censured for Levity in the amendment of them is more than the
Damage they can do by continuing. So that where they will by Degrees cease of
themselves, without drawing on greater, 'twill be better to let 'em remain.
There are some of that Nature, that it is better to follow 'em, nay, and
vigorously to persist in them, there being perhaps more danger in retracting;
and these frequently happen in War; there are some Affairs, in which that you
may succeed, it is requisite to use indirect means, though you incur some small
Inconveniences, as the way to straiten a crooked Stick is to bend it the
contrary way; in these Cases small Errors are not to be valued, nor their
Causes, nor Means, provided they be not wholly opposite to Honor and Justice,
and when the Advantage to be reaped from 'em is considerable: For so they are
allowable, and ought rather to be called Disposition to Success than Errors.
Others are so interwoven in great Attempts, that like Roses there is no
approaching them without pricking ones hand. And this in those Counsels which
concern the general Good of a Nation, which are always prejudicial to some
private Persons. The Bodies of States are composed of different and opposite
Parts, as to their Qualities and Humors, and a Remedy which is applied to the
whole Body, is usually disagreeable to some Part: A Prince therefore has need
of great Prudence, to weigh and compare Advantages with Damages, and of a great
Courage to execute without hazarding the loss of those for fear of these.

EMBLEM LXVI.
RENOVATION perpetuates the most fading things in Nature; each individual
Eternizes it self in another, and by that means preserves its Species. It Is for
this the Husbandman carefully preserves young Plants to substitute in the room
of those Trees which die. He does not leave this to Chance, because perhaps
they will either not spring at all, or not such as he desires, or else not in
proper places, nor will they of themselves grow strait and handsome, without
his Care in setting them while they are young; for when once grown up no Force
can straiten them. The same Care ought to be taken in the Education of Youth',
especially in those Countries, where the Constitution of the Climate is apt to
produce great and noble Spirits, which are like fertile Fields soon overrun
with Wood and Brambles, unless their Fertility be corrected by the Art and
Industry of the Husbandman. The greater the Spirit is, the more dangerous it is
to the State, unless timely moderated by Education. A high aspiring Spirit
cannot contain it self; it shakes off the Curb of the Laws, and is eager for
Liberty, and should therefore be restrained by Art and Instruction, and
afterward by being busied in some honorable Exercise, but when a little more
advanced in years, the Cure for its Levity is, to employ it in Affairs of
State; I take this to be the Reason, why some States admitted young Persons
into their Senates. But the best way is, that which Gardiners use, to
transplant their young Trees into another Ground, that the superfluous Roots
may be pruned, and the Tree grow strait and tall. Youth seldom thrives well in
its own Country. For their Friends and Relations by too much Indulgence make
them Extravagant. In other Countries it is otherwise, for their Necessity
obliges them to regulate their Actions, and to endeavor to gain People's
Esteem. At home we generally expect a little more Liberty, and are apt to
promise our selves Pardon; but abroad when we are not known, we are afraid of
the Rigor of the Laws, besides Travel polishes our Behavior, and corrects the
Roughness of our Nature, and that foolish Vanity, which attends our homebred
Gentlemen. There Languages, and Men are learned, and their Manners and Customs
observed, the Knowledge of which qualifies a Man for Affairs, as well of Peace
as War. 'Twas Travel made Plato, Lycurgus, Solon, and Pythagoras, such prudent
Lawgivers and Philosophers. At home Men are born and die with the same Fortune,
but abroad they raise it. No Planet is exalted in its own House, but in
another, though not without Detriment and Inconveniency to it self.

Travel is the great Mistress of Prudence, if made for Information, as well as
Direction. In this the Northern People are very much to be commended, who with
great Curiosity and Attention travel the World over to learn Languages, Arts
and Sciences. The Spaniards who have greater Convenience for traveling than
any other Nation, because of the great Extent of their Kingdom, have the least
inclination to it, lazily spending all their time at home, unless sometimes
they are called out by War; when nevertheless it is absolutely necessary for
Princes, who have often occasion to bring their Armies into several Countries,
to have a perfect Knowledge of them. The two chief Reasons which detain our
Spanish Nobility at home, are first, because Spain being almost wholly
surrounded by the Sea, it is more inconvenient Sailing, than Traveling by Land;
the other is a vain Conceit, that they cannot appear abroad without great Pomp,
and expensive Equipage, in which Strangers, though Persons of the best Quality
are more modest.

Nor is it sufficient only to transplant Youth, but Nurseries should be also
raised, of which vacant Offices may be supplied, to avoid the necessity of
employing fresh Persons, who must buy their Experience at the hazard of the
State. This is represented in the present Device by a bundle of Rods, the
Emblem of Magistracy; for these being planted produce more of the same; and
because in each of the three Forms, that is to say Monarchy, Aristocracy, and
Democracy, the methods of Government are different, so should also the methods
of Education of Youth, according to the different Institutions and Customs of
each State; and according to those things, in which they have most occasion for
able Men. The Persians, Egyptians, Chaldaeans, and Romans were particularly
careful about this; but principally about the Education of Youth for the
Magistracy, the Welfare or Ruin of States, depending upon the Capacity, or
insufficiency of the Magistrates, who are as it were their Soul, and according
to the Affections of it the whole Body is governed. There were several Colleges
erected in Spain for this Purpose, which were so many Seminaries of able Men
for the Administration of the Government; these though their Institutions might
seem vain and frivolous, yet were they of great Use upon this account, that
they first taught those to obey, who were afterward to command.

I have elsewhere said, that the Knowledge of Sciences was a necessary
Qualification for a Prince, and will now examine whether it be proper for
Subjects, or whether the young Commonalty should be instructed therein. Nature
has placed in the Head, as having the Command over the whole Body, the
Understanding to apprehend Sciences, and the Memory to retain them. But to the
Hands and other parts she has given only a Disposition to Obedience. Men at
first entered into Society, for the mutual Assistance of each other, not for
Contemplation; more for the convenience of Action, than the Subtilty of nice
Speculation: The Happiness of Governments proceeds not from the Vivacity of the
Wit, but the Activity of the Hands. The leisure of Studies is employed in
Vices, and Eternizes all those upon Paper, which the wickedness of the Times
shall invent; plotting against the Government, and raising Seditions among the
People. The Spartans thought it sufficient to learn Obedience, Patience, and
Conquest Literas ad usum saltem discebant, reliqua omnis disciplina erat, ut
pulchre parerent, ut labores perferrent, ut in pugna vincerent. Plutar.
. Too subtle and learned Subjects are always fond of Novelty, continually
reflecting upon the Government, and disputing the Princes Orders, and raising
Commotions among the People; Obedience should be prompt not ingenious, sincere
not cunning Patres valere decet consilio, populo supervacanea calliditas est.
Sallust.
. Ignorance is the principal Foundation of the Turkish Empire. And the readiest
way to Ruin it is to sow Literature among the People. The Happiness and
Tranquillity of the Swisse proceeds from the same Cause, for frivolous Sophistry
is forbid among them, yet are they governed with as much Policy and Prudence,
as any Nation whatever. Study enervates the Body, and deba^es the Mind, giving
it too quick an apprehension of Danger. Most Men are charmed by the Pleasure,
Honor, or Profit of Learning, so that few would apply themselves to Arms, or
Military Exercise for the defense of the State, whose Interest is in having its
People Valiant, rather rather than Learned. The Genteel Politeness of Learning,
makes the Mind wholly averse to all laborious Exercises. Study makes Men
melancholy, and Lovers of a retired and single Life; which is wholly opposite
to the Design of Government, which is to multiply, and raise Men fit and
capable of public Employments, and such as are able to Act offensively, or
defensively with an Enemy. The Neatherlands show us, that it is not Learning
and Ingenuity, but Arts, Industry and Trade, that makes a Nation flourish. The
Germans and other Nations considered these Inconveniences, and therefore
founded their Nobility upon Arms, not regarding the Honor and Reputation of
Learning; whence almost all the Nobility applied themselves to War, and Arts
Military. Though Literature conduces much to the Knowledge of the true
Religion, yet it is evident, that from thence arise different Opinions, which
create as many Sects, whence proceed the Confusion and Ruin of Empires, so that
the true Religion being now found, a sincere and credulous Ignorance would be
much safer, than a presumptuous and conceited Knowledge, which is exposed to so
many Errors. These and some other Reasons which might be alleged, seem to
advise an utter Extirpation of Learning, according to the Rules of Policy,
which regard more the Authority of the Prince, than the advantage of the
Subject; but these are Maxims of a Tyrant, not a good and just Prince, who
should have no other Object than the Honor and Welfare of his People; to whom
Learning is absolutely necessary to confute the Errors of Sectaries, which
always flourish where Ignorance Reigns, and also to administer Justice, and to
preserve and improve Arts Military, as well as Civil. For Scholars are as
useful in defending Cities as Soldiers; as Syracuse formerly found in the
Person of Archimedes: And Dole in its learned Senate, by whose prudent Counsel,
ingenious Machines, and vigorous and resolute Defense, it resisted the whole
Power of France; changing their Libraries into Magazines, their Gowns into
Coats of Mail, and their Pens into Swords, which dipped in French Blood,
recorded their Names and Actions to Eternity. It Is only too great a number of
Universities and Students, which is prejudicial to the Public, as Spain found,
whence it is highly necessary, that the greatest number should apply themselves
to Arts of Navigation and War, not to Law or Speculative Sciences: For which
Reason there should be greater Encouragement given to those than the other,
that Men may be the more inclined to follow them; for want of such
Encouragement in Spain, there are so many apply themselves to Learning, that
there wants Soldiers to defend the Kingdom. This ought to be remedied by the
Care and Prudence of the Prince, who should so judiciously dispose the
Education of Youth, that the number of Scholars, Soldiers and Tradesmen might
be proportioned to his State.

The same Proportion should be observed in those who would lead a religious
Monastic Life, of whom too great a number is very prejudicial, both to the
Prince and State. Though Religion and Piety ought not to be measured by the
Rule of Policy, and in the Church Militant, Spiritual Arms are of more use than
Temporal, he who was the first Founder of that State, will maintain and
preserve it without Detriment to the Public; nevertheless since human Prudence
ought to believe, not expect Miracles, I leave it to him whose Duty it is, to
consider, whether if the number of Ecclesiastics, and religious Orders should
exceed the Laity which should support 'em, it would not be of great Detriment
even to the Church it self The Council of Lateran in the time of Innocent III.
provided a Remedy for this Inconveniency, by prohibiting the Introduction of
new Religions Ne nimia Religionum diversitas grav^m in Ecclesia Dei confusionem
i^ducat firmiter prohibemus, nequis de c^ter^ novam Religionem inven^at, etc.
Conc. Later.
. The Royal Counsel of Castile, also persuaded his Majesty to request of the
Pope, that there might be none admitted into any Convent under the Age of
sixteen years, and not be ordained under twenty; but pretended Piety and nice
Scruples of Conscience, easily pass over these Inconveniences.

But this Proportion in those who are designed for Business or Speculation,
will be of small use, unless the Prince also take Care of the Nurseries of the
Commonalty, which should produce a sufficient number of well qualified Citizens
to succeed in the room of those whom Death daily takes off. The Ancients were
always very careful of Propagation, that each Individual might be succeeded by
another. Of the necessity of this, the Romans in particular were so well
satisfied, that they not only proposed Rewards for Procreation, but also looked
upon a single Life as infamous. Germanicus the better to oblige the People to
revenge his Death among the rest of the Services, he had done the Government,
he urged, that he had six Children by his Wise Ostendite populo Romano Divi
Augusti neptem, eandemque conjuge^^ meam, numerate sex liberos. Tac 2. ann.
. Tiberius also told it, as a good Omen to the Senate that Drusus's Wife, was
brought to Bed of Twins Nulli ante Romanoru^^ ejusdem fastigii viro g^^inam
stirpem editam. Tac. 2. ann.
. The Strength of Kingdoms consists in the number of Subjects; and he is the
greatest Prince whose State is most populous, not he whose Territories are
largest: For they of themselves can neither defend nor offend; but by means of
their Inhabitants^, on whom all their Glory depends. The Emperor Adrian used
to say, That he had rather his Empire should ab^und with Men than Riches; and
with a great deal of Reason, for Riches without Subjects do only invite Wars,
without being able to defend themselves, as on the contrary, Subjects without
Riches, want neither Power to acquire, or maintain them Cum ampliari imperium
^ominum add^^^iion^ potius, quam pecuniarum copi^ malim.
, in the multitude of People is the King's Honor: but in the want of People,
is the Destruction of the Prince Prove. 14. 28.
. The Wise Alphonso would have a Prince take particular care to People his
State, and that not only with Commonalty, but also with Nobility; in which he
judged with great Prudence, for one without the other is like a Body without a
Soul, the Commonalty being insignificant without the Nobility, which are their
Life, and by whose Example they learn to covet Glory, and despise Danger. It
ought therefore to be a Prince's chief Care, to preserve and maintain them. As
Augustus did, who not only caused Hortalus to marry, but also allowed
wherewithal to his Quality, that that Noble Family might not be extinct Ne
clarissima familia extingueretur. Tac. 2. ann.
. The Germans are very circumspect in this Point, for which Reason they
anciently gave no Portion with their Women Dotem no^ uxor marito, sed uxori
maritus affert. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
, and even now give very small ones, that their Virtue and Nobility might be
their only Dowry, and that their Lovers might respect the Endowments of their
Minds and Bodies, more than their Fortunes, that Marriages might be sooner
concluded, without losing so much time in Fortune-Hunting; for which Reason
Lycurgus wholly prohibited the giving Dowries to Women; and the Emperor
Charles V. regulated them; it is said also, that Aristotle reprehended the
La^edaemonians, for giving such large Fortunes to their Daughters Statuit
virgins sine dote nubere: jussit uxores eligerentur, non pecunia. Trog. lib. 3.
. King Alphonso also advises, that a Prince unless upon extraordinary occasions
should not People his State with Foreigners, and truly with a great deal of
Reason, for different Manners and Religions are the worst Domestic Enemies.
This made the Spaniards drive the Jews and Moors out of Spain. Foreigners
introduce with them their Vices, and Errors, and are ready upon every occasion
to rise against the Natives Quare qui inquilinos and advenas antehac in
Civitatem receperunt, ^i magna ex part seditionibus jactati sunt. Arist. ^. 5.
pol. c. 3*
. But this Inconveniency would not be much to be feared, if only Laborers and
Husbandmen were admitted, nay, this is sometimes of great Advantage. So the
Grand Signior Selim sent a vast number of Laborers from Cairo to
Constantinople. The Poles having Elected Henry Duke of Anjou King, among other
Articles 'twas agreed, That he should bring with him several Families of
Artificers. Nebuchadnezzar upon the taking of Jerusalem, carried away all the
Men of might even seven thousand, and Crafts Men, and Smiths a thousand, and
all that were strong, and kept for War, even them the King of Babylon
broughtCaptive to Babylon 2 Kings 24. 16.
. But because this method may be too troublesome and chargeable, and also
because such a Supply may be insufficient, I will here set down the usual
Causes of want of People in Nations. And these are either internal or external;
External are Wars and Plantations; War is a sort of Monster which feeds on
humane Blood; and since it is the Interest of each State to maintain it abroad
as the Romans did, it must necessarily be done at the Expense of the Lives and
Estates of the Subjects Fuit proprium Pop. Romans long a dom^ bellare, and
propugnaculum imperii sociorum fortunas, ^on sua tecta defendere. Cic. pro leg.
Man.
. Neither can Plantations be long ma^ntain'd, without great Suppl^es of Men, as
we have found in Spain; for which Reason the Romans during the War with
Hannibal, and for some years after, took little Care of planting new Colonies
Dei^d^ neque dum Annibal in Italia moraretur, nec proximis post excessum ejus
annis vacavit Romany Colonias ^^ndere, cum esset in bello conquirendus potius
miles, and post bellum vires ref^ve^dae, potius quam spergendae, Vell. lib 1.
; they having more reason to recruit than weaken their Forces. Velleius
Paterculus esteemed the planting Colonies out of Italy as very pernicious,
because being so far distant from the Heart of the Empire, they could ^ot
assist it upon occasion In legibus Gracch^ inter perniciosissima num^raverim,
quod extra Italiam Coloni^s posuit, Vell. lib. ^.
. The other Causes are Internal. The principal of which are Taxes, want of
Husbandry and Trade, and too great a number of Holy Days, the Inconveniences,
and Remedies of which I have set down elsewhere.

The Court is also a great Cause of the want of People, for as a hot Liver
draws all the natural Heat to it self, leaving other parts of the Body
spiritless and faint, so the Pomp, Ease, Delight, Profit, and hopes of Reward
at Court, allure the Minds of most, especially of the Artificers and Tradesmen,
who think it a more pleasant and easy Life to serve some Person of Quality;
than to toil at their own Trade; the Nobility also, invited by the Prince's
Presence, or the Charms of the Court, leave their Estates in the Country for a
Court Life; whence not being able to look after them, but spending their
Revenu^s upon extravagant and unnecessary Expenses, their Estates become poo^
and uninhabited, whereas they would have been rich and populous, had their Lord
resided there. The Emperor Iusti^^n prudently reflected upon these
Inconveniences, and appointed an Officer on purpose to prevent them Invenim^^
enim quia populatim Provinci^ suis habitatoribus spolr^^^^: Magno vero haec
nostra civitas populos^ est, turbis diversor^^^ h^minum, and maxima Agricolarum
suas civitates and culturas relinquentiam, Auth de Quaest.
. King John II. also ordered, that all the Nobility at his Court should at
certain times, visit their own Estates, as also the Emperor Trojan did before
him.

Birthright also, especially in Spain is very prejudicial to Propagation; for
the eldest Brother Claims the whole Estate (which King Theodorick thought very
unjust) Iniquum est enim ut de una substantia, qu^bus competit. aequa
successio. alii abundanter affuant, alii paupert ati^ r^comm^d^ ^^gemiscunt
Cass. lib. 1. Epist 7.
, so that the youngest not having wherewithal to maintain a Family, instead of
marrying, either shut themselves into Convents, or turn Soldiers. For this
Reason Plato called Riches and Poverty, the ancient Plagues of Commonwealths,
knowing that almost all their misfortunes proceeded from an unequal
Distribution of Riches. If the Citizens had all an equal Dividend, State would
undoubtedly flourish more. But though the advantage redounding from hence wou^d
be great, the Preservation of the Nobility by means of Fie^^ would not be less,
for by that means they would be in a Capacity to serve the Prince and State; so
that those may be allowed to the ancient Nobility, not to the modern, by making
a Law, that all Relations to the fourth Degree, should be joint Heirs, if not
of the whole, yet of the greatest part of the Estate Commodum est etiam, (...)
donati^^e sed jure cognitionis tradantur, Arist l. 5. pol. 8
; thus the Inconveniences of Legacies and Gifts would be prevented, which are
more the Effects of Vanity, than a design to serve the Public, as also of that
religious Prodigality, which observing neither Bounds, nor Proximity of Blood,
gives all to the Church, not leaving so much as Subsistence to Brethren, or any
other Relations, whence Families become Extinct, the Royal Revenues are
exhausted, the People impoverished, and unable to pay Taxes, the Power of those
who are exempted is increased, and the Authority of the Prince diminished. This
Moses considering Exodus 36. 5^.
forbid by Edict, any one from offering any more toward the Work of the
Sanctuary Exodus 36. 6.
, though God himself was the Author of those Offerings, and they were offered
through pure Devotion* Exodus 35. 29.
; the Republic of ^e^ice have made very prudent Provisions against this.

It Is necessary also, that a fit time should be observed in Marriages: for if
too late the Succession is endangered, and the Government would be too much
exposed to the Incontinency of Youth: And if soon the Children being almost of
the same Age with their Fathers, would soon forget their Duty, and grudge 'em
the time they live.

EMBLEM LXVII.
THE Policy of our Times presupposes Malice and Fraud in all things, and
therefore arms it self with greater, without any regard to Religion, Justice or
Honor. It thinks nothing disallowable that is advantageous; but as these
Practices are now common, they must need justle and confound one another, to
the Detriment of the public Tranquillity, and without obtaining their proposed
Ends. But let a Prince cautiously avoid such Doctrine, and learn rather of
Nature the Mistress of true Policy, without Malice, Fraud, or any ill Practice,
there being none so certain, firm and solid, as that which she observes in the
Government, of Vegetables and Animals, more especially that which she dictates
to every Man by his Reason. Particularly to Shepherds and Husbandmen, for the
Preservation of their Flocks, and improvement of their Ground: Hence may be
it is, that those Kings who have been chosen from the Crook or the Plow, have
made the best Governors. Though the Shepherd (whose Office is almost the same
of a Prince's) Jerem. 23.
enjoys the Benefit of the Wool and the Milk of his Flock, yet it is with such
moderation, that he neither draws Blood from their Duggs, nor shears their Skin
so close as to leave 'em wholly exposed to the Inconveniences of cold and heat.
So a Prince, says King Alphonso) ought more to value the common Good of his
People, than his own particular Interest, for the common Good and Riches of his
Subjects, are as it were his own L. 19. ti^. 2. p. 3.
. The Husbandman cuts not down the Body of the Tree, for his Domestic
occasions, but only Lops the Branches, and not all of them neither, but leaves
enough to sprout out and serve his Occasions the next Year; but the Farmer is
not so careful, who is for making the best of his Farm while his Lease
continues, not caring how much he impoverishes his Ground for his Landlord
Aliter utimur propriis. aliter commodatis Quint. de Orat.
. This is the difference between a lawful Prince and a Tyrant, in respect of
Taxes and Impositions. This having an unjust Title, and fearing soon to be
dethroned, makes the best use of his time, stocking up all by the Roots,
fleaing instead of shearing his Flock, instead of feeding them he gluts
himself, Ezekiel. 34. 2.
and instead of defending them, leaves them a naked Prey to every Wolf John 10.
12.
. But a just and lawful Prince in imposing Taxes, considers the Justice of the
Cause, the Quantity, Quality, and Occasion, and also Proportions them to his
Subjects Estates and Persons, treating his Kingdom not as a Body which is to
die with him, but to remain to his Posterity; knowing that though Princes are
Mortal, States are Eternal, Principes mortales, Rempub. aeternam esse, Tac. 3.
ann.
and since he expects a new Crop from his Kingdom every Year, he preserves it
carefully, as his best Treasury, which he may make use of upon urgent
Occasions: for as King Alphonso said in one of his Laws, borrowing his Thought
from a Precept of Aristotle to Alexander the Great: The best and most lasting
Treasure of a King, is his People, when they are well defended; according to a
saying of the Emperor Justinian, that the Kingdom was always rich, and the
Exchequer full when the Subjects were wealthy, and the Land plentiful Lib. 15.
tit. 5. p. 2.
.

When therefore a Prince raises Taxes with this Moderation, the Subjects ought
cheerfully to pay them, nor can they without a sort of Rebellion refuse them;
for Sovereignty has no other Portion, nor public necessity any other
Assistance; there is no Peace without Soldiers, no Soldier without Pay, no Pay
without Taxes Neque quies gentium sine armis neque arma sine stipendiis, neque
stipendia sine tributis haberi queunt, Tac. 4. Hist.
. For this Reason when Nero would have remitted the Taxes, the Roman Senate
opposed him, saying, that without them the Empire would be ruined Diss^lution^m
Imperii docendo, si fructus quibus Resp. sustinetur (...), Tac. 13. ann.
. Taxes are the Prince of Peace: but if they are too heavy, and the People not
well satisfied of their necessity, they soon rebel against their Prince. 'Twas
for no other Reason that King Alphonso Surnamed the Great, grew so odious to
the People, that after many Troubles and Vexations he was obliged to quit his
Crown; for the same also Garcios King of Galicia lost both his Kingdom and Life
too Mar. Hist. Hisp. lib. 9. cap. 8.
. K. Henry III. considered this Danger, when being advised by some, to raise
new Taxes to defray the Expense of War, he answered, I fear the Discontent of
my People more than my Enemies. Money collected from unjust Taxes, is mingled
with the Subjects Blood, as was seen to drop from that piece which St. Francis
of Padua broke in the Presence of Ferdinand King of Naples, and this ever cries
for Vengeance against the Prince.

Great Taxes therefore ought not to be raised till the People be well convinced
of the Necessity o^ them; for when they are satisfied of that, and of the
Justice of the Cause, they patiently bear the heaviest Impositions, as we see
in those which were raised by K. Ferdinand IVth, and in the Grant which the
Parliament, of Toledo made of a Million, in the times of Henry III. permitting
him also to raise more of his own accord, to carry on the Wars against the
Moors. For though it is not for private Persons to examine into the Justice of
Taxes, though they cannot often apprehend the Causes of Expenses, nor can they
be communicated to them without evident Danger Tibi summum rerum judicium dii
dedere: nobis obs^quii gl^^ia relict^ est, Tac. 6. ann.
, yet are there some general Reasons which they may without Damage be informed
of, and though Natural and Divine Reason do allow the Power of levying
Impositions to the Prince, without the Subjects Consent, when they are just and
necessary (as King Alphonso used to say) yet will a prudent Prince so manage
the matter, and dispose the Minds of his Subjects, that it may seem to be done
with their Approbation; Taxes are (according to the Scripture) the Bridle of
the People 2 Samuel 8. 1. Vide.
; they keep them in Obedience, and uphold the Prince's Authority. Those who are
free from all Taxes are ungovernable; yet this Bridle should be so easy, as
not to gall them too much; as King Flavius Herwegi^s prudently considered in
the Thirteenth Council of Toledo, saying, That that Government was best which
neither oppressed the People with too great Taxes, nor made them remiss and
negligent by too little Ut nec incauta exactio populos gravet, nec indiscreta
r^missio statum gentis fociat deperire, Council. Tol xiii.
.

The Command which Princes have over the Lives of their Subjects, is executed
without Danger, it being done by Law, which punishes some as Examples to the
rest; but not so that Command which they have over their Goods and Estates, for
that comprehend^ all in general, and People are more sensible in what concerns
their Estates than their Bodies; especially when they are got by Sweat and
Blood, and are to be employed to supply the Prince's Luxury. In which that
remarkable Action of K. David ought to be considered, when he refused to drink
the water which his three Soldiers brought him from amidst the Enemies Camp,
least he should seem to drink the Blood of those Men 2 Samuel 23. 17.
. It Is no good Policy to impoverish the People by Taxes the better to keep them
in Obedience, for though Poverty, whether Original or Accidental, debases our
Spirits, which always rise and fall with our Condition; yet does Oppression
provoke our Minds, and urge us to Rebellion Ferocissimo quoque adsumpto, aut
quibus ob egestatem, ac metum ex Flagitiis maxima peccandi necessitudo, Tac. 3.
ann
. All the Israelites that were in Distress, and every one that was in Debt, and
every one that was discontented joined David against Saul 1 Samuel 22. 2.
. The People are always most obedient when they are richest. The plenty of
Egypt made the People of God, though very severely used, forget their Liberty;
but afterward when they came to want in the Wilderness, they complained
heavily of their Slavery and Bondage.

When a Kingdom is given upon Condition, that no Taxes shall be levied without
its Consent, or if this be afterward provided by some general Decree, as was
in the Parliament of Madrid, in the time of King Alphonso XIth. or when it has
acquired this Privilege by long Prescription, as in Spain, and France; in such
Cases the Prince must wait the Consent of the Parliament, least he should
expose himself to the same Danger, as Charles VIIth. of France did formerly,
when he went to raise a certain Tax without communicating it to his Council.
It Is also of great advantage to a Prince to be so well es^eem'd of his People,
that from their Opinion of his Zeal for their Good, they may think whatever
Taxes he imposes upon them are just and reasonable, and blindly agree to
whatever he proposes, committing themselves wholly to his Prudence and
Management, as the Egyptians did to Ioseph's, when he exacted the fifth part of
their Estates Genesis 47. 25.
. When the People have once this Confidence in the Prince, he ought diligently
to take Care, not to burden them without sufficient Cause, and mature
Deliberation. But if necessity does require it, let him at least take Care that
the Taxes be well expended; for the People take nothing more hainously, than to
see no advantage from their Oppressions, and to see their Estates squandered
away to no purpose. They are also very uneasy to see Taxes continued, when the
Occasion for which they were raised is over. As 'twas in Vespasian's time, when
the Taxes raised for the necessity of War were continued in time of Peace
Necissitate arm^rum excusorta, etiam in pace mau^er^, Tac. 2. ann.
. For afterward Subjects dread them, and grudge to pay them though never so
small, thinking that they will be perpetual. Queen Mary gained the Hearts of
her Subjects, and preserved their Loyalty in the most difficult times, by
remitting the Excise which her Husband King Sancho IVth. had laid upon
Provisions.

It Is difficult to persuade People to part with their Money to maintain a
foreign War, nor can they easily apprehend how much it conduces to their
Interest, to keep War from their own Doors, and maintain it in foreign States,
and how much safer is the Defense of a Shield than that of a Helmet, that being
farther distant from the Head. The Purblind Mobb can seldom see so far. They
weigh rather the present Burden, than the future Benefit, not thinking all the
Riches of the Kingdom will be afterward too little to make good the Damage
they have suffered by their obstinate Negligence Plerumque accidit, ut quae
provinciae pecuniae parcendo, ^mota pericula contemnunt incumbentibus demum
malis, desperat^ s^pe remedio graviora sentiant detrim^nta, Paul. Jov.
. It requires therefore, all the Prudence and Dexterity of a Prince to make
them know their Interest.

In raising Taxes, Care ought always to be taken not to oppress the Nobility:
for Exemption from Taxes being the chief Distinction between them and the
Commons, they cannot brook to see themselves degraded, and their Privileges
violated, which were acquired by the Valor and Virtue of their Ancestors. This
was the Reason why the Nobility of Castile took up Arms against Henry III. who
taxed 'em at fi^e Marvedees of Gold apiece, toward the Charge of the War.

Neither should Taxes be laid upon such things as are absolutely necessary for
Life; but rather upon Toys, Curiosities, Pride and Vanity: for so besides
correcting Luxury, they would fall in the greatest measure upon the Rich, and
would be Encouragement to Husbandmen and Tradesmen, which part of the
Government ought most to be cherished and supported; so the Romans laid great
Taxes upon the Spices, Pearls and Jewels, which were imported from Arabia; as
Alexander Severus did upon those Offices which tended more to Debauchery, than
Use and Necessity, it is the readiest way to Reformation, to inhance the Price
of Vanity. There are no Taxes paid more easily than those which are laid upon
Commodities imported; for the greatest part of them is paid by Foreigners;
wherefore in England the Royal Revenue is very prudently raised from these kind
of Taxes, the Kingdom it self being Exempt.

The greatest Inconveniency in raising Taxes and Excise is, in the Collectors
and Receivers, who are often more burdensome than the Taxes themselves; for
there is nothing that the Subjects take more grievously, than the violence and
importunity of these sort of Men in collecting their Money. It Is an Observation
that only Sicily endured them with Patience: God himself complains of them by
the Prophet Isaiah, that they oppressed his People Isa. 3 12. Vid.
. In Egypt some Prophet was always President of the Customs, for they thought
it not safe to trust 'em to any but God's immediate Servant; but now they are
committed to Pedlars and Broakers, who wreck a Ship in Port, which had escaped
the Fury of the Wind and Sea Portus nostros navis veniens non paveseat, ut
certum nautis possit esse naufragium, si manus non incurrere^t exigentium: quos
frequenter plus affligunt damna, quam solent naufragia, Cassiod. lib. 4. Ep. 19.
, like Robbers plundering Travelers of their Goods and Money. What wonder
therefore that Trade decays, and that Riches and Merchandice are not imported,
if they are exposed to such as these, who plunder 'em by Authority, what
Wonder, I say, That the People complain of Taxes, if for one Shilling that
comes to the King, ten goes to the Collectors and Receivers for this Reason,
when in the Parliament of Guadal^jara, the Kingdom of Castile offered to raise
150000 Ducats, it was upon Condition, that they themselves should keep Books of
the Receipts and Disbursements of it, that they might know what was employed to
the public Interest, and how it was expended, without trusting it to the
Management of those who had the Government of the Kingdom during the Kings
Minority. For the same Reason, the People of France proposed to King Henry II.
that if he would discharge his Collectors, they would themselves pay in their
Assessments, wherever he should Order; which the King had agreed to, had not
some of his Ministers dissuaded him. The Kingdoms of Castile have often offered
the same thing, nay, and also to pay off the Crown Debts; but 'twas judged that
it would be a Diminution to the Royal Authority, to be instructed and tutored
by the Kingdom, and besides, that such a Power could not be without Danger. But
I believe the true Reason was, that the Court was unwilling to lose so many
beneficial Offices, and such ready means of getting Money. A Prince's Credit
consists not in the Administration, but in the Possession of Riches. The Roman
State was not less careful of their Authority than any other, yet by Reason of
the Trouble and Charge of Collecting, it ordered each Province to Collect and
pay in their own Taxes; taking Care to keep the Officers in their Duty, that
they might not oppress the People through Avarice and Extortion; in this
Tiberius took particular Care Ne Provinciae nobis oneribus turbarentur, utque
vetera sin^ a varitia, ^ut crudelitate Magistratuum tolerarent, Tac. lib. 4.
ann.
. Modesty in the Collecting of one Tax, obliges the People more readily to
grant others.

EMBLEM LXVIII.
THE Ingenious Greeks included in certain pretty Fables, as the Egyptians in
Hieroglyphics, not only all Natural Philosophy, but also Moral and Politic;
either to hide them from the Vulgar, or else that they might be the better
imprinted in their Minds, by these pleasant and delightful Fictions. So, to
represent the Power of Navigation, and the Riches thereby acquired, they
feigned, that the Ship Argo (which was the first that durst venture upon the
main Ocean) obtained the famous Fleece, which instead of Wool, yielded Gold;
for which glorious Exploit it was consecrated to Pallas, the Goddess of War,
and placed amongst the Constellations, as a Reward of such dangerous Voyages:
showing the World, that by the Help of Oars and Sails, they might make Way
through Mountains of Waves; and by the Assistance of the Wind, carry Arms and
Merchandise all the World over. This Morality, and the Preferment of that Ship
to the Skies, occasioned me to draw two in this present Emblem; as the Poles of
the Globe Terrestrial, to show that Navigation is the Support of the World, by
Commerce and Arms: These Poles are Movable, but in their Motion consists the
Stability of Empires: There Is scarce any Monarchy which has not received its
Rise and Preservation from thence. If the Grandeur of Spain were not supported
by both those Poles, the Mediterranean and Ocean, it would soon fall: For it is
evident, that Provinces so distant from one another, would be in imminent
Danger, were it not, as 'twere, united by Oars and Sails, and timely supplied
with Recruits for its Support and Defense: So that Ships and Galleys seem to be
nothing but a kind of Sea-Bridge. For this Reason, the Emperor Charles V. and
Ferdinand Duke d' Alva, advised King Philip II. to maintain a great Fleet at
Sea. King Sisebutus well knew the Advantage of it, being the first that kept a
Fleet upon the Spanish Seas. Themistocles gave the same Adice to his State; and
the Romans made use of it afterward to conquer the World. This Element begirts
and conquers the Earth: In it Strength and Speed are united; and whoever can
make use of them with Valor, has the World at command. Arms at Land attack and
terrify only one Nation, but at Sea they Alarm the whole World. There is no
Circumspection, or Power sufficient by Land, to defend the Sea Coasts. It Is the
Sea which has civilized all Nations, which had been rude and barbarous, without
the Use of Navigation and Commerce, which has taught 'em to know one another's
Languages and Customs: This Antiquity meant, when they feigned that the Rudder
of the Ship Argo spoke; intimating, that by the Help of that, foreign Languages
were learned. It Is Navigation that supplies each Nation with the Goods and
Riches of others, all Nations mutually furnishing each other with what they
want; which Advantage promotes that mutual Love and Correspondence between Men,
which is necessary for their reciprocal Assistance.

This Marine Power is more necessary for some Kingdoms than others, according
to their several Situation and Disposition. The Asiatick Monarchies have more
Occasion for a Land than Sea Force. Venice and Genoa, of which one lies upon
the Sea, the other near it, being utterly unapt for Husbandry and Agriculture,
apply themselves wholly to Navigation: And as long as they maintained their
Power at Sea, they were the Terror and Glory of the World. So Spain, which is
in a manner surrounded with the Ocean, must establish its Power at Sea, if it
would aspire to Universal Monarchy. The Situation of its Ports is very
commodious, not only for the Support of such Force, but also for hindering the
Navigation of other Nations, who, by our Trade, get Riches and Strength to make
War upon us afterward. For which Reason, 'twill be convenient to provide
sufficient Security for Commerce and Traffic, they being the principal Causes;
it is they turn all the Ports into Magazines and Stores, furnishing the Kingdom
with all things necessary, making it flourish, and grow Populous. These and
other Conveniences the Prophet Ezekiel intimated, in the Allegory of the Ships
which belonged to Sidon (a City situate at the Entry of the Ezekiel. 27. 3.
Sea,) which was full of Merchants and Mariners Ibid.
. They of Persia, and of Lud, and of Phut, were in its Armies, Men of War: they
hanged the Shield and Helmet in it, they set forth its comeliness Ibid. ver. 10.
. Tarshish was its Merchant, by reason of the multitude of all kind of Riches;
with Silver, Iron, Tin, and Lead, they traded in its Fairs Ibid. ver. 12.
. In a word, There was nothing in any Nation, which was not sold in its Fairs;
so that it might be truly called glorious in the midst of the Seas Ibid. ver.
25.
. We find also its Prince exalted, and lifted up by its Traffic Ezekiel. 28. 5.
. The Republics of Si^^ Nineveh, Babylon, Rome, and Carthage, flourished bo^^
in War and Peace, as long as they maintained the^^ Trade and Commerce. When
Venice and Genoa failed ^ Traffic and Navigation, their Grandeur and Glory
soon faded. Holland, situate upon a barren Sand, (...) capable of being manured
by either Spade or Plow supports very numerous Armies by their Trade an^
Commerce; and maintains such populous Cities, as the most fertile Plains would
not be able to supply. Fr^^^ has neither Mines of Silver nor Gold, yet does it
enri^^ it self by its Trade in several kind of Toys and Guga^ in Iron, Lead and
Tin: Whereas we, through Laziness, neglect these Riches, which the Convenience
(...) the Sea offers us. We, with great Toil and Danger bring Home the
Treasures of both the Indies, as Diamond^ Pearls, Spice, etc. without
proceeding any further; where^as other Nations reap the Benefit of this our
Labor, b^ transporting them into all the Countries of Europe, Asia and Africa.
We support the Genouese with Gold (...) Silver to trade with, and afterward
pay 'em extravaga^ Prices for their Commodities, so paying Interest for o^ own
Money. We furnish other Nations with Silk^ Wool, Steel, Iron, and many other
Commodities which, after they are wrought, are brought to us again and we buy
them at a prodigious Rate, by reason of the Carriage and Workmanship: So that
we pay very de^ for the Ingenuity and Industry of other Nations. Th^^ bring us
trifling, insignificant Ware, and carry hen^^ our substantial Gold and Silver.
Whence it is, (^ King Henry II. said) That Foreigners, nay, sometimes (...)
very Enemies, grow Rich and Powerful, while our own (...) are Impoverished and
Beggared. This the Emperor Tiber^^ formerly complained of, when he saw the
Extravagan^ of the Roman Ladies in Pearls and Jewels Quid? lapidum causa
pecuniae nostra ^ hostiles gentes transferuntur. Tac. 3. Annal.
. Yo^ R. H. would gain Immortal Honor, in Encouragi^ and Promoting Trade and
Navigation, both in the Citizens and Nobility; for the Products of the Earth
are not more Natural than those of Traffic and Commerce. The Kings of Tire did
not disdain to Trade; and the Fleets which Solomon sent to Tarshish, carried
not only Necessaries, but also Merchandise and Effects to Trade with, that he
might exceed all the Kings of the Earth for Wisdom and Riches 1 King. 10. 22.
. We read, that Pompey put out his Money to Use. The Nobility also of Rome and
Carthage thought it not beneath 'em to Traffic. Rome Instituted a College of
Merchants; whence, I believe, the Dutch took the Institution of their
Companies. How much more commodiously might Spain Establish them, by securing
them with Men of War; which would make it not only Rich, but Formidable. These
Conveniences the Kings of Portugal considering, settled their Commerce in the
East, by Force of Arms; maintaining their Arms by their Trade; and by the help
of both, founded a new and large Empire Psalm 71. 8.
; Establishing Religion, before unknown to those remote Countries: As it was
also to the Western Part of the World, till introduced by the Valor and
Prowess of the Castilians, who instructed that Heathen Country in what before
they never so much as heard of Isai. 49. 12
; so that receiving from them the True Religion of the Gospel, and the
Mysterious Bread of the Encharist, brought them so far Prove. 31. 14.
, that they cried out for Joy, with the Prophet Isaiah, Who has begotten me
these; seeing I have lost my Children, and am desolate, a Captive, and removing
to and fro? and who has brought (...) these? Behold, I was left alone, these,
where had they ^een Isai. 49. 21.
?

'T would be also conducive, that if, as the Romans formerly established
Garrisons at Constantinople, Rhodes, upon the Rhine, and at Cadiz, as in the
four principal Angles of the Empire; so now the Spaniards should erect Military
Orders in several Places in the Mediterranean and Ocean, who might Cruise about
the Seas, and clear them of Pirates, and secure our Trade with other Nations.
These Badges of Honor and Nobility, are sufficient Rewards for Virtue and
Valor; and the Presidency of these Orders are rich enough to give a Beginning
to so Glorious and Royal an Undertaking. But if their Revenues should not
suffice, nor the Crown be willing to be deprived of so many Noble Posts, the
Administration of which is invested in it by the Apostolic See, some
Ecclesiastical Rents might be applied to that use. This was the Advice of King
Ferdinand the Catholic, who would have Constituted the Knights of St. James at
Oran; and the Orders of Alcantara, and Calatrava, at Bugia and Tripoli; having
obtained leave of the Pope, to convert the Revenues of the Conven^^ del Villar
de Venas, St. Martin, in the Diocese of Saint James, and that of Oviedo, to
that use. But by reason of the War, which soon after broke out in Italy, this
Design was not accomplished, or perhaps because God reserved the Glory of this
Institution for some other King. Nor is the State-Objection, against Intrusting
such Potent Offices to the Nobility, of force. Military Orders were, it is true,
the Occasion of so many Rebellions in Castile: yet now, when the Power of our
King is enlarged by the addition of so many Crowns, tha^ Inconveniency is not
to be feared; especially if these Orders were settled out of Spain, and the
Presidency of them Ingrafted, as it were, in the Crown.

EMBLEM LXIX.
DIvine Providence would not suffer this Monarchy of the World to be one moment
without Gold and Iron; one to preserve, and the other to defend it: For if it
did not create them at the same time with the World; yet did the Sun, the
Second Governor of all things, immediately after its Creation, operate in
Purifying and Refining the Mineral Matter, and locking it up in Mountains, as
in public Treasuries; where also Mars, after the Matter was hardened and
re^in'd into Iron and Steel, erected his Armory. Arms are the Hands of
Governments; and Riches their Blood and Spirit: And if these don't supply the
Hands with Strength, and they again preserve and defend them, the whole Body
will soon fall, and be exposed to Ruin and Violence. Pliny tells of a sort of
Ants, in India, which instead of Grains of Corn, heap up Grains of Gold. Nature
has not granted those laborious Animals the Use of this Metal; yet it would
have them, like Masters, inform every Government of the Importance of laying up
Treasure. And though it be the Opinion of some Statesmen, That hoarding up
Riches, serves for nothing but to invite Enemies, as Hezekiah found, when he
had shown his Treasure to the Ambassadors of Assyria 2 King. 20. 13.
; and as the Egyptians knew, who, for this Reason, employed all their Royal
Revenues in Building; yet are their Reasons invalid, and these two Examples of
no force: For 'twas not Hezekiah's showing his Riches, that brought the War
upon him; but his Vanity and Pride, in putting his Trust in them, more than in
God: 'Twas this that made Isaiah prophecy, That he should lose all that he had
Ibid. ver. 17.
. Nor did the Egyptians employ their Treasure in Building, through fear of
losing it, but through Vainglory, and a design to amuse the Peoples Minds, as
we shall observe in its proper place. If a Prince amasses Treasure, through
Avarice, not making use of it, when Occasion requires, to defend his Country,
and offend his Enemy, and, to save Charges, leaves his State unprovided of Arms
and Men, he will soon invite his Enemies to forge Keys to open his Chests, and
plunder him of his Riches. But if he applies those Treasures to the Use and
Service of his State, he will at once strike an Awe and Respect into his
Enemies. For Riches are the Nerves of War Sed nihil aqu^ fatigabat, quam
pecuniarum conquisitio; eos esse belli civilis nervos dictitans, Tac. 2. Hist.
: It Is they procure Friends and Allies. In a word, A Full Exchequer does more
Execution than Artillery, Fleets, or Armies. When thus applied, hoarding
Riches, and Moderation of Expenses, are not Avarice, but Prudence; as was that
of King Ferdinand the Catholic, who, while living, was called Miserable and
Covetous; but after his Death, was cleared of that Aspersion, he leaving behind
him but a very inconsiderable Sum; whatever he hoarded, he used to expend upon
the Fabric of the Kingdom, placing his Glory not in spending, but in having
what to spend. It must be observed, That Treasures are sometimes collected with
a true and Heroic Design, to execute some Great and Glorious Action: yet does
this, by degrees, dwindle into Avarice, and the Ruin of States happens before
the Treasury is opened for their Relief. Man's Mind is easily taken with the
Love of Riches, and is wholly possessed with a desire of obtaining them.

Nor is it sufficient, that these Treasures be divided among the whole Body of
the State, as Chlorus in Eutropius desired Melius publicas opes a privatis
haberi, quam intra unum claustrum asservari. Eutrop.
: For Riches secure the Prince, but endanger the People. Cerealis told the
People of Treves, That their Riches were the chief Cause of their Wars Penes
quos Aurum, and opes praecipuae bellorum causae. Tacit. 6. Hist.
. When the Public is Poor, and private Persons Rich, Misfortunes arrive,
before they can be prevented. Counsels are prejudiced; for the People avoid
those Resolutions, which seek to redress the Public Grievances, at the Expense
of particular Persons, so that they can very difficultly be induced to make
War. Aristole, for this Reason, blamed the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Sparta, it having no Public Treasury Male e^iam circa pecunias publicas
constitutum est apud ill^s, quia neque in publi^o habent quicquam, and magna
bella gerere coacti, pecunias agree con^erunt. Arist. l. 2. c. 6. Pol.
. And if the People are more intent upon their own private, than the Public
Interest, with how much Regret will they be induced to remedy the Grievances of
the Public, at their own particular Expense Privato usui bonum publicum
postponitur. Tac. 6. Annal.
? The Republic of Genoa feels this Inconveniency. And Plato ascribes the Ruin
of that of Rome to no other Cause, in an Oration which Sallust says he made in
the Senate, against the Accomplices of Cataline's Conspiracy; having (as St.
Augustine explains it St. August. lib. 5. de Civ. Dei, cap. 12.
) strayed from their first Institution, in which private Persons were Poor, but
the Public Rich. Of which Horace complains Lib. 2. Ode 15.
: Non it a Romuli
Praescriptum, and intonsi Catonis
Auspiciis, etc.


Great Princes, relying too much upon their own Power, lay aside all Care of
laying up Treasure, or of preserving what they already have; not considering,
that if the Necessity of their Affairs should require Money, they must be
obliged to oppress their Subjects with Taxes, to the great hazard of their
Fidelity; and the greater the Kingdom is, there will be need of greater Expense
and Charge. Princes are Briareus's, who, what they receive with fifty Hands,
spend with a hundred; nor is any Kingdom rich enough to supply the Extravagance
of one. Clouds, in one Hour, spend all the Vapors which they have been many
Days in collecting. Those Riches which Nature had for many Ages hoarded up in
the close Treasury of the Earth, were not sufficient for the extravagant
Prodigality of some of the Roman Emperors. And this Extravagance is usual to
Successors who find the Treasury filled to their Hands: For they spend that
carelessly and lavishly, which they never knew the trouble of acquiring; they
soon pull down the Banks of the Treasury, and drown their State in Pleasure and
Luxury. In less than three Years time, Caligula squandered away Sixty Six
Millions of Gold, though then One Crown was as much as Two now. Power is
self-willed and foolish, and should therefore be corrected by Prudence; for
without that, Empires would soon fall to Ruin: that of Rome seemed to decline,
from the Time that the Emperors began to squander away its Treasures. The World
is wholly ruled by Arms and Riches. Which is represented in the present Emblem,
by a Sword and Golden Bough, which a Hand holds over a Globe; to intimate, that
by both these the World is governed: alluding to Virgil's Story of Aeneas, who,
by the help of both these, conquered even Hell it self, and subdued its
Monsters and Furies. The Sword wounds most, whose edge is Gold; and Valor
without Conduct, and Magazines without Treasuries, are insignificant. A Prince
ought therefore to consider, before he declares War, whether he is sufficiently
furnished with these Means to prosecute it: For which Reason, 'twill be
convenient, that the President of the Treasury should be one of the Council,
that he may give an Account of the State of the Revenue, and what Grounds they
have to proceed upon. Power ought to be cautious and circumspect, and
diligently consider of what it undertakes. Prudence does the same in the Mind,
as the Eyes do in the Head; without that, Kingdoms and States would be blind:
And Polyphemus, who having once lost his Eye by the Cunning of Ulysses, in vain
threw Stones about, and stormed for Revenge: so will they vainly squander and
throw away their Treasure and Riches. What prodigious Sums have we seen spent
in our Times, upon some vain Fear, in countermining Enemies Designs, in raising
Armies, and making War, which might have been avoided by a Friendly
Composition, or by Dissimulation? How much in Subsidies and Taxes ill applied,
and in other Necessary Expenses, by which Princes, thinking to make themselves
Powerful, have found the contrary: The Ostentations and Menaces of Gold
extravagantly and unseasonably squandered away, render themselves ineffectual,
and the second are less than the first, for one weakens the other. Strength
lost, is soon recruited; but Riches once spent, are hard to be recovered. They
ought not to be used but upon absolute Necessity. Aeneas did not first show the
Golden Bough, but offered to force his Passage with his Sword. The Chief
unsheathed his shinning Steel, prepared,
Though seized with sudden Fear, to force the Guard.
But when he found that neither Force nor Fair Means could oblige Charon to
waft him over, the Golden Bough was produced, which had been hitherto concealed
Prove. 21. 14.
: At the sight of which, the angry God was pacified.

Dryden' s Virgil.
If neither Piety, nor Heaven's Command,
Can gain his Passage to the Stygian Strand,
This fatal Present shall prevail, at least,
(Then showed the Golden Bough, concealed within her Vest.)
No more was needful; for the Gloomy God
Stood mute with Awe, to see the Golden Rod, etc.
Let Princes therefore take Care to keep those Eyes of Prudence upon their
Scepters, clear, and quick-sighted, not disdaining Economy, which is the
Safety and Preservation thereof; Princes being, as 'twere, the Fathers of their
People. The Great Augustus condescended, as we have said before, for the Good
of the Public, to take the Accounts of the Empire with his own Hand. Spain had
had long since the Universal Empire of the World, if it had been less
Extravagant in War, and more Regular and Methodical in Peace; but through a
certain Negligence, the usual Effect of Grandeur, it has suffered those Riches
which should have rendered it Invincible, to be made use of by other Nations.
We purchase them of the simple Indians, for Toys and Baubles; and afterward,
we our selves, as silly as they, permit other Nations to Export them, leaving
us Brass, Lead, or some such worthless Commodities, in their stead. 'Twas the
Kingdom of Castile, which, by its Valor and Prowess, erected our Monarchy; yet
others triumph, and that suffers, not knowing how to make good Use of the vast
Treasures which are brought to them. So Divine Providence, in a manner, levels
and equals States; giving to the Great Ones Strength, without Industry; and to
the Little, Industry to acquire Strength. But lest I should seem only to
discover Wounds, and not heal them, I will prescribe some Remedies; not drawn
from the Quintessence and Nicety of Speculation, which are approved at first,
when new, but afterward rejected by Experience; but such as Natural Reason
shall suggest, and such as Ignorance slights as vulgar.

The chief Wealth and Riches of Nations, are the Fruits of the Earth; no Mines
in the World being richer than Agriculture. This the Egyptians knew, who made
the lower End of their Scepters like a Plow-share; to intimate, that its Power
and Grandeur was founded upon that: The fertile Sides of Vesuvi^s, are richer
than Potosus with all its Gold. It Is not by Chance, that Nature has so
liberally imparted the Fruits of the Earth to All, and hid Gold and Silver in
the very Bowels of the Earth: It made those common, and exposed them upon the
Superficies of the Earth, on purpose for Man's Nourishment Maxima pars hominum
e terra vivit and fructibus. Aristor. Polit. lib. 1. c. 5.
; and hid these in the Bowels thereof, that they might not easily be dug out,
and refined, knowing they would prove the Bane and Ruin of Mankind. Spain was,
in former times, so rich, almost only from the Fruits of the Earth, that Lewis
King of France, coming to Toledo, in the time of King Alphonso the Emperor, was
surpised at the Splendor and Magnificence of that Court, affirming, That he
had not seen the like in all that Part of Asia or Europe, which he had
traveled through, in his Voyage to the Holy Land. Such was then ^he Grandeur
of one King of Castile, though distracted with Civil Wars, and the greatest
part of his Kingdom possessed by the Moors. There are some Authors affirm, That
there was in this Kingdom, in the time of the Holy War against the Heathens, a
Rendezvous of a Hundred Thousand Foot, Ten Thousand Horse, and Sixty Thousand
Wagons; and that King Alphonso III. daily paid both the Soldiers, Captains,
and Generals, according to their Office and Quality. These vast Expenses and
Provisions, which at present seem incredible, the single Kingdom of Castile
could afford; nay, and at the same time maintained a greater Number of Enemies,
without the Assistance of Foreign Riches; until a certain Biscayner, roving
upon the Sea, by fortune, got a sight of this New World, either unknown to, or
forgotten by the Ancients, and preserved for the Honor of Columbus, who, after
the Death of this Spaniard, diligently considering the Observations that he,
the first Discoverer had made, undertook to demonstrate the Discovery of the
Provinces which Nature seemed designedly to separate from us by Mountainous
Waves. He communicated this his Project to several Princes, hoping, by their
Assistance, to facilitate his great and difficult Enterprise: But all slighted
it, as vain and notionary. Which if they had done through Prudence and Caution,
and not Distrust and Misbelief, they had merited the same Praise which Carthage
gained of old; which, when some Sailors were boasting in the Senate, of the
Discovery of a wonderful Rich and Delicious Island, (supposed to be Hispaniola)
caused 'em immediately to be put to Death, thinking the Discovery of such an
Island would be of more Detriment than Advantage to the Commonwealth. Columbus,
at last, applies himself to Their Catholic Majesty's, Ferdinand and Isabella;
whose Generous Spirits, capable of many Worlds, could not be content with one
alone. So that having received necessary Assistance, he put to Sea; and after a
tedious and hazardous Voyage, in which he encountered as great Danger from the
Diffidence of his Companions, as from the Sea it self, he at last returned to
Spain, laden with Gold and Silver. The People flocked to the Shore of
Guadalquivir, to admire these precious Products of the Earth, brought to light
by the Indians, and thither by the Valor and Industry of their Countrymen. But
this great Plenty of them soon perverted all Things; the Husbandman soon leaves
Plough, gets into his Embroidered Silks, and begins to be more curious of his
Tawny, Sunburned Hands; the Merchant steps from his Counter into his Sedan, and
lolls it lazily about the Streets; Workmen disdain their Tools, and all,
forsooth, must now turn Gentlemen. No Money is current now but Silver and Gold;
and our Coin being wholly unmixed and pure, is coveted and desired by all
Nations. Gold and Silver now growing common, all Things raise their Price. In
fine, It befell our Kings, as it did the Emperor Nero, whom a certain African
put a Trick upon, telling him, in his Grounds he had found a vast Treasure,
which he believed Queen Dido had buried there, either lest too much Riches
should enervate the Minds of her Subjects, or lest they should invite others to
Invade her Kingdom. Which the Emperor giving credit to, and thinking himself
already sure of the Treasure, squandered away the Old Stock, upon the Hope of
these Newfound Riches: The Expectation of Riches being the cause of the
Public Want Et divitiarum expectatio inter causas paupertatis publicae erat.
Tac. 16. Annal.
. Cheated by the same Hopes, we were persuaded that we had no more need of
fixed and standing Treasuries, but think our Ships sufficient, not considering
that all our Power depends upon the Uncertainty of the Winds and Seas; as
Tiberius said the Lives of the Romans did, because their Provisions were all
brought them from Foreign Provinces At hercule nemo refert, quod Italia
extern^e opis indiget; quod vita populi Romani per incerta maris and
tempestatum quotidie vivitur. Tac. 3. Annal.
. Which Hazard Aleto considered, when dissuading Godfredo from going to the
Holy Wars, he said, Tasso.
Shall then your Life upon the Winds depend?

And as Men's Hopes are generally above their Estates S^epe enim de facultatibus
suis amplius quam in his est, sperant homines. Justin. Instit. quibus ex causis
man. in fraudem.
, State and Pomp increases; the Salaries, Wages, and other Charges of the Crown
are enlarged, out of Confidence and Expectations of these Foreign Riches; which
being afterward ill and negligently managed, were not sufficient to defray
such Expenses: and this made way for Debts, and those for Usury and Interest.
Necessity daily increased, and occasioned new Expenses: But nothing was so
prejudicial to the Public, as the Alteration of the Coin; which, though not
considered, should be preserved in as much Purity as Religion it self; the
Kings, Alphonso the Wise, Alphonso XI. and Henry II. who did offer to alter it,
endangered both themselves and Kingdoms; and their Misfortunes ought to have
been a Warning to us. But when Ills are fatal, neither Experience, nor Example,
can move us. King Philip II. deaf to all these Cautions, doubled the Value of
Copper Coin, which was before convenient for common Use, and answerable to
bigger Money. Foreigners coming to understand the Value that the Royal Stamp
gave to this paultry Metal, began to Traffic with nothing else, bringing us in
vast quantities of Copper ready Coined, in Exchange for our Gold, Silver, and
other Merchandise: Which did us more Damage, than if all the Monsters and
venomous Serpents of Africa had been brought among us: And the Spaniards, who
used to ridicule the Rhodians for their Copper Money, became themselves the
Jest and Laughing Stock of the whole World. Trade was ruined by this
troublesome, scoundrel Metal, all things grew dearer, and, by degrees, scarcer,
as in the time of Alphonso the Wise. Buying and Selling ceased, and at the same
time the Revenues of the Crown were diminished, so that new Impositions and
Taxes were unavoidable; whence, for want of Commerce, the Wealth of Castile was
spent, and the same Inconveniences renewed, proceeding one from another in a
pernicious Circle; which will at last prove our Ruin, unless a Remedy be
timely applied, by reducing that king of Money to its former and intrinsic
Value. Who would not think that this World must be subdued by the Riches and
Wealth of the other? And yet we see there were greater Exploits performed
formerly by pure Valor, than since, by all these Riches; as Tacitus observed,
in the time of Vitellius Vires luxu corrumpebantur, contra veterem disciplinam,
and instituta majorum, apud quos virtute, quam pecunia res Romans melius stetit.
Tac. 2. Hist.
. Foreign Nations did soon after find the same Damage, from the Discovery of
the Indies, from their too great Dependence upon their Riches; all things grew
dearer with them; as with us, their Expenses surmounted their Revenues: In a
word, they suffered all the same Inconveniences with us; which were so much
greater to them, as being farther Distance from those Provinces; and the Remedy
of Gold and Silver which is brought us from the Indies, and which they must
receive from us, being more uncertain.

These are the Inconveniences which the Discovery of the Indies caused: In
knowing the Causes of which, we know also their Remedies. The First, is, Not to
neglect Agriculture, upon Hopes of those Riches: Those which we receive from
the Earth, being more natural, sure, and common to all: Wherefore Husbandmen
should be encouraged and exempted from the Oppressions of War, and all other
Encumbrances.

The Second, is, That since all things are restored by the contrary Means to
which they were ruined, and the Expenses are greater than the Hopes and
Expectation of those Metals; the Prince should, like a prudent Governor,
provide, as the Senators of Rome advised Nero Vt ratio quaestuum, and
necessitas erogationum inter se congruerent. Tac. 13. Annal.
, That the Public Revenues should rather Exceed, than fall short of the
Expenses; That he should moderate those that were superfluous and unnecessary:
imitating the Emperors Antoninus Pius, and Alexander Severus, the last of which
used to say, That 'twas the Part of a Tyrant, to support them with the Intrails
of his State. Such a Reform would only Disgust some few, not the whole Nation.
And if Abuse or Imprudence has raised the Salaries of Offices, and Charges in
Peace and War; and if they are only introduced by Vanity, under the title of
Grandeur; Why should they not be corrected and reformed by Prudence? And as the
greater the Kingdoms are, those Abuses will be greater; so also will be the
Effects of this Remedy. Frugality is the best Revenue. Gold once spent, returns
not. By damming up the Streams, the Fountainhead rises. And the way to keep
Silver, is to fix the Mercury of it; that being the True and Approved
Philosopher's Stone. Wherefore, I am satisfied, that if a Prince be informed by
his Ministers, of all superfluous Expenses by Sea and Land, and would resolve
to moderate them; he would soon find himself enabled to pay his Debts, lessen
his Taxes, and fill his Treasury. As King Henry III. who finding the Crown much
in Debt, consulted with his Parliament, how to remedy it: And they could not
find a better Expedient, than what we have here proposed; that is, To Reduce
Salaries and Pensions, and Regulate Superfluous Expenses. The Treasurers also,
and other Officers in the Treasury and Exchequer, should be reduced to a less
number, as also the Collectors of Taxes, who all, like the thirsty Sands of
Africa, soak and drink up all the Streams of the Revenue, which pass by them.
The Great Emperor of the Turks, though he has immense Revenues, has but two
Treasurers, one in Asia, and 'tother in Europe. Henry IV. of France (not less a
Statesman than a Soldier) was satisfied of the Inconveniency of this, and
therefore reduced the Ministers of his Revenue to a less, yet sufficient number.

The Third Remedy, is, That since Princes are, by Importunity, often forced to
grant those Things which are not in their Power; all such Grants, Privileges,
Immunities and Rewards, as are prejudicial to the Crown, should be revoked;
especially when the same Causes concur, as moved Their Catholic Majesty's to
repeal those of King Henry IV. For, said they, in another Law, A Princes
Liberality should not be so great as to ruin him* and the Immunities granted
to Subjects, should be such as may not prejudice the Crown. But if a Prince,
through Negligence or Necessity, has not considered this; it must be remedied
afterward. As was after the Abdication of Ramirez King of Arragon; at which
time, all Grants that had weakened the Crown, were made void. King Henry the
Liberal, and Queen Isabella, did the same thing: And King John II. repealed the
Privileges and Immunities which himself and his Predecessors had granted. It Is
with Princes, as 'twas with the Idols of Babylon; from whose Crowns, according
to Jeremiah, the People took the Gold and Silver, and applied it to their own
Use Baruch 6. 9.
. King Henry III. perceiving the same Abuse, Imprisoned several of his
Nobility, and made 'em refund what they had purloin'd from the Crown; by which,
and a just Administration of his Revenues, he amassed a prodigious Treasure in
the Castle of Madrid.

The Last Remedy, (which should have been the First) is, That a Prince should
first regulate the Expenses of his own Family, if he would reform those of his
People: For their Reformation, as King Theodatus said A domesticis volumus
inchoare disciplinam, ut reliquos pudea^ errare, quando nostris cognoscimur
excedendi licentiam non praebere. Cas. lib. 10. ep. 5.
, must be begun by the Prince, that it may be effectual. St. Lewis, King of
France, advised his Son Philip to take care that his Expenses were moderate and
reasonable Da operam ut impensae t^ae moderat^ sint, and rationi consentaneae.
Bell. in Vit. S. Lud.
It Is a Misfortune, that Princes think it becomes their Grandeur to be
Careless, and keep no Accounts; and take Extravagance to be Liberality, not
considering how contemptible they are when poor; and that true Greatness does
not consist in Shows, and gaudy Ostentation, but in Castles, strong Garrisons,
and Armies. The Emperor Charles V. in the Parliament of Valladolid, moderated
the Expenses of his Household. The true Greatness of Princes, consists in being
liberal to others, and moderate and sparing to themselves. For which Reason,
Sisenand, King of Spain and France, (so styled by the Fourth Council of Toledo)
used to say, That Kings should be Mais Escasos que Gastadores; that is, Rather
Rich than Lavish. I well know the Difficulty of these Remedies; but, as
Petrarch said, in the like case, I do my Duty: And though all that is
requisite, cannot be executed; it ought to be represented, to accomplish the
Design of this Book Multa scribo non tam ut saeculo meo prosim, cujus jam
despera^^ miseria est, quam ut meipsum conceptis exonerem, and animum script^^
soler. Petrarch.
.

I dare hardly say any thing about the Remedies of Money, it being the Apple of
the Eye of the State, which you cannot touch, without hurting; so that it is
better to let it alone, than to alter the ancient Method: The acutest Judgment
cannot foresee all the Inconveniences which attend every Alteration thereof,
until they are discovered by Experience: For it being, as it were, the Rule and
Measure of Contracts, every one feels the least Variation of it; Commerce is
disturbed, and the whole State disordered. Wherefore, after King Peter II. had
Abdicated the Throne, it was prudently Enacted by the Kingdom of Arragon, That
all their Kings thenceforward, should take an Oath, not to alter any thing
about the Coin. This is the Duty of a Prince, as Pope Innocent III. wrote to
the same King Peter, when his Subjects began to rebel against him. Of which
this seems to be the Reason; That the Prince is subject to the Law of Nations,
and as Public Trustee, ought to take care that there be no Alteration in the
Nature of the Coin, which consists in Matter, Form, and Quantity; nor can any
Kingdom be constituted, where that is not pure. But not to be wholly silent in
a Matter so Important to Government, I Will mention Two things. First, That Money
is then Just and Convenient, when the Coin or Stamp adds nothing to the
Intrinsic Value of it, and when the Gold and Silver have the common Alloy of
other Nations; for this will prevent its being Exported. The other, is, That it
should be of the same Weight and Value with that of other Nations, permitting
also the Currency of Foreign Coin: Nor will it at all derogate from the
Prince's Authority, since the Coin serves only to show the Weight and Value of
it. And this seems most commodious, i^ those Kingdoms which hold Correspondence
and Trade with many Nations.

EMBLEM LXX.
EMPIRE admits of no Companion, nor can Majesty be divided: For it is
impossible that each should Command and Obey at the same time; especially since
Power and Accidents cannot be so nicely shared between them both, nor Ambition
so equally balanced, but that one will desire to be above the other, or that
Envy and Emulation will disturb their Agreement. Lucan.
Rivals in Empire still mistrustful are;
Nor can Authority a Part'ner bear.
It seems next to an Impossibility, that the Orders and Commands of two
Governors should not thwart one another. Moses and Aaron were Brothers; and yet
when God made them Part'ners, he thought it necessary to be in the Mouth of
one, and in the Mouth of the other, and to teach them what to do, lest any
Dissension should arise between them Exodus 4. 15.
. A Republic has but one Body, and should therefore be guided but by one Soul
Vnum esse Reip. Corpus atque unius animo regendum. Tac. 3. Annal.
. A King will hardly entertain even a deposed Prince within his Kingdom. This
was the King of Portugal's Excuse, for not admitting King Peter, when deposed
by his Brother Henry. Nothing but Matrimony, which unites Bodies and Souls, and
the singular Prudence of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, could have
prevented the Inconveniences of their Joint-Reign in the Kingdom of Castile.
For Power and Concord are very rarely found together Quanquam arduum sit, eodem
loci potenti^^^ and concordiam esse. Tac. 4. Annal.
. And though there was some Consent and Union in the Joint-Empire of Dioclesian
and Maximinian, yet was not that without its Troubles and Inconveniences; for
which Reason, the Roman Consuls used to Command by Turns.

But if there be occasion for more Princes than One, it is better to have Three;
for the Authority of One, will check the Ambition of the other Two. There can
be no Faction, where there is no Equality; which was the Reason why the
Triumvirates of Caesar, Crassus, and Pompey, and of Anthony, Lepidus and
Augustus, continued for sometime. The Kingdom was well governed, during the
Minority of King Henry III. by his Three Guardians Mar. Hist. Hisp. l. 15. c.
12.
. Upon which Consideration, King Alphonso the Wise proposed, That during the
Nonage of Kings, the Administration of Affairs should be committed to One,
Three, Five, or Seven. Which not being observed in the Minority of Alphonso XI.
the Kingdom of Castile felt great Commotions, from the Government of the two
Infants, John and Peter, which at last obliged the Royal Council to take upon
'em the Administration. Though Empires are always violent, and of short
continuance, which are divided, and depend not upon one; as it happened to
Alexander's, which, vast as it was, ended with his Life; for that after him,
'twas divided among many. That which the Moors had founded in Spain, had lasted
longer, had it not been divided into many Kingdoms. This is represented in this
present Emblem, by a Crowned Tree, which signifies a Kingdom: To intimate, that
if two Hands, though of the same Body, should pull this Tree two different ways,
they would rend, burst, and ruin the Crown. For Humane Ambition sometimes
forgets the Bonds of Nature. When States are divided among Brothers, the Crown
can never remain entire, and in Union; for every one is for himself, and grasps
at the whole Scepter as his Father held it. So it befell King Sancho the Elder.
Divine Providence united all the Kingdoms of Spain to his Empire, that by their
Joint-Force they might expel the Moors, and free themselves from their
Tyrannick Slavery: But he, through Fatherly Affection, rather than prudent
Policy, divided his Kingdoms among his Children, thinking that so they would be
stronger, and more ready to unite against the Common Enemy Mat. Hist. Hisp. l.
9. c. 1.
. But instead of that, each of the Brothers set up for King himself. So that
the Crown being thus rent in pieces, lost its Strength and Splendor. And as
Domestic Feuds and Grudges are more inveterate than other, they soon grew to
Civil Wars, each endeavoring to depose his Brother, to the utmost Detriment of
the Public. This Example might, one would have thought, have been a Warning to
all Princes, for the future; yet we find King Ferdinand the Great, the Emperor
Alphonso, and James I. King of Arragon, guilty of the same fault, dividing the
Command of their Kingdoms among their Children Mar. Hist. Hisp. l. 9. c. 8.
. I know not whether this be the Effect of Self-Conceit, or Humane Nature, ever
greedy of Novelty, and fond of old rejected Opinions, thinking that best, which
was done by their Ancestors; if it is not that we seek for Examples to excuse
our own Resolutions. James II. King of Arragon, was more prudent upon this
score, when he firmly Enacted, That the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valence, and
the Province of Catalonia, should never be separated Mar. Hist. Hisp. l. 15. c.
19.
.

Nor can these Errors be excused, either by the Law of the Twelve Tables, or
the Common Law, which shares the Father's Estate equally among the Children; or
by Natural Reason, which seems to urge, that as the Children received their
being in common from their Father, they should also be Sharers of his Estate.
For a King is a Public Person, and ought to act as King, and not as a Father;
and ought rather to attend the Good of his Subjects, than his Children.
Besides, a Kingdom is a kind of Public Chattel, and so belongs to no one in
particular; it not being in the King's Power to dispose of that, as of his own
private Goods: For the Subjects, in submitting themselves to One, have required
a Right to be preserved, defended and maintained by him; which is inconsistent
with the Division of the Empire: And since this Right is Common and Universal,
it ought surely to be preferred to private Love, and Paternal Affection, or to
Desire of making Peace among his Children, by the Ruin of the Public.
Besides, instead of making them agree, it arms 'em with Power to quarrel with
one another about the Dividends, which cannot be made so equal as to satisfy
all. Brothers would live much more quietly, if their Maintenance should depend
upon him who Commands in Chief; for so each would receive a Revenue sufficient
to support the Grandeur of his Birth. Thus Iehosaphat did 2 Chronicles. 21. 3.
. There being no Occasion for that barbarous Custom of the Turks, or that
Impious Policy of some, who think no Government firm and secure, unless its
Foundation be mixed with the Blood of all such who have but the least
Pretensions to it; as if that, like Cement or Mortar, fastened the Stones of
the Building.

For the said Reason, almost all Nations prefer Succession to Election; well
knowing that an Interregnum is liable to Dissentions and Civil Wars, and that
it is safer to accept a Prince, than to seek one Minori discrimine sumi
principem quam quaeri. Tac. 1. Hist.
.

Wherefore, since Succession is best, it is most agreeable to follow the Course
of Nature, preferring him whom she first sent into the World; so that neither
Minority, nor any other Natural Defect, is a sufficient Objection to this
Right, especially when there are greater Inconveniences attend the admittance
of another, of which the Scriptures afford us very many Examples.

There is the same Reason and Right for the Succession of Women to the Crown,
in default of Heirs Male; for otherwise the Crown would be subject to
Divisions, by Collateral Pretensions. And though the Salique Law, under the
Pretense of the Frailty and Imbecility of that Sex, (if it may not rather be
called the Envy and Ambition of Men) does, contrary to the many glorious
Examples of the Valor and Conduct of the Female Sex, urge many
Inconveniences, which may seem to exclude them from the Administration; yet is
there none so weighty as to balance the Advantage of preventing an Interregnum.
Nay, there are strong Reasons why they ought to be admitted, it preventing
Pretensions and Civil Wars about the Succession: And besides, matching the
Heiress to some Great Prince, there acceeds a considerable Addition to the
Crown; as it happened to the Kingdom of Castile and the House of Austria. If
the abovementioned Inconveniences are ever of weight, it is in small
Principalities; where the Heiress marrying with other Princes, the Family may
become extinct, and one State be confounded with the other.

EMBLEM LXXI.
WHAT does not Labor overcome? It subdues Iron, softens Brass, draws out Gold
into the finest Wire, and cuts the hardest Diamonds. A soft Rope does, by
continual Motion, wear the Marble Edge of the Well. By this Consideration, St.
Isidore, when he applied himself to Study, overcame the Dullness of his Genius.
What Fort was ever so strong, as that Assiduity could not conquer it? The
continued Force of that Engine, which the Ancients called a Ram, would make a
Breach in the thickest and strongest Walls. And we see now adays, that
Castles, though defended by Artillery Walls, Ramparts and Ditches, are at last
forced to yield to the Spade and Mattock. No Difficulty retards or checks a
Constant Spirit. The Temple of Glory is not situated in a delightful Valley,
nor in a delicious Plain, but upon a rugged Mountain's Top, not to be arrived
at, but by rough, uncouth Paths, overrun with Thorns and Brambles. The Temples
of Minerva, Mars, and Hercules, (Deities glorious for their Virtue) were not
built of Corinthian or Carved Work, finely imbellish'd with curious Engravings,
as were those of Flora and Venus; but after the Dorick Fashion, rough and
unpolished: Nor did the Cornices and Chapiters of the Pillars show any thing,
but that they were built by Labor and Industry, not by Luxury and Ease. 'Twas
not the Ship Argos's lying at Anchor in Port, that preferred it to the Skies;
but its daring the Wind and Sea, and resolutely exposing it self to all Dangers
and Difficulties. Never did any Prince Enlarge his Territories by Effeminacy,
Luxury and Ease. Labor, Traffic and Industry are necessary to all, but to
none more than to a Prince; for others are born only for themselves, but a
Prince for All. A Kingdom is not an Office of Repose and Rest. Certain
Courtiers once were discoursing before Alphonso, King of Arragon and Naples,
against the necessity of a Prince taking Pains; Do you think then, says he,
that Nature gave Princes Hands to do nothing. That wise Prince had, doubtless,
considered the admirable Composure of them, their Joins, their Readiness to
open, and their Strength to hold, and also their mutual Aptness to do whatever
the Mind proposes, being, as it were, the Instruments of all Arts: Whence he
concluded, that this exquisite Structure was not accidental, or merely for no
Use, but for Pains and Toil, Labor and Industry. The Prince whose Hands are
careless and unclinched, will soon drop his Scepter, and give his Courtiers
opportunity of catching at it. As it befell King John II. who so wholly gave
himself up to the Diversions of Poetry and Music, that he could not endure the
Weight of Affairs, and either carelessly transacted them himself, or left 'em
totally to the Management of his Ministers; rather choosing this sottish Ease,
than the glorious Labor of Government; not at all regarding the Examples of
his Heroic Predecessors. So we often find, that the Virtue and ardent Courage
of Ancestors is wholly extinguished in their Posterity, by the Luxury and
Voluptuousness of Empire, and so the Race of great Princes becomes degenerate;
as we see in Horses, when they are removed from a dry and lean Pasture, into
one too fat and fertile. This Consideration moved Frederick King of Naples,
upon his Deathbed, to write to his Son the Duke of Calabria, to inure his Body
to Military Exercise, and not suffer himself to be debauched by Pleasures, nor
vanquished by Difficulties and Dangers Mar. Hist. Hisp. l. 28. 11.
. Labor and Employment is, as it were, the Anchor of the Mind: without which,
it would be tossed about with the Waves of Passion, and dashed to pieces upon
the Rocks of Vice. God enjoined Labor to Man, as a Punishment; yet so, as it
might be at the same time the Means of his Quiet and Prosperity Genesis 3. 19.
. Those Foundations and noble Superstructures of the Monarchies of the Medes,
Assyrians, Greeks and Romans, were not founded by Sloth and Laziness, but by
Toil and Labor. It was that which so long supported their Grandeur; it is this
which still preserves Oeconomies in Kingdoms: For since it partly depends upon
the mutual Assistance of Peoples Labors, when they flag, all those
Conveniences at the same time cease; which obliged Men to Society and Order of
Government. Divine Wisdom proposes the Example of the Ant, to instruct Men in
their Duty; for that, with great Care and Prudence, lays up a Store in the
Summer, to supply its Necessity in Winter Prove. 6. 6.
. Let Princes learn from this little, prudent Animal, timely to provide their
Cities, Forts and Garrisons with Necessaries; and to make Preparations in the
Winter, to meet the Enemy in the Spring. Nor is the Commonwealth of Bees less
assiduous than these; you shall never find them idle, but continually employed
both within and without their little Cells; the Diligence of each, causes the
Prosperity of all. And if the Labor of these little Animals can enrich the
whole World with Honey and Wax; What would a Kingdom do, in which all the
People should be equally Industrious? For this Reason, in China, though it be so
Populous, that it reckons Seventy Millions of Inhabitants; they all live in the
greatest Affluence and Plenty, there being none among them but exercises some
Trade. The Scarcity of things in Spain, proceeds from the want of this, not
from the Infertility of the Soil; for in the Countries of Muroia and
Carthagena, Wheat returns a hundred Corns for one, and might thereby sustain a
War for many Ages: But this Misfortune arrives from the neglect of Husbandry,
Trades, Business, and Commerce; the People, even the meanest of them, being so
excessive proud, that they cannot be content with what Lot Nature has given
them, but aspire to something greater, loathing those Employments which are not
agreeable to their affected Grandeur. The Reason of which, seems to be, that
the Bounds between the Nobility and the Commonalty are not so well
distinguished with us, as in Germany.

But as Noble and Well-employ'd Labor is Advantageous, that which is Nice and
Superfluous is Prejudicial. For Men's Minds are not less effeminated by soft and
easy Employments, than by Idleness.

Wherefore the Prince ought to take particular care to employ his Subjects in
such Arts as tend to the Defense and Preservation of the State, not to Luxury
and Debauchery. How many Hands are vainly wearied in adorning one Finger, and
how few in the Necessities of the Body? How many are employed in making
Conveniences for Pleasure and Recreation, and how few in making necessary
Works for the Defense of Cities? How many in Gardening, and forming curious
Figures in Box or Myrtle; and how few in Agriculture? Whence we see Kingdoms
abound so much in superfluous Trifles, and want those things which are most
necessary. Since therefore Labor is so conducive to the Preservation of a
State, the Prince ought to take care that it be continual, and not be hindered
by too great a number of Holy Days, such as the People, through a kind of Pious
Levity, dedicate to Divine Worship: For Experience shows us, that such are more
employed in profane Games and Sports, than Religious Exercise. But if Laborers
would spend those Days, as we read St. Isidore of Madrid did, 'twere to be
hoped that the Time would not be lost, and that Angels would descend and hold
the Plough: But Experience has taught us the contrary. One Holy Day in which
all Arts and Trade ceases, is more considerable than any Tax; and, as St.
Chrysostom says, Saints take no delight in being worshipped, at the Expense of
the Poor Non gaudent Martyrs, quando exillis pecuniis honorantur, in quibus
pauperes plorant. St. Chrysoft sup. Matthew.
. So that Holy Days and Working-Days should be so divided, as that those might
not hinder the other Oportere dividi sacros and negotiosos dies, quibus divi^a
colerentur, and humana non impedirent. Tac. 13. Annal.
. And it was argued in the Council of Mentz, in the time of Pope Leo III.
whether 'twas not better either to reduce them to a less Number, or else to
transferr some of them to the next Sundays.

Though generally the End of all Actions is Rest, yet it is otherwise in those
which belong to Government: For it is not sufficient for Princes and States to
labor, but their Labor must also be continual. One Hour's Negligence in a
Garrison, frustrates the Care and Vigilance of many Months. The Roman Empire,
which had been supported by the Labor and Valor of Six Ages, was ruined by
the Negligence of a few Months. Spain would scarce repair the Loss in Eight
Year, which it sustained in Eight Months. There should be no Interposition of
Idleness between the Acquisition and Preservation of Empires. The Husbandman
has no sooner got his Harvest into the Barn, but he immediately goes to Plough
again; his Labors never end, but continually renew. If he should rely upon his
Grainery, and leave his Lands untilled; he would soon find one empty, and the
other overrun with Weeds and Briars. But there is this difference between the
Husbandman and the Prince; That he has his Set-times of Sowing and Reaping, but
the Prince has not: For in Government, all Months are Septembers to Sow, and
Augusts to Reap in.

Let not a Prince believe that the Pains and Labors of his Ancestors excuse
him, for this Motion must be continual: And as declining things surely fall,
unless supported by some new Force; so do Empires, unless sustained by the
Strength of the Successor. This is the Cause (as we have observed) of the
Ruins of all Kingdoms. When any Monarchy shall be once instituted and founded,
it should never be idle, but should imitate Heaven, whose Orbs continue their
Motion from their first Creation; and if they should once stop, the Generation
and Production of all Things would cease. The Exercise of States should be
always continual and vigorous, and not be corrupted by Idleness or
Intermission; as we see the Sea, if not agitated by the Winds, is kept in
Motion by its Tides. Citizens who carelessly give themselves up to Pleasure and
Luxury, without ever moving their Hands to Work or Labor, are their own
greatest Enemies. Such Idleness plots against the Laws and Government, and is
nourished by Vice, from whence proceeds all the Internal and External
Misfortunes of States. That Repose only is commendable and beneficial which is
the Gift of Peace, and which is employed in Trade, and Employments and
Exercises Military and Civil, by which all enjoy a serene, peaceable and secure
Tranquillity.

EMBLEM LXXII.
THE Steel would lost its Spring, and the String its Force, if a Bow were
always bent. Labor is necessary and beneficial, but cannot continue without
some intermission. The Yoke does not always hang upon the Oxe's Neck. The Force
and Vigor of Things consists in Vicissitude. From Motion comes Rest, and from
thence Motion again Nostram omnem vitam, in remissionem atque studium esse
divis^^* Plat. de lib. Educat.
. Nothing, (says the wise Alphonso) can continue long, which takes no Respite.
Even Land must be Fallowed, that it may afterward brings better Crops. Virtue
is refreshed and strengthened by Rest Otium enim tum ad virtutes generandas,
(...) civilia munera obeunda requiru^^tur. Arist. Pol. l. 7. c. 9.
, like the Stream of a Fountain (the Figure of the present Emblem) when stopped
by the Hand.

A seasonable Rest, Refreshment gives;
And weary Valor, after Ease, revives.
For this Reason, Day and Night have divided the Hours into Labor and Rest.
While half the World wakes, the other sleeps. And the Ancients feigned, that
even Jove himself sometimes eased himself, by laying the Burden of the World
upon the Shoulders of Atlas. The most Robust Constitutions are not able
continually to bear the Fatigues of Government. Continual Toil weakens the
Body, and besots the Mind; so does also too much Ease Nascitur ex assiduitate
laborum animorum hebetatio quaedam, and l^nguor. Senec. de Tranquil. Anim.
. It should be therefore only as a Watering to Plants, which refreshes, not
drowns them: or like Sleep, which, if moderate, corroborates; if excessive,
rather enervates the Body. There are no Diversions better than those which at
the same time recreate and instruct the Mind, as does the Conversation of
ingenious and learned Persons. Such the Emperor Adrian always entertained at
his Table; which, for that reason, Philostratus called, A Rendezvous of the
Learned. The same, Pliny commends in Trajan; and Lampridius in Alexander
Severus Cum inter suos convivaretur, (...) Vlpianum, aut doctos homines
adhibebat, ut habere fabulas literatas, (...) se recreari dicebat and pasci.
Lamp. in Vit. Alex. Sev.
. Alphonso, King of Naples, always retired with them, after Dinner, into
another Apartment, that he might (as he used to say) feed his Mind, as he had
done his Body. Tiberius never traveled from Rome without Nerva and Atticus,
Men of excellent Learning, to direct him Co^ceius Nerva, cui legum peritia:
eques Romanus, praeter Sejanum, and illustribus Curtius Atticus; ^aeteri
liberalibus artibus praediti fer^^ Graeci, quorum sermonibus levaretur. Tac. 4.
Annal.
. Francis, the First King of France, learned so much from his constant and
continual Conversation with such learned Men, that though he had never applied
himself to Literature, he would discourse very pertinently upon any Subject.
But this commendable Custom is out of date; and instead of it, Princes keep
Buffoons, Jesters, and Ridiculous Fellows, for their Entertainment at Table.
The Errors and Shame of Nature are become now their Diversions. They love to
hear themselves praised, though undeservedly: And though Reason and Modesty
would reject those Praises, as coming from some Fool; yet Self-conceit easily
receives them; and the Ears being by degrees used to them, soon give way to
Flatterers and Pick-thanks. Their Jests impose upon the Will, being generally
obscene, sometimes vicious. And if such Buffoonry can divert the Mind, how much
more will the neat and witty Discourses of the Learned, who not being too grave
and rigid (as they are sometimes) can be facetious and witty upon occasion? If
there be any Diversion in looking upon some misshapen, ridiculous Monster; What
Satisfaction will it be, to hear of the prodigious Works of Nature, and to
discourse of her Wonders and Secrets? Athenaeus mentions of Anacharsus, that
some of these Buffoons being once brought to Table, to promote Mirth, he
remained grave and serious, but laughed heartily at the sight of an Ape, saying,
That th^^ Animal was naturally ridiculous, but Man only by Art, and base
Affectation Accitis in convivium peritis ad risum commovendum hominibus, (...)
omnium non risisse, post autem inducta simia in risum solutum, dixisse, Natura
id Animal ridiculum, hominem autem art, and studio eoque pa^^^ honesto. Athen.
l. 4.
This Composure was great, and becoming the Dignity of a Prince. These Fools
are a kind of Public Spies in Courts, Corruptors of Manners, and very often
Plotters against the Prince and State: For which Reason, the Emperors Augustus,
and Alexander Severus, would never entertain them. If they are good for any
thing, it is for the Truth they tell the Great Ones by way of Jest.

Some Princes, through the Glory and Ambition of Affairs, think themselves
sufficiently eased, in resting from Matters of Importance, and employing
themselves in those of less moment; as the Hair of a Mad Dog cures his Bite.
But because then all Minds are not diverted by this means, and that there is no
Affair, though never so little, but requires Attention enough to tire the Mind;
it is necessary to be sometimes wholly unemploy'd, and to quit, for a time, the
Trouble and Toil of Government Satis Onerum Principibus, satis etiam potentiae.
Tac. 3. Annal.
. Business ought to be so mixed with Diversion and Pastime, as that the Mind
may neither be oppressed by the first, nor enervated by the latter: It being
like a Mill, which having nothing to grind, wears out it self. Pope Innocent
VIII. sometimes laid by the Helm of the Church, and diverted himself in his
Garden, in planting Trees. In these Truces of Repose, Age, Time, and the
Quality of the Diversion, ought also to be considered: So that Gaiety may not be
offensive to Reserv'dness, Ingenuity to Gravity, nor Recreation to Majesty. For
some Pastimes not only debase the Mind, but also diminish the Prince's
Authority. So Artaxerxes was infamous for Spinning; Viantes, a King of Lydia,
for fishing for Frogs; Augustus, for playing at Even or Odd with the Boys;
Domitian, for killing Flies with a Bodkin; Solomon, for making Pins; and Selim,
for Embroidering with the Women. While the Prince is young, there are no
Diversions more proper than such as confirm the Mind and Body; such as Fencing,
Horse-races, Tennis, and Hunting; and also those Noble Arts of Music and
Painting, which we elsewhere commended in a Prince's Education; which are very
requisite to refresh the Spirits, when exhausted by Assiduity of Affairs,
provided they be used with Moderation: So as not to waste that Time therein,
which should be employed in Matters of State.

King Ferdinand the Catholic diverted himself so profitably, that even amidst
his Recreations he forgot not his Affairs; but while a Hawking, he gave ear to
the Journals and Dispatches which his Secretary read to him, and at the same
time observed the Game. Emanuel, King of Portugal, never denied Audience amidst
his Diversions. A Prince should divert himself upon Affairs, as the Dolphin
does upon the Waves, though never so deep, not seeking the quiet Retreat of
some River. His Repose should not be Idleness, but Refreshment.

'Twill be convenient sometimes to entertain the People with Public
Diversions, that they may breath a little, and return more vigorously to their
Work, upon which their Thoughts are employed: For if they are always sad and
melancholy, they turn them against the Prince and Magistracy; whereas if they
are allowed some Refreshment and Recreation, they submit their Necks to any
Burden; and losing their Heat and Restiness, live in Obedience. For this
reason, Croesus told Cyrus, That he must learn his Lydians to Sing, Dance, and
Revel, if he would keep them in Obedience Impera, ut liberos cit^aram pulsare,
psallere, cauponari doceant, and (...) comperies, O Rex, viros in mulieres
degenerasse, nihilque metuendum, (...) rebels ^ te unquam desciscant. Herod.
lib. 40
. These Diversions keep the People as firm in their Obedience, as did that
Method of Pharaoh, in employing the People of Israel in making Bricks. For the
same reason, Agricola granted the Britains many of these Diversions; and they
looked upon that as a Favor, which was part of their Slavery Idque apud (...)
ritos humanitas vocabatur, cum pars servitutis esset. Tac. in Vit. Agr.
. This the Ambassadors of the Tencteri knew, when being sent to Cologn, they
proposed the ^estitution of their Ancient Native Customs, and the Abolition of
those Pleasures which the Romans had introduced, by which they subdued more
than by Force of Arms Instituta cultumque patrium resumite, abruptis
voluptatibus qui^^ Romani plus adversus subjectos, quam armis valent. Tac. 4.
Hist.
.

States being more observant of this Policy, than Princes, permit every one to
live according to his Pleasure, conniving at Vices, that the People may less
apprehend the Tyranny of the Magistracy, and be more in love with that way of
Government, taking this License for Liberty; they being ever more prone to a
Dissolute, than a Regular way of living Item vivere ut quisque velit permissio,
quoniam sic magna erit tali Reip. faventium multitudo, ^^am vulgo dissoluta
gratior est quam temperata vita. Arist. 6. Pol. 4.
. But this Policy is none of the safest: For when People have once laid aside
Respect for Virtue and the Laws, they begin to despise the Authority of the
Magistracy; nay, almost all Mischiefs in States proceed from Libertinism; it
being sufficient to keep the People in Peace and Tranquillity, and to allow them
some honest and agreeable Recreations. To live conformable to Government, is
not Slavery, but Liberty. But since in all things the Public Good ought to be
the only aim, it is conducive to convert all these Diversions into such Pastimes
as exercise the Strength, prohibiting all such as depend upon Luck, as
pernicious both to the Government and Subject: To these, because they give
themselves so much to them, that they neglect their Business; to that, because
by such Games the People squander away their Livelihood, and so, through Want,
are necessitated to Plunder and Rebel.

EMBLEM LXXIII.
THE Diseases of States are hidden: Nor can any one judge of them by their
present Disposition; for when they seem in full Health and Vigor, they are
taken ill of a sudden, the Distemper breaking out when least thought of; like
the Vapors of the Earth, which are not visible till gathered into Clouds.
Wherefore a Prince ought carefully to remedy the first Symptoms; nor are they
to be slighted, as seeming frivolous and distant: as neither the first Rumors
of Ills, though to appearance never so unreasonable. Who can penetrate the
unsettled Designs of the frantic Mobb? Upon the least Occasion, the least
Shadow of Slavery, or Maladministration, it rises, and takes Arms against the
Prince. Seditions arise from small Causes, and afterward proceed to greater Ex
parvis orta seditione de rebus magnis dissidetur. Arist. l. 5. Pol. cap. 4
. If they are neglected at first, they will be at last incurable; they spring
like Rivers from small Fountains, and afterward flow into large Streams. Their
Beginnings always create too much Fear, or too much Confidence Primis eventibus
metum ac fiduciam gigni. Tac. l. 12. Annal.
. These Considerations kept Tiberius in suspense, when he had notice that a
certain Slave pretended to be Agrippa, and began to raise Commotions in the
Empire: For he was in doubt whether he should punish him out of hand, or let
Time discover the Cheat; sometimes considering that nothing should be slighted,
then again, that he ought not to be frighted at every thing, being dubious
between Shame and Fear, but at last he resolved upon a Remedy Vi ne militum
servum suum coerceret, an inanem credulitatem tempore ipso vanescere sinere^,
modo nihil spernendum, modo omnia metuend^, ambiguus pudoris a^ metus
reputabat. Tac. 2. Annal.
. Certain it is, that sometimes the Torrent of the Mutinous Mobb is so rapid,
that unless Care be taken, it leaves its own Channel dry, or falls into Civil
Wars, the Consequences of which are always terrible, but are, if taken in time,
moderated by Accidents and Chance, and wholly quashed by Care and Prudence
Initia bellorum civilium fortunae permittenda, victoriam consiliis and ratione
perfici. Tac. ^ Hist.
. Experience shows many ways to appease the Commotions and Seditions of
Kingdoms; sometimes Chance offers them, and sometimes the Inclination of the
Seditious. As it happened to Drusus, who seeing the Legions repent of their
having Mutiny'd, because of an Eclipse of the Moon, which happened at that
time, and which they took for an ill Omen, made use of that Inclination to
appease 'em Vtendum inclinatione e^ Caesar, and quae casus obtulerat, in
sapientiam vertenda ratus. Tac. 1. Annal.
. The same also Herman Cortez did, upon another Occasion. Nor are these Means
to be slighted as frivolous; for the Mobb is often quieted with the same Ease
it is raised: Neither of which Motions are guided by Reason. A blind Hurry puts
them in motion, and an empty Shadow stops 'em. All the Art lies in knowing how
to humor their Rage; while that works, they are uncontrollable; they always
either fear, or are feared Nihil in vulgo modicum: terrere ni paveant, ubi
pertimuerint impune contemni. Tac. 1. Annal.
. If any one should endeavor, by a set, premeditated Speech, to appease and
quiet them, he would lose his Time and Pains. A sharp Sentence, or severe
Check, has more Force than all the Rhetoric in the World. Julius Caesar with
one Word quashed a Mutiny among the Soldiers; Lucan.
-- Begone, ye Roman Drones,
And leave our Ensigns to be born by Men.


But the most effectual Means to pacify a Sedition, is Division; by drawing
the Heads thereof into diverse Factions and Parties. This Way we use with Bees,
whenever that Winged People begin to Mutiny, (for even that Republic has its
Intestine Broils) and leaving their waxen Houses, begin to gather in the Air,
by throwing a little Dust among them, they are soon separated: Virg. in Georg.
Throw but a little Sand, they settle straight. Whence the Figure and Motto of
this present Emblem is taken. But though this Division be always good, it is
more Prudence thereby to prevent Ills e're they happen, than to remedy them
afterward. King Ferdinand IV. understanding the Commotions of some of the
Nobility of Galicia, sent for them; and giving them Commissions, sent them to
the Wars. The Romans used to send all turbulent and seditious Men to their
Colonies or Armies. Publius Aemilius transported the chief Authors of Seditions
to Italy; as also Charles V. did the Nobles of Saxony. Rutilius and Germanicus,
instead of Punishing some Mutineers, made 'em Freemen. Drusus appeased the
Mutinous Legions, by separating them from one another Tyronem a ve^erano,
Legionem a Legione dissociant. Ta^. 1. Annal.
. Loyalty, and Military Virtue, are maintained by Division, because it hinders
Forces and Vices from joining. For this Reason, the Armies were separated, in
the time of Galba Longis spatiis discreti exercitus, quod saluberrimum est ad
^ontinendam ^ilitarem fidem, ne vitiis nec viribus mis^ebantur. Tac. 1. Hist.
It Is for this Reason, that many think it requisite to prohibit all Cabals and
Meetings of the People: For the same Cause, Grand Cairo was divided into
several Districts or Parishes, by very high Walls, that the People might not so
easily associate. Nor is it any thing else that has so long preserved Venice in
quiet, than that all its Streets are divided by the Sea. Separation makes
People dubious and unresolved, not knowing which Part is safest; but without
that, they would all unanimously side with the Strongest Quod in seditionibus
accidit, unde plures ^rant, omnes fuere. Tac. 1. Hist.
. This made Pisander sow Discord among the Athenians, that he might divide and
separate them.

In Military Seditions, 'twill be sometimes conducive to set them together by
the Ears Dux ad solvendam militum conspirationem alterum in alterum concitat.
S. Chrysostom.
: for one Mutiny is generally remedied by another. The Roman Senate was
advised, upon a certain Popular Insurrection, to appease the Mobb by the Mobb
Remedium tumultus fuit alius tumultus. Tac. 2. Hist.
, weakening their Force by Division. And doubtless this is the meaning of that
Law of Solon, which Condemned a Citizen, who, in a Sedition, did not adhere to
some one Party. But this is rather to inflame, than quench and divide it;
since, at this rate, there would remain none who might be Mediators to compose
it.

There is also another effectual Remedy, which is the Presence of the Prince,
bravely and resolutely confronting the Fury of the People: For as the Sea,
which foams and dashes against Rocks and Hills, runs smooth upon the even Sand;
so is the Mobb hushed and quieted by the serene Presence of its Prince.
Augustus, with his Looks, frighted the Actian Legions into Obedience Divus
Augustus vultu and aspectu Actiacas Legione^ exterruit. Tac. 1. Annal.
. In the Disorders of the German Legions, when the Soldiers looked upon the
Multitude, they shouted; but when again they cast their Eyes upon Caesar, they
seemed to tremble Illi quoties oculos ad multitudinem retulerant vocibus
trucul^^^ ^^repere, rursum viso caesare trepidare. Tac. 1. Annal.
. Sedition is soon quashed by Authority and Presence. As the Blood hasts to the
Assistance of the Part wounded, so ought the Prince to assist with his Presence
at the Disorders of his State. Majesty easily reduces Subjects to their
Obedience; for in that Nature has placed a certain Occult Force, which often
produces wonderful Effects. Certain Conspirators had entered the very Palace of
Peter IV. King of Arragon, with a Design upon his Life; and he readily going to
meet them, quite dashed their Resolutions. The Rebellion in the Belgic
Provinces had never gone so far, had Philip II. been himself upon the Spot. But
this Remedy ought well to be weighed and considered of, whether or no absolute
Necessity requires it: for it is the last; and if that fails, there is no other.
For this Reason, Tiberius sent Drusus and Germanicus to compose the Mutinous
Legions in Hungary Res^st^^^^esque Germanico and Druso, posse a se mitigari,
vel infringi: quod aliud s^^sidium si Imperatorem sprevissent? Tac. 1. Annal.
. The Prince's Presence is also dangerous, if he be hated, or a Tyrant; for
then the Subjects are willing and eager to shake off the Yoke of Obedience.

But if any Kingdom be divided into Factions, by the private Grudges of
Families one to another, it is Prudence to prohibit their Names from being
mentioned. Thus did King Francis of Navarr, forbidding any one, upon severe
Penalties, to be called Agramont or Biamont, which were two Families in that
Kingdom at continual Enmity.

But if the Peoples Dissatisfaction and Sedition proceed from the
Maladministration of some Minister, there is no Dust more effectual to
appease them, than the Punishment of that Person. If they impute to the
Minister that which is really the Prince's fault, and so rise against him,
their Error must have its free course; since neither Force nor Reason can stop
it, without greater Detriment to the Public. Innocence, it is true, will
thereby suffer, but not through the Prince's fault. In all such great Accidents
there is no Remedy without Injustice, which is compensated by the Public Good
Habet aliquid ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum, quod contra (...) utilitate
publica rependitur. Tac. 14. Annal.
. Sedition is a Poison which strikes at the Heart; and it is therefore necessary
sometimes to lop off a Limb, to save the Body; and to give way to the Torrent
of Fury, though disagreeable to Reason and Justice. Thus did Queen Isabella, in
a Rising of the People of Sevill: For when they insisted upon her turning
Andrew Cabrera, Governor of the Palace, out of his Office, and were running on
to further Demands, she cut 'em off short; Gentlemen, says she, what you
demand, I had before resolved on; Go, remove not only the Governor, but also
all my other Domestics. By which Answer, she seemed to command that which she
was forced to, and the Mutineers took it as her Favor and Kindness; and having
satisfied their Rage, by tumbling down those headlong, whom they found upon the
Towers, they were quiet; and afterward she, upon Examining the Accusations
which they laid to the Governor's Charge, finding them unjust and groundless,
restored him to his Office. When the Mutineers think that the Punishment of the
Heads of the Sedition will be sufficient, they spare none, hoping by that means
to expiate their Crime; as the German Legions did Gaudebat cae^^^^s miles,
tanquam semet absolvere^. Tac. 1. Annal.
; though Patience and Connivance did increase their Insolence Nihil ^^^ci
Patientia, nisi ut graviora, tanquam ex facil tolerantibus imperen^^^. Tac. in
Vit. Agr.
; and the more you grant them, the more they crave, as did the Soldiers which
Flaccus sent to Rome Et Flaccus multa concedendo, nihil aliud (...), qu^m ut
acrius exposc^rent, quae sci^bant negaturum. Tac. 4. Annal.
: Yet this chiefly happens, when the Person so Granting is but of small
Authority among them, as was Flaccus, whom the whole Army despised Superior
exercitus Legatum Hordenium Flaccum spernebat. Tac. 1. Hist.
. But in the forementioned Case of Germanicus, the Demands of the Mutineers
ought to be complied with, though violent and unreasonable, that their Fury
might have been qualified, or that he might have had some honorable Pretense,
to wave their Punishment. He knew the Injustice and Inconvenience of a general
Punishment, and that it would of necessity involve the Innocent: But though it
could not wholly be avoided, it seemed not to be done by his Command, but was
rather to be imputed to Chance, and the Fury of the Seditious Nec Caesar
ar^ebat, quando nihil ipsius jussu, penes ^osd^^ saevitia facti and invidia
^rat. Tac 1. Annal.
.

The fault of the Minister ought to be excused, as a piece of Policy, when by
Popular Constraint he becomes Head of the Sedition; that he may afterward,
when their Fury begins to abate, with more ease reduce them to Obedience. So
Spurinna gave way to the Soldiers Rage, and pretended to Countenance them, that
he might preserve his Authority among them, when they began to repent Fit
temerit^^^^ alienae comes Spurinna, primo coactus, mox velle simulans, quo plus
aucto^itat^^ inesse^ consiliis, si seditio mitescere^. Tac. 2. Hist.
.

Sometimes the People, upon pretense of Preservation of their Liberties and
Privileges, encroach upon the Royal Prerogative: A piece of Arrogance that
ought by no means to be connived at, lest they should thence become more saucy.
In this Case, the Punishment of the Delinquents should be speedy, and the Heads
of the Promoters stuck up, as a Terror to the rest, when they least think
on it. For there is nothing quells their Insolence more, than the Punishment of
their Leaders Neque (...) glis^entis discordiae remedium, quam si unus alt^^ve
maxim prompti subverterent^r. Tac. 4. Annal.
; it being an approved Truth, That the Body of the Mobb dare attempt nothing
without them Nihil ausuram plebem principibus amot^^. Tac. 1. Annal.
.

Ramirus, King of Arragon, being embroiled in the Insurrections of his People,
asked Advice of the Abbot of Tomer: Who gave him no Answer, but with his
Switch, imitating Periander Nam Periander caduceatori, per quem Thrasybulus
consilium ejus exquirebat, nihil respondisse fertur, sed s^icis eminentibus
sublatis segetem ad^quasse. Arist. Pol. 3. c. 9.
, lopt off the Heads of the Tallest Flowers in his Garden, (where he was then
walking) and by that showed him what he was to do. Upon which he Beheading the
chief Authors of the Rebellion, and restored Peace to his Kingdom. The same was
the Advice of Don Lopez Barrientos, to King Henry IV. Yet will it be convenient
to use this Method with such Moderation, as that the Execution may fall but on
few: But those who cannot be punished, must be connived it, or so dealt with,
as that their Affections may be gained; as we read Otho did, when his Army
Mutiny'd E^ oration ad perstringendos mulcendosque militum animos, severitatis
modus (neque enim in plures quam in duos animadverti jusserat) grate accepta,
compositique ad praesens, qui coerceri non poterant. Tac. 1. Hist.
. Severity with Moderation, appeases all Commotions: For when the Bad begin to
fear, the Good will obey; as Vocula found, who, in a general Mutiny of the
Legions, punished but one Man Et dum mali pavent, optimu^ ^^isque jussis
paruere. Tac. 4. Hist.
.

The Method also of the Punishment ought to be so mild, as not to give the
People occasion to resent it as a National Grievance, for that would make them
more Resolute. Slavery, Wounds, and all the Miseries of War, were not so
grievous to the Germans, as that Trophy which Germanicus erected out of the
Spoils of the Rebellious Provinces Haud peri^de Germanos vul^era, luctus,
excidia, quam ea species dolor and ira adfecit. Tacit. 2. Annal.
. Ferdinand Duke d'Alba did not forget this Precept, when he erected a Statue
of the Rebels Heads: Nor had he omitted it, though he had read or heard, that
Vitellius would not put to Death Julius Civilis, a Man of great Authority among
the Dutch, lest he should thereby alienate the Minds of that Warlike People
Julius igitur Civilis periculo exemptus praepotens inter Bata^^s, ne supplicio
ejus ferox gens alienaretur. Tac. 1. Hist.
; for he thought a severe Animadversion more proper: which nevertheless created
no Disturbance; though there were not wanting those who urged it as an
Aggravation, to make that People revolt.

There is another sort of Disobedience, which proceeds from a too zealous and
inconsiderate Fidelity; in which case the Subjects are to be brought to their
Duty, by benign and mild Means. Such as John II. King of Arragon, used, in an
Insurrection at Barcelona, upon the Death of his Son, Prince Charles: For he
wrote to that City, That unless compelled by Necessity, he would never use
violent Methods; but that if they would return to their Obedience, he would use
them as his own Children. This Mildness, and his Promise of a General Pardon,
reduced them all to their Devoir. A Prince ought always to discover an
Inclination to Clemency; for without Hopes of that, Criminals grow desperate.
For which Reason, Valentinus, after he had moved the People of Treves to a
Rebellion, ordered the Roman Ambassadors to be killed, that he might, by the
Peoples Despair, strengthen his Crime Quo minor spes veniae, cresceret vinculum
sceleris, Tac. 4. Hist.
. Sedition turns to Obstinacy, where there is no Hopes of Pardon; and the
Seditious had rather die Rebels, than Malefactors. Upon this account, those who
followed the Faction of Vitellius, were Pardoned Tac. 4. Hist.
. This Generosity is particularly necessary in Insurrections of the Mobb. This
King Ferdinand the Holy used in the Commotions of Castile; and John I. in the
Convention of the States of Guadalajara, pardoning all those who sided with the
Portuguese. But if a Prince has lost his Reputation, and is in contempt with
his Subjects; then, I confess, Clemency will be of small use: nay, those very
Remedies which should cure these Wounds, do more exulcerate, and render them
incurable. For his Authority once lost, he can neither maintain the Severity of
Punishment, nor terrify the Offenders by Example: so that he must give way to
his Misfortunes, and as prudently as he can, circumvent them by Policy and
Stratagem. Thus Vocula did, when he saw he was unable to punish the Mutinous
Legions Sed vires ad coercendum deerant, in frequentibus infidisque Legionibus,
etc. Tac. 4. Hist.
. For the same Reasons, King John II. released those Noblemen whom he had in
Prison.

Nor are those Favors and Benefits more effectual in appeasing Seditions,
which proceed from a Prince who has lost his Reputation: For the Receiver
either imputes them to Cowardice, or persists in Rebellion to preserve them
Nihil spei, nisi per discordias habeant. Tac. 11. Annal.
; and sometimes sets up another King, by whose Protection he may enjoy them: As
did those who Conspired against King Henry IV. for they would never be obliged
by his Favors, though never so great and numerous. When a Prince resolves to
quench the Fire of Sedition, 'twill be conducive, that those Resolutions should
be thought to proceed from his own Virtue, not from the Persuasions of others;
for the People are generally more Incensed, when they find the Prince does
nothing but by the Instigation of his Ministers. But when a General Pardon is
once granted, the Prince ought punctually to observe it, wholly forgetting all
former Offenses and Injuries; for otherwise he would give occasion for fresh
Commotions: As Ferdinand King of Naples did, when he offered to punish some
Noblemen whom he had already pardoned, and who had put themselves under the
Protection of King Ferdinand the Catholic. But if they are afterward found
Delinquent, they should be punished with the utmost Rigor of the Law, to curb
them, and prevent others from abusing the Prince's Authority.

In these, and all other Remedies, there is nothing more useful than Expedition
Nihil in discordiis civilibus festinatione tuti^s, ^^i facto magis, quam
con^ulto opus est. Tac. 1. Hist.
: For the People grow Arrogant and Saucy, when their Insolence meets wi^h no
Check nor Opposition. Time confirms them in their Revolt, and makes those who
were Dubious declare for them, and so endangers the most Loyal. Therefore
Artabanus endeavored, with utmost Speed and Diligence, to compose the
Commotions of his Kingdom Pergit properus and pra^veniens inimico^um actus,
amicorum ^^^^ite^tiam. Tac. 6. Annal.
. As Seditions are suddenly raised, they ought suddenly to be remedied. There
is more need of Action than of Consultation, before the Venom takes Root and
spreads. When the People are once used to Murder, Rapine, and all other Ills
that Sedition brings with it, it is very difficult to recall and pacify them.
This King Henry well knew, when, upon the Death of his Brother, King Peter, he
immediately seized upon the chief Cities and Garrisons of the Kingdom; and by
this Diligence, soon established its Tranquillity.

Seditions therefore, and Civil Wars, being Distempers which consume the Life
of the State Paul. ad Gal. 5. 15.
, and enervate the Prince, by the Losses which he receives, and the Gratuities
which he is obliged to give, it is the best way to compose them upon any Terms.
This moved King Ferdinand the Catholic to agree with Alphonso King of
Portugal, in his Pretensions to the Crown of Castile. For in such Disorders,
the Weakest, and most Oppressed, are strongest Quippe i^ turbis and discordiis
pessimo cuique plurima vis. Tac. 4. Hist.
. Princes are at the Discretion of those who have their Arms in their Hands,
and the Soldiers have more Authority than their Commanders Civilibus bellis
plus militibus quam ducibus licere. Tac. 2. Hist.
.

EMBLEM LXXIV.
ANIMALS naturally endeavor nothing but the Preservation of their Individuals;
and if at any time they injure one another, it is generally from that Reason,
and a certain Natural Fierceness, which is not subject to the Command of
Reason. On the contrary, Man, animated with that Celestial Flame, which gives
him the Command of all Things, easily persuades himself, that he is not born
only to live, but also to enjoy all those Things, even beyond the Bounds which
Reason has prescribed him; and his Imagination being cheated by the false
Appearance of Good, seeks this Enjoyment in several Objects, and therein places
his Felicity and Satisfaction. Some think it consists in Riches, others in
Dainties and Luxury, others in Dominion, and every one in what the Errors of
his Appetite or Fancy suggest; for the Enjoyment of which, they apply those
Means which their rambling and unquiet Minds prompt 'em to, though never so
unjust Vn^ ac ca vetus causa bellandi, profunda libido imperii, and d^^^tiarum.
Sal. in Cons. Catil.
. Whence proceed Murders, Rapine, and Tyranny, which make Man the most unjust
of all Animals: And since one cannot be secure from another, several kind of
Arms were invented, to repel Villainy, and preserve Innocence and Liberty, and
so War was introduced into the World Iam. 4. 1.
. This was the Original of this Monster, unless it came from Hell, after the
Fall of the Rebellious Angels. War is so hateful to God, that he would not
permit David, as Just as he was, to build the Temple, because he had shed much
Blood 1 Chronicles. 22. 8.
. All good Princes dread it, as knowing the various Events and Success thereof
2 Samuel 11. 25.
. War disturbs the Order and Harmony of States; changes Religion, violates
Justice, silences the Laws, destroys Friendship and Relation, makes Arts
forgot, Agriculture cease, ruins Trade, depopulates Cities, and alters
Governments. King Alphonso calls Wars, the Alienation from Peace, the Disturber
of Quiet, and the Destruction of Order. A Civil War is like a Burning Fever,
which soon scorches up the State: A Foreign War cuts its Veins, and dreins it
of its Riches, Strength and Vigor. War is a Vice contrary to Reason, Nature,
and the End of Man; for God created him after his own Image, and gave him the
Command of all Things here below, not to destroy them by War, but to preserve
'em by Peace: He did not create him for War, but Peace; not for Rage, but
Quiet; not to Ruin, but to Preserve: For which Reason he sent him into the
World Naked, without Arms to offend others, or a thick Hide to defend himself;
so indigent of the Assistance and Government of others, that even in his most
flourishing Estate he cannot subsist without foreign Aid. This Necessity obliged
him to Society, and Civil Correspondence; from which, by the Joint-Labour of
all, he might be supplied with necessary Conveniences for Life, and that this
Politic Felicity might unite all in the firmest Bonds of mutual Friendship;
and that one Country, haughty with its own Riches, might not disdain
Communication with the rest, he has shared his Blessings among all; Wheat he
has given to Sicily, Wine to Crete, Purple to Tire, Silk to Calabria,
Aromaticks to Arabia, Gold and Silver to Spain and the West Indies; Diamonds,
Pearls and Spices, to the East Indies. The Desire and Want of the Riches and
Rarities creating Commerce, by which the whole World became as one common
House, and that they might understand one another in this Correspondence, and
mutually express their Affections of Love and Benevolence, he endued them with
a Voice Articulate, smooth and pleasant, to explain their Conceptions;
Laughter, to show their Satisfaction; Tears, to show their Sorrow; Hands, to
exert their Faith and Liberality; Knees, their Submission and Obedience: Which
are all Tokens of a Civil, Benign, and Pacifick Animal. But those Animals which
Nature designed for War, she created with Arms Offensive and Defensive, for
that purpose; to the Lion she has given Claws, to the Eagle Talons, to the
Elephant a Trunk, to the Bull Horns, to the Bear Fangs, to the Porcupine sharp
Quills; she has made Adders and Vipers formidable by their Poison, for their
Defense consists in our Danger, and their Security in our Fear. For which
Reason, she has clothed almost all Beasts with a thick Skin, for their
Defense; the Crocadile with a Breast Plate, Serpents with a Coat of Mail,
Scorpions with Scales: She has given all an Aspect terrible, and a Voice
horrible and dreadful. Let therefore Savage War be for them, not for Man, in
whom Reason is predominate over Rage. Nature has hid Iron, Steel, Gold and
Silver, in the Bowels of the Earth, lest Men should make ill Use of them; but
Revenge or Injustice has found them even there, some for the Instruments, and
some for the Price of Murder Video serrum ex iisdem tenebris esse prolatum,
quibus A^rum and Argentum, ne aut instrumentum in caedes mutuas deesset, aut
Pretium. Senec.
. Great Abuse of Mankind, to employ Gold and Silver to the Destruction of Life,
which was given for its Preservation!

But because many Men (as we have said) more Savage than the very Beasts
themselves, are more swayed by Lust and Ambition, than Reason, and so unjustly
covet to oppress and govern others, War became necessary for Natural Defense;
for there being two Methods of deciding Matters, one by Justice, the other by
Force, which is common to all Animals, when the one cannot be used, the other
must Nam cum duo sint genera disceptandi, unum per disceptationem, alter^^ per
vim, cumque illud proprium sit hominis, hoc belluarum, confugiendum e^^ ad
posterius, si ^ti non licet superiori. Cicero.
, provided the Cause and Intention be just, and the Authority of the Prince be
lawful; in which also nothing should be resolved on, without due Deliberation.
So the Athenians used to consult their Orators and Philosophers, about the
Legality of their Wars; for it is in our Power to begin, but not to end them; he
who undertakes them in haste, will repent at leisure. War (says King Alphonso)
ought to be well weighed e're it is begun, that it may be agreeable to Reason
and Justice; for from hence proceed three great Advantages: The first, is, That
God favors those who do so: The second, is, That they themselves are more
encouraged, upon Confidence of their Justice: The third, is, That those who
know it, if they are Friends, join more cheerfully; if Enemies, they have the
less hopes of Success L. 2. tt. 23. p. 2.
. War ought not to be undertaken for slight and frivolous Matters, such as were
those which moved Xerxes to bring War upon the Greeks, and the Lumbards to make
an Irruption into Italy. That Prince is a Tyrant, who wages War for another
State; but he Just and Commendable, who does it for the Defense of his own, or
the Recovery of unjust Usurpations; in such case especially where Justice
cannot be obtained otherwise, or where it is more securely decided by the
Sword, than the Book so subject to Deceit and Cavil Castrensis jurisdictio
secura, and obtusior, and plura manu agens, calliditatem fori non exerceat.
Tac. in Vit. Agric.
. The Success of War is a Just Judge, giving the Right of Victory to him to
whom it belongs. King Philip II. was so desirous to clear his Right to the
Crown of Portugal, upon the Death of King Sebastian, that after having had the
Opinions of many Divines and Lawyers, and his Army being then upon the
Frontiers, he stopped, to conferr with them further about it. A Prince who
desires gradually to raise his Fortune, may do it by War, provided he has just
Occasion. But he who is already in quiet Possession of a competent Greatness,
ought diligently to consider how he engages himself in War; and to endeavor,
as much as possible, to avoid it by honorable Means, without loss of Authority
and Reputation; for if he loses them, the Refusal will rather kindle it. The
Emperor Rodolphus I. used to say, That 'twas more commendable to Govern a State
well, than to Enlarge it. It Is not less Glorious for a Prince to preserve Peace
with his Sword, than to Conquer in War. Happy is that Kingdom, in which the
Reputation of Arms maintains Plenty, and where Lances support the Vines and
Olive Trees; where Ceres is protected by Bellona's Headpiece. The greater the
Courage is, the more averse it is to War, as knowing to what it must be obliged.
Many times, Cowards advise and promote it, and the Brave act it Sumi Bellum
etiam ab ignavis, tenu^ssimi cujusque Periculum geri. Tac. 4. Annal.
. If War is commenced for the sake of Peace, what need of that, when we may
enjoy this? The Choice of it ought not to proceed from the Will, but from Force
or Necessity Pa^em habere debet Voluntas, Bell^m Necessi^^s. De August. Epist.
207. Tom. 2.
. The Ancients feigned, that Pallas was born out of the Head of Jupiter; to
intimate, that War ought to proceed from Prudence, not from the Perverseness of
the Mind. Sebastian, King of Portugal, who carried it into Africa, more by the
impulse of his Courage than Counsel, with his Blood imprinted on those Sands
the Truth of this Precept. The Bees don't choose an armed King, that he may not
be given to War, and neglect the Government of his own State, for foreign
Conquests. If Francis King of France, and Gustavus King of Sweden, had duly
considered this, the first had not been taken at Pavia, nor the last killed at
Lutzen. Ambition of Rule, is that which begins the Ruin of many States. This
Hanibal knew at last, when he told Scipio, That ' twould have been better, had
the Gods given Men more modest Thoughts, that the Romans might be content with
Italy, and the Carthaginians with Africa.

Great Princes ought to carry on War with their utmost Power and Vigor, that
they may the sooner end it, as the Romans did; for the Protraction of it is
both chargeable and dangerous. The Enemy is also thereby disciplined, and
forewarned, and encouraged. Power, without Vigor, loses its Esteem. For these
Reasons, two Wars ought not to be commenced at the same time; for the Forces
being divided, they cannot be ended so soon, nor is any Power sufficient to
maintain 'em long, nor Subjects capable to Command them. The Romans ever
endeavored, as do the Turks at this day, not to be engaged in two Wars at a
time. Upon this were grounded the Threats of Corbulo to the Parthians; telling
them, That all the Empire enjoyed a firm Peace, and that they had only that War
Tac. 15. Annal.
.

EMBLEM LXXV.
MEDEA (to facilitate the Conquest of the Golden Fleece) sowed Serpents Teeth
in Col^hos, whence immediately sprang Troops of armed Men, who falling together
by the ears, destroyed one another. So some Princes and States, the pernicious
Medea's of the World, sow Discord among Princes, and reap Wars, and Confusion,
the Fruit thereof, in their own States For they have sown the Wind, and reaped
the Whirlwind. H^sea 8. 7.
. They think to enjoy themselves that Repose which they molest in others, and
the Event proves contrary. Cosmographers say, about the Aequilibrium of the
World, that it is so Equidistant from the Center, that the least Weight moves
the Earth. It Is the same in War; there is none so distant, but it changes the
Center of Rest of other Kingdoms. War is a raging Fire, which kindled in one
Place, runs on to others, and very often to its own Home, according as the Wind
drives it. The prudent Farmer dreads the Storm he sees gathering upon the
Mountain's top, though at never so great a distance: Much greater need has he
to fear, who raises it, by supplying it with Vapors. Those who foment the
Dutch Power and Grandeur, may in time repent it, when subject to the Yoke of
their Slavery; as it befell those who favored the Rise of the Roman Grandeur.
The Venetians, jealous of the Portuguese, for that by their Voyages they
deprived 'em of the Traffic of the Persian Sea, and the East Indies, sent an
Ambassador against them to Cairo, and Engineers and Carpenters to arm the King
of Cal^cut against them, persuading the Dutch to oppose their Passage by the
Cape of Good Hope. But they having complied with their Desires, and established
their own Factories and Commerce, quite disappointed the Republic, who had
better have left the Portuguese Trade free, since so they might have made use
of their Ships to Import the Eastern Commodities; which when they had brought
to their Ports, the Inhabitants might with more Industry and Profit disperse
over Europe. Thus we see the Means which humane Prudence makes use of for its
own Safety, turn to the Ruin of the Author. The Dukes of Savoy and Parma
thought to maintain the War in the State of Milan; and the one utterly ruined
his own, and the other made his the Seat of War. Ill Advice imposed upon the
Goodness of the French King, made him fearful of himself, diffident of his
Mother and Brother, and of the whole Kingdom, being persuaded, that without War
he could not subsist, and that his Preservation depended upon the Ruin of the
House of Austria; and for that end, he raised (with the Blood of the Nobility
of that Kingdom, engaged in Civil Broils) Clouds which created a general
Tempest against all Christendom; the Rhine, Moselle, Danube, and Elbe, being
summoned to his Assistance. He foments the Clouds in England, Holland and
Denmark. He breaks the Ice of Sweden, that he might pass the Baltic Sea by
those Northern Streights, to the Ruin of Empire Isai. 23. 11.
. He thaws the Snows of the Switzers and Grisons, and scatters them through
Germany and Italy. He turns the River Po upon the State of Milan, summoning the
Tyber and Adriatic to his Assistance Ezekiel. 32. 2.
. He raises the Fogs of Africa, Persia, Turkey, Tartary and Moscovia, that they
might in Clouds of Arrows and Lightning invade Europe. He forces through the
secret Crannies of the Earth, Earthquakes which shook Brazil and the
East Indies. He sends through all Parts furious Hurricanes, which made one
continual Tempest; and he disturbed the Heavens with such Diligence and Art,
that it darted Fire, hailed Shot, and rained Blood upon the Earth Ier. 4. 13.
. He reaches from Pole to Pole with the Shot of his Artillery Ier. 8. 16.
, and with his Dragoons, more swift (by the Negligence or Malice of some) than
the Imperial Eagles 4. 13.
. Their Neighings are heard in all Parts, and Mars triumphs in Blood and Dust
Ier. 8. 16.
. The Author of so many Wars, verifying what Isaiah said of Lucifer, That he
disturbs the Earth, ruins Kingdoms, dispeoples the World, and destroys its
Cities Isai. 14. 16.
. For when God makes use of one as a Scourge to the rest, he gives him his
Power, by which he succeeds in whatever he undertakes, while his Divine Anger
continues Isai. 10. 5.
. He told Moses, That he had made him God over Pharaoh Exodus 7. 1.
; and so, as God, he wrought Miracles, to punish him and his Kingdom Data est
Moysi authoritas, and potest^^, (...) vel^t Deus Pharaontem ^erreret, puniret.
Hill. l. 7. de Trin.
.

But I am not so bold to say, that in Pharaoh's Person, and his Kingdom, is
represented that of France, and the Punishment that Divine Sun of Justice
threatens it, and that we must hope for other miraculous Actions for the
Preservation and Grandeur of the House of Austria 2 Mac. 15. 8.
, That his Displeasure being appeased, will by little and little dispell the
Clouds which obscure its Pinnacles, discovering thereupon the Triumphant
Imperial Eagle, which having sharpened its Talons and its Beak, and refreshed
its Feathers in the Waters of its Trouble, shall join that Divine Lightning,
which shall be Light to it, and Fire to France, causing to fall upon them the
whole Tempest which they had raised against other Kingdoms. The Spirit of so
many Tempests shall waste it self, their Counsels being rash and violent Isai.
19. 3.
. French shall War with French, Friend with Friend, Brother with Brother, City
with City, and the Kingdom with the Kingdom Ibid.
, by which it shall become the Bloody Scene of that War which it has so
industriously procured other Nations Ezekiel. 29. 10.
. Such Counsels are like Spiders Webs, drawn from their own Bowels; their due
Punishment is, to fall into the same Nets which they have spread for others
Pro^. 26. 27.
. Perillus invented a Brazen Bull for the Exercise of his Tyranny, and was
himself the first that made it Bellow.

No Possession is secure, which is founded upon the Destruction of others. A
certain French Ambassador advised the League of Cambray against the Republic
of Venice, insinuating, That she should sow Dissentions among the Princes, and
build her own Fortune upon their Ruin: And several of them uniting, disarmed
her, and took from her all the Lands she possessed upon the Continent. It may
be, that those Times required such Artifices; or that the Prudent Noblemen, of
which that Illustrious Senate always consists, knew those Inconveniences, but
could not prevent 'em, either through the furious Torrent of the Multitude, or
through fear of rendering themselves suspected by Opposition. This is the
Misfortune of Republics, that Malice, Tyranny, fomenting Hatred, and
Self-Interest, without respect to Justice, pass for Zeal and Love to their
Country, hindering Persons of Integrity from appearing. That the Prudent
endeavor to procure the Peace of the State, while giddy Fellows, who have no
Prospect of the Time to come, molest it by their vain and dangerous Enterprises
Sapientibus quietis and Reip. curae: levissimus quisque, and futuri imp^ovidus
spe vana tumens. Tac. 1. Hist.
, and that in their Resolves, their Votes are counted not weighed; and that
Communities are always fuller of Raw, Ignorant Persons, than of those of
Prudence and Experience; thence happen grievous Inconveniences. And we see at
present that Republic governs with great Applause by the best Maxims, and that
she always promotes the universal Peace and good Correspondence with her
neighboring Princes, not being to be prevailed upon by the continual
Importunities of France to join in the present War; by which she has not only
obliged the House of Austria, but has been also freed from this general
Influence of Mars, by which she has gained more than she could have done by the
Sword. The Neighborhood of greater Power is not always Dangerous; it is
sometimes like the Sea, which Ebbing, leaves whole Provinces to the Continent.
There are not few Princes and Republics which owe their Preservation to this
Monarchy. 'Twould be a dangerous Attempt for the lesser Powers always to join
in making War upon the Greater, (as we observed elsewhere.) States gain more by
their good Correspondence with Princes, than by Force. They are cunning Ladies,
who easily captivate their Heart and Will, and guide their Actions to their
particular Ends. Let 'em not therefore be disturbed, if Princes are sometimes
angry with them; for such Anger is like the Petty Quarrels of Lovers, which are
the Renewing of Love: Let them blame rather Jealousies, and credulous
Suspicions, which make them doubt the Fidelity of their best Friends; which is
the Vice of the Multitude, who measure Things not by Reason, but by their vain
Suspicions.

These Arts of Sowing Discord, and procuring the Rise of one by the Fall of
others, are most in use in Courts and Palaces: They proceed from Ambition; for
Rewards being already divided, and there being no means to introduce new Forms,
but by the Corruption of others, they procure it by Scandal and Violence.
Sometime it is the Envy of one Minister to another, for some excellent
Qualifications, endeavoring to prevent his continuance in a Post where they
may be conspicuous, or else to ruin the Reputation he has already acquired, by
false Accusations: And when he cannot obscure the Truth, he Sneers, Joaks at,
and Ridicules it, under pretense of a kind of Friendship; that losing his
Credit in Things of small concern, he may afterward gain it in Things of
greater moment. Such malicious, sly Tricks, are ever perni^ious to their
Author, as Tacitus remarked in Hispon Perniciem aliis, ac postremum sibi
invenere. Tac. 1. Annal.
, and in those who followed him. Notwithstanding, Lucinus Proculus succeeded
well, by accusing others Vt cuique erat, criminando, quod facillimum factu est,
prav^s and callidus, bonos and modestos anteibat. Tac. 1. Hist.
. This sometimes happens, when Goodness and Modesty are so reserved as to live
privately, despising the Honors and Favor of Princes, as it befalls those,
who, through distrust of their own Abilities, are thought unfit for the
Management of Public Affairs; such as these, assiduous Malice, such as is
intent upon gaining Men's Opinions, easily robs of the due Rewards of their
Virtue, as Tigillinus used to do Praefectur^^ vigilum, and praetorii, and alia
praemia virtutum velocius vitiis adeptus. Tac. 1. Hist.
But such Artifices fall with the same speed they rise; of which Tigillinus is
an Example, who died infamously by his own Hands Inter stupra concubinarum, and
oscula, and deforme^ mores, sectis novacula faeucibus, infamem vitam foedavit,
etiam exi^u se^^ and inhonesto. Tac. 1. Hist.
.

EMBLEM LXXVI.
THE Sun darts the Rays of his Light upon a Concave-Glass, and thence proceeds,
in Rays of Fire, the Figure of this present Emblem; intimating, That in the
good or bad Intention of the Ministers consist Peace or War. The Reverberation
of the Orders they receive, is Fatal. If the Breast be of clear and plain
Crystal, the Orders flow thence as pure, if not purer, than they entered; but if
it be Steel, they will imbroil the whole World in Wars. To this end, Princes,
desirous of Peace, should beware of making use of Warlike Ministers; for as
they found all their Fortune upon Arms, they continually seek Occasions to
exercise them. France had never bewailed the Effects of so much Discord, nor
Europe of so many Wars, had not the Preservation of that King's Favor
consisted therein. We find, in Holy Writ, that the Priests carried the Trumpets
wherewith they declared War And the Sons of Aaron the Priest shall blow with
the Trumpets, and they shall be for an Ordinance for ever to you, throughout
your Generations. Numb. 10. 8.
; that the Modesty and Gravity of their Sacred Office would not use them
without great Occasion. The Breasts of Princes are Seas, which swell with
Mountains of Waves, when their Ministers are blustering Boreas's, but are calm
and serene when they are gentle Zephyrs; for a generous and peaceful Mind
tempers the hot and dangerous Orders, and turns them to good; like the Sun,
whose Rays, though they pass by Angles, endeavor to free themselves from this
imperfect Form, and return Spherical in their Reverberation. And sometimes it
suffices not that their Intention is good, if they pass for Warriors; for
either none believe that Men of their Courage would neglect an Occasion, and
Fear arms against their Bravery, or at least Malice takes it as a Pretense. The
Count of Fuentes, foreseeing what would happen to the Valtoline, from the
Revolt of the Grisons, upon account of the League with the Republic of Venice,
built a Fort at the Mouth of the River Ada, for the Security of the State of
Milan. The Duke of Feria, in the same Country, summoned the Catholics to
defend themselves from the Protestants. The Duke d' Ossuna endeavored, by a
Fleet which he had in the Adriatic, to divert the Arms of Venice upon Friuli.
And to these three Ministers are ascribed the Wars which were afterward
occasioned through the Troubles of the Duke of Savoy.

In those who assist at Treaties of Peace, the Danger is yet greater, each
acting according to his Inclination and Passion, and not according to the good
Intention of the Prince. Don Lopez de Haro being disgusted by King Sancho the
Strong, revenged himself in the Treaties of Peace between that King, and Peter
III. King of Arragon, differently reporting the Answers of both; which incensed
them more than before. The greatest Misfortune of Princes, is, that they cannot
Personally assist at all Affairs, but are obliged to be guided by others
Reports, which are like Streams which are always tinctured with the Quality of
the Minerals through which they pass, proceeding always infected with the
Malice, Passion or Affection of the Ministers, and answer their Conveniences
and Designs; by these they strive to flatter the Prince, preparing them so,
that they may be grateful to his Taste and Inclination. Ministers, and
principally Ambassadors, eager to show their Abilities, and that they penetrate
all things, report to the Prince for Certainty, not that which is, but that
which they fancy may be; they are too prone to Suspicions, which they form
from the least Shadow, and then give credit to them, whence proceed great
Equivocations and Errors, and is the chief cause of Quarrels and Wars among
Princes; for no Minister but has Power to promote Broils and Discord In turb^s
and discordi^s pess^mo cuique plurima vis. Tac. 4. Hist.
. Let Princes therefore be cautious of giving Credit to the first Relations of
their Ministers, but compare them first with those they receive from others:
And to form a more certain Judgment of what is written to them, let them be
perfectly acquainted with their Humor and Genius, and with their Method of
Conceiving Things, whether they act by private Interest and Passion; for it
happens sometimes, that the Minister is taken with a Love for the Country or
Prince with whom he Treats. and thinks all things Right and Just; and sometimes
suffers himself to be obliged by their Favors and Civilities, and being
naturally Grateful, is of their Side, and acts their Cause. Sometimes is
deluded by plain Appearances, and by contrary Reports, cunningly spread, and so
easily deceives his Prince; for there is none more apt to deceive others, than
one who has been imposed upon before. Many Ministers are moved by slight
Reasons, or by some Passion or private Aversion which disturbs their Judgments,
and turn every thing to ill. There are some also naturally inclined to
Misconstrue all Actions and Designs; whereas others are so Frank and Generous,
that they think nothing ill designed. Both the one and the other are dangerous,
and these last not less so than the others.

Sometimes the Minister, thinking it part of his Duty to discover to the Prince
his Enemies, and that by that means he shall gain the Character of a Zealous
and Understanding Person, becomes so nicely suspicious, that no one is safe
from his Tongue and Pen; and to make his Surmises and Apprehensions sure, gives
occasion, by his Distrust, to Friends to become Enemies, to the great Detriment
of the Prince, to whom it were much better to have a good Confidence in all, or
for the Minister to apply Remedies to cure, not to infect the Minds and Wills
of the Subject.

Ministers also, weary of Embassies, that they may retire to enjoy the
Conveniences and Ease of a Domestic Life, stick not to promote a Rupture
between the Princes they assist, or at least to suggest Counsels not less
pernicious.

Princes are much deceived, who think their Ministers act always as Ministers,
and not as Men. If it were so, they would be much better served, and find less
Inconveniences. But they are Men, and their Office does not strip 'em of their
Inclination to Ease, and to the Pleasures of Love, Anger, Revenge, and other
Affections and Passions, which Zeal nor Duty are not always capable to correct.

But let Princes be apprized, that those who cannot seduce Good and Loyal
Ministers, (for that they fathom their Artifices and Counsels, and know what is
their Prince's Interest, what not) they traduce them as Distrustful,
Passionate, Perverse and Obstinate, and therefore endeavor to remove them from
the Management of Affairs, and to introduce others less Knowing, or to treat
immediately with the Prince himself, tendering him specious Propositions, which
oblige him to Resolves more prejudicial. He must not give the least grounds to
any one, to think that he cannot change the course of Affairs, or displace
Ministers; for if such Thoughts take place, the Prince will be ill served: For
such Confidence causes Disdain and Disobedience in the Accuser, and the Fear of
it discourages the Minister. The Errors of these are less dangerous than those
to admit the Accusations against them, especially if they are Foreigners: And
were they true, yet it is more Prudence to deferr the Remedy, till he from whom
they came cannot ascribe it to himself.

EMBLEM LXXVII.
THE farther those two Luminaries of Day and Night are distant from each other,
the greater their Influence and Light is Below: But when they are in
Conjunction, their being Brethren; does not prevent the one from obscuring the
other's Rays; and such Eclipse creates Shadows and Inconveniences to the
Earth. Princes, by the benefit of their Ministers and Letters, maintain and
uphold mutual Correspondence with each other: But if they should Conferr
Personally with one another, their Interview would create shadows of Suspicion
and Jealousy, which would put all their States in Confusion, for that they
never find in one another what they promised to themselves, and that neither
measures himself by his own Rule, but pretends always to much more than his
Due. An Interview of two Princes, is almost like a Duel, in which they fight
with Ceremonies, each endeavoring to conquer the other. The Families of each
assist at the Engagement, like two Hostile Troops, each being zealous for his
Prince's Triumph over the other, in Personal Accomplishments or Grandeur; and
as in such a number all cannot be Men of Prudence, some light Expression, or
slight Affront, causes Dissatisfaction in the rest. So it happened in the
Interview between King Henry, and Lewis XI. of France; in which the Spaniards
exceeding them in Pomp and Greatness, and scouting the Meanness and
Slovenliness of the French, those two Nations departed Enemies, who had till
then maintained a good Correspondence together Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. The Hatred between Germanicus and Piso was private, till they saw one another
Discesser^ntque opertis Odiis. Tac. 2. An^al.
. The Interview between Ferdinand IV. of Castile, and Dionysius, his
Father-in-Law, King of Portugal, caused great Disorders; as did that of King
Philip I. and King Ferdinand. And though the Meeting of James I. and King
Alphonso, produced very good Effects, yet is it the safest way for Princes to
manage their Affairs by Ambassadors.

Sometimes Favorites sow Discord between the Prince and those of the
Blood Royal, (as we have before observed) of which there are many Examples in
our Histories. Don Lopez de Haro procured a Separation between King Sancho the
Strong, and the Queen his Consort. The Domestics of Queen Catharine, Mother to
King John II. incensed her against the Infant, Don Ferdinand. Don Alvarez de
Lara endeavored (thereby to keep the Government in his own Hands) to persuade
King Henry I. that his Sister, Queen Berenguela, designed to poison him. Those
who were interested in the Quarrels between the Infant Sancho, and King
Alphonso the Wise, his Father, took what care they could, to prevent their
Meeting and Agreement. The Grandees of Castile hindered the Reconcilement of
King John II. to his Son Henry. Don Alvarez de Luna, that of King John of
Navarre, to his Son Prince Carlos of Viana. The Favorites of King Philip I.
dissuaded him from an Interview with King Ferdinand. Such Artifices we have
seen used in France, in these Times, to the Detriment of that Kingdom, and of
all Christendom. The only Remedy is, to despise the Difficulties and
Inconveniences which these Favorites represent, and to come to an Interview,
when the secret Operation of the Blood has appeased their Minds, and discovered
the Malice of those who procured the Misunderstanding. Upon these Reasons, King
Ferdinand gave a Meeting at Segovia, to King Henry IV. his Brother-in-Law, not
fearing the Danger of exposing himself to the Resentment of an offended King,
who, either through Natural Affection, or to disguise his Infamy, procured his
Daughter Ioanna 's Succession to the Crown Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. For though he was sufficiently pre-advis'd by his Ministers of the Danger of
the thing; yet in the Scales of Prudence, this Consideration outweigh'd, That
no Force nor Treaty was so effectual as Presence.

EMBLEM LXXVIII.
WHAT we see of the Mermaid, is Beautiful; what we hear, Melodious; that which
the Intention conceals, Pernicious; and that which is hidden under Water,
Monstrous. Who could imagine so great an Inequality in so fair an Appearance?
Such Beauty as to charm the Mind, and such Harmony as to entice Ships upon
Rocks? Antiquity admired this Monster as an extraordinary Prodigy: yet is
nothing more frequent; Courts and Palaces are full of them Isai. 13. 22.
. How often is a fair, smooth Tongue, the Snare to entrap a Friend Prove. 29. 5.
? How often does a Friendly, Smiling Look, conceal a Heart full of Rancour and
Malice? How often are Tears forced from a Spring of Joy Peractis tritsitia
imitamentis. Tac. 13. Annal.
! Those who showed most Sorrow for the Death of Germanicus, were those who
rejoiced most Periisse Germanicum nulli jact antius moerent, quam qui maxim
laetantur. Tac. 2. Annal.
. When the Head of Pompey was brought to Caesar, he, by his Tears, dissembled
the Satisfaction of the Sight: Caesar, at first, his Gift would not refuse,
Nor turn his Eyes away, but fix'dly views
Till he perceived 'twas true, and plainly saw
'Twas safe to be a pious Father-in-Law;
Then shed forced Tears, and from a joyful Breast
Drew Sighs and Groans, as thinking Tears would best
Conceal his inward Joy -- May's Version of Lucan.



We see much of the Siren in the Pretexts of some Princes: How full of Religion
and Concern for the Public Good? How Obliging, Kind, and Promising? And what
Cheats do they impose upon each other, under these Feints and Appearances? They
have the Face of Angels, but end in Serpents; and Embrace, only to Sting and
Poison: The Wounds of a Well-meaning Sincerity are more wholesome than the Kisses
of such Lips Prove. 27. 6.
. The Words of those are smooth and balmy, but of these sharp-pointed Arrows
Psalm. 54. 22.
. How often has Treason took Rise from Honors? Tiberius, designing the Death
of Germanicus, as jealous of the Glory of his Victories, and to extinguish
thereby the Race of Augustus, called him to Triumph, and made him his Companion
in the Empire. By such Arts he strives to disguise his Mind: He burns with Envy
of Germanicus; and makes his Glory blaze more, only the sooner to extinguish
it: What appears is Honor and Affection, what is concealed is Hatred and
Malice Nec ideo sincerae charitatis fidem adsecutus, amoliri juvenem specie
ho^oris statuit, struxitque caus^s, aut forte oblatas a^ripuit. Tac. 2. Annal.
The more Frank and Sincere a Man appears, the more Fraud and Design he
harbors. We are not so apt to be deceived by Muddy as by Clear Fountains,
which hide their Poison, and invite by their Clearness. For this Reason,
Prudence should be upon her Guard, to penetrate these Arts of Princes,
suspecting them most when they seem most fair and obliging, and acting against
their Custom and Nature; as Agrippina did, changing her morose Temper into good
Humor and Dalliance, to take Nero off from the Love of his Slave Tum Agrippina
ver^is Artibus, per blandimenta juvenem aggredi, suum potius cubiculum ac sinum
offerre contegendis, quae prima aetas, and summa fortuna expeterent. Tac. 14.
Annal.
: Which Alteration was suspected by Nero and his Friends, who advised him to
beware of her Subtilties Quae muta^i^ nequ^ Ner^nem fefellit, and proximi
amicorum metuebant, orabantque caver^ in^idis mulior is semper ^trocis, tum and
falsae. Tac. 13. Annal.
. We should be more cautious against what Princes conceal, than against what
they show; more against what they are silent of, than what they declare. The
Elector of Treves delivers up that City to the French King, to put therein a
Garrison, though he knew 'twas Imperial, and under the Hereditary Protection of
the King of France, as Duke of Luxemburgh, and Lord of the Lower Burgundy, and
that thereby he not only ran counter to that Protection, but also to the
Constitutions of the Empire; for which Reason, the Troops of Spain surprise
this City from the French, and accidentally detain the Person of the Elector,
and treat him with all Respect due to his Dignity: And the King of France
having Eighteen Days before concluded a League with the Hollanders against the
Netherlands, makes use of this Pretext, though happening afterward, and enters
with his Forces in their behalf, under pretense of setting at liberty his
Friend and Allie. He who seeks Occasions, easily finds or makes 'em. Malice is
like Light, which enters at the least Chink; and such is our Inclination to
Liberty, and so blind our Ambition, that there is no Pretense which respects
either of them, but we immediately embrace it, suffering our selves to be
deceived by it, though never so unlikely or unreasonable. Italy does not yet
apprehend the Designs of France, to Lord it over her, under pretense of
Protection, though she has seen the Public Faith so often violated, as in the
Treaties of Ratisbon, Carasco, and Mon^on; the Usurpation of Montferrat, the
Valtoline, and Pignerol, and a Garrison put into Monaco. By such Pretexts
Princes mask their Ambition, their Avarice and Designs, to the expense of the
Lives and Fortunes of their Subjects. Hence proceed all the Commotions and Wars
that the World labors under.

As Interests alter, so also do these Pretexts; for they give Umbrage to them,
and follow them. The Republic of Venice enter into League with the Grisons;
the French oppose it, lest it should diminish their Alliance with them.
Whereupon the People are divided into Factions, to the prejudice of the
Catholics, whom the Protestants endeavor to extirpate. The Switzers hereupon
summon a Diet, and can find no better Remedy, than to invite the Spaniards into
the Valley; an Expedient before thought on by Pope Clement VIII. in the
Instructions given to the Bishop of Veglia, when sent to the Catholic Cantons
in Quality of Nuncio. Which Method was also approved of by Gouffier, who
managed the Affairs of France, and who persuaded Count Alphonso Casati,
Ambassador from Spain to the Switzers, to write to the Duke of Feria, to enter
the Valtoline with His Majesty's Forces; that thereby shutting up the Passage
of Valcamonica from the Venetians, they might desist from their Pretensions,
and that the Valley might be cleared of the Protestants. The Duke, moved by
these Instances, and by the common Danger of this Sect, which threatened the
State of Milan, and all Italy, and also by the Complaints and Tears of the
Catholics, entered the Valtoline; and immediately the French, upon new
Considerations, change their Minds, and oppose this Intent, entering into League
in Avignon with Venice and Savoy, under Pretense of the Liberty of Italy,
though that consists more in the stopping that Passage from the Protestants on
the other side the Mountains, than in any Acquisitions the Spaniards could make
in this Country; and the Valtoline being only the Pretense of the League, the
Arms of the Allies served only as a Diversion, and all the Force and Design
were turned to the Oppression of the Republic of Genoa. So that Pretenses vary
according to the Alteration of Interests.

Times by their Effects discover the Falsity of these Pretenses; for either
they don't perform what they promise, or don't act where they proposed. The
Republic of Venice had a mind to seize Gradisca, and took for a Pretext the
Incursions of the Vscoques in Croatia: They made a Feint to defend the Liberty
of the Sea, and made War upon the Land.

Many times they make War, upon pretense of Zeal for the Glory of God, and
rather hinder it; sometimes for Religion, and confound it; sometimes for
Public Peace, and disturb it; sometimes for the Peoples Liberty, and oppress
'em; sometimes for Protection, and enslave them; sometimes to preserve their
own State, and they invade others. O Men, O People, O States, O Kingdoms! whose
Tranquillity and Happiness depends upon the Ambition and Capriche of a few.

When the Ends of Actions are Just, but are in danger of not being so
interpreted, or of miscarrying if they are understood, we may so dispose them,
that our Actions may appear different to the Eyes of the World, and be thought
to be guided by other honest Causes. He who acts so, cheats none, but acts
justifiably, but only amuses Malice by false Appearances, by which it deceives
it self, and prevents its opposition to the just Designs of the Prince; for no
Reason obliges him to point at the Mark at which he levels; for it would be
impossible for him to strike one, if at the same time he did not seem to aim at
another.

There is not less Danger to States, in the feigned Zeal with which some would
seem to respect the Public, and regard only their own particular Interest.
They pretend to reform the Government, to weaken its Authority: They propose
Means, and suggest Counsels after the Effect, to discover Errors already past
Remedy: They affect Liberty, to gain the Applause of the People against the
Magistracy, and confound the State, by reducing it afterward to Slavery Vt
Imperium evertant Libertatem praeferunt: si impetraverint ipsam aggredientur.
Tac. 16. Annal.
. These Artifices are used by all Tyrants of Republics Caeterum libertas, and
speciosa nomina praetexuntur, nec quisquam alienum servitium and dominationem
sibi concupivit, ut non eadem ista vocabula usurparet. Tac. 4. Hist.
. What Feints did Tiberius make of restoring Liberty to that of Rome, when his
whole Design was to oppress it Speciosa verbis, re inania au^ subdola:
quantaque majore libertatis imagine ^egebantur, tanto eruptura ad infensius
servitium. Tac. 1. Annal.
. The same Methods the Prince of O -- used to make the Netherlands Revolt,
which his Family have made use of since to Lord it over the United Provinces.
Time will show them, to their Cost, the difference between a Natural Prince and
a Tyrant; then they will repent of having preferred Rebellion with their Ruin,
to Obedience with Security, as Cerialis advised those of Treves Ne cont^^aciam
cum pernicie, quam obsequium cum securitate m^litis. Tac. 4. Hist*
. The People blindly fly to the Call of Liberty, and don't know it till they
have lost it, and find themselves entangled in the Nets of Slavery. They suffer
themselves to be moved by the Fears of these false Crocodiles, and rashly
entrust them with their Lives and Fortunes. How peaceable would the World be,
if Subjects knew, that whether the Government be of All, of Many, or of One, it
would have its Inconveniences, with some kind of Tyranny: For though
Speculation may invent a perfect Form of Government, as it must be of Men, not
of Angels, it may be commended, but not practiced Dilecta ex his, and
constituta Reipub. forma laudari facilius quam evenire, vel si evenit, haud
diuturna esse potest. Tac. 4. Annal.
. So that Liberty consists not in this or that Form of Government, but in the
Preservation of that which a long Use and Experience has constituted and
approved, in which Justice is defended, and Public Peace preserved, supposing
that some sort of Government must be obeyed; for Liberty never suffers more
than in such Changes. We think to find a better, and we fall into a worse; as
it happened to those who survived Tiberius and Caius An Neronem extremum
Dominorum putatis? idem crediderunt, qui Tiberio, qui Caio superstites fuerunt:
cum interim instabilior and saevior exortus est. Tac. 4. Hist.
; and when we better our selves, it does not countervail the Damage we sustain
in the change of one Form to another. So that it is better to bear with the
present, though unjust Ferenda Regum ingenia, neque usui crebraes mutationes.
Tac. 12. Annal.
; and hope, that if the Prince be bad, God will be pleased to send another good
one Vlteriora mirari, praesenti^ sequi, bonos Imperatores voto expetere,
qualescunque tolerare. Tac. 4. Hist.
. It Is he bestows Kingdoms; and 'twould be accusing his Divine Decrees, not to
obey those whom he has constituted. Nebuchadnezzar was a wicked Prince, yet God
threatened a severe Punishment to those who did not obey him Ier. 27. 6.
. As we are contented with the Seasons, and bear patiently the Inconveniences
of Nature; so also we should the Defects of our Princes Quomodo sterilitatem,
aut nimios imbres, and ^aetera Naturae mala, ita Luxuriam vel avaritiam
dominantium tolerare. Tac. 4. Hist.
. While there are Men, there will be Vices Vi^ia erunt, donec Homines. Ibid.
. Where is there to be found a Prince without them? These Evils are not
continual. If one Prince be bad, another good one succeeds, and so one makes
amends for the other Sed neque haec continua; and meliorum interventu
pensantur. Ibid.
.

EMBLEM LXXIX.
NO Bird so much resembles Man in the Articulation of the Voice, as the Parrot
Si me non vide^s esse negabis avem. Mar^.
. Its Vivacity is so great, that some Philosophers have doubted whether it did
not participate of Reason. Cardan says, that it surpasses all Birds in
Ingenuity, and Quickness of Apprehension; and that it not only learns to Speak,
but also to Meditate with a Desire of Glory Inter aves Ingenio, Sa^^citateque
praestat, quod grandi sit c^pite, atque in India coelo sincero (...), unde
didicit non solum loqui, sed etiam meditari, meditatur ob st^dium Gloriae.
^ardan.
. This Bird is very Candid and Ingenuous, the Quality of Great Spirits: yet is
not its Candor exposed to Deceit, but she knows how to prevent it; and as sly
and crafty as the Serpent is, it evades his Artifices, and to secure its Nest
from him, it hangs it at the end of the highest and slenderest Twig of a Tree,
in the manner here represented, that when he would pass by them to devour its
young ones, he falls by his own weight. So Artifice must be frustrated by
Artifice, and Counsel by Counsel. In which Case, King Ferdinand the Catholic
was an Exellent Master for Princes, as he sufficiently showed in all his
Designs, particularly in his Marriage with Germana de Foix, Niece to Lewis XII.
of France, to break the Peace clapped up at Hagenaw, between the Emperor, and his
Son-in-Law, King Philip I. without his knowledge, and to his prejudice. Nor did
he use with less Address the Opportunity offered by the same King of France 's
desiring a League with him, to get liberty to Invade the Kingdom of Naples,
contriving the Matter so that he might recover the Governments of Rousillon and
Sardinia: And when he saw the French King had already made an Inroad into Italy
with that Intent, and withal how dangerous a Neighbor he would prove to the
Kingdom of Sicily, which his Eye was upon, he put a stop to his Progress, broke
the Treaty, and denounced War against him, entering into an Alliance with the
Republic of Venice, and other Princes. And these Weapons are more necessary in
War than Peace; for their Wit does more than Strength. And certainly that
Commander deserves no small Praise, who despising the Vainglory of Conquering
his Enemy with the Sword, steals the Victory, and triumphs by Policy and
Stratagem, whereby the Law of Nations is not the least violated Cum just
Bellum suscipitur, ut aperte pugnet quis, aut ex Insidiis, nihil ad Iustitiam
interest. D. Aug.
. For if the War be Just, the Methods thereof are so also Dolus an Virtus quis
in Host requirat. Virg.
: 'Twixt Force and Fraud, what Difference in War? And indeed, what Reason can
be given, why you may not deceive him, whom it is lawful even to kill? It is a
piece of Magnanimity to prefer the Public Safety before a Triumph, and make
sure of Victory without exposing it to the manifest Fortune of War, when
there is none, in Humane Judgment, can appear so certain, but it is subject to a
thousand Chances. In countermining the cunning Designs and Intrigues of an
Enemy, we must not always regard what a Prudent Man would do in the like case,
(though to have also some Forethought of that were advisable) but a Judgment
must be formed from the Condition and Capacity of the Person to be dealt with;
for all Men take not always the most proper and prudent Methods. Ferdinand Duke
of Alba 's entering Portugal with an Army, upon King Sebastian 's Death, was
Amazing; by several blamed as a very Dangerous Enterprise, in a Person so
eminently versed in the Art of War. To whom he replied, That he was not
ignorant of the Danger; but he trusted in having to do with a Nation, which by
a continued Enjoyment of Peace, had probably forgot the Affairs of War. Even
when we have to do with Men eminent for Prudence, the Judgment and Conjecture
we pass upon their Actions, even by the Rule of Reason and Prudence, is not
infallibly certain; for sometimes they suffer themselves to be carried away by
Passion, and the wisest Men are now and then guilty of the greatest Errors,
Self-conceit rendering them negligent, or too much Confidence in their
Discretion, making them presume, that though they have a little lost their Way,
they can easily find it again. Sometimes in Things they presuppose, Time and
other Events deceive them. Wherefore it is the safest way, ever to suspend
one's Judgment in Things that depend upon another's Pleasure, and not to go
about to regulate them by our own Private Discretion; for every one has his
particular Reasons unknown to others, and consonant to his Nature, which are
the Spring of his Actions. What to one seems impossible, another thinks easy:
And there be some Genius's that fear not the most hazardous Enterprises; some
that are guided by Reason, others that are utterly averse to it.

The most secret Artifices of Enemies, or those who under color of Friendship,
aim wholly at their own Interest, are such particularly whereby they make their
Proposals with so much Subtilty, that they seem to redound to the Prince's
Advantage, when they really tend to his Ruin; a Thing his Integrity is easily
deluded in, if he want Experience, or smell not their Drift. It requires
therefore no small Prudence and Attention to turn such Counsels to the
Destruction of the Authors thereof. Into what Precipes will that Government
fall, which is directed by Foreign Councils, contrary to the Advice of the Holy
Ghost Receive a stranger into thine house, and he will disturb thee, and turn
thee out of thine own. Eccles. 11. 34.
. But although an Enemy's Designs are usually discoverable by bare Reasoning,
yet is it convenient to trace them also by Spies, the principal Instruments of
Government, without which a Crown can never be secure, or admit of Increase,
nor a War be carried on with Success Ignarus militiae, improvidus con^ilii,
quis ordo Agminis, quae cura explorandi, quantus urgendo, trahendove Bello
modus. Tac. Hist. l. 3.
. Vitellius was condemned for being improvident in Council, in Warfare
ignorant, how to draw up an Army, what belonged to Scouts, when to prosecute,
when protract a War. And indeed, of what ill Consequence this Negligence is,
Germany can abundantly testify, which has lost several advantageous
Opportunities, and its Soldiers been oftentimes surprised and cut off in their
Quarters, for want of Intelligence of the Enemies Designs and Marches And
Joshua sent out two men to spy secretly. Ios. 2. 1.
. Joshua made use of Spies, though God himself took care of his Arms And the
Angel of God which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind
them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind
them. Exodus 14. 19.
. Moses never Marched, but an Angel carried a Pillar of Fire before him, to
show where to encamp; yet by God's Command, he sent out Men to search the
Promised Land Send thou men, that they may search the Land of Canaan, which I
give unto the Children of Israel. Numb. 13. 2.
. Ambassadors are nothing but Public Spies; and without prejudice to the Law
of God, or that of Nations, may endeavor, by Bribes and Presents, to corrupt
the Fidelity of Ministers, who even by Oaths are obliged to it, and to sift out
what ill Contrivances are in Agitation against their Prince; for these are no
way obliged to keep the Secret, and the other have on their side the Natural
Reason of Self-preservation.

EMBLEM LXXX.
THE Stone-cutter at Home first prepares and polishes the Marbles he designs
for the Ornanament of a Building; because afterward it would be more
troublesome, and the Work imperfect. For this Reason, I conceive, those of
Solomon's Temple were fashioned, that it might be erected without Noise, and
the Sound of Tools. Thus wise Princes ought to polish their Designs, and bring
their Resolutions to Maturity, before they put them in Execution; for not to
consider of them but in the Field, is more like a Gladiator than a Prince. The
Bull(the Figure of this Emblem) before he engages his Rival, practices by
making Trial of himself, and by often running his Horns against a Tree, by
degrees learns the Art of Defending himself, and Goring his Opposer Timet,
atque eum deficere omnia videntur, qui in ipso negotio ^^^silium capere
cogitur. Jul. Caes.
. He who is to Consult in heat of Action, fears all things, and knows not what
Measures to take. But because Occasions happen not always as we wish, and
sometimes it is not in our Power to retard or hasten them, it will be the part
of Prudence to consider whether it is better to execute our Resolutions with
Leisure or Expedition, for that some Affairs require Speed in their
Resolutions, others Time, and mature Consultation; and to offend on either
hand, will be to the prejudice of the Government. Consideration, when of worse
consequence than Rashness, is by all means to be avoided. In sudden
Emergencies, Counsels are better snatched than taken. Whatever Time is spent in
Deliberation, will either overcome the Danger, or lose the Opportunity.
Fortune's nimble, but the generality of Men move but slowly, and that is the
reason so few overtake her. The greatest part of our Deliberations are upon
Things already past, and the Counsel comes after the Event Res nostrae
feruntur, imo volvuntur; ergo consilium sub die nasci debet; and hoc quoque
tardum est (...), sub manu, quod aiunt nascatur. Seneca.
. Our Affairs run with so much swiftness, that Counsel must be speedy to pursue
them; nay, even that will be too slow, it ought to be in a readiness to expect
them. When Time favors, it is assisted by Delay; otherwise Expedition
surmounts it, and then Counselors of lively, active Spirits, are chiefly
necessary. Other Affairs, which allow Time, should be transacted with Maturity;
for nothing is more opposite to Prudence, than Haste and Passion. Impetuousness
ever miscarries, and Examination and Attention are confounded by it. Hence it
is that hot, rash Counsels almost always please at first Sight; are difficult
in the Execution; in the Event grievous; and the Persons who suggest them,
though they may appear at first daring, yet when they come to execute, are at a
stand, being embroiled by their own Counsels: For Haste is blind, and without
Forecast Omnia non properanti clara certaque sunt, festinatio improvida est and
(...) Livy.
. Wicked Counsels require Precipitation, but Good usually get Strength by Delay
Scelera impetu, bona consilia mora valescere solent. ^ac. l. 1. Hist.
. And although the Common People love to see Effects before they do Causes, and
so always condemn slow Counsels; yet the Prince ought to be Proof against these
Murmurings, which, upon Success, will afterward redound to his Glory Festinare
quodvis negotium gignit errores, ^nde (...) detrimenta exoriri solent; at in
cunctando bona insunt, quae si non (...) talia videantur, in tempore bona quis
esse reperiat. Herod.
. Nevertheless, Delay must not be so great, as to let slip the Opportunity of
Execution; a Fault the Emperor Valens was guilty of, who idly spent the Time of
Action in Consultation Ips^ (...) cunctatione agendi tempora consultando
consumpsit. Taci^.
. This is a general Error in imprudent Counselors, who, perplexed with the
Weight of Affairs, can neither judge of the Danger, nor come to any Conclusion;
whence they start at the least Shadow, nay, and think by these very Doubts to
pass for Discreet. They suspend their Counsels, till Time it self furnish them;
and then begin to Resolve, when the Opportunity is gone. Counsels therefore
should be ripened, not hurried; for Maturity errs neither in Excess nor Defect
of Time: as it is admirably expressed by Augustus, in his Device of a Dolphin
twined round an Anchor, with this Inscription, Festina lent; with which that
of Alexander the Great is not incompatible, Nihil cunctando: the one being
understood of Affairs of Peace, the other concerning those of War, where
Expedition gives Success to the greatest Designs. Cerealis succeeded well in
all Things, by Resolving and Executing with Expedition Sane Cerealis parum
temporis ad exequenda imperia dabat, (...) consiliis, sed eventu clarus. Tac.
l. 5. Hist.
. But notwithstanding Speed does generally produce great Effects in War; yet
Care should be taken, that it be not blind and inconsiderate, beginning
briskly, but in the end languisheth Omnia inconsulti imp^^^ caepta, initiis
valida, spatio languescunt. Tac. 3. Hist.
. When the Thing it self admits of Delay, and there is room for Deliberation,
this is of more service than Rashness Duces pr^videndo, consultando,
curctatione saepius, quam temerita^e prodesse. Idem Ibid.
: Though both in the one and the other Prudence should measure Time, either
lest through want of it the Counsels be like Whelps, born blind, or as Hedghogs
with Prickles and Difficulties, by being too slow.

When therefore Orders come first out of the Prince's Hand, let them be
Absolute, to prevent Confusion or Doubt in their Execution. For the most
prudent Ministers can never perform as they ought, such as come to them rough
and deformed: It is for him that Commands to prescribe the Form, for the
Subject to Execute it. And if each do not keep to their distinct Duties, the
Work will remain defective. The Prince should do the part of a Master-Workman,
the Minister that of an inferior Labourer. That Prince who leaves all to the
Disposal of his Ministers, either is ignorant or weary of his Office. It Is an
ill-constituted Government, where ^ower is lodged in many; nay, it is indeed no
Government, which is not under one Head. If Ministers Rule, all Authority and
the Order of Government will perish. Then only they may and ought to suspend
the Execution of Orders, when the same appear evidently unjust, inasmuch as
they are born for God, before their Prince. As also when the Prince's Commands
are prejudicial to his Patrimony or Reputation, or inconsistent with good
Government, and depend upon the knowledge of some particular Matters of Fact,
or lastly, when Distance or other Accidents shall seem to have made such an
Alteration in the state of Affairs, that it may be probably gathered, that had
the Prince known these before, he would not have given those Orders; in this
Case, provided however there be no other considerable Danger in Delaying, they
may be deferred and excepted against, modestly however, and with all the
Respect due to his Authority and Judgment, with this Hope at least, that upon
better Information, he may Command what is more proper to be done. Thus the
Great Captain did, when, contrary to the Orders of Ferdinand the Catholic, he
stayed at Naples with his Army, considering with what Impatience the Italian
Princes expected the Result of the Interview between the two Kings, Ferdinand,
and his Son-in-Law, Philip I. and what a desperate Condition the Affairs of
Naples would be in, if he abandoned them at that Juncture. For all this, if the
Minister know his Prince to be so great a Lover of his own Counsels, as rather
to do amiss, than admit of Instruction, he may hold his Tongue, and Dissemble;
for it were downright Folly for him to expose himself to Danger, without hopes
of a Remedy. Corbulo was already engaged in some considerable Enterprise; but
the Emperor having Commanded him to desist, he retired: For though he knew those
Orders were unadvisedly given, yet he would not ruin himself by Disobeying
them Iam castra in hostili loco moliebatur Corbulo, acceptis tamen a (...)
Imperatore literis, quibus se recipere jubebatur, re subita, quanquam (...)
simul offenderentur, metus ex Imperatore, contemptus ex Barbaris, (...)brium
apud socios; nihil aliud prolocutus, quam ^eatos quos^am Duces (...), fignum
recep^ui dedit. Tac. l. 11. Annal.
.

No Orders require so punctual Observance in the Minister, as those which
relate to Matters of State. In this Case (unless the abovementioned
Circumstances occurr, or there be otherwise any considerable evident Danger in
the Execution) he is implicitly to Obey, without giving any heed to his private
Opinion and Arg^ments. For the Designs of Princes are often too deeply rooted,
to be penetrated by the Minister, or rather they would not have him dive into
them; and therefore he should side with the Prince's Commands, and presume upon
his Prudence that so it ought to be. Hence Dolabella, when Commanded by
Tiberius to bring the Ninth Legion out of Germany, readily Obeyed, although he
wanted not Reasons to the contrary Iussa Principis magis, quam incerta belli
metuens. Tac. l. 4. Annal.
. If every one had liberty to canvas and examine what is enjoined, all things
would be confounded, and infinite Opportunities lost. A Kingdom (as has been
said elsewhere) is like a Musical Instrument, whose Strings the Prince tunes,
who runs them all over with his Fingers; whereas the Minister touches only one,
and not hearing the rest sound, cannot know whether it be too high or too low,
and would very easily be mistaken, if he went to set it according to his own
Fancy. The Count de Fuentes, by the liberty of his Years, Zeal, Services and
Experiences, crowned with so many signal Trophies and Victories gave him,
sometimes (while he governed the State of Milan) suspended his Obedience to
King Philip the Third's Orders, because he ^udged them improper, and to proceed
rather from the Self-Interest or Ignorance of his Ministers, than his own Mind:
Which Example many afterward have followed, to the great prejudice of the
Public Repose, and Regal Authority. It would be of very ill Consequence, for
Ministers to be always allowed to question, whether what is Commanded, be the
Prince's Will or not; an Abuse which usually has its first Rise from their
knowing it not to be his own Hand that proportions and polishes the Stones
designed for the Edifice of Government. But suppose it be another's, yet due
Honor and submission ought to be paid to the Commands, no less than if they
came from his own Will and Judgment, or else there would be nothing but
Confusion and Disorder. Zealous and Prudent Obedience reverences the bare Hand
and Seal of its Sovereign.

But if Princes are too remote, and there is Danger of their Orders coming too
late, even after the Event, or that variety of Accidents (particularly in
Affairs of War) may not allow Time for Deliberation, and there be certain
Intelligence that the Opportunity will be in the mean time lost, it will be
Prudence to give full Power of Acting as Occasion shall require, lest that
happen which befell Vespasian, in the Civil War with Vitellius, when Distance
of Place made the Counsels come after the Events. To avoid which Inconveniency,
Tiberius, upon sending Drusus to Command the German Legions, joined with him
some Prudent and Experienced Counselors, whom he might Consult as Occasion
required, but a full Power to Act as he saw Opportunity. When Helvidius Priscus
was sent into Armenia, he had a Commission to Act as he saw Occasion. In^fine,
this was the usual Practice of the Roman Senate, to leave all to the Discretion
and Conduct of their Commanders, and to recommend nothing in particular to
them, but only all possible Care that the Commonwealth suffered no Damage. An
Example the Republics of Venice and Florence are far from imitating; who,
unwilling to let their Liberty lie at the Mercy of one Man, restrain the Power
of their Generals; being forewarned by the Example of Augustus, who turned the
Arms upon the Commonwealth, which he had taken up in its Defense against Mark
Anthony.

This Freedom of Power the Ministers who are near the King's Person are wont to
limit, to increase their own, and render it necessary for all to pass through
their Hands. Whence it is that so much Time is spent in Deliberating, and that
Resolutions are taken too late to be executed, or at least to have the Success
that might be expected from them; and consequently the Charges and Pains in
Preventing is utterly thrown away. It happens also sometimes, that while there
passes so great a Space of Time between the Accidents themselves, and their
being known and examined, fresh Advice is brought of the State of Affairs, with
new Circumstances, which make it necessary to alter the former Orders; and
after this manner Days and Years slide away, without any Effect either of
Resolution or Action.

EMBLEM LXXXI.
THE Forces of all Powers are limited, those of Ambition alone (the common Vice
of Humane Nature) infinite. This, the more it has, the more it desires to have,
or rather is a kind of fiery Appetite by the Heart exhaled, which draws
Strength and Increase from the very Matter it is applied to. This Failing is
greater in Princes than in other Men; for to the Desire of Getting is joined
that Glory of Commanding, both which neither submit to Reason nor Danger, and
hate to measure themselves by their Abilities. Wherefore the Prince ought to
weigh well what his Sword is able to strike, what his Shield to defend, always
remembering this, that his Crown is a finite and limited Circle. King Ferdinand
the Catholic, in all his Undertakings, never failed to consider every
Circumstance of them, their Cause, Disposition, Time, Means, and End. He who
attempts nothing but what he can effect, will pass for Invincible; whereas one
that aspires to a Thing impossible, or too difficult, discovers the Bounds of
his Power, and the frustrated Designs are, as 'twere, public Records of his
Weakness. There is no Monarchy so Potent, but it is upheld more by Opinion than
Reality, by Reputation than Strength. Desire of Glory and Sovereignty hurry us
on, so that all things seem easy, but in the end we meet with Difficulties
unobserved before. Almost all Wars might be avoided, were their Means and End
thoroughly examined at first: It is therefore incumbent on the Prince, before he
engage in them, perfectly to know his Forces, as well Offensive as Defensive,
the State of his Malitia, and what Officers he has to Command them, the
Substance of his Coffers, what Contributions he may expect from his Subjects,
and whether they be like to continue Loyal in Adversity, also by Study, Reading
and Conversation, to instruct himself in the Disposition and Situation of
Countries, in the Customs of Nations, the Natures of his Enemies, their Wealth,
Auxiliaries and Allies. Let him measure every one's Sword, and examine wherein
his Strength consists. Henry, King of Castile, notwithstanding his Sickness,
never neglected this, but sent several Ambassadors as far as Asia, to inform
him of the Manners and Customs of those Parts. The same did Moses, before the
Israelites entered the Promised Land See the land what it is, and the People
that dwell therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many. Numb. 13. 18.
. And lest the Prince we frame by these Emblems should want this Matter also, I
shall here, in general, touch upon some Points of it, with what brevity the
present Design requires.

Nature, willing to show her Beauty and Power, by the variety of her
Productions, has stamped a Difference not only upon the Faces, but also on the
Minds of Men; there being a vast Disagreement between the Tempers and Morals of
Nations. To this end, she has variously disposed the Causes themselves; which
either jointly all operate in some Places, or separately; in these some, in
those others. Geographers have divided the Globe of the Earth into diverse
Climates, each of which is subject to a particular Planet, as to the principal
Cause and Fountain of that Diversity: And because the First Climate, which is
drawn through Meroe, an Island of the River Nile, is subject to Saturn, they
say its Inhabitants are Black, Barbarous, Rough, Suspicious, Treacherous, and
Cannibals.

That those of the Second, which is attributed to Jupiter, and passes through
Siene, a City of Egypt, are Religious, Grave, Honest and Prudent.

Those of the Third, which is subject to Mars, and reaches through Alexandria,
are Restless and Warlike.

Those of the Fourth, which is under the Sun, and is stretched through the Isle
of Rhodes and the Midst of Greece, are Men of Learning, Orators, Poets, and
Ingenious Artists.

Those of the Fifth, which passes through Rome, dividing Italy from Savoy, and
is ascribed to Venus, are Effeminate, Lovers of Music and Luxury.

Those of the Sixth, governed by Mercury, and passing through France, are
Fickle, Inconstant, and addicted to Sciences.

Lastly, Those of the Seventh, where the Moon presides, and which is extended
through Germany, the Low Countries, and England, are Phlegmatic, Lovers of
Good-Fellowship, Fishing, and Trading.

Nevertheless, this one Cause seems not to be always uniform, nor sufficient:
For under the same Parallel or Climate, with the same Elevation of the Pole,
and an equal Rising and Setting of the Stars, we see opposite Effects,
particularly in the Climates of the Lower Hemisphere. In Aethiopia, for
Instance, the Sun's Beams scorch and blacken Men's Bodies; but in Brasil, which
has the same Latitude, their Skins are White, and the Air Temperate and
Agreeable. The Ancients held the Torrid Zone, for its excessive Heat, to be
uninhabitable, yet in Armenia it is very Temperate, and well Peopled. And
though those Eternal Luminaries of Heaven have some energy, yet the Disposition
of the Earth contributes more; for we find the Effects of their Rays to be
greater or varied, according to the various Situation of Hills and Valleys, and
tempered even by Rivers and Lakes. This is undeniable, That Nature is wonderful
in her Works, and that she sometimes seems to swerve from the ordinary Laws of
Causes, and from Reason, as it were on purpose to baffle Humane Curiosity. Who
can account for what we see happen in the Country of Malabar, where Calecut is?
Vast high Mountains, which touch the very Clouds, and end in a Promontory
called anciently Corus, now Cape Comorin, divide this Country into two Parts,
and although both have the same Elevation of the Pole, yet when on this side the
Mountains Winter begins, and Neptune's Billows rage and swell, on the other
side the Fields and Towns are burnt up with the scorching Heats of Summer, and
the Waters continually calm.

This Diversity then which is in Climates, in the Situation of Places, the
Temperature of the Air, and Food, variously distinguishes Men's Complexions, and
these again their very Natures. For the Manners of the Mind follow the
Temperament and Disposition of the Body. The Northerns, by reason of the Sun's
Remoteness, and the Coldness of their Countries, are Sanguine, Robust, and
Valiant; whence they have almost ever had Dominion over the Southern Nations
Homines, qui frigida h^^, Europamque habitant, sunt illi quidem (...). Arist.
l. 7. Pol. c. 7.
; the Assyrians over the Chaldaeans, the Medes over the Assyrians, the
Parthians over the Greeks, the Turks over the Arabians, the Goths over the
Germans, the Romans over the Africans, over the French the English, and over
these the Scotch. They love Liberty, as those also do who inhabit Mountains, as
the Switzers, Grisons, and Biscayners, their Temperament being not much unlike
the Constitution of the Northerns. In Nations very near the Sun, Excess of Heat
quite dries up the Blood; which makes the Inhabitants Melancholy, and Profound
in the Penetration of Nature's Secrets; whence all other Northerly Nations have
received the Mysteries of Sciences from the Egyptians and Arabians. Those
Countries which lie between the two Torrid Zones enjoy a favorable Air, and
there Religion, Justice and Prudence Flourish Graecorum autem genus, ut locorum
medium tenet, sic ex utr^q^^ natura praeditum, quippe animo simul and
intelligentia valet. Arist. l. 7. Pol. c. 7.
. But because every Nation differs from others in many Particulars, although
they are all situate under one Climate, I shall here set down what I have by
long Experience and Study observed of each, lest this necessary piece of
Knowledge should be wanting to your Highness, who exercise Dominion over almost
all.

The Spaniards love Religion and Justice, are patient of Toil, in Counsel
profound, in Execution slow; of such great Souls, that neither Good Fortune
elevates, nor Ill dejects them. What is in them a Natural Glory, and Greatness
of Mind, is imputed to them for Pride, and a Contempt of other Nations, when
notwithstanding it is that which is most agreeable to all, and makes them most
esteemed Advenientes enim externos benign hospitio excipiunt, adeo u^
aem^latione quadam invicem pro illorum honor certent: Quos advenae sequ^ntur,
hos laudant aemicosque Deorum putant. Diod. Sicul. l. 6. c. 9.
; that, I say, which above all follows the guidance of Reason, and by the
Dictates of that checks its Passions and Appetites.

The Africans are Subtle, Deceitful, Superstitious and Barbarous, and observe
no Military Discipline.

The Italians Cautious and Prudent: There Is no Species or Image of Virtue which
they represent not in their Words and Behavior, to promote their Ends and
Interest. A Glorious Nation, whose Temporal Empire did heretofore, as its
Spiritual one does at this day, Rule almost the whole World. They are no less
able and fit to Command, than Obey; of Prodigious Courage and Ingenuity in
Arts, as well of Peace as War. Their excess of Judgment makes them enclinable
to Suspicion, to the prejudice of themselves, and other Nations. They are in
continual fear and jealousy of greater Powers, and make it their endeavor to
balance them. There Is not a Sword drawn, nor Pike trail'd in any part of the
Earth, but what has been first made and sharpened in the Forge of Italy.

In Germany, variety of Religions, Civil Wars, and the Soldiers of other
Nations serving there, have corrupted their ancient Candor and Ingenuity of
Mind. And as things of a Delicate Make receive most Damage by being corrupted;
so where Foreign Malice has infected these People, it has rendered them more
Mistrustful and Depraved in their Morals. Some of them have wholly thrown off
Allegiance to their Prince. The Horror of so many Cruelties has rendered their
Minds so Savage, that they are neither touched with Love nor Compassion toward
their Neighbors or one another. One cannot, without Tears, compare what this
Illustrious Heroic Nation has been, with what it is now, ruined no less by the
Vices, than Arms of others. Although this must be confessed, that in a great
many Nature has had more Force than Example, several still refaining the
Candor and generous Sincerity of their Ancestors; those ancient Manners are
yet in our Time sufficiently demonstrated by the Integrity and Nobleness of
these. Nevertheless, though the Case be thus in Germany, yet we cannot deny but
Good Manners have more In^^^nce there, than in other Places Good Laws Plus ibi
bonos Mores valere, quam alibi bonas Leges. Tac. de Mor. ^^^^^norum.
. All Arts are in request there; Nobility is most diligently preserved, in
which Thing it may boast above all other Nations. Their Obedience and Patience
in War is great, their Hearts strenuous and valiant. The Power of the Empire
perished, by being too prodigal of it Grandeur and Majesty among the Princes,
and suffering the Usurpation of so many Provinces, and the too great Liberty of
the Free Towns, the chief Rise of its Troubles, by the Disunion of the Parts of
so Puissant a Body.

The French are Civil, Affable, and Warlike: Their first Onsets, with the same
Speed they are heated, cool again. They neither know how to keep within the
Bounds of their own, nor preserve themselves in another Land; are Impatient and
Fickle; in Look lovely, in Manners intolerable; their Vivacity, and Freedom of
Action, being very disagreeable to the Gravity of other Nations. All Arts and
Sciences flourish among them.

The English are Grave and Resolute, have a good Opinion of themselves; and,
when Occasion requires, undauntedly expose their Lives to the greatest Dangers,
though sometimes carried on by too bold and impetuous Passion, rather than
premeditated Choice. They are excellent and Powerful by Sea, and good Soldiers
also at Land, when by long Use inured to Arms.

The Irish are Hardy; despise Arts, and proudly boast of their Extraction.

The Scots are Constant and Faithful to their Kings, having continued the Crown
in one Line for Twenty Ages down to these Times. They know no other Tribunal of
their Anger and Revenge, but the Sword.

The Netherlands are Industrious, Men of Candor and Sincerity, fit for Arts
both of Peace and War, in which that Soil has always produced Eminent Men. They
love Religion and Liberty; know not how to cheat others, nor will they suffer
themselves to be cheated. Their kind Natures are like melted Metals, which
afterward consolidated, always retain the Impression of their Jealousies.
Hence the Wit and Address of Count Maurice were able to give them an Aversion
to the Spaniards, ^^d under a Pretense of Liberty, bring on them that Yoke of
Slavery under which the United Provinces live even at this day Had the Author
lived longer, or not wrote so soon, he would have been of another Opinion.
.

The rest of the Northern Nations are Wild and Ungovernable; know how to
Conquer, and maintain their Conquests.

The Polanders are Martial, but better at Preserving than Acquiring.

The Hungarians Haughty, and resolute Assertors of their Privileges. They
retain also many of the Manners of those Nations which have took up Arms for or
against them.

The Sclavonians Fierce.

The Greeks Vain, Superstitious, and without Faith; forgetful now of what they
have been heretofore.

The Asiaticks are Slaves to their Sovereigns, to their Vices also, and
Superstitions. That vast Empire was at first raised and is still supported more
by our Cowardice than the Courage of that People, more for our Punishment than
their Desert.

The Moscovites and Tartars are naturally Servile; rush with heat into the
Battle, and as presently fly.

But these General Observations comprehend not without Exception every
Individual: For there are found some Grateful and Loyal Persons in the most
Ungrateful and Perfidious Nation, inasmuch as Alteration of Governments,
passing from one Nation to another, Conversation, Inter-Marriages, War, Peace,
and those very Motions of the Spheres which from the Poles and from the Zodiac
of the Primum Mobile derive on Things here below Celestial Influences, change
Customs and Manners, nay, even Nature it self. For if we consult Histories, we
shall find the Germans were noted for their Bravery; the Italians, on the
contrary, branded with Cowardice: a Difference not visible now. Nations have
been uppermost by turns; and while Monarchy lasted in them, Virtues, Arts and
Arms flourished, which have been afterward, with the Empires Ruin, buried in
its Ashes, and with it revived again in another Place. Nevertheless, all
Nations have some peculiar Inclinations and Passions, which insensibly stick to
Foreigners, if they make any considerable Stay amongst them.

The Customs then of Nations being known, the Prince will be able far better to
manage Affairs whether of Peace or War, and know how to rule Foreign Countries,
every one of which enclines to a particular Manner of Government Natura enim
quoddam hominum genus proclive est ut imperio herili gubernetur, aliud ut
regio, aliud ut civili, and horum imperium cujusque aliud est jus, and alia
commodit^s. Arist. l. 3. Pol. c. 12.
, as conformable to its Nature. They have not all an Uniform Reason of State,
no more than one Medicine is a Cure for all their Diseases. And herein
Unexperienced Counselors are generally out, who think others can be governed
by the Maxims and Principles of their own States. The Bit which is easy to the
Spaniard, is not so to the Italian and Netherlander: And as the ways of
Dressing, Managing and Breaking the Horses of Spain, Naples and Hungary are
different, though they are all of one Species; so Nations also should be
differently governed according to their Natures, Customs and Habits.

From this variety of Peoples Conditions, we may gather, how careful the Prince
ought to be in sending Ambassadors, to see that they be not only endued with
all the Qualifications necessary for the Representation of his Person, and
Exercise of his Power; but withal, that their Natures, Wit and Manners, agree
with those of the Nation they are to treat with: For if this Conformity be
wanting, they will be fitter to kindle War, than to make Peace; to excite
Hatred, than procure Love. Hence God himself was, as it were, in Suspense, and
Dubious in the Choice of a Minister to send to his People, and therefore
deliberates thus with himself; Whom shall I send, and who will go for us Isai.
6. 8.
? Every Court requires a Minister suitable to its Nature. In that of Rome, Men
of Thought are approved, who are perfectly versed in the Art of Dissimulation,
so as not to betray any Passion, either in their Speech or Looks: such as
appear Sincere, and are Subtle and Prudent; who know how to Oblige all Men,
and be Obliged to none; are Civil in Negotiations, Easy in Treaties, Reserved
in Counsels, Constant in Resolutions, Friends to all, Intimate with none.

The Emperor's Court requires a Man who maintains his Authority without Pride,
who Speaks with Sincerity, Proposes with Modesty, Answers with Truth, and
Expects with Patience; who anticipates not Accidents, but makes use of them
when they happen; who, in a word, is Cautious in Promising, Exact in performing.

The French Court likes Men of Facetious, Pleasant Humors, that can mix
Seriousness with Gaiety; that neither despise, nor very much regard Promises;
who change with the Times, though more according to the present than future.

In England, the Grave and Reserved are commended, such as are slow both in
Negotiations and Dispatches.

At Venice are valued Men of Eloquence, of a Ready lavention, Ingenuous in
Reasoning and Proposing, and Quick-sighted into others Designs.

At Genoa, Persons of Frugality, loving rather to compose than breed
Dissension; who keep up their Authority without State, are Patient, and
Time-Servers.

The Suissers require such as can, upon occasion, lay aside Public Grandeur,
and be Familiar in Conversation; as have learned to ingratiate themselves by
Presents and Hopes, to have Patience, and watch their Opportunities; for they
have to do with a Subtle and Jealous People, differing from each other in
Religion, Factions, and Methods of Government, but are unanimous in their
Resolutions and Decrees, and in their Counsels avoid Extremes, which each
Canton afterward executes according to its own Method.

Now, as these Qualities are proper for every Court beforementioned; so are
Complaisance, Civility, and Splendor, of universal use in all, if accompanied
with a good Mien and Carriage, with some Learning and Knowledge of Languages,
particularly the Latin; for these affect every body, procure the Applause and
Esteem of Foreigners, and Credit to one's own Country.

As Nations differ in Manners, so do they also in Strength. That of the Church,
consists in the Respect and Obedience of Christian Believers; that of the
Empire, in Reputation of Grandeur; of Spain, in its Infantry; France, in the
Nobility; of England, in the Sea; of the Turks, in their Number; that of
Poland, in its Cavalry; that of the Venetians, in their Prudence; of the
Savoyards, in their Judgment.

Almost all Nations differ from each other in Arms both Offensive and
Defensive, which are adapted to the Genius and Disposition of each Country;
wherein it is principally to be considered which are the most common and
general, and whether those of our own Country are inferior to others, that the
most advantageous may be made use of; for Excellency in one kind of Weapons, or
the Novelty of the late-invented ones, often give or take away Empires. The
Parthians enlarged theirs by the use of Darts: The French and Northerns opened
a way to theirs by that of the armed Lance, forced on by the Swiftness of their
Cavalry: The Art of Fencing, which the Romans practiced in their Public
Sword-Plays, (wherein Judgment has great effect) made them Masters of the
Universe: And the Spaniards have conquered a New World, and established a
Monarchy in Europe, by the Invention of several sorts of Firearms; for these,
above all, require Courage and Resolution, which are the particular Virtues of
that Nation. To this Element of Fire the very Earth has opposed it self, (so
that now all the Four Elements conspire the Destruction of Mankind;) and by
introducing the Pick-ax and Shovel, the Industry of the Dutch has made such
advances, as to be able to resist the Valor of Spain.

The greatest Politicians often mistake the Balance of Governments;
particularly some of the Italians, who vainly strive to keep them always in
Aequilibrio; for that Government is not the most Dangerous or Potent, whose
Dominions are of the Largest Extent, or Subjects most Numerous, but which knows
best how to use its Strength. If you put the Forces in a pair of Scales, and
one fall down, the other hang in the Air; yet, upon adding to this but one
dram of Prudence and Valor, or else if the quantity of Ambition and Tyranny
exceed in that, the former shall poise, if not outweigh the latter. They who
have raised their Fortune in this World, and ruled it, have all had but slender
Beginnings. The Grandeur of the House of Austria inflamed the Envy of many, and
all conspired to bring it down, while not one so much as thought of Sweden,
which had undoubtedly enslaved Germany, and perhaps Italy too, had not the
King's Death prevented it. Powers that begin to grow, are more to be feared
than those that are already grown; for in these their Declension is Natural, as
in those their Increase. The one strive to preserve themselves by the Public
Quiet, the other to advance themselves by disturbing Foreign Dominions. Suppose
one Power be in it self stronger than another, this has not therefore less
Valor than that, to defend and protect it self. One Planet has more Force and
Vigor in its own House, than another in its Elevation. Nor are these Fears of
a Neighboring Power always well grounded; on the other side, they often turn
to its Advantage. Italy was under Apprehensions of Slavery from the West, when
it saw the Kingdom of Sicily united to the Crown of Castile; which were not a
little augmented when Naples was added, and both at once paid Obedience to
Castile: But when the Emperor Charles V. annexed the State of Milan to the
Crown of Spain, it seemed absolutely to Despair; yet for all this, the Princes
lost not their Liberty; on the contrary, have been effectually preserved
against the Turkish and Transalpine Arms, and enjoyed a whole Age of Peace. The
Fort de Fuentes, built by the Spaniards, was a great Eyesore to many, who
looked on it as a Bridle to Italy, yet Experience has showed its only Design
was their Defense. But all these Examples are not sufficient to cure the
Pannick Fears of that Hypochondria of State-Interest, as they call it,
especially complicated with the ill Humors of Envy and Emulation, so as to
make it shake off those Melancholy Whimsies. His Catholic Majesty lays Siege
to Casal, to dispossess the French of it, and put it into the Hands of the
right Owner, to promote the Peace of Italy: And what do the Envious, but
immediately enter into a new League to oppose him? As if one City, more or
less, were of any moment to so vast a Dominion. From this false Apprehension of
future Evils and Dangers, which perhaps would never have really come to pass,
proceed other present ones, much greater, by the Anticipation of their
Remedies. Let such Persons then as are thus solicitous to poise the Balance of
Governments, lay aside their Emulations; for it cannot be effected without
prejudice to the Public Repose. Who can so keep the Globe of the World in this
Equinox of Power, that some shall not come nearer the Solstices of Grandeur
than others; Nations would be in perpetual War; nothing giving more Disturbance
to them, than to be once possessed with such empty Chimera's which never have
an end, especially since the Union of inferior Powers against a Greater cannot
be of long continuance: And should they pull this down, who will they find to
share the Grandeur among them, so that each shall be satisfied, and not every
one desire the Whole? Who shall keep them so even, that one shall not increase
faster than another? Since Man's Body is preserved by the inequality of its
Members, why should not States, as well by the Greatness of one and Mediocrity
of another Commonwealth? It is the securer Policy to follow the most Powerful,
and conform to their Fortune, than to oppose them. Opposition awaken^ Power,
and gives a Pretense to Tyranny. The Orb^ of Heaven suffer themselves to be
whirled by the Violence of the Prim^m Mobile, which they cannot resist; and in
following the Motion of that, perform their own Course. Ferdinand de Medicis,
Duke of Tuscany, learned at Rome the Art of Molesting Superior Powers, and
practiced it against Spain by certain new Devices, in France, England, and
Holland; but he afterward found the Danger of it, and left it as a Lesson to
his Successors never to use them; which they observe to this day, to the great
Benefit of the Public Tranquillity.

EMBLEM LXXXII.
SOme adorned their Helmets with Swans and Peacocks, by the Generosity of these
Creatures to animate their Minds, and inflame them with a Desire of Glory;
others with a Bear's or Lion's Head, letting the Skin hang down their
Shoulders, to strike Terror into their Enemies. So that of this Device (the
Design of which is to show what a Price the Prince ought to set upon Arms) I
have chosen for the Crest a Porcupine, whose Quills, no less agreeable for
their Roughness, than the Ostrich's Feathers are for their Smoothness, at once
Defend and Assault. There Is no Garb more graceful than Armor adorned with
Arms. The Splendor of Purple, however sparkling with Gold, Pearls and
Diamonds, is insignificant; and the Magnificence of Palaces and Attendance, and
the Pomp of Courts useless, except flaming Swords, and the Glittering of Arms,
contribute to render Princes Illustrious. Solomon, the wisest of Kings, gloried
not so much in his costly Wardrobes, as in his rich Arsenals, which were stored
with Shields and Targets of an inestimable Value And King Solomon made two
hundred targets of beaten gold, six hundred sheckl^s of beaten gold went to
each target: And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold, and three
hundred sheckles went to one shield. 2 Chronicles. 9. 15, 16.
. The Spaniards of old prized a War-Horse more than their Blood Hispanis
militares E^^ sanguine ipsorum cariores erant. Trog
: now that Esteem is sunk, by the Convenience of Coaches and Chariots, the Use
of which was prohibited among the Romans to all but Senators, and Ladies of
Quality Quibus quidem vehiculi^ (...) and spectatae probitatis, alias uti non
licuit. Alex. ab Alexan^ l. 8. c. 18.
. To remedy which Abuses, and once more introduce the Custom of Riding, the
Emperor Charles V. spoke thus in the Assembly of the States of Madrid, in the
Year 1534: The Natives of these Kingdoms(said he) have ever been esteemed and
honored both at Home and Abroad, for their Skill in Chivalry; and it is by
this alone they have obtained so many glorious Victories over their Enemies, as
well Christians as Infidels, conquered so many Kingdoms and Dominions as at
this day depend on our Crown. The Scripture says, in the Praise of Men of
Courage, that their Shields are of Fire And the shield of his mighty men is
made red Na^um 2. 3.
; intimating how careful they are to keep them bright and well polished: and in
another place observes, that their Rays reflected on neighboring Mountains
were like Lamps of Fire Now when the sun shined upon the shields of gold and
brass, the mountains glistered therewith, and shined like lamps of fire.
Macchab. 6. 39.
. David said, a Sword added Grace even to the Majesty of God Psalm. 44. 4.
. Hannibal's Habit was mean and modest, but in Equipage he surpassed all others
Vestibus nihil inter aequales ^^ellens, arma a^que equi inspiciebantur.
. The Emperor Charles V. took more delight in Military Pomp, than in Robes
embroidered with Gold. Ottocarus, King of Bohemia, being overcome by the
Emperor Rodolphus, came with great Splendor to swear Homage to him, and, as he
was exhorted by his Attendance, to deck himself as became his Majesty: he
replied; Arm, and March in Rank and File, and show these men, that you place
your Bravery and Gallantry, not in Fine Clothes, but in your Arms, for they
best become both me and you. That Majesty begets Princes most Authority, which
proceeds from Power. The People choose them for their Defense; which was
intimated by the Navarrois, when, in their Coronations, they seated the Kings
on a Shield: This was their Throne, and Heaven their Canopy. The Prince should
be a Buckler to his Subjects, armed against all Assaults, and exposed to
Dangers and Injuries. He will never appear more beautiful either to them or
Foreigners, than when in Armor. The first Ornaments and Marks of Honor the
ancient Germans gave their Youth, was a Sword and Buckler: Till then they were
part of their Family, but afterward became Members of their Government Scuto
Frameaque juvenes ^^abant. Haec apud illos toga, hic primus Iuventae honos,
ante hoc Domus (...) videbantur, mox Reipublicae. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
. The Prince never looks like himself, but when in Arms. There Is no Equipage
more splendid than a Troop of Curiassiers; no Train more pleasing to the Eye
than that of Squadrons, whose Sight is then most agreeable, when they are
Martially equipt with all things necessary for an Attack, and want Nothing
either for their Defense or Subsistence. An Army requires no other Ornament but
what is necessary for them. Splendid Furniture is but Luggage and Cumber
Supellex pretiosa nihil aliud quam onus and impedimentum. Curt. l. 5.
. That makes the best Appearance in War, which conduces most to the principal
End of Victory. Hence Scipio the African, upon going into Spain, commanded each
of his Men to carry on his Shoulders Thirty Days Provision, and Seven Stakes
for Intrenchments. Such was then the Equipage of that Warlike Nation, so inured
to Hardships, that they took the City to be built for the Roman Senate and
People, the Temples for the Gods, but thought their Glory was in the Fields,
under Tents and Pavilions Vrbem Senatui, and Populo Romano, Templa Diis
reddita, propri^ esse Militiae decus in Armis. Tac. l. 3. Hist.
. By such Discipline they were able to rule the World. Delights, Costly
Clothes, and Riches, are for Courtiers; in Soldiers they do but excite the
Enemy's Avarice. Hence Hannibal had just cause to smile, when Antiochus,
showing him his Army, rather beautiful in Apparel, than strong in Arms,
demanded whether this would be enough for the Romans: Yes,(answered he, with an
African Subtilty) certainly enough, be they never so Covetous. Let not the
empty Show and Glittering of Gold and Silver terrify you, which neither Defend
nor Wound, said Galgacus to the Britains, to take away the fear of the Romans
Ne terreat va^^ aspectus, and auri fulgor atque argenti, quod neque regit neque
vulner^^. Tac. in Vit. Agric.
. And Solomon, going to relieve Jerusalem, to encourage his Men, tells them:
Their Glorious Equipage you view from hence,
Shall be our Plunder, 'stead of their Defense. Tass. Can. 9.



And though Julius Caesar was for having his Soldiers Rich, because he thought
fear of losing their Estates would make such Men more Resolute; yet large
Spoils expose Victory to sale Quod tenaciores eorum i^ pretio essent metu
damni. Sueton.
, and Arms adorned with nothing but their own Strength buy it: For the Soldier
is generally more solicitous to preserve what he has, than even to get the
Victory. He that goes to fight, with a Spirit of Covetousness, is desirous to
conquer his Enemy, only that he may afterward rifle him. Interest and Glory
are powerful Incentives to Man's Breast. How would Hannibal have laughed to
have seen the Soldiers of these times so fine and spruce, and with such
sumptuous Equipages, that there are scarce Horses and Carriages enough for
them. How could he have passed the Pyrenaean Hills, or opened a Way over the
Snowy Alps, with such a number of Chariots? They now (particularly in Germany)
look not like Armies, but large Colonies of Nations, removing from one Place to
another, with their whole Families, and all their Household Goods, as if they
were Instruments of War Quidam luxuriosos apparatus conviviorum, and
irritamenta libidinum, (...) instrumenta belli mercarentur. Tac. l. 1. Hist.
. The like Remissness in Discipline Tacitus observed to be in Otho's Army.
There is no Prince rich enough, no Province plentiful enough to supply them
with Provision. They are equally injurious to Friends and Enemies. The same
slackness was introduced by Duke Fridland, to raise a great number of Soldiers,
suffering them to Forage whole Countries, with a Design, as some thought, to
oppress and weaken them, so that they should never after be able to make head
against his Forces, or else by this Licentiousness to enervate the Army it
self, following herein the Practice of Caecinna Cui perfidiam (...), infringere
exercitus virtutem inter arts erat. Tac. l. 2. Hist.
.

This Abuse threatens great Inconveniences, unless a timely Remedy be applied,
and that one which shall not appear desperate. For though it costs no less Pains
to correct undisciplined Soldiers, than resist Enemies, as Corbulo ^ound in
Syria Sed Corbuloni plus molis adversus ignaviam militum, quam contra per^^iam
hostium erat. Tac. l. 13. Annal.
; yet this must be understood, when the Enemy gives not Time, or at least when
it is improper to make so sudden a leap from one extreme to the other. But if
Time allow, nothing hinders but an Army may be reduced to Order and Discipline,
by Exercise, Severity, and Example; without which three, it is impossible it
should be reformed, at least long continue so, as Vitellius experimentally
found true Degenerabat a labor ac virtute miles, assuetudine voluptatum and
conviviorum. Tac. l. 2. Hist.
. Corbulo was sensible of the same, when he was sent into Germany, and
therefore reduced those slothful, disorderly Legions to their ancient
Discipline. The same he did afterward with his Army in Syria Legiones operum
and laboris ignar^^, popul^tionibus laetantes, veterem ad morem reduxit. Tac.
l. 11. Annal.
, where he found Soldiers so ignorant in the Affairs of War, that there were
many, even Veterans, who had never kept Guard, or stood Sentinel, who were
utter Strangers to Trenches and Fortifications, unarmed, but rich and
magnificent, as having served all their time in good Garrisons Veterani qui non
stationem non vigilias inissent, vallum, fossamque quasi nova and mira
viserent, sine galeis, sine loricis, nitidi, and quaestuo^^, militi^ per oppida
expieta. Tac. l. 13. Annal.
; and cashiering such as were unserviceable, kept the rest encamped all the
Winter, to inure them to Cold, himself in a thin Habit, and his Head uncovered,
always attending them, whether on a March or in their Works, commending the
Valiant, comforting the Weak, and giving Example to all ^pse cultu levi, capite
intecto, in agmine, in laboribus frequens adesse; laudem strenu^^, solatium
invalidis, exemplum omnibus o^tendere. Ibid.
; and when he perceived the Inclemency of the Weather made many leave their
Colors, he remedied that by Severity, not pardoning (as was usual in other
Armies) the first and second Transgression of that nature, but whoever Deserted
was immediately put to Death. And that was found to be of more use than
Clemency; for fewer deserted his Camp, than did those where it was pardoned
Remediu^ severitate quae^i^um est. Nec enim ut in aliis exercitibus, primum
alterumqu^ venia prosequebatur, sed qui signa reliq^erat, s^atim capite poenas
luebat. Idque usu salubre, and misericordia melius apparuit. Quippe pauciores
castr^ deseru^re, quam ea in quibus ignoscebatur. Ibid.
. The Soldier could never be brought to undergo those great Fatigues, and
expose himself to the present Hazards of War, without some other Severity, or
some Reward to equal those two. Princes, by Honors and Recompenses, make good
Generals; and these good Soldiers, by Example, Rigor, and Liberality. Godfrey
well knew Courage to be increased by Glory, and Hopes of Advantage, when, upon
the point of giving Battle, He clears the Doubts, and elevates the Hopes
Of those whose Bravery deserves Reward. --
Some he with Wealth, with Honor some excites,
And differing Genius's as each delights. Tass. Can. 20.

I dare affirm, no Soldiers can be good, unless their Commanders be something
inclined to Prodigality and Severity. And it is probably on this account the
Germans call a Regiment, and all that belongs to it, the Colonel's Staff, (den
Regiment oder Colonelstah,) for with that Soldiers are to be ruled. Moses kept
his in such strict Discipline, that suing once for Passage through the King of
Edom's Country, he withal engaged, that none of them should drink of the Water
of his Wells, or pass through any one's Fields or Vineyards We will not pass
through the fields nor through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the
water of the wells. Numb. 20. 19.
.

Antiquity has left us an illustrious Example of the Reestablishment of decayed
Military Discipline in the Person of Metellus, when he was in Africa, where he
found the Roman Army so corrupted, that the Soldiers would not stir out of
their Quarters, deserted their Colors, and dispersing themselves over the
Province, Ravaged and Plundered wherever they came, being guilty of all the
Extravagancies that Avarice and Luxury are capable of inspiring. Yet all these
he insensibly remedied, by Exercising them in Military Arts. He first ordered,
that no Bread, or any other Meat dressed, should be sold in the Camp; forbad
the Sutlers to follow the Army; suffered not any Common Soldier, upon a March,
to have a Servant or Mule. And thus correcting the other Abuses, he restored
them to their former Courage and Strength. The effect of which Care was so
great, as of it self to terrify Iugurtha, and obliged him, by Ambassadors, to
beg his Life, and the Lives of his Children of him, and to promise the Delivery
of all besides to the Romans. Arms are Vital Spirits, which cherish and give
motion to the Body of a Government; the Surety of Public Tranquillity, wherein
the Preservation and Increase of the same consists, provided they be well
ordered, and admit of Discipline. This the Emperor Alexander Severus well knew,
when he said, Ancient Discipline was the Support of the Commonwealth, the Fall
of which would be the Ruin of the Roman Name and Empire Disciplinam majorum
Rempublicam tenet, quae si dilabatur, and nomen Romanum, and Imperium amissum
iri. Alex. Sever. apud Lamprid.
.

Since then it is of so great Importance to have good Soldiers, it is the Duty
of Princes to conferr Favors and Honors upon them. Saul loved a brave Soldier
so well, that he would not suffer him out of his sight. Reward and Honor find,
and Exercise makes them: For Nature produces few Valiant Men; but Industry,
with good Instruction, brings up many Paucos viros fortes natura procreat, bona
institutione plures reddit industria. Veget.
. This ought to be the care of the Captains, Colonels, and Generals, as it was
of Sopher the Chief of the Host, who exercised his Fresh Water Soldiers And the
principal scribe of the army, who mustered the people of the land, etc. 2 King.
25. 9.
. And thus the Holy Scriptures call Commanders, Masters of Soldiers Genesis 37. 36.
, it being their business to teach and instruct them; such were Potiphar and
Nebuzaradan Ierem. 39. 9.
.

But because this, through the excessive Indulgence and Carelessness of
Officers, and upon account of other Impediments in War, is not easily reduced
to Practice, the Evil of it ought rather to be timely prevented; a Thing which
Princes and Commonwealths are strangely negligent in. Upon the Study of
Literature are founded Colleges; for Religion, Convents and Monasteries. The
Church Militant has its Nurseries for the Edification of Spiritual Soldiers to
defend it; for Temporal ones there is none. The Turk alone regards this, who,
to that end, gathers Children of all Nations into certain Seraglio's, and sees
them brought up in the Exercise of Arms; whence afterward is formed the Body
of his Janissaries, who knowing no other Father or Lord but the Grand Signior,
are the chiefest Strength and Defense of his Empire. Christian Princes ought to
do the same in all great Cities, by taking Orphans, Foundlings, and all other
of that nature, into Seminaries for that purpose, there to be instructed in
Military Exercises, taught to forge Arms, twist Ropes, make Gunpowder, and all
other Ammunition, to prepare them for War-Service. There might also be some
educated in Seaport Towns, where they might have an early insight into
Navigation, and see the manner of Building Ships, of making Sails and Cables,
which would be a means to cleanse the Commonwealth from those Dregs of
Vagabonds, and furnish it with Persons that would be useful in Military Arts,
which might be kept out of what they daily earn; or, if that would not suffice,
a Law might be made to assign such Seminaries the Third of all Pious Gifts or
Legacies: For assuredly they deserve no less who defend the Altars, than those
that offer Incense at them.

It would be also a very good way, for the Subsistence of an Army, to endow the
Treasury of War with certain stated Revenues, to be employed to no other uses:
As Augustus did, who settled the Tenth of all Hereditaments and Legacies, and
the Hundredth part of all Commodities sold upon it. Which Tax Tiberius would
not afterward take off, even though the Senate requested it, because it was
the Support of the Military Treasury Centesimam rerum venalium post bella
civilia institutam, deprecante populo, edixit Tiberius militare ^rarium eo
subsidio niti. Tacit. ^. 1. Annal.
. Thus Peter Count de Lemos endowed that of N^ples; but Envy afterward
overthrew all that his Zeal and Prudence had established.

Neither should this Care be taken for Soldiers only, but also in Erecting
Fortresses, and Garrisoning them; forasmuch as that Charge may prevent many
greater. The Weakness of a Place invites an Enemy, whereas scarce any one
Attacks a State he thinks able to Defend it self. If all that is lavishly
squandered away in Gaming, Shows, and Building, were expended upon this,
Princes would live abundantly more Secure, and the whole World enjoy more Peace
and Tranquillity. The Emperors, Dioclesian and Maximilian, took it as a signal
piece of Service of a certain Governor of a Province, who laid out a Sum of
Money designed for the Structure of an Amphitheater, upon the Repair of a
Citadel Ita enim and tutelae civitatis instructae murorum praesidio
providebitur, and instaurandi agonis voluptas, confirmatis his, qua ad
securitatis cautionem spectant, in secuti temporis circuitus circuitione
repraesentabit. L. Unica C. de Expen. Publ. l. 11.
.

EMBLEM LXXXIII.
THE very Ground whereon Fortresses are built is their greatest Enemy. It is
upon the Surface of that with the Shovel and Pick-Axe (Weapons of this Age)
Trenches and Approaches are made to begin a Storm. It Is within the Bowels of
the same, that Mines are secretly sprung under the Foundations of the Walls and
Bulwarks, which taking Fire, blow them all up. That Castle only is Impregnable,
which, situated in the midst of Waters, is on all sides surrounded with the
Fury of Foaming Billows; which, although they beat against it, yet do at the
same time also defend it, by not admitting of a Naval Siege; and all the Danger
would be in a Calm, if it should continue long. Thus Governments, while engaged
in War, are generally safe Civitates magna ex part bellum gerentes
conservantur, caedem I^per^o potitae corrumpuntur. Aristot. l. 7. Polit. c. 14.
: Then are they industriously Vigilant, providently forewarned; Glory animates;
Exercise redoubles their Courage; Emulation prompts to great Enterprises; and
Common Danger unites Men's Affections, and purges off the State's ill Humors.
Fear of an Enemy, keeps a People Regular, and under Laws Metus hostilis in
bonis artibus civitatem retinebat. Salust.
. The Romans were never more Valiant, nor their Subjects more Quiet and
Obedient to the Magistrates, than when Pyrrhus first, and after him Hannibal,
came up to the very Gates of their City. A great Monarchy is in more Danger
upon the account of its Power, than others are from their Weakness; for that,
through too much confidence in its Strength, neglects to provide against future
Casualties Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent: their horses hoofs
shall be counted like ^lints. Isai. 5. 28.
: whereas, on the contrary, Fear puts this always upon its Guard. If Military
Discipline cease, and be not kept in continual Exercise, Sloth effeminates
Minds, weakens and throws down Walls, rusts Swords, and gnaws the Straps of
Shields; Debaucheries, by degrees, increase with it, and Ambition reigns;
whence arise Dissentions, and from them Civil Wars: so that there is not one
Intestine Malady or Infirmity ingender'd by Laziness, but the whole State
suffers by it. Nothing grows or is preserved without Motion. Q. Metellus, upon
the News of the Loss of Carthage, said openly in the Senate, That he now
apprehended that of Rome would follow, when he saw that Rival Republic
destroyed. Pub. Nasica, hearing one say, This Success put Affairs in a better
Posture; answered, Nay, rather, they are now in greater Danger. This wise Man
well knew those Hostile Forces were like Surges, which indeed shook the City,
but withal added Strength and Courage to it; and therefore exhorts them to
beware of their Ruin, as knowing weak Minds to have no greater Enemy than
Security, and (...) Fear was a necessary Tutor to this Pupil People Timens
infirmis animis hostem securitatem, and tanquam pupilli^ (...) idoneum tutorem
necessarium videns e^se terrorem. Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. ^^inthila, King of the Goths, was great in Spain, and ^^quired Renown by his
Achievements, while he was engaged in War: when that ceased, he abandoned
himself to Luxury, and was ruined. King Alphonsus VI. re^lecting upon the
Losses he had received from the Moors, ^^k'd the reason of it; and was
answered, It was the Sloth and Looseness of his Men: upon which he immediately
forbad Bathing, and all other Wantonnesses that impair Strength. The Oscitancy
and Drowsiness of the two Kings, Roderick and Vitiza, made almost all Spain
fall a Prey to the Africans, till the times of Pelagius and his Successors,
when Warfare beginning to flourish again, Valor, and the Glory of Arms,
increased by constant Emulation, and not only delivered Spain from that heavy
Yoke, but rendered it Head of a Puissant Monarchy. The Emulation between the
Military Orders of Castile produced abundance of Great Men, who ^trove more to
surpass each other in Military Glory, than to conquer an Enemy. The House of
Austria had never ascended to this Pitch of Grandeur, had it always been given
up to Idleness. The same means Envy takes to pull it down by, strengthen and
render it more glorious: For they who live in Peace, like Iron not used, lose
their Brightness, and become rusty Nam pacem agentes, tanquam ferrum,
splendorem amittunt. Arist. l. 7. Polit. c. 14.
. Lesser Powers may indeed be preserved without Arms, but not great ones: For
it is not so difficult to keep Fortune equal in them, as in these; out of
which, if Arms be ^ot sent abroad, War is kindled at Home: As it befell the
Roman Monarchy; with whose Grandeur, Ambition, that old inbred Vice, increased
and broke out. For when Affairs were in a low Condition, it was easy to keep
an Equality: but after the Conquest of the World, when their Rival Cities and
Kings were destroyed, and they at leisure to share their Riches, then it was
that the Senators and Common People first began to fall out Vetus (...) jam
pridem in^ita mortalibus potentiae cupido, cum (...) per^i magnitudine
adolevit, erupitque. Nam rebus modicis, aequalitas fa^^^ habeb^tur, sed ubi
subacto orb, and aemulis Vrbibus Regibusque excisi^ s^ cu^as opes concupiscere
vacuum fuit, prima inter Patres Plebemque (...) mina exarsere. Arist. l. 7.
Pol. c. 14.
. The Emulation of Valor which is exercised against Enemies, when there is
any, is usually inflamed between Countrymen, when there is none. This the
Germans had Experience of, when, upon the Romans leaving them, and their being
exempt from Foreign Fear, out of Emulation, turned their Arms upon one another
Decessu Romanorum, (...) vacui externo metu gentis assuetudine, and tum
aemulatione gloriae arma in se verterant. Tac. l. 2. Hist
. The Peace of the Roman Empire was very bloody, it being the Source of all
their Civil Wars Pacem sine dubio post haec verum cruent^^. Tac. l. 1. Annal.
. Long Peace was agreeable to the Cherusci, but of no advantage Cherusci nimiam
ac marcentem diu pacem illacessui nutrierunt, idque ju^undius quam tutius fuit.
Tac. de Mor. Roman.
. The Wars of the Low Countries put an end to the Intestine Commotions in
Spain. That Theater of War, or rather that School of Mars, where so many
Military Arts have been taught and exercised, has been very much to the
Advantage of this Monarchy: Though, it is true, this Military Exercise and
Discipline has been common to its Enemies and Rivals, almost all the Princes of
Europe having learned the Use of Arms there, although it is a prodigious Charge
to make War in Countries so disturbed and remote, with so much Bloodshed and
Extortion, so much Advantage on the Enemies side, and so little on ours, that
it may reasonably be questioned whether it were better to conquer or be
conquered; or if it would not be more expedient to apply some Remedy, whereby
to quench, or at least damp, for a time, that ardent Thirst after Blood and
Riches; to the end, that what is thrown away there, might be laid out upon a a
Fleet, for the Establishment of the Empire of the Ocean and Mediterranean, and
the carrying on a War in Africa, the successful Progress of which, by reason of
the nearness of Spain and Italy, would the more unite this Monarchy. However,
Love of those so Ancient and Loyal Subjects, joined with a Desire to see them
redeemed from that vile Slavery, they are, under the Notion of Liberty,
miserably oppressed with, and to reduce them to the true Worship of God, have
more Influence on us, than State-Interest.

Now as the Encouragement of Valor and Military Glory in a Monarchy, is the
Security thereof; so is it not without Danger, when the Supreme Power is lodged
in many, as in Commonwealths; their greatest Hazard being in their own Arms,
while they entrust the Power of the Army to one; that very Hand which they
first armed usually laying the Yoke on them; those Forces themselves gave,
oppressing their Liberty. Thus it was with the Roman Republic, and from thence
Tyranny passed to almost all other Nations. However requisite therefore it be
to keep Armies always ready, and in Exercise; yet the Arts of Peace are still
more secure, especially if the People be corrupted, and separated in distant
Places: For the Fierceness of War does but render them more Insolent; and it is
better to keep them in view of Danger, than secure from it, if you expect they
should unite for their Conservation. The Liberty of the Republic of Genoua was
not less safe, when its Mountains were not regularly fortified, than now that
through singular Industry and Labor they are made as Impregnable Walls to the
State. For too much Security breeds ill Humors, divides the People into
Factions, begets Presumptuous Spirits, and despises External Means. In a word,
In Commonwealths harrass'd with Intestine Broils, Wars are more dangerous than
useful; and consequently then only will be of advantage to Genoua, when that
prudent Senate shall act as if they had never built them.

EMBLEM LXXXIV.
IT has been the Opinion of some, That Nature was rather a Stepmother to Man,
than his own; and that she had showed her self more liberal to other Creatures,
in giving them a clearer Instinct and Notice of the Means necessary for their
Defense and Conservation. But these Persons did not sufficiently consider their
own Excellency, their Power and Dominion over Sublunary Things; Nature having
bestowed on them a swift Understanding, in a Moment penetrating both the Earth
and Heavens: a Memory, wherein, without the least confusion or disorder, are
reposited the Idea's of Things so various: a Reason, which Distinguishes,
Collects, and Concludes: a Judgment, that Comprehends, Weighs, and Determines;
Gifts whereby Man is entitled to the Sovereignty of all Created Beings, and a
Liberty to dispose of them according to his Pleasure, having Hands framed with
such Skill and Wisdom, that they are Tools fit for all Arts; so that although
he comes into the World naked and without Arms, yet he forges them according to
his Fancy, either to defend himself, or assault others. The Earth, to that end,
furnishes him with Iron and Steel; the Water (as you see in this Device) turns
the Mill that strikes them: Thus all the Elements obey his Will. With any
slight Plank (Boat) he tames the Sea's Pride, and gathers the Winds into a
small piece of Canvas, to make them serve him for Wings to fly from one Place
to another; confines all the Fire's Violence within Brazen Pipes, called Guns,
and thence shoots Thunderbolts no less terrible than those of Jupiter himself.
By Wit and Art he facilitates many Things impossible to Nature: By these he
improves Nature Multa quae natura impedita erant, c^nsi^io expediebat. Livy,
Dec. 2.
; he tempers Breast-Plates, and sharpens Iron into Lances. It behooves the
Prince to use Industry more than Force, Wisdom than Arms Wisd. 6. 1.
, the Pen rather than the Sword Eccl. 9 18.
. For to attempt every thing with one's utmost Power, is the Folly of the
Giants, who heaped Mountains upon Mountains. It is not the greatest Strength
that always Triumphs; the little Remora stops the Course of a Ship. That one
City, Numantia, fatigued the whole Roman Empire, for fourteen Years: Nor did
the Conquest of those vast Countries of Asia cost it so much Pains as the
Taking of Saguntum A City of Spain, now called Morvedre.
. Strength decays by degrees, and is consumed, but Wisdom and Ingenuity endures
for ever; and except War be managed by this, Victory is never obtained by that.
A War carried on by Policy is secure; that which relies wholly upon Strength,
hazardous and uncertain.

One Wise Head is worth Twenty Hands. Eurip.
Tiberius, writing to Germanicus, boasts, that in the nine times he was sent by
Augustus into Germany, he had done more by Stratagem than by Force Se novies a
Divo Augusto in Germaniam missum, plu^a consilio, qu^^ vi perfe^isse. Tacit. l.
6. Annal.
. Nor did he use to take any other Measures, when Emperor, especially to
maintain the remote Provinces; and would frequently say, That Foreign Affairs
should be managed by Wisdom and Policy, and Armies kept as far off as possible
Consiliis and astu, exter^as res ^^liend^s, arma procul habenda.
. All things are not surmounted by Strength and Expedition, but many by Policy
and Deliberation Non omnia viribus superantur, non velacitate, non celeritate,
sed corilio and sententia. C^cero. Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. The Low Countries were ruined amidst their continual Victories; because they
confided in Strength, more than Prudence. Let Force submit to Policy; for that
will conquer where the other cannot. When the Moorish Armies annoyed Spain, in
the time of King Roderick, the Governor of Murcia was defeated in a Battle,
where all the Nobility of this City lost their Lives; and the Women having
Intelligence of it, placed themselves along the Walls, in Men's Habit, and all
in Armor. Upon which the Conquerors, thinking by this they were still very
Numerous, consented to Honorable Terms. Edward IV. King of England, used to
say, That Charles the Wise, of France, without any Armies, by writing Letters
only, did him more mischief than his Father or Grandfather had done with all
theirs. The Sword can exert its Force but in a few Places; good Management is
of Universal Influence. Nor does Princes being remote one from another signify
any thing: For as Trees have Communication with, and are united to each other
by the means of Roots, their Activity being a very large Extent; so they, by
their Ambassadors, and secret Practices, may do the same. Policy makes the
Strength of Foreigners its own by Alliance, having the Common Interest in view.
A Prince may do more from a private Closet, than in an open Plain. King Philip
II. never went out of Madrid, yet kept the World in Awe and Obedience: He made
himself more Formidable by Prudence than by Power. The Power that makes use of
Address, is in a manner Infinite. Archimedes often said, If he had a Place to
stand on, he could, with his Machines, move this Terraqueous Globe. Any Potent
Monarchy might easily attain to an Universal Empire, if to its Strength were
joined Skill and Industry: But lest this should be, that Primum Mobile of
Empires permits the Great Ones to want Prudence, and wholly trust to their
Power. More Affairs are transacted by Counsel and Conduct, than by Blows
Pleraque in summa fortuna auspiciis and consiliis, magis quam ^elis and ^^nibus
geri solent. Tac. 13 Annal.
. Power with Rashness is as dangerous as Rashness without Power. Abundance of
Wars between Christian Princes might be avoided by Industry; but either
Judgment is insensible of their Inconveniences, and cannot find a way to
decline them Honorably, or it does not regard them, Ambition blinding
Prudence; or else Vanity and Haughtiness look on it as a piece of Bravery,
voluntarily to face them; and thus are tickled with a Counterfeit-Glory of War,
which, as it is a Public Action, whereon the Common Preservation of all
depends, ought not to be measured by thin Shadows of Honor, but by the Public
Advantage and Utility; yet so, that the Prince must in the mean time leave no
Stone unturned to shun War, cutting off all Occasions, before they happen, or
if they be already, getting the Hearts of such as by their Counsel can promote
Peace. Let him find out all endearing ways imaginable to preserve Friendship:
Let him embrace his Enemy both within and without his Realms; and by crossing
his Designs, and entering into Leagues and Alliances Defensive, terrify him.
And to these Humane Means let him join the Divine Assistances of Prayer and
Sacrifice, and apply himself to the Pope, as the Common Father of Christendom,
ingenuously telling him his Intentions and Desire of the Public Quiet, of the
Injury received, or the Reasons that induce him to take up Arms, if
Satisfaction be not made him. Whence the Matter being also carried to the
College of Cardinals, and the Authority of the Apostolic See interposed,
either the War will be avoided, or the Prince justify the Cause of it at Rome,
where is the Tribunal at which all Princes Actions ought to be judged, and
their Controversies decided. Nor is this a Mean-spiritedness, but rather a
Christian Generosity, and Political Provision for the maintaining Amity among
Nations, and the avoiding of Emulations, and the Confederacy they occasion.

EMBLEM LXXXV.
WHen the Bear has got a Bee-Hive, he finds no better way than to plunge it
under Water; for any other would rather hinder his Design of getting the Honey,
and escaping the Stings of the Bees. By this Example, the present Emblem shows
the Inconveniences of keeping a Mediocrity in Counsels; experienced in that
which Herennius Pontius gave the Samnites, when they had got the Romans in a
narrow Pass, who seeing his first Advice rejected, which was to let them all
go, was for putting them all to the Sword: And being asked why he thus went
from one Extreme to the other, when the Middle-way might be taken, of giving
them their Liberty, after the Imposition of certain Laws, as being Conquered?
He answered, That it was necessary either to show themselves generous to the
Romans, by so signal a Kindness to establish a firm and inviolable Peace with
them, or else to give such a Blow to their Forces, that they should never again
be able to make Head against them; Any way between these two, said he, will
neither make Friends, nor take away Enemies Neutralitas nec amicos pa^it, nec
inimicos tollit. Polyb.
. Hence that of Aristodemus to the Aetolians: We must have the Romans either
our Allies or Enemies; there is no Middle-way Romanos (...) socios habere
oportuit, aut hosts, media via null^ est. Aristodem.
. In those Cases where any one would oblige a Friend or Enemy, Moderate
Expressions of Kindness do nothing: For Gratitude always looks upon the
Omissions are made, and seldom fails to find a Reason not to think it self
Obliged. Thus Francis I. King of France, laid not aside his Enmity to the
Emperor Charles V. notwithstanding he set him at liberty, because his Captivity
was not so generous as that of Alphonsus King of Portugal, who being taken in a
Battle by Ferdinand King of Leon, was treated by him with all the Humanity
imaginable, his Wounds dressed carefully, and himself set at liberty after his
Recovery; Favors which wrought upon him to lay his whole Kingdom at the
Conqueror's Feet: But Ferdinand refused the Offer, satisfied with the
Restitution of such Places as had been lately taken in Galicia. The same
Consideration had Philip, Duke of Milan, when having taken Prisoners the Kings
of Arragon and Navarr, (the first of which was Alphonsus V.) he called a
Council, to deliberate what should be done with them; and while some were for
having them pay a Ransom, others for binding them to certain Conditions, and
lasty, others for freely Dismissing them without either, he took this last
Advice, thereby to lay the greater Obligation upon them, and so engage their
Friendship.

When Kingdoms are embroiled in Civil Wars, there is nothing more dangerous than
standing Neuter, as Henry the Infant endeavored to do, during the Troubles of
Castile, occasioned by the Nonage of King Ferdinand IV. by which means he lost
his Friends, without obliging his Enemies.

Nor is it less dangerous in the Punishments of the Multitude, to inflict them
promiscuously on all; wherefore it seems most advisable, either wholly to
connive at their Faults, or to make a severe Example of some one. Hence
Germanicus was counseled, in the Rebellion of the German Legions, either to
grant All or None of what the Soldiers demanded Periculosa severitas,
flagitiosa l^rgitio: seu nihil militi, seu omnia concedereniur in ancipiti
Republica. Tac. 1. Annal.
; and deservedly blamed for indulging them Part, taking a Middle-way Satis
superque missione, and pecunia and mollibus consul^is peccatum. Id. Ibid.
. Thus Drusus, in another Occasion of the like nature, was advised either to
Dissemble, or Punish with Rigor. The prudentest Counsel certainly in the
World: For the Common People can never keep a Medium between two Extremes, but
always exceed in the one or the other Al^i fortioribus remediis agendum, nihil
in vulgo modicum: terrere ni paveam, ubi pertimuerint, impune contemni. Tac. 1.
Annal.
.

If the Matter require Expedition, it is certain Ruin not to venture enough,
or not to use sufficient Precaution; as it happened to Valens, who wavering
between the Counsels that were given him, could not come to any determinate
Resolution Mox utrumque consilium aspernatur, quod inter ancipitia deterrimum
est, dum media se quitur, nec ausus est satis, nec providit. Id. l. 3. Hist.
.

In Affairs of War, Fear would sometimes appear prudent; and to that end,
suggests Moderate Resolutions; which serve but to encourage the Enemy, and give
him Time to look about him. As King John I. found, who pretending the Crown of
Portugal was devolved on him by the Death of Ferdinand, his Father-in-Law,
resolved to enter that Kingdom alone, and to have his Army follow: whence the
Portuguese gained Time to take up Arms in the interim; which had never been
done, had he immediately fell upon them; but he, to avoid War, left his Right
to the Decision of Justice. Threats signify little, if the Hand lifted up,
have no Weapon in it, and do not sometimes punish Disobedience in earnest.

The Hastiness of the French, makes them regard neither the past nor present
Time, and through the Heat of their Minds they are too adventurous, and too
precipitous in their Resolutions: However, this very thing oftentimes gives
Success to them; for by this means they avoid Luke-warmness, and dispatch every
thing in a trice. The Spaniards, on the other side, are Dilatory, that they
may, by long and much Consideration, proceed with more Caution; and out of an
Affectation of Prudence, use to Hesitate; nay, while they take Time to Consult,
lose the Opportunity of Execution.

The Italians know better how to make their Advantage both of the one and the
other, using the Opportunities as they present themselves: Not like the
Germans, who are slow in Resolving, lazy in Executing, and consult only the
present Time, without any regard to the past or future. Their Minds change with
Events, which is the reason they have so little advanced their Fortune; it
being otherwise a Nation, which, considering its innate Courage, might extend
its Dominions far and near. To the same Cause may be ascribed the long
Continuance of the Civil Wars the Empire is harrass'd with at this day; which
undoubtedly, by resolute Counsel and Expedition, might have been laid asleep
long ago; whereas by slow Counsels, which yet passed for Prudent, we have seen
vast Armies, upon the Rhine, which might have made way even into France, and
forced it to an Universal Peace: a thing has done them more prejudice, than if
they had lost several Battles: For there can be no greater Overthrow, than for
an Army insensibly to waste and perish within it self. It is this has made
Havoc of their own Country, and the Places adjacent, through which War ought
to be carried, when now its Seat is in the very Heart of Germany.

In all other Affairs of Civil Government, Middle-Counsels may have place;
because of the Danger of Extremes, and because it is of great Importance ever
to take away from which you may afterward (in case of Necessity) come to any
one of the two with the less inconvenience. Between these two Extremes, the
Ancients placed Prudence, represented by the flight of Daedalus, who came
neither too near the Sun, nor too near the Sea, lest the excessive Heat of the
one should melt, or the Moisture of the other wet his Wings. I^ Countries whose
Inhabitants are not of a Servile Nature, but of a Polite Genius, and Generous
Spirit, the Reins of the People ought to be governed with so much Caution and
Address, that neither too much Indulgence shall breed Arrogance, nor too much
Rigor Aversion. It is equally dangerous to curb them with Bits and Barnacles,
and turn them loose without a Bridle; for they can neither endure all Liberty,
nor all Slavery, (as Galba told Piso of the Neque enim hic, aut in caeteris
gentibus, quae regnantur, certa Dominorum Domus, and caeteri servi: sed
im^eraturus es hominibus, qui ne^ ^otam servitutem pati possunt, nec totam
libertatem. Tac. l. 1. Hist.
Romans.) Always to execute Power, is to wear out the Chain of Servitude: It Is
a kind of Tyranny, to go about to reduce Subjects to the model of an absolute
Perfect State, in that the Condition of Humane Nature admits not of it. It is
not necessary for a Government to be such as it ought to be, but as it is
capable of being; for all things that are expedient, are not possible to Humane
Infirmity. It is an Absurdity, to wish there may be no Defect at all in a
Commonwealth. There will be Vices, as long as there be Men. Excess of Zeal is
the Spring of many Mistakes in Governors, in not knowing how to conform to
Prudence. The same is Ambition, when Princes affect to pass for Severe, and
imagining their Reputation consists in Ruling their Subjects so, that they
shall never in the least degree swerve from Reason and the Laws. It Is a
dangerous Strictness, which consults not the ordinary Passions of the Vulgar.
Open Address prevails more than Power; Example and Complacency, than Inhuman
Severity. Let the Prince therefore rather make believe he finds his Subjects
good, than value himself upon making them so: which Tacitus commends Agricola
for, in his Government of Britain Maluit videri invenisse bonos quam fecisse.
Tacit. in Vit. Agric.
. Let him not suffer himself to be deceived in the past Times, so as to wish he
could see those Good Manners he fancies were in those Days: For Malice was ever
the same in all Times; but it is a fault of our corrupt Nature, always to like
the Past better than the Present Laudamus veteres, praesentes carpimus annos.
. Besides, granting that Severity and Obedience were greater formerly, yet this
Age will not bear it, if those Ancient Manners are altered in it: This Mistake
cost Galba both his Life and Empire Nocuit antiqu^s rigor, and nimia severitas,
cui pares non sumus. Tac. l. 1. Hist.
.

EMBLEM LXXXVI.
MAN's Mind has not been satisfied with the Speculation of Terrestrial Things;
but impatient that the Knowledge of the Heavens should be deferred so long as
till after Death, has broke the Prison of the Body, and soared above the very
Elements, to find out, by Reasoning, what it could not by Touching, Sight, and
Hearing: and to this end, has formed in Imagination an Idea of that most
Beautiful Fabric, contriving a Sphere with such various Circles, Equations and
Epicycles, as aptly represent the several Motions of the Planets and
Constellations; and though he be not positively assured whether the thing be
really so, he has, however, acquired this Glory, that he can now conceive how
this World is, or at least how it might have been created. Neither does the
Mind stay here; but restless and venturesom in its Researches, has imagined
another quite different Hypothesis, and would persuade others, that the Sun is
the Center of those Orbs which move round it, and have their Light from it. An
Hypothesis impious, and directly contrary to Natural Reason, which gives Rest
to heavy Bodies; repugnant to Holy Writ, which says, the Earth stands for ever
Eccles. 1. 4.
: lastly, inconsistent with the Dignity of Man, as if he must be moved to enjoy
the Sun's Rays, and not the Sun to bring them him, when yet this (as all other
Creatures) was made, only for his Service This Opinion was embraced and
maint^i^ed by Copernicus, Rheticus, Rothmannus, Kepler, Galilaeus, Des Carts,
and Gassendus, by whom all Arguments to the contrary are fully answered.
. It is certain then, that this Prince of Light, who has in Charge the Empire
of all Things here below, illuminates, and by his Presence informs them, by
going, without intermission, from one Tropic to the other, with a Contrivance
so wonderful, that all Parts of the Earth receive from him, if not an equal
Heat, at least, an equal Light, whereby the Divine Wisdom has prevented the
Evil that would unavoidably ensue, if the Sun should never leave the Equator;
for then its Rays would utterly burn up some Countries, while others would
freeze, and be involved in perpetual Darkness. This Natural Example teaches
Princes how much it advances the Public Utility, for Them, like that Swiftest
of the Planets, continually to move about their States, to warm the Affection
of their Subjects, and give Life to their Affairs Velocissimi sideris more,
omnia invisere, omnia au^ire. Plin. Jun.
. This is what the Royal Prophet would intimate, when he says, God has placed
his Tabernacle upon the Sun Psalm. 19 4.
, which never stands still, but is present on all Occasions. King Ferdinand the
Catholic, and the Emperor Charles V. kept not their Courts in one certain
Place; by which means they achieved many Notable Things which they could not
possibly have done by Ministers, who, although dexterous and careful enough,
yet never perform what the Prince would, were he present in Person; because
they want either Orders or Power. Our Savior Christ no sooner came to the
Sheep-pool, but he healed the Paralytick Rise, take up thy bed and walk. John
5. 8.
, which the Angel could not do in Eight and thirty Years, whose Commission
being only to trouble the Water, he, as a Minister, could not go beyond it For
an Angel went down at a certain season, and troubled the water. Ibid. 4.
. It Is impossible for States to be well governed by the bare Relations of
others, and therefore Solomon advises Kings to give ^ar to their Subjects
themselves Give ear, you that rule the people, etc. Wisd. 6. 2. ibid. ver. 4.
; for this is a part of their Office, and to them, not to their Ministers, is
given of the Lord that Power and Virtue which accompanies the Scepter only,
wherein it infuses the Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel, of Courage and Piety; nay,
I may say, a kind of Divinity, enabling the Prince to foresee Things to come,
so as that he cannot be put upon either in what he sees or hears And the spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord. Isai. 11. 2.
. Nevertheless, in Time of Peace, some fixed Place of Residence seems by no
means inconvenient; and it will be sufficient, by going a Progress round each
Country, to have once visited his States. Nor indeed are any Treasuries capable
of defraying the Expenses frequent Removals of a Court will require; nor can
they be made without considerable Detriment to the Subject, without disturbing
the Order of Councils and Tribunals, and retarding the Proceedings of
Government and Justice. King Philip II. throughout his whole Reign, scarce ever
went a step out of Madrid.

But in Occasions of War, it appears more advisable for the Prince to be
himself present, and to Head his Subjects: For it is for that Reason the Scared
Writings call him Shepherd and Captain And I will set up shepherds over them,
which shall feed them, and they shall fear no more, etc. Jer. 23. 4.
. Thus God, commanding Samuel to anoint Saul, does not say to be King, but to
be Captain over Israel And thou ^^alt anoint him to be a Captain over my people
I^rael. 1 Samuel 9. 16.
: intimating that this was his principal Office; and in effect, that this was
the Practice of all Kings in former Ages. Upon this it was that the People
grounded their Petition for a King, that they might have one to go out before
them, and fight their Battles Rex enim Dux erat in Bello. Arist. l. 3. Pol. c.
11.
. Nothing encourages Soldiers more in War, than their Prince's Presence Nay,
but we will have a King over us; That we also may be like all the ^^tions, and
that our King may judge us, and go out before us, and ^^ght our battles, 1 Samuel
8. 19, 20.
The Lacedaemonians thought theirs, even while in their Cradles, had the same
Power, and therefore carried them, in their Infancy, into the Field. Antigonus,
the Son of Demetrius, took his Presence, in a Sea Fight, to be equivalent to a
great many Ships of the Enemy Mevero, inquit, praesentem, (...) multis navibus
comparas. Plut. in Ep^ph.
. Alexander the Great animated his Men, by representing to them, that he first
exposed himself to Dangers. When the Prince, in such a case, is upon the Place,
great Exploits are often performed, which no one, in his absence, would dare to
undertake: Nor is there need to wait for Orders from Court, whence they
generally come too late, after the Opportunity is gone, and always full of vain
Apprehensions, and impracticable Circumstances; a Thing we have often
experienced in Germany, not without great Prejudice of the Public. There Is
nothing kindles Spirits so generously, nothing that inspires such Lofty
Thoughts in the Minds of Soldiers, as to have the Prince, in whose Hand is
Reward, an Eyewitness of their Bravery Ego qui nihil (...) unquam praecepi,
quin primus me periculis obtulerim, qui saepe cive^ (...) cl^peo texi. Curt. l
8.
. This Argument Hannibal made use of, to inflame the Courage of his Men;
There Is none of you, said he, whom I am not a Witness and Spectator of, and
cannot too, in convenient Time and Place, requite, where I observe Merit Nemo
vestrum est, cujus non idem ego spectator and testis, notata temporibus
locisque refer possim decora. Live. Dec. l. 2.
. To the same effect, Godfrey thus spoke to his Men: Whose Country is not
known? Whose Noble Blood,
Whose Courage or whose Conduct is not understood? Tass. Cant. 20.



Upon this account, it will not be convenient for the Prince to entrust his
Forces with a General; which is so certain a Danger, that it was looked upon as
unsafe for Tiberius to put his into the Hands even of his Son Germanicus In
cujus manu tot legiones, immensa sociorum auxilia, mirus apud populum favor,
habere imperium quam expectare mallet. Tac. l. 4. Annal.
. And this takes place more particularly in Civil Insurrections, where (as has
been said) the Princes appearing, easily dashes the Rebels Divus Julius
seditionem exercitus verbo uno compescuit. Quirites ^^cando, qui sacramentum
ejus detrectabant. Divus Augustus vultu and aspect^ Actiacas legiones
exterruit. Tac. l. 1. Hist.
. Notwithstanding, every Motion of War, or the loss of any small Town, should
not make the Prince come abroad, and desert the Court; whence Government flows
to all the other Parts, as Tiberius well observed in the Troubles of Germany
Neque decorum pri^cipibus, si una ^lterave civitas, omissa urbe, unde in om^ia
regimen. Tac. l. 3. Annal.
: He, at another time, hearing himself reviled, for not going to quiet the
Hungarian and German Legions, stood unshaken at those Murmurings, and was fixed
not to abandon the Head of the Monarchy, and expose that and himself to the
Chance of War. By these Reasons were they led, who persuaded David not to go
out to fight against the Israelites who adhered to Absalom, saying, That their
being put to flight, or cut off, would not be of so bad consequence, as if he
should fly or be killed in his own Person, which was worth Ten Thousand of
them, and therefore that it seemed best that he should stay behind to guard the
City: Which accordingly he did 2 S^m. 18. 3, 4.
. So if the War be made to revenge an Injury or Affront, Vindictam mandasse sat
est. Claud.
The same may be said when Arms are taken up for Defense only, and there be no
evident Danger; for then the Prince will get more Credit by despising it, and
leaving it to a General. So if the War be waged to make any new Conquests, it
will be thought too eager Ambition in him to hazard his Person, and be greater
Prudence to try his Fortune by another; as King Ferdinand the Catholic did,
committing the Conquest of Naples to the Great Captain, and that of the Indies
to Herman Cortez. If a General fall, it is easy to find another to succeed
him; but if the Prince be lost, all is lost, as it befell King S^bastian. The
Absence of Princes from their Courts is very dangerous, as Spain found to its
cost, in that of the Emperor Charles V. Nor should a Prince venture his own
State, to conquer others Ne nova molire^ur, nisi ^ioribus firmatis. Tac. Annal.
l. 12.
The same Sun (whose Figure we use in this Device) never visits the Poles,
because one of them would be endangered in the mean time: -- Medium non des^rit
unquam
Coeli Phoebus iter, radiis tamen omnia lustrat. Claud.

Nature has given the Kings of the Bees Wings, but those very small, lest they
should stray too far from their Kingdoms. Let the Prince go to those Wars only
whose Seat is within his own Dominions, or that threaten him with evident
Danger. Hence Mucianus advised the Emperor Domitian to stay at Lions in France,
and not stir till the State of those Provinces, or the Empire it self, were in
greater danger Ipse Lugduni vim fortunamque Principatus e proximo ostenta^^^,
nec parvis periculis mixtus, and majoribus non defuturus. Tac. Hist. l. 4.
. Nor was it good Counsel which Titianus and Proculus gave Otho, not to be at
the Battle of Bedriacum, upon the Issue of which the whole Empire depended
Postquam pugnari placitum, interesse pugnae Imperatorem, an se^^^ melius foret,
dubitavere. Paulino and Celso non adversantibus, ne Pr^^cipem objectare
periculis viderentur; iidem illi deterioris consilii perpul^^^, ut Brixellum
conderet, ac dubiis praeliorum exemptus, summae rerum and ^^perii seipsum
reservaret. Tac. Hist. l. 2.
. The Archduke Leopold shows much more Courage and Prudence, who though he
sees himself assaulted at Salefeld, by the Joint-Forces of his Enemies, much
superior to his, yet undervalues his Personal Dangers, and always maintains a
general Constancy, well knowing the Safety of the Empire and House of Austria
to consist in this Event; and so is the foremost in the Perils and Fatigues of
War.

-- Monstrat tolerare labores,
Non jubet -- Lucan.

But even in these Cases too, it is necessary to examine the Condition of the
War, whether the Prince, by absenting himself, will not leave his State in
greater danger, either from within or abroad; if he shall not hazard his
Succession; whether he have Courage enough, and be capable of Arms, and have an
Inclination to them: For if he want but any one of these Qualities, he will do
more by putting his Power and Forces into another Hand; as we see in the
Loadstone, which by touching the Iron, and communicating its Virtue to it,
lifts up a greater Weight than it could do by it self. But if the Necessity be
great, it will suffice, if the Prince be hard by, to Influence his Army,
staying in some Place, whence he may readily Consult, Resolve, and give Orders:
This was the Emperor Leopold's way, who removed sometimes to Aquileia,
sometimes to Ravenna or Milan, to be near the Wars of Hungary and Germany

EMBLEM LXXXVII.
PRudence is not always fortunate, nor Temerity always unhappy: -- Quisquis
sapit celeriter, non tuto sapit. It is however good for fiery Tempers to follow
the first impetus of Nature, because by delay they cool insensibly, and can
never determine themselves; nor has it usually an ill End (in War particularly)
to let themselves be l^d by that secret Force of Second Causes, which if it
does not compel, at least moves them so, that with it they seldom miscarry.
Some Divine Genius favors Daring Actions.

Scipio passes the Sea into Africa, and freely trusts himself to the Punick
Faith of Syphax, with apparent Risque of his Life, and the Public Safety of
Rome: Julius Caesar in a small Bark abandons himself to the Fury of the
Adriatic; and both succeed in their Ras^ness. It is impossible for all things
to be provided against by Prudence; nor would any thing great be attempted, if
that should stand to consult all Casualties and Hazards. Cardinal Gaspar Borgia
entered Naples in Disguise, upon hearing of the Sedition between the Commons
and Nobility: The Danger was great; and when some of the Nobility proposed
several ways for him to secure himself, he answered, with a p^esence of Mind
truly generous, It is not now a Time for Deliberation, something must be
allowed to Chance Nullum nunc in is^a occaaione deliberandi tempus est, aliquid
(...) permittendum. Mar. Hist. Hisp. l. 12. c. 19.
. If after the Success of great Enterprises, we should look back upon all the
Dangers that attended them, we should scarce venture on them again. James, King
of Arragon, was so adventurous, as to sit down before Valencia with only a
Thousand Foot, and Three hundred and sixty Horse: And though this Undertaking
was looked on by all Men as rash, nay, impossible, yet the Town surrendered.
Bold Counsels are commonly judged by the Event; if they succeed, they are
commended for Prudent Fortuna in sapient^^^ cessit. Tac* de Mor. Germ.
, and those Persons blamed who gave safer Advice. No Judgment can either in
Precipitation, or when it acts calmly, sufficiently provide for it self, in
that Affairs depend upon Contingencies, which are uncertain even to the most
wary Foresight. Sometimes Rashness comes before Occasion, and Moderation
follows it; sometimes this slides swiftly between them, nor has it any Hair
behind to be held by.

All things depend on that Eternal Providence, which efficaciously moves us to
act, when the Disposition of it, and the Accomplishing of its Divine Decrees so
require; and then Foolhardy Counsels are Prudence, and Errors the highest
Reason. When Providence would pull down the Pride of a Monarchy, lest, like the
Tower of Babel, it should attempt to reach Heaven, it confounds the Designs and
Languages of its Ministers, that they may disagree; so that if one asks for
Lime, another either does not understand what he means, or else offers him
Sand. In the Untimely Death of those who are invested with Supreme Government,
its end is not to cut their Thread of Life, but to throw down that Grandeur.
The Holy Spirit, mentioning David's Victory over Goliath, says not that his
Body, but that his Boasting was beat down with the Stone When he lift up his
hand with the stone in his sling, and beat down the boasting Goliath Eccles. 47.
4.
. So if, on the other side, it has decreed to Exalt a Monarchy, it creates in
that Age brave Commanders, and wise Counselors, or causes them to be made
choice of, and gives them occasion of exerting their Valor, and giving Proof
of their Wisdom, by which two more is done than by the Arm and Sword Pleraque
in summa ^^^una, auspiciis and consiliis potius quam telis ac manibus geruntur.
Tac. Annal. l. 3.
. Bees then swarm into Helmets, and Weapons grow, as that Hunting Spear of
Romulus did, upon Mount Palatine, and erected at a Wild Boar. The very missing
of the Blow of this Founder of the Roman Monarchy was fortunate, being a kind
of Prognostic of it. Which shows, that it is not always Courage or Prudence
that raises and supports Monarchies, (though they are generally the
Instruments) but that Superior Impulse which moves all Causes together, for
their Increase or Preservation; and then even Chance, directed by that Eternal
Mind, effects what Prudence could not so much as have imagined before. When
Germany Revolted, and the Roman Affairs were extremely desperate, the Fortune
of this Nation, as it had often upon other Occasions, came to its Assistance
out of the East Affuit ut saepe alias fortuna populi Romani (...) Orient. Tac.
Hist. l. 3.
. If the Valor and Conduct of any Hero be ordained to these ends, no other
Person, though never so Brave, and truly Great, can deprive him of the Glory of
obtaining them. Could there be a finer Soldier than D'Aubigny? Yet he was
unsuccessful, having to deal with the Great Captain, who was Destined to
Establish the Spanish Monarchy in Italy: God so disposing (as he did in favor
of the Struebat jam fortuna, in diversa part terrarum, initia causasque
imperio. Tac. Hist. l. 2.
Roman Empire) its Beginnings and Causes, by the means chiefly of Ferdinand the
Catholic, who, by his Prudence and Skill in Government, laid the Foundations
of that Monarchy, and by his Valor erected and enlarged it; being so careful
and vigilant to increase it, that he neglected no Occasion which offered it
self; nay, of himself, found all that Humane Judgment is capable of: Lastly, so
strenuous in the prosecution of them, that he was always the first in Danger
and Fatigue; and as Imitation is abundantly more easy to Mankind than
Obedience, he made it his business to Command more by his Actions than Orders.
But because so great a Fabric required Workmen, that Age (fertile in Great
Persons) produced Columbus, Herman Cortez, the two Brothers Francis and
Ferdinand Pizarro, Antony de Liba, Fabritius, and Prosper Colonna, Raimond de
Cardona, the Marquesses of Pescara and Basto, and many other Hero's so
illustrious, that a whole Age now scarce brings forth one such. To that end,
God then prolonged their Lives; whereas now, not Mars's Fury, but some lingering
Fever, carries them off before their time. Within how few Years has untimely
Death deprived us of Peter of Toledo, Lewis Tajardo, Frederick of Toledo, the
Marquess Spinola, Gonsalez of Cordova, the Duke de Feria, the Marquess
d'Aytona, the Duke of Lerma, John Fajardo, the Marquess de Zelada, the Count de
la Fere, and the Marquess de Fuentes, all Persons no less considerable for the
glorious Actions they did, than those which all the World still expected from
them? How Profound and Inscrutable is the Providence of this Eternal Deity! Who
would not from hence infer the Decay of the Spanish Monarchy? as in the
Emperor Claudius's time, the Death of so many Magistrates, as a Quaestor,
Aedile, Tribune, Praetor, and a Consul, in a few Month's time, was looked on as
a Prodigy portending some Evil Numerabatur inter osfenta, diminutu: omnium
magistratuum numerus, Quaestors, Aedile, Tribu^o, ac Praetore and Consule,
paucos intra menses defunctis. Tac. Annal. l. 12,
, unless he considered, that these Instruments are taken away, to let all Men
see, it is by Divine Grace, rather than Humane Strength, is upheld that Power,
the Pillar and Support of Christian Commonwealths. It is this First Mover of
the Universe that disposes these interchangeable Alterations of Things, these
Revolutions of Empires. One Age raises up great Men in a Country, improves
Arts, and makes Arms flourish; and the succeeding immediately overturns and
confounds all, without leaving so much as the Traces of the Virtue and Valor
which were an Ornament to those of the past. What great, what secret Force on
Things, nay, even on Minds, is concealed in those Second Causes of the Heavenly
Spheres? It is not by mere Accident that those Superior Lights are so different
one from another, some having a Fixed Place, others Wandering; and since this
Disorder and Irregularity gives no additional Beauty, it is a sign at least
they contribute to Operations and Effects. O vast Volume! in the Leaves of
which, God, the Contriver and Maker of all Things (yet without laying any
Obligation upon his own Power, or Etiam merito accidisse videtur, and casus in
culpam transit. Velleius.
Man's Will) has wrote their Changes and Vicissitudes in Characters of Light,
for the Glory of his Eternal Wisdom, which past Ages have, the present do, and
those to come will for ever read! Greece was heretofore flourishing both in
Arms and Arts; it left Rome enough to learn, but little to invent; but now it
lies buried in the Depth of Ignorance and Degeneracy. The Wits in Augustus's
time exceeded even Expectation, but under Nero they began to flag, so that all
the Pains and Industry in the World was not sufficient to save the Arts and
Sciences from Destruction. Unhappy are those great Genius's who come into the
World when Monarchies are declining, in that they either are not employed, or
if they be, cannot withstand the weight of their Ruin, or perhaps miserably
fall with them, without Honor or Renown; nay, sometimes their Fate seems
deserved, and they are blamed for what was the effect of Chance Cuj^scunque
fortunam mutare constituit, consilia corrumpit. Velleius.
. God lays no Constraint upon Free Will; but yet either the course of Causes
draws it on, or, for want of that Divine Light, it stumbles of it self, and its
Designs are overthrown or executed too late. Princes and Counselors are the
Eyes of Kingdoms; and when God Almighty determines the overthrow of these, he
blinds them, that they may neither see Dangers, nor know their Remedies For the
Lord has poured forth upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your
eyes; the prophets, and the rulers, and the seers has he covered. Isai 29. 10.
. That which they think to succeed most by, leads them most into Miscarriages:
They see Accidents, but do not prevent, but rather, as much as in them lies,
forward them. A Dangerous Instance of this Truth we have in the Swiss-Cantons,
ever so prudent and stout in defending their Country and Liberty, but now so
negligent and supine, that themselves are the Cause of the Ruin that threatens
them. The First Author of Monarchies had situated their Republic between the
Outworks of the Alps and the Rhine, and environed it with the Countries of
Alsace, Lorrain, and Burgundy, against the Power of France, and other Princes;
and when they were farthest from the Fire of War, in the Fruition of a happy
and desired Peace, they of themselves called and encouraged One upon their own
Borders, standing by and seeing the Ruin of those Provinces, redounding
afterward to their own Prejudice, they not considering the Danger of a
neighboring Power, superior in Strength, and whose Fortune must of necessity
be raised out of their Ashes. May I be deceived, but I fear this Body of the
Switzers is already at its full growth, and that it will begin to decay, when
those Spirits and Forces are spent which supported its Reputation and Grandeur.
Empires, it is certain, have their Periods: That which has endured longest, is
nearest its Ruin.

EMBLEM LXXXVIII.
WHat strange Force has the Loadstone, to produce such Wonderful Effects? What
so Amorous Correspondence with the Polar Star, that although because of its
Weight it cannot always gaze on its Beauty, yet the Needles it touches should?
What Resemblance can there be betwixt these two? What so great Virtue, that is
not lost at so wide and remote Distances? And why does it incline to that Star
or Point of Heaven, rather than to any other? Were not the Experience common,
Ignorance would be apt to impute it to Magic, as it does all other
Extraordinary Effects of Nature, when it cannot penetrate the Obscurity of its
Operations.

Nor is the Loadstone less admirable in that other Virtue of Attracting and
Lifting up Iron, against its Innate Gravity; nay, even this, carried by a kind
of Natural Tendency to obey that Superior Power, closes with it, and does
voluntarily, what, one would think, could not but be violent. How much were it
to be wished that the Prince would, by this Example, learn to know that
concourse of Causes, which (as has been said) sets up or pulls down Empires,
and how to carry himself therein, so as not to increase their Force by a too
obstinate Opposition, nor by a too easy Yielding to facilitate their Effects,
it being with this Series and Connection of Causes moved by the First Cause, as
with a River Fluminum instabili^ natura, simul ostendere^ omnia (...) Tac.
Annal. l. 6.
, which while it streams in its ordinary Current, is easily parted into several
Branches, or, by Banks cast up, turned this or that way, and suffers Bridges to
be made over it; but when swelled by continual Rains, or melting Snows, admits
of no Resistance; and for any one to contend with it, does but augment its
Force, and put it in a condition to carry all before it. Hence the Holy Spirit
admonishes us not to strive against the Stream Eccles. 4. 32.
. Patience surmounts that Violence, which in a moment loses both its Power and
Being. Upon which account it was looked on as an ill Omen to the War of
Vitellius, in the East, that Euphrates overflowed, and bubbled into a kind of
Frothy Crowns, by those who considered how Transitory these were. When
therefore many Causes conspiring together, attend the Victories of a^ Enemy,
and open an happy Way to his Military Expeditions, it will be great Prudence to
allow them Time to disperse sensibly of themselves, not that they lay any
necessity upon the Freedom of the Will, but because this Freedom has power only
over the Motions of the Mind and Body, not over those External Things: It may
indeed give way to Accidents, but cannot avoid being overwhelmed by them.
Constancy in Expecting, is infinitely more valuable than Valor in Fighting.
This Fabius Maximus well knew; and therefore let that Torrent of Hannibal run
by, till having by long Delays weakened, he at length surmounted it, and saved
the Roman State. Successes get strength from one another; and by the Reputation
Opinion gives them, suddenly increase to that degree, that no Power is able to
grapple with them. The Spanish Monarchy rendered Charles V. Fortunate and
Glorious; and he, by his Prudence, Courage and Vigilance, made the Empire
happy. Which eminent Qualities were followed by the general Acclamations and
Applause of all Nations. All Men joined with his Fortune; and the French King,
Francis I. emulous of so great Splendor, striving to eclipse it, lost his own
Liberty. What Terrors does Lightning strike us with, when it breaks out of the
Clouds! Then first exerting its Force when it meets with Resistance; without
that, vanishing into Air. Such was that Thunderbolt raised out of the
Exhalations of the North; within a few Days it triumphed over the Empire, and
struck almost the whole World with Terror: And yet one leaden Bullet piercing
it, made it presently disappear. There is nothing so frail and uncertain as the
Fame of a Power that stands not upon its own Bottom Nihil rerum mortalium tam
instabile ac fluxum, quam fama potentiae non sui vi nixae. Tac. Annal. l. 13.
. All those Efforts of several Causes concurring, are very brittle, in that
they hinder each other; and are subject not only to various Accidents, but to
Time also, which by degrees brings their Effects to Nothing. Many Wars, hot and
impetuous at the first, vanish by Delay Multa bella impetu valida per t^edia
and moras evanuisse. Tac.
. He who can but a little while bear up against the Forces of Confederate
Enemies, certainly gets the better of them at last: For as they are many, they
have different Causes, different Interests and Designs; and if they happen to
disagree in any one thing, part and leave one another. There was never a
greater League than that of Cambray against the Republic of Venice, yet the
Resolution and Prudence of this Valiant Senate soon broke it. All things in the
World arrive to a certain Period; after which, they decline again. Were that
Critical Minute known, it would be easy to overcome them Opportunos magnis
conatibus transitus rerum. Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
. It Is for want of this Knowledge, which sometimes consists in the least Delay
imaginable, that we sink under Accidents. Our Impatience or Ignorance
aggravates them, in that often, not sensible of their Force, we voluntarily
submit to them, or else perhaps promote them by the violence of those very
Means we take to shun them. God had undertaken the Grandeur of Cosmo de
Medicis; and they who strove to put a stop to it, by Banishing him from the
Republic of Venice, were the Instruments of making him Master of it. Nicholas
Vzanus observed, with much greater Prudence, the Torrent of that Fortune; and
lest it should increase by Opposition, thought it most advisable (as long as he
lived) to give him no Occasion of Displeasure; but with his Death the
Consideration of such discreet Counsel fell. Nor is it possible for the greater
Force of such like Cases to be concealed; forasmuch as all things conspire to
their Success, though they appear, at first sight, directly contrary to that
end. And therefore it is then best to Endure what you cannot Mend; and quietly
to conform to God, by whose Appointment all Things come to pass Optimum est
pati quod emenda^re non possis, and Deum, quo Authore ^uncta eveniunt, sine
murmr ^omitari. Sen. Ep.
. The Iron should not obey the Loadstone more readily, than we the Divine
Pleasure. He comes to less Harm who lets himself be carried down by the Stream,
than he that struggles against it. It is a foolish Presumption, to think to
overthrow the Decrees of the Almighty. The Predictions of the Statue with Feet
of Clay, in Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, was never the less certain, for his making
another of Gold, and commanding it to be worshipped Dan. 3. 1.
. However, this Resignation of our Will to the Divine must not be so Brutish,
as that we should believe all Things were so Ordained from Eternity, that
nothing can be Improved by our Diligence and Conduct; for this would be the
very Weakness of Mind which had given occasion to that Divine Decree: We are to
Act as if all depended on our Will, for God makes use of our Selves to bring us
to Happiness or Misery Eccles. 10. 5.
. We make a part of the Creation, and that no small one; and though Things were
set in order without us, yet they were not made without us. It Is true, we
cannot break that Web of Events wrought on the Loom of Eternity, but we might
very well concur to the weaving of it. The same that ranged the Causes foresaw
their Effects, and permitted their Course, yet so that it should be still at
his Command. He has saved from Danger whom he thought fit; and left others in
it, by abandoning them to their liberty: If the first was an Effect of his
Mercy, or our Merit, this is of his Justice. Our Will involved in the Ruin of
Accidents, falls with them; and as this most Wise Contriver of the Universe is
the Supreme and Absolute Arbitrator, he might break his Vessels as he pleased,
and make one to Honor, another to Dishonor Romans 9. 21.
. In the Eternal Disposal of Empires, their Progresses, Revolutions, or Ruins;
that Sovereign Governor of the Orbs had always present in his Mind our Valor
and Virtue, our Negligence, Impudence, and Tyranny: And upon this Prescience it
was, that he disposed the Eternal Order of Things, in conformity to the Motion
and Execution of our Choice, without the least Violence done to the same. For
as he lays no Constraint upon our Free Will, who discovers its Operations by
Reasoning; so neither does the Supreme Being, who by his Immense Wisdom foresaw
them long ago. He forced not our Will in the Alterations of Empires; but rather
altered Empires, because our Wills freely and deliberately deviated from
Justice. The Cruelty exercised by King Peter was the cause of his Brother
Henry's succeeding him; not, on the contrary, this the Occasion of that. For
the Mind has more Power than any Fortune, turns its Affairs which way it
pleases, and is the sole Cause of a Happy or Miserable Life Valentior enim omni
fortuna animus est, in utramque partem res suas ducit. Sen. Epist. 98.
. To expect Fortune from Chance, is Heartlesness; to think it prescribed and
already determined, Desperation. At this rate, Virtue would be useless, and
Vice excusable by Compulsion. Let your Highness but look upon your Glorious
Ancestors, who have raised the Greatness of this Monarchy, and I am assured you
will see, it was not Chance that Crowned them, but Virtue, Courage, and
Fatigues, and that it has been supported by the same Means, by their
Descendants, to whom an equal Glory is due; he no less contributing to the
Fabric of his Fortune who maintains it, than he that at first raised it. It Is
a thing equally difficult to get, and easy to lose. One Hour's Imprudence
ruins what cost many Years to acquire. By Labor and Vigilance alone is
procured God's Assistance, and the Grandeur of Princes is derived from Eternity
Non enim votis, neque supplici^^ muliebribus auxilia Deorum parantur;
vigilando, agendo, prospere omni^ cedunt. Sallust.
.

EMBLEM LXXXIX.
THE smallest things increase by Concord; by Discord the greatest fall to the
ground. Those which being divided, were weak and impotent; when united, resist
any Force whatever A threefold cord is not quickly broken.
. What Arm can pull off a Horse's Main when the Hairs are not parted, or break
a Bundle of Arrows? And yet either of these, of it self, is unable to withstand
the least Violence. By these Emblems, Sertorius, and Scilurus the Scythian,
expressed the Force of Concord, which of many distinct Parts makes one united
and consequently strong Body. Care of the Public Repose has raised the Walls
of Cities so much above the reach of Men, that they might not scale them; but
however, many Soldiers at once closing their Shields, and mutually joining and
agreeing to lift one another up, have got above their Battlements, and stormed
them. All the Works of Nature are preserved by Amity and Concord; and when this
fails, they decay and die: The cause of Death being no other than a Discord of
the Part, whereon Life depends. The very same happens in Commonwealths; as
common Consent made them a Society, so a Dissension between the greatest or
most powerful part dissolves again and dissociates, or else new models them.
That City, which by Concord was but one, without it becomes two, nay, sometimes
three or four, for want of that Body of Love whereby its Inhabitants made one
Body. This Division engenders Hatred, whence Revenge arises, and from that a
disrespect of Laws; without the Authority of which, Justice loses its force;
and where that fails, Arms are taken up; and a Civil War breaking out, the
Order of the State, which wholly consists in Unity, is confounded Wisdom 18. 9.
. The Bees no sooner fall out, but their Commonwealth is destroyed. The
Ancients, to represent Discord, painted a Woman tearing her Clothes.

Et scissa gaudens vadit discordia palla. Virg
Now if it has the same effect between Citizens, how will they be able to unite
for their Common Defense and Interest? How will they have God on their side,
who is Peace it self, and so great a Lover of it, that (as Job says) with it he
maintains his Heavenly Monarchy He makes peace in high places.
. Plato used to say, Nothing was so pernicious to Commonwealths as Division.
Concord is the Ornament of a City, its Walls and Guard; even Malice it self
cannot stand long without it. Domestic Dissentions are so many Victories for
the Enemy Nostris illi dissentionibus, and discordiis clari, vitia ^ostium in
gloria^ exercitus sui vertunt. Tac. in Vit. Ag^ic.
; as those of the Britains, Galgacus said, were to the Romans Conversis ad
civil bellum animis, externa sine cura ^abentur. Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. But notwithstanding these and other Reasons, some Politicians assert, That it
is necessary, for the Preservation of a State, to sow Discords among the
People; and to this end, alleges, for an Example, the Bees, in whose Hives is
always heard a kind of Murmurring and Dissension. But, alas, this is so far
from strengthening, that it rather overthrows their Opinion; for that Humming is
not a Dissonance, as I may say, of Wills, but a Harmony of Voices, whereby
these Creatures, as it were, encourage and stir up each other to the Labors of
making Honey, as Mariners do when they Hoise Sail. Nor is the Argument drawn
from the contrariety of the four Humors in living Bodies, of any force; for
it is rather from this Conflict of theirs that proceed Diseases, and Shortness
of Life, that which is Prdominant at last getting the Victory. Hence
Vegetables, because without that contrariety, endure longer. What differs from,
and is at variance with it self, must of necessity suffer; and what suffers,
can never be lasting. Who, when a Republic is divided, can keep the Flame of
Dissentions within certain Bounds? Who will afterward quench it, when All are
involved in them? The more Powerful Faction will now oppress the Weaker; and
that to Defend, this to Revenge it self, make use of Foreign Forces, and so
enslave the Commonwealth, or else introduce a new Form of Government, which
will almost always be Tyrannical, as several Instances witness. It is not the
Prince's Duty to distract the Minds of his Subjects, but rather to keep them
loving and amicable; and besides, it is impossible they should conspire to love
and obey him, who are divided amongst themselves, or consider not whence their
Evil comes. As often therefore as the Prince himself is the cause of Discord,
Divine Providence (as it abominably And a seventh does my heart abhor, he that
sows discord among brethren. Prove. 6. 14.
detests it) permits those very Means he thought to preserve himself by, to be
the Instruments of his Ruin: For when the Parties come to know it, they
despise and abhor him, as the first Author and Promoter of their Differences.
King Italus gained the Affection and Applause of the Germans, by never
fomenting Dissentions, and carrying himself alike to all.

For these then, and such like Reasons, the Prince should beware of letting
Discords take root; and rather strive to encourage the Union of his State,
which will easily be maintained, if he look carefully to the Observance of the
Laws, the Unity of Religion, Plenty of Corn and Provision, to the equal
Distribution of Favors and Gratuities, to the Maintaining of Privileges; if he
take care that the Common People be employed in Mechanic Arts, the Nobility in
Public Government, Arms, and Literature, to prohibit Cabals, and Clandestine
Meetings, to keep the Great Ones Frugal and Modest, and the Inferiors
Peaceable, to restrain Privileged Persons, and those who pretend to be exempt
from Duties; in a word, if he see that Riches be reduced to a Mediocrity, and
Poverty remedied. For from the Reformation and Regulating these, results good
Government; and where that is, there Peace and Concord ever flourish. There is
but one Case wherein it seems convenient and warrantable to kindle Discords in
Kingdoms, and that is, when they are already troubled with Seditions, and
Intestine Broils; for then to distract them into Factions, will be a means to
weaken the Power of the Bad, the only end in that being to render Peace to the
Good. And it is a piece of Self-Preservation, not to let Disturbers be at
quiet; inasmuch as the Concord of Ill Men is to the Prejudice of the Good; as
it is to be wished that these may live Peaceably, so it is that those may be in
Discord: For Good Men always come by the worst, when Bad Men are united
Concordi^ malorum contraria est bonorum, and sicut optandum est, ut boni pacem
habeant ad invicem, ita optandum est, ut mali sint discordes, Impeditur enim
iter bono um, si unitas non dividatur malorum. S. Isid.
.

The Discord we condemn as pernicious to Commonwealths, is that which arises
from Hatred and Enmity; not that Contention which has place between several
Conditions and Members of the same Commonwealth, as between the Lords and
Commons, the Soldiers and Tradesmen: For that Contrariety, or rather Emulation,
by the very diversity of Natures and Ends, keeps up a Distinction in the
Degrees and Spheres of the State, and supports it; nor are there Seditions, but
when the States combine together, and make every private Person's the Common
Interest: just as from the commixtion of the Elements, and the meeting of
Rivers and Streams, proceed Storms and Inundations. It concerns the Prince
therefore to employ all his Care upon this Division; so moderating it, that it
shall neither come on the one hand to absolute Rupture, nor on the other to
unlawful Combinations.

The same thing should be done between Ministers, that some kind of Emulation
and Diffidence one of another, may make them more attentive of their Duty; for
if once, through a neglect of this, they Dissemble, and conceal one another's
Faults, or with one consent join the pursuit of their own Interests, there will
be an end of the Prince and the State, without the possibility of a Remedy, in
that none can be applied but by their Hands. But if this Honest and Generous
Emulation should degenerate into Aversion and Enmity, it will create the same
Inconveniences; for they will then be more intent on contradicting and
thwarting one another, more solicitous to overthrow each others Counsels and
Actions, than to promote the Public Good, and their Prince's Service. Every
one has his Friends and Creatures, and the Common sort of People are apt to be
^ead into Factions, whence generally arise Tumults and Dissentions. For this
Reason, Drusus and Germanicus ^oined themselves, lest the Flame of the
Differences ^indled in Tiberius's Palace, should be increased by the ^last of
their Favor. Whence it is apparent how ^^roneous the Judgment of Lycurgus was,
who sowed Dissentions among the Kings of Lacedaemon, and ordained, that when
Ambassadors were to be sent afar off, such Persons should be made choice of, as
had some grudge to each other. We have not a few Examples in this Age of
Public Losses, occasioned by the clashing of Ministers joined in one
Commission, upon a Supposition that this very Emulation would incite them to
execute it carefully. The Prince's Service is One, and cannot be performed but
by Persons Unanimous: Whence Tacitus commends Agricola, for one who was far
from envying his Colleagues Procul ab aemulatione adversus collegas. Tac. in
Vit. Agric.
. And certainly it is less dangerous for an Affair to be managed by one Bad,
than by two Good Ministers, if they don't agree, which rarely happens.

The Nobility is the Prince's greatest Security, or greatest Hazard, being a
Powerful Body, that draws most of the People after it. Spain and France furnish
us with many Bloody Instances of this Truth; that in former Ages, this in all.
The best Remedies are, by the means of Emulation, to keep them divided from the
Commons and themselves, yet with the Moderation abovementioned. To multiply
and level the Titles and Dignities of the Nobles; to spend their Estates upon
Public Ostentations, and their Great Souls in the Toils and Dangers of War; to
divert their Thoughts by Employments of Peace, and humble their Exalted Spirits
by the servile Offices of the Court.

EMBLEM XC.
KINGS, in Holy Scripture, are compared to Rivers; for so the Prophet Habakkuk
is to be understood, when he says, God would cleave the Rivers of the Earth
Thou did cleave the earth with rivers. Haba^. 3. 9.
; meaning, that God would divide the Forces of those who took up Arms against
his People: As David actually found he did, in his Defeat of the Philistines;
and therefore openly confessed, that the Lord had divided his Enemies before
him, as Waters are divided The Lord has broken forth upon mine enemies before
me, as the breach of waters. 2 Samuel 5. 20.
. Division is the most effectual means to pull down any Power; the very
greatest, if divided, being incapable of making any further Resistance. How
impetuously does a River stream down the midst of its Channel, breaking through
its very Banks to open it self new Passages; yet if parted into several
Rivulets, it loses its strength, and becomes passable to all. Thus it happened
to the River Gyndes, where a beloved Horse of Cyrus's having been drowned, it
so enraged him, that he immediately commanded it to be cut into an Hundred and
sixty Canals; by which means it lost both its Name and Greatness; and that
which before would scarce bear Bridges, might afterward be easily forded. This
the Counsel had regard to, which some gave the Roman Senate, to weaken the
River Tiber, by turning the Course of the Lakes and Brooks that discharged
themselves into it Siamnis Nar (id enim parabatur) in Rivos diductus
supernavigasset. Tac. Annal. l. 1.
, to rid the City of continual Fear and Danger of its Inundations. But the
Senate refused to do it, as unwilling to deprive the Tiber of its Glory Quin
ipsum Tiberim no^^e, prorsus accolis fluv^s ^^batum, minori gloria fluere. Ibid.
. All these things have given occasion to the present ^mblem, which (by a River
parted into several Branches) shows of what consequence it is to distract the
Forces of Puissant Princes: For the greater the Power is, the more Forces and
Expense its Defense requires; nor is it hardly possible to find Officers and
Soldiers enough for it, or to prevent all Mischances. Courage and Prudence are
confounded, when Dangers threaten thus on all sides. Besides, this is the most
secure and the cheapest Method that can be taken; inasmuch as a Trumpet on a
sudden sounding an Alarm in several Parts of a Kingdom, has abundantly greater
Effects, than a War solemnly denounced.

It is always the best and securest way, to divide Enemies Forces, and sow
seeds of Dissension within their States Prudentis est Ducis inter bostes
discordi^e causas serere. Veget.
: Nothing so much exposing to Plots and Invasions, as Discord and Sedition
Discordia and Seditio omnia facit opportuniora insidiantibus. Livy.
. By these Artifices the Phoenicians established their Dominion in Spain,
dividing it into various Factions. The same did the Carthaginians against them.
Therefore the Counsel of the Marquess of Cadiz was not at all imprudent, when
having taken Boabdili, King of Grenada, he moved Ferdinand the Catholic to set
him at liberty, that his Presence might foment the Factions a foot between him
and his Father, about the Crown, which had distracted the Kingdom into a great
many Parties. When the Roman Empire, says Tacitus, began to decline, and hasten
to decay, nothing greater could be desired of Fortune, than the Discord of its
Enemies Vrgentibus Imperii Romani fatis, nihil jam praes^are fortuna majus
^^tuit, quam hostium discordiam. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
. No Money is laid out to more Advantage, none with less Bloodshed or Danger,
than that which is employed in encouraging the Dissentions of an Enemy's
Kingdom, or in getting another Prince to make War upon it; for the Charges and
Damage become hereby much more inconsiderable. But this matter demands
extraordinary Advertency; for sometimes, upon a mis-grounded Apprehension,
Money is expended to no purpose, and the Discovery of the ill Intention begets
open Hostility: A thing we have many Instances of, in those who without any
Provocation, or the least Prospect of Advantage, have countenanced the
Adversaries of the House of Austria, to keep its Hands full, by continual Wars,
in the mean time unprofitably exhausting their Treasuries, without considering,
that if they should once be attacked by those of this House, it would be much
better to have still by them, for their own Defense, what they had laid out
upon the Diversion of their Forces.

And this whole Doctrine has place, without any scruple in Policy, in an open
War, where the Reason of Self-Preservation is more cogent, than other
Considerations less solid; and the same Cause that makes the War lawful,
justifies also this Discord. But when the case is nothing but an invidious
Emulation of Grandeur, these Artifices are not warrantable; for he who stirs up
the Subjects of another Prince to Rebellion, at the same time teaches his own
to be Traitors. The Emulation should be between the Persons, not the Offices:
Dignity is of the same kind in all its parts; that which wounds one, wounds
all. Passions and Hatreds are transient, but Bad Examples remain for ever. It
is the Interest and Concern of every Prince, not to suffer the Dignity of
another to be injured by Contempt or Disobedience, or his Person by Treason.
It Is an Action unworthy of a Prince to conquer by Poison, not by the Sword. It
was ever accounted base, among the Romans Non fraud neque occultis, sed palam,
and armatum populum Romanum bostes suos ulcisci. Tac. Hist. l. 2.
; and is to this day with the Spaniards, who have been so far from making use
of such secret Practices against their Enemies, that they have often been
assisting to them. A remarkable Example of which, our Catholic King left your
Highness, when he sent an Army to aid the French King against the English, who
had possessed themselves of the Isle of Rhea, not regarding the Duke of Roan's
Advice, which was, to divide the Kingdom into several Governments. And another
time, when His Majesty offered, by Monsieur de Maximi, the Pope's Nuncio, to
assist the same King in Person to subdue the Hugonots of Montauban, and drive
them out of his Country. Which Signal and Heroic Kindness had no other Return
but Ingratitude; leaving a Lesson to Reason, not to let it self be too easily
touched with Compassion toward a Foreign State.

From what has been said, it is obvious to deduce how much the Agreement of
Subjects Minds, and the Union of States, contribute to their Common Defense:
If, I say, every particular Person did look on the Danger of his Neighbor as
his own, be it at never so remote a distance, and accordingly endeavor all
ways, both with Men and Money, to relieve him, that the whole Body may be
preserved. But not a few are deceived in this Point; they who are far off,
flattering themselves with the Thoughts that the Danger will never reach them,
or that they are no way obliged to anticipate such Expenses, and that it is
greater Prudence to keep their Forces entire till the Enemy come nigher. But
alas! then all the Difficulties being surmounted, and those States taken, which
served them for Outworks the rest will never be able to hold out. This was the
Fate of the Britains: of whom, thus Tacitus; Heretofore they were under Kings,
now are by petty Princes distracted into Factions; nor does any thing further
our Designs against the strongest Nations, than their not consulting the Common
Good. Seldom above two or three Cities associate to repel the Common Danger:
Thus while every one fights single, all are overcome Olim Regibus parebant,
nunc per Principes factionibus, and studiis trabantur; nec aliud adversus
validiss^mas gentes pro nobis ^^ilius, quam quod in commune non consulunt.
Rarus duabus, tribusve civitatibus, ad propulsandum commune periculu^
conventus: ita dum singuli pu^nant, universi vincuntur. Tac. in Vi^. Agric.
. The Kingdoms of Spain, and Provinces of Italy, Burgundy and Flanders are
sensible of this Danger, with a greater Prudence, a more eminent and exemplary
Piety, Zeal and Affection toward their Lawful Lord; in that with a generous
Emulation they voluntarily offer His Majesty their Lives and Fortunes, to
protect them from their Enemies, who with joint-Forces conspire the Overthrow
of the Catholic Religion, and that Monarchy. Let Your Highness ingrave these
Services on your tender Breast; and let the Gratitude and Esteem due to
Subjects so Loyal, increase with your Glorious Years: Then you will judge which
is most excellent,
To Rule the World, or such a Government. Came. Lus.



EMBLEM XCI.
FRiendship seems to restrain a Government more, and to have been more
considered by Lawgivers, than Justice. For if all Men were Friends, there
would be no need of Justice; but though all were Just, yet would they want the
Protection of Friendship Videtur amicitia magis continere, and majore quam
justitia in studio fuisse Legislatoribus. Nam si amicitia inter omnes esset,
ni^il esset, quod justitiam desiderarent; at si justi essent, tamen amicitiae
praesidium requirerent. Arist. Ethic. l. 1.
. Friendship is the greatest good Mankind enjoys; a sure Sword always by one's
side, both in Peace and War; a faithful Companion in both Fortunes. With this,
Prosperity is crowned, and Adversity becomes more easy. For it neither is
diminished by one, or increased by the other: In one it is guided by Modesty,
in the other by Constancy; in the one and the other always at hand, as if by
both it were like to gain. Consanguinity may be without Kindness and Affection,
Friendship cannot. This comes from our own Choice, that from Chance. That may
be without the Bond of Communication and Mutual Assistance, this cannot;
forasmuch as there are three things, which, as constituent parts of its Being
unite it; Nature by the means of Resemblance; the Will, by that of Good Humor;
and Reason, by that of Honor. Hereunto, certainly, King Alphonsus the Wise
alludes, when he accuses a certain Person of Cruelty and Injustice, for
carrying away Prisoner one of two Persons who were endeared to each other by
Consanguinity and Friendship L. 19. Tit. 2. p. 2.
.

The more tried therefore and sincere the Friendship has been, so much the less
valuable will it be, when once violated. A Crystal cracked, is good for nothing.
The Diamond loses all its Worth, when divided into Pieces. A Sword once broken,
can never be solder'd again. Whoever trusts to reconciled Friendship, will find
himself deceived; for upon the first Blow of Adversity, or Prospect of
Advantage, it will presently relapse again. Neither David's Mercy, in sparing
Readiness Life, nor the Acknowledgments and fair Protestations of Saul, confirmed
by Oath, were sufficient to make the first think himself ever the safer for
this Reconcilement, or the last to cease Plotting against him And Saul went
home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold. 1 Samuel 24. 22.
. Esau, with Embraces, and Tears in his Eyes, tried to regain the Favor of his
Brother Jacob; and though there passed great Signs and Expressions of
Friendship on both sides, yet could they never take away Jacob's Distrust, who,
notwithstanding, endeavored all he could to be severed from him, and secure
himself Genesis 33. 12.
. Renewed Friendship is like a vessel of Metal, which to day shines, and to
morrow is covered with Rust Never trust thine enemy; for like as iron rusteth,
so is his wickedness: though he humble himself, and go crouching, yet take good
heed, and beware of him, Eccl. 12. 10.
. Nor are all the good offices in the World capable of making it firm, because
the remembrance of Injuries is never quite erased out of the Mind. Ervigius,
after the Usurpation of Wamba's Crown, married his Daughter Cixilon to Egica, a
very near Relation of that King's, and afterward nominated him for his
Successor; but even this could not keep Egica from giving some marks of his
Hatred to his Father-in-Law, as soon as ever he came to the Crown Mar. Hist.
Hisp.
. The Scars of Wounds made by Injuries on the Mind, always remain in the Person
wronged, and upon the first motion bleed afresh. Injuries are like Marshes,
which, though dried up, are easily filled with Water again. There is a certain
Shadow always betwixt the Offender and the Offended, which no Light of Excuse
or Satisfaction can dispell. Nor is Friendship secure on the former's side, in
that he never is persuaded the other has really and from his heart forgiven the
Injury, and always looks on him as an Enemy. Besides that, it is natural to
hate one you have injured Proprium humani ingenii est, odisse quem laeser is.
Tac. Vit. Agric.
.

This is what happens in the Friendship of private Persons, but it is not so in
those of Princes, (if indeed there be any true Friendship to be met with
between them) for Self-Interest makes them Friends or Enemies; and though the
Friendship be broke a thousand times, yet it is presently renewed again by
hopes of Advantage; and as long as this may be executed, continues firm and
constant. Wherefore in such Friendships as these, no regard is to be had to the
Ties of Blood, or Obligations of Favors received, for these are things
disowned by Ambition. Their Duration is to be esteemed by Utility, in that all
Friendships nowadays are like those of Philip, King of Macedon, who made
Interest, not Faith, the Measure of them. In these, Friendships, which are more
Reason of State, than any Mutual Harmony of Wills, Aristotle and Cicero would
never have so sharply reprimanded Bias, for saying, We ought to love no
otherwise, than if we were to hate again: For a Prince would be deceived in his
Confidence, should he ground it upon such Friendship. It is best then for
Princes to be Friends so to day, as to think they may possibly fall out to
morrow. But although this Precaution is not to be found fault with, yet
Interest and Self Ends are not to be preferred to Friendship, ever the more,
for that it is common for others to do so. Let Friendship fail in others, but
not the Prince we propose to form by these Emblems, whom we exhort to Constancy
in his Actions and Obligations.

All that has been said hitherto, has respect to such Friendships as are
betwixt neighboring Princes, between whom there is some Emulation of Grandeur;
for among others, sincere Amity, and a reciprocal Correspondence, may have
place. Power should not be so over-careful, as to trust no one. Like a Tyrant,
he will be ever in Fear, who puts no Confidence in his Friends. Without these,
the Crown is Slavery, not Majesty. It Is an unjust Empire, that deprives Princes
of Friendships. Not Armies nor Treasures are the Defense of a Kingdom, but
Friends Non exercitus neque thesauri, praesidia Regni sunt, verum amici,
Sallust.
. It Is not the Golden Scepter that protects a King, but abundance of Friends;
those are the truest, those the securest Scepter Non aureum istud sceptrum est,
quod Regem custodit, sed copia amicorum, ea Regibus sceptrum tutissimum, Xenoph.
. Nor is there any greater Instrument of good Government, than good Friends Nec
^llum majus boni Imperii instrumen^um quam boni Amici, Tac. Annal. l. 4.
.

Friendship between great Princes, should be maintained rather by a good
Correspondence, than by Presents; for Interest is always ungrateful and
insatiable: For the sake of that, Friendships are pretended, never really
contracted; as Vitellius found, who thinking to preserve his Friends, by the
Richness of his Presents, not by his Merit, deserved rather than had them Dum
amicitias magnitudine munerum, non constantia morum continere putavit, meruit,
magis quam habuit, Tac. Hist. l. 2.
. Friends are to be kept by Iron, not Gold; for Fear of Arms creates more of
them, than Desire of Money. Pecuniary Subsidies enervate the Giver; and the
greater they are, the lesser time can they be continued; and as fast as the
Prince's Coffers empty, his Reputation diminishes. Princes are esteemed and
loved for the Treasures they still have, not those they have already squandered
away; more, I say, for what they can give, than for what they have given: For
Hope prevails much more with Men than Gratitude. He who buys Peace, is unable
to uphold it with Arms. This is a Fault which almost all Monarchies fall into,
when arrived to some height of Grandeur, they strive to maintain it by Money,
not Arms; and thus consuming their Treasures, and oppressing their Subjects, to
raise Contributions for neighboring Princes, to keep the Circumference quiet,
they weaken the Center. And though that Greatness be supported for a time, yet
it is at the Price of a greater Downfall; for that Weakness being known, and the
Frontiers once lost, the Enemy, without Opposition, makes way to their Heart.
Thus it befell the Roman Empire, when, after having been at so many useless
Expenses, and wasted their Strength, the Emperors went about to gain the
Parthians and Germans by Presents, which was the first beginning of their
Ruin. Hence Alcibiades advised Tisaphernes not to be so liberal of his Succors
to the Lacedaemonians, but to remember, that it was not his own, but another's
Victory he promoted; and that he was to support the War, so as not to be
obliged to abandon it through Want Ne tanta stipendia classi Lacedaemoniorum
praeberet, sed nec auxiliis nimis enixe ju^andos, quippe non immemorem esse
debere, alienam esse victoriam non suam instruere, and eatenus bellum
sustinendum, ne inopia deseratur, Trog. l. 5.
. This Counsel we may make our Advantage of, by taking care, what is expended
on Favor of Foreign Princes, to the great prejudice and weakening of Castile;
which yet, as being the Heart of the whole Monarchy, should be furnished with
the greatest quantity of Blood, to distribute Vital Spirits to all the other
Parts of the Body; as Nature her self, the best Mistress of Politics,
instructs, who fortifies with the strongest Fences the interior Parts, whereon
Life depends. If what Timorousness and Solicitude spends Abroad to keep the
Monarchy in Security, Prudence would lay out at Home in maintaining Forces both
by Sea and Land, in Fortifying and Garrisoning Strong Holds, Forts and Cities,
the remote Provinces would be abundantly more safe; and if any one should be
lost, it might easily be recovered by the Forces within. Rome was able to
defend it self, and even to retake all that Hannibal had gotten from them, nay,
even to overthrow Carthage it self, by keeping all its Wealth and Strength
within the Bowels of the Commonwealth.

Not that I say this, with a desire to persuade Princes always to refuse their
Money to their Friends and Neighbors, but only that they might be very careful
how they lay it out, and rather assist them with Men than Money; for this stays
with them that received it, whereas those return to him who sent them. And this
is to be understood, when there is no danger of engaging themselves in the War,
by drawing it into their own States, or of getting their Friend greater
Enemies; as also when it is more Expensive, and liable to more Inconveniences
to aid with Money, than Arms: For one of the two ways State-Interest absolutely
requires us to defend a neighboring Prince, as often as our Fortune is
inseparably joined with his; it being prudenter to carry on a War in another's
State, than to feed it in the very Heart of our own. Thus, of old, it was the
peculiar way of the Romans to make War far from Home, and by the Fortresses of
the Empire to defend the Fortunes of their Allies Fuit proprium populi Romani
long a domo bellare, and pro^ugnaculi^, Imperii sociorum fortunas, non sua
tecta defendere, Cic. pro leg. Man.
, not their own Houses. And this we ought to have learned from that Government,
that we might not be forced to lament at this day so many Calamities. It Is this
Policy, rather than Ambition, that has moved the Swiss-Cantons to undertake the
Protection of some People; for though they were sensible this could not be done
without great Charges, and the running the Risque of their own Defense, yet
they thought it more their Interest to keep the War out of their own
Territories: The Confines of a neighboring State are the Walls of our own, and
as such, to be guarded with all the Care imaginable.

EMBLEM XCII.
EVen the Feathers of Birds are in danger, when too near those of the Eagle; in
that these, by that natural Antipathy surviving in them, which is between the
Eagle and the other Birds, corrode and destroy them Plin. l. 10. c. 3. Ael. l.
9. c. 11. de Animal.
. Thus Protection changes into Tyranny. A Superior Power observes no Laws,
Ambition no Respect. What was committed to its Trust, it afterward detains as
its own, under color of Self-Preservation. Petty Princes think to secure their
States by Foreign Aids and utterly ruin them: They fall a Prey both to Friend
and Enemy; the former being no less dangerous from Confidence, than the latter
from Hatred. With a Friend we live secure, without the least Fear or
Precaution; so that he may easily strike us, without any Danger on his side.
Upon this Reason, I conceive, was founded that Law, which commanded, the Ox
that had gored any one, to be stoned If an ox gore a man or a woman, and they
die, the ox shall be s^rely stoned, Exodus 21. 28.
, but says nothing of the Bull; because we trust the Ox more, as being a
Domestic Animal we every day make use of. Ambition creeps in, under the
pretext of Friendship and Protection; and that, by their means, is easily
obtained, which never could have been by Force. With what specious Names did
the Romans mask their Tyranny, when they received the People of other Nations
for Citizens, Friends, and Allies? They admitted the Albani into their
Commonwealth, peopling it with those who before were Enemies: The Sabines they
made Free of their City; and abundance of Countries called them to their Aid,
against their Enemies, as the Protectors of their Liberties and Privileges, and
the Universal Arbitrators of Justice. Thus they, who of themselves could not
have (...) one Foot of Ground, by the Ignorance of others, extended their
Dominions far and near. At first they exacted but moderate Tributes of those
Nations; thus disguising their Treachery, under the Appearance of Morality. But
when that Imperial Eagle had spread its Wings wider, over the three Parts of
the World, Europe, Asia, and Africa, she whet her Beak upon Ambition, and
discovered the Claws of her Tyranny. The People then found their Confidence was
miserably deluded, and the Feathers of their Power destroyed, under those of
the Oppression of Taxes, and the loss of their Liberty and Privileges; and now
the Tyranny was grown powerful, could neither recover themselves again, nor
re-establish their Forces: And to the end the Venom might turn into Nature, the
Romans invented Colonies, and introduced the Latin Tongue, thus to efface the
Distinction of Nations, and leave the Romans alone to enjoy the Empire of all.
This was that Eagle in Ezekiel's Vision, with great Wings, and many Feathers
And there was also another Eagle, with great wings, and many feathers, etc.
Ezekiel. 17. 7.
; or, as the Septuagint has it, many Talons, because such were its Feathers.
How often do Men think they stand under the one, when they are really under the
other? How often do they think themselves covered with the Lily, when stuck so
fast amidst Thorns and Briars, that they cannot escape without tearing their
Clothes. The City of Pisa put their Rights and Pretensions against the
Republic of Florence, under the Protection of Ferdinand the Catholic, and the
King of France; and both agreed to deliver it to the Florentines, under the
pretense of the Repose of Italy. Lewis Sforza employed the Assistance of the
French against his Nephew, John Galeas; and they having divested him of the
Duchy of Milan, carried him Prisoner into France. But what need is there to
look so far for Examples? Let the Duke of Mantua (...) how dear another's
Protection has cost him? Let (...) Elector of Treves, and the Grisons, say
whether they have ^^eserved their Liberty, by admitting Foreign Armies into
their States, for their Defense and Protection: Let Germany tell us how it
finds it self, under the Patronage of Sweden; now the noble Circles of its
Provinces, heretofore the Splendor and Support of the Imperial Diadem, are
divided and broken; now those sparkling Diamonds, the Cities of the Empire, its
ancient Ornament, are sullied and unset, the Orders of its States overthrown
and confounded, the Harmony of its Politic Government destroyed, its ancient
Nobility stripped and impoverished; that, of all its Provinces which knew best
how to assert its Liberty, now without the least appearance of it, is trampled
under foot and laid waste by the Fire and Sword of Foreign Nations, and exposed
to the Will of a thousand Tyrants, all living Pictures of the King of Sweden;
in a word, a Slave both to Friends and Enemies, and so stupefied by its
Misfortunes, that it is rendered incapable of discerning its Interest or
Disadvantage. This is the Fate of all People at variance with themselves, of
all Princes who make use of Foreign Forces; especially if he who sends, does
not also pay them. Thus it happened to the Cities of Greece, when Philip, King
of Macedon, contriving to ensnare the Liberty of all, fomented their
Contentions; and by fiding with the Weaker, made both the Victors and
Vanquished submit to one Yoke Philippus Rex Ma^edonum libertati ^^^ium
insidiatus, dum contentiones civitatum alit, auxilium inserioribus ferendo,
victos pariter, victoresque subire regiam s^rvitutem coegit. Justin.
. Glory, at first, prompts to the Defense; but in the end, Ambition seizes all.
Whoever employs his Forces for another, expects some Amends for it. The Country
always loves the Power that protects it; the Subjects imagining they shall live
more secure and happy under his Government, freed from the Fear and Danger of
Wars, and the severe Taxes inferior Princes are wont to impose, and from those
Grievances they generally suffer at their Hands. The Nobles too, think it more
Honorable to serve a greater Master, who has larger Rewards to give, and
greater Preferments to confer upon them. All these Considerations make way for
Tyranny and Usurpation. Auxiliary Troops always obey him who sends them, or in
whose Pay they are, and treat those Countries they serve in, as Foreign; so
that when the War is ended with the Enemy, they must begin with the Friend.
Therefore I think it better, and less hazardous and expensive, for the weaker
Prince to come to a Composition, upon any Terms, with the more powerful, than
even to conquer him with Foreign Arms: What cannot be obtained but by them, can
much less be preserved without them, after they shall be withdrawn.

This Danger of Auxiliary Forces is yet more to be feared, when the Prince who
sends them is of a different Religion, or has, or at least pretends to some
Right to that State; or else, if it be of any considerable Advantage for him to
be possessed of it, for the opening a Passage to his own, or obstructing that
of an Enemy. These Apprehensions should be measured by Necessity, the Condition
and Manners of the Prince being well examined; for if he be open and generous,
Public Faith and Reputation will have more Influence on him, than Interest,
and Reasons of State; as has been experienced in all the Princes of the House
of Austria, (represented by that powerful protecting Cherub to which Ezekiel
Thou art the anointed Cherub that governs, Ezekiel. 28. 14.
compares the King of Tire, before he failed in his Duty) of whose Friendship
no one can justly complain. Piedmont, Savoy, Cologne, Constance, and Brisac,
all Places defended by the Spanish Arms, and afterward restored without so
much as a Garrison left in them, are everlasting Witnesses of this Truth. Nor
can Genoua deny it; for when oppressed by France and Savoy, it put its Liberty
into the Hands of the Spaniards, these People most faithfully preserved it, as
esteeming more their Friendship, and the Glory of Public Faith, than Dominion.

But if Necessity, at any time, oblige the Prince to have recourse to a
Foreigner, he may avoid the Dangers mentioned, by these two or three Cautions:
If he take care that the Foreign Forces be not greater than his own; That his
own Officers Command them; That they be not put in Garrisons; That they be
mixed or divided, and immediately drawn out against the Enemy.

EMBLEM XCIII.
OFten has the Tyrrhene Sea felt the Danger of the Neighborhood of Mount
Vesuvius: But we learn not always to profit by our Misfortunes, being, out of a
vain confidence, apt to persuade our selves, they will never happen a second
time. The World had long since been at the height of Wisdom, had it known how
to improve by its Experiences: But Time, we see, effaces them, as it did in the
Ruins the late Conflagrations had left upon the skirts of that Mountain,
covering it with a prodigious quantity of Ashes, which, but a few Years
afterward, the Plough cultivated, and reduced again to Soil. The Remembrance
of the Losses sustained, was lost, or rather, no one would retain it, when yet
they ought to have ever kept Humane Caution upon its Guard. The treacherous
Mountain concealed under its green Garment the Heat and Drought of its
Entrails; and the Sea, suspecting no harm, made an Alliance with it, and
embraced it with its Waters, not regarding the contrariety of those two
Natures. But the treacherous Mountain kept its Intention so close, that not the
least Smoke gave any sign of what was plotting within. Their Communication
increased by secret ways: Nor co^ld the Sea imagine this pretended Friend was
raising Fortifications against it, and preparing Mines with diverse sulphurous
Metals; which being afterward filled, and that in our Age, was set fire to.
There opened, on the top of it, a wide and deep Mouth, breathing out Flames,
which at first seemed to be no more than P^^mes, as I may say, of Sparks, or
Bonfires, but in a few hours proved tragical Prodigies. This heavy Body several
times shook; and amidst its dreadful Thunder, vomited up the liquid Flames of
those indigested Matters of melted Metals which boiled in its Stomach: like
Torrents of Fire they streamed down it, into the Plains adjacent, burning the
Trees, and carrying the Houses along with them, till at length they run into
the Sea; which, astonished at so sudden an Hostility, retired with its Waters
to the very Center, whether out of Fear, or Policy, to raise a greater Body of
Waves to defend it self withal; for now the old League was violated, it was
obliged to prepare for its Defense. The two Elements engaged not without the
trembling of Nature her ^elf, afraid of seeing this beautiful Fabric of the
Universe on Fire: The very Waves, conquered by a superior Enemy, burned; and
the Fish, swimming in the Flames, were drowned: For the Fire, (as Solomon For
earthly things were turned into watery; and the things that before swam in the
water, now went upon the ground, Wisd. 19. 9.
speaks) had power in the Water, forgetting his own Virtue; and the Water
forgot his own quenching Nature.

Such will be the Effects of all the like Alliances of contrary Natures. Let
not the Catholic Prince, who enters into a Confederacy with Infidels, expect
less Evils. For there being no more inveterate Animosities than those which
arise from the Difference of Religions, the present Necessity may indeed
dissemble them, but it is impossible that Time should not discover them: And
how is it to be imagined that Amity can ever be maintained between them, when
the one cannot trust the other? when the Ruin of this, is the Interest of
that? They who differ in Opinions, differ also in Minds; and as Creatures of
that Eternal Artificer, we cannot suffer any other Adoration to be paid him,
than what we judge to be true and Orthodox. And although the Friendship of
Infidels were never so good, yet Divine Justice permits us not to obtain our
Ends by the means of his Enemies, nay, usually chastises us by the very
Infidel's Hand that Signed the Treaty. The Emperor which Constantine the Great
translated into the East, was ruined by the Alliance of the Palaeologi with the
Turk; God permitting it to remain to Posterity, for an Example of his
Correction, but not any living Memorial of that Family. But if, by reason of
the Distance of Places, or Disposition of Things, the Chastisement cannot be
inflicted by those very Infidels, God uses his own Hand. What Calamities has
not France suffered, since Francis I. more through Emulation of Charles the
Fifth's Glory, than forced by any Necessity, made a League with the Turk, and
called him into Europe? This Fault he acknowledged in the last moments of his
Life, expressed his utmost Detestation of it in Words; which piously we ought
to impute to a Christian Compunction, though otherwise they seemed to proceed
from extreme Despair. God pursued his Chastisement in some of his Successors,
by taking them off with violent and unhappy Deaths. Now if this Just Judge be
thus severe on Princes who do but ask the Aid of Infidels and Heretics, what
will he do to those who assist them against the Catholics, and are the reason
of their making such great Progresses? The Example of Peter II. of Arragon,
will tell us Mar. Hist. l. 12. c. 2.
: This King stuck with all his Forces to the Faction of the Albigenses in
France; and though he fought at the Head of One hundred thousand Men, against
the Catholics, who were but Eight hundred Horse, and a Thousand Foot, lost at
once both his Life and the Battle. Judas Machabaeus no sooner joined with the
Romans, though only to defend himself against the Grecian Power, but the two
Angels, that stood by his side, left him, and he was slain. The same
Punishment, and for the same Cause, suffered Jonathan and Simon, his Brothers
and Successors.

Nor is the Excuse of Self-Defence always sufficient; for all the Conditions
and Circumstances that make such Confederacies allowable, very rarely concur,
and are of greater weight than that universal Scandal and Danger of defiling
the true Religion with Errors; the Communication of Heretics being a Poison
apt to infect, a Gangrene that soon spreads, where Minds are inclined to
Novelty and Licentiousness And their word will eat as does a canker, 2 Timothy 2.
17.
. Policy distrusting the Divine Assistance, and wholly relying upon Humane
Artifices, may indeed deceive it self, but not God, at whose Tribunal mere
Appearances of Reason are not received. Baasha, King of Israel, built a
Fortress in Ramah, the last City of the Tribe of Benjamin, in the Kingdom of
Asa, and so stopped its Avenues, that no one could go in or out of it with safety
In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel came
up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out
or come in to Asa king of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 16. 1.
. This occasioned a War between those two Kings; and Asa fearing the Alliance
of Ben-hadad, King of Syria, with his Enemy, contrived first to break that, and
then entered himself into a Confederacy with Ben-hadad: which when Baasha
heard, he left off building the Fortifications of Ramah And it came to pass,
when Baasha heard it, that he left off building of Ramah, and let his work
cease, 2 Chronicles. 16. 5.
. Nevertheless, though Asa made this League out of Necessity, and only for his
own Defense, whereof the good Effect soon appeared; yet God was displeased that
he put more confidence in the King of Syria than in him, and sent Hanani the
Prophet to represent his fault to him, and threaten him with Wars, as a
Punishment Because thou have relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the
Lord thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine
hand, etc. Herein thou have done foolishly; therefore from henceforth thou
shall have wars, 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 9.
; which accordingly happened. Whence it will be easy to gather, how much
France has incurred the Divine Displeasure, by the Alliances it has now engaged
it self in with those of another Religion, to oppress the House of Austria:
Where is no room for the Pretense of Self-Preservation in extreme Necessity,
since without any Provocation or Reason, he has sided with all its Adversaries,
and made War upon it, fomenting it out of their States, and enlarging these by
the Usurpation of foreign Provinces, and assisting the Heretics and their
Allies with Counsel and Arms to conquer the Catholics; no one, in the mean
time, coming thence to the Treaty of Peace at Cologne, although the Pope, the
Emperor, and King of Spain, had all sent their Plenipotentiaries thither.

Nor is it unlawful only to make Leagues with Heretics, but even to make use
of their Forces. The Holy Scriptures give us an illustrious Instance of this,
in the Person of King Amasiah, who having hired an Army of the Sons of Israel,
was commanded of God to dismiss it, and reproved, for not rather relying on him
O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee: for the Lord is not with
Israel, to wit, with all the children of Ephraim. But if thou will go, do it,
be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the enemy: for God
has power to help, and to cast down, 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8.
. And because he presently obeyed, without any regard to the Danger, or to the
hundred Talents he had given them, God gave him a signal Victory over his
Enemies. Confederacy with those of a different Religion is lawful, when its End
is the Intermission of War, and Liberty of Commerce; such as that was which
Isaac made with Abimelech We s^e certainly that the Lord is with thee: and we
said, Let there be now an oat^ betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us
make a covenant with thee, That thou shall do us no hurt, Gen 26. 28, 29.
, and as now is between Spain and England.

When any Treaty is made with Heretics, provided it interfere not with
Religion or Good Manners, and be confirmed by Oath, the Public Faith is by all
means to be kept with them; for in the Oath, God is called to be a Witness to
the Agreement, and, as it were, a Surety for the Performance of it, both
Parties consenting to make him Judge of it, to punish the Perjurer. And
certainly it were a heinous Sin, to call him to witness to a Lie. Nations have
no other Security of the Treaties they make, than the Religion of Oaths; which
if they should make use of to deceive, there would be an end of Commerce in the
World, nor would it be possible for firm Truces or Peace to be ever concluded.
But though there pass no Oath, yet the Treaties should nevertheless be
observed: For from the Truth, Fidelity and Justice whereby they are maintained,
there arises in them a mutual Obligation, and a Duty common to all Nations; and
as it is not allowable to kill or hate a Man of a different Communion, so
neither is it to cheat, or break a Promise to him. Hence Joshua kept his Oath
with the Gibeonites We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now
therefore we may not touch them, I^sh. 9. 19.
: A thing which was so pleasing to God Almighty, that he vouchsafed in his
savor to interrupt the Natural Order of the Orbs of Heaven, obeying the Voice
of Joshua, and stopping the Sun in the midst of its Course, to give him Time to
prosecute the slaughter of his Enemies, and acquit himself of his Obligation So
the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a
w^ole day. And there was no day like that, before it, or after it, that the
Lord hearkened unto the voice of man: for the Lord sought for I^rael, Josh. 10.
13, 14.
: As, on the contrary, he punished David with a Three Years Famine, for Readiness
breaking this very Treaty Three hundred Years after Then there was a famine in
the days of David, three years, year after year; and David enquired of the
Lord. And the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because
he slew the Gi^eonites, 2 Samuel 21. 1.
.

EMBLEM XCIV.
THE Sun, when in Libra, distributes his Rays with so much Justice, that he
makes the Days and Nights equal; not, however, without having a more particular
regard to the Zones that are nearest and most subject to his Empire, to which
he imparts a greater Force of Light, always preferring those Climates and
Pa^allels that are least remote; and if any Country suffers the Intemperatures
of Heat under the Torrid Zone, the fault is in its ill Situation, not in the
Sun's Rays, since they are at the same Time benign to other Parts of the same
Zone. Now what the Sun does in the Equinoctial-Line, a Part of Heaven so
considerable, that if the immense Being of God could be confined to any limited
Place, it could be no other than that; the same Effect, I say, is produced here
below, by that Pontifical Triple-Crown, which from Rome, as a Fixed Equinox,
with its Divine Rays illuminates all the Parts of the World: This is the Sun of
these inferior Orbs, in which was substituted the Power of the Light of that
Eternal Sun of Righteousness, that all Things Sacred might receive from it
their true Form, so as never to be called in question by the shadows of impious
Opinions. There is no Country so near the Poles, but the Brightness of its
Rays, in spite of the Frosts and Mists of Ignorance, has reached it. This
Tiara, or Triple-Crown, is the Touchstone on which other Crowns are tried, and
the Caracts of their Gold and Silver proved, in that, as in a Crucible, they
are separated from other base Metals; and it is by the Tau they are stamped
with, that they are assured of their real Value. Hence Ramius, King of Arragon,
and many others, voluntarily offered to become Feudataries to the Church,
looking on it as an Honor and Happiness for their Crowns to pay it Tribute.
Those that refuse the Touch of this Apostolical Stone, are of Lead and Tin, and
so soon wear out, and consume, rarely passing to the Fifth Generation, (as we
see by frequent Experience.) It was with the Respect and Obedience of Princes,
that their Temporal Grandeur and Dignity, foretold by the Prophet Isaiah Then
thou shall see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged,
because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of
the Gentiles shall come unto thee, Isai. 6^. 5.
, was increased; who afterward armed the Spiritual Sword, so as to render it
capable of being the Balance of the Kingdoms of Christendom. And by the same
means the Popes still endeavor to support their Power, procuring the Favor of
Potentates by their Paternal Affection. Their Empire over Minds is a Voluntary
one, imposed by Reason, not Force: and if at any time this latter has been too
immoderate, it has had quite contrary Effects; for Passion is blind, and easily
runs headlong. The Papacy even unarmed, is stronger than the best appointed
Armies. The Presence of Pope Leo in his Pontifical Robes, struck such a Terror
into Attila, that it made him retreat, and lay aside his Thoughts of Sacking of
Rome; which had he attempted by Arms, he had never quelled the haughty Spirit
of that Barbarian. The bare Whistle of the Shepherd, or a kind Menace of the
Crook or Sling, do more than the hardest Stones. It is a Rebellious Sheep, that
must be led by Rigor: For if the Piety of the Faithful has given Force to the
Papal Dignity, that was rather for the Security of its Grandeur, than done with
a design to let them use it, except when the Maintenance of Religion, and the
Universal Benefit of the Church so required. When, contrary to this one
Consideration, the Mitre is turned into a Helmet, no more Reverence or
Obedience is due to it, than if it were merely Temporal The Italian is ^ere
guilty of par^ial Omissions and Additions.
: And if it will depend on Reasons of State, it will be looked upon only as a
Politic Prince's Crown, not as the Diadem of a Pope, whose Empire is supported
by a Spiritual Authority. His Pastoral Office is of Peace only, not War; his
Crosier crooked, to guide, not pointed, to wound. The Sovereign Priest is the
Sovereign Man, and therefore should not, as other Men, be guilty of Envy,
Hatred or Partiality, which are always Incentives of War Summum Pontificem
etiam summum h^minem esse, non amulationi^ (...) odio aut privatis
affectio^i^us (...), Tac. Annal. li^. 3.
. This even the very Pagans required in their Chief-Priest. The Splendor of
his Virtues strike the Mind more than the Sword does the Body, which is much
less prevalent in composing the Differences of Princes than Love and Respect;
for when Princes once see that his good Offices proceed from a true Paternal
Love, free from Passions, Affections, and Politic Artifices, they willingly
lay their Rights, and Arms, at his Feet. This several Popes have had Experience
of, who avoiding Neutrality, have shown themselves the Common Fathers of the
whole World. He who adheres to one alone, denies himself to all besides; and he
that is neither on this Side nor that Side, takes the Part of none. Whereas the
Highpriests should be for All, as their Garments, in the Old Law, gave us to
understand, whose exquisite Make represented the Globe of the Earth For in the
long garment was the whole world, Wisd. 18. 2^.
. It Is a piece of Cruelty to stand with Arms across at the sight of other Men's
Calamities. Should a Father stand still while his Children quarrel, he would be
deservedly blamed for whatever mischief they should do one to another; he
ought, sometimes by Rigor, sometimes by good Words, to part them, putting
himself betwixt them, or, if need be, espousing one's Cause, the better to
reduce the other to Agreement. Thus if Princes refuse to hearken to the
Fatherly Admonition of His Holiness, if they pay not the Respect due to his
Authority, and there be no hopes of ever recovering them, it seems best to
declare in favor of the most just Side, always having regard to the Public
Quiet, and the Advancement of Religion and the Church, to assist that, till the
other be brought to its Duty: For he that approves the Cause of the one and the
other, will be thought to cooperate with both. A whole Page is here omitted in
the French.
In Italy, more than in any other Part of the World, this Care of the Popes is
necessary Zurit. Hist. Arragon. l. 13. c. 13.
: For if once they so openly betray their Inclination to the French, that they
may promise themselves their Aid and Favor, they will soon bring their Arms
thither. This Conside^^tion prevailed on some Popes to show themselves more
addicted to Spain, the better to keep France within Bounds; and if at any time,
any one, induced by an appearance of Good, or through Partiality or
Self-Interest, and a Forgetfulness of this Caution, has used Secular Arms, and
called in the Aid of Foreigners, he (...) given occasion to great Commotions in
Italy; as Historians observe, in the Lives of Mar. Hist. Hisp.
Urban IV. who sent for Charles, Count of Anjou and Provence, to (...) Relief,
against Mainfroy, King of both Sicilies: Of Nicholas III. who being jealous of
the Power of King Charles, had recourse to Peter, King of Arragon: Of Nicholas
IV. who entered into a League with Alphonsus ^f Arragon, against King James: Of
Boniface VIII. who ^ppealed to James, King of Arragon, and called in the
Assistance of Charles of Valois, Count of Anjou, against ^rederick, King of
Sicily: Of Eugenius IV. who sided with the Faction of Anjou, against Alphonsus,
King of N^ples: Of Clement V. who sought the Aid of Philip of (...), against
the Viscounts of Milan: Of Leo X. and c^^ment VII. who made a League with
Francis, King of France, against Charles V. to throw the Spaniards out of
Italy. This Inconveniency proceeds from the Weight of the Apostolic See, it
being so great, that the Scale wherein it is put must necessarily fall very
much. It is probable that some Appearance of Good moved those ^^pes to do thus;
but certainly, in some of them, the (...) was far from answering their
Intention.

But as it is the Duty of the Popes to endeavor to ^^intain Princes in Peace
and Tranquillity; so ought these, out of Interest (were there no Divine
Obligation for it, as there really is) to have continually their Eyes, like the
Heliotrope, upon that Sun of the Pope's Triple-Crown, which always shines, and
never sets, and to be ^^edient to, and protect it. Hence Alphonsus V. King of
Arragon, upon his Deathbed, charged his Son Ferdinand, King of Naples, to
esteem nothing beyond the Authority of the Apostolic See, and the Favor of
the Popes; and to take care not to disgust them, whatever Reason he had on his
side Zurit. Ann. de Arrag.
. Impious or Imprudent Princes think it a piece of Bravery to carry themselves
haughtily toward the Popes: but such an Humility is so far from being a
Weakness, that it is a Religious Act; it is no Dishonor, but a Glory. The most
submissive Deferences paid them by the greatest Princes, are but a pious
Magnanimity, that teaches Subjects what Respect is to be paid to all that is
Sacred; they beget not any Infamy, but rather an Universal Applause. No one
condemned the Emperor Constanti^^, for taking a low Seat in a Council of
Bishops Eusebius. in Vit. Constable.
; nor King Egica, for prostrating himself upon the Ground, in another held at
Toledo (...) Reg. Goth.
. No one ever succeeds in opposing the Popes; those are Quarrels that nev^^
have a good end? And who can separate the Inter^^^ of the Temporal Prince from
that of the Head of the Church? Injury and Authority are so joined, that the
greater that is, the more it derogates from this. The Pontifical Dignity, when
armed with both the Temporal and Spiritual Sword, withstands the greatest
Power. It meets with an unshaken Obedience in Foreign Kingdoms; and if it once
goes to make War upon them, the People's Piety grows cold, and from fighting
with Arms, they come to that of Books; Allegiance tott^^* and Religion being
confounded, changes of Governm^^^ ensue, and the overthrow of Kingdoms, whose
only Bottom is the Reverence and Respect of the Priesthood Honor (...) Tac.
Hist. l. 5.
. which made some Nations unite it to the Re^^ Dignity. Princes ought therefore
to carry themsel^^ with so much Prudence, as to decline, as much as (...)
sible, giving any Occasion of Distaste to the Pope^^ which they will do, if
they pay a due Respect to (...) Apostolic See, maintaining its Privileges,
Rights, (...) ^munities inviolable, and asserting their own with ^urage and
Resolution, when they interfere not with ^^^m, without admitting any
Innovations prejudicial to ^^eir own States, and which tend not to the
Spiritual ^ood of their Subjects. When Charles V. went into ^ely to be Crowned,
the Pope's Legates would oblige ^^^m to take an Oath to preserve the Rights of
the Church. ^o which he answered, That as he would not alter them, (...)
neither would he, on the other side, do any thing against (...) Constitutions
of the Empire: Which he said, upon the ^^count of the Fiefs which the Church
pre^ded on Parma and Placentia. A Page and an half is here omitted in the
Italian.
King ^dinand the Catholic was so exact in this, ^at one may, in a manner, say
he fell ^to Excess; judging it not fit to transgress ^^e Limits of Rights and
Privileges the ^st in the World; because when the Foot is once ^^ed, it
presently defends the Place it stands on, as a ^^^ssession; and insensibly goes
farther, when, by briskly ^^posing its first steps, much greater Losses might
be ^^oided. John, King of Arragon, refused to ratify the ^^ant of the
Archbishopric of Saragossa, made by Pope ^^tus IV. to Cardinal Ausias Dezpuch,
because he did not ^ominate him, as was then the Custom; but causing the
^^rdinal's Goods and Revenues to be seized, and mis^ing his Relations, forced
him to quit the Pontificate, ^^ich he afterward conferred upon his Nephew
Al^^^sus Zur. Hist. Arrag Mar. Hist. Hisp. l. 24. c. 16.
. Such another Dispute, a little after, arose ^^on the Subject of the Church of
Tarrassona; which a ^rtain Temporal Judge having been made Bishop of, (...)
ordered him to leave it instantly, threatening, if he ^^d not, to drive him, and
all that belonged to him, out (...) his Kingdom. The same did his Son
Ferdinand, in (...) the Bishopric of Cuenca, to which Pope Sixtus had ^^^ated
Raphael Galeot, a Relation of his own Anton. ^eb. Hist. Hisp.
: For ^^e King, incensed that it should be given to a Foreigner, and without
his Nomination, enjoined all the Spaniards to leave Rome, protesting he would
call a Council upon that and some other Matters; and when the Pope afterward
sent his Nuncio into Spain, he bid him return, complaining that His Holiness
did not use him as such an obedient Son of the Church deserved, and wondered
that the Ambassador should undertake such a Commission: But he humbly making
answer, That he would renounce the Pri^^es of an Ambassador, and submit wholly
to His Majesty's Pleasure; by this, and the good Offices of the Cardinal of
Spain, he was admitted, and all the Differences adjusted. But unless, for
Self-Preservation, or otherwise, the Case be extremely dangerous, recourse
should not be had to these Methods; and it is befitting the Paternal Affection
of the Popes, not to give Occasion to them, behaving themselves so Courteous
always, so as thereby to maintain a good Correspondence with Princes: For
although they have in their Hand, as was said, the two Swords of Spiritual and
Temporal Authority, yet this ought to execute nothing but by the Arms of
Emperors and Kings, as Protectors and Defenders of the Church: Which makes it
(as Alphonsus the Wise says In Proem. p. 2.
) of so much concernment for those two Powers always to agree, so that each may
help the other, when Occasion requires. I doubt not but all those whom God has
placed in this High Station, have this Care deeply rooted in their Hearts; but
yet it is oftentimes perplexed by the Courtiers of Rome, whose only business
is to sow Discords; as also by the Ambition of some Ministers, who think to
wind themselves into the Favor of the Popes, and to procure the best
Preferments by their Independency on Princes, and by the Aversion they bear
them, always inventing Pretenses to reject their Petitions, and taking all
occasions of Affronting their Ambassadors; and who, to appear Stout, suggest
violent Counsels, under color of Religion and Zeal: all which ruin the good
Understanding of the Popes and Temporal Princes, to the great prejudice of the
Christian Commonwealth, and chills the Veins of Piety, for want of Love, the
Artery that cherishes them, and maintains their warmth.

EMBLEM XCV.
THE Isthmus maintains it self between the Force and Power of two contrary
Seas, as their common Arbiter, not enclining more to this than that: Hence,
what one takes from it, the other restores again; and by the conflict of both,
it is preserved entire; for if the Waves of either should once swell and
overflow the whole Tract of Ground, they would spoil its Jurisdiction, and it
would be no longer an Isthmus. This Neutrality betwixt two great Powers
supported, for a long time, Peter Ruiz d'Azagra in his Government of
Albarraein, situate on the Frontiers of Castile and Arragon Mar. Hist. Hisp. l.
11. c. 16.
; for each of these Kings took care not to let it be oppressed by the other,
and those Emulations kept the Freedom of that little State untouched. By this
the Dukes of Savoy may see how much it is their Interest to stand Neuter
between the two Crowns of France and Spain, and to keep in their Hands the free
Disposal of the Passes into ^^aly by the Alps, as a thing whereon their
Grandeu^, their Conservation, and the Necessity of their Friendship, entirely
depends; it highly concerning each of these Crowns not to let them be subdued
by the other. Hence the Spaniards have so often marched to the Aid of Charles
Emanuel, and recovered such Places as the French had taken from him. I know
only one Case wherein it is better that these Princes brea^ this Neutrality,
and side with one of the two Crowns and that is, when the other attempts the
Conquest of their Dominions, particularly that of France: For if once the
French should drive the Spaniards out of Italy, they would become so powerful
(considering they have already e^tended their Dominions from the very utmost
Limits of the Ocean, as far as the Mediterranean, through Cal^^ria) that over
running the States of Savoy and Piedmont, they must of necessity either unite
them to the Crown of France, or but then them with an intolerable Slavery,
which the whole Body of Italy would soon feel the Effects of, without hopes of
redeeming their Liberty again; and for Spain ever to retrieve their Losses, or
balance their Forces, would be extremely difficult, considering the vast
distance between them too. This Danger the Republic of Venice, with a great
deal of Prudence, weighed, when seeing Charles the Eighth's Power increase in
Italy, they struck up that which was called the Holy League. From that time,
one may say, Divine Providence began to contrive the Security and Preservation
of the Apostolic Chair, and of Religion, and to prevent its falling under the
Tyranny of the Turk, or being infected with the Heresies, then taking root in
Germany; advanced the Greatness of the House of Austria, and established the
Spanish Monarchy in the States of Naples, Sicily, and Milan, that Italy might
have a Catholic Prince to defend it on all sides: And to restrain the Power of
Spain, and make it content with the Rights of Succession, Fiefs, and Arms, it
raised it a Rival in the Person of the King of France, to lay its Kings under a
necessity for their Preservation of gaining the Love and Good Will of their
Subjects, and the Esteem of other Princes, by maintaining Justice among them,
with these Peace, without giving the least Occasion to War, which always
hazards the Rights and Designs of the most Powerful.

This Advantage which Italy reaps from the Power of Spain, is, by some,
unjustly traduced as a Yoke of Slavery; when, on the contrary, it is the only
Instrument of its Repose, of its Liberty and Religion: The Mistake proceeds
from their not well knowing the Importance of this Counterpoise. A Person,
ignorant in Navigation, seeing the Bottom of a Ship filled with Sand and
Stones, thinks it carries the Cause of its Wreck in this Weight: whereas they
who are acquainted with Sea-Affairs, know, that without this Ballast, the
Lightness of the Ship could never subsist long against the Agitation of the
Waves. Nicephorus, speaking of this Aequilibrium between two Crowns, looks on
it as a Common Advantage to the Subjects of both Kingdoms, when he says, That
he could not enough admire the inscrutable Wisdom of God, who makes two
directly opposite Means tend to the same End; as when he would keep two Powers
at variance, without however subjecting the one to the other, he either gives
to both Commanders, whose Capacity and Courage discover the Artifices, and
oppose the Attempts of the adverse Party, which makes for the Liberty of the
Subjects of both Sides; or else sets over them Men so senseless and cowardly,
that they undertake nothing considerable one against another, but leave the
Limits of the Kingdom as they found them Mirari (...) subit impervestigabile^
Dei sapientiam, qui plane ^^^traria uno fine conclusit. Nam cum du^^
ad^ersarias potestates inter se co^mittere statuit, nee alteram alteri
subjicere, aut ingenio and virtute (...) utrinque parti moderatores praeficit,
ut alter alterius consilia and (...) vertas, and utrinque subditorum libertati
consulatur, aut utrosque ^ebetes and imbelles deligit, ut neuter alterum
tentare, and s^pta (quod aiunt) (...) aude^^, veteresque regnorum limits
convellere. Niceph.
. For the same ends, Divine Providence has parted the Forces of the French and
Spanish Kings, by interposing the high Walls of the Alps, lest Propinquity of
Territories, or Easiness of Passage, should be a Temptation to War, and favor
the French most, if that Nation should have these Doors so often open. It has
still, for greater Security, given the Keys of them to the Duke of Savoy, an
Italian Prince, who having his States between those two Kingdoms, can lock or
leave them open, according as the Public Good requires. This Divine
Disposition Pope Clement VIII. was sensible of, and with singular Prudence
procured the State of Saluzzes to fall into the Duke of Savoy' s Hands. Here is
a Page and an half omitted in the French.
This was a very ancient State-Maxim; on which Alphonsus, King of Naples,
grounded his Advice to the Duke of Milan, not to deliver up Asti to Lewis the
Dauphin: For (said he) it is not for the good of Italy, that the French strive
to get footing there, but to bring it under their Subjection, as was attempted
in the Genoese Expedition. That Italian Prince penetrated not the force of this
Counsel, who advised the prefent French King, by making himself Master of
Pignerol, to get firm footing on the Alps; deceived probably (unless it were
Malice) by the appearing Convenience of having the French ready against any
Attacks of the Spaniards; not considering, that by the fear of a future War,
which might perhaps never have really happened, a present and most certain one
is kindled, upon the admission of the French into Italy; it being impossible
for Peace to be preserved in any one Province betwixt two Nations so opposite
and disagreeing: Nor were Italy like to reap any other Benefit from it than
this, That it would nourish a Serpent in its Bosom, whose poisonous Sting would
certainly afterward envenom it. Besides that the French, even when within
their own Limits, on the other side of the Alps, are always near enough to
march into Italy, when called, nor is it necessary that they be so near as to
have the Passage at their Command. Besides, were the French so modest, so void
of Ambition, as to confine themselves there, and not move but when called upon;
yet who doubts but upon such an Occasion they would widely transgress the
Bounds of Protection; as Lewis Sforza, Castruchio Castrocani, and several
others, have actually experienced, who sought their Aid with no other
Advantage, than that the same befell them (as it does some at this day) which
Tacitus relates to have happened to the Frecentini, who, while they agreed
among themselves, valued not the Parthians; but upon their falling into
Dissentions, while each called in Aid against his Rival, the Person invited by
one Party conquered both Quoties concordes agunt, spe^nitur Parth^^; ubi
dissensere, dum sibi quisque contra aemulos subsidium vocant, accitus in partem
adversu^ omnes valescit. Tac. Annal. l. 6.
. Now if that Power might be brought into Pignerol, so as to be wholly at the
Disposal of Italy, either to call it in, or send it out of its Territories, as
Occasion should require, there had then been some Reason in the Policy, some
color of Zeal for the Public Good, in this Counsel: But now, in a time the
most improper in the World, to place it within the very Gates of Italy, to
enter them upon every Motion of Ambition or Levity, and that Fear of it might
keep the Spaniards continually upon their Guard, and Occasion be given to other
Princes to take up Arms, and a Storm of Wars be raised never to be calmed, was
so far from being good Counsel, that it was the rankest Treason, being, in
plain terms, no other than exposing it to the Power of France, and wresting
that out of the Italian Prince's Hand, which he had over the Alps, for the
Common Good of All.

In the other Potentates of Italy, which are not situate between those two
Crowns, this Reason of Neutrality has not the same force; for when once War is
brought into Italy, they cannot but fall a Prey to the Conqueror, without
having obliged either Party; as the Consul Quinetius said to the Aetolians, to
persuade them to declare for the Romans, in the War against Antiochus; and as
the Florentines found, when refusing to join with the King of Arragon, they
stood Neuter; thereby losing the Favor of the French King, without appeasing
the Anger of the Pope Quippe sine dignitate praemium victoris eritis. Live. l.
35.
. Neutrality neither makes Friends, nor removes Enemies Neutralitas neque
a^icos parit, ^eque inimicos tollit. Polyh.
. Hence Alphonsus, King of Naples, said of the Sienois, who thinking to save
themselves by Neutrality, were ruined, That the same happened to them, which
usually does to one who lodges in the middle of an House, whom they below fill
with Smoke, those above pour Water down upon him. What did not the Thebans
suffer, by being Neutral, when Xerxes invaded Greece? While Lewis XI. of France
continued so, he never had Peace with any Prince Phil. de Comin.
. This whole Paragraph is omitted in the French.
Let not the Prince be deceived, in imagining this Neutrality to be the best
means to balance the Forces of Spain and France; for certainly there ought to
be some Declaration in behalf of the former, not that it may enlarge its
Territories, or make an Inrode into France, but that it may maintain what it is
already possessed of, and the French be kept within their Kingdom, and not by
any Neutrality or Affection be invited out. And this is so certain, that the
very Declaration of Favor, without any other Public De^^nstrations, poises
these Scales, and is a sufficient Ar^ment of War. Italy can never bear two
Factions that ^ive to raise their Fortunes by the Contention of both ^owns
within its Bowels. This Charles V. was sensible (...) when, to restore Peace to
Italy, he destroyed them, ^^d new-modelled the Republic of Florence, which at
^^at Time encouraged them; for one of the two Balances (...) France or Spain,
never so little over-loaded, turned. (...) Scale of Peace, which consists in
keeping them even. ^^on the knowledge of this Truth, all prudent Princes ^^d
Commonwealths have showed themselves more ad^^ed to Spain, to add some Weight
to it; and that by ^^ing a more perfect Aequilibrium, they, with their ^^tes,
might enjoy a happy Tranquillity; and if at any ^ne any one has disordered it,
by espousing the contrary ^^ty, he has been the Occasion of great Troubles, and
^^moted the Ruin of Italy.

Glory, that constant attendant of Ambition, prompts ^ne Italians to think it
would be more advantageous (...) them to unite against both Crowns, and have no
^^er Masters but themselves, either by dividing them^^ves into Republics, or
setting up one Head. Thoughts ^re for Talk, than Effect, considering the
present ^^ndition of Italy; for either this Sovereign must be (...) Pope, or
some other. If the Pope, there want not ^^y many plausible Reasons to show the
impossibility (...) maintaining a Spiritual Monarchy changed into a ^mporal one
under an Elective Prince (especially if (...) be of a declining Age, as
generally all the Popes are) ^sed only in Arts of Peace, and Ecclesiastical
Tran^lity, wholly employed in Spiritual Affairs, and sur^nded with Nephews and
Relations, who, should ^^^y not require to secure to themselves the Succession
(...) their States, will be sure to share them by Investitures. ^^^des, it
being the Interest of Christendom, that the ^^^es be the Common Fathers of all
its Members, and (...) have any Differences with other Princes, they will
^^^eby be engaged in perpetual Quarrels with those two ^^wns; which, on account
of the Claims each lay to the Duchy of Milan, and the Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily, will soon fall upon the Apostolic See, whethe^ joined by some Compact
to divide the Conquests of these States, or separately, one breaking into Italy
through, the Milanese, the other through Naples, with the Danger too of one of
them calling in the Aid of the Germans, or the Turk, who would afterward fix
in Italy.

But suppose any Person were created King of all Italy, yet still the same
Inconveniences would remain; nay, another much greater would arise from hence;
that in form a Monarchy, this King must necessarily make other Princes subject
to him, and strip the Pope of his Empire: For should he leave them in the same
Condition they are at present, (though it were under some acknowledgment of
Homage, or in Alliance) he could never support himself; besides that thus Italy
would lose that Spiritual Empire, which renders it no less Ill^strious than
heretofore the Roman did, and being d^prived of its Liberty, would be brought
to a kind (...) Tyrannical Confusion.

There is yet less probability of Italy 's continuing (...) Peace, under
several Native Princes, for they can never agree so uniformly as to unite
against the two Crow^ but will rather ruin one another by Intestine Wars, ^ it
happened in former Ages; the Italian Nation being (...) so lofty a Genius, that
it scorns a Medium; either it m^^^ absolutely Govern or Obey.

From all which, it appears, how necessary so^^ Foreign Power is to Italy,
which, opposed to all other neither suffers Wars between its Princes, nor allo^
them to make use of Foreign Arms; which is the reas^ that since it was united
with the Crown of Spain, it (...) always enjoyed a perfect and continual Peace.

The Advantage therefore that attends that necessity (...) joining it self to
one of the two Crowns, may pre^^^ upon the Italian Nation to conform to the
present (...) especially since if there should happen any Alteration (...)
Milan, Naples and Sicily, it could not but give a (...) ^^^^rbance to other
Governments: For no New Forms (...) ^ntroduced without the corruption of
others; and (...) one of the two Nations must be incorporated (...) Italy, the
Spanish has most Reason for it, they lying (...) under the same Climate, which
renders them more (...) in Firmness of Religion, Observance of Justice, ^vity
of Actions, Fidelity to their princes, Constancy in (...) Promises and Public
Faith, in Moderation of Mind, (...) briefly, in all other Customs and Manners;
and ^es, because the King of Spain governs not in Italy (...) Stranger, but as
an Italian Prince, who aims at no^^^g more there, than to maintain what he
justly pos^^^ since he can, with much more Advantage to his (...), extend his
Monarchy over the vast Countries (...) Africa. This Maxim Ferdinand the
Catholic left to Successors, in generously refusing the Offer of the (...) of
Emperor of Italy, saying, That he desired nothing (...) what of Right belonged
to him, and that it was not his (...) to dismember the Imperial Dignity. This
Truth is ^^^ently attested by the Restitutions the King of Spain (...) made of
several Places, without making use of any (...) of Arms, or demanding
Satisfaction for Charges (...) Damage, or taking up Arms but upon necessity,
(...) for his own defense, or that of another, as the (...) of Mantua have
experienced; and if he has at (...) time made War upon the Duke of Nevers, it
was (...) as Malice would insinuate, to make himself Master ^asal, but to put
it in the Power of the Emperor to justice to those who laid Pretensions to
these States. (...) the Duke of Nevers having implored, by the Marquess
Mirebaean, His Majesty's Protection and Consent to (...) Marriage of his Son,
the Duke of Retel, with the ^^^eess Mary, obtained both: But after the
Conclusion of (...) Matter, Advice was brought to Madrid, That by the ^er-hand
Practices of Count d'Estrige, the Wedding (...) already celebrated, Vincent,
Duke of Mantua, being ^he point of Death, without the King's knowledge, ^^^ctly
against the Agreement between him and the (...); which was the reason that this
Novelty, which appeared to some a kind of Slight and Distrust, deferred first
the execution of the Protection, and gave afterward place to fresh
Deliberations; wherein it was resolved, That without any Notice taken of all
this, the Favor promised, should remain in full force, and One be sent to give
the Married Couple Joy. But as Divine Providence had determined the Destruction
of the City and House of Mantua, for the Vices of its Princes, and their
Violation of so many Marriages, it directed all Events to that end; and
accordingly, for this Reason, while these Things passed in Spain, Cardinal
Richlieu, a sworn Enemy to the Duke of Nevers, brought it about, that the Duke
of Savoy, assisted by his Master, denounced War against him, to get what he
laid claim to in Montferrat. But the Duke smelling this to be nothing but a
Pretense, under which to bring the French Arms into Italy, and by the Ruin of
both Dukes, to increase the Grandeur of France, discovered the whole Intrigue
to Gonsalvo of Cordoua, Governor of Milan, promising to desert the French, if
he would ass^^^ him. Gonsalvo desired Time to consider, and se^^^ Advice of it
into Spain; and seeing the Duke make some difficulty to grant it, and that if
he did not succo^ him, the Doors of the Alps would be open to the French, he,
of his own head, agreed with the Duke, hoping to make himself Master of Casal,
by the mea^^^ of Espadin, whereby (as himself wrote to His Majesty) the Emperor
might with much more ease determine the Controversies on foot in Montferrat and
Mantua: a Reso^lution which obliged His Majesty to suspend a second time^ the
execution of the Protection promised, though contrary to his Design of
procuring the Peace of Italy* nevertheless, to maintain that, and cut off all
Occasi^^ of Jealousy, he gave Order to Gonsalvo of Cordoua, That if, as was
supposed, he was already possessed of Casa^* he should keep it in the Name of
the Emperor, the true Master of it, at the same time dispatching Letters to him
to that effect, to convey, in that case, to His Imperial Majesty. But the
Treaty with Espadin not su^^ding, Gonsalvo, without any Order from His Ma^^^y,
invested Casal; which was the Occasion of the (...) of France' s Journey to
Susa, and of Spain's being ^xpectedly engaged in the War, after having pub^ly
protested that those Forces were only Auxi^ies to the Emperor, to the end the
Rights of the ^^enders upon Mon^ferrat and Mantua might be ^^ded by way of
Justice; nor would Gonsalvo accept ^he Term offered him by the Duke of Nevers,
of ^^^ng Casal, lest any should think His Majesty engaged ^ese Commotions more
out of private Interest, than (...) the fake of the Public Quiet. This is the
very ^th of the Matter, which so many have unjustly ^aim'd against, so few
really known.

^et the Prince therefore and Republic of Italy lay ^e the empty Shadows of
Jealousies assuring them^es that Spain aims at nothing more than to keep up
(...) Grandeur amongst them, not to increase it; and let (...) give place to
this true piece of Policy, if they desire Peace of Italy: for these imaginary
Emulations tend ^o other end, but to promote its Disquiet; there ^g no War but
what proceeds either from the Ambi^^^ of a powerful Monarch, or the
Apprehensions of ^^feriour Prince.

EMBLEM XCVI.
VIctory in just Wars, aims at no other end (...) Peace: Hence that is the most
Glorious, wh^^^ is obtained with least Damage, and more (...) Stratagem than
Force, which was least covered (...) Dust and Blood; which Horace calls, --
Dulcis sine pulvere palma: Horat.

Laurels with Ease obtained, smell always sweet.


The Romans, for bloody Victories, sacrificed a (...) and an Ox, for those got
by Stratagem. If by Wit^^^ ^nderstanding we are like God, but have Force in
com^on with Brutes, undoubtedly there is more Glory in ^^quering with the
former than the latter. Tiberius ^s better pleased in having quieted the Empire
by Pru^nce, than if he had done it by the Sword Laetiore Tiberio, qui^ pacem
sapienti^ firmaverat, quim si bellu^ (...) a^ies consecisses, Tac. Annal. l. 2.
: And Agricola looked on it as Glorious to vanquish the Britains ^^^thout the
loss of Roman Blood Ingens victoria dec^^ (...) a Romanum sanguinem bellants,
Id. in Vit. Ag^ic.
. If Victory pro^oses the Preservation and Increase of the Common^ealth, it
will succeed much better by Policy or Nego^tion, than by Arms. The Life of one
Citizen is of ^ore account than the Death of many Enemies. Whence ^^pio the
African used to say, That be had rather save (...) Citizen, than conquer a
thousand Enemies: A Sentence which afterward the Emperor Marcus Antoninus Pius
^ok for his Device. For to conquer an Enemy is the (...) Work of a General; to
save a Citizen, that of a ^^triot. Vitellius considered not this, when having
de^^ded Otho, he said, in passing among the dead Bodies, ^^he smell of dead
Enemies is sweet, but that of Citizens yet ^^eter. A barbarous Saying, unworthy
even of a Vulture. ^ quite different Compassion was seen in Himilcon, who ^ving
obtained considerable Victories in Sicily, because (...) had lost most of his
Men by Sicknesses which seized (...) Army in their Camp, entered Carthage, not
in ^riumph, but in Mourning, and the Habit of a Slave, ^^d going strait to his
Quarters, killed himself, without ^aking a word to any. Cruel Victory seems to
be ^^re the Heat of Revenge, than Effect of Courage; it has ^^re of Fierceness
than Reason in it. When Lewis XII. ^ing of France, received News, that his Army
had ^otten the better in the Battle of Ravenna, though with (...) loss of all
his Officers, and the best part of his ^^diers; Would to God (said he, sighing)
I had lost the ^ay, and my brave Captains were now alive! May such ^ctories as
these be for my Enemies, wherein the Conquered (...) Conqueror, and the Victor
vanquished. For this Reason, the most prudent Commanders decline Engagements
and Attacks as much as possible; and value themselves more upon obliging the
Enemy to yield, than upon subduing him by Force Dare in discrimen legiones haud
imperatorium ratus, Tac. Annal. lib. 2.
. The Great Captain received Gajeta by Surrender: and some thinking he had
better, since he was now Master of the Field, have stormed it, and taken the
Officers, with the Garrison, Prisoners, to prevent any mischief they might do,
if let go; he answered, It would have cost more in Powder and Ball than the
Danger would have been worth. It is a generous Valor that brings the Enemy to
a Surrender without Bloodshed, and a happy War that is ended by Mercy and
Pardon Bellorum egregios ^ines, quoties ignoscendo transigatur, Ta^ Annal. l.
12.
. Valor is for the Enemy, but Mercy for the Captive Quanta pervicacia in
hostem tanta beneficentia (...) versus supplices utendum, Id* ibid.
. This Generosity of Mind is very rare nowadays, when War is undertaken more
to satisfy Passion, than to exert Valor, more for Devastation than Conquest.
It is called Peace, to reduce Cities into Ashes, and Countries into Deserts Vbi
solitudinem fa^^^ pacem appellant, Tac. in Vit. Agric.
, to lay waste and burn up Fields, as we see in Germany and Burgundy. What a
barbarous Cruelty, how inconsistent with Humane Reason is it thus to wage War
with Nature her self, and take from her those Means wherewith she nourishes and
supports us? The Holy Scriptures forbid even the Trees that grow near besieged
Cities to be cut down, because they are Wood, not Men, and so cannot increase
the Enemy's Number When thou shall besi^^^ a city a long time, in making war
against it to take it, thou shall (...) destroy the trees thereof, by forcing
an are against them: for (...) may eat of them, and thou shall not cut them
down (for the (...) of the field is man's life) to employ them in the siege,
Deuteronomy. 20. 19.
. To that degree does God abhor Blood spilt in War, that though he had made
his People take up Arms against the Midianites yet he afterward enjoined, That
whosoever had killed any Person, or touched any Slain, should purify himself
^^ven Days out of the Camp And do ye abide without the camp seven days:
whosoever ^^th killed any person, and whosoever has touched any slain, purify
^^^h your selves and your captives, on the third day, and on the ^^^^th day,
Numb. 31. 19.
. Aeneas thought it ^ Crime to touch Things Sacred before he had washed ^is
Hands in some living Stream: Attrectare nefas, donec me flumine vivo Abluero.
Virgil.
God, as he is equally the Author of Peace and Life, hates those who disturb
that, or cut the thread of this: ^ven to Weapons, as the Instruments of Death,
he has ^eclared his aversion; for hence, I conceive, he com^anded his Altars to
be built of rough, unpolished ^tone, which no Iron had touched; such as that
was which the People of Israel raised, after they had passed ^^e River Jordan
And there shall (...) build an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar of stone:
thou ^^it not lift up any iron tool upon them, Deuteronomy. 27. 5.
; and that of Joshua, after his ^ctory over the Men of Ai Then ^^ua built an
altar, etc. an altar of whole stones, over which no (...) had lift up an iron,
Josh. 8. 30. 31.
. The Reason of this, (...) that Iron is the Matter of War, whereof Swords are
^ade: nor would he suffer the use of it in the purity and ^aceableness of his
Sacrifices, as that other Precept ^^^ms to intimate If thou will make ^an altar
of stone, thou shall not build it of hewn stone: for if thou (...) up the tool
upon it, thou have polluted it, Exodus 2^. 25.
.

But ambition of Glory seldom gives place to these ^nsiderations, imagining
there can be no Reputation ^t, where Valor is not exercised, and Blood spilt;
^^d thence it is that some care not to make use of ^^xiliaries, or admit of
Companions in Victory. ^ing Alphonsus III. lost the Battle of Arc, only because
(...) would not stay for the coming up of the Forces of ^on and Navarr; and
Tilly, that of Leipsick, by not ^aiting for the Imperial Forces. In which thing
Ambi^on is much in the wrong; the Glory of Victories consisting not so much in
any degree of Courage, as in having known how to make good use of safe
Counsels; forasmuch as the one depends on Chance, the other on Prudence. He
obtains the Victory soon enough, who has with Judgment so provided that he
should not be overcome. Ambition burns; and Reason, once disturbed, follows its
Natural Force and Tendency, and destroys it self. States are never more
beholding to their Prince, than when undervaluing Trophies and Triumphs, he
strives to maintain Peace by Negotiation, and purchases Victory with Money; for
it is much cheaper buying for that than Blood, and generally safer fighting
with Golden than Iron Weapons.

The variety of past Accidents is apt to make Victory forget it self; Glory, to
make it vanish; Joy, to disorder; Spoils, to puff it up; Acclamations, to make
it over^confident; and Bloodshed prompts it to despise the Enemy, and sleep
secure, when it should be most vigilant, and show greater Fortune in subduing
it self, than it met with in conquering the Enemy: for this latter may possibly
be more an effect of Fortune than Courage; but in the Triumph over our
Affections and Passions, Chance has no part. The General therefore would do
well, immediately after a Victory, to retire into himself, and with Prudence
and Constancy compose the Civil War of his Passions; forasmuch as without this
Triumph, that other will but be more dangerous. Let him watch his Spoils and
Trophies the more carefully, the more of them he has gotten; for in Danger,
Fear doubles Guards and Sentinels, when he who thinks himself out of it,
abandons himself to Sleep. Joshua drew not back his Hand, till he had utterly
destroyed all the Inhabitants of A^. For (...) drew not his hand back wherewith
he stret^^^^ out the spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitan^
A^, Josh. 8. 26.
. Between the Battle and Victory there is no Security: Despair is daring; and
the most contemptible Animal, when provoked, turns again. This Experience cost
Archduke Albert dear, at Newport: And Abner told Ioab the danger of making his
Sword too bloody Shall the sword devour for ever? know thou not that it
(...) be bitterness in the latter end? 2 Samuel 2. 26.
. Besides, Adversity is ingenuous; and the Enemy it oppresses often lays hold
on the Occasion, and recovers in a moment whatever it had lost, baffling
Fortune by her own Incon^ancy: A Goddess, who the more she shines, the more
brittle she is, and the sooner broken. A General must not therefore be elated
by his Victories, nor think it impossible for him to become in his turn a
Trophy to the Person he ^as conquered. He should have ever before his eyes the
like Casualty, phansying he always sees plunged ^der the Waters of Calamities
the same Palm which ^e has once lifted up in Triumph: Thus that of this ^^blem
looks it self in the Water, whose liquid Mirror ^^presents to it the
Condition, the Force of Winds, or ^^jury of Time, may reduce it to. This
prudent Cau^^usness made the Spouse compare the Eyes of her ^eloved to Rivers
of Waters His eyes (...) as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, Cant. 5.
12.
, because in them the (...) dresses and prepares it self for Adversities.
^^sperity is Glory's greatest Enemy: Confidence ren^ing Virtue negligent, and
Pride undervaluing Danger. ^cessity obliges the Conquered to good Discipline;
^ger and Revenge animate him, and inspire Cou^ge Aliquando etiam victis ira
virtusque, Tac. in Vit. Agric.
: Whereas the Conqueror, through Arro^^^ce, and breach of Discipline, grows
dull and ^^^vy Acriore hodie disciplini victi quam victores agunt: h^s ira,
odium, (...) cupiditas ad virtutem acc^ndit, Tac. Hist. l. 2.
. The gain of a Battle is oftentimes the ^ginning of Happiness to the
Conquered, of Misfortune (...) the Victor; the one being blinded by his
Fortune, (...) other casting about to retrieve his. What Arms ^^rishing could
not conquer, those thrown down often (...); and Spoils scattered here and
there, inflaming the Avarice of the Victorious, make of them an ea^ie Victory.
Thus it befell the Sarmatae, who being loaded with Plunder, were cut in pieces,
as if they had been bound, and immovable Qui cupidine praedae graves onere
sarcinarum velut vi^cti
. The Battle of Tarro, against Charles VIII. of France, was lost, at least
dubious, ^^debanmur, Tac. Hist. l 2. only by the Italian Soldiers falling too
soon upon the Baggage. Hence Judas Maccabaeus required his Men not to touch the
Booty, until the Fight was over But ^tand ye now fast against your enemies, and
overcome them; then may ye safely take the spoils, 1 Maccab. 4. 18.
.

Victories are to be esteemed more for the Progresses may be expected from
them, than for themselves, and therefore should be cultivated, that they may
bear the more. To give the Enemy Time, is to Arm him; and to sit down satisfied
with the Fruit already gathered, to leave Arms barren. It is as easy for a
Fortune raised to fall, as it is to lift up again one fallen. Tiberius,
considering this Uncertainty of Things, endeavored, with many Arguments, to
persuade the Senate not to be so quick in executing the Honors decreed to
Germanicus, for his Victories in Germany Cuncta mortal um incerta, quan^^^^
plus ad^ptus forat, tanto se magis in lubrico dictans, Tac. Annal. l. ^.
.

Although Victories should be pursued, yet it ought not to be with a Heat so
secure and careless as to slight Dangers. Let Expedition consult with Prudence,
with regard to Time, Place, and Occasion. Let the Prince use his Victories with
Moderation, not with a Bloody and Inhumane Tyranny, always having before him
that Counsel of Theodorick, King of the Ostrogoths, in a Letter to his
Father-in-Law, Clovis, about the Germa^ Victories; In such Cases, let him be
heard who has most Experience: No Wars have been more successful to me, than
those I have ended with Moderation; for he comes oftenest off Conqueror, who
best uses his Victory; and Fortune ever favors them most, who are least puffed
up Cassiod.
. The French follow not this prudent Advice, but rather have imposed a heavier
Yoke on Germany than it ever yet bore, and hastened the Ruin of that Empire.
The Piety and Modesty of Marcellus made a greater Show, when he wept to see the
Ruin of the beautiful Buildings of Syracuse, than his Valor and Glory in
having stormed it, and made a Triumphant Entry at the Breach. Count Tilly
struck the Hearts of several, more by the Tears he shed for the burning of
Magdeburg, than by his Sword. And though Joshua commanded the Officers of his
Army to put their Feet upon the Necks of the Kings taken in the Battle of
Gibaon Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings, ^osh. 10. 24.
; yet this was not done out of Pride or Vainglory, but to animate his
Soldiers, and to remove the Fear they had conceived of the Giants of Canaan
Fear not, nor be dismayed; be strong, and ^f good courage: for thus shall the
Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye fight, Josh. 10. 25.
.

To treat those one has subdued with Humanity, to maintain their Privileges and
Nobility, and to ease them of Taxes, is twice to conquer them, once by Arms,
and afterward by Kindness, and in the mean while to prepare a Chain for other
Nations; no fewer yielding to Generosity, than to Force.

Expugnat nostram clementia gentem,
Mars gravior sub pace latet. Claud.

By these Artifices the Romans made themselves Masters of the whole World; and
if ever they forgot them, their Victories were the more difficult. Despair it
self arms against a bloody Conqueror.

Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem. Virg.

The Wretch's only Comfort is Despair.
There are some Men, who, with more Impiety than Reason, advise, for greater
Security, to extirpate the hostile Nation, as the Romans did in demolishing
Carthage, Numantia, and Corinth, or else to oblige it to seek a new Habitation;
which is a barbarous and inhumane Counsel: Others are for extinguishing the
Nobility, building Forts, and disarming the Inhabitants. But this Tyranny is
practicable only in servile Nations, not among People of ^ more generous
Nature. Cato the Consul, to secure himself from some People of Spain, near the
^iver ^berus, took away their Arms, but was soon obliged to return them; they
being so exasperated to see themselves without them, that they killed one
another; they despised a Life destitute of Instruments to defend their Honor,
and acquire Glory Mar. Hist. Hisp.
.

EMBLEM XCVII.
HERCULES having mastered the Lion, knew how to enjoy his Victory, in covering
his Shoulders with its Skin, in order the more easily to tame other Monsters.
Thus the Spoils of a Triumph arm the Conqueror, and increase his Power. Thus
ought Princes to use their Victories, augmenting their Forces by the Prisoners,
and advancing the Grandeur of their States by the Places they take. All
Kingdoms, in their Original, were small; and if they increased, it was by
getting, and preserving. The same Reasons that make the War lawful, justify
also the detaining of what it brings. To spoil, only that you may restore
again, is a foolish and extravagant Levity. That Man holds not himself at all
obliged, who to day receives what was yesterday wrested from him with
Bloodshed. Princes, by Restitution, barter for Peace, and buy its contrary:
(...) render them Formidable; what they (...) contemptible, this being
generally (...); and if after, upon (...), they go about to recover it, (...)
Difficulties. His Majesty (...) put the Valtaline in (...); and the French
(...) the State of Milan in (...) and Arms. By holding (...) is checked, (...)
by so many Pawns (...) Necessity. Time and (...) the (...) in what Cases it is
(...), to prevent greater (...), however, must be (...), whose blind appetite
(...) by those very means it (...).

Princes (...), let several considerable Forts (...), in War, they are sorry
for, but too late. Present Necessity accuses past Liberality. No Power should
be so confident of it self, as to think it stands not in need of every one of
them for its Defense. The Eagle parts not with her Tallons; which if she did,
she would become the Je^^ of other Birds: They respect her not as their Queen,
for her Beauty, since in that the Peacock much exceeds, but for the Strength of
her Pounces. The Grandeur of His Majesty would now be in far more Veneration
and Security, had he still kept the State of Siena, the Garrison of Placentia,
and, in general, all those Places which he has left in other Hands. Even
Restitution of a State is not to be made, when it cannot be without Prejudice
to another.

There is no less Inconveniences in making War upon another, than in using
Arms negligently: To take them (...) only to offer Blows, is a dangerous way of
fighting. ^ Sword drawn without being dyed in Blood, returns ^^amed into the
Scabbard; if it wounds not our Enemy, ^ does our Honor. Fire is the Instrument
of War; ^^oever holds it up in his Hand, will be burnt by it. ^he Army, if not
kept in the Enemy's Country, wastes ^s own, nay, is wasted it self. Courage
grows cold, without Occasions to exercise, and Spoils to inflame it. ^ence
Vocula quartered his Men in the Enemies Land Vt praeda ad virtutem
incenderentur, Tac. Hist. l. 4.
; (...) David went out of his own Realms to meet the Philistines And ^avid ca^e
to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there, 2 Samuel ^. 20.
. The same did Iehoash, King of Israel, ^hen he heard that Amaziah, King of
Judah, was ^^ming against him Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went up, and he
and Amaziah king of Judah lo^ked one another in the face at Bethshemeth, ^^ich
belongs to Judah: And Judah was put to the worst before Israel, 2 King. 14.
11, 12.
. Subjects can never long bear (...) War at Home; for by maintaining, in this
manner, ^oth Friends and Enemies, Charges increase, Means ^il, and Dangers
continue. But if any one thinks ^^reby to sooth up, and the more easily appease
him he ^^gaged with, it is imprudent Counsel, there being no ^^ttering a
declared Enemy. Moderation in War, is ^ot imputed to Clemency, but to Weakness,
and the ^ost Powerful lose their Reputation, and are endangered (...) it. The
King of Spain 's Mildness to Charles of Savoy, ^^st him dear. This Duke made
War against Ferdinand Duke of Mantua, to assert his ancient Pretensions upon
Montferrat; and King Philip III. not thinking it fit that (...) Sword should
decide this Suit, then depending before the Emperor, and that the Quarrel of
these two ^rinces should disturb the Peace of all Italy, made War upon the
former, and sat down before Asti, not with ^^y design to enter that Place
forcibly, (which might ^^ve been easily done) but by this Menace to oblige him
(...) Peace, as accordingly he did. This moderate way ^f proceeding increased
the Duke's Obstinacy, and, contrary to the Treaty, he again took up Arms,
kindling another War more dangerous than the first. Upon which, His Majesty
besieged Ver^eil; which he took, but presently restored again: so that the
Duke, who saw his Designs succeed so happily, struck up a Leag^^ with the
French and Venetians at Avigno^, and a third time disturbed Italy. All which
Wars might very easily have been avoided, had the Duke of Savoy been made to
feel the weight of the Spanish Arms, and suffered the loss of part of his
State. Whoever has once opposed a greater Power, will never become a Friend,
till he sees himself oppressed and robbed of all, (as Vocula said to the
Mutinous Legions, when he encouraged them against some Provinces of France
(...) cum spoli^^i exutique (...) fore, Tac. Hist. l. 4.
that revolted.) Princes are not feared for having the Weapons in their Hands,
but for knowing how to use them. No one assaults him who dares turn again.
Almost all Wars are grounded either upon the Oscitancy or Cowardice of the
Person against whom they are waged. What Risque is there in making War against
a Prince wholly devoted to Peace, since whatever the Success be, that will
certainly be obtained? For this Reason, it seems convenient, that the Maxims of
the Spaniards be changed in Italy, which endeavor to inculcate, That the King
wishes nothing so much as Peace, and would purchase it at any Rate. It is fit,
indeed, Princes should know that His Majesty is always Sincere, and willing to
keep a good Understanding with them, ready to employ all his Forces for their
Conservation and Defense, and that he will spare no Care which may contribute
to the Quiet of those Provinces: but withal, they should know, That if any one
unjustly opposes his Grandeur, and conspires to overthrow it, putting him to
the Damages and Expenses of War, he will get Satisfaction, by detaining what he
shall take from them. What Court of Justice will not allow Costs to the Party
that sues another without Reason? ^^o will not try his Sword upon the Body of a
potent (...), if he can do it with safety?

When a Victory is obtained, the Spoils should be (...) among the Soldiers, and
particular Honor showed (...) as have eminently signalized themselves in the
Fight; ^^at Valor seeing it self rewarded, may be encouraged (...) greater
Enterprises, and be an Example to others. (...) this end, the Romans invented
so many Crowns, ^ollars, Ovations, and Triumphs. Saul erected to him^^lf a
Triumphant-Arch, upon the Defeat of the Ama^^^ites Saul came to Ca^mel, and
behold, ^e set him up a place, 1 Samuel ^5. 12.
. Nor are these Honors to be done the ^^rvivors only, but those also who have
valiantly lost ^^eir Lives in the Battle, since they bought the Victory (...)
so dear a Price. Signal Services done the State, cannot be recome^^^ed but by
some Eternal Remembrance. ^hus those of (...) were requited with a Sepulcher
which lasted (...) many Ages And set up (...) pillars upon it, one against
another, for (...) father, his (...): And he set great pillars round ^^out
them, and set arms upon the pillars, for a perpetual memory, (...) carved ships
beside the arms, that they might be seen of men ^^^lling in the sea. This
sepulcher, which he made at Modin, stands (...) unto this day, 1 Maccab. 13.
28, 29, 30.
. The Soul, sensible of (...) own (...), undervalues Dangers, to make the
^emory of its Actions immortal too: Hence the Spaniards (...) old raised as
many Obelisks about every Soldier's ^omb, as he had killed Enemies (...),
Arist. l. 7. Po^. c. 2.
. God being the ^^vereign Disposer of Victories, to him we ought to pay (...)
Acknowledgments first, to engage him to grant us others, not only by way of
Thanksgiving and Sacrifice, ^ut by Spoils (...) and Offerings; as the
Israelites did, upon raising the Siege of Bethulia, and routing the Assyrians
After, when they (...) Jerusalem, they worshipped the Lord; and as soon as the
(...) were purified, they offered their burnt^ offerings, and their
(...)-offerings, and their gifts, Judith 1^. 18.
; and Joshua, after his Victory over the Men of Ai And thou shall offer
burnt-offerings thereon unto the Lord thy God, and thou shall offer
peace offerings, (...) 27. 6.
. In which particular the Spanish Kings have always been very liberal; which
Piety of theirs God has rewarded with the present Monarchy.

EMBLEM XCVIII.
WAR, in many things, resembles Fire, not only in its Nature, which is to
destroy, but also for that the same Matter wherewith it i^ fed, when there is
too much of it, extinguishes it. Arms support War; but if they are very
powerful, quench it, (...) change it into Peace. Therefore whoever would ob^^in
this, must use them; it being impossible that any ^eace should be concluded
with Honor and Advantage, ^Nless it be treated of under the Shield^, and with
this ^he Arm must be guarded, which reaches out the Hand to receive the Olive
of Peace. Clovis wished for two Right-Hands; one armed, to oppose Alaricus; the
other ^aked, to present in token of Peace to Theodorick, the Mediator between
them. The Arms of a Prince should be equally prepared for Peace and War. Clovis
never thought he could obtain that by showing his unarmed Right Hand, without
having at the same time another upon its Guard. This is that the Greeks meant,
by the Hieroglyphick of a Man holding in one Hand a Pike, in the* other a
Caduceus. Negotiation, expressed by the latter, can never succeed, except the
Menace of the former attend it. When the Athenians were annoyed by Eumolphus,
their General marched first, with a Caduceus in his Hand, and was followed by
the flower of his Men in Armor, hereby showing himself ready as well for Peace
as War. When the Rhodians sent an Embassy to Constantinople, there went one by
the Embassador's side carrying three Boughs, signifying the same Disposition of
Mind: To which Virgil seems also to have alluded, in this Verse of his, Pacem
orare manu, praefigere puppibus arma. Virg.

To sue for Peace, yet prosecute the War.


Even after the Conclusion of Peace, Care ought still to be taken of War; since
between the Conqueror and Conquered no firm Faith is ever established Cum in
victores victosque, munquam solida fides convalesceret, Tac. Hist. l. 2.
. One Day saw that of the French several times engaged and violated at Casal,
and the Marquess de Saint Croix 's Goodness abused, he who preferred the Quiet
of Italy before the Glory of Victory, which an advantageous Post, and (...)
Forces, offered him as (...)

In Treaties of Peace, a Free Temper is no less requisite than i^ the
Management of a War. He that cons^lts too much his Honor in them, and would
conquer his Enemy as well with the Pen as Sword, bu^ies Sparks under the Ashes,
to kindle the Fire of a greater War. Those Peaces which Pompey, and after him,
the Consul Mancinus, made with the Nu^^^tines, had no effect, because they were
not a little derogatory to the Honor of the Roman Commonwealth. The
Capitulation of Asti, between Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, and the Marquess
de Hino^osa, was soon broken, upon account of one of the Articles about
Di^arming the Soldiers, not much for His Majesty's Reputation, which those
Disturbances and Innovations of the Duke seemed to tend to. No Peace can be
secure, when there is so much inequality Bellum anceps, an pax in^onesta
placeret, nec dubitatum de bello, Tac. Annal. l. 15.
. One of the Privernates being asked by the Roman Senate, how his Countrymen
would observe the Peace, if it were allowed them; answered, Faithfully, and for
Ever, if you grant us a good and equal one; but if you impose hard Conditions,
you must not expect we should keep them long Si (...) dederitis, and fidam, and
perpetuam; si (...) Tit. Live. l. 8.
. Never does any one observe a Peace which he knows is to his Disadvantage Nec
credideris ullu^ (...) in ea condition, cujus cum paniteat, diutius, quam
necesse sit, mansurum, Tit. Live. l. 8.
. Except it be Honorable, and for the Convenience of both Parties, it will be
but a lame Contract: he that studies most his own Interest in it, makes it most
slender, and subjects it to an easy Rupture.

Upon any ill Success, one is not immediately to have recourse to Peace, as
long as the least room is left for putting Affairs in a better posture;
otherwise it can never go well with the Oppressed: Hence, after the loss of the
Battle of Toro, Alphonsus, King of Portugal, thought it not a good Time to talk
of Agreeing with ^^rdinand the Catholic. That is a weak Peace which ^^rce and
Menace extort; for Honor and Liberty never (...) to plot against it.

There are usually no less Cheats and Contrivances in ^reaties of Peace than in
War: witness those pretended (...) of Rhadamistus, to take away Mithridates 's
Life Tac. Annal. l. 12.
. ^hey are generally set on foot only to discover the ^ctions and Designs of
the Enemy, to give Time for ^^rtifications, Succors, and the Practices of
Alliance; (...) waste the Enemy's Forces, break Confederacies, and ^ll asleep
with the Hopes of Peace, Diligence and Precaution. Sometimes they are clapped up,
in order to raise ^ew Forces, frustrate Counsels; and, in a word, to serve
(...) a Truce, or Cessation of Arms, until a better Oppor^^nity for taking them
up again shall offer it self, or that the Seat of the War may be changed. Thus
the French Signed the Peace of Mouzon, with no other intent than to remove the
War into Germany, and fall upon the Valtoline that way. So the only end of the
Peace of Ratisbone was to disarm the Emperor; for at the same Time the French
agreed to it, they were brewing a League with the Crown of Sweden against him,
and there was not above two Months between the one and the other. Now in the
like Cases, War is much better than a suspected Peace In pace suspecta tutius
bellum, Tac. Hist. l. 4.
; this being indeed a Peace without Peace Saying, Peace, peace, when there is
no peace, Ier. 6. 14.
.

Peaces should be perpetual, as all those of God have been And I will establish
my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations,
for an everlasting covenant; to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,
Genesis 17 7.
. Hence the Holy Scriptures call such Treaties, Covenants of Salt; by this
expression intimating their Permanency The Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom
over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of
salt, 2 Chronicles. 13. 5.
. A Prince who is a real Lover of Peace, and sincerely endeavors the
Settlement of it, is not afraid to bind even his Posterity to its Observance. A
short Peace is good for nothing but to gather Fuel to light War withal. The
same Inconveniences attend Trucer made for a few Years; they do but suspend
Anger for a time, and give place for the sharpening of Swords, and pointing of
Lances; by their means Usurpations pass into Prescription, and Peace is
afterward rendered more difficult, inasmuch as no one resigns willingly what he
has possessed a long time. The Ten Years Truce between the Emperor Charles V.
and Francis I. gave not Peace to Europe, as In ^ul. Indict. Conc. Trident.
Pope Paul III. very well observed.

But when the Peace is secure, firm, and honorable, no prudenter Course can be
taken than to embrace it, however Victorious your Arms are, or whatever
considerable Progresses may be expected from them; since the Casualties of War
are various and fortunate, often beget unhappy Successes. How frequent is it to
see him begging for Peace, who was but just before asked it. A Certain Peace is
better than a Victory in Expectation; the one depends on our own Pleasure, the
other is in God's Hand Melior enim tutiorque est certa pax, quam sperata
victoria; illa in tua^, haec in Deorum manu est, Live. Dec. 3. l. 1.
. And though Sabinus said, That Peace was to the Glory only of the Conqueror,
but Profitable to the Conquered Pac^m, and concordiam victis uti^ia, victorib^
tantum pulc^ra esse, Tac. Hist. l. 3.
: yet this Advantage reaches the Victor too; for by being so, he may have it
the more advantageous, and secure the Progresses already made. There is no
better Time for Peace, than when one is uppermost in War. This, among other
Reasons, moved Hanno, when News was brought to Carthage of the Victory of
Cannae, to advise the Senate to close with the Romans: And it was for nothing
but the neglect of this, that they were forced in the end to submit to such
Laws and Conditions as Scipio thought fit to impose. In the Heat of Arms, when
Success is yet dubious, to show a Desire of Peace, betrays weakness, and gives
Heart to the Enemy. He that is too passionate for it at such a time, never
obtains it: Valor and Resolutions are much better Persuasives to it. Let the
Prince then love Peace, yet not to that degree, as to commit In^ustice, or
suffer Indignities, for the sake of it: Let ^im not look on that he has made
with a Neighbor superior in Strength, to be safe; for it can never be, where
the one is powerful, the other weak Quia inter innocents, and validos ^also
qu^escunt, Tac. de Mor. ^^rm.
. Ambition knows not how to contain it self, where ^here is a prospect of
Usurping any thing; and specious Names, and Pretexts of Moderation and Justice,
are never wanting to him that seeks to enlarge his Do^inions, and aspires to be
a Monarch: For one who is so already, aims at nothing more than the Enjoyment
of his own Grandeur, without going to entrench upon that of another, or
designing any thing against it Vbi manu agitur, modestia, ac probitas, nomina
(...) sunt, Tac. ibid.
.

EMBLEM XCIX.
HE knows not how to value the Quietness of the Harbor, who has not felt the
Storm; nor is he sensible of the sweetness of Peace, that has never tasted the
bitterness of War: Then first this wild Beast, the sworn Enemy of Life, appears
in its true Colors, when it is tamed. To that agrees Samson 's Riddle of the
dead Lion, in whose Mouth Bees swarmed, and wrought their Honey-Combs And
behold, there was a swarm of bees, and honey in the carcass of the lion, Judge.
14. 8.
. For when War is ended, Peace opens the Doors of Commerce, brings the Hand to
the Plough, re-establishes the Exercise of Arts, the effect of which is Plenty,
as of that Riches which freed from the Fears that drove them away, then begin
to circulate. Peace then, as Isaiah the Prophet speaks Lord, thou will ordain
Peace ^or us: for thou have wrought all our works in us* Isai. 26. 12.
, is the greatest Good that God has bestowed on Mankind, as War the greatest
Evil. Hence the Egyptians, to describe Peace, represented Pluto, the God of
Riches, as a Boy crowned with Ears of Corn, Laurel and Roses, to signify all
the Happiness it brings along with it. God has given it the Name of Beauty, in
Isaiah, saying, his People should take their Rest in it, as upon a Bed of
Flowers And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting places, Isai. 32. 18. Et sedebit pop^l^s (...)
in pulc^ritudine pacis, Vulg.
. Even the most insensible Beings rejoice at Peace. How cheerful, how fertile
do the Fields look, which that cultivates? How beautiful the Cities adorned and
enriched by its Calmness? On the other side, what Deserts, what ruinous
Countries are not those where the Fury of War has ranged? Scarce can one know
now the fair Cities and Castles of Germany, by those disfigured Carcasses.
Burgundy sees its Verdant Perriwig (as I may call it) died in Blood; and its
Clothes, once so gay and fine, now ragged and scorched up, with amazement at so
wonderful a Change. Nature has no greater Enemy than War. He who was the Author
of the whole Creation, was at the same time Author of Peace. Justice gives it
self up to its Embraces Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other, Psalm.
85. 10.
. Laws tremble, hide themselves, and are dumb at the frightful sight of
Weapons. Hence Marius excuses himself, for having done something against the
Laws of the Country, by saying, he could not hear them for the Noise of Arms.
In War, it is equally unfortunate to good Men to kill and to be killed Aeque
apud bonos miserum est occidere, quam perire, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. In War, Fathers, by a subversion of the Order of Mortality, bury their
Children; whereas in Peace, these bury them. Here every one's Merit is
considered, and Causes examined: In War, Innocence and Malice run the same
Fortune Nam i^ pace causas, and merita spectari: ubi bellum ingrua^, innocents
a noxios juxta ca^dere, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
. In Peace, Nobility is distinguished from Populacy: In War, they are
confounded, the Weaker obeying the Stronger. In that, Religion is (...); in
this, lost; that maintains, this usurps Dominions; the one breaks the haughty
Spirits of Subjects, and renders them Submissive and Loyal Sed longa pax ad
(...) servitium fregerat, Tac. Hist. l. 2.
, the other makes them haughty and rebellious. This made Tiberius fear nothing
so much as disturbing the Repose Augustus had left in the Empire Ni^il aque
Tiberium (...) habebat, quam ne composita turbarentur, Tac. Annal. l. 2.
. With Peace, Delights and Pleasures increase; and the greater these are, the
weaker are Subjects, and more secure Quanta pecunia dites, and voluptatibus
opulentos, tanto magis imbelles, Tac. Annal. l. 3.
. In Peace, all depends on the Prince himself; in War, on him that has the
Command of the Armies. Hence Tiberius dissembled all Occasions of War, that he
might not commit it to the Management of another Dissimulante Tiberio damna, ne
cui bellum permitteret, Tac. Annal. l. 4.
. Pomponius Laetus well knew all these Inconveniences, when he said, That
while the Prince could live in Peace, he should by no means kindle War. The
Emperor Marcianus used this Motto, Pax bello potior; and certainly not without
Reason, forasmuch as War can never be convenient, unless carried on to maintain
Peace. This is the only Good that Infernal Monster brings with it. That of the
Emperor Aurelius Caracalla, Omnis in ferro salus, was a Tyrannical Saying, and
fit for that Prince only who cannot maintain himself but by Force. That Empire
is of a short continuance, whose support is War Violentia nemo imperia
continuit diu, ^^derata durant, Seneca.
. As long as the Sword is by the Side, Danger is so too: and though Victory be
in one's Power, yet Peace is rather to be embraced: for there is none so happy,
but the Damage that attends it is greater.

Peace is the greatest Treasure Man ever knew,
A Thousand Triumphs to it seem but few. Sil. Ital.

No Victory can make amends for the Expenses of it. So mischievous is War, that
even when triumphant, it throws down Walls, as it was the Custom among the
Romans.

Now then we have conducted our Prince amidst Dust and Blood, and thus seated
him in the quiet, happy state of Peace; our next Advice is, That he do his
utmost to preserve it, and enjoy the happiness thereof, without imbittering it
with the Perils and Calamities of War. David never took up Arms, but when
indispensibly obliged. The Emperor Theodosius did not seek, but rather found
War. It is a Glorious and Princely Care, that of procuring Peace.

Now Caesar 's Grandeur, Caesar 's Glories reign,
His Conquering Arm sheathing his Sword again. Propert.

Nothing in the World is more an Enemy to Possession than War. It is a wicked,
as well as foolish Doctrine, which teaches, that Seeds of Hatred should be
nourished, that Matter for War may be furnished, whenever it shall be thought
fit Semina odiorum jacienda, and omne scelus externum habendum cum laetitia,
Tac. Annal. l. 12.
. He always lives in War, who has it always in his Thoughts. The Advice of the
Holy Spirit is much more wholesome, Seek Peace, and pursue it Psalm. 34. 14.
.

When a Peace is once Concluded, the Laws of God and Man oblige to a faithful
Observance of it, even although transacted with one's Predecessors, without any
Distinction between the Government of One and Many; both the Kingdom and
Commonwealth, for the Benefit, and upon the Faith of which the Contract was
made, being always the same, and never dying. Time, and Common Consent, have
Passed what was once Agreed upon into a Law. Nor is Force or Necessity a
sufficient Excuse for making War: For if the Public Faith might be violated
for these things, there would be no Capitulation, no Treaty of Peace, but might
be broken, under the same color. Francis I. was blamed for declaring War
against Charles V. contrary to the Agreement made during his Imprisonment,
under pretense of Constraint. By such Artifices, and Equivocal Negotiations, it
comes to pass, that none at all are firm; so that to establish them, it is
necessary to demand Hostages, or detain some considerable Place; things which
embarrass a Peace, and fatigue the World with perpetual Wars.

The Prince then being free from the Toils and Dangers of War, should apply
himself wholly to the Arts of Peace, (according to Tasso,) Learning and Arts
promote throughout your Realm,
Divert your Subjects Minds with Plays and Balls:
With equal Justice punish and reward;
And out of Danger, stand upon your Guard.
Yet not without reflecting how soon War may possibly disturb his Rest. Let not
his Eye quit the Arms his Hand has laid down; nor those old Medals influence
him, upon the Reverse of which Peace was described burning Shields with a
Torch: This was far from being a prudent Emblem; for there is nothing so
necessary after War, as the preserving of Arms, to keep Violence from making
any attempt against Peace. None but God alone could, when he gave it to his
People, break the Bow, (as the Psalmist expresses it) cut the Spear in sunder,
and (...) the Chariots in the fire Psalm. 46. 9.
; forasmuch as he being the Arbiter of War, needs not Arms to maintain Peace
withal: But among Men there can be no Peace, where Ambition is not restrained
by Fear or Force. This gave Occasion to the Invention of Arms, which Defense
found out before Offense. The Plough marked out the Walls before the Streets
were disposed, and almost at the same time Tents were pitched, and Houses
built. The Public Repose would never be secure, did not Care armed guard its
Sleep. A State unprovided with Arms, awakens the Enemy, and invites War. Never
had the Alps heard the Echo's of so many Trumpets, had the Cities of the
Milanese been better fortified: This State is, as it were, an Outwork to all
the Kingdoms of the Spanish Monarchy, and each ought, for its own Security, to
contribute to its Strength; which, joined with the Power of the Sea, would
render the Monarchy firm and unshaken. Men's Hearts, were they of Adamant, could
not supply the Defect of Walls. King Witiza, by demolishing these, made the
Moors so bold as to invade Spain, when those Banks were gone, which, till then,
had stopped their Inundations Mar. Hist. Hisp.
. Augustus was not guilty of this Negligence, in that long Peace he enjoyed;
but appointed a Public Treasury, as a Provision against a War. Except Forces
be Exercised in Time of Peace, and the Mind disciplined in the Arts of War, it
will not easily be done, when Danger of Invasion shall have put all Men in a
Consternation, and they be more intent on flying and saving what they have,
than on their Defense. There is no greater Stratagem, than to leave a Kingdom
to its own Idleness. When Military Exercise fails, Valor does the same. Nature
produces in all Parts great Souls, which either Occasion discovers, or want of
Business burieth. Past Ages have not furnished braver Men in Greece and Rome,
than are at this day born; but they then appeared so Heroical, because Desire
of Rule made them use themselves to Arms. Let not a Prince be discouraged at
the Sluggishness of his Subjects; Discipline will fit them either to preserve
Peace, or to maintain War. Let him keep them always employed in the Exercise of
Arms; for he that desires Peace, must prevent War.

EMBLEM C.
IT is a short breathing between the Cradle and the Tomb; short, I say, yet
(...) of occasioning considerable Evils, if ill employed. Often does a
Commonwealth lament whole Ages the Error of one Moment. On this Point turns
the Fall or Rise of Empires. One bad Counsel, in a Minute throws down what has
cost Valor and Prudence many Years to build (...) Ta^. Annal. l. 5.
. And therefore it is not enough, in this Amphitheater of Life, to have run
well, if the Course be not equal to the End. He only receives the Crown, who
has lawfully touched the last Goal of Death. The Foundation of Houses consists
in the first Stones; that of Renown, in the last; except they be Glorious, it
soon falls, and is buried in Oblivion. The Cradle does not flourish until the
Tomb has first, and then even the Briars of past Vices turn to Flowers; for
Fame is the last Spirit of our Actions, which thence receive their Beauty and
Luster, a thing never seen in an infamous Old Age, that rather effacing the
Glory of Youth, (as it happened to Cesserunt que prim^ postremis, and bo^a^
juventae, senectus flagitios^ ^^^teravit, Tac. Annal. 1. 6.
Vitellius.) The most perfect Strokes of the Pencil or Chizel are not esteemed,
if the whole Work remain imperfect: And if ever Fragments were regarded, it was
for being the Relics of a once perfect Statue. Envy or Flattery, while Life
lasts, give different Forms to Actions; but Fame, unbiased by those Passions,
pronounces, after Death, true and just Sentences, which the Tribunal of
Posterity confirms S^^m ^uique decus posteritas rependit, Tac. Annal. 1. 4.
. Some Princes are sensible enough of how great Consequence it is to Crown
their Life with Virtues; but they are mistaken, in thinking to supply that, by
leaving them described in Epitaphs, and represented in Statues; not considering
that they blush to accompany him in Death, whom they had not accompanied while
alive, and that the Marbles are, as it were, in Indignation to see the
Counterfeit-Glory of a Tyrant inscribed on them, but seem to soften to
facilitate the engraving of that of a Just Prince, hardening again afterward
to preserve it to Eternity; which even the Stones themselves sometimes write on
their hardness. Letters of a miraculous Epitaph were the Tears of Blood, shed
by those before St. Isidore's Altar at Leon, for the Death of King Alphonsus
VI. Mar. Hist. Hisp.
Nor came they out of the Joints, but from the Heart of the Marbles, which
seemed mollified for the Loss of so great a King. The Statue of a vicious
Prince is a kind of Transcript of his Vices, nor is there either Marble or
Brass so durable as not to submit to Time: For as the Natural Fabric is
dissolved, so also is the Artificial; and that only is lasting which Virtues
frame, those intrinsic and inseparable Ornaments of an immortal Soul Vt vultus
^ominun, it a simulacr^ v^ltus imbecilla a^ mortal^a (...); for^a mentis
aeterna, quam tene* e, and exprimere non per alie^^^ ^^teriam, and artem, sed
iuu ipse moribus possi^, Tac. in Vit. Agri^.
. What is engraved on the Minds of Men, being successively derived from one to
another, endures as long as the World. No Statues are (...) perpetual than
those carved by Virtue and good Offices (...) the Esteem and Acknowledgment of
Men, (as Mecanus (...) tibi neque aureas, nequ^ argemeas. ^ieri ^^q^am (...),
(...) a^tem ali^s tibi sta^^as in ipsi^ hominu^ animis nibil (...) effice,
Me^aen. ad August.
told Augustus^) For this Reason, Tiberius refused the Temples which the Nearer
Spain would have built in Honor of him, saying, That the Temples and Statues
which he most esteemed, was to perpetuate his Memory in the Minds of the
Commonwealth Hac mibi in ^nimis vestris templa, bae pulcherrim^e effigies and
ma^surae, n^m que saxo (...), si ^^dicium poster^^um in odium vert^t, pro
(...), Tac. Annal. l. 4.
. The Ashes of Hero's are preserved in the Everlasting Obelisks of Universal
Applause and Triumph, even after having been spoiled by Fire, as it happened to
those of Trajan. The dead Body of that Valiant Prelate, Giles d' Albornoz was
carried 'from Rome to Toled^ upon the Shoulders of Nations as well Friends as
Enemies, and a Guard was forced to be set to defend that of Augustus Auxilio
militari t^^ndu^, (...) sepultr^ ejus (...), Tac. Annal. l. 1.
. But granting the Firmness of the Marble, and Solidity of the Brass, should
equal future Ages, yet it is not known afterward who they were raised for The
memory of them is forgotten, Eccle^. 9. 5.
; as it is at this day with the Pyramids of Egypt, where we see that Names of
those worn out who laid their Ashes there to immortalize themselves ^^ter omnes
eos n^n cons^at a quib^^ factae s^^t, justi^^i^^ casu ^bliteratis t^^ta
vanit^ti^ au^^orib^s, P^^n. 36. 12.
.

From what has been said, may be easily gathered how much it concerns the
Prince, in the Declension of his Life, to endeavor that his former Glories may
receive new Life and Vigor from those of his last Days, and that both, after
his Death, may remain for ever in the memory of Mankind. To which end, we shall
offer some Rules to direct him how he ought to govern himself, with relation to
his Person, his Successor, and his Dominions. As to his Person, he is to know,
that as he advances in Years, his Empire grows more savage, and less subject
to Reason; for the variety of Accidents he has met with, instruct him in
Malice; and by indulging Jealousies and Distrusts, he becomes Cruel and
Tyrannical. A long Reign is apt to beget Pride and Presumption Ve^ustate
imper^^ c^alita ^udacia, Tac. Annal. l. 14.
; and the Experience of Want, Avarice: whence proceed many things inconsistent
with the Decorum of Majesty, and from them contempt of the Royal Person.
Princes will still retain their ancient Customs and Gravity, forgetting what
they did when young, and thus they render themselves odious. In the Beginnings
of Government, Passion for Glory, and Fear of Ruin, make them take care to Act
with Prudence and Caution: But afterward Ambition is tired, and the Prince has
neither any Satisfaction in good, nor any Concern for ill Success Ips^^ sa^e
se^em, and prosperis, adversisque satiatum, Tac. Hist. l. 3.
; but imagining Vice to be the Recompense of his Glory, and Reward of his
Toils, shamefully gives himself up to it: Whence it is that so few Princes grow
better by Ruling, of which the Holy Scriptures give us Instances in Saul and
Solomon. They are, in their Government, like the Image in Nebuchadnezzar's
Dream, its Beginning's of Gold, its End of Clay. Vespasian was the only Prnce
remarkable for having passed from bad to good Solusque ^^^ium ante se
princip^^, in meliu^ mutatus est, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. Besides, let the Prince strive never so much to continue like himself, it is
impossible for him to please All, if his Reign be long; for the People hate to
be ruled so long by the same Hand. They love Novelty, and rejoice at
Revolutions, though dangerous, as it fell out in the Reign of Tiberius Multi
odio praesentium cupidine mutationis, suis quoque periculis l^tab^^tur, Tac.
Annal. l. 3.
. If the Prince be Virtuous, he is hated by the Bad; if Vicious, both by the
Good and Bad, and then the only talk is of the Successor Pars ^u^to maxima
imminen^es d^^inos var^is (...) differeb^nt, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
, whom every one makes his Court to; a thing which cannot but incense the
Prince, and which usually enclines him to hate his Subjects, and use them ill.
As his Strength decays, his Care and vigilance, his Prudence also,
Understanding and Memory proportionably fail: For the Sense^ grow old no less
than the Body Quippe ut ^^^pus, sic e^iam men's su^^ ^abet senium, Ari^t. l. 2.
Pol. c. 7.
; and as he desires to reserve this small remainder of his days to himself,
free from the Hurry and Fatigue of Government, he surrenders all to his
Ministers, or some Favorite, on whom the Weight of Affairs lies, and the Odium
of the People is transferred. In which Case, they who are not in the Prince's
Favor, and have no share in the Administration and Preferments, wish for, and
do their utmost to procure a new Master.

These are the most dangerous Rocks of a declining Age, among which the Prince
cannot use too much Precaution against a Shipwreck. Yet though the Course be
hazardous, he ought not therefore to despair of passing securely, since many
Princes have maintained their Esteem and Respect to their last Gasp. An
Excellency which the whole World admired in Philip II. The motion of a prudent
Government continues uniform to the very shore of Death; a former Character and
Reputation support it against the Hatreds and Inconveniences of Age, as
Tiherius experienced in himself Reputante Tiber^o public^^ sibi odi^^, extre^^^
aetatem ^^gisque fama, q^a^ v^ stare res (...), Tac. Annal. l. 6.
. Besides we pass over a great many Slips in Old Age, which would be
unpardonable in Youth, (as Drusus Sane gravaretur aspectum civium senex
imperator, fessamque ^^atem, and actos labores, praetender^t: Druso quod nisi
ex arrogant^a impedimentum? Tac. Annal. l. 3.
observed.) The more boisterous the Storms are, with the more Resolution the
Prince had need be armed to bear up against them, and the closer he ought to
keep to the Helm of Government; lest by entrusting it in the Hands of others,
both himself and the Commonwealth should fall a Prey to the Sea. While the
Prince's Vigor lasts, he should live and die in Action. Government is like the
Spheres, which never stand still; it admits no Poles but those of the Prince.
In the Arms of the State, not those of Sloth, the Prince must find Refreshment
in the Toils of his Old Age Se tamen fortiora solatia e complexu Reip.
petivisse, Tac. Annal. l. 4.
: And if through the Infirmities of his Age he wants Strength to bear them, and
has need of other Shoulders, yet let him not wholly refuse the Assistance of
his own, were it only for Show, since that is the same thing in the Eyes of the
ignorant Mobb as Reality, and (as we observed elsewhere) is a Restraint to
Ministers, and Support to Reputation. In this Case it is safer to form a
Privy Council of Three, as Philip II. did, than to leave all to the Management
of One single Person; because the People look not on them as Favorites, but as
Counselors.

Let the Prince beware of Covetousness, a Vice universally detested, and
peculiar to Old Age, which it never forsakes, though it has bid adieu to all
others. Undoubtedly Galba might have ingratiated himself with the People, had
he been in the least Generous Constat po^uisse con^iliari animos quantulacu^que
parci senis liberalitate, Tac. Hist. lib. 1.
. Let him conform to the Mode, and present Customs, and forget those more harsh
and rigid ones of former Times, a fault Old Men are too apt to fall into,
whether it proceed from the prejudice of their Education, from Vainglory, or
the difficulty they find in taking up those new Customs; whence they incurr the
hate of all Men. They give way to that melancholy Humor, which arises from
the Coldness of their Age, and exclaim against all Pastimes and Divertisements,
not remembering how much Time they have formerly spent in them themselves.

Let him not discover any Jealousy of his Successor, as Ferdinand the Catholic
did, when Philip I. was to succeed him in the Kingdom of Castile. That is the
time when most adore the Rising Sun; and if any one appears reserved in this
particular, it is a Trick to make himself pass for a Loyal, Constant Man, in
the Opinion of the Successor, and to gain his Esteem; as was observed of
several, at the Death of Augustus Patres, Eq^es. (...) quis illustrior, ^^nto
magis falsi a^ (...), ^^ltuque composito, ne laeti excessu P^incipis neu
tristiores, pri^ordio lachrymas, gaudi^^, quaestus, adulationes misceb^nt, Tac.
Annal. lib^. 1.
.

Let him strive to endear himself to All by Courtesy, Equality of Justice, by
Clemency and Plenty; being assured, that if he have governed well, and got the
Love and good Opinion of his Subjects, he will maintain them without much
difficulty, begetting in their Minds a fear of losing, and a desire of keeping
him.

All these Methods will be yet of more force, if the Successor be such as he
may be in a manner born again, and immortalized by; for although Adoption be
only a Fiction of the Law, yet the Person Adopting seems to renew his Youth in
him, (as Galba Et audita adoptione defi^am videri senex, q^iod nu^^ (...)
objicitur, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
said to Piso.) Succession ought not to be the least Care of Princes, it being
not so frivolous a thing as Solomon imagined Y^a, I hated all my labor which I
had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be
after me, Eccles. 2. 18.
. Sons are the Anchors and Props of a State, the Joy and Comfort of a
Government and Court, Augustus well knew this, when having none, he Adapted his
Nearest Relations, to be, as it were, Pillars to support the Empire Quo
pluri^us munimentis insis^eret, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
. Neither Fleets nor Armies are greater Securities to a Prince, than a numerous
Offspring Non legiones, non classer, perinde firma imperii munimenta quam
numer^^ liberorum, Tac. Hist. l. 4.
. There are no greater Friends than They; no more zealous Opposers of Tyranny,
Domestic and Foreign. All bear a part in the Happiness of Princes, their
Children only are Sharers in their Misfortunes Quorum prosperis and alii
fruantur, adversa ad justissimos perti^eant, Tac. Hist. l. 4.
. Friends change and fall off with Adversity, but never our own Blood, which
though transfused into another, still corresponds with us by a secret and
Natural Inclination Nam a^icos tempore, fortuna, cupiainibus, aliquando aut
erroribus imminui, transfer^i desinere: suum cuique sanguinem indis^retum, Tac.
Hist. lib. 4.
. The Safety of the Prince includes that of his Relations, and his Faults
reflect upon them; and therefore they endeavor to mend them, being most
concerned to observe, and most free and bold to reprove them. Thus Drusus made
it his business to discover what was disliked at Rome in his Father, that he
might correct it Vtrumque in laudem Drusi trabebatu^: ab eo in urbe inter
coetus and sermones bominum obversante secreta patris mitigari, Tac. Annal. l 3.
. And these Reasons may serve to excuse that Authority which some Popes have
allowed their Nephews in the Management of Affairs. The Subject has, in the
Heir, one to reward his Services; and, on the other side, he is afraid to
offend the Father, who leaves a Son to inherit his Power and Quarrels He
leaves behind him an avenger against his enemies, and one that should show
favor unto his friends, Ecclus. 30. 6.
. On this Marcellus grounded his Advice to Priscus, not to pretend to prescribe
to Vespasian, a Man grown old in Triumphs, and the Father of many young
Children Suadere (...) Prisco, ne supra Principem scanderet; ne Vespasianum
senem triu^. ^ha^em, juvenum liberorum Patrem prae^eptis ^oer^eret, Tac. Hist.
l. 4.
. The Hopes of the Rising Sun makes the cold and gloomy Evenings of the Setting
much more tolerable. Ambition is confounded, and Tyranny trembles. Liberty dare
not break the Chain of Servitude, when she sees the Links continued in a Long
Train of Successors. The Public Repose is not disturbed by Factions and
Differences about the Succession Intempera^tia civitatis donec ^us eligatur
^ultos desti^andi, Tac. Hist. l. 2.
, every one already knowing that a new Phoenix must arise out of the Ashes of
the old one, and that even now this Successor has taken Root, and got Strength,
by making himself beloved and feared; as an old Tree shoots out of its Stump a
young Sprig, which, in time, comes to grow in its place Ex ^rbore (...), and
trunco novam producit qu^^ anteq^am antiqua decidat, jam radices and vires
accepit, Tol. de Rep. l. 7. c. 4. ^. 1.


Nevertheless, if it lie in the Prince's Breast to appoint the Successor, he is
not to make such use of this Advantage, as to prefer the Interest of his
Kindred to that of the Public. Moses, distrusting the Abilities of his own
Sons, left to God the Choice of a new Captain of his People Let the Lord, the
God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation, Numb. 27. 16.
: And Galba gloried, in having had more Regard to the Public Good, than to his
Family, and having chosen a Person out of the Commonwealth to succeed him Sed
Augustus in d^mo successorem quaes^vit; ego in Republica, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. This is the last and greatest Benefit the Prince is capable of doing his
States, (as the same Galba told Piso Nunc ^o ^ecessitatis jampridem ventum est,
ut nec mea senectus confer plus populo Romano possit qu^m bonum successore^,
nec tua plus j^venta quam bonum Principe^, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
, when he Adopted him.) It Is a Noble Instance of the Prince's Generosity, to
strive to make his successor better than himself. He has but a mean Opinion of
his Merit, who seeks a Name only by the Vices of him that comes after, and by
the Comparison of one Reign with another. Herein Augustus himself was faulty,
in choosing Tiberius upon the same motive Ne Ti^erium quidem caritate aut
Reipublicae cura successor^m ^dscitum: sed quoniam arrogan^iam saevitiamque
introspexerit, compar^tione deterrima ^ibi gloriam quaefi^isse, Tac. Annal. l.
1.
, without considering, that the glorious or infamous Actions of a Successor are
charged upon the Predecessor who was concerned in his Election.

This Care to provide a good Heir is a Natural Duty in Parents, and they ought
to attend it with utmost Application, since in their Sons they in a manner live
for ever: And indeed it were against Natural Reason to envy the Excellency of
their own Image, or leave it unpolished. And though the Institution of a Great
Person be generally the Occasion of Domestic Dangers, inasmuch as Men's
Ambition is proportioned to the Capacity of their Souls Optimos quippe
mort^lirum, altissima cupere, Tac. Annal. l. 4.
; and though oftentimes, by the subversion of the Ties of Reason and Nature,
Children grow weary of expecting the Crown so long, and seeing the Time of
their Pleasure and Glory waste, as it was with Rhadamistus, in the long Reign
of his Father Pharasman, King of Iberia Is modi^um Hyberiae regnum senecta
patris detineri, ferocius crebriusque jactabat, Tac. Annal. l. 12.
; although too it was the Counsel of the Holy Spirit Give him no liberty in his
youth, and wink not at his folly, Ecclus. 30. 11.
to Fathers, not to give their Sons Liberty in their Youth, nor wink at their
Follies: yet for all this, I say, a Father ought to spare no Pains that may
contribute to the good Education of his Son, which is the second Obligation of
Nature, nor let fall his Hopes and Confidence for a few particular Cases. No
Prince was ever more jealous of his Children than Tiberius, yet he absented
himself from Rome to leave Drusus in his Place Vt amoto P^tre, Drusus munia
consulatu^ solus impleret, Tac. Annal. lib. 3.
.

But if the Prince would prevent these Suspicions by Politic Methods, let him
allow his Son a part in the Administration of Affairs both Civil and Military,
but never in the Dispensation of his Favors; for by the former the Applause of
the People is not so much got, who are apt to be taken with the Liberal and
Obliging Temper of the Son, a thing not very pleasing to the Fathers who sit on
the Throne Displicere regna^ntibus civilia filiorum ingeni^, Tac. Annal. l. 2.
. In a word, he may be admitted into the Secrets of State, not into the Hearts
of the Subjects. Augustus, who well understood this, when he desired to have
Tiberius made Tribune, commended him with so much Artifice, that he discovered
his Faults in excusing them Qu^nquam ^onor^ ^^atione, qu^dam de habitu,
^^ltuq^e and institutis ej^s jecerat, qu^ vel^t excu^ando exprobraret, Tac.
Annal. l. 1.
. And it was believed that Tiberius, to render Drusus odious, and make him pass
for one of a cruel Temper, gave him leave to frequent the Sword-Plays Ad
o^te^tand^^ saevitiam in^vend^sque p^pull off^nsio^^^, concess^m f^lio
materiam, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
; as he was glad when any Contest arose between his Sons and the Senate
L^tabatur Tiberi^^ quum inter filios and leges Sen^tus dis^ept^ret, Tac. Annal.
l. 2.
. But these Artifices are more hurtful and treacherous than becomes the
Sincerity of a Father; it is more prudent to join with the young Prince some
Confident, in whose Power the Direction and Management of Affairs may be: as
Vespasian did, when her gave the Praetorship to his Son Domitian, and assigned
Mutian for his Assistant Caesar D^mitianus Pr^^turam capit. Ejus (...)
epistoli^ edictisque proponebatur, vis penes Mutianum erat, Tac. Hist. l. 4.
. But if the Son shall seem to harbor great and enterprising Thoughts, such as
may give just Apprehension of some ambitious Design against the Respect due to
a Father, out of impatience of his long life, the best way will be to employ
him in some Undertaking that may wholly engage those Thoughts, and cool the
warmth and vigor of his Mind. It was this made Pharasman, King of Iberia, put
his Son Rhadamistus upon the Conquest of Armenia ^gitur Pharasmanes juvenem
potentiae promptae and studio pop^darium accinctum, vergentibus jam armis suis
metuens, alia^ ad spem tra^ere and Armeniam oftentare, Tac. Annal. 1. 12.
. But as this Caution of Honoring the Son, and employing him in Places of
Difficulty, is absolutely necessary, so also must care be taken to put the
Command of the Armies in the Hand of another; for whoever is Master of them,
rules the whole State. To this end, Otho gave his Brother Titianus the Name and
Reputation of the Supreme Command, yet left all the Authority and real Power
lodged in Proculus ^rofecto Brixellum Othone, honor imperii penes Titianum
fratrem, ^is, ac potestas penes Proculum Praefectum, Tac. Hist. l. 2.
: And Tiberius, when the Senate had decreed Germanicus all the Provinces beyond
the Seas, made Piso Lieutenant of Syria, to be a Check to his Hopes and Designs
Qu^ Syriae imponeretur, ad spes Germanici coercendas, Tac. Annal. l. 2.
. Indeed, the Constitution of States and Governments in Europe is such, that
there is little fear of those Dangers; yet if the Genius of the Son should be
so violent and terrible, that the Remedies mentioned cannot sufficiently
provide for the Father's Security, let him consider whether it be proper to
apply that which Philip II. used with his only Son, Don Carlos, the execution
of which made Politics admire its own Power, struck Nature with Amazement, and
the whole World with Horror.

But if he distrust the Fidelity of his Subjects, because of their Aversion to
his Son, there is usually no better Remedy than to have him educated in some
other Court, and under the Protection of some greater Prince, (provided there
be no danger of any Emulation between them) with whom he may afterward
establish an Alliance. This Motive prevailed with Phraates, King of Parthia, to
bring up Vonones in the Court of Augustus Partemque prolis, firmandae
amicitiae, miserat: ^aud perinde nostri me^u, quam fidei popularium diffisus,
Tac. Annal. l. 2.
: Though this oftentimes produces a contrary effect, the People being apt to
hate him afterward as a Foreigner, who returns to them with strange Manners,
which was the Case of the same Vonones Quamvi^ gentis Arsaci^arum, ut extern^m
aspernaban^ur, Tac. Annal. l. 2.
. In the Disposal of his Dominions to his Children, the Prince cannot be too
cautious; inasmuch as it is sometimes the Advancement, sometimes the Ruin of a
Kingdom, especially in the Younger Sons, who generally envy the Elder his
Prerogative, and in the Daughters matched with his own Subjects; whence arise
Jealousies and Uneasinesses, which end in Civil Wars. Augustus re^^^^ting upon
this, refused his Daughter to a Roman Knight, who might occasion Disturbance
Immensumq^^ attolli pro^ideret q^em conjunctione ta^^ super alios (...), Tac.
Annal. l. 4.
, and proposed Proc^dejus, and others, who lived a calm and retired Life, and
intermedled not with Affairs of State Proculejum, and quosda^ in sermonibus
(...), Reip negotiis permixto^, Tac. Annal. l. 4.


The Choice of a Tutor for the Son who is to succeed in his Nonage is another
thing, which demands all the Skill and Prudence the Father is Master of, there
being nothing more exposed to Casualties than that; as we see present, and read
of past Examples of many Princes, who, during their Minority, have lost their
Lives and Kingdoms, at least been reduced to great Distress Woe to thee, O land,
when thy king is a child, Eceles. 10. 16.
. For if the Guardianship be left to the Mother, though that may be looked upon
as most secure, yet the Prudence and Experience requisite for such a Task are
rarely to be met with in a Woman, and most of that Sex want Courage to awe
Subjects, and gain Respect. But should it fall to the Uncle, Ambition of Rule
is wont to break the strongest and most close Ties of Blood. If it light upon
the Ministers, every one of them is wholly devoted to his private Interest,
which occasions Divisions among them. Besides, Subjects despise the Government
of their Equals, which is the Rise of Troubles, and Civil Commotions; and
therefore out of all these Dangers and Inconveniences the Prince must choose
the least, considering the Nature of the State, and of the Persons most capable
of the Education of his Son, and picking out a Class of Subjects, whereby the
Security of the Pupil may be so provided for, that they cannot possibly unite
and conspire to ruin him. In this Case it is highly requisite that they be
immediately brought into Business, who are to have, after the Father's Death,
the Tuition and Guidance of the Heir, and Administration of the Government.

Nor is it the Prince's only Duty to get the Successor secured and instructed,
but he is also to prevent the Accidents of his new Government, and their ill
Consequence; for when the Sails are changed the Ship is endangered; and by the
Introduction of New Forms, Nature suffers; because Things end faintly, but
begin with vigor: It Is from this Vicissitude of Things that those Dangers
proceed which threaten upon the meeting of the Waves of both Reigns, as it
happens when one rapid River runs violently into another of an equal Current.
The Authority of the Successor is easily lost, and Conspiracies and Innovations
contrived against him Quando ausuros exposcere remedia, nisi novum, and
nutantem a^hus Principem, precibus vel armis adirent, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
; and therefore the Prince should endeavor to make the latter part of his
Reign so calm, that the new one may be entered on without the least hazard: and
as Seamen, when they enter the Port, quit their Oars, and furl their Sails; so
ought he to close his Government, by laying aside all thoughts of Enterprises
and Wars, by confirming ancient Alliances, and making new ones, particularly
with his Neighbors, that Peace may be settled in his Realms. It Is no less
worthy Praise, when Age draws on,
To settle Peace and Quietness at Home;
That no Intestine Broil^ subvert the State,
Or powerful Neighbors War without create. Tasso.

Let him dissemble Injuries, us Tiberius did with Getulicus M^lt^que gratia
man^it reputante Tiberi^ publicum sibi odium, extre^am ^^atem, magisque fama
quam vi^st^re res suas, Tac. Annal. l. 6.
and Philip II. with Ferdinand de Medicis; for at such a time the most prudent
Princes order a Rainbow to be put over their Tombs, for a Token of Peace to
their Successors, not a Lance fixed in the Earth, to prompt them to revenge
their Quarrels, as the Athenians used to do. Let him govern his foreign
Provinces with Counsel and Address, not Arms Consilis and astu res externa^
moliri, arm^ procul ba^ere, Tac. Annal. l. 6.
; and see that the Governors he sets over them be Eloquent, Lovers of Peace,
and unexperienced in War, lest they kindle it, as it was done in the time of
Galba Hispaniae praeerat Cl^vius Ruf^^ vir fa^und^s, and pacis artibus, belli
ine^p^^t^^, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. Let him compose the Minds of his Subjects, and reconcile their Differences;
protect them from Inj^ries, moderate their Taxes, and re^ove all Nor^lties
odiovs to the People. Let him make choice of prudent Ministers, Friends to
peace and the Public Quiet; for by this means his Subjects Minds being formed
to Ease, and gentle Usage, will promise themselves the same from the Successor,
and so not attempt any Innovation.

EMBLEM CI.
MAny great Men have labored, by Speculation and Exper^ence, to form the Idea
of a Perfect Prince. It has (...) this Royal Porcelain, this (...) Vessel of
Ear^^, no less brittle than others, and more subject to Casualties than any;
particularly when the Potter is of the School of Matchiavel, whence all come
out distorted, and of short continuance, as that was which he laid down as a
Model of the rest.

The Design of these Emblems has been to set off that Purple, whose Scarlet Dye
soon turns to Ashes; they began at the Cradle, and end at the Tomb. They are
the Parenthesis of Man's Life, which the least clause of Time includes; nor is
it easy to determine which Hour is the most happy, that wherein the Eyes are
open to the Day of Life, or that in which they are closed to the Night of Death
And the day of death, than the day of birth, Eccles. 7. 1.
, since the one is the beginning, the other the end of our Labors; and however
great the difference may be betwixt being and not being, yet the Material Part
of Man only feels that, not the Form, which is Immortal, and improved by Death.
The Dread we have of the Grave is natural; but had Reason more influence on us
than Desire of Living, we should rejoice at the fight of it, as those do, who
looking for Treasures, find urns, being sure to meet with Riches there And dig
for it more than for rich treasure, which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad
when they can find the grave, Job 3. 21, 22.
; for it is in the Grave that the Soul finds the real Treasure of Eternal Rest.
This Simon Maccahaeus signified by that Hieroglyphick of Ships carved upon the
Pillars he set about the Maus^laeum of his Father and Brothers And set great
pillars round about them, and set arms upon the pillars, for a perpetual
memory, and carved ships be^ides the arms, 1 Ma^cab. 13. 29.
; intimating, that the Ship of our Life floating upon the Billows of the World,
is never quiet till landed at the Shore of Death. In effect, what is Life but a
perpetual Fear of Death? without any thing to assure us of its continuance.
Many Signs portend the Approach of Death, not one exactly marks out the Bounds
of Life, The most flourishing Age and strongest Constitution are not sufficient
Sureties for one Hour of Health. The Heart, which performs the part of a
Balance in this clock of the Body, points indeed to the present^ Hours, but
never to the future. Nor ought this ^ncertainty to be termed Disdain, but
rather a Favor of Nature; for were the precise Time determined for Death as it
is for Birth, for the Dissolution as for the Formation of the Body, Man would
become Insolent to Reason; and therefore she has not only given him one sure
Minute to breath in, but, on the contrary, has in all things imaginable laid
before him Evidences of the Shortness of Life: The Earth represents it to him
in the Youth of its Flowers, and Gray-Hairs of its Harvests; the Water, in the
Rapidness of its Current; the Air, in the Fires it kindles, and extinguishes
again in a moment; and the Heavens, in the Prince of Light which the same Day
sees rise in the golden Cradle of the East, and set in the dark Tomb of the
West. But if Death be the last of all Evils, that it comes not too late is to
be esteemed a Happiness. The shorter the Interval is between the Cradle and the
Tomb, the shorter is the Course of our Labors; and therefore Job wished he had
been immediately carried from the Womb of his Mother to that of the Earth
Wherefore then have thou brought me forth out of the womb? O that I had given
up the Ghost, and no eye had seen me, I should have been as though I had not
been, I should have been carried from the womb to the grave, Job 10. 18, 19.
. We are bound as soon as born, and all our Lifetime after involved in Care^ I
was nourished in swaddling clothes and with care^, Wisd. 7. 4.
; nor have Kings, in this, any Privilege above the rest of Mankind For there is
no king that has any o^^er ^eginning of birth, Wisd. 7. 5.
. Did Humane Felicity consist in long Life, Man would undoubtedly outlive the
Stag; for it were absurd that any Creature should be happier than him, for
whose Service they were all created l^sas (...) fact^s na^^ra fuisse necesse
est, Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 5.
. That Natural Desire we have of seeing Hours pass swiftly away, is an Argument
that it is not Time which makes our Happiness; for then would the Mind find its
Rest in that: whatever it desires out of Time, it always wants. In Princes,
more than in others, as they are exposed to greater Accidents, Experience shows
that in a long Life Fortune is endangered, she being tired as much with being
propitions, as with being adverse. Lewis XI. had been a happy Prince, had he
ended his Days before the Calamities of his last Years. Sovereignty is a kind
of tempestuous Sea, not to be kept calm by a long Course of Life; he who lives
longest, suffers most Storms and Dangers. But if we consider the End and
Perfection of Nature, a long Life is happy, when, according to the Testimony of
Job, it comes into the Grave in its Maturity, as Corn into the Barn Thou shall
come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his
season, Job 5. 26. secund. Septuagint.
, before Decrepidness makes it wither; for with the Shadow of Death the Vital
Spirits congeal, and the Body remains useless. The Trembling Hand can no longer
steer the Helm of the State, the Eye perceive the Clouds of Heaven, the Course
of the Winds, and the Rocks of the Sea, nor the Ear hear the Barkings of Scylla
and Carybdis. Amidst so many Miseries of Nature, Constancy fails the Prince;
and being reduced, by the Moisture of the Senses, to a second Infancy, he
believes every thing, and suffers himself to be governed by Malice, which is
then most awake in those about him, who at such a time offend with equal Profit
and Impunity Cum ^pud infirmum and credulum, minore metu and majore prae^io
peccaretur, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. Women get Possession of his Will, as Livia did of Augustus's, when she made
him banish his Nephew Agrippa Nam senem Augustum devi^xerat, adeo, uti Nepotem
unicum Agrippam Posthumu^ in insulam Planasiam projic^ret, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
, bringing him to such a pass, that he who before knew how to maintain the
whole World in Peace, became incapable of ruling his own Family Nulla in
praesens formidine dum Augustus aetate validus, seque and domum, and pacem
sustentavit, postquam profecta jam senectus and agro corpore fatigabatur,
aderatque finis, and spei novae; pauci bon^ liber^atis inc^ssum disserere, Ibid.
. By this means Majesty is made the Derision of all Men, of which Galba was an
Instance Ipsa aetas Galb^e, and irrisu^ and fastid^o erat, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
Other Nations despise him, and are not afraid to rise up against him, as
Arbanus did against Tiberius Senectutem Tiberii ut inermem despicient, Tac.
Hist. l. 6.
. The Authority of a decrepid Prince is lost, and his Orders (...), not taken
for his own, as it was (...) of those of (...) (...), and Principe i^^^to
exitium d^mui ejus i^tendi (...), (...) l. 5.
. He is hated by the (...), who look upon him as an unprofitable Instrument,
the Source of all the Evils the Government suffers: And as Love is in a manner
bred by interest, and brought up by Hope, all make slight of him; inasmuch as
he is not ^ble to give much, who has but a little while to live. His Empire is
accounted precarious, and short lived, as that of Galba was Precarium sibi
imperium and brevi transi^^^^^, Tac. Hist. l. 1.
; and the Ministers, like the GossHawks of Norway, that they may get the day,
lay their Pounces upon the Public Trea^ures, selling Places and Favors, as
the Servants of the same Emperor did (...) afferebant ve^alia c^nct^,
prap^^^mses libe^^. (...), Tac. Hist. l. 1.
. When therefore the Age is come to this pass, the Prince has more need of
Instructions to make him sensible of his inability, and resign the weight of
the Government to his Successor, than of Precepts to continue it to himself.
Let not Ambition delude him, by the Representation of his post Character and
Applause; for Men consider not the Prince as he was, but as he now is: Nor is
it enough to have once made himself feared, if he cannot do it now; nor to have
governed well heretofore, if he neither is able nor knows how to govern well
still. Dominion is like the Sea, which immediately casts on Shore all
unprofitable Carcasses. The Prince is esteemed for the Form of the Soul with
which he Ordains, Commands, Rewards and Punishes; so that when Age comes to
discompose that Form, the Esteem vanishes; and therefore it will be prudent to
acknowledge the Injuries and Contempts of Age in time, and so slip from them
before they arrive. If the Prince and Business must part, it is better that he
bid the first adieu. It Is a glorious Action to submit to own one's Frailty, and
voluntarily divest one's self of Grandeur, before Death takes it away by Force;
lest it should be said, that he died unknown by himself, who lived known by all
Men. He should consider, that his Royal Scepter is like the Herb of the same
Name, which in a little time turns to Worms Theophr. l. de Plant.
: and that if the whole Globe of the Earth be no more than a Point, in
comparison of the Heavens; What will one Monarchy, one Kingdom be? And though
this were never so large, yet he can have no more of it than a Place to bury
him in My breath is corrupt, my days are exti^^^, the graves are ready for me,
Io^ 17. 1.
, or, as Saladin said, a Shroud, without carrying away with him any other
Glory. The Prince is not to live always for the Commonwealth; he should reserve
some Time to himself, and endeavor, that at the setting of his Life the
Horizon of Death may be cleared from the Vapors of Ambition, and the Clouds of
Passion and Interest, as is expressed by the Sun in this Emblem, taken from the
Sepulcher of Joshua, upon which a Representation of that Planet was raised,
with this difference only, that there it was put in memory of its standing
still, at the Voice of this Great Captain And the sun stood still, and the moon
stayed, Ios^. 10. 13.
; here, to signify, that as a Clear and Fair Evening is an infallible Sign of
the Serenity of the next Morning, so a Reign ended in Sanctity and Happiness,
portends, that he who is a to succeed will be also happy, for a Reward to the
Virtue, and by the irresistible Efficacy of this last Example. The Art of
Living and Dying well, that glorious Retirement of the Emperor Charles Va. May
teach, who so far laid aside all Public Cares, that he never so much as
enquired after the State of his Monarchy, but brought his great Soul, otherwise
made for brave Achievements, to the dressing of a Garden, or to divert the
Hours (after his Spiritual Exercise performed) at some Ingenious Art or other.

But if there are any Disputes or Revolutions to be apprehended upon account of
the Succession, it will be Prudence in the Persons present at the King's Death
to keep it secret, and make that and the Possession of the Successor public at
one time. For in such Cases the People are like a Colt not broke, which suffers
not the Saddle, unless it (...) sees it. Th^^ Livi^ concealed the (...) until
(...) was settled in his (...) Sim^l exce^^i^^e Augustum, and rer^m pot^ri
Neronem ^ama e^dem ^^lit, Tac. Annal. l. 1.
; as Agrippin^ did that of Claudius, with so much Di^^imulation, that even
after his Decease a Senate was convened in his Name, and Prayers offered for
his Health, till Time was gained to contrive Nero's Succession Dum res firmando
Nero^^^ i^p^rio (...), Tac. Annal. l. 12.
. The Death of the Prince being made known, neither Piety nor Prudence dissuade
from Tears, and Demonstrations of Sorrow. The Holy Ghost, far from forbidding,
recommends th^em My son, pour forth tears over the dead, E^clus. 38. 16.
. All the People of Israel lamented the Death of Abner, and David followed his
Corpse to the Grave Mourn before Abner: and king David himself followd the bier,
2 S^m. 3. 31.
. For though there want not Christian Considerations to comfort us; and though
there has been heretofore a Nation, which, less enlightened with the Rays of
Immortality, received those with Tears who came into the World, and took leave
of them that went out of it with Rejoycings; yet these Reasons stand good only
on their side who are gone to a better Life, but are not for those who are left
alone, and deprived of their Services and Conversation. Even our Savior Christ
going to raise Lazarus, wept over his Sepulcher Jesus wept, Io^. 11. 35.
. These last Expressions of Grief must not be denied the Tenderness and
Resentments of Nature: They are the Scales wherein the Merit of the deceased
Prince is weighed, and whereby may be known what Value his Subjects had for
him; in a word, the Touchstone on which their Love and Obedience is tried,
which strengthens the Links of Subjection, and gives Heart to the Successor.
Yet for all this, the People must not be obliged to an expensive Mourning, for
fear their Prince's Death should turn to a burthensom Tax.

Not, however, that Funeral Pomp, and magnificent Tombs, adorned with Statues,
and costly Imbossed Works, are to be looked on as a mere Vanity of Princes;
they are rather a generous piece of Piety, which marks out the last Bounds of
Humane Greatness, and shows, in the Magnificence wherewith their Ashes are
honored, what Respect is owing to Majesty; Sepulchers being no other than a
kind of mute History of the Royal Race Quomodo imaginibus suis noscuntur, quas
nec victor quidem abolevit, ^ic partem memoriae apud scriptores retinent, Tac.
Annal. l. 4.
. The Obsequies of David and Solomon were celebrated with extraordinary Pomp
and Splendor.

In the Funerals of private Persons great Care is required, because
Superstitions prejudicial to Religion are easily introduced, the Imagination
being deluded in what is hoped or feared from the Deceased; and for that
Funeral Charges are things which happen every day, and concern many, it is
absolutely necessary they should be moderated, Sorrow and Vainglory being apt
to raise them too high. Plato set a certain Rate upon the Building of
Sepulchers, as did Solon also, and after them the Romans. King Philip II. made
a Law to regulate the Abuses and Excesses of Funerals and Monuments; saying,
That what was laid out superfluously upon them, were better given to pious
Uses, and to pray for the Souls of the Deceased.

Thus far Your Highness has seen the Birth, Death, and Burial of the Prince
whom these Emblems form; being, as it were, present at the Building of this
Politic Edifice, from the very Foundation, to the last Stone.

And now, that your Highness may with more ease take a Review of the whole
Fabric, I have thought convenient to subjoin here a kind of Platform thereof,
or Looking-Glass, wherein it may be represented, as a greater City is in a
lesser. This shall be King Ferdinand the Catholic, one of Your Royal
Highnesses's Ancestors; in whose glorious Reign, all the Arts both of Peace and
War flourished, and Accidents both of prosperous and adverse Fortune occurred.
The Infancy of this Great King was ripe and vigorous, his Youth employed in
Military Exercises; and what art and Industry could not perfect in him,
Experience supplied. His very Leisure was Employment; and his Diversions,
Attention of Mind. He was absolute Master of his Passions, following more the
Dictates of Policy, than his own Natural inclinations. He owned his Grandeur to
be from God only; and gloried in his own Actions, not those of his Ancestors.
He looked on Sovereignty rather as a Charge than a Succession. He qu^e^ed his
Realms by Dil^gence, and Personal Presence, raised his Monarchy by Valor and
Prudence, ^stabllsh'd it by Religion and Justice, supported it by Love and
Respect, embellished it with Arts and Sciences, enriched it by Trade and
Husbandry, and eternized it by Maxims and Institutions truly Politic. He was a
King as well of his Court as Kingdoms, and Master as well as Home as Abroad. He
tempered his Liberality with Frugality, Affab^lity with Authority, Modesty with
Gravity, and Clemency with Justice. By punishing some few, he terrified many;
and by rewarding others, he encouraged the Hopes of all. Personal Affronts he
easily pardoned, but those which struck at the Royal Dignity he never forgave.
The Injuries done to his Subjects he revenged as his own, behaving himself
always as a Father to them. He valued his Glory more than his Dominion; but was
neither puffed up by Prosperity, nor dejected by Adversity: In the one he
fortified himself against the other; and when Fortune frowned, he used all his
Industry to retrieve her Favor. He made use of Time, not Time of him; and
though he submitted to Necessity, he made it subservient to his own Advantage.
His Conduct rendered him both beloved and feared of all. He gave Audience with
readiness; Hearing, that he might know; and asking Questions, for his more
certain Information. He trusted not his Enemies, and was reserved even with his
Friends. His Friendship was Conv^niency; his Kindred, Reason of State; his
Confidence vigilant; his Diffidence considerate; his Providence, Assurance; his
Jealousy, Circumspection; his Malice, a Defense; and his Dissimulation, a
Refuge. He deceived none, yet others were deceived by the Ambiguity of his
Words and Treaties, which he knew how to manage with so much Artifice (when it
was necessary to baffle Malice with Prudence) as to be able to extricate
himself without violating the Public Faith. Neither Falsehood dared attack his
Majesty, nor Flattery his Knowledge. He made his Ministers serviceable to him,
without making them Favorites; and suffered himself to be counseled, not
governed by them. What he could do himself, he committed not to others. He took
Time for Consultation, but was very Expeditious in Execution. In his
Resolutions the Effects were seen sooner than the Causes. He concealed his
Designs from his Ambassadors, when he desired, that being deceived themselves,
they should more effectually persuade others the contrary. He knew how to rule
with his Queen, and obey his Son-in-Law. He imposed Taxes through Necessity,
not out of Avarice and Luxury; and what he then took from the Church, he
afterward restored, respecting the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
maintaining the Regal. He kept no fixed Court, but, like the Sun, moved
continually about the Orbs of his Realms. He managed Peace with Moderation and
Integrity, and prosecuted War with Force and Stratagem, neither desiring the
one, nor refusing the other. Whatsoever his Foot was fixed on, his Arm and
Conduct joined in the Defecne thereof, increasing his Strength by the Spoils of
his Enemies. He did as much by his Negotiations, as by his Arms, never
committing to the Sword, what he could conquer by Address. he placed the
Ostentation of his Grandeur and Pomp in the Bravery of his Battalions. He was
always present, in time of War, within his Kingdoms. The same Orders which he
gave, he observed himself; and made Leagues so as to remain Arbiter, not
subject. He was neither exalted when Conqueror; nor when beaten, dispirited. He
Signed Treaties of Peace under the Shield. In a word, He lived to all the
World, and died to himself; yet always remaining, in the memory of. Men, as an
absolute Pattern for Princes, and Immortalizing himself in the Desire of his
Subjects.

THis naked Skull of Death, the dismal Sc^^e,
Which now the simple Spider measures over
WIth its slight Web; which baffled heretofore
The nicest Subteilties of Humane Brain,
Once wore a (...), and triumphant stood,
As Monarch of the (...) of Peace and War:
His Smiles gave Life; his Anger dire Despair;
And all the World depended on its Nod.
What oncee gave proudly Laws to War and Peace,
Spiders and Ear-wigs do now possess.
Why then this Pride, O Princes, since the Grave
Makes no Distinction 'twixt the Base and Brave,
Betwixt the mighty Prince and wretched Slave?


On the Author and his Book, in Allusion to the EMBLEM.
WHither so fast, vain Man? before out of breath,
Stop, and behold this lively Scene of Death.
The Head thou see was Great Saavedra's once,
A greater Name no Rhetoric can pronounce.
Here Piety with Policy were joined.
Here Honor, Sense and Learning were combined
False Machiavilian Notions to convince,
And form at oncea Wise and Virtuous Prince.
Where now, alas! Worms having eat it bare,
The Death-watch Spiders spread their curious Hair,
And with their Bowels nobly re-interr,
Scepters and Crowns here tumbled down you see;
A trifling Lose to one so Great as He:
But since this Work remains, the World may cry,
Death, where is thy Sting? Grave, where is thy Victory?
FINIS.

