CVRIA POLITIAE
depiction of the four virtues Justitia

Prudentia

Fortitudo

Temperantia

LONDON Printed for HUMPHREY MOSELEY in St Paul's Churchyard

1654



Curia Politiae: OR, THE APOLOGIES OF SEVERAL PRINCES: Justifying to the WORLD
Their most Eminent Actions, by the strength OF REASON, And the most Exact RULES
OF POLICY.

Written in FRENCH by the acurate Pen of MONSIEUR de SCVDERY, Governor of
NOSTRE-DAME.

And now faithfully Rendered into ENGLISH.

With the FIGURES of many Emperors and Kings.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the sign of the Prince's-Arms in Saint
Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. LIVE.

TO His Most Excellent Majesty CHARLES By the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
THE Politics of these Illustrious Princes adventured to be seen in England in
Your Royal Absence; having no splendor to Countenance them, but the beams of
their own worth; nor any Patron to shelter them but true Honor and Renown: yet
a good Success has waited on them through some tempestuous years, wherein they
have been entertained by many of Your Majesty's Subjects: who Amazed or
satisfied with the Piercing and Transcendent Reasons of these Earthly Gods,
have (Probably) better learned their duties toward their Sovereigns; and have
found out a more even Path to guide them to Loyalty and true Obedience to Gods
Anointed. Amongst these more Glorious Heroes, some have been Your Royal
Ancestors and Predecessors, as King Henry the Seventh, King Henry the Eighth,
and King James of Blessed Memory: Others have been either of Your Blood, or in
Alliance and Amity with Your Predecessors. And King Lewis the Fourth of France,
has not only been an Example and Parallel of Your Troubles; but may prove a
good Counselor and Pilot to guide Your Peoples hearts to their Native Duties;
and so more easily and joyfully to raise a degree to Elevate and Preserve Your
Majesty in Your Illustrious Throne. These twenty Princely Orators; now
speaking English (as they have already French) expect Your Gracious Patronage
throughout all Your Majesty's Dominions; over which, that You may exceed all
Your Ancestors with a most Glorious and Happy Reign, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Majesty's Devoted Chaplain and Loyal Subject Edward Wolley. D. D.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
IT is not one of the least remarkable assurances of the sage Conduct of those,
who Govern this Monarchy, to see how their high Prudence and incomparable
Wisdom remove the Enemies of France so far from our Kingdom, that the
Governors of the Frontiers have leisure to study and compose Books. It is in
the fruition of this profound repose, wherein I enjoy, even in the midst of the
Tumults of War, an opportunity to render in some degree, my retiredness more
profitable, by composing this Work, which I now expose to Public Censure and
Approbation. I believe (Reader) though Fortune was not pleased to ordain me for
the management of more sublime affairs; yet she gave me leave to see, that if
she had pleased to call me, I might happily, have acquitted my self without
dishonor or disgrace; and that he who caused Lewis the fourth to speak so
nobly, and so many other Kings, might have bin capable to serve Lewis the
fourteenth, at least, under their orders and directions, who council so
successfully, if in stead of a Command in Remote extremities of the State, and
most imbroiled borders and limits, Fortune had vouchsafed to call me to Court,
and there appointed my employments. In effect, though naturally I had no Genius
or disposition to noble enterprises, and had contracted from my birth an
absolute stupidity; yet so many great Princes whom I have had the honor to
attend, so many splendent Courts which I have seen, so many people, and so
different in their Manners, Customs, and Laws, which I have visited, so many
Armies, Wars, and various affairs, wherein I have been engaged, both
voluntarily and under command; so many Grand Personages, with whom I have had
society and friendship, so many remarkable events that I have observed,
together with those precious relics of Prudence exhausted out of the Greeks
and Romans. All this (I say) is sufficient to inform my judgment, and for Art
and education to complete in me, what Nature could not. And I think (Reader) it
were not possible for me to revive Kings to a quick and lively discourse,
without some competent abilities in me: and I dare presume to believe, though
my design appear full of confidence, yet it may be excused from being censured
rash.

I have then made choice of twenty Princes (out of universal History) and have
selected the most eminent actions of their reigns for the subject of this
discourse; endeavoring herein to dive and pierce into those reasons and causes
which overruled them to their resolutions. In this I seem to be (in a kind)
admitted to the Cabinet Council of these Princes (who are in their graves,) and
by most probable conjectures, have hinted at those profound reasons which so
directed them. Thus guided by the light of History, I have essayed to discover
those secret and concealed mysteries of State, and so to remonstrate the events
of Councels and grand Enterprises, undertaken with so high deliberations. To
this end, that if Princes and Monarchs admit not of instruction rising from
their inferiors; yet that they may not refuse it flowing from their equals.
This being composed by some Politic reflections, which are as the muscles and
nerves of the body, and resembling all the several parts, make up and discover
(Reader) the aim and end of this Work.

Now whether the Builder have the skill to make this high design practical, and
so to cause this stately Piece admired and loved according to the beauty of the
Model; it is for you (Reader) to judge; for it becomes no one to be Judge and
Supreme in his own affairs.

I have confined my self to these 7 or 8 last ages of Time in the election of
these Princes, and those others, which may follow in the second part of this
Work. The rather, because already so many learned Historians having traveled
to Macedonia, have written so accurately and fully, that nothing is left that
may farther relate the Grandeur and magnificence of Alexander the Great. So
many exquisite Authors, (conversant in the affairs of the Persians and Medes)
have followed Cyrus to the Conquest of Asia, that nothing of rarity can be
superadded: and so many learned Pens have written of Caesar, and commented on
his Commentaries, that nothing can be found out to more illustrate those
relations. It may be said of those renowned ages of Antiquity in the words of
Solomon, That nothing is new under the Sun: and that they have been so often
examined, that those rare and precious subjects are rendered now more familiar,
and so less admired. As I then walk in a path less obvious to common
footsteps, so am I restrained to more confined and choicer limits; wherefore I
have not troubled their famous umbra's, whom an innocent kind of Magic has so
often summoned from their Royal Tombs: but leaving those Princely Hero's to the
repose of their sepultures, I have presumed to summon others from their
retirements of obscurity, to present their Noblest Actions to the light.

I am assured (Reader) their apparition will not affright you with their
Presence, nor their voice daunt your soul: I conjure you then to hear, and to
give a favorable audience to these illustrious dead Princes. This is a respect
due to their high qualities, and which they exactly look for from those who are
most rude and uncivil to Thrones, Scepters, and Crowns.

A CATALOGUE Of the several Princes discoursed of in this VOLUME.
I. THE Emperor Charles the Fifth, to his Royal Sisters, page 1 II. Lewis the
Fourth, King of France, to his revolted Subjects, 11 III. Matthias Corvin King
of Hungary, to the Ambassadors of the Republic of Venice, 20 IV. Mahomet the
Second the Grand Seignior, to his Janissaries, 33 V. Ferdinando, King of
Castile, to the Duke Nagera, 41 VI. Don Henry, King of Castile, to Count D'Alba
Tormes, 50 VII. Don Sanche, King of Castile, to Count Garcia de Gabria, 60
VIII. Emanuel, King of Portugal, to John de Menesais, 67 IX. Charles the Ninth,
King of France, to John de Monluc, 76 X. Don Ramir, King D'Oviedo, to the Grand
Council of his Kingdom, 84 XI. James the First, King of England, to the Duke of
Lenox page 91. XII. Henry the seventh King of England, to Thomas Lord Stanley,
p. 102 XIII. Soliman the Second, the Grand Seignior to Rustan Bassa, 113 XIV.
Scanderbeg, King of Albania, to his Captains and Council of Officers, 122 XV.
Henry the Third King of France, to Pibrac and Philip de Ports, 132 XVI. Henry
the Eight, King of England, to Thomas Lord Cromwell Lord Chamberlain of
England, 145 XVII. Pepin le 'Bref, King of France, to the Archbishop of
Maience, 154 XVIII. Tamberlane, Emperor of Tartary, to Axalla his Lieutenant
General, 163 XIX. Hugh Capet, King of France, to Frederick Count De Metz, 171
XX. Gustavus Adolphus, King of Swedeland, to Oxerstern his Lord Chancellor. 179
A TABLE Of the several Subjects and Debates in this VOLUME.
I. WHether the Emperor did judiciously in a Voluntary surrender of the Empire?
II. Whether a Prince ought to speak high and boldly to an Army and Subjects
newly reconciled? III. Whether it be lawful to be perfidious by a false and
fraudulent Example? IV. Whether it be lawful to prye into, and censure the
actions of Sovereign Princes? V. Whether all ways of Agrandising a man's self be
lawful and commendable? VI. Whether it be expedient to force an Enemy to
despair? VII. Whether, health ought to be preferred above a Crown? VIII.
Whether the Public ought to be preferred above the private interest? IX.
Whether those who are in the Princes suspicion, ought to be removed and
distanced? X. Whether it be consistent with Sovereignty to be divided and
communicable. XI. Whether Princes ought to remember and revenge injuries and
affronts offered them before they ascended the Royal Throne? XII. Whether it
were better to embrace a Crown in the right of Conquest, or as lawful heir, or
in the right of marriage of the Princess an Heretrix to the Crown? XIII.
Whether faith ought to be kept inviolably by Princes? XIV. Whether a Prince may
break his faith with another Prince who has first violated his? XV. Whether an
elected King ought to acquit and leave those Subjects, who have made choice of
him, and embrace another Crown more considerable? XVI. Whether all Princelike
actions ought not to be sacrificed, and to aim at true Glory and Renown? XVII.
Whether it be permitted to create himself a King? XVIII. Whether it be not true
Policy to humble the high and insolent, and to remit and pardon the submiss and
prostrated Subjects? XIX. Whether it be good for a Prince to have a chief
Minister of State superintendent to all others? XX. Whether Conquerors ought to
expose themselves to the common and ordinary perils of War?
Curia Politiae.
IF the hearts of all men in general (as the Scriptures testify) are so
unsearchable that none but God can find them out, or penetrate and discover the
secrets thereof. Certainly the hearts of Princes are so profound Abysses, as
all the subtlety of the People cannot sound or fathom: The hearts of Kings are
in the hands of God. It is Gods own assurance, and he alone is able to discern
and know them. As Kings reign by him alone, so he alone knows by what Maxims he
will have them rule. The distance is so far betwixt us and the Prima Mobilia,
that their motions are indiscernable to us; they train and lead us on after
them, but we neither know how nor why we follow them: And as they are
infinitely above us, so if our curiosity should soar aloft to discover the
ways and ends of their Revolutions, the most elevated spirits would find
themselves infinitely low and short in their capacities.

If God (as he names himself) be an invisible God, Princes who are the living
Images of God, are in that attribute like unto him. The Israelites sometimes
said, We have seen the living God, we shall dye and not live. It is little less
dangerous to peep and prye into the secrets of Princes. If God be a consuming
fire, and is concealed in the fiery flaming bush, the Majesty of Sovereigns
has a near resemblance to this inaccessible light, which never suffers it self
entirely visible no more then God himself. And if the splendour of the Celestial
Majesty commanded the Cherubims to cover their faces with their wings: the
glory of terrestrial Sovereignty is so illustrious and bright, that it not only
transcendeth, but diminishes all inferior lights and luminations. The
strongest sighted Eagles are too weak to dare to look steadfastly on these
glorious Suns. These mortal Deities may then say (but in all humble reverence
to the great King of Heaven,) I am what I am, without a farther discovery of
themselves, and their Royal pleasure. And the derrogation is less, or none at
all; seeing the holy Scriptures have admitted Kings to be styled Gods on Earth.
The Fable of Prometheus teaches little less, but that it is highly dangerous
to desire to know the depth of Princes thoughts, and so to have a will to
resemble those most sublime Persons. Give me what you please, (said a sage
Courtier to his Lord and Master) seeing you give me not leave to have a share
in your secrets. Notwithstanding the great danger of tasting the forbidden
fruit, there is a natural Curiosity in all men to know Good and Evil; which
has derived it self from the first man to all posterity. As for the
concealments of secrets, they inflame the mind to a greater ardor of knowing
them: And it is received as a common Maxim, In great enterprises, it is noble
enough to dare to wish them. And the more Princes endeavor to conceal their
thoughts, the more the people labor to divine them.

Physic is not the sole Art, which may be termed, The Art or Mystery of
Conjectures: Vulgar Policy has no other Foundations, and works by no other
Principles. Tiberius thought fit to conceal himself amongst the Rocks of the
Isle of Caprea, and to envelop his true resentment of affairs, under the veil
of ambiguous terms: and out of these equivocal notions, Rome toiled to
explicate his most enigmatical obscurities, and mysterious Oracles. When the
Thunderbolt fell on Sejanus head, the most ignorant of all the people took the
vanity to brag and boast, that they foresaw the tempest long before that
accident arived. And that Tiberius had not so much as a thought in his
solitude, which they had not formerly divined in the Capitol, or foreseen at
the foot of Mount Aventine: so true it is, that every one has a strong opinion
of his worth and great abilities, and boldly presumes to censure rashly the
intentions of Princes. In conclusion, it may be said to this purpose, that a
Kingdom has as many Ministers of State, as men; and that all are assistants to
the highest Councels, and impart their opinions to the deliberations of Peace
and War; and that the great Engine of Government has no results so secret, but
what are absolutely discovered; This is the infirmity and disease of all
Countries and Ages; but if it was ever Epidemical and spreading over the earth,
if ever Curiosity did exercise the Parts and Policy of the most refined Wits,
or the less ingenuous, and provoked the whole world to admire and talk. It was
doubtless then, when the Emperor Charles the Fifth voluntarily surrendered his
Empire to his brother, and his Kingdom into the hands of his son.

All men were amazed to see a soul so ambitious of true Renown, freely to
renounce Glory and Granduer, to pass from a Throne to an Hermitage, and from
the high quality of a puissant Sovereign, to the low Fortune of a Private
Person. And as they stood at gaze, so each one desired to search into the
intentions of this Prince, and to guess at those reasons which transported him
to an Action so extraordinary. Now as sometimes the grave Sages please to
intermix themselves with the common people, and in their condescentions permit
themselves to be trod on in a crowd; let us presume to make our conjectures of
him, who lives not in our Age, and whose action is above the reach of our
knowledge. And let us observe this most Illustrious Prince (now in his
solitude) speaking to the Queens his Royal Sisters, who were his companions in
his voyage, when he passed out of Flanders into Spain, after this grand Action.

portrait of Charles V PROGENIES DIVVM QVINTVS SIC CAROLVS ILLE IMPERII CAESAR
LVMINA ET ORA TVLIT AETAT. SVAE XXXI. ANN. M.D. XXXI.
Imperium oceano: famam qui terminat astris.

Lombart Sculpt. londre.

THE DISCOVERSE OF THE EMPEROVR CHARLES THE FIFTH, TO THE QUEENS HIS DEAR
SISTERS.
I Doubt not but that at this instant the whole world is ready to Descant on
that stupendous action I have undertaken; and that the greatest contemplators
employ (at present) their deepest Policy, Morality, and Reason to divine and
search out the causes of my resolutions. This action is of such an admirable
and extraordinary nature, as may render astonishment to the curiosity of the
most profound and most capeable understandings; In the undertaking whereof, and
although I live in an Age wherein I have these more illustrious and great
Personages to bear witness with me; Philip King of England; Maximilian King
of Bohemia, Elianor Queen of France and Portugal, Mary Queen of Hungary,
Emanuell Philibert Duke of Savoy, Christiana Daughter to the King of Denmark
and Duchess of Lorraine: All the Knights of the Order of the golden Fleece, all
the Grandees of Spain; all Persons of Eminent condition in Flanders, and an
infinite number of other people; yet I may say, and my reason tells me, that I
may well doubt, whether posterity can be persuaded to believe, what I have
undertaken to effect. All Ages furnish us with too many examples of Usurpers of
Empires and Crowns; and of Princes who have left their Scepters: but in the
universal history of times, it is most rare to hear of any, who voluntarily
quitted Soverainty without constraint: I shall only except the Emperor
Dioclesian; and (perhaps) I shall have none to imitate me. The world sees that
I have transferred to my Son, all the Kingdoms, Provinces, and Isles, of which
I was Sovereign, both in the new, and old World, that I have dispatched the
Prince of Aurange to my Brother Ferdinando King of the Romans, to present him
with the Scepter and Crown Imperial; I have (already) been observed to
withdraw from a Royal Palace, and to have retired to a private house at
Bruxells, and thence to have descended to an humble Hermitage: But (it is
possible) that thousands can never judge rightly, nor search directly into the
motives of so great a change; If I had lost many famous Battles, If the
Turks and Barbares had invaded the Provinces of the Empire; or had they all
disloyally revolted, then might men have said or censured, that I had
discreetly quitted, what I had not been able longer to protect and guard; and
that I had done well to abandon voluntarily, that which might have been
violently forced from me. But the whole earth knows, That since my age of
sixteen years, (when first I bore a Scepter) to the age of fifty six years
(when at last I surrendered them all) my life and all my Adventures, were
nothing else, but a Concatenation of victories and Tryumphes, and a glorious
continuation of most renowned successes; I have enjoyed forty years the
Royalties and Kingdoms of my Father; which I have now conferred on my Son, and
thirty six years the Majesty of the Empire, which I have surrendered to my
Brother with such success and glory, that I dare say (without vanity) amongst
the greatest Caesar's, of all my predecessors, Charles the great only bears
comparison with Charles the fifth. In effect, what Prince can be preferred
before Charles, since Charles was preferred before Francis? This high Soul
(whom glory inflamed to become my mortal Enemy; and whom the Renown of my
victories so often amazed, aspired to the Empire as well as I; and left nothing
unattempted that might make his way less difficult; he moved by all secret
engines to gain intelligence, and make his party in Germany, he alarmed the
towns along the River of Rheine, with the great numbers of his Forses and
Armies, the more to terrify and dispirit the Princes Electors; notwithstanding
the Genius of Augustus was more prevalent then that of Anthony, although that
of Anthony was more subtle then those of other Men, yet (mauger all despite of
this illustrious Rival) I obtained the Empire to which he pretended, and
gained the Throne with more honor, (as all Europe knows) then my competitor:
This was not the sole advantage which fortune crowned me with in degrees above
my mortal enemies; But on the contrary, she seemed willing that I should be
borne in such an Age, that should chiefly serve for my renown; And the
Tryumphs of Charles, had not received their complete ornament, if this
illustrious conquest had not attended his Royal Chariott. I know not (my dear
sister) if it may not prove an error in my judgment, or a blemish to my
wisdom to remember you (at this reencounter) of the imprisonment of your
husband; first, because that he is not now alive, and then because he was my
prisoner: yet the relation is a sweet temptation to a soul so ambitious of
true glory, as that of mine; and to silence it, is not an ordinary difficulty.
And now (to discourse the passages as they fall) to take Prisoner a King with
his sword in his hand, in the midst of the field, the battle being all
inveloped in blood and fire, the forces routed, and environed, the Colors
torn, the Squadrons flying, and the maine body in confusion; some dying, and
others slain outright; such a King (I say) though entirely vanquished, is no
less glorious then his conqueror. Permit me then (sweet Sister) to call to
my memory that Battle of Pavie, as one of the most eminent Actions of all my
Reign, and if you sadly call to mind that this Prince (whom Italy and Spain
saw my Prisoner) was your husband; yet forget not (if you please) that I am
also your Brother; But now to pass from Foreign to Domestic affairs, from
Wars abroad to civil Dissentions, and so from Spain to Flanders; what
honor did I not gain; when I did chastise the Revolted City of Gaunt, this
Rebellion was so great, that the consequence might have been terrible, and yet
to see this fire extinguished, before the flame grew higher, I was forced to
have confidence in an Ancient Enemy newly reconciled; and enter into a Province
of a Prince, whom I remitted out of Prison, and to take assurance from one whom
I had forced to pay a Ransom: In a word, J was constrained to adventure the
hazard of losing all, that by my bold endeavors I might preserve Flanders; no
Policy (more suspicious then mine) could well overcome such scruples in this
conjuncture when (during the time after deliberation) the Rebels found out
ways to foment new Revolts, and to corroborate their unjust usurpation. As for
me, I used all ways, and means; and as soon as my reason discovered, that I
could not suffer the contempt of that Rebellious Town without great disgrace,
and much dishonor, I commended Caesar and his Fortune to the mercy of the Wind
and Waves; I slighted that which others thought I had cause to fear; I marched
throughout all France Heroickly, and at last chastised this Popular City; and
reduced her to her Devoirs. Truly Francis used generosity well beseeming him;
(But I think I may say in this occasion) my courage well beseemed me. Now to
return from Flanders into Spain, if we look toward Font-Arabia, what new
Trophies has not she discovered. This Siege cost me no more days, then many
believed it would have expended years. And it fell out there, what Caesar once
said (veni vidi vice) But (my most dear Sister) that which I relate to you
alone, my wisdom obliges me to deny to all Europe: Your discretion has
merited this Confidence, and he who has trusted you with his life, shall never
fear to trust you with any secret. We tell you then that the gaining of Rome
adds a mavelous luster to our renown, which others would endeavor to
obscure. It is at her Capitol where Caesar's and the Emperors ought to
Triumph, and it is just to make this imperious City (the Mistrisse of the
World) to stoop to the power and puissance of her chief Lords and Masters But
if virtue be scrupulous (in this conjunction) and that any thing seem too much
to struggle with, or disturb her victorious magnificence; let us leave Rome,
and turn our eyes toward Boloyn, which saw us receive the Imperial Crown
from the Sovereign Bishop; and yet, if she can expect a further sacrifice to
pacify and appease; and so to cause her utterly to forget the sacking of Rome;
she may (if she please) follow us into Austria, where she shall see we have
proved the Buckler of Christendom in repulsing the forces of invincible
Solomon; who was the greatest Emperor of the Turks; she shall see us make
head against our greatest Enemy, and to damme up that dangerous Torrent, which
threatened the Ruin of all Germany, and (Possibly) of all Europe; but if the
Lady Vertupl ease to march with me out of Europe into Africa, she may look
on me there Grapling with the same Enemies; That is, the Mahometans, the
greatest Foes to Christianity. Who has not heard of the taking and sacking of
Gouletta? and what Climate is so remote from the Coast of Barbary, as has not
talked of this grand Action; seeing that almost all Christians were spectators
on the effects of this War; where I alone caused the Roman Eagle to fly in
Triumph, in those places where she never appeard since the defeat of Hannibal,
and the victory of Scipio? Who has not understood of the flight of Cairadden
Barbarossa, that famous, and formidable Pirate, who so enriched that
abominable Town of Algiers, and made so many Slaves? he was the terror of all
our Coasts, and kept all our Navall Force in subjection: he styled one of his
Ships the Dragon of the sea; notwithstanding this Dragon flew before the Eagle:
And if the Pirate lost not his Navy, his Life, nor his Liberty, yet he lost his
Honor, which he ought to have prized above them all. This famous Thief fled
from his mighty Wealth, and we had the honor to pursue him flying, who was
the Tyrant of the Sea. Who has not heard of the fame of the taking of Tunis,
the most important, and capital City of that whole Kingdom? Have we not
cause to hope (as the effect of so great Achievements) that Fez, and Morocco,
shall have the same destiny? That Algiers it self shall fall within our power?
And that all Assrick shall yield entirely to the fortune of our Victories? Yes
(my dear Sisters) we have cause to hope, and the success had been infallible,
according to expectation, if the Affairs of Europe had not stopped our progress
in Barbary, and that we had not been constrained to return speedily to Sea.
It is true, I changed the climate, and encountered with a new sort of Enemies,
but lost not the least point of good fortune; Victory followed me from Africa
to Germany; and the Duke of Cleve found that I became speedily a Terrible
Enemy; I defied him and all his Troops, took him and all his Towns: And if my
Clemency had not equalized my Valor, I had buried him under the Ruins of his
own Territories. Then the Error of Luther had infected Germany, and I could no
less then with Fire and Faggot oppose the birth of that dangerous Monster. How
many Towns did fortify themselves against our victorious Armies, which saw
their own Walls thrown down, and demolished by the succesfull strength of our
puissant Forces: Ulmes yielded first, Auspurgh followed quickly after; Halle
was willing to imitate the one and the other; and above thirty Towns more
submitted likewise: at last Strasbourg, with her famous Clock (of which all
Europe talks) remembers the hour of her surprise, and that of my Triumph.
What shall I tell you of the Duke of Saxony, the dangerous head of that party,
that violent Defender of the Impostures of Luther, who set all Germany in
Arms, and all the Countries of the Empire in confusion? Did it not turn to his
dishonor, and my glory, that God conducted Caesar and his fortune? Having so
good, so great a Pilot, his Ship could not perish? Did not all Europe see the
very foundation of this Heresy imprisoned within my power? and has not that
Prison clearly seen, that the Cause which I defended was that of Heaven, and
that a Robbing of me, was a Robbing of God? and seeing that God will be for
us, we may demand, Quis erit contra nos? Who dare be against us? Thus (my dear
Sisters) I have had this particular fortune, that almost always those who
dared to attaque my Person, or Forces, have not only lost the hopes of
Conquering me, but even themselves, their Forces, their Armies, their Estates,
and their Liberties. It is now that this very thought calls to memory the
imprisonment of Francis le Grand, and his imprisonment, the great advantages
which I obtained with those good successes which attended: I shall conclude
with a Narration of my Successes, as the chiefest Honor to my greatest
actions. Hedin did offer Sacrifice to my memory, and desired permission to be
inserted in the Schedule of my Triumphs. Teroune being taken appears no little
ornament; and many other Towns, which I subdued in France, humbly craved the
same favors. But (most dear Ladies) I shall yet in this discourse mount higher
then I have before. Then know that I caused Paris to tremble, which alone ^s
able to shake a Kingdom; Paris that vast and superbe City, which could (as
ancient Rome) levy Armies in an instant; Paris (I say) which the whole Earth
considers now, as the Abridgment of the World, and as the wonder of the
Universe. After this (dear Ladies) I shall not dare to speak any thing, of what
I have done in Europe and in Africa; But, (as a device and a well drawn
intention presented to me) which fansied me to pass beyond Hercules's Pillars.
Remember yet (if you please) that it was under my auspitious conduct and
Authority that Perew was first discovered. This inexhaustible source of Gold
and treasure, and this new World, the old World never knew; and of this
mavellous mass of Riches, my successors may more truly glory, then ever
Pompey did, and raise Troops of Armed Men, stamping their feet upon the Earth
as often as they please. Yes (my dear Ladies) it is this that will cause the
Renown of Sp^ine to be illustrious to all posterity, and render her formidable
to all the Earth. And to present you with an Epitomy of my life since my age of
seaventeen years, I have made nine voiages into Germany, six into Spain, seven
into Italy, four into France, ten into the Low Countries, two into England, two
into Africa, besides eleaven times traversing the Main Ocean. What shall I say
any more, I have made Wars, Truces, Peace and Alliances, equally honorable,
And (except the Enterprise of Algiers, and the Seige of Marcelles) you shall
find that my Reign was a continued prosperity; and that that ancient Captain,
which the Greeks styled the Towntaker, gained not so many as I. But (perhaps
you will say unto me) since all these affairs succeed so favorably, and that
you appeared like a Star situated in the Heavens, attended with fortunate
aspects, thereby enabled to Regulate your own destinies, wherefore will you
abandone the Helm of that great vessel which you have so prosperously
governed, transferring those great affairs to a young Pilot; who has not so
large experience as you? his high endeavors may be as great, or more, yet,
it is possible, not so successful. O (most honored Sisters) it is the desire
of immortal Glory that caused me to quit this transient splendour; and to live
eternally in the memory of men, that I cease to Reign. It is true, that (to
this instant) fortune has been ever propitious to me, that she has followed
my Standard that she never was unconstant unto my party; Nay her favors
surpassed my expectations, and seconded all my Ambitions: But I know well this
is not allwaies her nature, and I am equally persuaded that I ought not to be
too confident; for having placed me upon the very highest step of glory (to
which degree no man ascended before me) she has withal elevated me so high;
that on the view of the circumference where I stand, I am environed with
precipices which are able to amaze the greatest courage. Though I walk
securely, (accustomed to behold those dangers without fear;) yet one false step
may cause all the glory of my renown to be dashed in pieces, and hazard all the
travailes of my whole life to be lost in an unfortunate moment. Yes (my dear
Sisters) as I know the inconstancy of Fortune, so I understand the injustice
and malice of men, and how they look on Conquerours: They would not that they
should be sometime successful, but constantly and always; it is not by
precedent noble actions, but by the last events that they censure and judge of
the Grandeur of all former Enterprises; and when fortune forsakes them, renown
takes leave with her, and reputation dies and follows no farther; some will
say that mere chance gave them their advantages, and that their own imprudence
destroyed all: and truly if Alexander himself, after he had gained the Battle
of Granique, had lost that of Arbella, he had returned without honor into
Macedonia, Although (effectively) he had been neither less wise nor valiant.
Why should not I then fix a nail in the wheel of this inconstant Chariot; to
stop her instability? and why should the World think it no danger to expose to
loss such high renown obtained with so much industry? were it not better that
I should quit the Company of this mutable Lady, then that she should (coylie)
forsake me? And that I should rather descend voluntarily from the Throne, then
to expose my self to the hazard of a precipitious fall? A man ought not to
flatter and deceive himself in an affair so important as this, my Throne is
not more secure then that of Bajazet, and as for Tamberlain, was not Barbary
alone capable to confound him and all his Power? There are fewer Crowns and
Scepters entire (in all the Earth) then those which lie bruised and broken
under the feet of Fortune. This grand and sadobject may teach all Princes (who
strike their Subjects with fear) to be daunted and tremble themselves. It is
then with the strength of reason, and a consideration so high, that I arrive
safely on shore, having hitherto sailed so fortunately, and so much the sooner;
because I can be no greater then I am (or could) reasonably desire more; should
I then vainly expose my self to Storms, Rocks, Sands, and Shipwreck it self?
Besides, as Kings have not the immortality of the Gods (if a Christian may be
admitted to use this Phrase) so they have not their Power: But (on the
contrary) are subject to the most feeble casualties and all infirmities of
other men. I am remembered by my diseases, which daily increase upon me, to take
order for my Supreme and last affairs, for fear of being prevented, and to
remit the Scepter of Government (which I cannot longer well support) to the
shoulders of a Prince more young and vigorous then I, and consequently, more
capable to bear up so great a weight with all the Royal dignity of the Empire.
The Soul and body (my dear Sisters) are so chained together, that the weakness
of the one must needs communicate infirmity to the other, and then, when the
constitution of the one is altered (it is very possible) that the operation of
the other must admit a change: Judge then, after so many People, and so many
Princes have listened to my voice, as to an Oracle; and followed my opinion as
decrees of Heaven (if I had done well to have exposed my infirmities to the
eyes of all the World?) No, the pangs of the Gout are so sharp and picquant,
that they force my Patience to sighs and Groans; It must needs be then greater
wisdom that those cries shall Echo no where but in the desert, and where noe
person shall over-hear them. Would Men, that I should do like Tiberius, who to
preserve the shadow of his former Power, was obliged to disguise his misery in
an Island, where he was confined by dispatching daily Warrants to Rome for the
death of some Citizen, for no other end but that Rome might know Tiberius was
still living? No, this Barbarous proceeding becomes not a Christian, a Prince,
nor a Man, and I hate to practice it. For that time that I have had my health,
I conceive J have governed my Subjects in such a fashion, that none (except my
Enemies) can be displeased that I either lived, or reigned. But seeing my
strength fails me, I shall not farther prefer mine ambition above the safety
of my Subjects. Other Princes leave their Crowns to their Children only at
that instant when they dye, that is, when they are not fit to wear the Diadem
any longer. But as for me, I was never willing that Death should make this
present to my Son; but rather, that he should receive, and hold this Blessing
from me; and as I was a means to make him live, so (before I dyed) I would be a
means to make him Reign, and thereby oblige him to me more entirely. Moreover
(not to conceal any of my thoughts) I know well that most people of the Earth
imitate the Injustice of the ancient people of Libya, who adored the Rising
Sun, but regard not the Sunsetting. Yes (Royal Ladies) the flourishing age of
Philip withdraws the Subjects hearts from the gray hairs of Charles; they
would regard the latter years of my Reign as an unseasonable cloud which
interposed the bright beams of this new star, and attend with impatience a
thing which (rationally) they ought to fear; and if the more moderate party be
pleased with their attendance; yet others indiscreet, are inflamed with their
new desires; and will not spare to make unjust vows, to hasten a birth to their
expectations. The humors of men, who ^^eat in an eternal change, and dwell in
a continued instability, never satisfied with the present condition of affairs,
fancy new felicities in their imaginations of things to come. It may be said
of the People, as of those who are sick, who think they shall receive a
Refreshment by change of the Situation, or place where they lie; and, how good
soe'r a Prince is, we may easily discern fewer sighs and groans at his
Funerals, then cries, or acclamations of joy at the Coronation of his
Successor. Then they fancy to themselves the Golden Age, and the innocence of
former days, when their new Master begins to Reign; and six Months after
(perhaps) regrett the death of the former Prince, repine, and murmur at him
that is alive: David, who was according to Gods own heart, yet was not so in
the eyes of Shim^i and Absalon: And who knows (in imitation of the latter) if
the Malady of Rebellious spirits shall not prove contageous in the evil
Counsels of Sycophants, and that Flatterers may not infect the Soul of Philip?
He is well born, but young; he is my Son, but a Prince; and as I am not wiser
then David, so (it is possible) he may prove no more obedient then Absolon. I
know that men have observed his sad complaint in England of the condition of
his Fortune, and I am not ignorant of what his Confederates have counseled to
exasperate him, in regard the English would not entitle him their King, but the
Husband of their Queen. (Madams) would men that I should hear that this young
Lion had broken his Chains, and that his fury had enraged him to trouble the
course of my prosperities? Have I not encountered enough with Foreign Wars,
but that I must be embroyled in a Civil? And would they that I should commit
my self to a condition more hateful then death? to be at dissension with my
own Son, whom I love more then mine own life? Should I expose my self to the
danger of a War, where the victory and the defeat would prove equally funeste,
and direful to me? Where if I were conquered I must be vanquished by a
Paricide? Or if I should prove the Conqueror, should be constrained to
sacrifice mine own Son as an Oblation to the Empire? And so blot out the high
crime of Treason with blood flowing from mine own veins? No, no, Herod, and
Charles follow not the same Maxims, if Herod caused his children to die, I
love rather to cause mine to Reign: And as the innocence of Philip is like to
that of those young Princes, I have been willing to provide that he should not
be able to lose it. To this end, that I might preserve my self from imitating
that unfortunate Politician, I believe that few Princes will copy out my
example, as I have had much difficulty to find out any to imitate of former
Ages. However Posterity will commend my design, when they shall understand how
much my Son has merited; I having done a thing so extraordinary. And I wish,
with all my heart, that Philip may have children so wise and hopeful, that he
may do for them, as I am about to do for him, and that he may voluntarily
surrender his Empire without any constraint at all.

All these reasons (honored Sisters) are (as seems to me) forcible enough to
oblige me to act as I have done. Yet (if without ostentation and vanity I shall
discover the secret of my soul) I vow to you I am in part stripped from the
Empire by a deep sense of Piety, and Devotion to Religion: For why? the rest of
my life past has been mixed in the Tumults of Armies, and with Managerie of
War, where he who is styled Dominus exercituum has not been so adored as he
ought. And I cannot but know that he (from whom all their puissance springs)
will demand an exact account of their Administration: And that they who have
judged Nations and People, shall (at last) be judged themselves. Yes (Sisters)
as I know how the ambition of Francis, and mine have troubled all Europe, and
interrupted the repose of all Christendom; I fear, that this ardent desire of
Renown, which has so animated us both, will not prove a cause and ground
sufficient and lawful before the undoubted Tribunal of the Justice of GOD:
Seeing then, that the wisdom of men is but foolishness before him, their
vanity can be no other then criminal abomination. I tell you, I have a
fearful sense of the blood of so many Soldiers slain, of the outcries of so
many people ruined, and of the flames of so many Towns burned, lest they should
mount to the Throne of Heaven, and there cry for vengeance against me. But if
that be true (which we must not doubt, since Truth it self speaks it) that the
Righteous fall seven times a day, how often offends he who is not just at
all? This reflection (my dear Sisters) has caused me to look on Scepters,
Crowns, Kingdoms, and Empires, as common obstacles of my Salvavation; and made
me resolve to lose them, to find out means to save my Soul. An old Captain of
mine one day entreating my Pass, and Conge, told me that one ought to have
some space and time betwixt the affairs of this life, and the day of death.
This piercing word stroke so deeply within my Soul, that it can never be
blotted out: And since that fortunate hour, wherein that sage Captain
admonished me, even to this instant, I have imitated his prudence; nor has
that pious Memento slipped out of my memory. No (virtuous Ladies) it was not in a
rude Tumult that I concluded this Grand action; I examined it a hundred times
before I undertook it; and after that, I submitted my own blindness to the
inspirations of Heaven. Yet if besides this so just cause of my Retreat, I may
be permitted to add another reason, which shall be the last end of my
discourse: I vow freely, that the death of Francis the first, seemed to say to
Charles the fifth, that it was high time for him to cease to live, or at least,
longer to Reign; in effect it were not just that this great person should enjoy
repose in his Tomb, and that I should continue still in trouble: Seeing that
our travelis are alike, it is fit (in some respect) that our recompense should
be proportionable; and as some illustrious Persons buried him when he was dead,
I am content (in some sort) to bury my self alive. All the Earth cannot now
afford an Enemy worthy of Charles, after the death of Francis, and the youth of
Henry has not the proportion of years to that age, to which I am reduced, he
ought first to have made three hundred Sieges, and gained more then twenty
Battles, before he be fit to enter the Lists equally with me: It were not
just to expose lightly the Glory of an old Captain to the fortune of a young
Soldier; I have too much to lose, and I see too little to gain, to prevent me
from a game so hazardous, and I should not have less Testimony of imprudence
then of courage. If I should longer be pertinaciously confident, the Seige of
Metz has cleared mine eyes, and makes me see perspicuously that fortune, like
Ladies, loves to court beautiful youth. Let not then men think it strange, if
I retire my self from her service, and commend my Son to her favor. In a word,
Charles opposed Francis as long as he lived, and I leave Philip to grapple with
Henry as long as he Reigns. It shall suffice for my renown, that I leave off
to Reign then, when I have most absolute power, and hence all the World shall
be in an amaze; shall dispute and doubt, which Act shall be more glorious,
either to have Reigned so soveraignly, or acquitted the Empire so freely.
Seeing therefore that the Empires of the chiefest Caesar's were not more
glorious then that of mine, it is fit that having excelled all others, I should
at last conquer my self, quitting my Ambition with my Crowns, and Scepters, and
so with this new kind of Victory obtain an unheard of glory, which all
posterity shall not equallize, but with much difficulty. Let us go on then
(most incomparable Ladies) let us go on to honor the Trees of my desert, and
store my Wilderness of retirement, with the Monuments and glorious Trophies of
so many Nations; and we will make the whole Earth confess, that he that had
power to quit so many Crowns and Scepters, was not unworthy to wear them.

The Censure.
CErtainly it is not less difficult to quit Crowns and Scepters, then to gain
and Conquer them: and those who say it is lawful to violate the Laws to gain
a Sovereign Crown, had no regard of giving approbation to that Act which the
Emperor Charles the fifth effected in this unparalleled example and
Resolution. That wicked woman who caused her Chariot to wheel over the body of
her own Father, to make her way more easy to his Throne, never thought of a
voluntary resignation of a Crown as Charles did. An effect so stupendeous and
extraordinary, that it surprises all the World: Many will give no credit to it,
some admire it, others (without judgment) slight the Action as not worthy
imitation; some attribute this Act to the Grandeur of his courage, others (if I
durst say it) to his pusillanimity, His own Son (and so Strada does assure us)
could not abstain from a gallant and ingenious Raillery, for when one told him
he had the hap of a good year when the Emperor his father surrendered his
Crown, he replied that his Father might have another when to repent it. This
sentence was a certain prognostic of the humor of Philip the second. And these
different discourses of the Father and Son, makes it evident to the World that
Philip would not appear of the temper of Charles; And that it should never be
said of him, that antiquity related of a Noble Grecian, that, Tydides was
better then his Father. This subtle and cunning Politician resolved not to be
so kind to Philip the third as his Father had been to him; who through the
infirmities of age, and the Gout, and the thoughts of death, conceived himself
obliged to surrender a Scepter he bad born so long. Our Lewis the eleventh,
likeed not a Maxim and resolution of this Nature; who, as long as he could
retain his soul within his body, held fast all the marks of Royalty with
Sovereign Power. It is true that he commended them (at the last moment of his
death) to his Son, but he sent them in such a fashion, as a man may easily
believe the Act was rather to taste his inclination, then to oblige his Son, and
rather to discover the Daulphins resentment, then to express his own paternall
tenderness. A man may say that this Prince seemed to have a long time to live,
because he desired to prolong his Reign, he used all endeavors to cause his
miseries to dye, that men might know that he was yet alive, he fortified the
Castles of Plessis, and Tours rather against death then any other Enemy; he
experienced the choicest and rarest remedies to renew Old Age, and cure his
Consumption: And if his Christianity had not sweetened the Asperity of Policy,
it may be well believed, that he would have ordained when he was a dying, what
once a great Politician appointed, that he would have showers of tears run
plentifully at his Funerals, thereby (if it were possible) to cause the living
to resent his power when he was in the grave. And now, considering all the
precedent Affairs, I may be justly permitted to honor, and commend a Spaniard
(if a Prince born in Flanders may bear that name) and dare venture to say, the
action of the Emperor CHARLES the fifth, was Grand, Glorious, truly Noble, and
Heroic: For he freely parted with that which the loss and ruin of ten bloody
Battles could not force him to. He understood (at last) the vanities of those
Grandeures which he had so much courted; and deprived Fortune of all power of
robbing him of any thing, and as his Motto was, Plus ultra, so he concluded he
had something to endeavor beyond his Empire, and earthy Kingdoms to look
after: This great soul found out (at last) that the whole Earth was but as a
point, or prick in comparison of Heaven: Without doubt the blessed Spirit which
guides the hearts of Kings (and so a great King tells us) infused this generous
Resolution. And though this Action have no example but that of Dioclesian (whom
the Primitive Christians permitted not to be ranged amongst good Princes, yet
we may confess and avow, it was a sublime, and high Act, worthy of greatest
admiration, and most worthy of those happy times, when men said, Philosophi
sunt Reges, and Reges Philosophantur. To conclude, it is not less rare to see
a King become an humble Hermit, then to see a poor Gardener advanced to be a
King, as Abdolominus was, whom Alexander commanded to be crowned. Now as it is
rare and admirable to see one surrender, and quit a Crown, as CHARLES the
fifth, so it is no less to be admired to see one assume, and take it up, as
one of our Kings did, who was LEWIS the fourth. His Father was dead in prison,
his Subjects in rebellion, and (at the same time) he an Exile in England, but
the success of time changed the fate of all affairs, and strock a deep sense
into the Rebels thoughts, so that they (who so evil entreated ^he Father)
called home the Son to elevate him to the Royal Throne. Behold here that
gallant young Prince at the sea side, and in the view of those vessels wherein
he sailed from Dover to Callis thus congratulating his subjects, before he
accepted the present of his Scepter.

portrait of King Louis IV Lewis the 4.th King of France.

LEWIS THE FOVRTH To his Revolted Subjects.
BEfore I shall receive your Oath of Fidelity, which I may justly demand, and
you ought dutifully to take, I shall let you know, you have recalled (this day)
a Prince (who during his Exile) had nothing else to do, but to study how to
Rule and Reign; and hereby I shall enforce you to believe that you shall not be
able to make a Royal Throne a passage into my Fathers Prison: And after you
have presented me with a Crown, to dare to wish me so much ill, as once to
think of Chains and Irons. I know well, that this discourse will surprise you,
and that you did not believe when you presented me with a Scepter, that I
should not rather have received it with Thanks, then Reprehensions; but this
act is extraordinary in its commencement, in its progress, and in its
conclusion; and it is just that all circumstances should be proportionable. Let
it then suffice you only to know, that if I be ignorant to what point Subjects
are to pay their obeisance, yet I am not ignorant to what degree Sovereigns may
extend their clemency: Notwithstanding there is this difference betwixt them,
that the Subjects have no limits for the first, but Sovereigns have for the
latter. The People are obliged to the Princes wills, both by their Bir^h, and
their Laws. They owe them their goods, their lives, and their liberties; and
their Princes owe them nothing but Justice, which can hardly pardon Traitors.
If these Truths, and Maxims had been equally understood, and followed by the
late King my Sovereign, and you his People, affairs had not been in that sad
condition as they now are. The State had not been reduced to such confusion;
the Provinces had not been Cantonized; Germany had not been so full of
Factions; Italy had not been so divided; all the Cities of the kingdom had not
had so many Kings as they now have Governors; you had not been guilty of the
crime of Treason, in elevating an Usurper to the Throne, the King my Father
might still have Reigned, or (at least) I might have received the Crown from
his hands, and not from yours; his Tomb might have been bedewed with my tears,
his Scepter had not been profaned, his Hearse might have been covered with
Trophies, and not with Chains. And (to speak all in a few words) you might have
been happy and innocent. But as his Clemency, and your Rebellion were the sole
causers of all these evils, so your Obedience, and my Justice, are the only
means to make reparation. Consider a little (I pray you) (that you fall not
back in the same estate wherein you were) in what Relation you now stand; and
in what condition I am. First, you have violated all sorts of Rights in the
person of your King, you have raised a War against him, you have assaulted
him, and afterward poisoned him; you have abused the confidence he had in you,
you have detained him prisoner with as great Treason as Injustice, with as
great insolency as cruelty: an injury which was never offered (hardly) to the
person of an ordinary Herald. Thus you have violated, and impudently abused
your King; you have detained him prisoner during a Treaty of Peace, for five
years together led him from prison to prison; you have forced him not only to
set by his Militia, and to depose his Crown; but you have constrained him with
violence to transfer it into other hands then mine. To conclude; you put him
to death, and you have reduced my self to a strict necessity, to search my
safety in my flight, and to go and show my misery beyond the Seas. Yet this is
not all, you have done one thing which never any did before; it has been seen
sometimes that the Grandees of a Kingdom have interposed themselves against a
Tyranny, and have destroyed it; but 'twas never seen that they themselves
elevated a Tyrant to the Throne as you have done: In these kind of crimes the
Abettors may be said to be more criminal then he who has received all the
fruit: For if each one of you in particular had aspired to set the Crown upon
his own head, you might have been more excusable, then to have snatched it from
your lawful Prince to place it on the head of an Usurper. But you will say to
me, the Prince that bore it was not able to suppert it. To that I shall answer,
As I have the honor to be his Son, and was his Subject, it belongs not to me
to determine what he could, or what he could not: seeing he was my Father, I
ought not to presume to be his judge, and seeing he was my King, I ought not
to be so impudent to censure, much less to condemn his actions; he being not
obliged to render an account to any, But God alone. Believe then, the same
respect I have for his memory, you ought to have had for his person, he was
your King as well as mine: seeing then that Kings' are called the Fathers of
the People; Their Subjects are obliged to have for them a true resentment of
respect, which their very birth may infuse into them; Bsiedes as Sovereigns
are the ^^ue Images of God, and that the splendour of their puissance is a beam
and ray of his power; Subjects ought to have an equal submission to their
Sovereigns will. When then you see a Comet appear, the Sun eclipsed, the Thunder
bolt fall on innocent heads, when you see Floods drown whole Towns, by their
inundation, and the Sea (passing his bounds, and swallowing whole Provinces in
the bottom of the deep) devour them up; When you see an Earthquake make
Kingdoms tremble, and cause horrid devastations of whole Countries; then (I
say) it is permitted to the People to murmr? Do you not discern the contrary,
how in these occurrences they redouble their vows and prayers, and that they
are never more obedient to God, then at such a time, as if God had forsaken his
providence of the Universe? and when it shall so happen, that Heaven (for the
punishment of your sins) gives you a Prince under whose Reign policy and
prudence are not well observed, during whose Government Foreign and Civil
Wars devour all with cruel ravages; it belongs not then to you to reprehend
and condemn your Sovereign; for, is he feeble? then you ought to sustain him:
is he unfortunate? you ought to bemoane him: is he wicked? you ought to look
upon him as a scourge and chastisement sent from Heaven, and to wait with
Patience for a remedy from that hand, which has caused your evil. For when a
Prince commands an Army, and gives Battle; if it so happen that the Soldiers
perform not their devoires and duty, that his squadrons yield, the main body be
broken, and (in the end) after he has done even miracles in his person, he be
yet constrained to quit the field, and to retreat from his Enemies? ^s it not
the Prince that loses the Battle? Is it not the Prince that suffers the
disgrace? Is it not the Prince that is reputed vanquished? And that bears the
loss and infamy of the day? Notwithstanding, that by his own particular
actions he has merited to be conqueror? seeing it is thus, why will not you
(in such conjunctions) bear with the infirmities, and misfortunes of your
Princes, as well as they do with yours? Or (to speak something yet nearer to
the quick) who do you not repair these disorders by your own more exact
obedience? The Prince alone is obvious in a Battle to the infamy, Couardise
and misfortnue of his whole Army, and you are thousands, who are obliged to
strengthen the Authority and Honor of your King-which he cannot support with
his single valor. Believe me, if all Subjects would be loyal, no Kingdom
could be miserable: and if all Princes thought more of severity then of
clemency, there would not be so many Subjects Rebels. Moreover if it were
permitted to the Capritious people to take and give Crowns, when they fancied a
change; I conceive there is not a Shepherd but might hope to be a King, and
not a King but might be reduced to be a Shepherd; so unruly and uncertain are
their floating Judgments. But (to speak the truth to you) these things ought
not thus to pass: we are your Masters, and you ought not to become ours. It is
not that I am ignorant that God disposes of Scepters and Crowns, as he
pleases, and gives them as he lists, and bestows them on, or takes them
from whom he will, and what he always does is without all injustice; sometimes
permitting that the people shall elevate to the Throne, these who never
pretended to such a high degree. But when such an accident happens, it is
usually in favor to those extraordinary persons in whom Virtue has impressed a
Royal Chararacter so visible, that it were almost injustice not to admit them
Kings. To conclude, that which precedes, and that which follows, ought to be
sufficient to justify the effect, and it became Charles Martel, Pepin, and
Charlemain puissantly to erect a Throne, which was not founded upon a line of
right succession, yet even in this reencounter you well see the event to this
present has not authorized your design. The Engine of of this enterprise, has
been slain in battle; The Archbishop of Rhemes preserved not his life, but
three days after he had anointed the usurper. But it is not seasonable (to
day) to exaggerate the injustice of your proceedings; I am not willing to
particularize other things, and I shall satisfy my self with telling you, in
general, that Kings ought not to lose their Crowns, but with their lives, and
that nothing can dispense Subjects from the respect, and loyallty, which they
owe to their Sovereigns, nor any pretense (Whatsoever) Authorize Treason and
Rebellion. If sacred persons may notenjoy their particular privilege, (which
is derived from none but God) they shallbe exposed, more then others, to all
sorts of miseries; Their guards will appear to them instead of Enemies, their
Thrones will rather seem a direful precipice then a place of honor, and
safety; a King (of this kind) is no better then an illustrious slave, when he
shall have as many Masters as Subjects. This first disorder will quickly cause
a second, for, when the Nobles of a Kingdom fail in their duty to their
Prince, their own Vassalls, and Tenants will forfeit their feality to them, and
then Rebellion communicated from the Grandees to the Commons, and so descending
from one Soul to another, an universal confusion swells and devours all. Every
one will command, and no person obey, and (in this resentment of Levelling
equality) each person proves a slave to his own ambition, and no one, either
rationally Commands himself or others. In effect, this is the most sad
condition that a Kingdom can fall into, when there is no subjection, and where
(for their punishment) the Prince has not force to reduce the people to their
obedience. For mine own part, when I consider my self to be the Son of a
King, the successor of so many Kings, and yet, notwithstanding that I
immediately succeed not my Father; This Idea imprints in me, a strange
confusion as toward you, and an extreme grief as toward my self; for when I
reflect how the same Subjects who inchained Charles in Fetters, and gave the
Crown to Robert, placed Lewis on the Throne, the malice which they bore to the
Father, may it not easily fall upon the Son? and may not they fear that the Son
will revenge the outrages committed against the Father? but yet (may someone
say,) those who have searched after you, and passed the Seas to present you with
a Scepter, they need not fear that the memory of their ancient injustice will
oblige you to punish them; They have reason rather to believe, that this last
submission should blot out the memory of the first disservice: It is certain,
in the exact Rule of justice, no Noble Action ought to pass without his
recompense: and it is really as true; That no Crime ought to escape without his
punishment. After all these reasons, what ought you not to fear? and what not
to hope? you have recalled me to the Throne, it is true, but if you had not, had
you not been as Criminal against Lewis, as you had been against Charles? he
who gives to another, that which he has taken from him, restores without doubt
that which he has taken, but his restoration is not a free present, and he
ought not to expect thanks for an Action of that nature. No, it suffices if
one punish not the first, without intending any recompense for the second. I
may say also, that you understand not rightly all my present concernments; for
why? because you have not left me still in exile, because you have rendered what
justly appertained to me, Because you understood that I came to re-demand mine
own, not with a powerful Army; and (being tired with your crimes and miseries)
you believe you may probably disarm the fury of Heaven, by this Act of justice;
No, no, confide not in any of these pretenses, for if I had not stronger
considerations then these, I should commence my Reign with the punishment of
your treasons, I should send them to prison, who restrained the person of my
Father, and expose them to the most cruel tortures, who contrived and caused
his death, with the greatness of his misfortunes. Those black crimes are such
which nothing can exterminate; Repentance and tears for common errors, where
humane frailty may plead excuse, and not for Traitors and Rebels, nor for
those, who have destroyed ^hrones and Scepters, inchained Kings, and created
and protected Tyrants. Think not then, that by taking an Oath of fidelity
(which i^ your duty) that I am thereby engaged not to do what becomes a King.
No, I scorn a Throne where I should be a slave, and I had rather be obscured in
Prison, as my Father was, then not to Reign as Sovereign. Those people with
whom Loyalty is elective, forbear not to make their Kings absolute, because
they could have no pretense of Justice to do otherwise: Judge then, if those who
hold their Crowns from Heaven ought to acknowledge their subjects for their
Masters, and whether they ought not rather to Punish, or Pardon, as best
agrees with their pleasure. In a word, I find it far more glorious to be a
loyal Subject, then to be a King disobeyed. Prepare then your selves to render
me all that obedience which you owe me, and (without farther informing you
whether you are to hope more for Clemency or Justice) resolve your selves to
an absolute submission. I know well some peevish Politicians will censure, that
I act not as I ought in this conjuncture, and that I should reflect on former
passages with some sweetness, and gratify you with Presents, to encourage you
with future hopes, but I presume my Policy is more generous, and more secure
then theirs; for if I had so persuaded you, perhaps you would have believed me
to have been more fit to wear my Fathers Irons then his Crown; and would have
more suspected me of weakness and dissimulation; this excessive indulgence
would give you more of fear, and me less of honor and estimation: I (being
then so far from following such Maxims) tell you once more, that I declare my
self to be your King. And (without farther capitulation with you) I ascend the
Throne by the steps of mine own Authority as Soveraignly, as if not recalled by
you at all. Hitherto I have let you know I am not ignorant how far the duty of
Subjects ought to bend: But moreover I judge it fit to acquaint you to what
degree Sovereign Clemency may extend it self; to this end, that by that
resentment, you may reasonably know what to fear and what to hope. Know then,
that although a Prince may justly punish Traitors, he may likewise pardon
penitent offenders, principally then, when he discernes his pardon shall
reclaim insolency to obedience, and fidelity: For, seeing Kings are the
Fathers of the people, they ought not always to be too severe in Justice; and
seeing that a Prince may afford grace and pardon to his enemies, he may without
doubt show pity and mercy to his own Subjects: He cannot well punish them
all, but must (in part) enfeeble himself; nor sluice out their blood without
emptying his own veins; wherefore he ought to spare them as far as Reason and
Justice can make the way passable. When then a particular accident grows up
against a Prince, or State, it may suffice that the heads of some chief
offenders be sacrificed to a reparation, and that by some severe examples
others may be instructed with examplarie terror. But seeing that the number of
the offenders may prove infinite, and if all should be punished, a desolation of
entire Provinces might succeed, and consequently more men be lost then 15 main
Battails could devour, so that the piles of dead corpse should make mountains,
and severe execution of revenge cause Rivers of blood: In such considerations
(I say) it may be better to use a greater example of Clemency, then of
Justice, and hazard something, rather then to lose the lives of so many
miserable souls; and there cannot be a greater Victory then to vanquish ones
own Passion in such dangerous conjunctures. Fear not then that I shall abuse my
Authority, since if I should punish all who have offended, I should reduce my
Kingdom to a forlorn Desert: For who is there among you that has not failed
of his duty? Some have done mischief, others have desired it, or at least
permitted it to be acted; some have assisted Robert, others have directly
fought against their King; some have most perfidiously laid their hands upon
their Anointed Lord, and committed a sacred person into Prison; and others have
(at least) forsaken him. The public good is the pretext of all things, but
Rebellion alone is the Mother of that horrid Monster. The Nobles agitated (as
they did) for their own interest, and the people by their madness, and
unadvisednesse, seconded their fury, and put in execution the intentions of the
Paricides: Your Wives and your Children are not exempt from these crimes,
seeing (without doubt) they made vows for their Parents offending, and prayers
against their Prince. Whereas then I cannot punish you all, but that I must
utterly exterterminate you; it rests at my choice, whether I would become a
King without Subjects, or to pardon you out of pure grace and bounty, and not
by Obligation. It may be that during your lives you may repent you of your
ancient crimes, and become as faithful as you have been disobedient. But
(perhaps you will tell me) as to our selves, we have repented formerly before
we sent to you to come, and receive the Scepter which belongs to you. It Is
true, it may be as you have said, and that I have considered your Addresses to
me were to make reparation of what formerly passed, and that with those hands
you would advance to the Throne his Son whose Father you had barbarously
removed. But (after all) whosoever can abandon the path of Virtue to make
choice of that of Vice, can again embrace that occasion if presented. Wherefore
you owe greater obligation to me then I can confidence to you; for had I not
resolved to show Grace and Pardon, the great number of Nobles which the King of
England, my Uncle, has presented to me to attend my person, had not come
without Soldiers; each one of these who incircle me have Troops at their
command; and I would not have received my Fathers Crown but in the head of a
victorious Army, in the midst of a Field covered with dead, and dying men,
bedewed with the blood of ten thousand Rebels; I would have been the Conqueror
of my Kingdom, and not have mounted unto the Throne supported by the same
hands who snatched it from my Fathers head. But I call to mind I am your King,
as you are also my Subjects, and in this relation I can love you yet, as guilty
as you are; I can have pity for your errors, and kindness for your
obstinacy; and I will not put my self into a condition of sadness after the
Victory: I am then come to you without an Army, to receive what is mine. This
Action (without doubt) is hardy, bold, and well deserves glory; and is
sufficiently obliging to demerit your acknowledgement in all degrees of
fidelity. Before that you were criminous, the Divine and humane right conjured
you not to forsake your Prince; but this day a new obligation chaineth you to
more strict obedience. It is not enough alone to be faithful, so to satisfy
your duty; but it is your part to blot out the memory of what is past, and to
justify what is present; you ought not to look on me merely as your King, but
as a King of your own choice, as a King who has pardoned you, as a King who
consideth in you, who now is commending his person into your hands, and commits
the very care of his life to your protection, next to Heaven: Study then to
gratify such pressing endearments, and provoke not the wrath of Heaven upon
your heads by new Rebellions. Those who have examined your by past actions,
approve not (doubtless) that resolution that I have taken to return into
France as I have done; for (they will tell me) what confidence can you have in
those who have had no regard to their lawful Sovereign? They pretend much to
desire your presence, but their fears exceed their desires: And it is rather
to secure your person, then to advance your Scepter; that though you are this
day recalled, yet as long as your youth continued, they suffered you to live in
exile, and obeyed Robert; but he being dead (at present) and they seeing that
you were in a condition to obtain by force that which they now offer, they
seem to repent, not so much regarding your loss, as themselves. Behold the
reasons which have here contested with my resolution, which (seeing they are
not without some rational ground) I have not desisted to persuade my self,
and in that double choice, whether to make a War with you, or confide in you, I
have chose the latter as more glorious, and I love rather to hazard my person
then the destruction of all my Kingdoms. Those who taught me the art to Reign,
have well foreseen the Exigencies to which I am now reduced, and therefore
without doubt they took so much care to advise me what I ought to do in
justice, and what I might be allowed to do in Clemency; These two Virtues
appear as contraries, but are not; they accord easily in the heart of a Prince.
They mutually give place each one to the other in the Empire of his Soul,
according to the diverse occasions which are presented, for he ought always to
abound in Clemency, and he ought not likewise to be ever too severe with the
strict measure of justice. Mercy and justice are two excellent Virtues, but
prudence ought to employ them both: And the Princes sole Will, ought to be the
only rule to guide them. Having then conjured you to an equal confidence in
me, as I have in you, let an Act of oblivion pass, and let us remember no more
former crimes, unless it be to prevent relapses. Let us not look on the Tomb
of Charles, but merely to bedew it with the tears of tender repentance: Not to
make it an Altar whereupon to sacrifice his Enemies; let us Raze to the ground
those horrid Cells which served for his imprisonment, thereby (if possible) to
destroy the memory, and not to leave a mark or point to posterity of those
black crimes; let us ascend the Throne with as much splendour as if it had never
been profaned, and let us Reign (if possible) with more honor and
tranquillity then the late King my Sovereign did. But do not think I shall be
able to effect it without the aid and succors of my Subjects; deceive not your
selves, the valor and prudence of the Prince are not sufficient of themselves
to make a Kingdom happy: The Subjects ought to contribute their proportions.
The Nobles are to offer their loyal obedience, and the people to follow their
good example, and both degrees ought to be united in virtue: for otherwise he
who gives Victory and Masters Fortune, will approve the virtue of the Prince
in punishing the vice of the Subjects. Those who are valiant, do not always
gain the Battle; and those who are wise, are not allwaies for^unate: However
let us place our selves in such a capacity, that we may be successful, though
we cannot merit it. See here what your Prince has said unto you, who in Liew
of punishing you, has pardoned you; instead of fighting with you, prepares to
defend you; instead of being your Enemy, becomes your Conservator, and who by
his own birth and your choice, is now your Lord, your Master, and your King.
These two qualities permit me not to Capitulate farther with you: It suffices
that I only add this; That I admit you to hope for clemency, whilst I
Reign, as I wish you to fear allwaies my justice, and beware that you put not
your selves in a condition to make trial of the second, or of losing the
former.

The Censure on LEWIS the Fourth.
I Doubt not but many will censure that in this discourse I have confounded two
great Virtues, and that I have mistaken generosity for prudence. Others will
conclude this Action of our LEWIS the fourth, as savouring more of the
fierceness and impetuosity of youth, then of the Sage and orderly conduct of a
skillfull politician. And they may seem to speak truly (if their examination of
the passages be only superficial and slight) and the Objection appear
equitable; And then (consequently) that I could not handsomely range this
illustrious Prince amongst those who have exactly followed the Precepts and
Rules of true policy, which is the Mistress that guides Royal affairs with
least danger. What State-prudence (will some Politician object) counseled this
young Monarch to speak to his Subjects so high, when he was so low? and having
scarce got well on horseback, thus to salute his Subjects, who had their Arms
in their hands? Rebels, Subjects, who had lately tumbled his Father from the
Throne; who had torn the Crown from off his sacred head, changed his Scepter
into Chains, and his Palace into a Prison? might not this bold entrance to the
Throne have rather provoked them to desperation then obedience? and raised a
new tempest which could not be appeased, without much difficulty? might not
this noise have served to awaken them to fresh jealousies and fears, which
their own prudence should have taught them? Certainly this objection (at first
view) seems invincible, that Lewis did not appear so discreet and judicious as
his condition required: And that I was little less, who presumed to rank and
reckon this Frince amongst those, who had exactly learned the Art of Reigning
over a Kingdom. Notwithstanding, he failed not in his Kingly craft, and (if my
reason deceive me not) I am not guily of any mistake in this decision; for
whosoever shall examine this great Action from the bottom, and weigh the
Arguments maturely, will be convinced of this opinion, and neither condemn my
judgment, nor the Resolution of Lewis in this eminent Action. The Counsels of
Prudence prove different according to several conjunctures of occasions, and
ought to change their countenances according to the present diversities, and
important alterations of affairs. And, as hardy and bold resolutions are not
always seasonable, so neither are timorous and fearful proceedings ever wise
and safe; That Politician who trembles, and is not confident; who dares do
nothing generously and stoutly for fear he may prove too rash and
inconsiderate, shall be seldom fortunate; he is too speculative a
Contemplator, and proves rarely quick and active. And whiles he amuseth himself
with curious considerations whether he should, or should not undertake the
enterprise, whether he should speak or be silent, be an industrious actor, or a
dull flegmatique Spectator; The opportunity (by this time) may be well lost,
the Stars change their scituations, Aspects alter, and so the fatal moment
whereon depended the good or ill success of a grand design slip clean away
without advantage. That Philosopher (whom some censured as over-wise) found
that his tedious doting on too much consideration brought forth no fruit, but
folly; and that his most subtle conclusions, were no better than fancies and
dreams of one newly awaked out of sleep. The Augurs telling an old Captain that
the Pullets would not eat; he quickly discerned the mystery, and answered, If
they would not eat except they drank, they should have their fill, and so
caused them to be flung into the Sea; at which summons he gave battle to his
Enemies and gained the day. An old Soldier told his General, the Enemies were
twentytimes more then they; but he replied gallantly; And for how many do
then account me? Another told his General that the Enemy darted Arrows like
showers of Hail; he replied instantly, it is so much the better for us, we shall
fight against empty quivers, and but shadows of men. The Policy of high borne
Heroes, and low hearted Peasants is not the same. The Mariners dispute in one
fashion aboard their Ships, and the Commanders and Soldiers after another in
their Trenches. And as these persons are very distinct, and different in their
qualities, so are they in their Counsels, and Agitations. Those who walk on
dangerous Precipices, ought to march boldly, if they intend to pass securely.
And in those Attempts, he who stays to measure the depth of peril in his way,
either will prove so fearful as not to adventure; or else will be in great
danger of a ruinous fall. To judge then of the Action of Lewis the fourth, a
man ought to consider what this Prince preponderated, how his Fathers
gentleness and civility was his ruin: That he spoke to the same Rebels who had
ravished his Fathers Crown from his head, and deprived his person of his
liberty: And that by the same capricious humor they recalled the Son who had
destroyed the Father; and lest that might ranckle and swell again, and so
infect and destroy the Son as it had the Father, it concerned him then to let
them know, that he came now to inherit his Fathers Kingdom, and not his
infirmities: That though first impressions may exchange, or obliterate ill
humors, yet it is with great hazard and difficulty. Wherefore it was more
important to his purpose to strike deeper at the rootat first, to gain better
advantages. If Lewis his feet had been seen to tremble when he was to ascend
the throne, he must then have discovered a capacity to fall again. If he had
received the crown with a dull and phlegmatic deportment, he had been rather
made a King by his Lords and Masters then his Subjects; and he would have
unfolded to his People the passion of cowardly fear, rather then have procured
due regard from them. We may conclude then, that this Prince was wise, in being
stout and gallant in this occasion; that his Policy was not indiscreet, and
(coping with Soldiers, and men of Arms and Valor) his discourse was not
improper, as containing nothing that might give the shock to Sovereign
prudence; but rather on the contrary what well became the Grandeur, and Majesty
of a King. Yet perhaps some will say unto me, such harsh and rigorous
proceedings have not always had the best success; if Caesar had well observed
the predictions of his death, if he had better regarded his words, who answered
him, That the Ides of March could not pass, and were not yet come: If he had
read the Note presented to him as he entered into the Senate, it is to be
presumed he had not been stabbed. If the Duke of Guise instead of an haugty
reply to what he found under his Napkin, had speedily taken post, and fled from
Blois, he had not satisfied the States General with his own Ruin, nor signed
his death at Cayere with his own blood. All this is true, I must needs consess:
But suppose it so happens once, it is not necessary that it prove so always:
And it is more perilous to be stupidly silent, then to discourse heroickly,
for such reasons chiefly which I formerly mentioned. He declared his courage,
and his constancy: And Lewis did nothing in this conjuncture but what well
became a truly noble, and wise Prince. Nor did this glorious action relish of
any thing but what beseemed an Illustrious Hero, and a prudent Politician: O,
that Kings would more observantly regard the infusions and mo^ions of their
Tutelarie Angels, who guard their Kingdoms, and not incline, nor listen to
Parasites and Flatterers, who divert their good disposuions by the insinuations
of persidious, and pernicious Counsels. This truth found a great example in the
person of MATHIAS CORVIN, that famous King of Hungary, whose name was
Illustrious through all the earth, in so much that he ascended to such a
height, that his renown cannot but be derived to posterity with much honor and
glory. The Venetians were formerly in league with the Turks against the
Hungarians: they aided them to the ruin of that Kingdom, and reduced that
Country almost to a desolation. And having been the cause of the death of two
of their Kings, of which the grand HUNNIADES, Father of MATHIAS was the last;
yet notwithstanding (seeing themselves afterward all in flames by the Turks
their Allies, and ready to be consumed by a bloo^y War): They sent Ambassadors
to Hungary, to implore succors from this famous MATHIAS CORVIN, who after he
had afforded them an honorable Audience, answered them speedily after this
sort.

MATHIAS CORVIN To the Ambassadors of the Republic of VENICE.
IF the Habits you wear, and the Language you speak, did not convince me that
you were Venetians, I could hardly believe that you were Ambassadors sent from
that Country. And if the Robes I carry, and my Accents did not clearly assure
you that I am King of Hungary, I believe you would take me for some other; and
that all that you have discoursed had not been addressed to me: For what pretense
can you have to dream of the effect of your desire, and expectation, after so
great an affront and injury, as we have received from you? And if ye had no
just cause to hope (as without doubt, ye had not) why has your Senate sent you
on an Embassy so unprofitable? Truly the great reputation which your prudent
conduct of Affairs has gained you, seems strongly founded: And the
flourishing estate of your Illustrious Republic, which has been known through
so many Ages to have preserved her glory, and grandeur, is an undoubted
argument of your great abilities in such weighty matters. Notwithstanding I am
obliged to let you know (on this occasion) that though you seem to abound in
judgment, yet you seem to be but of a short and failing memory. Consider (I
say) former passages, and the request you make this day: Is it possible that
you should have entirely lost the remembrance of that miserable estate out of
which this Kingdom is hardly as yet recovered? and that ignoble denial which
your Republique made Uladislaus my Predecessor? The great Storm and Tempest
which was raised at Constantinople, and designed to fall on Hungary, was taken
notice of, and talked of in all Countries; and the formicable portrait of
Mathias Corvin Mathias Corvin King of Hungary
power of the Turks, as a swelling Inundation, threatened to overflow, and drown
whole Provinces. The Turk armed Africa, a great part of Asia, and of Europe
against us, and it appeared very probable that we should have been swallowed up
under the numbers of those great Forces, so prodigious, and unequal to ours.
Hungary having been as the Buckler to all Christendom, and an impregnable
wall, which was continually battered, and dashed against, by the savage Waves
of this unruly Torrent: This insatiable Usurper swore solemnly to rend this
Buckler into shivers, and to level this Rampart to the ground, which had ever
resisted the violence of his Inundations. In this mischievous conjuncture, the
young, and valiant Vladislaus let slip no advantage that might fortify and
strengthen his party to preserve them from perishing and ruin. And as he knew
how, that besides the Interest in general, of all the Christians in this
public affair, you had particular cause in respect of Friuli, which you were
Lords of in the Main Continent, and the Isles which you possessed in the
Archipelagus, he made and raised his Forces to greater strength and magnitude,
to oblige you the rather to make a League with him, both Offensive, and
Defensive against this irreconcilable Enemy. To this purpose he dispatched his
Ambassadors to you to Venice, and by them represented to the Senate, what that
Republique owed to the honor and name of Christians and put them in mind of
the ancient Alliance and Amity betwixt the Crown of Hungary and that State.
The Pope (as a common Father to the Christians) joined his importunities with
our requests, and used all endeavors to persuade you to a thing in which you
had (certainly) no less interest then we our selves: And to the undertaking of
which, Virtue, and Equity seemed naturally to oblige, and enjoin assistance.
Notwithstanding the force of all persuasions, and endeavors, we prevailed not,
but advised, and treated in vain, and you had the hard heartedness neither to
listen to our Counsels, nor regard our Remonstrances, and so refused absolutely
to aid us with those Succors, or Auxiliaries we desired, as necessary, and with
which we had so much reason to hope to be supplied. The excuse which you
alleged was, That it was neither fair, nor just to declare against a Prince
who had not injured you; and that you were not obliged to that. Nay, your
cruel policy was not contained in these terms and bounds, a bare Neutrality
was not sufficient for you to secure your own safeties. Nor did it suffice you
to be mere spectators of our miseries, but you were willing to augment them. If
so be that you had neither declared for the one nor the other, probably your
Forces might have given at least a suspicion to the Turk, and possibly caused
his Armies to have marched more slowly, in a design of such high importance.
But instead of an act of such a nature, you made an infamous and horrid
Alliance at that time, and utterly to remove away all suspicions and
jealousies, that he might not dread your Forces, you let him see your fears,
you signified to him, that we were not in hopes of assistance of any person. In
brief, you (as much as in you lay) exposed us to their rage and fury, and to
the eminent peril of all misfortunes, or (to speak freely) not only Hungary,
but all Christendom, and your very selves also. Now to what a height of
Miseries your forsaking us has brought us, and what sad events this
unfortunate War has produced, which we alone were forced to encounter, You
(Venetians) well kn^w, and all the earth is full of the reports of our
miser^es, though we (of all others) more sensibly find, and feel the sad
effects; since the wounds which we received, yet bleed a fresh, and time has
not had days and years enough to obliterate the memory, nor to obumbrate and
deface the representation and ghastly sight of those evil, and mischievous
Conjunctures: It so happened then with forces so unequal, and through the
inconsiderate Counsels of perfidious flatterers, that the brave, yet
unfortunate Uladislaus lost two Battles on the other side of the River
Danubius, where anin finite number of Souldies and persons of great Condition
were slain, or made slaves in the battle which was lost, in the plains of
Varne, and after that in the Battle of Cosobe, in the Country of the
Trebelliens. It fell out also that Valiant Vadalislaus lost his life fighting
magnanimously: And these two Plains were covered with the blood of Christians:
At which time the whole Kingdom was filled with horror and confusion, many
thousands were made poor Widows, which have sighed out their Prayers, and
sent their cries to Heaven against you, in regard of the loss of their dear
Husbands; thousands of Orphans cry for their Fathers, and Fathers for their
slain Children. And it might have so fallen out, that all Christendom had been
in hazard and danger to have been swallowed up, if the bounty and favor of
God, (which much exceeded the horror of your crime) provoked with jealousy
for the defense of his own Altars, for his own Glory, and for the protection of
the name of Christian had not raised up the invincible Hunniades my Sovereign
King and Father. But alas, these misfortunes which attended us with such horror
and cruelty, were not alone; other sad effects and dangerous consequences
succeeded in the midst of those great losses. I sustained the chiefest in mine
own particular; so that the Honor of that Scepter I bear, and that Crown I
enjoy are not able to poize my grief with equal consolation of glory and
renown. Shall I tell you? or am I able to speak? or be silent on this subject?
The great and invincible Hunniades has lost his own life by those glorious
wounds which he received in that unhappy War, wherein you were ambitious
spectators. He repelled the Turks a hundred times with his Victorious sword,
but at last not able longer to resist the slashes of their Symetars, he died
with those fatal strokes. Victory attended him a thousand times, but at length
(alas!) she forsook her Champion. He was a long time a Rampart to
Christianity, but in the end that Bulwark was levelled as strong as it
appeared. He Combated, Vanquished, and Triumphed; yet after so many Conquests
he was forced to submit to fortune. He met with a good hour to ascend a Throne,
but that high step was but a stair to descend to an humble Tomb. He made
himself a King with his nobleness and Valor, but he ceased to be a man by the
unworthy Cowardice of those that forsook him. He obtained immortal honor,
but (alas!) he came not to this immortality, But at his death. To conclude,
Hungary lost her King, Christianity lost her Protector, Europe lost her most
glorious Jewel, and Mathias (from whom you now implore assistance) lost his
Sovereign and Father. Judge then, you Venetians (if you have not utterly lost
the memory of my great losses, and your own in humanity) whither you have any
cause to hope for succor from me as you now desire. Consider if you have not
ground to believe that the blood of a Father (such a Father as Hunniades) be
not more loud then you, and more persuasive then your eloquent Oration. Oh! if
the Laws of Nations were not inviolable betwixt Princes, who make profession
of Honor and Faith; If the persons of Ambassadors were not sacred amidst the
most barbarous and least civilized people; The impudency which you have made
appear in your discourse and requests, might justly hazard your safety; your
fears might cause you to tremble, and make you despair of my Clemency, which
finds much difficulty to withold from revenge. But as you are Ambassadors, you
are in a Sanctuary which covers your heads from the just rage of indignation:
Yet since Vengeance belongs to God, who knows how and when to exercise it; And
that there is none but he who punishes the Children for the iniquity of their
Fathers to the third Generation. Seeing also that time has closed up that
wound which you have thought to open, and that which is the end of all things,
has calmed my displeasure, and removed the Gall of my resentment, we will not
raise those appeased Waves, but letting the Tempest and the winds sleep, we
will examine without Rancour or Passion former passages, and so judge better of
what you now desire, viewing with a disinteressed eye the injustice of mine own
reproaches, and of your unworthy Actions. It is certain (and experience of all
ages does teach and show) That next to the immediate Power of Almighty God)
this great and mavelous Frame of the Universe, knows no other motives to set
and put all her rational desires into action, then those three Grand Engines
of Jucundum, Honestum, and Utile. And how different soever men's intentions may
be, it must necessarily follow that their thoughts tend to one of these three.
Seeing then from the lowest to the highest condition of men, all do operate
upon one of these Principles, and that no design has its original from any
other motive; seeing all degrees of men, and orders of Creatures, Rational or
Irrational propose these as their chiefest ends, (as the Voluptuous design
their pleasure, the ambitious their glory, the Covetous their treasure) Let us
see by which of these three motives your merciless Republique could be obliged
to such unnatural proceedings toward us, and to be so full of inhumanity (in
so great a danger) to refuse us. For the first; What appearance was there, that
a people, Friends to Europe, a people civilized, and professing Christianity,
could be so barbarous as to take pleasure in the desolation of our Provinces,
and the ruin of our Towns? in the profaning of our Temples? the defeates of
our Armies? and the murdering of our Soldiers? What? was prey and Pillage,
Fire and sword, tears and blood, wounds and death, pleasant Objects for your
diversions? Could you take delight in ugly and extravagant pleasure? in things
capable to strike horror and pity in the most insensible Souls? the
Mountains of men slain, and the Earth covered with wounded bodies, old men
pulled by their beards and hair, and stabbed before their Children, Infants
snatched from their mothers pappes, and dashed against the walls, and mothers
dragged by the hair, and so piercing the Heavens with their hideous cries;
Virgins miserably exposed to the insolency of the Janissaries, and the blood of
grand and brave Kings powered out to the last drop, The howses of God
dishonored, his Priests murdered, his Altars defaced, and all those sacred
things in the hands of the profane and sacrilegious Turks? Could all this, and
such like objects, yield you any pleasure, and content? and could you look on
all this misery, not only with a dry eye, but with an eye ambitious of such
cruelty? as pleased with such horrid objects, and deigning such miseries no
compassion? Do not men speak of Nero as a Monster of Nature, and shame of
Mankind, who could look on Rome on Fire without regret and grief? You have
seen a Kingdom on Fire without the least touch of Compassion. And shall not you
pass under the censure of Monsters, as not worthy to behold the light, and fit
to lose that blessing with as much grief as ignominy? Judge your selves, did
ever Christians see their fellow Christians perish and moulder into crumbs under
the Infidels Swords and Simeters, and become so perfectly inhumane, as to
rejoice at their desolation? Did the Italians when they stormed the walls of
the Lestrigoes, and the Cannibals, and (as it were) eat those Men-eaters (or at
least saw them torn, and rent in pieces) find any content in such objects of
misery which they were forced to make? No, no, as barbarous as you have been,
and as extremely rigorous as we judge you, we shall not believe that men, that
Vene^ians, that Christians could laugh at our Tears, bath themselves in our
blood, and rejoice at our disgrace. Those that are incapable of committing such
grand offenses, cannot but think they may receive aid from others, and their
innocence makes them judge of others by themselves; nothing being able to
incline their judgments contrary to those natural inclinations upon which
they are founded; we cannot believe then that it was jucundum quid, a
delectable object which you proposed in refusing your assistance, and so
exposing us to the barbarous Mahometans; it being far from all appearance
that you should conceive a thought, or find any pleasantness in things so
contrary to humanity, and directly opposite to all that may pretend to give any
joyful content or pleasant satisfaction. Seeing then, that Jucundum quid was
not the object that united you, let us examine if it were hon^stum, honorable
for you to act as you did; and if it were by this motive, that you would expose
us as a prey to the rage of the Turks, and that you thrust all Hungary, and all
Christendom on such a precipice of danger; and (if I may so say) within two
fingers breadth of an universal ruin. Those who have most seriously examined
the consistance of the true glory of Princes, having discussed the question so
many several ways, and well observed the biasses of different interests, have
all agreed in this, that it consists principally in this Maxim, To protect the
more feeble, and to resist the more puissant. Yea it is in this alone, wherein
consists true generositie. It is in this disinterested virtue, wherein Princes
do find their greatest splendour. It is this unspotted reputation which they
ought to endeavor all their life. A beam of true honor, and which they ought
to prefer above that of their Scepter and Crown. In effect, all their other
actions (how glorious and beautiful soever they appear in the eyes of the
world) may meet with an ill construction, and without this receive an
inglorious interpretation. Conquerors may be deemed to be ambitious,
Peacemakers may be censured to be timid, severe Princes pass for cruel,
Clement may be suspected to be feeble, Liberal accused to be prodigalls,
Provident accounted covetous, Valiant styled rash, and the Prudent lazy. The
Majesty of Princes may be censured Pride, their Facility Baseness: If they are
too grave, the people will not love them: If too familiar, their Subjects scorn
them; If gay and glorious, they are reviled as incompassionate; if Melancholy,
then nothing will oblige them; If Prudent, then too full of craft and subtilty;
If Frank and Ingenious, then imprudent and indiscreet. In a word, all their
thoughts, words, and actions are subject to receive an evil interpretation
from the envy and malice of men. There is nothing then but the protection of
the feeble (when it is offered) being free, and without private interest, which
has no cause for an Apology: And there is nothing more truly noble then this
generous resistance, which (opposing over-powerfull enemies) is rewarded with
general approbation: And in a design of this nature there needs no Reasons or
Manifestoes to authorize the Armies of such illustrious Captains. The thing
speaks it self, each oppressed soul implores aid from heaven upon Auxiliary
Troops. And their high enterprises are not condemned of any person, no not of
their very enemies. The public vogue of the people gives to such generous
Princes the glorious titles of the Defenders of their Liberties, the Protectors
of their Innocence, the Supporters of to^tering Thrones, the Restorers of
Estates, and the Scourge of Tyrants. Posterity preserves their names, and
reverences their memories, as things which virtue has consecrated, and never
ought to perish: The Marble is polisht, and engraved to eternize their glory;
Books and Histories (of all Nations) speak of them in their own Languages;
Fathers tell their Children, and Children prattle, and after talk to their
Posterity: And so by this immortal and glorious Tradition, the honor and
reputation of virtuous Princes passes from Age to Age, to eternize their Fame
over all the World. And if ever any Senate found favorable opportunity, that
of yours might have seasonably afforded us protection which we so earnestly
demanded, and you so cruelly refused: We were weak, our Enemies were puissant;
they were the Invaders, we the Defenders of our Rights; they would have usurped
our Kingdom, we strove to defend our Country; they had no right in their
pretensions, and we no injustice in our Defense: What shall I say more? They
were Turks, and we Christians; they were ancient and natural Enemies, we your
Friends, Allies, and Brothers: And above all (as I said before) they were
strong and puissant, we weak and feeble; which argument was sufficient to have
obtained your Protection, if you had been truly Noble, and had aspired to true
glory. And what honor could you ever have obtained so great as that? to have
opposed and suppressed vigorously this torrent, and to have extinguished the
violence of Fire and Sword, which came to ravage two Empires, and ten
Kingdoms? What a glory would it have been to you to have arrested their Force,
and to have got Victories from that Monster who overthrew the Throne of
Constantine the great, and extinguished the Race of the noble Paleologus? What
Reputation had you not gained in revenging new Rome, and the Insolences of
these Barbars? and what estimation had you not deserved in the support of our
weak condition against so great an Enemy? To oppose those that do evil, and
to defend those which suffer, is a Lesson which Nature it self inspires, and is
taught without a Tutor. And (if Passions blind us not, nor disorder Natures
conduct) It is impossible to those who are nobly born, not to range themselves
on the weaker side, and not to oppose the unjust Violence of oppressors. A
natural instinct presses us, compassion forces us, reason leads us, and
(as we apprehend in our selves) such an Action of incompassion would seem very
rude. And humanity directs us, that we could not endure that ignoblenesse in
an other. Certainly they are not men, but cold statues, and such as the frozen
hearted Venetians, who stand still in such a Rencounter without motion and
action: They deserve not the names of men, who can be insensible in such
conjunctures; and he seems not a rational soul, nor scarce a mere Animal, but
a senseless stone, who can refuse succor to the oppressed when they implore,
and are in necessity. If it be a shame to refuse assistance when men are
implored, and not to oppose the injustice of them who oppress; how much more
shameful is it then, not only to see the feeble perish, not only to deny
them succors, not only to resist their violence, who devour them, but rather
to strengthen the oppressors, and (cowardly) to join themselves to them who
were too strong alone? Oh (Venetians) there has been too much of baseness and
inhumanity in these ignoble proceedings: and this action has been very black
and foul, relishing of as little honor and honesty as delight and pleasure,
unworthy to have engaged you in such an enterprise; which being utterly
incapable to render you any glory, will eternally cover you with the Clouds of
Reproach and infamy. For if you were our Enemies, why did you not publicly
declare and tell us, as the Turks did? and if you were our Friends, why did you
join with the Barbars, and so aid them to ruin us? No, No, true honor was
not the object of so base and black an Action, nor could true content or
satisfaction be enjoyed in an enterprise so bloody and cruel. Seeing then that
your undertakings were neither founded on that which may be rightly judged
Jucundum or Honestum, let us see if Utile, profit, and avarice has obliged you
to a cowardly acquitting of your Allies. When that Maxim proves true which is
ever false: That Kings, Sovereign Princes and Republics, ought not absolutely
to consider any thing but the repose of their own estates, and their particular
utility: When (I say) natural equity, civil society, the Alliances of Crowns,
the Conformity of Religions, Common interest, Glory and Honor, shall be valued
as things indifferent: Yet you shall not find really the Utile you may pretend
to in this unworthy Action, wherein you appeared. Is there any one who knows
the principles of Policy, and of that art which teaches Kings to reign? and
understands not, that a powerful neighbor is ever terrible? That it is very
advantageous, that Seas and Mountains separate their estates from ours; To
that end, That both the one and the other may be as bounds to resist their
avarice and ambition? and if a Prince less powerful then he, both in respect
of the numbers of his Subjects, and in the extent of his Dominions, lie in the
way as a guard to our Frontires, and be situate in the midst of two Potentates
as an eternal obstacle to the unjust Usurpation both of the one and the other;
is there not a clearer possibility of security? Were it not much better for the
Republique of Venice, that the Thrones of the Kings of Hungary shall not be
touched or shaken, and that the Valor of those Princes shall be able to protect
the Country: Then to see those Dominions environed with Janissaries, and the
Colors of Mahomets Crescents Flourishing amidst the standards of Saint Mark?
Know you not that their very neighborhood has begot an eternal jealousy?
And that jealousy of a Rival (so prevalent and too potent for us may possess
us with fears? Do you not consider how that such an irreconcilable Enemy will
never want pretexts to demand? And that success will daily feed new
expectation; Finding fortune so favorable, our resistance so weak, and our
loss so infinite? Will such accesses tempt a soul more moderate then such a
one as lodges in a M^ho^etans breast? Do you not discern that the formidable
power of the Otto^ans is like unto a contagious disease, which is best
prevented or healed at a distance? Can you Venetians believe that the Turks
should prove better neighbors then the Christians? And that the Policy of the
Alcoran is more persuasive then the Moralls of the Gospel? Have you not
experienced that ancient Friends make more firm Amity then new? And how that
the body politic is like the body natural, in which every mutation proves
dangerous? Do you not find that the ambition of Conquerors is like the Waves
of the Vast Ocean, which is neither willingly limited with Bancks nor Bottom?
And that the ambition of Mahomet the second runns as a devouring Fire, which
hastens to consume so many Empires, and so many Kingdoms? What security then
can you have in the amity of a Prince of so haughty an humor? And what great
advantage can you gain by this new Alliance, to engage you to such Obligations?
Can you hope that this proud Turk can admit you to share in his Conquests? Can
you pretend to expect a proportion in the spoils of Hungary? Do you not know
that the Wars of Nations Civilized, are waged chiefly for the obtaining of
Glory and true Renown? And how the Wars of Barbarous Nations are raised in a
design of Pillage and Plunder? As the sole mark of their enterprises, and
object of their Armies, who in their Conquests regard not the auxiliaries of
their Victory? and those whose ambition is insatiable, find all too little to
satisfy themselves, having no thoughts of contenting others? Who knows not
that avarice as well as ambition, and Cruelty, arries on the Turks with a
predominant inclination? that that Nation never acts by any other Principle?
And who can be ignorant, but that your new Allies will (at length) leave you in
the lurch? On the the other side, In the Condition wherein Hungary and
Christendom then were, might not Mahomet the second easily discern that you
joined your forces unto him out of a particular interest; And therein rather
sought your own safety then his glory? That you left us, to preserve your
selves? And that you begged his amity, to avoid his wrath? that base fears
made your progress, and not true Friendship or love? That (in truth, and
purely) you only regarded your own advantage, and therefore made a shameful
alliance, with one, whom you as much hated as feared? What Obligation can be
strong in a matter of this nature? and what reason have you to hope for any
thing under the pretense of such a favor? Moreover, when he shall observe how
cruelly you have forsaken (and that in extremity) your ancient Allies, your
neighbors, and your brethren, connected to you by the Ligaments of the same
Religion, Laws and Manners, what assurance can you fancy that Mahomet shall
have in your promises, having seen you violate such sacred obligations? And
what credit shall he give unto your words, having known you so notoriously to
forfeit your Faith? We may add yet, if that which ratifieth treaties, renders
alliances assured, and peace durable, is, That, treaties, Alliances, and
Peaces, are equally advantageous to Kings, Sovereigns, Princes or Republics,
Who make them because that equality is necessary, and reciprocal advantages
oblige the one and the other to an exact observation of the Articles concluded
betwixt them; What proportion then of equality can there be between the
Republic of Venice and the Vast Empire of Turkey? What advantage can the Turks
receive from your feeble Troops, who is a Conqueror attended with so many
Millions of Soldiers? what profit think you to gain from him who swallows
Scepters and Crowns as little morsells? Who depopulates more Kingdoms and
Empires then you have Towns in your Dominions? Whose formidable Armies cover
the largest Campanies, and traversing the mighty Plains, drink up whole Rivers
where they are encamped? Is not this your alliance as the oblation of a shallow
Brook to the Ocean, when you join your slender Troops to his mighty Armies?
and is not this a signal error, to dream that your handful of Forces should
be considerable amongst such infinite numbers? Can you believe that Mahomet
should religiously observe Articles of confederation wherein he could find
neither the increase of his profit or glory? To add nothing else from the
dangerous example that you (Venetians) have given him; what alliances may not
the Turk violate without all scruple? Is it possible that the history of the
Turks is so utterly a stranger to you, that you know not how that impious and
barbarous Nation make public profession of infidelity, and how they frame to
themselves such maxims, that, it is lawful for them to break all Articles of
what condition soever? to recede from any Oaths, and to violate Faith and all
engagements? and to jeere at the Laws and rights of Nations? Have you never
heard them call the Christians, Jaours, that is, Dogs? and from that injury
raise an argument, and consequently conclude that they are not obliged to keeep
their words with dogs? Do they not barbarously break Faith and promises with
those of their own Nation, as well as with their Enemies? How perfidious was
Bajazet, who, after the death of his Father, sent to seek for Soloman his elder
Brother, upon pretense of a desire to have him Crowned; And having abused the
facility of that Prince, caused him inhumanely to be strangled, and so
introduced a barbarous example into the Family of the Ottomans, which has been
but too often imitated since that horrid precedent? Orchan the second, Emperor
of the Turks, feigned an argreement with some Princes of Asia, thereby more
easily to delude some others; And after he had devoured his first Contractors,
with less difficulty destroyed the others according to the Stratagems of his
own devices. Did you never read (in the Roman History) the remarkable Emblem
of the bundle of arrows? which bound up together were not easily broken, but
taken asunder, each single arrow was frangible by the weakest arm? Have you
been so little conversant in the terrestrial Globe, that ye knew not your
selves heretofore too near neighbors to that Prince on the Coast of the
Archipelagus; But that you must likewise desire to border upon Friult and
Dalmatia? the Fountains and the Rivers which divide themselves into lesser
streams, are not much considerable: But united into one great body, they
compose and make up an Ocean which may terrify the boldest adventurers. You
may conclude, that if Christian Princes and Republiques held a Faithful
Correspondency and firm Union, both the one and the other might without doubt
resist the Turkish Power, and stop the progress of his dangerous Conquests,
with great facility: But when we see the Christians themselves divided, this
potent Enemy may with more ease destroy them all, singling out each Kingdom or
Republic apart. Oh, you Venetians, none of these just considerations have
prevailed to persuade you, being transported with the Violence of particular
Interests. The present condition of affairs was more Prevalent with you then
to admit a Praevision of future dangers: and your Caecity was so great, that
you have desperately cast your selves into an Abyss; thinking thereby to
avoid a precipice. Observe then the justice of God upon the heads of the
offenders. They (on the grounds of falsehood and imprudence) Contriving vainly
to preserve themselves from one peril, have cast themselves headlong into
another; Their impious craft seducing them to deceive others, deluded
themselves. Their subtle policy seemed to teach them perfectly the art of
Government, when the events discovered the errors of their maxims. It is true
then (as the Scripture witnesses) that God insatuateth the wicked in their own
designs, and disperseth them as a Clowd, and causes them to Vanish as smoke.
By all that I have said, it appears thereby, that Jucundum, Honestum, and
Utile, were not the arguments which persuaded you to this Savage action. I may
rightly conclude then, that by a mere inclination to an evil end, you were
willing to destroy us, and have found a Malignant rejoicing in our sorrows
without the Knowledge of that wherein consists true joy. Why was this evil
undertaken by you; Unless you had been borne to do no good? But seeing this
excuse is not sufficient for rational men, who act not as beasts, but
according to reason and election of what they voluntarily choose, equally
inclined to good or evil, vice, or Virtue: Are not we in a just expectation of
a Vicissitude, and Change; that Vindicative Justice may recompense all your
evils? We well understand that Martial Laws admit Letters of Reprizall; the
most rigorous of the moralists, allow us to resist Invaders, to defend us from
their Violence, and to repel their Forces; And if the Law of God ordained an
eye for an eye, and life for life in the punishment of Crimes, ought not we
imitate your selves, seeing the day is changed, and affairs have a better
presence? May not we now go and contract an alliance with Mahomet the second,
and refuse to aid you, who denied succors first to us? Might not we join our
Forces with his, giving him assistance with our Counsels and Soldiers,
whereby we might empower him to ravage your Frontiers, defeat your Armies,
storm your strongest Towns, inslave your Generals, chase you not only from
the main Continent, but even from all the Isles you hold in the Archipelagus?
This favorable Conjuncture may afford us an obligation to mix our Colors with
his ensigns, and so magnanimously march against that superbe Town, and those
aspiring Ramparts which obumbrate the Adriatique Sea, and command imperially
all the adjacent shores. Yes (without doubt) we are obliged: and as far as
humane reason can reach to judge, in the fresh memory of your greater cruelty,
you merit to be destroyed, and we revenged, and Venice deserves to be inslaved
and chastised severely, as a spectacle to all ages to come, to teach all
Republics not to refuse, so barbarously, and cowardly, their assistance to
their ancient Allies. We might listen now to these sweet temptations, and
chiefly to that to which the greatest souls are most inclined, Haughty and
pleasant Revenge. The occasion is now favorable: And Fortune seems to answer
us with plenary satisfaction: You have refused your succors, we may then
justly deny ours: You have made Alliance with our Enemy, we may (as justly) do
the like with yours: You joined your Troops with his, we may as equally join
our Armies: You aided him to our defeat, we can aid him to your utter ruin:
You thought you could destroy our Kingdom, we are assured we could make your
Republic a desolation: You have been the cause of the sad death of two of our
Kings, and we are able (if we please) to sacrifice upon their Tombs your Duke
and Senators: You aided our Enemy to rout our Armies on the Plains of Var^ey
and Cosola, we are able to demolish your high Walls, to burn your fair City,
and to force you to fly into the same Rocks and Caves where your Ancestors did
hide themselves to lie more secure from the violence of the Hunnes: Yes
(Venetians) we can do this, nay in some sort we ought; but God is pleased to
moderate our wills. That which you have done heretofore strikes us with such
horror, that we cannot imitate you: If you can forget that we are men, yet we
cannot forget that you are Christians. He who pleased to command us to love our
enemies, cannot but approve us in pardoning our Allies, how criminous soever
they have been. Seeing then (to make relation of affairs as they are) we have
an opportunity of Revenge, what can be more Illustrious to the greatest
spirits, then to see those who have offended them, reduced to a sharp
necessity, and become humble Petitioners? This suffices (Venetians) and is
enough to cause us to lay down our Arms, or rather to take them up, thereby to
protect you against that enemy which now assaults you. We do not desire your
blood to wash away your crimes, your tears shall serve to expiate. Those two
great Princes which your rigor hastened to Heaven, and laid in their Tombs,
will not condemn our Clemency, who, though they have lost their Terrestrial
Crowns, yet parted with them to become glorious Martyrs; an honor more
precious then all earthly glory: Who, as they are in the state of Immortality,
have no thoughts of Revenge: And it cannot but agree with their Celestial
Judgment to be least Vindicative in the way to Glory: They have poured out
their blood, and lost their lives for the good of Religion, and will approve
(without question) that we blot out the memory of our own misfortunes, as well
as your Errors, in relation to the welfare of the same Religion. Seeing
therefore these happy Saints have received that recompense which their services
have purchased for them, and that they enjoy a felicity which shall never
terminate, but be coaeternall with the memory of those grand actions they
accomplished: since they have received within the Church Triumphant those
glorious Palms which their achievements purchased in the Church Militant; and
that they more perfectly know in God (where all things are known) the Justice
of that Cause they defended: That they bless God every moment for the wounds
which they received, and the death they suffered for so good a cause: And
seeing that all good is communicable in its own nature, and that they cannot
but concur in approbation to what we now shall do in our resolution of so
holy and generous an ambition so suitable to Christianity: We shall not refuse
to aid you with succors, as you now do desire, nor fail to support you in so
just an enterprise. But, on the contrary, we are ready to pass with you over
the Danube, nay to march before you to destroy the Turkish Territories, and we
shall dispatch one of our Heralds to denounce a War against them, as soon as
the Spring approaches. We hope the issue will be succesfull, however we shall
not fail of our duty, and we shall employ all our Forces, and all that depends
on us to this purpose. But you must likewise for your part (all the same time)
advance to Peloponesus to cause a diversion, and to amuse our enemies, being at
the same instant at several places to be attempted. See (Venetians) what our
Resolutions are for the Republic of Venice, in favor to that Senate because
Christian, that is to say, to sacrifice the memory of our particular injuries
for the good of the general affairs, and private losses for public safety.

The Censure.
THose who conclude that the greatest Victories are most glorious, resolve
withal, That it is the hardest difficulty to command and conquer ones self.
And when a favorable occasion is presented of sweet revenge: That passion
tempts a moderate soul, and shakes the affections of the best temper. And if
the means of revenge be so uncertain, and rare to be found, it is more
incomparably difficult to refuse the occasion when it freely offer it self. It
is in this rencounter when the Spaniard makes that prayer, Guarda me Dios de
mi, God defend me from my self. And it is truly necessary; for if a soul be not
guarded with the shield of Virtue: It must (without doubt) yield in such a
dangerous combat. And if any particular obstacles prove more violent: How
outrageous then are the passions of Princes! And those who fancy to themselves,
that they can will nothing but what they ought? And when able to act what they
will, being in power, are not they most apt to destroy and ruinate those who
have provoked them? To restrain then the Thunderbolt from falling on the heads
of the offenders, is something Divine, or (at least) above ordinary humane
power. Execution belongs to the Hangman; but grace and pardon to the Gods. And
certainly the Theorie of this science is more facile then the Practice. Princes
seldom forget (in such affairs) that Justice is divided into two parts; and
that part which is called Vindicative, is no whit less equitable then that
other, because it seems less humane. Those who say they would punish if they
were not in choler, are as rare as the Phoenix; and History (in general) makes
no mention more of the one, then the other; that is, it speaks little or
nothing but of the first: For it is very difficult for the same person to be
mild, and mighty; to be able to punish, and yet to pardon; to be in a capacity
to revenge, and yet rather to relieve: It is very difficult, instead of
destroying of an Enemy, to study, and adventure for his preservation. From all
these arguments we rightly understand how perfectly that Prince was
accomplished, how great his Virtue, how magnificent his Generosity, of whom we
have spoken. Doubtless he understood not only the Philosophy of Aristotle, and
Seneca, but likewise the Morals of Christianity, which (without all exception)
are the most excellent and surest Foundations. He well knew that the King of
Kings is called the God of Vengeance, who reserves that punishment (primely) to
himself, as being only capable to render it without passion, and to punish
without interest. He understood that the sight of his Enemies, prostrate at his
feet, was far more glorious then to see them in their Graves; and to lock on
them weeping with their eyes, then weltring in their blood. That to have a
power to revenge is as equally satisfactory as revenge it self. Certainly with
what ever eye we view this grand action, we must conclude, that it was very
Glorious; which was not as the Painters Art, who by optical delusions, change
the face of things according to the diversities of several Viewes. But on the
contrary which way soever we look, this action was semper eadem, and most
admirable: Yet if we look into the exact rules of Policy (without any
consideration to the Maxims of Religion) according to those Principles, who
doubts not, but that this Prince did ill, and that his Progress herein, was
more generous then prudent? He was fully satisfied that the Turks held not for
his enemies only the Greeks, Hungarians, and Venetians; but likewise all
Christians; and that he designed a public ruin to them all. This moved him
to a generous Consideraration, and from former unkind passages to raise and
accomplish future advantages; thereby avoiding to make himself a sad example
to ruin his own Kingdoms, by endeavoring a revenge upon the Venetians. This
great Prince acted as became him: In which noble work his wisdom and bounty
equally proposed and obtained an immortal Commendation in the mouths of all
men. There are who say that Valor operateth in the Soul, as the heat of the
Sun in Plants and other Vegetables. For as the Sun exhaleth Poison from Hemlock
and Aconite, and makes who some remedies with the Virtues of other herbs; So
does Valor produce diverse effects in different Souls. She makes the Lion
generous, but the Tiger cruel. I conceive we may place Mahomet the second
amongst the Savage Tigers both for his ferocity and rage; whose power wasted
two Empires, and tw^nty Kingdoms, and consumed the proud unfortunate City of
Constantinople; with whose spoils, was presented unto him a beautiful
unparalleled Lady: She used her choicest skill to please him, and he seemed to
love and adore her. (For Tigers will love, though it last not) He treated this
beauty with the variety of all delights. His courage was turned to sighs, his
Valor enchanted with embraces, which infram'd him day and night with
inextinguishable sparks of love. At last, this insolent Conqueror was
vanquished by his own slave, and was a Vassal to that lovely Greek: In the mean
time his greedy Soldiers (fed with prey and Pillage) began to murmr at their
Emperors stupidity, and to revile him as an inglorious Commander. This Tiger
(at last) awaked w^i^ the taunts and scorns of the rude multitude, and his
rage being newly incensed, (shall I be able to speak, much less to believe so
horrid a Fact) he tore in pieces this innocent and unfortunate beauty, caused
her head to be cut off with a Symeter, whom he had adored as a Goddess, and to
whom he had offered the Victime of his heart a hundred times, he became
strangly cruel, and with his own hand stroke off the head of her who had
enamoured his heart. And, notwithstanding his love streamed betwixt her blood
and tears; He then said, here (O Soldiers) behold the subject of your
discontents, made now your sacrifice in my displeasure.

portrait of Mahomet II MAHOMET the Great, who was the greatest scourge to
Christendom of all the Turkishe Emperors. He subdued Mentesia, wined
Constantinople, overcame Craia, Subdued Pera, Peleponesus, and Castria, took
Otrunto, and so in going against the Caramanian King, died. Ano. 1483.

MAHOMET THE SECOND, To his JANISSARIES.
I Have ever believed, that thorough all the extents of my Empire, I have none
to my Subjects but Slaves and Vassalls; That I am the Sovereign Judge of the
actions of all men, who live under my power: and that no person whatsoever
dares to judge of me, The sacred Character, which distinguishes Crowned heads
from those of others, ought to be in violable in my person. It belongs not to
them who are to obey, to dare to Command, nor is it for the People to
intermedle with their Lords, who by all Rights may dispose of their lives as
they please; And if Sovereign Princes be their Masters and Commanders (which is
a right unquestionable) they are not (in any Case) to be their Judges. These
two qualities are utterly incompatible; It is then undeniably necessary that
there must be either no Th^ones, or an alsolute obedience to them, without all
dispute or reserves; otherwise, there will be neither Slaves nor Subjects,
Tributaries nor Vassalls; This were to usurp Sovereign authority over all
Princes; to disgrace and dissolve the Power and splendour of Crowns, and
Scepters; To admit of as many Subjects as Kings, and as many Masters as men.
Which disorder once permitted, a general confusion must speedily and
inevitably succeed. But (to speak the truth without ostentation) I believe few
Princes have better learned the Art of Government then my self. It is true, I
could not always obstruct you from that insolency which once broke forth,
sawsily to censure and condemn my actions, after you had so many thousand times
extolled and commended my enterprises, which heaped Glory on you. As for my
self (I freely protest) I know no just cause for your rash temerity: For If you
respect me as your lawful Prince, and as descended from the ancient Ottomans;
What respects do ye not, by the bonds of nature, owe me? And if you consider
me as a Conqueror, and behold me amidst my Trophies, where I am attended with
so many Scepters and Crowns which I have obtained with so much illustrious
fortitude and Gallantry; what veneration ought you not to pay me? Or if you
look upon me as merely your Prince, whose inclination is rather to exactness
of justice, then to any softness or mercy; And whose authority is laid in the
Foundation, and tempered in the blood of those who have been nearest to me
(though the Grandees of my Empire) what fear and reverence ought not to
possess you? And having advanced so much plenty to your Provinces, having
Conquered twelve Kingdoms, and two entire Empires, gained two and thirty Field
Battles, and fought in person more then in an hundred reencounters; Having
given such solemn examples of my Justice, which has ever appeared to be very
near allied to Cruelty (Especially to those who would not know how unlimited
our bounds were) After (I say) all these effects the splendour of my Actions,
the Grandeur of my Triumphs, the acknowledgement of my Victories, the dread and
fear of my Chastisements, could not all these restrain you from base and rude
repinings, but that you must needs carry seditious fire to my Seraglio? and
after so many Wars, so many hazards, so much pain and travel, because mine
eyes glanced upon a Beauty to murmur at my repose, enchanted with the sweet
charms of her pleasant conversation? But as unjust and impudent as you are,
see how after I have conquered others, I can as easily conquer my self: Behold
the sad Victory that I here present; and by the Victors tears guess at the
difficulty which I met with grapling with such a soul-inchanting Enemy. You
(cruel villains) know, that this fair and unfortunate person, without arms,
and without offense, has given me more trouble then the most potent Enemies.
Not able to satisfy your rage with the removal of my affections, I have taken
away her life, and with one blow of a Cymeter cut off her head to satisfy your
unjust desires. To establish my Throne I have rended my heart from my self. Do
you not think that this fair blood which I have spilt to gratify your
thirsty lusts, shall (sometime or other) extract brackish tears from your eyes?
No, no, you shall not be discharged at so easy a rate. You will say (perhaps)
you would have your Prince entirely without the affections of Love, and to aim
at nothing but ambition: You wish for War, and you shall have enough; I shall
lead you into such eminent dangers, that you shall see that he shall have
honor that dares to follow me; where, if you be not Cowards, you shall
satisfy with your blood for that which you have forced me to spill. I must
sacrifice at least a hundred crowned heads, if I shall proportion Oblations
equal to what you have seen me offer; and I ought to offer up my self if I
intend to expiate the fault of those who have constrained me to commit an
action so barbarous. Yet seeing in sacrificing my self I might lose vengeance
fit for you, it is necessary that I survive to punish you, to the end to make
insolent Subjects know how to respect Princes with greater honor, and to teach
Kings how to chastize barbarous vassals. Those who shall refuse to pay to their
Sovereigns just Tributes, are more excusable then those who dare to censure
their Actions, and to pass their judgment on their Sovereigns Government. It
is a thing very natural to love and keep Gold, Pearls, and Diamonds, which
enrich a Family, and serve for the convenience of Life: But to ravish Majesty
of her Glory, and explicate Royal Intentions with opprobrious Insolency, is a
crime as far from pardon as excuse: It could bring no advantage to the
offenders, and therefore the more irremissible. Should Kings dive and search
into the crimes and errors of their Subjects, how ugly would they appear? Is
there any one of you whom love, hatred, avarice, revenge, ambition, or envy,
has not transported to commit a hundred faults? which because they have not
offended civil society, and have not been complained of to me, you have not
so much as been reproached. And why then (unjust Censurers as you are) should I
deigne to answer before you (not for any crimes) For as toward you Kings
cannot commit them. Yet (not being insensible of what is past) What if I
suffered my self to be caught with the most accomplished Beauty that ever was
borne under Heaven? Trouble not your selves at the occasion of this accident,
that glance is over; you shall never more complain of my effeminate
tenderness: As is was the first in your observation, it shall be the last in
my passion. In the mean time learn from this lesson (sealed with innocent
blood) that I have passed from one extremity to another; be instructed (by this
fair Head separated from her body) that there is not one of you who may not
fall by the same destiny: And by this high, and great example, learn to serve
and fear those who can as easily destroy you. Of all the Crimes which Subjects
can commit, that which you have perpetrated is (without doubt) more directly
opposite to Sovereignty. To pass a censure, or to whisper sediticusly against
the Actions of Princes, is a sin so notorious, as none but you durst presume
to fancy. As for all other things which you might conceit against him, he can
preserve himself. If you should attempt his life, his Guards and personal
Valor might prevent your Treason and mischief; But from malicious tongues
there is no protection. Yet know, the more envious you are toward your Prince,
the more you you eternize his glory. And when your Prince (in his solitary
thoughts) is most serious for your prosperity; it is then (usually) when you
censure his careful retirements, laziness, or idleness. Not considering how
much his active soul contributes toward your quiet, nor his care to your
repose. Think not that the sacred Character of Princes (which distinguishes
them from their Vassals) consists merely in the magnificence of their
attendance, the puissance of their Armies, and in the riches of their
Treasures. No, it is not all this that compleateth the Majesty of Kings, nor
do these royal occurrences only command your obedience, and make Kings to
reign. But it is an honor and obedience seated in the very foundations of your
souls, in which garb you ought to approach to their throne with adoration. And
you are bound to believe (as toward yourselves) that your Prince cannot err as
toward his vassals. This may teach you not to intermeddle with his actions,
not to resist his Government, not to demand or Peace, or War, to will what he
likes, and to believe that his pleasure is not unjust. It is upon this Basis
of Loyalty and obedience that the foundation of Majesty is built; and whereby
it is solely preserved: Who ever fails in this original duty may easily fail
in all others. It is the Commencement of all Seditions, the ground of all
Revolts, the Platform of all Paricides, Rebellions, and Treasons. It is most
important then for all Princes to keep their subjects strictly to their duty,
which entertaineth a true tranquillity of their Estates: And makes them reign
and live as Kings. The mavelous harmony which governs the Universe, may
serve as a rule to all Princes and people of the World: Since the beginning of
all ages, the Rivers have glyded quietly without retortion toward their
Fountains. The Sea contains it self within its bounds, the Heavens are
constant and infallible in their motions, the whole course of nature orderly
obeys their primi^ive Commands, those streams which pass over the Gravel and
Sand, are not envious at those which flow over the flowery Meadows. The
serpents crawle on the Earth, without envy to the birds which fly in the air,
each Creature continues satisfied in that degree to which it has been first
assigned by its Sovereign; quietly resolved by native obedience, to render that
honor to the Creator which is due: And I wish that all people would render to
their Princes (whom Heaven has designed to be their Lords and Masters) that
which is due to them from their Subjects as their birthright naturally obliges
them. Then (without dispute) they might be more happy in their qualities; And
if the Prince be more virtuous, their obedience will but render them more
fortunate and glorious: If evil and wicked, the Subjects are bound the more to
conceal and obscure his vices and errors, or (at least,) so to compose
themselves, as that they will not discern any infirmities or imperfections in
their Prince to his prejudice and dishonor. For as there is no virtue, but a
vice attending, has some resemblance to it which every moralist cannot
suddenly distinguish: So is it with the Subject, they cannot discern what is
exact Justice: Or that Vice which so much resembles it, which is Cruelty: They
cannot conclude rightly whether their Prince be Prodigal or Liberal, whether
he loves Peace or fears War, whether timorous or prudent, rash or
Courageous, Provident or Covetous. And therefore Princes who every moment
dispose of their lives, ought not to be subject to their judgment, nor submit
to their Censure. Their business, is chiefly to study virtue, to practice
Obedience, and to refer the Government to their Princes pleasure; Commending
themselves to Common Providence of succeeding Events. Murmurs and reprehensions
of Vassalls never reform Princes. And they who dare to use such improper
addresses, are like those who throw stones up into the air, which fall on the
heads of those which cast them; who, if they wound not themselves, yet are they
in danger, or else they fall to no purpose. But (perhaps you will say to me)
our Complaints, our Murmurs, our Cries have rowsed your Valor from being
longer lulled and charmed with the embraces of love: And that you have not
only quitted the object of your passion, destroyed and removed it, but
likewise sacrificed that which we contended that you should forsake: at least
we have gained this advantage, that we have our desires and more then we
expected. To all this I reply, that I have done as much as you say, but do you
withal know the reason of this proceeding? It is to teach you with some
terror, never to presume to censure any Actions again: For (I lie not) in this
Conjecture you have most deceived your selves, you believed that love had
banished the thoughts of honor from my heart; That the wanton pleasures of
peace had robbed me of the desires of Glory in War; And that I had been so
accustomed to prostrate my will to the beauty of a fair slave, that I had
forgotten the art to Command and rule men; And when I lead the Damsel to the
Scaffold, you (doubtless) conceived that I ascended thither to make an
Apology as Captivated entirely by that fair Lady, and slain by the darts of
her beautiful eyes. But understand once more, You are too low and ignorant to
be my judges, and that it belongs to me to be yours. I doubt not but that you
will (with much difficulty) digest the strangeness of this accident, and that
now you acknowledge your selves not to be my Judges, but witnesses to approve
the Action which I have done in your presence. Some may presume in their
thoughts to account this as barbarous, others will say that the fair blood
which I have spilt, will blemish the brightness of mine honor: Some will
conclude that by this Action I have gained more then by a Battle; And in
others let thoughts be free. If I be not deceived, they dare not speak but what
pleases me, or else they do but whisper very low. This example is high enough
to strike a terror into those who have vapoured of their own insolency in
murmuring against me, and to persuade all Kings, that It is better policy to
render themselves formidable, and to live more in their Subjects fear, then in
their love. But if any one shall object, the severity of Justice is speedily
transformed into Cruelty: I answer; It is much better to think too little, then
too much of Clemency. I confess, Cruelty may make the Subjects miserable, but
Clemency may make them criminal: A severe Prince banisheth Vice from his
Estate: When the indulgent does tolerate and authorize it, and makes it his
usual recompense. It were better then that Subjects should complain of their
Princes, then that they should be forced to complain of their Subjects.
Murmur then (you Vassals) at my severity if you have cause. In the resolution I
am in, your accusation will rather prove an honor then an injury. I have been
severe to my self in taking away her life who was the chiefest satisfaction to
my own. And I do not think that any Age (heretofore) can present us so rare
an example. It is now our pleasure to resolve you that the Charms of love, and
the thoughts of honor lodge not in my breast at the same instant; Concluding
the repose of our present estate to be rendered more secure by so strange a
precedent. If I had admitted this fair Greek to attend me in a March, and that
her dalliances had separated me from the Councels and dangers of War, then
you might have murmured. If I had locked her within my Seraglio, the Jealousies
of my Sultanaes might have attempted her person, and your hands revenged their
Jealousy. And if you had been her Executioners, I had still justified my self
as Emperor and Conqueror of what I possess, though she were destroyed. But
rather see this inevitable Fate and Tragedy acted by my self in person. I did
believe it far better that she should fall by such an illustrious hand, then
to expose her (whom my soul so loved) to your profane rudeness. And as we
read of some Fathers who have sacrificed their own children gloriously for the
interest of their Country, I may do the like, and cause my Mistress to dye for
my glory, and the Interest of mine own Empire, without suspicion of fear or
ignominy. This act is nothing else but the cutting off the thread of her life,
not the shortning of mine; the destroying of her beauty, not of my self; the
closing up the splendor of her eyes, not the obscuring of mine own; and though
I be robbed of her for ever, yet am I not deprived of the variety of other
pleasures. Now as Kings live not only to themselves, but must render an
account of their actions, not to their subjects, but to their Posterity, and
Kings their Successors, (I hope) in sacrificing this object of my love, I have
sufficiently testified, that all things ought to submit to true honor and
renown: That this sole interest ought to supersede all others: And that no
other consideration should be able to interpose in a soul truly Heroic. To
bend toward the conclusion, A Prince who acts not with a noble resentment
above all others, is not worthy of the quality of that high condition: And
whosoever refuses an occasion (fitly offered) merits not to have it. It is by
so fair a temptation wherein you were so foully criminous, that I omitted not to
listen to your murmurings. Having then so cruelly commenced a War against my
self, it becomes me to continue it against mine enemies with an equal valor;
and it is your duty to repair your crime by their defeat; and so to merit your
lives (which I give you) by taking away theirs, by pouring out their blood for
sparing of yours; and that you expiate a pitiful death with an illustrious
Victory. Pardon (sairslave) him who has pardoned thine Enemies, our of mere
consideration to his honor: I have been an Infidel to true renown for love of
thee. I have abandoned the design of new Conquests, not revenged the hatred of
mine Enemies, and retarded the desire of Victory: But this imperious Mistress
of Heroic souls (whose Domination is so absolute) could not suffer thee
longer to be her Rival. She demands from me my heart entirely, and I have not
power to resist her: She has possessed me from my infancy, and she will enjoy
me to my end: I have forsaken thee, (it is true) but it is for that, for which
Alexander, the Caesar's, and all Princely Heroes of Antiquity have se^rched to
the d^a^h. Be contented then that I am rendered an Infidel to my promise for a
moment, and that I find it not ill to be longer enchanted or imprisoned in thy
beauty. It Is true, thy life must be short, but thy Hearse shall be the more
Magnificke, and thy Memory more illustrious, when I shall make the spoils of
Kingdoms pendants ^o thy Tomb: Come then (brave Soldiers) Come, let us March
to graspe their Standards and Ensigns in our hands. And all those Trophies of
Honor and Triumph which make Victories more bright and glorious in the peoples
eyes. You shall see that the Passions of love cannot cause me to forget the
honor of War; But that I know still how to Command and fight: And I pray
Heavens that you have not (for your part) forgot to follow and to obey me,
having in so high a degree already forgot your duty. Know (Soldiers) that I
caused not this fair Lady to dye, but as I found her a Cloud and Obstacle to
the splendour of my name. Look to it then, that your Cowardice Eclips not the
beams of my honor: For if such an accident shall arrive, nothing shall be able
to preserve you from my indignation, nor from the most exquisite punishments. I
shall then recompense two horrid Crimes at one time; Consider then, and be not
less hardy with your hands, then you have been saucy with your tongues. I know
well (according to ordinary Custom) instead of threatening you, I should gently
entreat you to the Wars, and suffer your affronts: But in this Conjuncture my
Prudence is more fit and useful. For if you shall prove Cowards, my Enemies
will punish you more severely then if you dyed in the Battle. And if you are
brave Spirits, and gain the Field, you may expiate your Crimes, and obtain your
Pardon. When one person offends, he is to be punished (without dispate) to
terrify others from being Malefactors; but when Multitudes become criminous,
it is wisdom to draw advantage from their strength, rather then to exterminate
their persons. Those who have taken the boldness to rebel against their
Prince being Soveraignly commanded, may prove stout and Valiant against his
Enemies when there is a power above them to force their endeavors. Come then
(Soldiers) come I pray let us march and fight. But as I have engaged in the
word of your Emperor, I will fight with as much resolution as any private
Soldier, and expose my self to equal danger. I shall pretend that you beat
the Enemy, and whilst I gain the Victory, you shall raise new Trophies to our
Crown. Such a success may redeem your Crimes from the Guilt of innocent blood
which you have spilt, and recover you to that Innocence which you have lost:
Such an act may appease the rage of your displeased Prince, and discharge you
from that Odium, Infamy and Tortures, which your black Rebellion has
contracted upon you. You know well that I have confined my Clemency to limits
of restraint, but my Justice never. Place not then your hopes in the former,
but your Dread and Fear in the latter. Soldiers (who are generous) ought to
fear nothing more then dishonor, and to hope for no other thing then Victory.
You may yet avoid the one, and obtain the other: But you shall not be able to
escape my revenge if you prove Cowards, not fail to meet with death if you be
not Victorious.

The Censure.
I Shall cause this fair head to be cut off when I please, said the Cruel
Emperor, to the Mistress of his affections, when he seemed violent in his
Caresses and embraces; yet as barbarous as his expression was, there can be no
Compare betwixt the verbal terror of a lust full Tyrant, and the savage action
of this Tiger Mahomet; The language of the first was but like a flash of
lightning, quickly over. But the wrath of the second was the destroying
Thunderbolt. The first motions of the souls and hasty rash words slip often
from us inconsiderately, and yet are notranked in the number of mortal sins:
No not by the most severe and strictest Casuists. It is confessed, that a good
man may have wicked thoughts, and yet those (quickly dying) grow not up to the
shape of sins; though their Conceptions be abominable, yet in a second
reflection the soul disliking them, and the will renouncing such sinful
Cogitations, it may be fairly granted that sinful thoughts, and rash words
suddenly repented, are very pardonable. There is no imagination so pure which
our fantasies can present, but conceived in a tumult, as well have their pardon
as imperfection: But within a soul, which radically preserves Innocence,
abortive Cogitations vanish away as Clouds: They are as the Creatures
Ephemeroy, which dye the same day they are born: Or yet if they have any being,
it is so exiguous, that it is scarce visible. But as for this Action of this
Monster Mahomet, it was not of that nature; He completed his Vilany by acting
what he had thought, and spoke: Circumstancing his Cruelty, with deiberation,
making no use of time to repent or return from what he intended. What his
imagination conceived, his understanding examined, and his will approved as
good: Commanding his hand to commit the Crime, which that member could not have
acted, but by the impetuous pleasure of the will. It was his disordered
ambition that transformed the Emperor to become the Executioner; Love was not
then the predominant passion, he submitted his soul to another affection more
powerful and Tyrannick; And the fear of exposing his authority to a hazard,
supplied him with courage to perpetrate that which I am hardly able to leave in
History; So highly does this Action (in my judgment) deserve to be concluded
Barbarous and unnatural. Policy is a most necessary guide to Government; And
it is then best, when regulated by the Maxims of Religion, whose sacred
direction permits not power to transgress beyond the bounds of reason, truth
and equity: Otherwise Policy is but like a keen sword in the hand of a furious
Madman. The thoughts of a wise man (where Religion is wanting) grow up into
horrid Crimes. And that which Philosophers and Legislators propose as an
universal good, turns to evil, and proves a plague and punishment to
particular persons. This Prince (of whom we have spoken) (if one so barbarous
deserve so noble a name) caused it to be written upon his Tomb, That his design
was to ruin Rhodes, and stately Italy. Let us not admire then, if one who
designed that his ambition should live on his Sepulcher when he was dead, stuck
not to take away that life which he feared might be an obstacle to his fatal
ambition. Such proceedings as these are much like to those of angry Lions, who
usually strangle them whom they most caresse and court. Those then whom such
Tyrants love, ought to fear: for it is a question not easily decided, whether
their love or hatred carry greater danger.

Now from this act of horror let us turn our eyes to a spectacle worthy of
Compassion, and from this ugly Monster (who dissembled Reluctancie upon the
Scaffold) let us contemplate upon a King of better merit, and so divert our
thoughts with more relations of varieties.

FERDINANDO King of Castile, was so far from being austere and cruel to
persons whom he affected, that he hated to be unjust to his very enemies. One
of his Captains named Corrall, having defrauded the King of Granada, and
unworthily gained vast sums of money by the too much confidence which he had
placed in his fidelity, FERDINAND his Master esteemed himself obliged in
honor to requite the injury: And upon this score restored to the King of
Granada diverse places of his Dominions which he had formerly taken from him.
And so soon as he understood how much the treachery of this Gentleman of
Castile had abused the credulity of the Moorish King, he committed him to
prison, he sent for that General (who commanded his Armies in the Frontiers of
Granada) to the Court, and spoke unto him as follows.

FERDINANDO KING OF CASTILE TO THE DVKE OF NAGERA.
IF the inconsiderate zeal of Corrall did not excuse (in some degree) as well
as condemn; and if I did not judge of his Actions more by his intentions then
by the unhandsome effect which followed, I should teach him by a punishment (as
rigorous as just) not to trespass any more so rashly against the honor,
reputation, and glory of his Prince, nor to trangresse his orders, or exceed
his Commission, whatsoever advantage his deluded reason persuaded him to
believe, that he might do, or had power to effect. Seeing then that some
shadow of good appears mixed with that which is evil, and his slight crime
rellished of some tincture of Virtue, and that Clemency is a Royal quality as
well as Justice, toward which the dictate of my natural inclination is very
pliable: I have resolved to pardon him, upon condition nevertheless; That you
(Duke of Nagera, who in this case appear more just then either he or I, by
detaining him prisoner, at the instant when he was culpable) shall make him
know at his deliverance, that he has at least merited a perpetual
imprisonment: That a hundred actions which a noble Spirit (as he was) might
effect, can never countervail his failings: And that if I did not as well call
to mind that I am the Father of my Subjects as their King, I should in his
person imprint such a bloody and signal mark of my anger and displeasure, that
all others who are inconsiderate should be terrified by his example, and become
more wise, declaring to posterity, that I never consented to a thing so
unworthy the Grandeur and Majesty of Kings. If this offender (Noble Duke) had
endeavored to breed division in the breasts of Ferdinando, and Isabella, and
to sow dissension and disorder in the Royal Family; if he had withdrawn my
Subjects from their duty, raised Forces in our Provinces, and armed my people
against me: I shall say yet further, had he held intelligence with the King of
Granada, whom he abused, and had falsely sold him more Towns then hecheated him
of by his treachery; had he filled our whole Kingdom with blood, horror, and
confusion, (I shall yet mount a degree higher) If he had attempted the life of
my Children, my Queen, and self, he had less offended me, and had been more
pardonable then for that crime which I mention here: For in those affairs he
had only troubled my repose, and shaken my power, but had not obscured my
glory, or stained my reputation. I should have esteemed him unfortunate, but
not so criminous; he should have appeared mine Enemy, not my Confident. But
he offended with greater dishonor then in all these Circumstances: And if I
had both lost my Crown and my life, my honor should have been still
entertained (dearer to me then both) which he hazarded to ruin. Oh (Noble
Duke) those who say that Princes love not Traitors, but their treasons, know
not rightly the secret inclinations of Princes; nor the deformity of Treason,
nor well understand what they say: However I well know that the heart of
Ferdinando, is not capable of designs so base and Cowardly; And he can safely
swear, that he equally detesteth the Traitor and the Treason. It is not because
I am ignorant how for many ages, interested and Cowardly Politicians have
established, or (at least) endeavored to settle as an infallible Maxim in the
affairs of State; that it is permitted to sow ^he Fox skin to the Lions Tail
(that is) to unite Craft to power, with design to prosper equally from them
both, as Fortune and occasion shall present. They will say, the Objects of all
Kings is their Grandeur and Puissance, and that they ought not to loose any
opportunity to enlarge their power, or forget any Circumstance which may serve
their design. They may yet add, that it is pertinent to use any means that
may facilitate their arrival to their ends; (It matters not by what Mediums
obtained) That all paths which lead to the Sovereignty of a Throne are fair,
and it little imports whether their Frontiers are guarded, or their limits
planted in fair weather or foul, whether by Force of Arms, or snatched from
others in the night by subtlety or craft; when the pretenses have been
Innocence, and the designs Ambition. In a word, such evil Judges of humane
actions, have confounded noble Conquerors with Robbers, Usurpation with just
titles, Good actions with bad, glory with Infamy. Such Statesmen permit, that
it is lawful to destroy, and to conceal the destroyer: They are not ashamed to
allow that execrable Maxim, that nature has made nothing in vain, nor created
poisons without their end. See (Duke) the wicked rules and horrid Counsels of
worldly Politicians; But these are not the guides that lead Ferdinando and
Isabella: Who, before we conceive evil thoughts, or at least, dash them not in
pieces in their birth, pray with all our hearts to God that he would rather
take away our Scepter and our life. How great and magnificent soever a King may
be (though a Conqueror) I hold a man of honor, and a Christian, of all persons
most highly excellent. Innocence and true nobleness are things of most
precious quality, and more full of Majesty then Robes of Purple or Crowns of
Gold. The quiet and tranquillity which springs from a good Conscience, gives a
sweet relish and satisfaction to the Soul, which no Throne of its own Virtue
can afford: And whosoever is touched with a desire of true generosity and
nobleness, can never meet with it, but in a participation and possession of a
Candid and unspotted mind. If the indiscreet and ill advised Corrall, instead
of those prisoners which he made me return without Ransom had brought the King
of Granada in fetters; If instead of the Silver which he stole from him, he had
brought to me all the gold which Christopher Columbus of Genoa pretends to be
within his Newfound World; If instead of those places which his Treason would
have given me, he had effectively delivered to me the proud Castle of Halambra:
If (I say) he had subdued unto me the whole Kingdom of Granada, surprised that
great City which gave nomination to the whole Kingdom, chased all the Moors
out of Spain, and driven those Monsters into Africa: If all these Great
actions had not been done by lawful means; I should have disavowed them, as
well as that which he has unworthily effected; and have refused those Crowns
and Kingdoms, as well as those Towns and that Treasure, which he so basely and
Cowardly obtained: But perhaps (will some one say) that the Theology of Kings
ought not to be so very scrupulous; For as their Condition is more eminent and
high then others, so the Conduct of their affairs is the like: that what is
prohibited to private subjects, is permitted to Sovereigns: And it matters not
so much whether the design be lawful and honorable, provided it prove possible
and profitable. Suppose we should yield, (as having suspended our reason) to
such Maxims of so dangerous error: Does not the Politician (in this Case) find
perfidious utility, black and odious? And when that position (which is
certainly ever false) shall prove true; that Princes never ought to Act, but
for their particular interest: What advantage may I look for, or what good
success may I attend? Nay, rather what evil does not my reason persuade me to
fear, and justly expect? Public Faith, the Laws of Nations, natural equity
ought to be sacred, and inviolable Bonds, which in all ages and all Nations
ought most religiously to be observed: These are as ancient as the World, and
will not terminate but with it; And whosoever transgresses these limits of
justice, is not looked upon only as mischievous, but as monstrous; an Enemy to
civil society, and a Common Perturbator of public peace. Such a one is a
horror to Heaven and Earth, and each soul looks upon him as an impious and
sacriligious person, who deserves not the Element of Fire or Water; but being
an odious offense to Nature, ought justly to have all creatures to fight
against him. All People have certain Laws and Customs which they hold, as
their particular proprieties, not like beasts intercommoning with each others;
Those Laws of the Persians are not those of the Turks, those of the Italians
are not those of the French, those of the Spaniards are not those of the
English; Nor those of Poland those of the Muscovits: So may it be said of all
other Nations. In this variety each person may be observant to their own Laws
without interruption to others, or infesting peace and repose of the universe;
Nay without so much as a verbal Contradiction. But it cannot be said so of
public Faith, of Jus Gentium, and natural equity; These are things that are
universally reverenced of all people and all Countries: And by Consequence,
those who violate them cannot expect but to be detested of all men in general.
If I should then have approved the odious Action of Corrall, my Faith, my Word,
my Integrity may come to be slighted, or at least suspected by all the Princes
of the Earth. Which of my Allies, in Leagues of peace might not fear my
perfidious underminings? And which of my Enemies (during War) would give
Faith to my Paroll, or affie in my Treaties? My most genuine and freest
proceedings would undergo the suspicion of treachery and deceit; they would
look upon my promises and engagements as baits to allure their Credulity; and
listen to my propositions as Fables and lies: They would credit that all my
discourse comprised under it a secret and malicious sense, they would strictly
examine all my words, scorn every particular syllable, and after an exact and
rigorous discussion of my thoughts, they would conclude, that they cannot be
assured of any thing they pretend to; And for fear of exposing the grandeur and
security of their estates to the hazard of Falsehood, they would resolve to
trouble me eternally. All persons are either my superiors, more powerful then
I, or my equals, or my inferiors: And amongst these three orders of men, not
only my neighbors, but all Princes of the Universe are comprehended: And it is
undoubtedly true that the first will resolve certainly rather to oppress me,
then injudiciously to expose themselves to peril, and to be anticipated by me.
In the choice of acting or suffering In justice, there are but few generous men
that will choose the latter way. And although the purity of Christianity has
left us a precept of perfection, yet there are but few Christians, and rarely
any Prince who is persuaded to obey that eternal truth, and to follow (upon
any occasion) such disinterested Counsels. To speak then the truth of things
(as they ought) there is no Prince who could, or ought to believe, if I had
committed such infidelity, that my ruin had not been very necessary; or (for a
general good) who would not think it a brave action to endeavor all his power
to hasted my fatal moment? As for the second rank, of those who are equal in
power with me, their perpetual observations of my infidelity howerly arming
them, will never suffer me to be in any repose, nor make any League or accord
with me. The least alteration between their Subjects and mine will speedily
be made a matter of State: The least disorder which shall arise in the
Commerce of Trade will be interpreted as an injury to the Sovereign: The least
Bank which shall be in dispute toward the Frontiers betwixt particulars, will
Alarm all the Country into Commotions, as if I incroached upon their
Provinces. And (in conclusion) it will fall out, that the hazard of a Battle
may decide the differences, and that the good fortune of the Victorious, or ill
of the Vanquished may bring ruin to both parties, and so calm their
inquietudes, and all their misapprehensions. For the last sort, which are the
weakest, though they appear most contemptible, they oftentimes prove most
formidable. For as they know themselves to be in danger to lose all, so they
deport themselves more cunningly crafty to defend themselves against the
oppression they fear, or misdoubt: Hereupon they endeavor to sow the seeds of
discord and division amongst the Subjects of an unfortunate Prince whom they
fear; they incite the Malcontents, and quicken their capricious humors; they
complain and murmur with seditious spirits, and interest them to their party
for mutual assistance of each other: Then they decry the present Government,
reproaching the Prince, as unjust and tyrannical, and so struggle to shake off
the yoke of their obedience, and abandon his protection. And if Princes be too
strong for these factious Boutefeus, then they gather, and assemble in
Conventicles; first whispering their mischief in secret, and after break out
into open Confederacies and Rebellions: In the end these unquiet, and turbulent
spirits, (hurried away with giddy apprehensions) redouble their natural
activity; and having a specious pretense for their enterprise, never cease, but
change and tumble until they reduce all things into confusion and disorder.
And having run into that extremity, engender (at length) such gross clouds
and opinions upon the Prince, that he is judged criminal; and outrages daily
increasing, the rude multitudes, like Thunderclaps, and Lightenings, threaten
a terrible desolation. It is in vain in such an unfortunate conjuncture of
evils to expect any succors from Neighbors; who (if not professed Enemies)
rather become Newters then Parties, or Assistants. This perfidiousness strikes
as well an odium, as a horror to all who observe it, and gains pity from no
person: Nay, it is a condition which scarce procures attention, much less
compassion to the saddest complaints; and the most scrupulous persons seem
satisfied, being spectators of the disgraces of a faithless Prince: Conceiving
themselves to merit respects, if they augment not their misfortunes, and
dishonor. This is not all, but how great soever their miseries be in a
visible appearance, the acts of Injustice prepare other exquisite and certain
evils. Princes are ordinarily the rules of their Subjects actions: And are as
the Primum mobile to all their motions: Their great examples are imitated, and
followed by the people; each one sees, observes, and strives to follow their
Prince as their guide; Complacency commenceth this imitation, and a submissive
habitude does continue it. If the Prince be virtuous, the people are of that
inclination: If wicked, and vicious, the Subjects are apt Scholars to such a
bad lesson. And as the Throne is highly elevated above ordinary ranks and
degrees, so are the Princes errors least concealed, and (by consequence) the
people speedily learn to imitate them, or study revenge against him. If it be
so, then what fidelity or confidence can that Prince have in his Subjects, who
wants fidelity himself? Will not such a faithless Governor, who fails to
regard his own word, teach his people the same practice? And will the people
believe that Rebellion can be a greater sin in them, then falseness can be in
their Prince? Does he think that by teaching of them that the Laws of Nations
are not sacred and inviolable, he does not likewise teach the way of dishonor,
and disloyalty to Princes? Does he believe (abusing the equity of Nature her
self) that the people can have any respect for his injustice? May he not expect
that his false and cowardly dealing wi^h his equals will persuade fear and
hatred in his inferiors? In brief, if good Princes have so great a trouble to
reign happily, how can evil Princes but expect to be destroyed with ignominy?
When none of these accidents shall arrive, our neighbor Princes shall live
without ambition, our Subjects without revolt, as having nothing to fear on
earth, and shall stand in dread of nothing but him who rules in heaven; their
love shall make them loyal, and their Princes Justice secure. Do not I know
that God hates the faithless, and their infidelity? that oaths cannot be
broke without a sin? And is not the right of Nations (in some divine
Relation) near to heaven? Have not I learned, that I should not take the name
of God in vain? And must we not then conclude, That in all Treaties which
Princes make, their words and intentions are as common witnesses of their
Treaties; whereby they warrant and establish engagements to each other? And
shall not he who is Lord of Lords, and Lord of hosts, as he is full of power,
be esteemed equally full of Justice? Can I believe he will approve the
Injustice of any in the service of those Armies where he himself is General?
And will authorize their perfideousness (who violate their promises) without
Revenge? Ought we not (in reason) not only to fear, but to believe (as a thing
infallible) that he will remit me to the power and fortune of mine Enemies, and
hurl upon my head the vials of his wrath and indignation? And that he will
(through mine own misery) render me a sad spectacle of his justice for the
enormitie of such a Crime? Oh (my Lord Nagera) had I no other consideration but
this alone, I could not but detest (as I have done) the unworthy action of
Corrall; and disavow his unjust proceedings. Yet (it may be) Corrall may say
(as endeavoring to disguise and extenuate his fault, and in some kind to
paint over the Ugliness of his infidelity) That had he dealt with generous
Enemies, who had had a sacred reverence for their word and honor, he would
have had more regard to his Faith: But knowing that (by many experiences) the
Africa of our age is the same with that of the former, and that the Punick
faith (sometimes so decried) is the same which the Moors observed to this day
to deceive the credulity of other people; Yet their fraud and falsnesse is no
example to any person of Honor. He could not believe himself to have erred in
imitating them; But rather that in this he committed a high act of Justice in
making use of the same weapon (of treachery) with which they so frequently
(though unjustly) assayl others to punish themselves. But in what School
distinction could Corral learn, that it was not lawful to make choice of evil
things for present advantages? If he who leads the way, throw himself
voluntarily upon a Precipe, can he oblige others to follow him? If the Moors
have been perfidious, ought the Christians to be so too? No, no, the Alcoran
and the Evangile teach not the same Maxims. Jesus Christ and Mahomet have not
commended to the World the same precepts. We are not then to act according to
that Doctrine, which we detest as abominable, and which we believe to have
sprung from Hell. These cowardly Actions, and infamous Treasons, ought to have
imprinted a horror in Corrall, and not to have engendered in his soul the
imitation of a design so Criminous. He ought to have remembered that he was born
in Spain, not in Morocco, and to have considered that he was a Christian, and
not a Moor, he ought not to have forgotten the names of Ferdinando and
Isabella, which certainly are to be distinguished from Abindarrais and Fatime;
And that they detested to approve an action which their Religion did condemn,
and directly shakes the Honor, renown, and Laws of Nations, and which (though
the Moors perfidiously admit) all Christian Princes abhor. To speak truth,
the Moore and Christian (in this conjuncture) have exchanged their Principles:
Have not men seen the Franknesse and ingenuity of the King of Granada in this
whole proceeding? And can any eye be shut at the Treason and perfidiousnesse of
Corrall? I am astonished that Corrall did not only not blush at his insolency,
but that he dyed not for shame in the horror of his own confusion; which he had
done, had he but had sense to consider that all the Earth must know, that a
Moore was saithfull, and that a Spaniard, a Gentleman, and a Christian had the
baseness to become a Coward and a Cheat. But he has not only deceived the
King of Granada, but Ferdinando and Isabella also: He had the boldness, after
he had abused the general; (And in that Action affronted you also who Command
our Armies in the Frontires,) to injure his Masters as impudently; And to
engage them in his persidious Acts and disgraceful carriage. For when he
addressed to me to obtain power to treat with the King of Granada, he spoke not
to me of any thing more then what your letters imported, mentioning no foul
design at all. He only moved that he might have leave to treat upon the
Ransom of some Prisoners, and the rendition of some places: And I was pleased
to invest him with Conditional power, which he abused in deceiving that
Prince. In the mean time, who could have believed a Subject should have
attempted so rashly a matter of so high a nature, and without order and consent
from his Master? Or rather who will not doubt but that I had the unworthiness
of Concurrence, if I had not biased my Course another way, by disavowing and
detesting what Corrall did? Now if we have found that men have slain their own
Sons for giving battle without order (although they were victorious over
their Enemies) What severe punishment has this undiscreet Commander merited,
who did not only this action without my order, but has committed a most
horrid fact, which is not only covered with Infamy, but which he basely
designed to obtrude on my Shoulders? (Sir) if I had in this action observed
reason and justice, Clemency and pity would have found no place, and the
offender should have received the wages, and recompense of his deserts. And now
who knows whither the restitution which I am about to give, will salve the
breach, and fully make reparation to mine honor? or whither posterity will judge
heartily of my intentions? or rather not conclude them culpable? And that these
second resolutions are but the effects of some remorse or poling? and yet the
glory of Ferdinando and Isabella is not of so little Fame, but that some
Princes out of envy would be glad to taint and obscure it with so black and
foul a cloud. Yet Cerrall may plead, those whom I deceived are Moors. I
answer, those whom thou did abuse, were Men better deserving then thy self;
because they had Faith, and thou were false. It matters not whether those we
treat with wear a Hat, or a Turbant, a Rapier, or a Cimeter, whether Christians
or Infidells, whether they love or hate; The obligation of Faith is the
chiefest Bond amongst persons of Honor: It is the very Ligament of Nature and
all society. During peace, what Commerce without faith? and during War, what
Capitulations without treaties? and without which men would be transfo^med into
a condition worse then Tigers and Lions? besides, the petty subtle falsities
and treacheries of private persons, are not compatible with the Grandeur and
Nobleness of Princes. Such poor Artifices become not Kings and Sovereigns.
Frugality in a Prince may be censured Avarice, and a vice, which in a subject
may be justly commended as a piece of prudence, and a virtue. In a condition
then so high, base and low thoughts are not to be admitted, nor any thing acted
not beseeming the quality of a King. And I shall incomparably loose the best
advantage, if I should but hazard that of mine honor; Which once forfeited,
instead of a Triumphant Chair in the midst of glorious Armies, and famous
Towns, I should obscure my self in forlorn deserts as unworthy to be in the
view of the World, or for ever to see Sun. The lives of glorious Princes ought
to be as unspotted as the purest Crystal, and mine is not to be defaced with
the black stain of falsity: For it is certain, if a Prince loose his honor, that
loss is irreparable for ever. The Crimes of private persons may be concealed
in the obscurity of their quality, and buried in oblivion as well as their
memory. But the actions of Princes whether good or bad survive to posterity. As
Pilots observe the Rocks in the Sea, to avoid them, so do the people the evil
actions of Princes. And as Fathers in the presence of their Children more
severely punish their slaves to deter their offspring from their faults: So
History immortalizeth the lives of monstrous Kings to prevent successors from
their crimes. Their memory proves an execration to all the Earth: Those who
never knew them, live to hate them: Those, whom they never offended, survive to
prosecute them, and will not permit their ashes to sleep in quiet; which is a
common Charity to all others, dead in their graves: They are deprived from all
protection, living or dead, and their Carcasses are insecure, and not sure to
moulder quietly in their Tombs. Let them then who are resolved to set holy
Temples on fire, and commit notorious crimes, that their infamous Acts may be
longer lived, follow the examples of Corrall, and approve, what his
Consideration undertook. But as for Ferdinando and Isabella, who aim at
glorious immortality, and abhor unworthy actions, they shall always detest
and condemn Corralls ignoble treachery. And they should as well condemn the
offender as the crime, if his Valor did not plead for Grace for his
imprudence, if Clemency were not a Virtue Royal as well as Justice, and did
not (of the two) more incline to humanity. But seeing no Kings are so perfect,
either in their Offices or persons; but have cause to address to Heaven for
pardon for many offenses: They are not to refuse others, humbly imploring
favor and remission, nor be inexorable for what they pray themselves. They
ought rather to apprehend by their own infirmities how to use grace and mercy
toward others; And if Princes expect their Subjects should tolerate their
errors and imperfections, there is a kind of a necessity for them to be
propitious to their Subjects, or at least to correct but gently, seeing they
are the Fathers of the people. That Corrall lives then, who is so unworthy, it
is a reprive only to render him capable to endeavor a Reparation of his
Crime, by better actions, and thereby to wash off the infamy of his
perfidiousnesse: And (in some degree) he may justify and manifest to all the
World the splendour and clearness of that honor and reputation of his King
which he had so basely abused. Return then (Duke Nagera) to the Frontiers,
where you commanded my Armies: make restitution to the King of Granada, of all
those places surprised by perfidious Corrall; satisfy him out of my own
Treasury for the Ransom of all the Prisoners delivered, and command Corral to
remain Prisoner till he have surrendered all the treasure he basely robbed from
the King of Granada. To this purpose dispatch a Trumpet with one of our
Heralds to the King of Granada to make an Apology, and to excuse the insolent
affronts of Corrall, and to assure him (at the same instant) that I have no
need of such ignoble means and ways to vanquish my Enemies; Nor shall such
treacherous falsities be the degrees to my advantages. Fail not in your duty
to our Commands: For I intend that all the Earth shall understand, that I scorn
to steal, or use treachery to gain a Victory, or to increase my grandeur by
dishonorable and ignoble means.

The Censure.
CErtainly this great action did well become Alexander the great, from whom
Ferdinando borrowed the last words of this d^scourse. And I do not wonder that
a Prince so high did so greatly value his honor; nor that his Conquests proved
correspondent to his courage. The pe^tie Artifices, and evil ways of unworthy
Actors, may serve sometimes to enrich the projectors with more facility; and
such sobbs and cheats are more tolerable (if ever) in persons of mean
fortunes, and base conditions, where the obscurity of their birth may conceal
a part of their shame, and an extreme necessity place them below the
cognizance of the Law: Both these qualities may frame excuse, and (in some
kind) tolerate, if not authorize the injustice of their proceedings. But for
Princes, Kings, and Monarchs, who have no other objects for their designs but
true renown, these base, and ignoble actions in them cannot but be famed
horrid and shameless crimes. Those Martial Laws which have warranted Heralds
boldly to denouncea War, have decreed their persons to be sacred, and the
same Laws do condemn Spies to death. Those Captains, who after the Battle
embrace, and caresse their Enemies prisoners, ordain exact punishment for them
that keep not their Paroll. In a word, as the Lightning still precedes the
Thunder, so Kings ought not basely to surprise their Enemies by perfidious
Treachery unworthy their Grandeur. Those whom Fortune has elevated to a Throne
are so rich and powerful, that in their Wars they ought not to have any other
end, or object, but honor, and reputation; and what valuation can they expect
by a perfidious interest, or by a base, and ugly Artifice? It was the speech of
an ordinary Officer to his King, I would use deceit if I were in thy place; and
it was a Princely Answer, I might perhaps use it if I were in thy condition.
The dark and lesser Stars as they are obscured with every Cloud, so their
spots are not visible to every eye; but the least Eclipse of the Sunue is
discerned by all the Earth. It is so with Kings; as the ascent of their Throne
is in the view of all the world, so are their perfections or errors equally
visible; They cannot then be too careful of their Renown. And as true lovers
are ever apt to be jealous: So Princes passionatly amorous of true Glory,
cannot be too scrupulous in its preservation. I know it is an Old Maxim, Give
a flying Enemy a Golden Bridge; And that Philip of Macedon said, that no place
was impregnable, where a Mule loaded with Gold can climb; And another
Politician asserted, That Children were to be deluded with toys, and men with
promifes. Yet I believe these Maxims are false, and fallible, and absolutely
unworthy a noble mind or a prudent statesman. But since that Ferdinando has
searched to the bottom the arguments of this discourse, we shall not further
engage in the dispute. And seeing we are at Castile, we intend to speak of
another King of that Nation. Don Henry during the Civil War having blockt up
a rebellious Fort, and the besieged having made a Sally, amongst others an
Enemy Cavalier was taken Prisoner; who finding his wounds Mortal, prayed the
Guards to give him leave to go speak with the King, that before his death he
might discover a secret of Grand importance; The chief Officer granted his
request, and in the presence of the King (before he expired his last) he
related with much regrett and testimony of repentance, that he sallied out of
the Town with express orders (as others) to kill the King; And according to
their joint command, they generally engaged; Then secretly whispering, he named
althose Grandees, to the King, who had consented and conspired to so evil a
resolution; as soon as the relation was made, the Prisoner died. After which
action Don Henry would never reveal to any one of his Confidents, those whom
that Cavalier had accused. And this discourse is to justify a silence so
extraordinary, which denied all importunities of his nearest friends and
Counselors to get discovered.

DON HENRY TO THE Count of D'ALBA TORMES.
I Know well (Noble Count) that the Subject whereon I am to discourse is not
ordinary, but I am satisfied also (if Prudence and Policy abuse me not) that it
is not unreasonable. In all the accidents of a Kings Reign, it stands with his
wisdom to consult and weigh those things he intends to undertake, whether they
be Just, Profitable, and Glorious; which three Conditions are very necessary to
Royal enterprises: and when these three qualities are first designed, it
cannot be, but that the Cooperation of all three will be harmonious in the same
end. Justice and true renown render joys full of Innocence, which voluptuous
pleasure is a stranger unto; and clemency in those who know how to practice it
as they ought, renders true delight, which revenge is ignorant of, how sweet
soever it may appear to the imagination. Before I can examine the resentment of
two objects so extremely contrary (which is the present task) I must present to
your memory, That a Cavalier pricked with remorse of Conscience, desired to see
me, and as he was dying, to discourse to me a design which he had to kill me,
and to reveal their names who had employed him in that cruel Office, at which
instant he could nominate no other Authors of his Crime, but mine own revolted
Subjects: He sallied out of Valladolid with others, and was not of my Camp
then, when he undertook this barbarous resolution. And it is with a well
balanced consideration (as I shall show in the sequel of this discourse) what
I have here undertaken: In the mean time let the spectators judge whether I
have not discreetly managed my power, being equally effective to revenge or
punish as Wisdom and Policy have advised me; or whether too much compassion
has not suborned me to Clemency, or a false representation of Glory has not
clouded my reason. First to consider the Affairs in general; it is confessed
that Revenge is sweet, and carries with it a Character of Divinity, and that it
is the most terrible Mark of the Power of Sovereigns: It is by that wherewith
the Subjects hearts are possessed with fear and trembling; it is revenge that
bridles Neighbor Princes, and confines them within their own limits: It is she
that aweth the people to a continuation of peace; And (in effect) she makes
Kings more formidable, to all other sorts of subordinate men. But we must admit
(sometimes) of this distinction, that amongst Christian Princes it is enough to
be of power to revenge those who prejudice the peace and welfare of a Kingdom;
who for some reasons sometimes may better be punished: But to imagine that
revenge is an act permitted on all occasions, is an erring Principle, which
evil Princes have established, as resolving whom they cannot make to love,
those they will enforce to fear: As often as the Thunder rattles over our
heads, it strikes a terror; but it falls not on all the criminous, because the
world is full of them: The Sun shines as well on the wicked as the good: God
pardons more often then he punishes; his Clemency spreads more universally
then his Justice; which Attributes, though equal in perfection, are not
equally and respectively executed on us. As for Revenge it is to be used as
Physicians do Poisons, (that is) in violent, and dangerous Maladies, where
every other remedy will be infective, and where necessity commands to force
and drive away one evil by another. Revenge may be sometimes convenient,
though not always. The destroyers of Cities, Provinces, and Kingdoms, who to
destroy one enemy commit thousand innocent persons to the miseries of war, and
care not for the prodigal effusion of blood to satisfy their rage, survive in
History, but in an infamous Character. The innocent blood spilt dies their
crime in a deep Tincture: And (in my opinion) such bloody Tyrants are not to be
ranked with noble Princes. But Clemency makes not so great a noise; She casts
a radiant beam of honor over them who practice so divine a Virtue: She covers
their heads with a bright Ray of Splendour who are guided by her, whiles the
Plotters and Actors of Revenge are inveloped in thick clouds of darkness and
blood. The one engendereth a birth of Love, the other of Hatred; the one leaves
you in tranquillity, the other moves you to perturbation; the one procures you
thousands of faithful servants, and the other stirs up millions of secret
enemies; the one intends the consolation of the miserable, and the other is
ever busy in the invention of punishments. Revenge devises Fetters, Clemency
considers how to unloose them: The one practices the filling of Tombs and
Graves, the other is recalling to life those who have merited the sentence of
Death. To conclude then rationally this point; Revenge is not to be permitted
to Kings, but when it serves infallibly for profit or glory: And that secret
delight which is inseparable to those who study revenge (as to punish those who
have offended them) is not considerable in the breast of a noble and Christian
Prince. It is so then (if occasion rightly offer) that if neither profit, nor
glory may be obtained, that the exercise of revenge may be prudently suspended:
And Justice (where these considerations are) will be no less satisfied: For
that which makes Revenge glorious, is then when a Prince has in his power a
proud and insolent Enemy, who being the head and chief of a Faction or
Conspiracy, deserves severest punishment, whose example may teach all his
party to tremble, and stand in awe, when they behold the most eminent and
notorious Malefactor amongst them so disgracefully lose his head: And where
Clemency may be interpreted fear or cowardice, there in the exact preservation
of the majesty of a Crown, it is more prudence to incline to revenge then
pity: For when one pardons, at that time, when it may be conjectured he dares
not presume to punish; at such an instant Clemency may be looked on as an
ambiguous Virtue: But when a Prince passes an Act of Grace on such considerate
circumstances as I have done, upon a poor Cavalier, full of mortal wounds, at
the point of death, and already stretched on the Beer, who expiring the last
minutes of his life, closes them up with repentance, begging pardon for his
traitorous design, and then naming the Authors, and Contrivers of the black
conspiracy; it would not only have appeared a kind of cruelty, but likewise
imprudence to have then augmented his torments which caused his remorse; and to
have posted him to his Grave, who had not (possibly) but a few moments longer
to breath: But I was so far from hastening his death, that I should rather
have endeavored his continuance if the cure of his wounds had been as equally
in my power as my disposition to pardon his offense: And certainly in his great
extremities the grief for his crime against his Prince did more sadly affect
him then the sharpness of his wounds. These reasons well weighed, no man can
justly suspect that fear or weakness snatched this pardon from my hands,
unless he will affirm, that it is a glory for a Prince to take revenge on a
feeble, wounded, dying Penitentiarie, weeping, and bleeding for his crimes.
Difficulty and danger equally set forth the glory of revenge as well as War.
And if Kings were obliged in policy to punish all indifferently who have
offended them, (They being naturally for the most part vindicative) they should
never want matter for their displeasure to work on, nor a plenary satisfaction
to their cruelty, if inclined to such practices: For there are too many feeble
Criminals in all estates, whose blood might he exhausted easily, and without
danger (their lives or deaths being indifferently in the Princes power) as to
the repose and quiet of their Kingdom. Now if the punishment I might have
inflicted on this poor snake could not be glorious, it could not have
redounded to any advantage. I have formerly told you that this Cavalier sallied
(as others) out of Valladolid, and that his evil enterprise was not formed in
our Camp; and consequently an example so severe and rigorous was not then
necessary, either to keep secret Enemies in their Allegiance, or thereby to
hinder the eruptions of their malice and rebellion: For they were public
Enemies who were accused, and who employed him. And this is (Generous Count)
the difference betwixt the one and the other (if my policy fail not) that the
one kind is to be terrified with fear, and the other invited by the acts and
grace of love. If a King receive intelligence that some notable plot is
designed against his person, or his royal Throne: And that the things in
agitation are not come to maturitie and ripeness, but depend on some
incertainties, so that his greatest Enemies appear loyal, as if his friends:
And the Bishops and Ecclesiastics (being of the same complexion) have their
hearts as equally divided as their Miters (their opinions in general being
dissentaneous) and no person having openly declared; In such a case an example
of punishment and revenge may be seasonable, and necessary: For if a Prince be
not sometimes active in revenge, his people will conclude him too timorous, or
too indulgent; and thereby be encouraged to a Revolt, which his severity might
have prevented. In occasions of this nature consideration ought to be had to
this Maxim of Policy, That a seasonable act of Justice (and thereby an
effusion of little blood) sometimes prevents an inundation of misery, and takes
away the cause of ample pardons, and unlimited Clemency. But then when secret
devices and concealed conspiracies break forth into public Revolts, and open
Rebellions, and such desperate resolutions have armed the Subjects against
their Prince: It is his business in such a case to know how to subdue
Insolency with true honor, and to chastise them with the Sword, as well as
how to pardon them. Revenging Justice is not always seasonable, public
punishments are most fit and proper for the Battle; and when Rebels become
vanquished prisoners, the surest second Conquest is effected on them by grace
and pardon; thereby conquering as well those who never came into the field, as
those who had the fortune to escape the edge of the sword. By this means some
are reclaimed, others cheerfully invited to obedience; and the Consequence
proves a double Victory. It is confessed, this Rule is not infallible; and that
some are so obstinate and malicious, that neither pardon, nor punishment can
regulate or subdue their passion: And as for Clemency, they are (for the most
part) deaf toward her mild and courteous voice (engaged wilfully to their
resolutions with some wicked party) but I know well that he who is not touched
with a just apprehension of his own error or crime, will hardly be convinced by
the terrors of fear; or, In the beginning of a Civil War, it is not wisdom to
make all those despera^e who are guilty: For what greater misery can happen to
them, after they are once engaged in mischief, then to fall into the hands of a
provoked Prince, whose severity will not hearken to a submissive Repentance?
This is the way to make them resolute even to the hazard of his own Army; since
it often happens, that the fear of an approaching death makes men act things
miraculous; and even more then can possibly be expected from humane power. To
rebate then the truth of things; Revenge consists not solely in the exercise of
punishment; but to have power to revenge, and to be able to undertake it with
facility; or (at least) without danger, is undoubtedly the most noble and
highest satisfaction in such occurrences: And there is often more content to
see an enemy obliged to your sweetness, then to see him expire under the
torments of a rigorous severitie. This example then of my moderation which I
have presented this day may be an occasion to disarme those who shall be most
violent against me in the remainder of my life. It may be in this very hour
(wherein I speak) some others may repent, and are consulting how to cast
themselves at my feet: And all who have revolted, hearing of this act, may be
touched with shame, or struck with confusion: But however if they are not yet
made penitent and pliant, (I said before) how rigorous soever it may be, shakes
none but feeble and fearful souls: But Clemency on the contrary is very
affective on generous minds, more then on others. Virtues are generally linked
in such a Concatenation, that what ever difference seems to appear amongst
them, they are all united in building up the same pile, and they have (which I
cannot describe) a secret union amongst them which causes those who possess
any one, to discern that they have an insensible cohabitation with all the
rest. Thus the valiant Soldier admires Justice in the person of the Prince,
the Magistrates honor Valor and Courage in the Commanders; all Noble minds,
who have Heroic thoughts have a capacity and sense of a virtuous example. But
you will tell me that which astonisheth us most in this your action, is not
that you have pardoned a single Cavalier, a Prisoner wounded, ready to dye, and
begging pardon; but that you are pleased to conceal the names of those who
commended the Poniard to his hand that was to stabbe you, and suggested the
design to attempt your life; since which time you have wrapped up that
secrecy in such silence, that even all your faithfullest Subjects are entirely
ignorant of those persons who were your chiefest Enemies. Some of you likewise
may object; what moves you to be of their party, and so to act against your
self? Behold (noble Count) these are the consultations and thoughts which I
read very legible in your countenances, and those conjectures I daily observe
through the impatience wherewith you have attended me hitherto. But before I
shall give you any more reasons which persuaded me to an action of this kind,
know this, that I shall be the most faithful of all my Conspirators, and that
in all my life I shall never discover to any one those who had designed my
death. I know this proceeding may be as singular as the example; yet I cannot
be dissuaded but that my intentions are rational; to examine which with more
strictness we must seriously consider the interest of the Prince; that of his
Children, that of the Families of the Conspirators, and that of the State in
general. For the first, it is true that it is possible that Posterity may not
know that there had been a conspiracy to destroy their King; and perhaps it
were better if it were so. That History (which professes to be impartial,
faithful, and exact) it may think fit (without any scruple) to silence those
actions which merit eternal oblivion; and whereby the memory of the Prince
could receive no advantage: And yet it is not so, because it is not true, that
wicked men conspire as well against virtuous Princes as against Tyrants. It may
be further objected, that such a Record were for the shame of those who lived
in that age, and were Subjects under that Reign; and it is doubtless more
glorious for Kings to suffocate the bruit of Conspiracies, then to perpetuate
them to Posterity. If this reason seem not strong enough to support my
resolution, let us examine what utilitie may redound by the publication of that
which has been revealed. You are not ignorant (since we are before
Valladolid, where reside the Archbishop of Toledo, Admiral Frederick, the
Master of Alcantara, Count De Medellin, and the rest of those Confederates are
met) That the Capital Conspirators are not in such a place where they can
easily be taken; That they have their Swords in their hands; That they are in a
most strong Town, and in the midst of a considerable Army, and by consequence
in a condition insolently to deny, and outface those evil designs which I
might publish, and to secure themselves against all attempts. If then (these
consideratious first premised) I should condescend to particularize the
Attempters of my life, how think you would such Enemies after be ever invited
to a Treaty of Peace? Can you imagine after such a declaration they will ever
have a confidence in me? Again, how resolutely, think you, they will now act?
Or how do you suppose they ought to proceed to put in execution that which
they shall know me to understand? Really, I think, they would have cause to
make this use of such an action in me: Nor could they provide for their own
security otherwise, then by adding one sin unto another. The ignominy and
danger which such a Publication would throw upon them, and lay them open unto,
could not possibly be increased: And being rendered thus desperate, can you
believe they would not act further to save those lives, which for what they
have already committed must certainly be lost. No, no (Noble Count) these must
necessarily be the events, and therefore I shall not repent my having been
secret and faithful to my Enemies. Crimes voluntarily repented of, merit less
of accusation, so sometimes shame directs the offenders to the way to virtue,
whose persons would never return if their faults were published. Therefore we
are never to divulge a crime but what we are able (if God please) to punish. If
Kings were to act as their Subjects, then undoubtedly a truth of this
importance were not to be concealed or disguised, because the hatred of one
particular person does usually last with his life, and it may be that which he
does not effect at one time, he may execute at another. But it is not so with
Princes. Malice ordinari^y is not directed toward their persons, but their
power. And conspiracies designed against them, are for the most part upon
causes which continue not long upon equal foundations: For we see that
Conspirators themselves (according to events) alter their intentions. Such
politic Artists there are, who may attempt the life of the Prince; And yet a
revolution of affairs may command them to hazard their own for his safety. As
for obtaining their desires, they are sometime wearied with them, and they may
chance to loose their evil intentions, because never published to the World;
and an evil constellation being past, it may so prove the Prince to be no
less in safety with criminal penitentiaries, then he has been amongst his
subjects who have been always faithful. Secrecy and dissimulation in such
points and cases, is most considerable. For if I had accused the Conspirators
by a Manifesto (whether they had the Grandees, Nobles, and Commons on their
party, or not,) It is certain they might have answered (as it is natural) that
they loved not to own and avow a wicked action; they might publish that this
accusation (though never so true) was a Calumny to decry their party, and
thereby render my integrity suspected to the greatest part of Europe. Besides,
after publication they might frame better disguises then before, and so with
new intentions more ably delude, and gain their ends. But as things now are, I
have understood their design by the single report of one who has deciphered
their intimate actions; and I am advised which way the wheel of their thoughts
turned: which inspection they not discerning, I shall read within their hearts,
and see the most concealed of their intentions, and destroy them (if I please)
with great facility. I may then with prudence, silence their names, and attend,
without danger, their repentance, but not without peril declare the
Criminalls. Yet may some one say, do you not believe by their spies that the
Conspirators know that one of their party has conferred with you in secret,
and then they cannot but imagine that it was to betray their designs, and
consequently they conclude with themselves as much as if you had accused them
openly? To that I answer, there is ever a notable difference betwixt ambiguity
and certainty. Those who act not but with some doubt, do little more with
precaution then if they had merely known nothing: And those who doubt not at
all, may perhaps become faithful to my service by the sole consideration of an
action so extraordinary. I know well that some men may censure that a piece of
Artifice which in me is an effect of Prudence and Bounty: Policy in this case
may be able to serve to two intentions entirely different (when I please) to
one end, and to explicate the most clear and apparent actions as I shall judge
fit. But as Kings ought not to attribute so much to common humane prudence, as
to secret assistances inspired to them from Heaven in the most emergent
difficulties; I believe in the election of pardon, or punishment, secrecy, or
discoveries, it is permitted indifferently to follow that way which my reason
tells me is most noble, and generous, as neither thwarting with the rules of
wisdom, nor opposing the means of safety. Now, if after the consideration of
the Princes interest it may prove necessary to advise of the good of his
succession; It is most important to an estate, that he who is to ascend the
Royal Throne ought to be free from all Malice, Passion, and Interest: And how
can that be if the successor understand, that the Inheritors of the most
illustrious houses of his Kingdom joined in Conspiracy to take away his
Fathers life? If he be a dutiful Son, and one who naturally honored his
Father, he cannot (but with difficulty) forbear to extinguish their memory; and
if he be jealous and suspicious, he will more hardly confide in their persons.
Therefore Kings never ought to espouse particular interests, and when they
receive the Crown by their Fathers death, it is best to bury in their Fathers
Tombs all their quarrels, their displeasure and revenge; and the Successor is
to guard nothing more choicely in his heart, then a Paternal love to his
Subjects. It is then most necessary (when it is possible) to conceal
conspiracies from those who are to succeed, least a preoccupant fear possess
their spirits, and make them commit greater oversights in rendering those
incapable as to any office or employment, who though they have committed great
Crimes, yet having repented, are more fit and able to exercise them then any
others, and by this means perpetuating an Enmity between the Prince and his
Subjects. Now as the relation is necessary between the one and the other, it is
important as toward the Conspirators Families, that their Crimes be rather
concealed then public, chiefly when they are so notorious, that they not only
merit revenge, but spread an Infamy which deriveth a bitter taste to future
posterity. Wherefore ignominious blemishes are not to be unadvisedly branded or
fixed on illustrious houses, because their race and lineage are the force and
strength which supporteth Crowns. The Princes in this case ought to be tender
of their Glory, as a beam of his own Majesty, and as to this purpose a prudent
concealment of their crimes may render more advantage then a rash discovery;
for why, their faults were personal, and it may not prove sound Policy to make
their crimes so immortal, as not to be forgotten in any Succession of ages.
This were to render them odious to the people, and to remove them from that
popular respect, which being united to them, may be serviceable to the Prince.

Again, as it may prove no good policy, so it may be questioned whether it be
an act of justice to make the Conspirators issue bear a part of their
Ancestors punishment for their delinquency; which proceedings (unless
Affairs of state judge them necessary) may prove very dangerous; For a King
alone forms not a Kingdom, he is but the head of that great body; the
Grandees (next under him) make up the more noble parts: There must then be
great Caution of dishonouring and debasing too much, and too long those
members, which, as the Arms and Shoulders immediately bear up the head. By all
this it appears that whether we look on the safety of my person, the splendour
of my Renown, the good of my Successor, or that of my Enemies, whether the
advancement of Peace or of the State: We may easily judge and conclude it to be
more Prudence to conceal what has (in this case) been concealed, then to
publish it to the World, in which respect I shall not easily change my
resolution. If mine Enemies shall continue obstinate in their Crime, I shall
not fail of other pretexts, whereby to punish them, if it so happen that they
fall under my power. Their being in Rebellion is a Crime sufficient to take
away their lives, with Justice, without a farther accusation of their being
Paricides or Regicides: And if they be capable to correct themselves, I shall
exceedingly rejoice to have extracted so fair an advantage out of their offense
and my own silence. Moreover if they prove persons of such a condition and more
noble quality, who have attempted my life, without doubt I have proceeded
judiciously, as not having discovered my intentions to either pardon or punish:
Seeing that as yet they are not in my power; if the Conspirators were men of
the middle rank, it were then superfluous to divulge their names, whose persons
are so obscure as scarce known, and if they were men of the lowest quality, it
would reflect with too much dishonor on Royal Majesty, to descend to an exact
discovery of such low shrubbs, who like Briars and Thorns have been bound up
together in such a black Conspiracy. He who keeps the hearts of Kings in his
own hands, reserveth Lightning and Thunder in his own power, which he can let
fall (when he pleases) to their destruction who shall oppress their Prince.
It is meet to refer some parts of Justice, to the God of Vengeance, and not
to presume on the exercise of all power he bestows on us. I say not this but
with resolution, that if the authors of the Conspiracy were in my hands; I
should severely chastise them, yet not for their particular injury to my
person, but for their impardonable crime against the King of Castile, which
punishment were not only requisite for the safety of my self, but likewise of
my successors. So then, if they were in my present power, their punishments
should be as notorious and remarkable as their Crime; But seeing I am the only
person alive, who can accuse them, I shall forbear, and rather prevent (if I
can) their evil designs: As for those who shall continue obdurate and
obstinate, I shall be revenged on them otherwise, Taking pleasure to pardon
those who do repent; And I value it not a little satisfaction to save and
preserve the honor of so many great Families, and the lives of so many persons,
rejoicing at the Conquests of my own affections in this Provocation which
renders to me no small Victory.

In all other occasions it is dangerous to have the Witness to be the Judge,
but in this case it is most advantageous to my Enemies, that I alone can accuse
them of their Crimes, which if known, my secret could neither preserve them nor
me: I could not longer be Master of that particular, because the Laws would
importune my Justice. But seeing heaven is pleased, that he who revealed their
crime is already dead, I shall only be the Arbitrator of their Destiny, and
convert my power to no other service then to afford means to amend, and reclaim
them from their wicked course. It is true in this Conjuncture, that the Royal
authority which I have in my hands leads me nearer to the Throne of God, who
knows the most secret crimes of all hearts, but forbears publish them. He
brands not the wicked with particular Marks, but leaves to their Malice locked
up within the circle of their own hearts. And it often falls out, that his
terrible Judgments which cause us to tremble here, foretell those great
punishments which the wicked may for their reward expect hereafter. Some say,
that secrecy is one of the most essential Attributes of the Divinity, and it
is by it alone whereby it is presented more adorable, and more venerable with
men. Do not admire then if I only be content to know my Enemies without their
discovery; seeing I have learnt this practice from God himself, who courteth us
to his courtesies, as well as receives addresses from those who he draws unto
him; and whom he is so far from punishing, that he promotes not so much as a
particular accusation against them. Permit me then (most generous Count) permit
me (I say) to leave the care of my revenge to him who best knows how to use
it. If he please that my Enemies shall be converted out of shame, and self
confusion, he can do it by ways unknown to us. And as he has given me power
to be silent, he can force them to speak, and accuse each other then when they
least dream of it. Come on then, let us march and fight without accusing them.
Let us not impede, nor dishonor the Victory at which we aim in discovering
them to be Paricides: Let us act with Princely resolution, and not longer
defer our power: Let us exercise our strength that we may have occasion to
use our Clemency: And let us make the World see that it is far more glorious
to conceal and conquer our secret adversaries, then barely to pardon our
declared enemies.

The Censure.
IN the diversity of opinions of several judgments, when I consider this
action of the King of Castile, I confess I agree with him, and I acknowledge
his Choice the better. There are some diseases which are not curable but by
gentle remedies, which (as the Physicians say) will prove more dangerous with
application of Corrosives. When the body has an arm or leg putrified, the
Surgeon may employ his knife, or sear with fire, or cut off the rotten
member to preserve the rest; but when the whole falls into an indisposition,
and that the more noble parts are infected, the Physician and Surgeon would
not only be censured rash, but mad, if they should undertake to cure an
infirmity or distemper above the force of Art and Nature, and which did almost
require a Miracle to recover it. It is not good to force an Enemy into despair,
if a man have not absolute power to destroy him. The extremity of peril (as
this Prince said) causes often the greatest Cowards to become desperately
valiant. And many, who would willingly make a fair retreat from mischief, if
they could assure themselves of security by being unknown, resolve to venture
the worst of hazards if discovered. The Scripture counsels, be ye wise as
Serpents: and if this Counsel be necessary to any, it is principally to Kings;
The Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics placed an eye on the top of their
Scepter, to represent Providence, and to advise Kings in that Royal Emblem:
This eye always open, taught them that they could not too carefully regard
what they intended to Act; The King of the Bees has no sting (as the
naturalists observe) which teaches Princes not to be transported with the
violence of their passions, and to meditate rather on Clemency, as more
natural, then on rigor which nature declines. I know not whether those who
presented Justice with a Ribband to blind her eyes have made a judicious piece:
For my part I think the contrary, that she sees not too clear. I should rather
have given her Argus eyes, then the blindness of Oedipus, or of Tiresias, if I
had painted her; and in my opinion the Lynx ought not to see better then Kings,
who hold the Sword of Justice in their hands: And for Princes to strike when
they cannot see, and to weigh in the Scales and not discern how the Beam
turns, are actions that can little satisfy, and relish not of any reason. I
know Antiquity intended by this Ribband, that Justice ought to be done without
respect of persons, but it were better to present her as a Goddess, whose
sight nothing could obstruct, and whose knowledge might whisper into her
hearers continually a caution to hinder unjust proceedings. It is necessary
then that Kings permit not themselves to be blinded with their passions: And
they are naturally to weigh with the Scales of Judgment the things which they
determine: And if their Sword be useful, it is no otherwise then as that of
the Surgeons, they may rescinde one member to save the rest, not destroy the
whole to cut off a part. But as it is now true, that I may make use of that
Figure which Rhetoricians call Transition, and pass from one subject to
another, and so from Physicians and Surgeons to diseases and cures; We shall
leave the discourse of DON HENRY, and visit a sick Prince who became his own
Physician, DON SANCHE, though he never had his health after he came to the
Throne of Castile (equally afflicted by the evils of Fortune, and nature) yet
at length, deposed from his Throne by the Injustice of his enemies, he enjoyed
healthful days. In this discourse we shall examine whether he gained or lost
more by this strange vicissitude, and whether the condition of a private person
in health, is preferrable to a Throne attended with continual sickness.

DON SANCHE TO COUNT GARCIA OF CABRA.
I Acknowledge as well as you (most Generous Count) that this wanton Fortune,
who has removed me from a Kingdom, and restored my health (which I never
enjoyed whilst I possessed the Crown) must as necessarily work extraordinary
alterations in my soul, (Contraries never meeting but they effect something)
And with as much reason as she has raised wonder in yours: and a curiosity
which (as I have observed) I shall rather satisfy then condemn. Will you then
that I discover in what condition I find my soul after so strange an event?
And whether the grief for what I have lost, sinkes not deeper into my heart
then the joy for the benefit that I have received by the exchange? It is
certain (to speak the truth) that the Philosophy of the Stoics (which
teaches men to be without all Passion) is not sufficient to restrain all grief
in such a stupendous alteration, as falling from a royal Throne to the low
condition of a private person: Yet it is true that a descent from the highest
degree of honor, and power is less ingrate, and unpleasant, and more
tolerable to a rational mind, where the condition chiefly serves for the
recovery of health, which is a treasure so precious to be enjoyed with the
least disgust or regret, as being the chief comfort of man's life, and
therefore most universally sought after. All the advantages of Fortune and
Nature have not so general an estimation. We find some ambitious souls have
aspired to, and usurped Crowns and Scepters; others have refused these royal
dignities, as places too precivitious, and too full of cares and troubles. Some
torment themselves with the gain of riches, hazarding their lives to fill their
baggs, which others (as more wise) do less regard and value. Glory with all
its splendour is less regarded by persons devoted to piety; And some as
seriously shun those glistering beams as others follow and adore them. In
fine, Some look on a Throne as a high and dangerous Rock; on Riches as a bait
to Vice; on Glory as a disposition to pride, and vanity: Nay even Beauty (which
seems to be a beam of Divinity it self) is looked on but as a great evil,
when it is not accompanied with modesty and virtue. But for health, it is a
Jewel which is of the highest price with Prince and people, with Philosophers
and Fools; never was there yet any person found which did not put an infinite
valuation on her above all concomitants of this life. We meet with one sort of
Philosophers who had the impudency to affirm, that there was effectively no
such thing as grief. But without doubt the same Phisopher when he lost his
health, had his Principles shaken, and his content and joy were changed into
grief and sadness In the mean time (to satisfy you more amply) you are not
to consider me merely as a King, but as a private person to whom a birth and
death is equally common with the meanest of my subjects; in which capacity our
resentments are the same. It is true, in relation to our divine Character
(which is inseparable from Royalty) we are far above them. But in respect of
God, and our selves, we are sometimes their equals, and may be their
inferiors. We participate with them of all the infirmities of life, and as we
enjoy the same Sun and Elements in common, so we have not other Arms then
they to guarde us from humane passions, and the debilities of Nature. Guards of
faithful Subjects may defend their Prince from the Treason of a Paricide, but
an Army of thirty thousand men cannot hinder the stroke of death, nor one fit
of a Fever: Death will enter the stateliest and strongest Palace (without
resistance) when she pleases; and the most beautiful, and magnificent glory
cannot assuage the least pain or anguish: Diadems, Purple, and Crowns are
unserviceable ornaments to cure the diseases of the body: And I have found my
self often in a Princely Palace, in a magnifick Chamber, lying in a bed
glittering all with gold, environed with the Grandees of my Kingdom, where all
my attendance designed nothing else but my diversions and ease: When in the
midst of all these seeming contents, I judged my self the most miserable of all
men, envying the health of the meanest of my subjects: Death which I have often
contemned in the midst of battles, in this condition looked grim and
formidable: And when I could neither fight nor retreat, give battle, or resist
the Enemy; I found that I was as well a man as a King; and (upon just
consultation with my self) that it was very difficult to be a sick Patient, and
a sound Politician, to govern the people, being personally weak, and in a great
disorder; and not to be exceeding miserable when all pleasures had a bitter
relish. Death (as terrible as she is) will command and make Kings and Subjects
equal, her business being to level all alike. But in this case Kings are not
only afflicted as other men being sick, but more unfortunate. The chiefest
point then (in this condition) is to seek after health, which is interrupted by
Secretaries, who interrupt every minute of repose, and persecute with multitude
of affairs, as well as Physicians with prescriptions of various remedies. The
deprivation of pleasure and augmentation of pain are equally tormenting. A sick
Prince judges by the contenance of his Visitors the variety of all their
humors, which rather increases then allayeth his passion; he reads their
desires in their faces. Some for their own ends fear his death, and others wish
it: In this sad condition he is more unfortunate then any of his Subjects, as
not enjoying any pleasure of a King. The higher he is advanced and elevated on
the Throne, the greater must his desires be: The Crown seems too heavy, yet
he cannot when he pleases quit that burden; the Scepter too ponderous for his
feeble hand, and his affairs permit him not honorably to part with what he
cannot hold but painfully. In this quality he is willing to act, but cannot; to
reign, but is made incapable. In these impossible contrarieties he can easily
judge what is the greatest affliction can arrive to a King, and that is to be
deprived of health. For imagine with your selves to what a deplorable extremity
is a Prince reduced, when a Counselor shall tell him (being sick and sad with
pain) that his Subjects have revolted, that his Neighbor Princes have in vaded
his Territories, that his General has lost the Battle, that many of his
Towns have surrendered themselves to the Enemy, that a pannick terror has
seized upon his people, that his Troops have disbanded for want of a chief
Commander, that a puissant Army is on their march to besiedge him, that his
Allies keep not their faith, and that within a few days (before he could
remove) he should hear the noise of the Canons playing before his Gates, that
his Palace shall become his prison, and that notwithstanding his sickness
gives him neither free choice of life or death, he shall yet fall into a lower
extremity of misery, and be reduced to the power and pleasure of his enemy:
Tell me (noble Garcia) if a Crown in such a condition be desirable; and Royalty
(though never so magnificent) to be valued at such a rate and degree worthy of
envy? All those who are ambitious to be Kings are not (doubtless) without the
passion of desiring glory mixed with pleasure, but of what glory or pleasure is
that Prince capable whose constant business is to support his infirmities? And
who instead of the delights of a Crown cannot enjoy a moment of repose? If the
Prince be evil, it is not possible but a remorse for his crimes must intermixe
with his Maladies to increase his torments: If he be good and virtuous, it is
impossible but that he shall be afflicted, being incapable to act in his Kingly
office for the repose and conservation of his people: At least I know well,
during this languishing condition, being on the Throne, nothing can be more
insupportable then to understand that* that sickness is the infirmity of the
State; and that I suffer not a single pain, but that the disease becomes
contageous to all the subjects. It is true these griefs of body which daily
obscure the light of my understanding, (if I may reason without prejudice to
former passages) I confess freely are not only insupportable to my self, but
to all my affairs, and it may be censured a fault, that finding my self unfit
to Reign, I did not choose to govern by the assistance and nomination of my
Successor: but the jealousy which ordinarily attends Sovereign authority,
prevailed with me in my resolutions, not to nominate that to him, whom I feared
as more worthy: I rather chose to support a Scepter with a feeble and trembling
hand, then admit of a Coadjutor, and to suffer that to be taken from me
rather by violence, then to be ecclipsed by a super officious-assistant, who
would convert my Sovereignty entirely to his own service and splendour. Lo (most
noble Count) the crime for which I am culpable, and such a one as all Kings
ought to avoid who are rendered incapable to reign by their diseases, or who
shall find themselves imperfect through their owe infirmities: For a Prince
(whom such evils do obstruct; or who through that lesser Talent which God has
given him for the conduct of the people, is not able to discharge that high
office with honor) is responsible before God for all the evils which may
happen through his defective Government, or at least if he choose not an able
Minister of State who may supply a remedy in these great failings: And it is
for that reason (without doubt) that Princes are obliged, whether they be sick
or well, of stronger or weaker judgments, to have ever near them faithful and
wise Counselors, to whom they may communicate a beam of their power, to that
end that it may not fail. That if the Princes be weak, their judgment may
support them, and if not, that they may refresh them, and so contribute some
leisure for their repose, after their grand agitations, in such great
concernment. God (whose Image are Kings) acts not always by his judgments, or
those terrible means, which seem more directly and suddenly to fall from his
hand: Those violent plagues which desolate whole Countries, come not every
year; God imployes not always his Thunderclaps, nor Famine, nor dreadful
Earthquakes, which shake the foundation of the World: Such punishments (being
very heavy) arrive but rarely. He serves himself sometimes with Princes, whom
he commands to wage a War, against those whom he pleases to prove or punish;
And then (when he pleases also) to be propitious to a people or Country, he
does not always show his mercy in causing Manna to rain on them, or manifest
himself by miracles. He pleases himself sometimes to send virtuous Princes,
appointing them to be the distributors of his Blessings, as (on other
occasions) he directs them to be the Executioners of his Justice. Let Princes
therefore cease to be jealous of their Authority; And since God (without any
obligation) is pleased to use them as his instruments, let them not scorn
(especially since their own necessities and concernments oblige them to it) to
make use of Faithful Ministers, who are the absolute foundation of Thrones and
Kingdom. For those Princes who are so fortunate as to meet with them, (of this
glorious quality) may defy Fortune and diseases, and not fear the confusion of
their Kingdom, when they languish on their Couches. It is good for a King to
resemble the Sun whose office is to inlighten all the universe; Yet this Noble
employment (which the Creator has given him) does not make the illustrious
Creature jealous of the beams and beauty of other stars, which in their
several Spheres of their Activity distribute their light which they have
received, as well, though not as bright as that great eye of the World. Yet is
there a distinction to be allowed betwixt the chief Minister which the Prince
chooses, and another which aspireth to that trust (moved by his own ambitious
desires) the first is like a fixed Star, the other as a blazing Comet, which at
present, casts a stupendous and mervailous light, but the flame borrowed
from a wrong Source, is exstinguisht in a moment; On the contrary the fixed
Star which is luminous, retains its splendour and brightness as long as the
Original light shall impart his beams unto it. Things thus stated, one may
say, that the Pomp and glory, which the Sun receives, when he is set, (when in
the night we see the Heavens adorned with radiant Starts) the Prince, when the
beams of his active power are obscured with sickness, enjoys; though he do
not act in his own person, but by those to whom he has communicated the Rays
of his power; And in them he still retains his Grandeur and Honor: But alas,
I considered not the depth of this Policy, until I had lost my Kingdom; And
after I was rendered into a condition to be able to do nothing else, but examine
my self whether I should be more happy in my health without a Crown, or else
should continue a sick and languishing Prince. I am assured (Generous Count) by
this discourse that you can easily judge, that the Crown which I wore was
platted with Thorns; And if I should grudge at my loss, it is not for the
deprivation of those pleasures I have received. Yet if I had lost it after the
defeat of a battle, if I had then met with this sad satisfaction, to make mine
Enemies see (in my courageous defense) that I had deserved to wear it; And that
though they gained the Victory, it was because they were more fortunate, and
not more Valiant then I; some matter might have been found for my Consolation.
But to have languished so long a time as you have known me, incapable of the
pleasure of peace, and constrained to quit the War, because not able to be in
the head of my Armies, and to see my self stripped of the Crown and Scepter
without a defensive power, to guard those Emblems of Royallty; This
consideration affects me with grief and pain unsupportable. If I were in an
active condition, it may be some signal occasion might make me fortunate so
far, as to provoke mine Enemies valor by mine own, and to oblige them to ^orce
me to hazard and loose my life gloriously. But the infirmities of my body have
made me unfit to Reign, and almost to live: and nothing but a prodigious
accident can recover my health after that I have lost all things that are dear
to me. I shall now relate to you with what joy I have seen this civil War of
my body to cease, which continued my grief for so long a time. It will not
prove so easy for me to describe to you the regrett I had in the loss of mine
estate, if you had not been an eye witness of what I suffered. Imagine then
your self, by those troubles I endured, what repose and tranquillity I now
possess. Not but that I easily believe that the continuation of health may
abate much of this high content and joy which I now feel; Nor that an
accustomed subjection will not in time make me forget my being King. But really
if I should be restored to the Crown with the attendance of my infirmity, I
should not accept it; more valuing health without a Crown, then to be an infirm
King unable to Reign. It Is true, ambition is sweet, and that nothing is more
difficult, then for a King to make his Subjects his Peers. But when I shall be
as insensible as a Statue through the violence of my diseases; the interest of
the people and Christian Policy would teach me to refuse that Crown which would
as much prejudice them, as it would dishonor my self. The Ambitious may object,
that it is a great loss, to be deprived of a Crown; But to that I answer, it
is no great advantage to bear it without honor, and to have no Fruits, but
distemper in such eminent dignity. They will say, that the torture of the body
may be born up, by the satisfaction of the mind; But I answer to the contrary,
that the purest contemplations of the Soul are troubled by the indisposition of
the Body. There is a bond of nature which so strictly unites both parties, that
nothing can divide their interest, and, if at any time there be any difference,
there is much more from the indisposition of the body, then from the
dissatisfaction of the mind. How many great and noble Souls have we seen so
resolved, that the most violent oppositions could not shake into disorder, and
their vexations so moderated, as not to distemper their health to an
alteration? Many have lost their Children who have never changed their
countenance, and good or bad Fortune has not prevailed against their
composure, because their reason was not disturbed. But as for Corporal pain,
when it is such, as the Physician cannot ease nor cure with all his art; It
must needs operate and have such an influence upon the soul, as fifth give her
not an absolute distemper, it will (at least) shrewdly shake the Patient.
Servitude, Poverty, and Infamy, are more tolerable; but for extremities of
pain, they infallibly banish all pleasure and joy. Love, Ambition, Glory, can
yield no peaceable satisfaction to a sick person; and though the Soul be the
more noble part, yet in such violent fits, no other virtue has its operation,
but Patience. And how imperially soever the Soul may brag of her Superior
excellency; There rests nothing to be acted (on such occasions) but what are
the effects of that virtue. Corporal pain arises from a natural or
accidental infirmity in man, but the vexations and anxieries of the mind, are
voluntary, and merely depend on the will. Sovereignty not Royally managed, is a
supreme disgrace, and to have a Scepter which he cannot sway, is as if a
Soldier wear a sword and cannot draw it. Policy which supporteth Kingdoms is
but a bad Physician, and cates which attend them are not Remedies and
applications for the recovery of health. Mortality is but a weak Comforter; And
as for the Jewel of health, it is not so much prised as it ought; all other
things are attended with some inquietude, as Riches, Honor, power. Ambition is
inflamed with new desires, love is attended with jealousy, care watches the
Rich men's Gates, who have more vexation in their Possession then content and
satisfaction; health alone is observed ordinarily with least solicitude and
observation. Yet to conclude (as one able to judge, out of a long languishing
experience) I cannot but prefer health above a Scepter, the one causing me
ever to sweat or sigh, the other rendering me cheerful and pleasant, though
never so low. Ask me not then (Noble Count) whether choice I better approve,
seeing the Memory of those outcryes passed, force me to praise God for a more
comfortable alteration.

The Censure.
IT is an ancient Aphorism, that If a man did but know the weightynes of a
Crown, he would not so much as take it up, though he found it in his way. If
this opinion be true, even in those who merit well, and are in health; it is no
less for Princes that are indisposed: As the gifts of Nature are more
excellent then those of Fortune, so are they by every well regulated soul
preserred before them; nor are the greatest advantages of a Crown to be put
into the balance with the miseries that attend them. The Diadem, the Scepter,
the Crown, the Throne, are glorious objects which tickle, and sweetly please
the imagination: But when the torments of the Gout, the Colic, and the
extreamities of other diseases, wholly possess the Patient, and are placed in
opposition to those glorious and lighter Fancies, a healthful Slave is far
more happy then a royal King. In the midst of such Grandeur, Princes seated in
such a condition (though never so illustrious) are like Tantalus, who in their
abundance are not admitted to taste of any thing that may yield them ease, or
content: So that what should raise their felicity increases their punishment,
being yet more miserable that they can command all things, but nothing to their
proper use; when the pain they suffer mixeth gall and bitterness with all
sweet appearances of their Scepters. The Gout and Stone confute the Stoics,
who deny all pain and passion: And I am of opinion, that a King (though never
so magnificent,) is deprived of all earthly comforts or enjoyments, suffering
under the extremities of a disease. I cannot but compare the condition of sick
Princes to those direful Scaffolds which are richly covered with black Velvet,
and (for greater state) have the splendour of Torches to conduct a Prince to his
execution: This funeral pomp imprints some respect of his misfortune to all
spectators, but they do not attenuate his miseries. It is thus with the
magnificence of Princes, it seems to flourish, and causes admiration, it
attracteth reverence, but all this glory is not sufficient to render him a
happy man who is a sick King, though he were the Emperor of all the Universe.
Grandeur can have no more then the effects of Dormant and Narcotique remedies:
some intermissive moments of sleep may suspend, but cannot heal the violence of
the disease, which will return, in its Course. How unfortunate then is a Prince
who in great conjunctures of Affairs, has scarce leisure to be sick, though
he cannot meet with one minute wherein he is sensible of health; He bears a
burden so great, that it would cause Atlas to yield, whilst he finds himself
daily growing weak, and his spirits every minute decaying; His occasions call
him to every part, but his diseases oblige him constantly to his bed, and
whereas he ought to see and seek about to order and Command, instead of these
royal employments, he is able to do nothing but complain. He is (in fine) in
this condition, a mere object of pity or scorn; where he ought to appear
awful and formidable; and therefore I conclude that Don Sanche had reason to
prefer his health above his Crown, and to consolate himself in the loss of
the one, by the consideration of the Importance of the other. A King ought to
die standing on his feet, was the speech of a Royal Prince, and certainly if
he ought to be found dying in this posture, much more ought he to appear so
living; since that without health Kings are not easily obeyed, nor can their
Reign be happy. We find some generals who have gained battles in their
Litters: but I think we have not read of any Monarchs who have reigned
gloriously on their bedds, unless it be those Bedds of Justice, where Majesty,
not Maladies appear. Kings in their Thrones are as that universal spirit which
the Greeks called Endelechia. If their influence be not over all their
Dominions, all goes ill, and if they be sick, all parts presently grow
distempered. But let us leave now the Kings of Castile, and direct our
discourse to a King of Portugal. It may be the ambitious will judge it no
less a Paradox then that of DON SANCHE, and that they will believe him as sick
in mind as the other was in body. But I conceive judicious persons will not be
of their opinion; and that true policy will condemn their errors. Emanuell the
first leavied a most puissant Army, with a design to pass into Africa, where
Victory seemed to attend him: When as being upon his march, and just ready to
transport his Army over those streights which divide Spain and Mauritania; The
Venetians dispatched Ambassadors to entreat succors from him as their Ally,
against the Turk, who had now declared War against them. This generous Prince
resolutely suspended his hopes of Conquest to assist his ancient Friends,
suddenly altered his design, and sent his Army entirely to them, deferring his
enterprise to Algiers to another season. See here the reasons which obliged
this illustrious Prince to his resolution, and the true Motives of so glorious
an action.

EMANVELL TO JOHN DE MENESAIS.
IAm not ignorant (Menesais) that the design of Conquests is as natural in
Kings, as life it self in other men: Yet I likewise know that Glory ought not
to be the only object of their sublime passion: And if they judge it as proper
to succor and assist their Allies, as to create new subjects; Then the quality
of Protectors is as honorable as the Titles of Conquerors. It is in this noble
resentment that I have changed my resolution: And though I have engaged the
greatest part of my Grandees into Arms, and covered the Sea with Ships, with a
design to extend my Dominions over all Barbary: I am (this day) otherwise
resolved to succor the Venetians, and not farther to intend my designed
Conquests. But have you well examined the matter? (you may tell me in this
occasion) It may be, the sad Complaints of your Allies have surprised your
thoughts; whereas had you pursued your own inclinations, or followed the heat
of your own ambitions; You had not then quitted your former design to take up
another, which (probably) will not increase but diminish your subjects with a
disadvantage as unprofitable as dangerous. No (Menesais) I took not up this
resolution in a tumult of passions, but have most seriously examined the
reasons and inforcements to this alteration. And after a more solemn debate, I
find that Justice, Generosity, Wisdom, and true Renown, have possessd my
heart, and prevailed with me, in this persuasion, to invite me to act as I have
undertaken. I do avow withal, that these mighty Forces, which I have raised
(though very formidable) have not so elevated my hopes to new Conquests, as my
desires inflame me to defend my Allies, though I might with greater ease have
subdued the Barbars, then have protected the Christians. It is most true, the
endeavor of Conquests is an honorable ambition, very active in the hearts of
all high born and generous Princes. And as the first Kings began their Reigns,
and enlarged their Domination by their Conquests, and have derived them on the
People and Subjects There seems a kind of Noble Princelike necessity to oblige
them to a Correspondency of their first honorable Co^mencements. So that (in
some degrees both of wisdom and Policy) Princes are bound to expatiate the
Grandeur of their Territories and Dominions; And it could not but reflect as an
indignity, and some dishonor to Successors, to confine themselves within the
limits of their Ancestors. The alterations, and signal changes (discernable in
all Histories) seem to authorize what is here affirmed. And the successes of
Ages (which have seen the ruins of so many Monarchies, and Empires) witness
to these times, the great numbers of Conquerors which have appeared in all
Ages; so that the Assyrians, the Persians, the Parthians, the Greeks, the
Romans, advanced not their names, nor enlarged their Dominations but by
Conquests; and (at last) were not destroyed but by the same means that they
were established: The fall of one Empire ever giving occasion to the rise of
another; whilst in the great conjuncture of all disorders, it may be said, that
either Princes became Tyrants, and were oppressors, or Subjects became Rebels
and traitorously oppressed their Sovereigns: And in all Ages past, the
ambition of Conquests has been the most violent passion in all minds which
have aimed at Sovereignty. Subjects are of more confined qualities, limited
with proportions amongst their neighbors, inslaved to Laws, and limited to some
certain parcels, descending to them as their Fathers heirs, to exceed which,
were as much danger as Injustice. But Sovereigns are confined, and their
usurpations more tolerable and innocent, because of their eminent and high
degree above other men, and their proximity to supernal and celestial power.
We declare then (noble Menesais) that it is not for petty considerations that
we prefer the title of Protector above that of Conqueror. And though Princes
are ranked as highest in quality, and so above all others; yet they are not
(being Christians) so much to regard their ambition as Justice. As for titles,
and even those which seem derived from the Princes greatest virtues, the
subjects challenge a communication of them; and they will dispute, that JUST is
an Epethite as well belonging to a Magistrate as a royal Prince; that VALIANT
belongs as well to a private Soldier as to the Emperor: All the virtues are
as habitable, and as content to dwell with the meanest Subject as the mightiest
Monarch; and it is true, that all United cannot set forth the Majesty and
splendour of a Sovereign; he who says one is Just, concludes not necessarily
that he is a King, or that one who is Valiant must needs be a Monarch; but he
who says he is a Conqueror, concludes that title which can only belong to an
illustrious Prince. The power of the Sword which protecteth or punishes, is
only reserved in their hands who are invested with supreme Authority;
Subjects are not to transgress the Landmarks of their Neighbors; they are
Slaves to Laws, and confined to the inheritance and patrimony of their Fathers;
the Prince alone has liberty (with innocence more excusable) to enlarge his
Territories. This enterprise then is not grounded on slender considerations,
that I suspend the possibility of the title of Conqueror to merit that of
Protector; and though the great splendour of that high quality has inflamed the
Illustrious Heroes of antiquity, and lessened their dangers through their
ambitious desires, yet a Christian Prince ought not so much to aim and attend
on his ambition, as to incline to Justice: So then, that which was permitted to
the Valor of Alexander, is here defended by the courage of Emanuel. Our Policy
excludes not any other particular virtues from our souls, but so, that in all
our enterprises we ought to be equitable, and severely to banish Injustice.
Which Conclusion admitted, it was now much more proper to succor my Allies,
then to endeavor a subjection of the Barbares: For as it is with all men in
general, who live in a civil society, that a mutual interchange of good
offices is necessary amongst them; so it is between Princes and States, and
their Allies; a common Interest obliges them to oppose the Enemies of their
Allies, as well as their own; and not to suffer those with whom they have made
an undoubted amity, to be devoured by the War, or to forsake them at the
approach of danger and peril. You doubt not (Menesais) but after the complete
Equipage of this mighty royal Navy, if I should have received advice, that
some of my Neighbor Princes had invaded me, I should quickly have steered
another course: And why then shall not the Interest of my Allies do the same
thing, seeing that I am no less obliged to their defense then to my own? The
sacred alliance which is amongst Princes cannot be violated without injury to
the rights and Laws of Nations; and it were most unjust in me to expect
succors from them to whom I did not intend any. Princes ought not to promise
amity, and after to sorfeit their sacred words with fraud, and infidelity; and
being able to relieve, they cannot (with honor) leave their friends to the
fury of their enemies, and the haters of all Christianity. It is true, it is a
great glory to conquer, but it is more honorable and necessary to keep a
royal promise inviolable and sacred. It is no dishonor to attempt a Conquest,
though it be not obtained: But a man can never violate his word and promise
without the blemish of baseness and falsehood; an act so unworthy of a Prince,
that he ought to detest it above all things. For if he fail in his Fidelity to
his Allies; what does he but teach his Subjects to be as false and fraudulent
as himself? And I confess as Justice pleads with me for the Venetians; so
Generositie and Nobleness prevails with me to accord to their humble
requests: For (with your good favor) tell me with what resolution could our
Army march to subdue strangers, if we had refused assistance where there was so
great necessity of aid, and such eminent peril of the ruin of our friends?
Should it be said, that I marched further from an Enemy into other parts,
because he came nearer toward our Allies? Or that I durst not engage my
Forces, as if those of the Enemies were too formidable? Am I a Neighbor at
such distance that I cannot succor speedily in the access of their greatest
calamities? Does it concern me, that I endeavor to pillage Alcassarquiber
because Bajazet intends to pillage Venice with his army? all these arguments
are unworthy a Christian Prince, who aspires after the quality of Justice, as
well as that of Conqueror. Noble minds are not only obliged to endeavor the
Victories of Towns, Provinces, and Kingdoms, but they are likewise to gain the
peoples hearts, and thereby obtain an universal approbation, which will
convert tumults to concords, and raise glorious acclamations resounding to
their honor who know to merit them. And what action do you imagine can be so
capable to render a Crown immortal, as that which relieves a Republic of
Christians terrified with an army of more then one hundred thousand Turks? Upon
all other occasions, when a Prince is engaged in War, he cannot expect honor
and commendations from all the World: For as for those whom he invadeth, they
will style him an Usurper, his neighbor Princes will censure his ambition, and
rather be spectators of his successes, then be supplyers; and according to
event they will speak in fear or flattery. But in such an action as this, no
ill censure can succeed. Those who are interested will estimate us as their
Liberators; other Kings will behold us far more eminent for our fortune, or more
surpassant for our virtue and valor: and Bajazet himself (though an Enemy)
cannot less esteem us. And truly to relieve the oppressed and feeble
resistants, being our Allies, is a far more generous action, then to abase a
puissant and formidable enemy. Is it not true (Menesais) that if in your
journey you shall meet with one man assaulted by three or four, and that he
should cry out for your assistance (though he were a stranger, and your
business urgent) could you refuse to stay, or assist him? ought not the same
nobleness of mind be in a King which is usual in every private person out of
the rules of humanity, and natural compassion? Should I then leave mine Allies
in their extremity to be a prey to the fury of an Enemy? This undertaking
presents a double reward to the noble undertaker; the one is, sustentation of
the feeble; the other is, the suppression of the mighty: And (if heaven please)
he shall repel the one with as much shame, as gain of glory to his own
endeavors. I may add moreover, that Justice and Generosity united, are the
most Royal virtues, the surest supporters, and the wisest Counselors of a
King. Some other Rules of Policy may pretend to be the sole guides, as
instructing them whether to make Peace or War, and to give orders to all their
actions. It is confessed that Policy is the royal Science, and compasses her
ends in great undertakings; but her Maxims are dangerous for them who have not
righteous intentions. Policy is like love, which changes her form according to
their receptions who entertain her. She proves unjust in a jealous preoccupated
spirit, she becomes furious in the violent, she appears base and cowardly in
a person of less interest, but she is always reasonable in a noble and
generous mind. In whatsoever dress she is found, she courteth her expedients,
and flatters those with whom she consulteth to give a color and varnish to her
designs. Yet in this conjuncture of affairs she cannot dissuade me from aiding
the Venetians, who, were they ruined, what advantage should I get, or what
danger incur? I know well the Turks are so remote in distance, that I cannot
rationally fear the enemies Invasion can extend as far as my Kingdom. But it is
the Interest of all Christian Princes to repel the Forces of the Turk, who is
already too puissant over Christendom; and all Kings ought deeply to resent an
opposition of the Grand Seigniors Forces, who is daily enriched with the
spoils and plunder of Christians: His unlimited ambition aiming at the
destruction of all Kingdoms, and aspiring to establish an universal Empire
and Monarchy. It is not only for the Venetians sakes that mine armies shall
march, but as I look on their Enemy as the Enemy of all the Christian world. If
all Princes were so prudent as they ought to be, they would not think that the
Venetians were first undertaken, because they were more hateful to the Turks
then others, but it is to make a passage by them to further extensions, to
leave no enemy in the rear to march after, and so to flank or offend. In this
design then all other Christian Kings have their common Interest, though I (at
present) be more active, and more ready in preparation then others. You know
(Menesais) when Kings make great preparations for War, they alarm their
neighbor Princes to arms, lest they should be surprised, lest the public
Faith should not prove sufficiently puissant to assure and to remove all fears
and jealousies. It being so then that all Christian Princes know how that
Bajazet has levied an army of 100000 men, why have they not armed themselves
as well as he for their Conservation? If they can be so stupid as to be false
to their Allies, or careless of their brethren and Christians. In the mean
time I shall oppose these numerous Forces, though I march alone: And by
consequence I alone shall be charged with the success of this War: Who, had
I refused, the Venetians might have been justly condemned by other Princes, who
shadowing their excuses with pretenses and accusations of their neighbors
might say, had they been in the same posture as I, they would have done no
less. Now as the event of War is ever ambiguous, if in stead of Conquering
Barbary, I should miscarry in this enterprise, with what Clouds of shame shall
I be obscured? From the Honor of a Conqueror I may be reduced to be a
Prisoner. From the hopes of being a Protector I may be rendered a Captive, and
instead of the Garland of Glory be rewarded with the brand of infamy; my
Friends and mine Enemies might equally scorn me, because I provoked the one and
the other, my discretion would be in question, preferring an uncertain before
an assured path to true honor. For there is this infallible difference betwixt
the designs of Conquest and assistance to Allies: The first cannot be glorious
but with a victorious success of War, but the other of it self is natively
honorable, and from thence springs a Fountain of reputation, though the event
prove not so Fortunate. I know well that all who promise to be Protectors of
their Allies, are not ever their Liberators in their necessity. But though
their Allies be Vanquished, and those who strive to assist them, yet their
misfortune is honorable, and that reward follows their memory, that they share
of their danger only, not of their disgrace. And though the Allies and their
assistants have a joint defeat, their miseries may deprive them of their lives
or liberties; but they are still faithful friends, having gained a generous
reputation in using their best and utmost endeavors. If then I prefer my
March to Venice, before my voyage to Africa, I have not done less honorable;
for if I should have been invaded by mine Enemies, of whom should I have
expected succors in the like condition? Of what danger might this resolution
have proved? If I had forsaken the Venetians, and exposed to the fury of the
Turks, those who are a people that adore the same God with us; And at the feet
of his Altars might power out innocent imprecations against us for our
refusal; What might my subjects think if I should not compassionate their
Condition? Might not they object that if the interest of Religion did not
oblige me to my duty, that they might shake off theirs out of the same respect?
It might be that some of our Provinces possessed with Rebellion, might take
example from my self, and neglect and forsake me as I might my Allies. Perhaps
my design of Conquest of other Countries might prove the occasion of losing
mine own Royal Inheritance, and the abandoning my Allies in their extremities,
and a dishonorable violation of the laws of Nations, might raise a
provocation in all neighbor Princes against my person; And (my absence
removing their fears) might persuade them to invade a part of (if not all) my
Kingdom. For when Kings do leavy Armies, and intend to wage War, they always
frame a pretense and reason for their martial Comportments, in which design
common Policy never fails, and where envy is the Counselor, infinite
malicious pretenses are never wanting. This rightly considered, a sage
prevision finds it better to commit a hundred things unprofitable, then to
perpetrate one act injurious and offensive to an Equal. And it is true, the
removal of an injurious pretense from a Prince, might occasion the diversion
of an Army, which might have been leavied against those who had not kept Faith
with their Allies. All the great revolutions which have arrived in Kingdoms and
Empires, have had but petty and small Commencements. And uncertain Policy has
no such grounded rules as to assure any security; For when she has labored
most, and promised to warrant an estate from a puissant enemy, and that
nothing without, or within, should trouble or shake the foundations of a
Kingdom; we find from what little sparks mighty flames have thriven. Perhaps
the love of a woman, or a subject of a mean quality made a favorite, or some
sharp resentment, sometimes a misprision or mistake has set division amongst
the Nobles; that dissension has generated hatred and envy, that envy has
introduced revolt, these revolts leavied Arms, and made War, and that War
destroyed the Kingdom. That is, then, true Policy, and infallible, when all
things are foreseen, that need Prevention. But to speak clearly, such an
impossibility can never arrive, and the profoundest Politician cannot prevent
the Contingency of strange Events. In observation then to what has been
presupposed, I have judged it necessary to wave my Voyage into Barbary, and to
march toward Venice: The undertaking of this latter enterprise presents no
greater inconvenience then a deferring of our design for Afric for some
farther time: and the entertaining of this occasion may happily secure my own
Dominions from a Civil War, or foreign invasion. You see then that
Generosity, Justice to my promise, and Policy has obliged me to this election.
And as for Renown and Glory which persuades the most impetuous passion, and is
a most Sovereign Mistress with all great Princes, see how she yields, and gives
way to my rational choice; Consenting that although I took up arms with a
design of Conquest, she suffers, or rather inspires my resolution, to relieve
and succor an oppressed People. Honor (my Menesais) is not only the
Mistress of virtuous Men; But has likewise a particular privilege to convert
all things to their advantage, who serve her. Courage without Arms is utterly
unserviceable, liberality without Riches cannot be distinguished well from
avarice; And all the virtues in their particular Consistencies have their
singular objects to manifest their effects in those who are habituated with
them: But true glory secures it self sufficient in all conditions. She is in an
equal valua^ion, whether ^n the Throne or in a Prison; her Triumphs and her
sufferings do both serve to her renown, wheresoever she is sought or found, she
is lovely and honorable. And we must not imagine that only Conquerors
possess her, and that Protectors have not their partage. The Romans, who are
possessors alone of true renown, and which they distributed with so much
equity to all that truly merited, bestowed no less honor to him who saved
the life of one Citizen, then to him who took off the head of an
irreconcilable Enemy: Let us not fear then after so noble an example, but that
we may find as great honor in saving the Christians, as in the destroying the
Barbarians, and that the action which we have undertaken is not less glorious,
then that which we have deferred. The titles of Conquerors prove not always
so pleasant and plausible as Princes may expect; For in the judgment of the
people, the Conquerors, though never so moderate, are accounted usurpers.
Besides that title is not to be obtained but with the subjugation of an entire
Kingdom, which is attended with the difficulties of destroying Thrones, taking
Scepters, giving Crowns, besides the Soldiers courage, and the peoples
submission; The Historians penns must with acclamations and descriptions
declare the Conquerors merit to the World. But as for him whose designs are to
be a Protector of his Allies, he has the Reins in his own power, he depends
on his own will, to attain his undoubted renown. He who is styled a Conqueror,
perhaps may acquire the Epithets of hardy, valiant, and fortunate; But he who
has the name of a protector, enjoyes not only these former qualities, but
these are added that he is just, faithful to his Allies, noble and generous.
Now if the difficulty of undertaking gives addition to glory, in any
enterprise; Then certainly the Contribution of relief in so eminent danger
cannot but be an act of most transcendent honor. At present we only intend
Preservation to the Venetians, and to encounter with a mighty Army of Turks,
and we may possibly get this advantage, having first subdued our own ambition
to vanquish this insolent Enemy, or at least be able to impede the designs of
his new Conquest. The honor which we shall gain, will be so clear and pure, as
not to appear corrupted with the least suspicion of self interest before the
Peoples eyes. If we shall not render the Turks Prisoners, we shall be happy in
preserving our Allies from being their slaves; If we cannot beautify the
sacred Altars, we shall repute our selves blessed if we can defend them from the
Turkish fury; and equally please our ambition, and be fully satisfied, though
we be not Conquerors in Africa, to be Protectors in Europe of the innocence and
virtue of our Allies and our Religion. These are honors to which we may
lawfully pretend; men in this noble endeavor are bound to acknowledge to us
the means of their Preservation: Fathers will have their Children, and husbands
their Wives protected in their Innocence and Modesty; our memory and fame will
grow up with the little infants, who by this deliverance, will be taught to
continue the honor of their liberator to posterity: and by a discharge from
such evils still prove firmer Christians and more faithfully hate the sins
and errrors of Mahomet. As for Conquerors they gain glory, but never without
effusion of much innocent blood, their Charriots of Triumph are a tended and
thronged with those who are more miserable, then criminous; but in this design
our Soldiers draw no blood, but from the veins of Infidells, and from those
who are the Christians Enemies; and as for our honor in this action, it is as
equally without spot as Competition. The joyful songs of innocent Mirth shall
not be interrupted with the mixtures of sighs and tears; in our addresses of
succor our princely compassion shall occasion public joys, and our
endeavors break the Forces of those, who are violators of their Faith, and
oppressors of the Christian People. Of all Wars the defensive is most just and
glorious; And then chieflly where the successes is happy. That right which
permits of a repulsion of force by force, is as ancient as the foundation of
the World; Nature her self inspires it, the Laws permit it, the Casuists
dispute it, but in conclusion, the best Divines authorize it, and that Maxim
is infallible, that what is just, is honorable. How great a reputation must it
prove then to subdue those mighty Armies which are prepared to fight, and vaunt
of being victorious? The Turks have gathered innumerable Forces to this
purpose, laid their design, advanced their march, with an infallible
expectation, that they cannot fail in their enterprise: But if they prove to be
subdued and disappointed, their retreat must be with great shame and Confusion.
*It Is true, the Events of War are very uncertain, and therefore shame ought
not always pursue the Conquered; Yet it is ever more notorious and signal
upon the invaders, when they are subdued then when the innocent Defenders are
overcome. A strenuous defense though at last overpowred, is as honorable as
those who subdue, and we find sometimes a place surrendered with as much
reputation to those who have yielded as to those who have gained it, and after
a long siedge reduced vigilant and active Soldiers. Oh (Menesais) we find
true glory in this War, (with what ever eye we behold the design) The cause is
just, the Enemy so mighty, that though we fail to vanquish, yet we cannot fail
of reputation; our endeavors (if we have the defeat) will take away all shame
and dishonor, how then shall I desert these powerful reasons and
considerations, which so mightily persuade me? If Justice alone commanded me, I
ought to undertake it for her sake; For Kings owe that duty to all the World,
as well as to their own subjects. Generosity is another promoter of this action
in my Soul, which if I should not observe, I deserved not the name and title of
a Prince. If I incline to Policy or secret Counsels of my perswaders; and if I
submit to that inspiration which so inflameth mine own mind, the Beams of
honor lead me to this relief, which no Princes could refuse but with an ill
reflection to the royal Dignity: Justice, Generosity, Policy, and Renown,
being the four wheels which carry my resolution; Seeing the first commands,
the second encourages, the third Counsels, and the fourth inflameth; we
cannot but submit to their united operations, believing we cannot fail, guided
by their Conduct and Counsels. These are those Princely attendants which have
honored the Train of great Princes. Justice cannot err, Generosity cannot be
dishonored, nor Policy indiscreet, and as for Glory, her brightness leads
and carries those splendent lights, which facilitate the way to all
nobleness: She is a bright Torch that illuminateth the actions of Princes, she
hates vice, and makes her flve, the virtues are her followers, and all her
Companions Noble. These attend her in peace and War. We are now in our March
to Venice; and doubt not but to find her there; all other Beams grow dark, and
are shadowed, when we are obscure in the Chambers of death; Justice can bring
us but to our Graves, Generosity serves us no longer then whilst we live,
Policy then leaves us, and addresseth to our successor, Sovereignty makes
choice to place a Scepter in other hands, the Crown is placed on another head,
Majesty is then buried in ashes, and lies in her Tomb; But Glory and renown
flourishes on the hearse, deriving foam to posterity, and so spreading over
all the World: She recompenseth with usury the pains of former cares, and those
who have sought her earnestly in the shortness of their days, she perpetuates
their memory to all ages: Let us follow then this glorious star which directs
our course now, not to Barbary but to Venice, where we shall be certainly
honored with the brightness of true glory and renown, whatever our successes
prove.

The Censure.
THe example of noble EMANUEL (this illustrious Hero) may guide the resolutions
of all Princes and Monarchs who aspire to sublime immortality. This action of
his was more glorious then his Throne, and more precious then the golden
Scepter which he bore: The Diademes of Imperial Crowns are not so sparkling
as the Rays of this illustrious action: The Purple, and magnificent garment
Princes wear, represent not perfect Majesty without their inclinations to
imitate so great a Prince, who has appeared in this not far short of Alexander
or Caesar. The high reputation of Conquerors exceeds not the generosity of an
equitable and moderate Prince, who is as glorious in the relief of his Allies,
as if mounted on the chair of the highest Triumphs. And sometimes to refuse
such glorious offers does not relish less of true renown, then eminently to
Triumph. To preserve ones friends, is no less prudence and honor then to
destroy the Enemy. And this is a Maxim as sage as sound. Rome (which this
Prince observed) gave freely a Crown to him who preserved one Roman Citizen,
and erected many Statues, and honored him with many thousand Trophies. To him
(I say) who honorably preserved the Republic, and defended his Allies by his
generous actions, in preferring them above his proper Interest. This is advice
fit for Princes, because those who seem to be above the Laws, easily believe
they are not obliged by any; and it is good to intimate to them (from time to
time) that they are men as well as Princes; and if their condition do exempt
them from what they prescribe to others. Nothing can free them from the rule of
humanity and natural equity: And we read that the Emperors of Rome had
attendance and followers, whose business was to moderate their excess of
pleasure, by the directions of Counsels; who if irritated and inflamed with
provocation, yet upon second notions, the advice prudently digested, they
became more discreet, and of a better temper. Some Princes have commanded that
they should be daily remembered with that saying, Souviene toy que tu es mortel,
least they should forget it through the splendour of their state. It Is true,
Kings are to be discoursed with most properly in soft and silken terms; and
imperious language sounds not well in Sovereigns ears; the sweetness of
persuasions are of greater force then boisterous speeches: Yet Thunder and
Lightning is welcome when it changes the corrupted air. In curing the
desperate wounds of Princes, the Surgeon obscures the instrument of Iron
which must open and heal, gives it a perfume which may be more pleasant, sugars
and clarifies the remedy to make it more conducible, and less sharp and
afflictive to the Patient. When Philosophers study Morality they find Virtue
environed with Prickles and Thorns, scarce to be saluted without danger. But
when they conduct virtue to Court, or would lead her into Princely Palaces, she
is adorned with all variety of rich accoutrements to make her more lovely in
the eyes of Majesty. It is this beauty of Virtue that enchanted this great King
of Portugal to prefer Justum before Utile, and the preservation of his
Allies and friends before the expectation of a Conquest. And for my own part
were I to follow my natural inclinations, I should fill this whole Volumn with
such examples as this. But the variety of Flowers is the beauty of a Garden,
and the diversity of matter is the delectation of books; we shall pass now then
from this most generous Prince the King of Portugal to the Duke of Anjou,
(afterward Henry the third) of France, who disgusted with Charles the ninth,
his brother, had the Crown of Poland procured for him by those who designed his
elongation and farther remove from Court. The subtle ways, and secrets of
Princes are not revealed to all, and ordinary capacities could not pierce at
the essects of so strange an action, that he should elevate his brother to that
honor on whom he had such constant jealousies; see here his reasons and
arguments to the Bishop of Valence in dispatching him to Poland.

CHARLES THE NINTH, To JOHN DE MONLUC, Bishop of VALENCE.
EXperience brings the most perfect instruction, and Philosophy and Policy
(though they may vaunt and pretend) yet cannot lead to the right paths of
Prudence without her conduct, by whose means they are chiefly beaten, and made
plain: All things which have appearance of good, are not therefore eligible;
but present affairs are first to be considered with circumstances which are
already passed. Prudence is the companion of Experience; and an excellent guide
under whose conduct we cannot easily err: But many who pretend to possess
that great virtue (if really examined) have little acquaintance with her:
Self-opinion being ordinarily the greatest cheat in the world. Old age, which
ought to have her as an inseparable companion, walks often alone, and has not
Prudence for her familiar friend; whereas Youth many times is more forcunate in
her society: It is not therefore long life which is solely blessed by gaining
Experience; since there are many men, nay even Princes, whose whole lives are
but a continued dream or slumber. They who pourtray Experience ought to have
lived longer then one Age, seeing that all Kings and men in their longest
duration continue but short moments of time. The years change, and seasons have
their alterations, but Kings (surfeited with Peace and Luxury) let time pass
without strictness of observation, to their office; and in an indulgent Reign
of plenty and tranquillity, their abundance causes them to swell with Pride
and Ease, that they will hardly be examples of Justice, much less of Mercy.
Luxuriant and wanton times cause Princes like iron to rust for want of use; but
when an unexpected Enemy appears with terror, or a Civil War breaks forth
and imbroyles a State; when the dissension of the Grandees endeavors to
dissolve the ligaments of Government, and secret Machinations are discovered to
produce general confusions; then Princes are forced to summon up their best
abilities, and having mustered all faculties to their service, they are then
unexpectedly drawn to several varieties, and strange hazards of necessitous
undertakings: Sometimes to dissimulate, and counterfeit kindness where they
hate most, and (on other occasions) to show rigor, and severity toward them
whom they most love, and honor: at other times they command to imprisonment
those Ministers and Favorites, whose company they chiefly honored, and wish
nothing more then their liberty. Such occurrences are the familiar attendances
of Crowns, whereby Kings gain experience, and discern the transient accidents
of their Reigns (which obliges them to the rules of Policy and Prudence) the
better to secure their Sovereignty. Histories, though they preserve a memory,
and treasure up the Actions of Kings, yet they give not perfect instruction to
them in their royal offices; New successes intervene in several Raigns, which
daily require new Counsels and fresh designs. He who seeks for instruction
solely in books, must not think to have his expectation satisfied by examining
only the Reigns of such Princes who pass their times merely in peace and
tranquillity. The Reign of Tiberius and his Ceurt of delicacies, may teach a
Prince to consume Golden time in airy vanities, and wanton Luxury. But the
Reign of Marcus Aurelius was in another temper, where ensigns (the Emblems of
honor) were in highest request. The history of a soft and luxurious Prince,
like a bed of sand to the pilot, is very dangerous, unless the example be
avoided: But the lives of hardy and valiant Princes like Anchors if well fixed,
may preserve a Royal Ship from Naufrage; the errors of Princes like Rocks in
the Sea are to be observed in the Charte, that they may be the more securely
avoided: But (above all these Theories and contemplations) experience is the
chiefest Mistress, Virtue consists in action, and he raigne^b most
prosperously, who by the observation of the evils past, and the judgment of
those that are present, does prevent future mischiefs. To open my thoughts
(Noble Prelate) to you I am but young, and have not seen more then a
Quinquennium of my reign; I dare not presume to brag of my experience, yet I
dare to say, I have seen those things, since I came to the Crown, which I
reserve in my memory, and which make me doubt whether I have not outlived many
of my Ancestors in the Kingly science. Certainly in the observation of what
has arrived both in Court and Kingdom (though I am but a young Prince, and of
the age of twenty three, yet) I have recorded many Mavelous and strange
occurrences in this short time, which have whetted my resolution and reason to
a deportment of more vigorous activity in this dubious conjuncture of mine
affairs. It may seem strange to you, and all the World, that I bestowed a Crown
on one I have held in Jealousy, and great suspicion, who for his person was a
Prince, my Subject and my Brother. And (it may be) you will tell me if you
procure Crowns for him whom you suspect, what rewards will you bestow on those
who are faithful? To this objection Policy makes her answer, hat there are
conjunctures when it is more seasonable to prefer then punish, and to remove an
Enemy to a degree of eminent honor, then to reward and recompense a Faithful
friend. And your wisdom teaches you, that all times are not proper for the
same service. The merits of some ought to be in the Register, though not
requited at present; and the dangers of others designs are considerable; And
when revenge may prove perilous, as well as ineffectuall; Fidelity is to be
suborned (if possible) to prevent more terrible inconveniences. The fairest
Flowers serve as well to conceal and hide the Aspes and Serpents, as to
beautify Chapplets and Crowns of Kings, and Princes are not obliged so much to
regard beauty and riches, as the hearts of those whom they rule and command.
Great rewards are not always the testimony of love, but often the effect of
Policy, and are not given so much to oblige to Respects, as to appease and
remove from wrath and revenge. It was the Trojans Counsel (though not
received) Timeo Dana^^ and d^na ferentes; let not then my liberality astonish
your apprehension, which I shall endeavor to satisfy by many arguments. First
I must let you know that all our Enemies are not to be treated after the same
manner: Some may be contemned, others ought to be feared, some actions of
Princes ought to be published to all the World, and others, to be concealed from
all eyes. Sovereign Government admits as well ingeniously to dissimulate, as
severely to punish. The Duke of Anjou is not one of the first rank, but a
person more considerable then to be despised; he and his party is rather more
formidable, and therefore the more to be suspected. If my private suspicion of
him were publicly declared to the World, my condition might grow more
dangerous, and he more puissant; because, he is so near to me in blood as a
brother, and so related as visible heir of the Crown. Great wounds in the more
noble parts endanger the body, and dissentions in the Royal Family are
commonly more destructive and fa^all to the who^e line: Such discords would be
invitations to the Subjects* to become more insolent to repair their private
Fortunes with the ruins of Royalty. If Henry and Charles were divided, some
would conceive in serving Charles they were subservient to Henry, and others
following Henry, may be ambitious and violent to banish and abandon Charles.
Fraternall discords as they are not honorable, so they are not safe. Charles
was too near in blood for my severity, being my brother, who though naturally
ambitious, might excite the subjects to sedition, they having too much
proclivity to that crime; And an execution of punishment on one so near, as it
might provoke a popular compassion, so it might probably occasion a general
revolt which might shake the Foundations of my Monarchy. The Laws of Heaven as
well as those of Policy conspire in the concealment of secrecies, least that
what is at present scarce an Embryo in the thought (breaking out into action by
a discovery) prove an unruly Monster in the birth. What remains then, but that
I should remove him to a mighty distance, whom I could not punish? and gratify
him with a Foreign Crown, the better to secure mine own, and to use
dissimulation where I durst not presume to chastise. But you may object, I
understand you speak of Enemies and punishments suitable to their crimes; If so,
I know not whom you intend, nor what is his crime whom you suspected; you may
farther reply, that I ought to consider the Duke of Anjou is the Mounsieur of
France, that he is your Brother, that he is young, that his inclinations are
sweet and amiable, that he is General of your Armies, that he has a great
influence on the Queen your Mother; And that with his affability he
insinuates, and gains the hearts of all, who address unto him. These
circumstances do justly engender, and beget great suspicions, and therefore
rather may merit a Guard to secure him, then a Crown to oblige his haughty
affections. To this I reply, it is true, the Duke of Anjou is my Brother, and so
in that relation near the Throne; Ambition may more easily transport him to
aspire to the Crown, and though his heart were so moderate and just, as not to
suggest to him such ambitious inspirations; yet doubtless he has a company of
Counselors and flatterers about him, too apt to inflame him in such desires,
persuading with adulation, that if he were King, his Reign would restore the
Golden Age; objecting, that this of mine was composed of nothing but Iron.
Those who are born near to Crowns, are ^oo prone to think themselves abused by
nature, who gave them not a more early birth to inherit the possession of
Sovereignty; to which high pitch if they cannot ascend, they commonly fall
desperate and melancholy. Alliance and blood are natural bonds strong enough
to oblige private interest, but when their relations are near a Crown, those
bonds usually grow feeble: And in the combat of ambition and nature, the more
equitable party does not always prevail: You tell me, the Duke of Anjou is
young; that is the age when passion is most predominant, and most easy to be
persuaded by those who gild over their own ambitions and self Interest, by
pretending to aim at nothing but his good and advantage, who nevertheless
though they should make him King, would be afterward as active in deposing
him, if it were in their power. Youth is an age where the acquisitions of ill
habits are more facile then the infusions of good and virtuous dispositions;
Yet it is a vigorous time which rendereth great advantage to those whom it
serves: It is the chiefest season to gain hearts, and to delude with hopes
and loveliness. If my Brother were elder, I should less suspect his power,
and more confide in his affections. As for his Inclination which may be sweet
and amiable: Those qualities do render him more formidable: With these shapes
of affability and courtship, he will more easily suborn my subjects, and reign
more puissantly in their hearts by his complacencie then by his gifts, his
solicitations, or expense of treasure. The fierceness of my humor, and the
sweetness of his comportment will cause those to love him who fear me, and
gladly to forsake so severe a General, to follow, and obey so complacent, and
courteous a Commander; and if there be occasion, I am not to doubt of their
resolution to a Revolt, when they are possessed with some expectation, and
hopes of him, as a fit Successor, and are so presently enchanted with his
extreme civilities. As for that other quality, his being Lieutenant General of
all my Armies, it is a relation and capacity wherein I may not least suspect
him: For then when he was but sixteen years of age, after the Battle of St.
Denis, and the Constable of France slain, he was cheerfully received General
to that victorious Army, with the unanimous applause of the greatest officers,
who so joyfully submitting to him as their chief, being so young, and after the
death of so noble and experienced a Commander, made me presently conclude that
he was born to be fortunate, and great: And since his advancement to be
General, do you not see how delightfully the Soldiers flock and follow after
him? Do they not pursue all occasions to manifest their Valor for his honor,
and daily thirst after the happy hours of his fortunate conduct? He has (since
his commands) not only beaten the Protestants, made the Queen of Navar to fly
to Rochell, and forced the Cardinal Cha^illon to escape for his life to
England; but he retreated with as much success as generosity from his dangers
in Poytiers, where both the Armies were ready to quarter in the same place, and
to fight, and so surprise a Victory. To conclude, during the continuance of
this War while he was active for me, he was superactive by his successes for
himself, by which means he made many Creatures for his own interest of ^he
best rank of all my Subjects. The glorious day which he had at Bassack, where
he made an eminent Prince his Prisoner, his success at Anbeterre and Muridan;
The second battle which he gained, whereby he reduced many places in Poitou,
Saintogne, and Angoulmois; and those other noble acquisitions even to the
taking of Saint John de Angelo. All these circumstances have peswaded me to a
suspicion, and to more stricter observations of his ways. These fortunate
events might inflame his expectations to sublime thoughts of commanding all:
And as sometimes the strength of force surmounts, and is prevalent above the
Laws of Nature, and the rights of birth, his thoughts may be transported
beyond those of a subject, he might conceit himself to have as good a Title to
a great part of France, as Alexander had to Persia when he commanded there with
his Army. And it is more then probable, his ambition will hardly admit of this
difference, that the Macedonians, who affected great Alexanders Conquests, were
his subjects: But the French who had compassed these illustious Achievements
in the service of their General, were not his but my subjects whilst I lived
and reigned. As to that relation, wherein you tell me that he rules the Queen
my Mother as he pleases; To that I shall reply, it is true, the Queen my Mother
has great passion for my Brother, and it may be she is so indulgent in her
love to him, that it tends much to my prejudice. The honor and respect which
I owe to her, (being her Son) and the quality of her Regency of France which
she so bravely performed, commands me, that I dare not presume to examine
severely that Article, though I apprehend (sometimes) that my Mother preferrs
my younger brother to more degrees of affection; yet I am to be pardoned if I
be not silent in that point, nor easily raze it out of my memory. You know when
the Duke of Anjou beseiged St. John de Angelo, he met with more difficulty then
he expected, and the affairs were so managed, that they rather threatened
disgrace then honor. But the Queen my Mother fearing (in this occasion) least
this action should reflect with a disreputation upon my brother, and asperse
with some disadvantage all his former Victories, commanded me to march and
raise the Seidge, by which accident I became liable to the dishonor of that
unsuccesful attempt. I leave you then to judge, whether I may more rationally
confide in him, or whether I ought not the more to suspect him, since he has
of his party not only the greatest of the Commanders and Captains, but even a
Princess whose honor and justice are so equally admired. But (as I said) I
must not scrue up this string too high, nor examine this point too rigorously:
For the Queen is my Mother, as well as she was Regent, and therefore of a
higher degree, then to be treated as an ordinary subject; And whatsoever
arrives, I shall be more glorious (let her use me as she please) in the effects
of any of her designs; then if by a disrespective preparation I should presume
openly to oppose her. But there is a midde way (which I choose to walk in) so
even and inoffensive, as shall give her no pretense to complain, and yet shall
remove all obstacles which can deprive me of her affection. The Courting and
Carressing of the people, if free (possibly) from secret ambition, is not only
tolerable but comendable; but when a young Prince is compliant and affable,
and studies to win and please, those endeavors being employed to his equals,
and inferiors as fellow subjects, with as much or more observation, then to his
Sovereign, can it be that one of his Condition would make himself so much a
slave to such persons, but upon design thereby to become their King? Certainly
if this were not his aim, he would esteem it far more conducing to his
advantages to court his Sovereign upon whom he depends; Then thus to fawn upon
his Inferiors. Liberality, on such anoccasion is but a Mercenary virtue; her
giving is rather a sowing in expectation of an Harvest, which may make a return
with usury: And it is these hopes which makes her Prodigal, who, upon another
score, would have given nothing. In the consultation then of all these
considerations that the Duke of Anjou is my Brother, that he is young, and
General of my Armies, that his inclinations are affable and sweet, that the
Queen my Mother so highly favors him, and that he has no other business but
to gain the hearts of those who address to him; It were imprudence not to be
jealous of him: Yet all these reasons and conjectures seem weak and feeble in
comparison of what I shall farther add. The Queen is of that disposition, that
she justifies all others before me, she authoriseth all to have suspicions on
me; She discovers the most concealed secrets of my trust to the Duke of Anjou,
and them of his faction; she accuses and convinces the clearest reasons, and
will not admit of truth it self to oppose her pleasure. I have read in history
that an old wise Rustic who confined his ambition within the Walls and
Pallisadoes of his Garden, received a Crown from Alexander with some regrett,
and show of Melancholy: And some Philosophers have not thought a Crown worthy
the lifting up to their heads: But I never yet read that a young Prince, whose
inclinations are wholly bent to Gallantry, and to pleasure (rather then toward
morality) would receive a Crown with regret or discontent. When one presents
me with the news of a Town surrendered, or a battle won; my presents were
usually Chains of Gold to those who bring such happy tidings: And yet the Duke
of Anjou has scarce a common Civility for them, who bring him the assurance
and tidings of a Crown and Kingdom; Notwithstanding that he is ambitious of
being reputed the most civil and obligeant Prince of all the world: Nay when
it was told him that Sigismond was dead, and consequently that he might aspire
and pretend to the Crown of Poland, he discovered more tears in his eyes for
the death of Sigismond, then if he had received the same news of me: what
variety of thoughts then may not hourly suggest to me strange apprehensions?
May I not think that he who receives such a Kingdom with regret, aims at one
more glorious? And for what other reason can it be, that the Crown of Poland
should be inconsiderable? I do not think he can easily compass the Crown of
Spain, his friends are not so intelligent, as to abuse Philip the second to
serve him and his design; as for the Crown of England, and that Illustrious
Queen Elizabeth, that Kingdom is as equally impossible; For the Queen will not
marry but dye a Virgin. What reason can there be then alleged, why my brother
should refuse to be a King, unless he hoped and expects my death, which might
prove his passage to a more glorious Throne? And allthough I discern not his
way, it is most evident, his design is laid to this haughty pitch. That mighty
faction which I have formerly mentioned, will treat and agitate profoundly for
his black interest and criminal expectations. His name is great, being of the
Royal Family, his party proportionable to their great occasions: He watches
all advantages, he expects the fruits of his dangerous enterprise, and may
plead no inclinations of his own, but my subjects aversion to serve me. To all
this the Duke of Anjou presumes he is assured of the Queens cordial wishes,
and his extremity of hatred to the Protestant party will occasion a War, that
War keep up his interest with the greatest Officers of the Army, and Grandees
of the Kingdom, and these interests still increase his power. I cannot deny but
those of whom I speak in their Qualities merit not a Kingdom, but though
Fortune has not given it them, their ambition thirsts after it, who (without
doubt) better deserve exile, or a prison, if it were seasonable to act such an
execution. But as his power cannot be shaken without ruining the Queen, and
endangering the peace of the whole Kingdom; I must not undertake what is
impossible, knowing that my Brother has the strongest places of France under
his command; and those not ordinarily fortified, but reinforced with the
affections of the people: It is necessary in this juncture to show him a fair
path, and to invite him with the temptation of a Crown, to remove him from his
popular Authority; and so to weane the people from their admiration of him to a
more proper object.

In this condition let Henry receive the Crown of Poland, and confined to so
noble an Exile, act his royal part on that foundation. In his ascension to
that Throne we shall better establish our own; and giving him Subjects, shall
place guards about him, who shall assure us of his person, that he reigning
more puissantly in Poland, we may reign more gloriously in France, and with
more tranquillity. There is (moreover) this advantage in this design, that
though I arm mine enemy, yet there is no fear that his weapons can reach me,
nor trouble my safety at such a distance. His Troops may be discovered, if he
design any irruption; and if we have any War, it is not likely to be on the
Frontiers of our Estates. Besides, this Exile is so remote, that his Creatures
(left behind) dare not presume to murmur, their complaints being not able to
reach their Patron, or (at least) he not near enough to revenge, or defend
their discontents. Things thus examined, I found no way better to discharge my
self of this so near a danger; which if I had longer deferred, the wound might
have been made too wide for any cure. Publicly to oppose by force those whose
crime is secret, is a provocation of the peoples hatred, and a leavying of
Forces for mine enemies: So to act for them who would destroy me, or my
Kingdom, and to commence a War, which may not have an end in a short time, and
which may be fatal, and destructive to the whole, as well as ruin to my self.
To have immured this young Lion in a place where his fury might have prevailed
with popular aid, had been a design too dangerous, and it is very difficult to
find faithful guards when he who is imprisoned is in a condition to be
proclaimed and declared a lawful King. Such a Fire as cannot be extinguished,
is better to be dispersed. It is then most rational that the Duke of Anjou be
made King of Poland, that I may be my self. Surely he will never have the
boldness publicly to interpret that an unkindnesse which deserves thanks.
And as for those who serve him, they dare not interpose in that, which appears
so advantageous to their Protector: As for the Queen her self, who is more
subtle and prudent then not to dissemble at least a feigned joy, for that
addition of a Crown to her Son, though it may inwardly cause some reluctancie
and grief. What can then oppose a design so judiciously and prudently
consulted of? The greatest objections (pressed with severest violence) must
needs be satisfied in the elevation of this young Prince to his Scepter; No
aggravations can seduce the People, but that this honor agrees with his
qualities, though never so noble. And as for you (Illustrious Prelate) consider
how in this Act the Kingdom is delivered from a secret Usurper; your King is
preserved from a dangerous and emulous Rival and brother. The roots of
Rebellion are extirpated, peace is established throughout all France, and never
did any person extract a more illustrious and innocent revenge from so deep an
injury: It being certain, that this is the first time that revenge was
satisfied by the Coronation of an Enemy.

The Censure.
AMbition has her Jealousies as well as love, and the one is no l^sse violent
then the other. Sovereign power is so delicate and tender, that all things
which do approach near it, occasion inquietude, and that which does but touch
it, wounds it. The very shadow and slight imagination accuses any thing as
culpable, which apprehension hardly can be altered or appeased. So deep an
impression, and so profoundly is jealousy ingraved in a Crown. The Greek Poets
said, that Kings knew no kindred; to signify that blood and Proximity were not
considerable with those who reigned soveraignly. And as soon as Kings are
feated in the Throne of supreme Authority (as if in that degree they had a
spiritual addition) they speedily become more jealous of their glory. The more
nature and fortune has obliged them; the more ambition disuniteth and raises
suspicions in their thoughts. It is true of sovereignty, as it is of the heart
of man, where all wounds are mortal. When Tiberius came to the Empire, Tacitus
tells us that the Senate designed to oblige their new Prince, by conferring a
glorious title of honor on his mother Livia, and stiling her Matter Patriae:
but this subtle and absolute Politician could not endure that title in his
mother, but answered, that Honors in women are more properly to be moderated
then augmented; And (as that famous Historian relates) that title procured her
a Guard, which he appointed perpetually to attend (Augustus being dead) least
her Grandeur should lessen and diminish his; And if Livia caused his
restlessnesse, what perturbations did Agrippina increase; the great
acclamations of the Soldiers as she marched by the River of Rhine, wounded him
on the Banks of Tiber. And those testimonies of affection which those legions
bestowed on her engendered not only jealousy, but hatred in his heart. Now if
this cruel passion so tormented him, that he was so enraged by a woman, what
might not she have endeavored to eternize the glory of her husband? he feared
Germanicus (much more then the Barbars) he suspected him too near to him in
Almany, and that he was not far enough from him in Asia; and Piso was not in
suspicion alone as to cause his death. What should I say more? the children
should have the same destiny with their Parents, and if the Priests dared to
pray for themselves, though after their Emperor, Tiberius would take exception,
make an ill interpretation of their Devotions, and quarrel with the Pontifical
orders. Nay this Prince was so infinitely jealous of his Power, that he
destroyed himself in the person of Seianus: he could not endure the glory of
any others, though after their Death: and as he opposed the honors tendered to
his mother, when she was alive, he frowned at her funeral Pompes, and
interrupted the kindness and profusion of the Senate when she was dead. Let us
not then be astonished if Charles the 9th grew jealous at the virtues of his
brother, being a passion to which all Princes are so subject, and who have as
many examples to follow as Sovereigns, who hardly reign and rule without this
passion, which is so common amongst Princes, that Crowns seem tempered as well
with Jealousy as Glory. Yet there is no rule but will admit of some exception.
Policy, like Janus, has two faces. I shall now therefore present you with the
example of a King, whose resentment was clean contrary to CHARLES the Ninth.
DON RAMIR, King of Oviedo, was so far from suspicion, that he associated his
brother in the Empire, caused him to sit with him in the Royal Throne, cladde
him in royal Purple, and imparted to him the joint fruition of his Crown and
Scepter; an Action so eminent, as well deserves our curiosity to discourse the
Motives. We have heard the reasons of CHARLES the Ninth, who could not endure a
Rival, or an equal. Let us new attend the discourse of DON RAMIR, who would
not sit alone in the Royal Throne without the Company of his brother. And
after examination of both let us judge whose reasons were most efficacious and
sound.

DON RAMIR TO THE ESTATES GENERAL OF HIS KINGDOM.
I Doubt not but most Capacities will be rather apt to condemn my design and
intentions of the Co-regency of my brother with me in the Throne, and will not
be inclined to approve this unparalleled action. But it matters not,
Multitudes and tumults are not fit juries to censure Kings, nor proper judges
to sentence and condemn their pleasures. It suffices me if I satisfy men more
rational, and the more eminent persons of my estate, and thereby convince
their judgments with those reasons which have obliged me to an action so rare,
as to communicate and make a partage of mine authority. Those who dive not
deeply into the intentions of Heroic persons, (who whilst they lived, were so
famous for their Achievements, and whose Renown is descended through so many
ages to us) may have their eyes dazelled, and their reason startled at this
great example; And may rashly conclude it as a matter against all rules of
wisdom, to endeavor a communion in Government, where the Kingdom is but
little, and therefore the Crown more unfit for any but one. For (they will say)
was it impossible for Caesar and Pompey, who were two such mighty men, so great
friends, so linked in Allies, to have contrived a Co-regnation? And do you
think that it is possible to be effected by you? Those (I say) who were so
incompatible, in the joint fruition of Sovereignty, that each one would rather
adventure the loss of every drop of blood then to be singly supreme? If royal
authority divided were for the assurance or advancement of any good, or (to
speak more plainly) if it were a thing that were possible, what means had not
been endeavored for that resolution. Now as Caesar, and Pomp^y, rather
abhorred then approved such a one: So Alexander the Great condemned a Rival in
supreme Authority before those noble Heroes. And if such persons have refused,
who dare adventure to be an example in so strange, and unprincely participation
of Royalty? They will yet press further) Great Alexander was peaceable in his
Kingdom of Macedonia; Darius was neither his neighbor, nor his enemy; yet
notwithstanding to gain command throughout all the Universe, he put himself
into a condition either to destroy the Persian power, or else (as one ambitious
of more illustrious glory) to fall in that design. Thus Antiquity relates and
venerates united Sovereign authority; so true it is that a divided power has
ever been the mother of disorders and misfortunes. Do we not remember (will
some object) that the Founders of Rome were Brothers, and Twins? Yet those who
had lain together in one womb could not sit quietly together in one Throne; and
nothing could satisfy until the blood of the one was mingled in the Mortar,
and laid in the Foundation of the Walls of that glorious City. Silla and Marius
never were in peace, nor could they rest while their power was equal. The
Triumvirat, a composition of three choicest men, could not continue long. And
Anthony and Lepidus were forced to surrender to the fortune of Augustus: Marcus
Aurelius (with all his Philosophy and Wisdom) found it an unsupportable
burden to bear sail with the Factions of Lucius Verus, his Colleague in the
Empire. Bassianus Caracalla was voluntarily a Fratricide (to reign alone) in
the person of Geta. Balbinus and Pupienus, those grave, and sage Princes did
adventure an equal perishing, aspiring to a superiority out of their ambitious
spirits. Gallus and Volusianus were massacred by their Soldiers as a reward of
their ambitious dissentions. Gallien^s creating Odena^e his Colleague hastened
his own death, with the ruin of the Empire, the envy of Meonius determining
his glory with his life. It is very possible that Dioclesian out of discontent
to his fellow Consul, after so many Victories and Triumphs renounced his
Empire to spend the rest of his days in solitude. To conclude, all examples of
this kind easily demonstrate, that the admission of a companion in the Throne,
is neither facile nor tolerable. These arguments may be objected against my
resolution, but to answer; Examples do rather illustrate, then demonstrate,
and rather persuade then convince reason. Fortune (who is active in most
enterprises) causes sometimes good successes to spring out of evil counsels,
and ill successes oftentimes to be the events of good designs. Wherefore, if
we rightly examine whether a thing be good or ill, the thing it self is to be
scanned, not the effects which follow, which ordinarily arrive not but through
strange causes, for which there may be no merit for accusation. Besides, the
apprehensions of Kings, Princes, and great persons, and their actions differing
from others, deserve a more extraordinary respect. They are not always
regulated by a Law, or necessitated to an example, otherwise they must forfeit
their reason, and their authority must entirely be destroyed. If the Prince of
Macedonia had failed to have been Master of the Universe, his design had been
interpreted rash, and he too ambitious, as rather aiming to make himself
glorious, then desiring the worlds good, which he so much pretended. His
ambition of Renown made him so active; and if the people found themselves happy
under his domination; their Fortunes were the more to be esteemed, meeting with
a Prince of such grand and noble inclinations. Yet I cannot but say that if
that Illustrious Conqueror had admitted a co-regence to some eminent Kingdoms
in his Sovereignty, he might better have preserved some virtues, which he lost,
and not so vainly attempted some things which have spotted his memory and
reputation. That stately Castle which he caused so rashly to be burnt at
Persepolis; Those voluptuous and Asiatique luxuries which vitiated the noble
Macedonians; the death of Cli^us and Parmenion, and some such other ignoble
accidents possibly had not obscured the splendour of his glorious Reign. As to
that discourse which concerned Caesar and Pompey, they did not in their
ambition aim at what was better, but what was greater. Their envy, and
emulation was so high, that in the contestation they seemed not to contend so
much for the Scepter, as to destroy each other; they had not spirits so
moderated, as either jointly, or successively to reign and govern. And that
which is said of Caesar and Pompey may be affirmed of Silla and Marius their
Ancestors; for Romulus and Remus, who ever knows how they were born, fostered,
and educated, may easily judge, and have foreseen the ill fortune which arrived
to them both, the one brother dying a violent death, and the other living a
heinous Fratricide: For Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus, seeing that they were
joint Competitors for Sovereignty, they could not but be harrassed with unquiet
perturbations: But as for Marcus Aurelius, and Lucius Verus, though the
Government was interrupted with some errors in their Consulship, yet it became
not so unfortunate under those two, as under many other Princes. It is then
neither unjust, nor impossible to admit of a companion, or assistant in
Government. Marcus Aurelius did nothing without reason, he was prudent,
discreet, and virtuous, to such a degree, that his example is sufficient to
justify my resolution. Caracalla, Balbinus, Pupienus, and others, though they
have differed in their judgments, yet have not contradicted my election and
choice. And as for Dioclesian and Maximianus, there was no circumstance in
their reign which yields not some assimulation to my purpose, their
conversation was unanimous, they fought, vanquished, conquered, and triumphed
alike: And if any difference did arise, it was so prudently smothered, as not
to stir up any popular trouble, or ill resentment: And (for ought we know) when
Dioclesian made choice of a private life, it was rather a voluntary election
to retiredness, then any jealousy of Maximianus, or any injury from so
faithful a Colleague. Besides, in this eminent, and great recession from the
Crown, Maximian encountered with as much trouble as Dioclesian could with
content and quiet. That which is said of these Primitive Emperors, may be said
of others who ruled in Greece since Constantine the Great transferred the
Empire: Valentinian associated his brother Valens, and afterward his son
Gratian, who in a succession continued the same Grace with Theodosius, and he
to his children Arcadius and Honorius; and when Honorius reigned in chief
alone, he nominated Constantius for his Colleague in the Empire. Thus Justinus
made choice of Justinian his Nephew, and many others of Princely quality
proposed this way as best for themselves, and subjects. Yet if all the Reigns
of these several Princes were not so fortunate, the evil consequents and
effects are not to reflect on my design. The same misfortunes have attended
them who have governed Empires, solely, and without a companion, as it appears
too evidently in the said Reigns of Caligula, Nero, and Domitian, and many
others who have been as wicked as great. But as I said before, it is not by
illustration or examples, but sense of reason that I shall support my
undertakings. Did I rely on the precedents of History, the Greeks can
plentifully furnish me with examples both great and illustrious. In Sparta,
where Morality and Policy seemed to have their birth, and whose rules may guide
all others; the command was there legal and usual for two Kings to be of
equal power. But because examples prove nothing, let us listen to reason which
most justly challenges obedience, and is the chiefest authority to govern
Princely actions: And now let us see whether she does not counsel me to place
my brother with me in the throne, which rational men must needs confess an act
of greatest Prudence, if it tend to the repose and safety of my people. To know
this truth more exactly, we must consider, that Monarchy is obvious to many
dangerous Concomitants; he who is highest in power, is not always fittest for
the discharge of the greatest employments. Kings, though they are possessors of
honor, they are not always friends to virtue, and often share in vice more
deeply then any of their subjects. And they who find themselves ranked in that
high condition, that they can do what they will, (it is to be feared) will not
always do what they ought. The first motions of a provoked King, or of a
Prince less virtuous ought to be feared, as much as lightning. His rage and
wrath are equally terrible; he no sooner hates, but is on fire with
indignation; he is no sooner displeased, but speedily punishes all whom he
suspecteth to displease him: Innocence cannot stop his fury, his executions are
as swift as his thoughts, his passion is sometimes so violent, that it runs
headlong into a precipitation, where Reason is not admitted to plead, nor
Justice administered, but Clemency utterly forgotten. It Is true, a Kingdom may
be unfortunate where two Princes are equally vicious, but if the one have
inclinations to virtue, they will prevent the errors and defaults of sociall
mistakes: But it is rare in Nature to see two men (much less two Princes) of
the same humors and tempers, yet some advantage may be extracted out of the
diversity of their vices: If one be lazy and idle, it may restrain the choler,
and impatience of the other; the coldness of the one may serve to correct the
hot and passionate humor of his companion. And he who is too slow may equally
be quickened by him who is superactive and vigorous: And why should not that
noble emulation which inliveneth skillful Artists, and has made great persons
Competitors in Virtues, cause Kings and Princes more eminent in their Office
and Government? From such an innocent Contestation may arise the secure result
of peace to a Kingdom, greater Glory to the State, abundant plenty and
happiness to the People. For when a King makes use of his Counselors, which
may be sage, faithful and wise, yet they are of no other use to him then books
are to private subjects, he consults with them but when he pleases, admits no
conference, but when he calls, believes as he likes, and acts nothing
but what agrees with his inclination, and perhaps no part of that which has
been presented in advice; But in this united Government, affairs are not so
transacted. Great resolves ought to be at least in the Consultations of two,
and the very time of debate may contribute some more exact advantage: The
diversity of their opinions and apprehensions may serve to produce a more
perfect discussion: And these considerations (if they effect not a happy
conclusion) they may at least prevent a precipitation and ruin to the State,
and to preserve the Kingdom from a Foreign invasion, or from the combustion
and broiles of Civil War, which are not easily quieted without general
destructions. Weigh the conveniences with the dangers of two equal in
Government, the condition will be more secure, either in Peace or War. In a War
the one may govern with Counsel, the other as General command the Army: The
one in the Court derive Justice to the People, the other in the Camp order
Martial affairs to the encouragement of the Soldier, and terror of the
Enemy. It being very difficult in such a juncture of danger to preserve the
Civil part from acts of high injustice, and the Martial from a deep
resentment of discontent. Seditions and Conspiracies are the common mothers of
Civil Wars, which (like more Venomous and Putredinous Creatures generated
farther from the Sun) have their birth, and are begotten in the absence of
their Kings. Where, if the Beams of authority did shine, the Government would
be more illustrious, and secure. Do we not see both in martial and civil
Government, both in the Camp and Courts of justice, that there are officers and
Ministers who in the absence of the chief Commanders and Magistrate, are
invested with their authority? and why may it not be as just and reasonable,
for a Prince, to have an associate on the Throne? not inferior to him, but his
equal, to this end, as not only to advise and counsel, but likewise to be a
sharer of his vast employments, and so thereby contribute an equal assistance
to support the weight of the Crown and Scepter. In this relation inferior
Persons cannot serve but feebly, in respect of those who have the sacred
Character. If you will say, subserviency in Authority may be equally useful; I
answer, Delega^ion of power is potent in those who grant it, but more feeble
and weak in those who receive it: Inferior creatures (subject to a change and
Princely displeasure) have not that Gallantry and Nobleness of mind, as those
who have the high and Divine marks of Sovereignty imprinted on them. Generals,
and great officers of State, mind more their private interest then that of the
Crown, and commonly study more to make themselves then their master great. But
two Princes of equal interest in the same Crown, as two obedient Sonns in one
mother are only divided in their persons, but not in their desires; Their
Glory is the same, their Throne, their Scepter, their Crown, their People,
their united interest: And consequently in this Community, they act with
greater order, and proceed with greater Prudence, and enjoy not only those
preheminencies which Monarchy is said to have above other Governments, but even
those also which seem to render an Aristocracy advantageous. The grand Presence
of Sovereignty seems divided, but the Puissance is entire; They are as two
great lights in the same Orb, where the authority is equal: The People though
they have two Princes, yet they pay but one tribute, and if their judgments
differ, the Government grows more secure, and the Princes and people in more
safety by their dissenting harmony. This capacity renders a Kingdom more
immortal, and admits not an Interregnum though one dye: Nor those Confusions
which are very common at the inopine and sudden deaths of Princes. By this
means a Civil War may be prevented; that power being communicated to my
brother, which was derived to me from my Uncle, wh^ might study an usurpation,
and the Commotions of the Kingdom, if I had not imparted this Grace and Favor
to him. And (if I mistake nor) in this action I shall gain this honor, that I
shall easily be supposed able to overcome all other Passions after my having
been victorious over ambition, which is so natural to princes. And who shall
suspect me covetous after my having admitted my brother to the moiety of my
Kingdom? Nor do I abandone those whom God has committed to my charge; But
contrariwise give them a second Protector, thereby endeavoring to provide the
more for their safety. It may be objected that I am not so discreet, parting
with a thing so puissant and precious as a Scepter: Yet moderation merits
Elogies, as well as ambition. Humble Virtues are as commendable as aspiring and
tumultuous honor, and to reign in peace with Justice, is as glorious as to
Conquer triumphantly in War. It is fit for a Prince to have the Theory of
Violence and severity, but not to practice it, if it be possible. In this
condition, if the Moors shall invade us with their Forces, our Armies and
theirs ready to join, the Enemy may be amazed to see two Crowned heads in the
Front, and body of the Battalia, or the one in Counsel as the other in the
Camp, and so conclude a Throne thus supported, is with more difficulty
destroyed and subdued.

The Censure.
DON RAMIR has used his strongest arguments for the pretenses of his Brothers
Co-regency and Coronation, but whatever this Kings self persuasions were to
him, his discourse may be justly censured a Paradox; And a wise man (in this
resolution) would rather have been o^t of his Kingdom then of his Counsel. As
for the Kings of Sparta which he proposes for example, they were rather the
chief of the Senate then Sovereign Princes. And as for the Lacedemonian Ephori,
who condemned one of their Kings to dye, it is well known that the King of
Lacedemon was but a painted and titular, not an absolute King; And as for DON
RAMIR, he could never have established the ill custom of Sparta in the Kingdom
of Spain, he might have so concladed if he had been a Prince, as high in
resolution as birth. Kings are not to degenerate by liberality to Communicate
Sovereignty, and thereby to disgrace, if not to destroy Royalty it self. That
great Prince who only aimed in all his Conquests, to get that he might give,
satisfying himself with fresh hopes, still reserved his Crown entire. The beams
of Sovereignty are no longer radient then in the presence of the Sun; This
Magnanimous Hero (ready to dye) kept his Crown on his Pillow, and being moved
to whom he would commend his Scepter, he answered to him who deserved, it best,
when I am dead.

And altheagh Arideus his Brother was in the head of his Army, yet at the point
of death he would not name his Succcessor, to preserve his puissant Royalty
more entire, to the last moment of his life. He said truly on another occasion,
Ephestion was another Alexander; but understood thereby that Alexander had
given him his heart, not his crown; that he made him his favorite, and not his
equal. That great Prince, who wrote to Darius that the whole earth ought not
to have two Masters, no more then the heavens two Suns, taught the world
another resolution then what Don Ramir practiced; and though he conquered Tire,
yet he would never suffer the Royal Robe of Purple to be communicated. This
action of Ramir is (as Divines say) more admirable then imitable: for Royalty,
like a Mathema^ical point ought to be indivisible, and that body that has more
then one head, ought not to be interpreted any other then a monster. Philosophy
says, omne bonum est sui diffusivum; but Fortune has another Maxim clean
contrary. The first speaks of intellectual goods, the second admits not, nor
will suffer the community, and participation of Crowns; she will be rather
offended to see such an illustrious condition in a divident, and cannot endure
that any shall be admitted to her glorious favors, holding them too precious
to be rendered divisible and common. Pluralities of Caesar's can neither be good
for Prince nor people, was a speech which the Philosopher Arius used to
Augustus; when he alluded to a verse of Homer, then when after the death of
Anthony and Cleopatra this Prince disputed with himself, whether it were better
to put the young Caesar to death, or save his life. And if the amity of private
persons ought to go no higher then the Altar, the grace and favors of Princes
ought to go no higher then the Throne; although the Church sings, Ecce quam
bonum and jucundum fratres habitare in unum, yet she intends the union of
private persons, and not of Kings in their high degrees; of brothers who dwell
in a house together, and not of them who sit in Thrones: Oh how pleasant is
this Feast? said a solitary churl to one of his humor, who did answer as
bitterly, Yes, if thou were not alive to enjoy it: That which this hater of
mankind said of his Table, may be rightly said of Sovereignty, where a Prince
can never sit at ease, or secure but when he sits alone. God made man after his
own Image; and how can Kings be said to be his Image, but in taking care that
they admit not any to resemble them. Royalty like Rivers, if divided, flow and
fall into shallow streams, which either quickly freeze, or are speedily dried
up. In this example, Don Ramir is like a Rock in the Sea, rather to be avoided
by Princes then imitated; if any shall be so weak to permit their reason to be
so deluded. Monarchy (as the Greek word has the signification) is not
separable, and the Scripture warranteth, that no one can well serve two
Masters. Having now concluded of one too excessive in his bounty, let us treat
of a Prince more judicious and wise; who though he graced his favorite with
great honors, and liberal dignities, yet was more morally and divinely
prudent. JAMES the First, King of England came to that Crown by the testament
and death of Queen Elizabeth, those, who knew that her Majesty had put to death
the Queen of Scots, his Mother, designed to oblige the King to revenge that
injury, by punishing those who were the Ministers, and Counselors of that
violent and sad accident, and so to revenge the blood of Mary Queen of Scots
with the blood of those Creatures who contrived her death. It is a subject so
delicate and tender as not to be touched or decided without his great judgment
and reason, whose Kingly examination could determine so weighty a difference:
He was another Solomon, and exalted Reason and Philosophy with him to his
Throne.

portrait of King James Kings have their Periods; by Dame Natures date, The
poor man dies, so does the Potentate; And though to ye Worlds eye Kings seem
compleater, Their standing high, makes but their fall the greater. Vaughn (...)

KING JAMES TO THE DVKE OF LENOX.
IF I did not know (most noble, and faithful Cosen) that he, who in the
Scriptures is called the God of vengeance, is also styled the God of Mercy; It
might prove a piece of great difficulty to my reason what to resolve in this
tickle point, and whether I were better to endeavor a general alteration of
whatsoever Queen Elizabeth settled, who caused my Mother to be put to death; or
to countenance and maintain those glorious actions, which were done by that
Virgin Queen, who made me King of England. For as Sovereigns are the Images of
Divinity (if the second Attribute corrects not the severitie of the first) I
were obliged certainly in duty to require blood for blood, and not ascend the
Throne without resolving to cause those to ascend a Scaffold, and there to dye,
through whose violent counsels she lost her head, from whom I received my
breath. But as vindicative Justice is not ever necessary, let us examine
curiously a circumstance which so equally concerns mine own glory, and my
Kingdoms happiness. Let us consider whether I had better to punish, or pardon,
whether the works of Injuries ought to harbor in Princes breasts; or whether
they may not more prudently forget, then chastise them. It is not (I protest)
otherwise, but as often as the Image and memory of the Queen my Mother is
represented to my fancy, my thoughts are afflicted deeply, and I resent
strongly, that no Christian, nor profane policy can permit me to live with
honor, and without immortal infamy, if I cause not those to be put to death,
who contrived and counseled to take away her life; (for when I recollect that
a Sovereign Queen, the Daughter, Sister, and Wife of great Kings; whose
Infancy was protected under the Crown of Scotland, whose riper years advanced
her to the Crown of France, who bore Illustrious Diadems upon her head, whose
hand swaied two glorious Scepters, who in her Widdowhood saw my self her Son a
King: Consider (I say) a Princess, attended with so many heaps of glory, after
she was constrained to fly from her own Kingdom, and was most ingloriously
committed to prison, where extremity forced her to make her confinement her
Asyle; where (after the languishing of twenty years) receiving no air but
through some windows, and as if a prison had been weary of her company, not to
go out but to ascend a Scaffold, and not to be discharged of her sufferings
but by the hand of an Executioner; and then her head to be cut off
ignominiously, which had borne two Royal Crowns, the representation of these
circumstances are so terrible, that they obfuscate and trouble my reason, and
render me incapable to have any other thoughts but what are surprised with sad
confusions, to behold such a doleful spectacle, which possessed all my
apprehensions with terror and Amazement. Yes (my Lord) I see with weeping eyes
this most unfortunate Queen, whose hair^s have grown white rather with grief
and discontent then age, and that tears furrowed her beauty, and not her length
of days: How funest and direful must my conceptions be, looking upon her
prison all hanged with black, and funeral flames lighting her to the Chambers
of death, where nothing presented any beauty or constancy but her Majesty
attended with Patience, and the Virtue of a Divine Soul. The eyes of all the
Spectators broake up, as fresh Fountains, over-swelling with tears of sorrow;
her very Enemies, if they did not weep, yet blushed for shame, or waxt pale for
grief: The whole World felt an inundation and new flood of grief; sorrow, and
sadness possessed all who considered of this unfortunate event, except her
self encouraged by her innocence, supported by her Majesty; the Executioner
himself (by his sad countenance and trembling hand) expressed the thoughts of
his heart, his fears to strike, his willingness to save her. But in the end
(Maugre all this universal compassion) her fair head fell to the ground, her
scarlet blood trickled from her veins, and her pulses keeping no longer time,
that beautiful Creature was rendered a dead Corpse. All these circumstances
plead aloud in my breast for vengeance, and remove my resolutions utterly from
the thoughts of pardon; The Queen my dear Mother had a soul so inured with
afflictions, that she was not terrified at the approach of death, nor amazed
with the horror of that punishment, which was ready to surprise her with so
strong a violence, but even in that Agony expressed her maternall thoughts and
care of me, her generous* kindness was such to me, that her bitter afflictions
could not obstruct her tender affections to her Son. No, not when she was
ascending her infamous Scaffold, it becomes me then not to forget her ascending
to my Throne. Grief did not seize upon her reason, though Death upon her Body,
and it is fit then that joy should not now give a chock to mine; and though we
could not hinder her death, we cannot do less then punish those that caused
it. In all these recollections, I cannot make any reparation to her, her
recovery being impossible; nor to my self, by the revolving over of those
occurrencies, but cause new additions of grief and sorrow, which are most
natural and proper for the passions of a Son: It is neither wisdom nor
Religion to be too violent in any extremity. To proceed then to a more exact
examination; the Royal and Prudent Queen Elizabeth may incur a censure in
the World as less politic and wise, who permitted her self to be persuaded
to so horrible an action: And as for this example, it is of too dangerous a
Nature for Princely qualities to imitate; It is certain that the persons of
Kings and Queens, like Temples and Altars, are more sacred, and all care is to
be used that they be not demolished, no nor rudely touched; and a resolution to
summon such to judgment agrees not with Royal persons, nor justice and
reason. The Laws, which (without doubt) search out Rules for the order of all
things, and admit no crime to pass without impunity, yet never found out nor
ordered any Castigation or punishment for Royal persons. The Laws bear a
respect to t^eir Masters, and Legisla^ors in all Nations, and they are not to
submit to their Severity; and although they command the rest of all the whole
universe, yet (in their sense in this matter) they proclaim to all the World,
that their being and dependency is of Kings, and that Sovereigns are not
subordinate and dependant to them. It belongs to Princes to punish the Crimes
of their People, and to none but God to punish the Crimes of Prin^es. The Queen
then though Noble, and in other things a most excellent Princess, was
Enormious and irregular in these proceedings, in which she forbore not to spill
the blood of one of equal quality with her self, that cannot but perpetuate to
her memory a black reputation, and the example is so exceedingly strange, that
it finds no president in any Antiquity. In effect, if Kings are to submit to
ordinary justice, the Majesty of Thrones is dissolved, when they are forced to
the Scaffold, their Scepters are profaned, and Monarchy grows transformed
into Anarchy, and if such a Rigorous progress be admitted, the foundations of
Royallty will be everted, Princes will be robbed of the respects and duty of
their people, and they deprived of their protection and be confounded; This
would Eclips the splendour of the most imperial Crowns, and destroy and
magnificence of the most secured Thrones, Scepters, and Robes of Royallty be
contemptible, and venerable Majesty be in no value or estimation, the sacred
Character (which distinguishes Crowns) would be defaced, and Kings would not
only cease to retain their Royal Dignity, but surcease to be the Image of God.
After all these considerations let us examine whether it be consistant with my
renown to receive the Crown of England, and to make use of that Sovereign power
to revenge these particular injuries: And whether that hand which gave me the
Crown ought not to be respected in the person of her cruel Counselors, who
transported her to cause the Queen of Scots to dye. Those who judiciously
consider affairs without partiality, and preoccupation, can judge, that Revenge
only belongs to God, and that the Acts of justice, not of vengeance belongs
to Kings. Such judgments conclude that Princes can reward or punish, and
refer the vindicative part to God himself, for Revenge (in what shape soever
it appears,) does not ordinarily spri^g or proceed, but from the motion of a
violent passion, when reason is in troubles and deprived of liberty; Fury is a
companion of Revenge, and throws down immoderate bounds, and limits; hatred
exasperateth fury, and sets revenge in such an address as this, effects not
only extreme injustice, but likewise most horrid cruelties It is most j^st then
to transfer the revenge of injuries to God himself, who (free from passion) can
punish without hat^ed or fury. If the case be so with all men in general, how
prone may Princes prove to outrages? their passions do not like greater bodies
turn with slower motions, but are as swift and terrible as lightning; they
whose power is greater, their displeasure is too apt to grow more dangerous.
yet (my Lord) perhaps you will tell me this discourse is rather a Moral then a
Political argument. To that I answer, that with virtuous Princes, these two
things, justice and mercy ought to be inseparable, and as twins to their
mothers breasts, they are to be equally admitted to Kings Counsels, where they
may propose or dispute, but never directly oppose each other: principally when
the Matter is important. It Is true, Tyrants call but one of these to their
resolute deliberations, but a Christian Prince must have the company of both in
the dispensation of all their Royal Offices; be not you amazed then if I admit
her who is more Sage and wise to speak first, before we admit the other, who,
as we account, is more bold and hardy, and if on this subject I appeal to her,
whose assistance I judge necessary to oppose the other: It is true, the noise
of the second (who is more loud) is more commonly heard, but the advice of both
is best, and more conformable to Christian Government; But seeing there is no
matter which according to the fancy of the Artists may not be discolored, and
so the Complexion altered, what appearance (will some one say) presented it
self to impress a resolution in the Kings of France and Spain to revenge the
death of Mary Steward Queen of Scots, and can you who are a Son do less? what
security can you fancy your self to affie in those who were in the Counsels,
and who drew up the process, and made themselves Peers to a Sovereign Queen,
and then to pronounce a sentence of death against her? The names of Thomas
Bromley Lord Chancellor, of William Burleigh Lord Treasurer, of Edward Earl of
Oxford Lord Chamberlain, of George Earl of Salisbury Lord Marshall of
England, of Ambrose Earl of Warwick Master of the Ordnance, of Henry Earl of
Derby, of George Earl of Cumberland, of Edward Earl of Rutland, of Henry Earl
of Pembrook, of Henry Earl of Lincoln, and those others, these names (I say)
do present not only horror to those who then effectively condemned the
Dowager of France and Queen of Scots to death; but do derive the same to all
those who shall bear those titles, with a black stain of in justice and
dishonor. Think you that those who have been so severe and rigorous to the
Mother, can ever be reduced to be loyal and obedient to her Son? at least, do
you believe that you can ever confide in them, or they in you, seeing that they
have been so cruel to a Princess, and caused her imprisonment twenty years, who
in all right, ought not to have been under their command? were they not over
bold to lay their hands on my most dear Mother, when they considered that I her
Son was lawful successor to that Crown? how might I give credit to their
words or counsels, but rather expect their designs to ruin my self, my Queen
and Children, who had been so barbarous to root up that Royal stock which bare
me? may not I rather be jealous that those who had provided an Executioner for
the Mother, would have found out a Regicide for me? and upon this juncto of
Reasons, might not they fear my resolutions, thus in raged to exterminate them
and their posterities? see (my Lord Duke) those reasons which oblige me to
decry and destroy what ever Qu. Eliz. and her party did, in causing the death
of my Royal Mother: from these arguments I can hardly resolve to maintain and
countenance Qu. Elizabeth's actions, though she discovered her willingness to
my Succession, to make me King of England. O (my Lord) there is yet a secret
within my soul which makes me conclude that it seems just that I should revenge
the cruelty of these Barbarous Politicians, which motion if I did not restrain
with more piety and greater prudence; the Reign of Henry the Eight, should not
be more full of terror and confusion, then that of James the First, and
England thereby see and feel more strange alterations then ever it had endured
before. In this Resolution the Tomb of the Queen my Mother should be covered
with the spoils of her, and my cruel Enemies; and revenge should be so full of
blood as capable to inspire terror into all, who should be spectators of that
action. This might be a means more securely to preserve the heads of all Kings
from the conspiracy of such violent, and evil Counselors. Though this policy
(at first notion) might seem prevalent, and most forcible to persuade my
resolution, yet other successes have administered cause and reasons for other
determinations. Seeing that very hand which signed the Warrant for my honored
Mothers death, signed the Declaration which caused me to be proclaimed King of
England. And as to this particular, I am as well bound to acknowledge and
reward so high a favor, as to revenge so high an injury. I am not ignorant how
that in this solemn action, that Queen gave me no more then what was mine own
by a just inheritance, and succession; and that by her Royal Testament she did
no more then confirm what was declared to me by King Henry the eight; yet if
this Princess had pleased, she might have declared that which might not have
proved so advantageous to my expectations; she might have objected, that my
dear Mother the Queen had not been of the Religion embraced in England, that
though she were a Queen, yet she was a Stranger: And as for my self, that I was
the Son of her whom she had caused to be destroyed: She might have caused her
Father King Henry his Will to be cancelled and annulled in Parliament, she
might have made another, and so have made a Favorite, or (if she had pleased)
her people her Heir: These difficulties might have obstructed my ascent, and
passage to the Crown. Besides, in this Act, if she did not repair, and render
satisfaction for her cruel error, yet she manifested to all the world her
resentment and detestation of what she had done, by recompencing her evil for
good; and that having been circumvented by persons as unjust as wicked, she
could elect, or follow better counsels; and if her jealousy and malice had so
far transported her, as to cause her to put my Royal Mother to death, it was
not through those passions, that she caused me her Son to be crowned. The ill
humor of malice is not easily purged, nor quickly abandoned, it usually
reaches not only the person hated, but all coneomitants and relations near.
Children and Kindred grow odious where a Parent is in detestation, and dislike;
this infection reaches often to those who are of a name; and (perhaps) stops
not, but grows epidemical, and produces odium to a Nation. In the effects of
this Queens proceedings I find other operations, the Queen expresses no malice
to my person, but rather on the contrary, studies my honor, and endeavors my
Coronation: And from hence I may most rationally conclude, that some secret
maxim, and policy of State put a resolution to that savage action; and
consequently if any duty binds me to forget her memory who caused my Mother to
dye, or being the Son of so great a Queen; yet in all the rules of gratitude
and prudence, I am bound to honor and respect her Nobleness and great favors
to me, whom she adopted her Son, and Successor to her Throne. But (may some one
object) will it not be enough that you eternize not her memory by prejudicial
manifestoes to her honor and reputation, that you destroy not her Tomb, and
that you permit her Ashes to sleep quietly in repose, but that you must
continue your Royal Authority in the hands of those Ministers which were her
creatures, and let them still enjoy those high offices wherein they exercised
such unheard of inhumanity, and in persons, who made no scruple to put his
Mother to death, who was heir aparent to the Crown, and could not fail (if he
survived) to be their sovereign? I confess (my Lord) this reason is very
strong and sound, and the answer that I shall make is no less. I told you
before she acknowledged me to be her heir, and adopted me her Son, so that if I
should have revenged her actions with severity, I should most imprudently have
presumed to have censured the errors and deviations of my greatest benefactor
too bitterly, and like impious children, not only have hated the vices, but
the person of so great a Queen: But good Children, though they may hate unjust
proceedings of their Parents, are not only to forbear to punish, but are
obliged to cover and conceal their errors and infirmities; To distinguish
perfectly betwixt the crimes and the offenders, who (though never so Culpable)
yet they can hold them worthy of honor and admiration. We may weep then
bitterly for the death of the Queen my Mother, and yet not proceed to an
accusation, or be severe to Queen Elizabeth, since the one was my Mother by
Nature and blood, and the other made me a Son by her election when she lived,
and her Testament (when she dyed) left me a Crown. Adoption (in all ages) has
been received as an action not to be violated, but with great injustice, and
venerable history (in her antiquity) accompanies truth with her examples, and
boldly tells us, that we owe an equal respect to those who have adopted, as
really as to those who have given birth unto their Children. Adoption has
conveyed Crowns and Empires often to those who have been received and
acknowledged by all the World in their Thrones and Sovereignty: and it is just
to imagine that the choicest respect is ever due to the bounty of the Adopter.
Parents who give us our Nativity, do not always leave us an inheritance, which
perhaps fortune or ill events have deprived from them; but those who in their
Election freely transfer their estates to us, their gift, as it is most
admirable for its merit, so it ought to be more noble in acceptance, and
consequently their voluntary choice may seem (if possible) to oblige us more,
then our Natural Parents. When first we come into the World, our Parents
cannot but incline with tender affection unto us; the cause of that passionate
and tender quality is a secret and mystery concealed in our blood, and rises
from the inclinations of Nature, and yet that amity (how strong soever) seems
not to differ much from the instinct of brutes, which naturally forces their
love and care toward their young ones. But in Adoption, there is another
operation, there is an affection and choice, and that springs not rudely from
sense, but from the strength of reasons, where the Agent strictly examines the
object, before it fall in love with it, and dotes not with fancy, but with
wisdom, before it orders gifts or setleth possessions. In effect I am very
certain, if Queen Elizabeth had not believed that my Soul had been more
inclined to generosity then revenge, she would not have commended her
Sovereignty and Crown to me, she would not have acquitted all her favorites,
and remitted her Scepter to my hands: there would not have been wanting
persons, neither within nor without the Kingdom, capable enough to support or
defend a Scepter. We may resolve then, if she have called me to the Throne, it
was because she judged me worthy, because she believed it appertained to me,
because she hoped I would render respect to her memory, and never violate or
break those bonds of love; and having regard to the Nobleness of her favors
toward me, I might be more firmly obliged from all thoughts of Revenge, in a
matter clean out of the reach of reparation; and to which, oblivion and silence
prescribed the best remedies. Do not you believe (my Lord) if (at my coming to
the Crown) I had filled the Prisons with the Grandees of the Kingdom, who were
the chief Authors of my Mothers death, and had commended to the great Offices
of the Kingdom such ignorant persons, who had had no employment or trust under
Queen Elizabeth, think you not that such a sudden alteration would have
caused a speedy general Confusion over all the Kingdom, and that at my first
access to the Crown, I might seem to govern neither with safety nor honor?
Should I have banished those bloody Counselors, all the secrets and mysteries
of State might have been discovered to foreign Princes; some of them were
Ministers, and employed under King Edward the Sixth, some under Queen Mary, and
others under Qu. Elizabeth, who was too wise to discharge those whom she judged
fit for continuance in such high employments, though they had been prime
parties in other factions, and violent Enemies against her person and interest.
Yet (may one object) she had no occasion to think on Revenge, for those who
caused her Mother Anne Bullen to be put to death, and were Counselors and
abettors of that act, they were dead long before Queen Elizabeth began to
Reign. But I shall easily answer to that: her actions were chiefly employed for
the conservations of her self, for during the Reign of her Sister Queen Mary,
she being unjustly suspected to have been a conspirator with those who
endeavored to hinder the match with Spain; the Privy Council concluded that
she deserved the same destiny as Jane of Suffolk, and was in danger to have
lost her head; of which result in Council, the Lady Elizabeth not being
ignorant, waited with patience her better fortune; and after coming to the
Crown, she preserved in memory their names, who had been such desperate
Counselors against her, and in process of time, she met with opportunities to
revenge those particular injuries; but upon new and fresh pretenses. We are not
then to be less prudent then she, whose dangers are as great, and business as
infinite: Besides, in this action of her adoption, she has not only aimed at
my renown, but likewise at the repose and welfare of the people, so that her
example guides me in the paths of policy, and not to provoke and anger the
Hornets nests, when I may pass by quietly (without the least murmuring) to my
Crown. If then I should be superactive in such a dangerous design, in whose
fidelity and strength might I confide? the number of the offenders is not so
inconsiderable, as to persuade me to dream that I can destroy them in a moment;
and as for relation to themselves, they are not only acquainted with all
mysteries of State; but they are likewise active Ministers of state in the
chiefest places of the Kingdom, wherein as they have gained much Treasure, so
doubtless they have obtained the hearts of the people, whereby a greater
difficulty would arise if I should contest rashly against such a party. Besides
to commence a Reign with a Civil War, were to put the State and Kingdom in a
capacity of desolation, and such a violent motion might invite the people to
such a hatred of me, that they might be hardly or never reconciled. If I had
resolved on this course, an hundred thousand Innocent persons might have
perished in the design of a revenge of a few notorious Counselors, this had
been to undertake a great Evil for the bringing to effect a little good. If I
should exterminate all, whom I neither can, nor ought to love, such a Revenge
would produce but a feeble satisfaction. The blood o Kings is to precious too
be satisfied with the blood of Subjects, and all that I might do (in such a
re-encounter) might prove unworthy of a Royal Prince, who (as I said before)
honors Virtue and Morality as well as Policy. The oblivion of injuries is an
Act every way as noble as revenge: And in some cases more glorious, principally
then when one forgets not an outrage which he dares not revenge, only because
his wisdom judges it not fit. In this occasion, I ought seriously to consider
that I do not only receive the Scepter from the hands of a Woman, but from her
who has swayed it very gloriously, and has reigned with honor, from a Lady
who knew how to govern in peace, and vanquish in War, who could stop and
prevent revolts as well as defend her self from forraigners: And could force
her subjects and her neighbors to fear her if they did not love her; and was
so fortunate as who triumphed over all who ever dared to oppose her. I leave
you then to judge (my Lord Duke) if a Prince whom so illustrious a Queen called
to the Throne, should begin his Reign by the destruction of all, which she had
maturely established. If I should not give occasion to all men to believe, that
the Kingdom would be speedily reduced to disorders, and confusion: And
consequently nothing to be expected but Ruin and desolation. It is very
important that the first Action of Princes should presage the symptoms of
their Reign, and foretell their last conclusions. Wherefore in the first step
to a Throne, the Prince is obliged to depose and set apart all passion, and
admit no company to that Royal seat but tru^ Glory: The memory of what is past
is not so necessary as the consideration of what is present, and a provision of
what is to come: In which high degree, it will be an addition of Renown to
outstrip and surpass in virtues all who have preceded. The Prince (if he be
wise) will prepare his desires not to revive the errors of his predecessors,
nor to publish them, but to avoid them; and I could not but be guilty of
injustice, if I should dare to declare my self absolute Judge of the Actions of
Queen Elizabeth, who suffered her wisdom to hearken to those Counselors,
whom she judged most able for her advice. Her Actions are not to be examined by
any alive, but only God in his Tribunal: the same obligation which should
have preserved her from causing the Queen of Scots to dye, forbids me to
intermeddle in the censure of her Royal proceedings. So that if I honor her
memory, it was because she was a Queen, if I cover and hide her errors, it is
because she made me her Adopted Son, if I continue her creature in the
employment of mine affairs, it is because the Kingdoms safety and repose
requires it. As for private injuries, as they are commonly betwixt the
subjects, they are less considerable with Princes. That famous Roman spoke not
amiss. Who said, that Caesar's Erection of Pompeys Statues might better secure
his own, and makes me apprehend (in this argument) that a confirmation of what
Queen Elizabeth did, may better ratify what I shall establish during my Reign,
and that respect which I render to her memory, will be presented to my person,
and that I shall act nothing tending toward her honor, but what shall reflect
to mine advantage. The change of great Officers in a Kingdom is little less
dangerous then the change of the Prince, which ought not to be without great
and weighty considerations. Affairs of State ought not slightly to be
managed, and if a maxim be resolved on, it is more safe to proceed then
dishonourably to retreat. What Variety of dangers might I expose my self and
Kingdom to, if I should think fit to banish those who under the Queen have
been the chief supporters and Governors of the State? It was not now long
since the Reformation of Religion, at which time particular Interests (under
the shapes of devout pretenses) promoted those terrible alterations; should I
then think of dying Thames in blood, as my Ancestors had done not long before.
I know, I cannot (with mine own honor) stain their reputation, but I may be
defended if I only remember their errors the better to avoid them; let us
then think it fit, not to hearken to that bloody Policy which establishes not
Thrones, but with the ruin of those who ought to support it; Who pardon none
with Clemency, but injustly condemn the least appearances of evil, and in
satisfaction to their own ambition, bear no respect to the highest quality of
men, and reverence no sex, no laws, nor virtue her self: but (on the
contrary) let us hearken to that rational Policy which foundeth Thrones and
Crowns in the preservation of the Grandees, which has inclinations mercifully
to pardon and condemn not to an extremity; who can honor a Royal person in
her Tomb, who can reverence Laws and virtue to such a degree, that he has
respect for her memory, who would not be satisfied, but with the blood of his
Mothers. I know some are of opinion, that a tempestuous commencement prepares a
way to a more secure Reign, but in my judgment (on this occasion) that Policy
is too desperate; for if I pardon all who have offended, it is impossible but
some party should be affected with my generosity; and if I should punish all, I
should inevitably multiply mine Enemies, in their Kindred, in their Friends,
and their dependencies; who (on such a Provocative pretense) might raise an
Army against me, which (in all probability) may prove no less valiant then
that sacred bond of the Ancients, who being armed, marched with greatest
violence to revenge the death of their Father, their Brothers, and their
Friends. Yet you will answer me, things of greatest difficulty (being effected)
render the most absolute duty. To that I reply, if they be injust, they ought
not so much as to be attempted. True glory does not ever attend the most hardy
enterprise, and matters of greatest difficulty. Moreover a Prince ought not to
expose the lives of his subjects to the peril of death, whether it be in War
or Peace, without great necessity, and prudent consultation; for their blood is
the most precious and sole Jewel, of which he ought to have the most exactest
care, and he had rather be sparing and thrifty of that choicest Treasure, then
of all other of his Estate. For it is for that principally, for which he shall
render an account to him who gave him Sovereignty: Who permits him not (above
all other restraints) to be abusive and prodigal of his subjects blood. From
the considerations of these reasons, we incline to save the lives of our
subjects, and (at our first coming to the Crown) rather chose to court our
enemies with the favor of Clemency, then to correct them with the Rod of
Justice. On these grounds we shall render honor to the memory of Queen
Elizabeth, and countermanding our natural affection with reason, and policy we
will make the whole world confess that we are not unworthy to Reign and to
enjoy our Princely Throne. Passing by then our Royal Mothers hearse, let us
look up toward the Throne, to which the Queen of England has prepared and
facilitated our ascent; let us suspend that tenderness of Soul which might
dissolve us with tears, and mind nothing more, but true nobleness and
generosity, remembering, it belongs to a Prince properly to pardon private
injuries, and that it is a chief point of wisdom not to lose fair and fit
occasions; for in an observation so seasonable the Estate and public good may
be more highly advanced, and more solid Laws ordained for their preservation.
In these resolutions we embrace and welcome our present condition, concluding,
that the general repose of the Kingdom requires it, that mine own glory
consents to it, and that my Soul is resolved to maintain, by a disinteressed
virtue all that Queen Elizabeth established, who though she took away the life
of my Mother, commended a Crown and Kingdom to me her Son.

The Censure.
IT is a question very Problematicall, and a controversy much disputed among
Politicians, whether Clemency or Rigor be more necessary or profitable for
Princes, and which of the two render their Kingdom more peaceful and
glorious. Both opinions want not strong desendors; since the World began, this
question has not received a full resolution: some affirm it is better to be
loved then feared; others, that it is better to be feared then loved; each one
(in the order of his contention) fortifies his opinions and arguments; Rigor
pretends to carry more of Majesty, Clemency has a beam of glory, which
seems to shine with more humanity; the one says she rules more securely, the
other that she reigns more honorably; both strive to bear away the Palm. A
famous Politician feared not to say, that a Prince ought to puff at that
infamy which seems to stain his reputation, because he was cruel; the
reason is, because that quality renders his subjects more obedient. But (in my
opinion) this is to set on fire the Temple of Diana. When Machiavell broached
this false proposition he prepared an infamous memory to himself, which his
book still retains. In effect, if glory be certainly the proper object of
renowned princes, how can they support infamy as a matter indifferent? And how
can that Prince who Reigns without honor live a moment without danger? We
cannot be ignorant of that ancient sentence, he who scorns his own life may
easily become Master of another; and what can provoke a man to be more violent
and desperate, then the cruelty and injustice of him who commands in chief?
Machiavell (the malicious Florentine) staide not at his first proposition, but
he said, 'twere good for a Prince to be loved and feared; but seeing it is a
thing impossible to enjoy both these passions at one time, in case either
should fail, it is much better to be feared then loved. Why should that
branded Politician make fear and love impossible and inseparable? could he be
ignorant that all the virtues consist in a concatenation, and are linked
together? Justice and Clemency are not incompatible though they seem (almost)
contrary. Did he never read in the holy Scriptures, that the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of Wisdom? Or would he conclude thence this abominable
consequence, that because one was obliged to fear God, that therefore it was
impossible to love him? did he pretend to teach the world policy, and instead
thereof produce Atheism? Did he not know that there is as well a filial as a
servill fear, which second (though it be without Love) yet the first walks
with love hand in hand? This bewitching Spirit farther adds, Men love according
to their own pleasure, but they fear according to the pleasure of their
Prince, who if judicious and wise, ought to rely cheerfully on that strength
which d^pends on himself, and not on that Transient humor which depends on the
people. Where does Machiavill find that the Prince is not interessed to gain
his peoples love as well as their fear? Are not graces and favors as well in
his hands as the Sword of justice? and as for those who fear him, are they
utterly incapable of his honor and respect? It is an ancient precept, if thou will be beloved thou must be loving. This is natural, an innocent Magic and
works infallibly as well betwixt Kings and subjects as private persons. He who
makes freindship his treasure may be liberal, when he pleases without danger
of profusion. That Author was a gross flatterer and spoke little truth, who
styled Hanniballs cruelty a virtue, for in the same Argument he concluded
Clemency a vice. The holy Scriptures warrant that Abyssus Abyssum invocat, and
the Moralists tell us, that vices are linked and chained together as well as
virtues. To conclude then, this Juditious and wise King has been the disciple
of a better Master, and learned his Christian policy in a better Schooll; he
well understood that golden saying of Antiquity, Ne quid nimis: and he had
(doubtless) read in the French History, that it became not the King of France
to revenge the quarrels of the Duke of Orleance, and likewise it consisted not
with the wisdom of the King of England to revenge the quarrels of the Queen
of Scots, and therefore this most learned and prudent Prince did proceed
judiciously, and the felicity of his reign has left an assured testimony of
his wisdom to all the World. But seeing we are now in England, let us
discourse of another famous King who reigned in that Throne: and examine
another question as equally important and of as great curiosity to be
determined: an example which has no^ any impression in histories of Antiquity
Henry the seventh, who (before he came to the Crown) was styled Duke of
Richmond, after he had been a long time banished and an exile, returned into
England in the head of an Army: and gave battle to Richard the third, a Prince
of the house of York, who had u^urped the Crown, Henry having given an entire
defeat slew the usurper, and made himself absolute Master of the Kingdom;
being then at the point to enter into London (the Metropolis of the Kingdom)
he discreetly deliberated how he should receive the Crown, whether as
conqueror or lawful heir to the house of Lancaster, or as husband to
Elizabeth, Sister and Daughter to the la^e King of England, over whom the
Tyrant had usurped. See here his reasons, in preference of the second before
the other two, to confirm a right of succession without prejudice to that of
conqueror, or that Title of the Queen his wife.

HENRY THE SEVENTH TO THOMAS STANLEY.
IT is not enough for a Prince to know how to vanquish (faithful and loyal
Stanley) but it is necessary for him to understand how to make use of his
victory; The Battle which I have gained, must not so transport me with joy and
exaltation, as to persuade me to a security in my present condition; but that I
must think how to make my joys lasting and durable. I know well my Enemy is
dead, his Army defeated, his Tyranny destroyed, the blood Royal revenged, that
all England rejoices at my successes, and that the Soldiers, by their
public and general acclamations, have proclaimed me King, that the Princess
Elizabeth attends for my espousall, and that you (brave Stanley) have put
that Crown upon my head which Richard Barhawarly usurped from his innocent
young Nephew King Edward. Yet before I receive this Royal Honor, it becomes
me to examine, by what title and right I may most judiciously entertain it. The
Scepter appertains to me in several and different rights, which may
hereafter prove as different effects; therefore I judge it very proper to
advise what choice may prove most necessary to mine advantage, and most
glorious for my renown. In these different titles, I am not ignorant that
neither the time nor the place are (at present) convenient for so confident a
debate in a matter of so great importance; Being yet in the Camp after so
bloody a battle, where I am environed with so many dead and dying Friends, and
Enemies, where the outcry of some for their wounds, and the acclamations of
others for victory, makes such strange confusion, where some are so elevated
with joy and honor, others are tumultuously transported with the spoils, and
prey of the field, where the Victors are so tryumphant, and the subdued Enemies
so afflicted and dispierced: I am not ignorant (I say) that it might become me
rather to be Tryumphant with my Army, or to think of my repose, (after so great
a battle as has been fought) then to amaze my self with reasons and arguments
on this subject; but I know (most valiant Stanley) that Conquerors are never
weary, and it may be said truly of me, that I fought not now singly for honor,
as illustrious Romans have often done, whom nothing persuaded to the War but
the design of a Noble reputation; No, it was for the Throne and Crown of
England that I dared and fought with Richard, who portrait of Henry VII Titulum
ne horresce novantis, Non rapit Imperium vis tua, sed recipit. Ausonius de
Severo.
now destroyed, it becoms me to lay firm and sure foundations for my future
Reign, and Government: to effect which thing with judgment, I must examine how
I ought to receive the Crown, whether Tryumphantly as Conqueror, or pretending
to espouse Elizabeth the Daughter and Sister of the late King of England, or
else as Heir of the house of Lancaster, receiving the rights of that Royal
Family with design of prejudice to that of York, because the Nobles of the
Kingdom had been favorable to that house, whence Princess Elizabeth
descended, and have condemned the Rights and title of that of Lancast^r in so
many Parliaments. The first is a Title as hardy and bold as glorious, the
second was facile to be effected, but the third and last is certainly the best,
though it may appear more difficult and dangerous; but to consider these three
apart, let us examine first if that right of Conqueror may not lay the
foundation strong enough to bear up the Title and Crown of the King of England,
without a dependency and Co-assistance of that of Marriage with Princess
Elizabeth, or that of Inheritance and pretense to the right of descent to the
house of Lancaster. I am well assured (generous Stanley) that if you shall
demand my judgment and opinion in this difficulty (having found the Crown
which Richard woare amongst the booty and spoils of the field, and having come
to place it on my head) I am assured (I say) that you will conceive my judgment
may conclude, that I have no reason nor occasion to dream of Elizabeth's Title,
or to look so far as the house of Lancaster, nor to consider the blood of
either house: but that I should receive the Crown as Conqueror, and the reward
of Victory; and so presented from thy hands to him, who came to defeat and
destroy the usurper Richard, and by this sole conquest could now as easily
mount unto the Throne, as give the prey and spoils of the field to the
Soldiers of my Army. In effect it may be said, that Force and power are the
chiefest supporters of Monarchy, and founda^ion of Empires, these create the
Grandeur of Republiques, these founded Rome, and made her great and glorious,
till (at last) she became Mistress of the World. And as these did put up, so
they pulled down that glorious Empire; the same fate raised the Monarchies of
the Assyrians, of the Medes and Persians, of the Parthians, and Grecians, and
so many famous Governments, of Athens, Lacedemon, and Thebes; and of many
others, which have commanded and ruled, and ceased to Reign by the fortune and
fate of force and power, which alone have raised and destroyed Kingdoms since
the first Creation of the World. Power has as well made legitimate Kings as
barbarous usurpers, and the wheel of fortune could not turn to the Eversion
of Crowns and Thrones without the conjunction of her assistance; and noble
Titles, and the way to true Glory and renown, are commonly made by her: She
looks not after Pedigrees, nor searches after the Genealogies of Princes, who
Reigns within this Title; she has no occasion of Manifestoes to delude a
popular Credulity, and to deceive and amaze the Grandees of a Kingdom. It
suffices her to say, I have vanquished, I have gained the battle, my Enemy is
dead, his Throne belongs to me, and if the same force which made me vanquish,
can maintain and support my power, I am King, I will reign gloriously. See
(sage Stanley) what they will say, who be persuaded that force and power makes
a Title to be just and right. It is true, that some small commencements of War
have laid great foundations to future hopes, and powerful possessions of
Soveraignety have drawn on securely popular faith, and dutiful submissions.
And certainly (I think) before Religion set bounds to unlimited ambition of
Princes, this kind of Right was not only practiced and permitted, but seemed
most secure and serviceable: and (as to my self) I have had this advantage,
that I have chased from the Throne him who had usurped it by force, and not
only so, but basely by treason, and the violent death of his Prince and his
own nephews, and by such murders and execrable Crimes, that the very
mentioning and remembrance thereof, may amaze with horror: and it seems to
me more reasonable and possible that (these circumstances considered) a
Conqueror having vanquished so bloody an usurper, might be well received as a
legitimate Prince, and yet how glorious soever this title may seem, I judge it
fit to renounce it on this occasion, rather then to hazard to loose that which
I have now so fortunately and honorably gained. Who knows not but that those
Soldiers who marched with me to Combat with the Tyrant might forsake me, if I
(after the victory) became as horrid an oppressor as Richard. And who knows
but that the Nobles and Grandies of the Kingdom might be as resolutely
provoked against me as against the usurper, to a popular commotion and my
Eternal troubles, if I took the Title, and then (as most necessary) subjected
all things to the Conquerors will. The right of power belongs to others as
well as to me, and if I had not a Title more just, I should not have occasion
to seek for one that is evil; which if (at present) it may serve me, might as
well serve others in their turn. It Is true to begin to reign with such
resolution, might have the reputation of hardy and glorious; but such violence
could not continue to any long duration of time; an entire age (at least) might
be required to corroborate (with all the arts of policy and power of Sword) a
conquest of this kind, and in conclusion (before the people would be reduced
to obey without murmuring) a Prince would be constrained either to quit his
Throne or loose his life, and so cease to be a King or be alive, before he
could reap and enjoy the fruits of his victories. Besides (as the affairs of
England stood) the Title of Conqueror might have proved too terrible to the
people, and too dangerous to the Prince, at that season, when (in all
appearances) a quality more equitable was more requisite, and it was not fit
then to administer the least pretext to the people, that might exasperate their
clamourous humor to decry their Princes marching toward, and not as yet
securely seated in his Throne. It is always an ill conjuncture when a subject
renders his obeisance to his Prince, not because he conceives it his duty, but
because he dares do no otherwise; a Prince is never well served with such
forced devoires, nor the subject well satisfied with such unpleasant Commands.
Perhaps (Noble Stanley) you will tell me yet that there is another way whereby
I may more safely ascend to the Throne, which policy does not only teach me to
be secure, but morality persuades me, is very heroic and noble; yes (faithful
Stanley) I know well if I espouse Princess Elizabeth, I shall not need to set
forth any declarations to manifest my Title and Right to the Crown, she being
sister and daughter to the late Royal Kings; the people look upon her as the
true and undoubted heir of the kingdom, And marrying her after my vanquishing
of the Tyrant who slew her Brothers, and usurped the Crown from her, and swayed
that Scepter which belonged to her; I doubt not, but for this, I should be
honored as the Liberator of the Estate, and esteemed as Heroic and Generous;
that all the People would extremely honor me, and that my moderation should be
admired as most extraordinary, and infinitely valuable after such victorious
successes. But, to speak truth, I should doubt extremely if I made choice of
this way, whether I might be esteemed to have been as Prudent as I had been
Fortunate, and whether I had not better have received my Crown from the hands
of fortune in expectation of the continuance of her favors, rather then from
the hands of a Woman; for (without doubt) it is a high degree of Fortune to be
advanced to be a King, but I do not think it a thing so entirely desirable to
be the husband of a Queen, and (in my present apprehensions) A Throne it self
is less lovely, when I must approach unto it only as the chiefest subject of
her whom I must espouse. In effect what obedience or loyallty may I expect from
a people who should not acknowledge me for their Sovereign? what submission
might I expect, or honor from those Nobles, who (were I dead) might have
Capacity to be successor to my relation and place; what reverence might I
expect from my Children, who (if my Queen should die) may become my Sovereign,
and I their Subject? What (Noble Stanley) were it fit for me (having gained a
Crown by my prowess and valor) to put my self in such a condition, that I
might be forced to leave it? and if my Queen should dye, to wear a mourning
weed instead of a Royal Diadem? If I should accept a Throne upon these
terms, I might be forced to depend upon mine own Childrens Wills and pleasure;
Or (if I should have none) an other pretender might contest for my removal,
and claim a right, and so I might be forced to obey whom I had commanded. No,
no, this choice could not manifest absolute power, nor could this borrowed
fortune satisfy the Ambition of my Renown; this acceptance of Royal
Authority might give me some splendour, but not render me truly glorious, these
streams seem to flow not from the Fountain of mine own, but another
sovereignty. Kings ought to acknowledge none for their superiors but God. I
do not conceive to be a husband and a subject to a Queen, are qualities
compatible: In one relation the husband is to be the head, in the other the
wife; and if the Queen intend to render her self, and husband truly happy, it
is necessary that he be her King, and so her Chief; without which relations
their condition can neither have true honor nor true content, and without them
a Court were worse then a Prison, and sovereignty as little lovely as
servitude. Now if she love her husband, and that by a most rare virtue, she
pleases to condescend so far, as to be ruled, and Reign by him, the
Subjects will presently murmur and cry out, the King's a Tyrant to his Queen,
and she but his illustrious slave. Some will speak too boldly, others complain
judiciously, and some prevail to persuade too far with insinuations and
suggestions: When his Children shall grow up to age, they will not be free from
flattering inspirations to incline them to jealousies and suspicions against
their Father; some will dare to inform them that he invades and usurpes the
Crown, that if the Queen dye, he will neglect and have no Paternall respects
for them, and that therefore they rather ought to Court the People then honor
their Father. These suspicions are too apt (ordinarily) to grow reciprocal,
and are fixed too naturally near the Souls of such eminent persons. Difference
in opinion breeds dissension in resolution, dissension draws on aversion, and
aversion changes love to hatred, and hatred breeds revolts, and revolts
proclaim open War; so that by these degrees, discontents thrive to be
irreconcilable: The people fall into greater troubles, and the Kingdom is made
more ready for greater ruins and confusions. Moreover do not you think, that
whether the King have Children or not (if he be noble and generous) that he
will prepare a party in his Kingdom to serve his affairs, on all occasions; and
that whether his Queen be kind, sweet, and debonaire in his society or not.
Moreover, how conceive you a Kingdom should be governed without many errors in
the conduct, when he must necessarily have his particular interest, besides the
public, which cannot but evene and happen on many occasions? for in order to
the preservation of his creatures, he will have cause sometimes to dissimulate
in many things, somteimes he will be forced to recompense with rewards, those
whose errors merit punishments, sometimes to punish them who deserve rather
favors and rewards. These accidents will make him endeavor to imbezell the
treasure of the State, and so make up Banks for private uses, or to make a
War if there be cause. And as for peace, it can never be so perfectly
established in a Kingdom, but a King must ever politiquely suspect either an
insurrection of a civil War at home, or an invasion from abroad. And do you
(brave Stanley) but imagine in what a pitiful condition is a King, who is not
prepared and provided for such contingences. He cease not only to be a
King, but loses his honor and reputation, as not worthy to rule. And of all
the ways whereby Crowns and Kingdoms are lost, as this is most far from
remedy; So it is the most weak and far from pity. When a Prince (in a
gallant resistance) loses a pitched battle in the field; Fortune can force
him to yield, and make him to fly to some Asyle; if the Cities and Towns of his
Kingdom do revolt, and his subjects treacherously forsake him, he may without
all dishonor seek for refuge, and search out for succor and supplies. And in
his distress, though the splendor of his glory be obscured, it is not
extinguished; Though his Magnificence and power be abated, yet it is not
dissolved, nor so annihilated, but that he may be encouraged with hopes, and
aided by his friends and Allies, and so make a just War, if he can obtain
means. Those Princes from whom he implores succors, may more possibly
contribute their supplies, either through the concernment of their own
interests, or their generosity; and so though his misfortunes be great, yet his
ruins are not absolutely desperate. But to acquit a Crown without more then
one Combat, to lose a Throne without a stroke, is a misery as dishonorable as
insupportable, and such a degree of baseness and lowness of spirit, as dwells
not in my Soul. And what dishonours and disadvantages attend not a King of
base, low and ignoble qualities? If he address to his neighbor Princes, they
will hardly look on him as a Sovereign, or renowned person: If he presume to
desire the aid of Auxiliaries and Soldiers, they will not only have
pretenses, but despise and scorn the Motion: if he continue in his Kingdom
without Children, what support can he expect if one of his Children be King?
how can he resolve and humble himself to give his Child obedience? For suppose
the Queen his Consort shall (at her death) ordain by Testament, That her
Husband whilst he lives, shall conserve, and exercise his Sovereign power;
with how many Nails and Thorns will his Crown be pierced; and how full of
troubles his Reign; with what impatience will the Successor attend; and with
what splendour and authority shall that Father rule, who swayes by the will of a
dead Wife; and (at no less) then at the pleasure, or permission of a living
Son? And if casually he shall proceed to a second Marriage, with how many
fancies and jealousies will his Son be agitated? and under this spetious
pretense, to what strange designs will he with his creatures be transported?
(Generous Stanley) to receive a Crown from the hands of an espoused Princess,
were to put on a resolution to wait on her only to her Tomb, and then to leave
the Throne when she leaves her life. And seeing that all Princesses (who are
Sovereigns) have not the same resolutions for their Husbands as Isabella had
for her Ferdinando: And it was not but with most incomparable virtue, that that
most rare Princess parted with her power, yet all that she was able to do,
was but a participation; and notwithstanding her affection was so great, and
her virtues so super excellent, yet where nothing could restrain her from a
contestation with her Husband in her claims to her rights in the Kingdom of
Leons, she did it (doubtless) with the greatest Modesty imaginable; yet with
so great security to her ends, as the breath of Ambition could inspire. For it
is apparent thus in all their expeditions, issuing forth in the names of
Ferdinando and Isabella; and their Subjects never spoke of them but plurally,
the Kings royal pleasure. A word insupportable, and not to be endured by so
Princely a heart as I bear* Judge you then (I pray) if Isabella (whom History
describes as a possessor of all virtues) could suppress with the greatest
difficultyes, and strip her desires of Sovereignty; how may it be expected then
from a Princess not so completely polished? What know I (if I become her
Spouse) but she may look upon me with scorn, as she considers me a Subject to
her Father and Brother? And who knows, but her elevated spirit may so use me as
if I were her Subject? If I were now prisoner to the Duke of Britany, and
Elizabeth were glorious on her Throne, and she had affections for me to redeem
me out of Prison, and Crown me with her Royal favors, and put into my hands
the Scepter, it may be the closeness of my prison might oblige me to desire
liberty, and my sad condition encourage me to receive the Crown of England from
her hands; but seeing she has no more share in this Crown, but that I can with
more right give it then accept it; and that it is the proper reward of mine own
valor; I being now a Conqueror; and that Elizabeth without me could not have
enjoyed her liberty, much less have pretended to a Sovereignty: It is
nobleness in me rather to offer, then receive Royal Grace from the hands of
Princess Elizabeth; and this is all that I can possibly do, whereby the House
of Lancaster (had it not right to the Crown of England) has for ever indeared,
and obliged the House of York; and in this act the world must conclude me to
have been as exactly, and scrupulously obedient to the Princess for morality
and civility, as to the maxims of Policy. Yet I inherit these generous rules
which have gallant and noble resolutions, and which love rather to expose the
hazard and loss of all, then not to gain all, and rather march undauntedly,
then not satisfy the ambition of my renown. Rights and pretenses to Crowns
ought to be resolute principles never to be abandoned, all other pretensions
(in subordinate affairs) are admitted to their dispensations for change and
alterations. But to Renown, Sovereignty, and the Right to a Crown, the
resolutions ought to be so unchangeable, as not to be shaken; and to yield, is
an indignity and baseness fit for none of Princely birth; but is a quality
more suitable for the most infamous and contemptible cowards. Now as to the
third way; The title of the House of Lancaster, you will tell me (perhaps noble
Stanley) this seems dangerous and difficile, that the Peers and Nobles of the
Kingdom have condemned the pretenses and rights of the Family of Lancaster,
and that the Title of York has a more popular preference in the spirits of the
people; that the Kings of latter Reigns have gained their inclinations; so that
I may pass under the censure, not of a lawful King, but an Usurper; such a
suggestion may prove a provocation to the people, and so faction beget a War,
and that may continue as long as I lived. To this I answer, as before; the
Rules of Policy I now follow, are generous, and hardy; wherefore I must not be
swayed by any consideration of peril; I must make my way through danger, and
not suffer a diversion in so weighty a matter to my resolution. Think not, that
I can easily persuade, nor prevail to turn the course of that Royal blood
which runs in my veins, or to renounce solemnly those rights to that Crown
which I have conquered, as I must (doubtless) if I should refer my self to
the grace and bounty of Princess Elizabeth, and should receive so Illustrious
a Diadem from the hand of a woman: what reproach should I not receive from
Posterity, if I should permit this spot to lie on the memory of my reputation?
You will yet tell me, the right which I pretend has been exploded, and
condemned solemnly in Parliament. I answer; this condemnation savoured of as
much misfortune as injustice; Great thieves, and great power robbed us of our
royal right: And suppose their condemnation were just and equitable, the
Rights of Conquerours are as equally Authentic; who if they have force, can
justly cancel, and dissolve to nothing all former edicts and sentences of
condemnation. He has fought in vain who has vanquished a Tyrant, and been a
Liberator to the people from Tyranny, if he have not as equally freed himself
from all oppression, and can thereby maintain his power to enjoy what he has
got. As for me, if I should not ascend a Throne but in the right of Elizabeth,
I should only believe that I have changed my prison, and but gilded my chains:
I can confess no less out of my internal repugnancy to this dependant
authority. Believe me then in the Acceptance of the Crown of England, I shall
receive it either as Conqueror, or as my right descending of the house of
Lancaster, and not from the hands of Elizabeth; and if I admit her to the
Throne, I shall place her on my right hand, as Alexander did Darius's Queen;
and yet not then, until I shall have the peaceable possession of the Crown
without the interruption of any of her pretenses. Yet, in this resolution, I
shall endeavor to spare the blood of my Subjects, for which I have reasons;
for my Forefathers have been their Kings; and if the last Prince of that
Illustrious House of Lancaster had not been too mild and gentle, and so more
unfit to bear up the weight of so great a Scepter, I should not now lie in
necessity to search for reasons to palliate and authorize my present designs.
But seeing what is past cannot be recalled, that which is present must regulate
that which is to come. I shall ascend then by the successive way, wherein
though there may be more of danger, there may be less of injury. In this great
action it is just that I forget not the peoples interest as well as mine own,
my Conquest shall serve me as to this end the more firmly to authorize the
right of my Birth and descent. And as I am not ignorant how that the house of
York has prevailed with the whole Kingdom to an universal approbation of
their title, and caused the Reigns of those Princes to be more peaceful while
they ruled, more then their wisdom or policy could have prevailed: I intend no
sooner to receive the Crown, but speedily to incircle Princess Elizabeth with
me within the Line of that Royal Circumference. But still with this reserve
and difference, that she shall receive that illustrious honor from my hands,
and not I from hers. Wherefore I shall take order that there shall be an
interval and space of time, betwixt my Coronation and my espousals, that no
person in my Kingdom may be ignorant with what right I ascend my Throne. In the
mean time the people that dive not so deeply into the secrecies and mysteries
of State, and are more easily satisfied with spetious pretenses then solid
reason; will more readily honor and applaud our actions, and less torment
themselves with murmurings or discontents; those who have affections and
inclinations to the house of Lancaster will rejoice exceedingly at my
advancement to the Crown; and those who still reserve their affections for the
house of York cannot be better satisfied then to see the Lawful heir of that
house to sit on the Throne with me; and if it should so chance that a civil
War should rise, by any who should suggest that the Duke of Clarence was not
dead, and that he had more right to the Crown then the Princess Elizabeth; I
shall have this power to oppose such falss impostures, and this triple and
different right to defend my Crown; and if I own it as Conqueror, as heir of
the house of Lancaster, and unite the title of that of York, what power will
be able to give a check to our Princely Resolutions. All the ways which policy
can invent to acquire and compass great enterprises, are either by open and
hostile forces, or by secret and subtle craft, or with plausible pretenses to
delude the people, or with reason and Arguments to persuade the Sages and
Grandies of a Kingdom, these are the ordinary engines of Policy. The first is
most absolute and least resisted, the second is persuasive, and effects what
seems almost impossible, the third disarmes the multitude, and the last
raises divisions and makes parties among great ones, and prepares a
disposition to hope for a victory of the Enemy: And fortune is so kind to us
to concenter all these four advantages to my design. First as to force; I
believe one cannot be more assured then having gained a Battle and defeated the
enemy; and seeing the Tyrant himself could not longer support his usurpation,
who (think you) dare be so bold as to design to be an usurper? To force I can
join subtilty and craft, and what could there be better, then to intermingle so
nearly, and yet to distinguish my right and title before I did marry my right
to that of Elizabeth's, so to make my Authority as indivisible as independent by
a deferring of my intentions for her espousalls, until my affairs persuade
me: And to this subtilty no pretenses are wanting which may gain popular
compliance and approbation; the People in this now fully satisfied, that I act
not merely as Conqueror, nor take from any what appertains to them; In this
proceeding they will not only be pleased, but seem to enjoy their chiefest
desire. To these if stronger reasons be required, what can better remove all
scruple from the greatest Statesmen or Grandies of the Kingdom (too inclinable
for factions, especially in high Royal differences) then to see the union of
the two howses of Lancaster and York? and thereby an extinction (by this
alliance) of those ancient Quarrels which did descend with Ages, and might
have lasted to a general divastation of the Kingdom. Besides all those
considerations, I find (moreover) all the virtues satisfied by this harmonious
conclusion; Generosity appears in my moderation, being so well tempered after
so great a Victory: for seeing that after the Conquest of a Crown, I am so
deliberate, it is an infallible mark that Pride and Presumption have not
elevated me above my self: my Bounty and goodness, whereby I would preserve
the people and Kingdom from the possibility of a Civil War, render me more
reasonable, as being careful of their good equally, as of my own. The Justice
which I impartially intend to all, begins with Princess Elizabeth, born so
near the Throne, and renders my Heroic mind so famous, as meriting to be
approved by all the World: The boldness whereby I have vindicated the title of
all my Ancestors to the Crown of England, will speak me honorable in the ears
of generous persons, and that I shall be renowned by all those who have a
haughty inclination to true Magnanimity. In effect, A desire to Reign and be a
King, is a thing of it self so high and noble, that I believe there was never
yet any Heroic spirit who was not surprised and inflamed (above all ordinary
degrees) with desire of sovereignty; yea (I am fully persuaded) that one borne
from a Royal Throne, though his birth be distant and in a great remotion, yet
it is impossible, but his dependencie (as a branch on that Royal stock) is
reputed as the most sovereign glory and comfort of all his life, and I believe
persons of Princely descent, the more they are oppressed, the more the Royal
Character is imprinted in their spirits: and the more they are forced to resent
of servitude, by so much the more they desire and thirst after domination and
Sovereignty: And if the power of command be a natural and universal affection
in all men, how supreme must their desires be, whose birth and education is so
sublime? their thoughts cannot but be independent (if possible to others) and
their wills would be legislative. Think not then strangly of me (brave Stanley)
if intending my possession of the Crown of England, I chiefly prefer mine
own right, without Admission of a partage, or the least shadow of contestation
for the title: Fortune honors me with it, as her present, yet I shall not
accept it but as a fruit, growing on the stock of my Ancestors, and that my
birth has now received its right. Assist me then (I conjure thy fidelity) to
fortify my reasons in a better resistance (if there shall be cause) of
opposition: tell thy friends and my subjects, that I ascend the Throne, as
their lawful Sovereign, and that I shall have more affection and tenderness
for them, as being mine own people, then as if they were Elizabeth's; let the
great ones know effectively, that I am their absolute master, and therefore
have greater power, as to receive, so to expect their services: let my
Soldiers know that I their King, am their General, and therefore, as I shall
lead, they cannot but march with greater courage, and that their advantage is
so much the more considerable, as not to be exposed to a Battle, but for such
a Royal person, who will adventure with them, and bear them company in their
Noble Actions. And let the Princess know that if I take the Crown, which her
Fathers have born, my Ancestors have worn it as well as they; and in this
quality her Grace may confess that I merit more gloriously to be her husband,
and to let her see, that without Scepter or Crown, she is as dear and precious
to me. To conclude (gallant Stanley) proclaim to all the world (though I would
claim the Crown as Conqueror) I have forborne it, though I might have accepted a
Crown from the hands of a Princess, I refused it, and that I have rather
chosen to hazard the Throne which I have Conquered, then not to possess it as a
legitimate Prince, and the issue and Heir of the Royal house of Lancaster.

The Censure.
THis Prince is in the Records and Annalls of the Kings of England accounted
and honored as one of the most famous and wisest Politicians as ever sat on
that Throne. This is the observation of the Lord Chancellor Bacon; and as he
elevated himself to the Royal Sovereignty, so he established it (in all
humane Conjecture) with greatest honor and security to himself and successors;
Though he might have ascended highly by the effects of his Conquests (which
usually are not moderated to any bounds) yet at that time, Fortune (if ever)
making her self a slave to her favorite, he waveth that interest as his
principal support; And though the title of this Princess Elizabeth might
procure him popular applauses, and approbations; yet his reasons seem too
strong to be subjected to that sp^cious dependant subordination: which quality
though it may agree with the Genius of a Subject, yet cannot be compatible and
tolerable in the digestion of a victorious Conqueror. Where a Queen has the
sovereign right, and the King a title only by marriage, it is not he, but she
that rules. Now if a Crown be not established, it has not it is perfect
beauty: if a Scepter be divided, it is no longer a Scepter: if two sit on a
Throne, it loses its form, and is no longer a Throne. The Electors of the
Empire, and those of Polony, entrench too deeply on the authority of their
Masters: if a Prince see any interposition betwixt him and God, he cannot style
himself Absolute: and if he have not Right to say, it is our will and pleasure,
and declare (without farther Reason) and say, stat pro ratione voluntas; he
carries but the shadow of a Sovereignty, he may wear the Crown, but others
exercise the Royal Office. Now if this kind of Government be not so noble,
then to hold a Crown by the Right or favor of a wife is neither so safe nor so
honorable. The Electors are styled subjects, and all Commissions and Edicts
are signed in the Princes name, but it is not so where the wife is supreme. The
Sun which divides the radiant beams to the universe in his course,
comprehends all splendent luster in his own glorious body, and when that is
set, no brightness at all appears, but what is (in its absence) communicated
to some lesser Stars to preserve the World from utter darkness and obscurity.
Thus, this wise Prince did judge of Sovereignty, which though it communicate
glorious rays, yet they are Originally united in one illustrious body, and
those lesser lights, which as the Moon and Stars radiate with more Glimmering
and Dusky Brightness, they have no native, but mutuations and borrowed light.
A quality utterly inconsistent with a generous and renowned Soul, and which
agrees not with the Nature of Sovereignty. If this Prince had held his Crown by
the title of Elizabeth, he must have depended on the will and pleasure of his
Wife; and never been able to sway and command absolutely. It is our will and
pleasure. As the Crown of England was an absolute Monarchy, so it had now a
King who scorned to lose the least circumstance or Punctilio that might grace
the splendour and brightness of Majesty. And as for the Complication and Acts
of Grace to gratify his people, he rather admitted and used such pleasant
Popular baits, out of Policy and deeper design to prevent all storms, or to
calm them if they should rise, then to diminish or extenuate the Grandeur of
Majesty. Those condescentions (Kings know well) are great Artifices of their
own making, which when the fish is caught they understand, and know how to
unrovel and break the nets to their own advantage. The Scripture teaches that
the woman is to be subject to the man, and not the man to the woman. Had not
this divine rule given liberty and dispensation to this Princes action and
choice, Policy (a more liberal, and free dispencer of her counsels) would not
stick at the discouragement of such Resolutions which endeavor to grasp at
supreme Authority. The example of Ferdinando and Isabella demonstrate that
Masculine Nobleness subjected to Feminine fancies, and their mutable pleasures
is neither so satisfactory, so honorable, nor so safe. And that other example
of Philip the second, who married Mary Queen of England, manifests, that such
a conjunction with an expectation of Soveraignties as concomitant, proves but
a more fine Golden chain to bind faster (at pleasure) Royal ambition; for so
was that Prince deluded and abused in his expectation, who instead of Sovereign
commands had only the honor of a Title, joined in Commissions and Coyns, but
had not the power to exercise the Royal office. It is apparent then, a Scepter
is only fit for one, and not two hands, and that a Crown (being circular
inform) is only proper for one Sovereign head. The two famous Queens of Naples
have taught all the world the dangers of pretending to hold Crowns by Female
rights: And this Prince was a person too sage and prudent to expose his Royal
advantages to such casual alterations, having made so noble a Conquest, he
holds still fast his sword in his hand, and espouseth Elizabeth with all her
rights and possibilities, and wisely chooses and declares none but his own
title, keeping those others as great Soldiers do their Reserves at distance,
rather to terrify, then to fight, unless there be great occasion. In this
action this King, whatever he pretended of Grace to Elizabeth, and so to be a
great Moralist, herein has left to the world this testimony; That he was
acquainted with the deepest and most profound ways of Policy; and therefore
did more prudently make his election, and so pitch his resolution, rather to
reign by his own, then the pretense or right of any other. Now if from an
action of such famous valor and prudence, we alter our discourse to another as
eminent for fidelity; here is an example in the person of an Infidel Prince,
which is most remarkable. Soliman the second (that Prince who was the glory of
the Ottoman Family) promised to John, King of Hungary, to establish his Empire,
to which purpose Soliman was earnest, constant, and faithful to his
resolution: But the War being somewhat unfortunate, or less succesfull, and
having lost the lives of an hundred thousand men, the Bassawes, and Turkish
Commanders would have interrupted, and prevented the said Kings investment, and
Inauguration unto the Kingdom of Hungary, though Soliman had made his royal
promise: But see here Solimans discourse and reasons which caused that generous
Monarch to keep his faith and resolution, and to crown gloriously John in the
famous Town of Bude.

portrait of Solomon SOLOMON the most Magnificent Emperor of the Turks. He
wan the I Will Rhodes and diverse Islands in the Mediterranean sea, overan Hungary,
conquered Babylon and the Countries of Mesopotamia: Took Strigonium, and won
Alba Regalis, and at the seidge of Sigeth died, in Anno: 1567.

SOLIMAN TO RVSTAN BASSA.
THE Counsel which you give me might have been approved by Mahomet the second,
but not by Soliman; that Prince who kept not his word with the Emperor David
Comineus, and his Children, who caused the death of Prince Bosnie, and
Methelin, contrary to his promises; pursued those Maxims which agree not with
Soliman. It Is true, he was certainly a great Conqueror, and the twelve
Kingdoms which he subdued, and thereby united the two Empires, merit much to
his honor, and free his actions from being censured with too much rigor and
severity; and by what means he reigned so puissantly. And as to my own
particular (because I enjoyed his Conquests) it may less become me to insult
over his errors, or to rail at his proceedings against the rules of exact
Justice; yet seeing truth and fidelity to my word and unspotted honor are the
marks I chiefly aim at, I shall not judge it irrational nor injust to say that
Mahomets forfeiting of his word and promise has stained the beauty of his
Reputation, and if he had been more sacred in observation of his word and
promise with his enemies, he had not gained less true glory then his conquests
have rendered to his name. I am not ignorant that Mahomet has not been the sole
example of my Predecessors, who have falsified their Faith without the least
scruple, and that many Politicians yield and persuade, that it is lawful to
deceive those whom they can delude, and that fraud and fowrbs are commendable
and innocent instruments; and as for sincerity, it is not laudable, much less
necessary, but when advantageous and convenient. The Christians (as well as the
Turks) (who seem to be obliged by the bonds of Religion, and upon pains of
hell) permit these rules and maxims amongst them very ordinarily, and have not
kept their public Faith inviolable, to compass and effect their particular
aims and designs; and yet some of the Ottoman Princes have been most exact and
strict in keeping of their word. Thus the magnificent Selim (of famous memory)
though naturally haughty and ambitious, was most punctual in his Conditions and
Articles with the Citizens of Damascus, who surrendering their Town, he saved
their lives, and preserved their goods from pillage and plunder; nay he was so
exact to every circumstance, that although his numerous forces had encamped,
and lay round about that vast Town, wherein the prey and wealth was infinite,
and might have largely enriched the whole army, yet Selim permitted not any one
soldier to commit the least insolence, nor so much as to gather a handful of
fruit or herbs out of the stately and luxuriant Gardens which lay round about
the walls. And do thou know (Rustan) what advantage succeeded this exact
curiosity of his fidelity and Paroll? The inhabitants of Damascus gave more by
a peaceable surrender, and the Emperor received more then he and his Army
could have gotten, if they had pillaged the Town; for by this example of the
Emperors exact law of his word, the towns of Barute, of Sidon, of Tripoly, of
Ptolomais, and (speedily after) those of Syria submitted, and surrendered on the
faith and credit of the Emperors word; by this means a great hardship of War,
and an expensive, and vast charge was saved, and the lives of many thousands
preserved from death. But you may tell me (Rustan) the chief means to enlarge
Territoryes, or to confirm, or assure Conquests, to destroy Enemies, to invade
Towns, to subdue Provinces, and Kingdoms, is it not by conjoyning fraud and
deceit with force and Arms? and by pretending faith, but not intending to keep
it? are not Towns surrendered, the Gates of Castles and Forts opened to
spetious and smooth delusions? Whereby great and potent Adversaries have
committed themselves (in person) to their Enemies? what need we search farther
then into the Histories of the first founders of the Ottoman family, as well as
into the life of the valiant Orchan, who succeeded them; we shall find that if
they had not as well used artificial delusions, fraud and falsehood; they had
not so frequently surprised Towns, subdued Provinces, nor Conquered Kingdoms,
nor laid such strong foundations to that Empire, which I now possess, and
which appears in its present condition to foretell her happy fruition of her
victories to as great glory and duration as the Romans extended theirs. Do you
not then think that too strict and punctual observation to your faith, and
word, may be an obstacle to your agrandizing and future establishment of your
Empire? To all these I answer, I am of the contrary opinion, as believing that
an honorable Regard of ones word, and a conservation of his faith solemnly and
publicly given, is the best way and means to begin, to enlarge, or to
establish a Sovereignty. When I call to mind then, and examine my faith and
promise made to King John, and my Engagement to use my best endeavors to
establish him in his Throne, Judge you if I be not obliged to keep my word
inviolable: For which all Mortals are strictly bound if they resolve not to
forget humanity and honor, and true renown. And if so severe a tie be morally
imprinted on the Souls of all men, how particularly are Princes, who are in
degrees of honor, as far transcendent to their subjects, as the lesser Stars
are inferior to the luster of the Sun. For in the observation of their Royal
Parole, the Peoples happiness, and the Sovereigns glory chiefly consists.
To confirm this argument, and so to know more exactly the sacredness of
promises; you may consider that the Religions of all kind which ever were or
shall be, have never restrained, nor ever shall oblige the people, but by this
way. Heaven it self is witness by the constancy of her motions to what I say.
In effect, what disorder and confusion would succeed to any estate, if men
shall declare to make open profession, that they did not regard what they did
say, or promise? what would be the disorder, and how irregular the society in
every particular party? what inconveniency and a general disturbance to all
commerce? and what union and agreement can be expected or hoped for amongst the
people, which is the very foundation, and frames a Solidity to the station,
and continuance of Empires? It is through faith in promises that amity and
friendship are preserved, that all Artizans and laborers work with so much
curiosity and pains: this causes the Mariners to imbarque, and so boldly to
adventure their lives at Sea, incourageth the Soldiers to be so hardy and
valiant in the Wars: And without this, it would be impossible to govern either
in peace or War. So then the keeping of faith inviolate, conduces much to the
rule and government of all the universe, and is as necessary to humane society,
as a foundation is to a stately and magnificent structure. Without this
incomparable bond, all society would be dissolved into confusion, laws be
despised and scorned, Fathers would not have any Reverence from their Children,
nor Children any kindness from their Parents, friends would grow perfidious,
Commanders would trample on their Soldiers, and they as insolently injure or
forsake their Commanders, Subjects would have no assurance in their Princes,
nor Princes any respect or honor from their Subjects. You see then (Rustan)
that a constant observation to ones faith and parole, is not only honorable
but necessary; and without which it were impossible but to go into most
irreparable misfortunes. Moreover this quality is the more noble, because no
creature is capable to effectuate in this kind but only rational, and the
incomparable creature man; as for other qualities they may be Acquired by
Habits, or possessed by Temperaments and natural Instincts, as appears in the
very Bruits. We find fidelity in Dogs, love in the Turtles, violent
inclinations of tenderness in the Male and Female creatures toward their young
ones; the Lions have their generosity and boldness, the Serpents their
prudence, the Elephant their wit and memory, and the little Ants their
providence in their Oeconomie; but as for the observation of faith and
promises, those are actions only belonging to Man, by which he becomes Master
of another will, as well as of his own, so that in these occasions it may be
well said, that there is a necessity as indispenceable to keep ones word, as to
obey a Law before a promise made; this caution is ever to be used, that no man
exceed the real and absolute limits of his own power, not to engage his faith
in any thing evil in it self, or injurious to another. These limitations first
proposed, faith is obligatory, and binding, and no retractation to be admitted,
which in it self cannot be less then base and dishonorable. These
considerations concern persons of all degrees; and as for Kings, they are not
free from the obligation of their Parole more then the meanest of their
Subjects: For if they make a promise to their equals, and fail in it, their
equals may force and compel them to a performance; and if to their Inferiors,
justice and honor obliges them to be exact to their own will and pleasure,
which once engaged is not longer free, but has a tie and obligation on it,
which they have imposed and framed to themselves. There cannot be then (with
justice and honor) a failing in Faith, nor any fair evasion; the very
possibility which Princes have in their own power not to oblige themselves to
any promise, foretells their facility to observation, which they cannot (but
against their own reason) disanul and dispense withal. Nay if a Prince shall
condescend to a resolution and solemn promise, to depose his Crown, I cannot
but judge it more glorious for him to keep his word, then to hold his Scepter.
Fundamental Laws (though in themselves sacred and inviolable) yet ought not to
be in so great a veneration with a Prince as observation to his own word: For
it may so arrive in the revolution of Ages, that Policy may permit and persuade
to change, and alter those first ordinances, which have founded and supported a
Monarchy; but as for the word of a King, it ought to be inchangeable;
otherwise, levity, and falsehood will so spot his reputation, that he will
hardly ever obliterate the stain of Infamy; and what fidelity, or loyalty can
be expected from Subjects to be paid to him, who is not noble and faithful to
himself? If you object (Rustan) that the King is less obliged because he is so
transcendent above them. I answer; a Prince is free before he pleases to
promise; but if he shall fail afterward to gratify his humor, or ambition,
or to give way to his own passions, he will provoke not only his peoples
hatred, but (if possible) their revenge; whom though they do not command, do
expect that he should obey the dictates of his own will; and if this
intercourse should fail, how should the Prince confide in his people, or they
in him? If I should design a noble recompense to my Bashaws and Janissaries, in
case they should effect some noble and grand enterprise, might I not give a
dangerous check to my commands and power, if I should start from my word, and
so they fail in their reward? If I were engaged with mine Army before a Town,
and resolved to subdue it, and encouraged my Soldiers to storm and take it,
and gave them promise of the prey, and pillage, and then did not prove noble
and faithful, and did not recompense them, having adventured their lives in
the assault, and breach with such violence and mettle to get the Victory; might
not such infidelity not only lose mine honor, but provoke a mutiny, and
hazard the loss of mine own Army? Again, if the Inhabitants of a Town should
agree voluntarily to submit, without other conditions, but the saving of their
lives, and after I had received the Keys of their Ports, and the Gates were
open, then I should suffer them to fall by the Edge of the sword; would not
such an Act obscure the honor of a sovereign Prince? and force the remainder
and survivant party to fight and dispute to the last drop of their bloods? and
might not such unworthiness cause mine own Soldiers to turn Cowards, or to
make them turn their swords against their own Prince? would not such Actions as
these increase the valor of the Enemy, cause them to redouble their Guards,
and inspire them with new designs, to deceive with falsehood him whom they
could neither subdue nor believe? were not such a Prince endangered to be
censured as the firebrand of his Age, and as well born to be the Enemy of his
neighbors, and the odium of his own subjects, as well as of his Enemies? and
as for Princes, if they as well consider their interest as their honor, they
are not only obliged for their advantage, to whom they have promised, but
likewise for their own ends: And it is a great dispute, whether it be of
greater importance to keep faith with friends or enemies; and the most subtle
Politicians do conclude, that in a case of absolute necessity, a breach with
friends is more tolerable then with enemies, whose eyes are most acute and
exact, to observe every scruple of conditions or Articles covenanted to them:
For when our Allies, our friends, and our subjects do affie in us, they do no
more then their duties and devoires; of which if they failed their neglect were
injury, and consequently their trust in us augmenteth our glory, and equitably
obliges us to keep our faith with them: but when it arriveth that our
professed Enemies place their assurance in our parole, this is an infallible
mark of that estimation which they have of our virtue not of our power: And
this conception works for our glory, and testifies so much for our
generosity, that (I dare boldly say) if it be injustice and baseness to
forfeit one's parole to his friend: It is an act of more horrid ignoblenesse
mixed with perfideousnesse and impudency, not to keep faith with an Enemy. I
cannot then with my honor let this opportunity escape, which fortune now
presents, but I must observe that which I have promised to this distressed
Prince; to him (I say) who has not forgotten, what ruin and ravages our
armies have committed in his Kingdom. He it is who confideth in us, and has
chosen him who was the greatest Enemy to this Kingdom to be the Protector of
his Crown. We cannot delude his hopes (Rustan) nor with any honor recede from
our promise. I know well that some rules of Policy oppose my design. If I
should make use of them, and if I should permit an interruption, many
considerations will arise, and you may tell me (first) that John engaged me to
this War, and that the fates, which go verns all things, have produced sad
and black effects to both parties, since I have taken the Fortes of Bude and
those of Altemberg, that other of Komar^, of Wissegrade, and all other along
the Danube: My Army have pillaged all Syria, and made an infinite number of
slaves, and have so terrified the Emperor Ferdinando, that he durst not
presume, with his Army once to face my force; and after all these successes I
am at last tryumphant in the Town of Bude, ready to invest and re-enthrone
John King of Hungary; and if that siege of Vienna, and the extremity of the
winter have caused me to lose an hundred thousand men, I might seem to complain
rather of this Prince then to render to him his Kingdom, and honor him with
his Crown. This may agree best with your sense: but it is true, I cannot submit
to your Judgment. If instead of one, I had lost two hundred thousand men, I
should not have desisted from my intentions, out of mere consideration to my
faith and promise. I never suffered my profit and advantage to be competitors,
or comparative with my glory and renown. And when I shall fail to be a strict
observer of my faith, I cannot judge my self worthy of respect or honor. Of
all the ways of Conquest these are most sure, which are effected with least
violence. In making a King my Tributary and Vassal, I create a more
illustrious slave to be as faithful and obedient, as if imprisoned with
fettered Chains: The recognition of distresses relieved, oblige a Prince more
powerfully then the strictest servitude: And those Tributes which are paid to a
King by a voluntary contribution, do more enrich his treasure, then those which
are exacted. For you cannot be ignorant how that in a Country newly Conquered,
Garrisons are to be established in the principal Forts and Towns; besides, it
is to be provided that an Army be ready to march, on all occasions, to be ready
to oppose all resistance that may arise, and yet this care and providence is to
be exercised, to see that the people be not utterly destroyed as well as
subdued from the power of Revolts: Policy teaching that they have not too much
liberty, least they grow insolent, nor too severe a servitude, least they grow
desperate; a mixture of gentleness with rigor is necessary in lawful
Royalty, but more absolutely inseparable from the foundation of new Conquests.
Moreover, in the establishment of a Tributarie Prince, more sweetness and
indulgence is tolerable, because he is substituted to all care, charge and
pains, and such a Conquest is as well without inquietude as danger. If I had
intended otherwise, I must have fought many battles, besieged many Towns, and
(besides a hazard not to have obtained what I now enjoy) I might have lost
honor and reputation. Moreover my violation of faith with this Prince, might
have united and provoked other Princes to levy forces, and march unanimously
against me: And what Grace or honor might that Emperor expect, but rather a
general detestation from all, who deserved to be branded with ignominy and
reproach, for being perfidious and false? will not both Princes and Subjects
act to save their lives, to defend their Country, preserve their liberties, and
revenge their Prince from a faithless and perfidious person? But you will tell
me (Rustan) after so many battles, and so many signal Advantages, what need
I fear, and what might I not hope for? No, no, Fortune is too mutable a Lady to
be confided in: We are not to abuse her favors, nor scorn her liberality, nor
to depend on the Constancy of her graces, who is so changable at her pleasure.
She who has given us all these Victories, has power to deprive us of them,
and as often as I think, what great obstacles stood in the way, to oppose the
mighty success of valiant Scanderbeg, and Mahomet, and many of my Ancestors; I
cannot prudently be over confident in my own Armies, my Enemies weakness, nor
my own valor. For it is possible, that the greatest Conquerors may be
vanquished, and consequently, nothing is to be hazarded highly. The fortunes
which attended Amurath and Bajazet, may also wait on me, and another Castriot
or Tamerlaines may arise to prevail over me. Let us not then abuse our Enemies
in the forfeiting of faith, nor thereby occasion all the world to oppose and
hate us, which they may do without injustice, and then the fates produce
strange and wonderful effects. Marcellus stopped the Progress of Hannibal,
when he was highly engaged; Camillus preserved his Country, when it was feared
he would have destroyed it. Besides all these reasons, the Senate and
Republique of Rome affords us examples of admitting Kings to be Tributaries,
Slaves, and Vassalls. And if true Renown be so exceedingly glorious in the
subjection of the Common People; how superexcellent, and most illustrious is a
command over Kings and Princes? Thus Antonius marched with two and twenty
Princes, (as his Royal attendance) into Alexandria. This infallible ensign of
honor declares to all the world, that the Romans made not always their
Enemies their Slaves, but gave them liberty to wear their Crowns, to make
their Royal Equipage more glorious. It is one of the greatest secrets of
Policy, so to temper and manage affairs, as to make our enemies serviceable to
us. And no advantage can be higher, then to make them fight for us, who fought
against us. And as for this Kingdom of Hungary, which is now divided by the
Factions of John and Ferdinando, it would be (doubtless) united against me, if
I should be perfidious to that party, which I am engaged to: And so that whole
Country become mine enemies, which (on these terms) are reduced to be my
vassals: By this action I shall either augment my Sovereignty; or, if the
division continues, more infeeble the adverse party. Princes ought deeply to
consider before they engage their faith; but if they value their honor, they
are obliged to perform their promise, though it succeed with the greatest loss.
This obligation binds more essentially; because it is a vow not made to
Subjects, but to a Prince by one in distress; he who renders himself my
Vassal, and has trusted to my word for the safety of his person. And should my
falsehood make my advantage in a Princes necessity, who relies on my fidelity,
and flies to me for succor? When the Emperor Ferdinando (who is an enemy
formidable enough) desired my Alliance, I publicly both refused and scorned
his Amity: And it had not become me now to have admitted this Prince to the
secrecy of my promise and resolutions, if I had not first exactly examined how
far I might condescend and adventure for his protection. No, no (Rustan) I
should rather choose to lose my life, then to forefeite my Parole, which I
shall preserve so inviolable, that I shall Crown King John with mine own hands,
that all posterity may learn from me that it is a necessary obligation (equally
concerning the peoples good, as well as the Princes glory) to keep and guard
their promises, without any fraud or violation. It is by this indivisible chain
that the universal society of Mankind subsisteth in that union which inableth
so many diverse Nations to treat and commerce so unanimously in their affairs.
This is that sacred bond which causes voluntarily the arms of so many
thousands (though enemies) peacefully to be laid down. This is that solemn
assurance which persuades and secureth peace after bloody Wars. If men should
not have a regard and observation to their Parroll, Justice, which is the
foundation of all virtues, would find no place for her feet to stand in all the
world; and if she failed, all other virtues would lose their grace and beauty;
Justice it self would lose her denomination, and be styled rigor, or severity;
Clemency would be reputed too much indulgent levity. Liberality would be
censured prodigality; and Valor (if not succesfull) would be accounted
rashness, or too much confidence. And it is true, though virtues consist in
moderation, yet when the action is not seasonable, they seem to wear the habits
of vice. But as for fidelity to ones Paroll, it admits of no various
explications, but ought to be exactly observed, at all times, in all places,
and with all persons; and as to mine own resolutions (being a Sovereign Prince)
I shall not be false, but faithful to all, whether Kings or Shepherds; nor
fail in that (which seems most difficult) to keep my Parole with mine Enemy.
This Law is properly mine own, because voluntary; therefore to be obeyed
without all repugnancie. It is in this resolution wherein my reason is so
mightily convinced, that I reverence the sanctity of public Faith; to violate
which becomes not men, much less Kings. And as for my self, to be false to
my Faith I am incapable.

The Censure.
SEe here the noble and generous resolutions of a Prince (who reverencing the
Alcoran, and only adoring the lies and fictions of Mahomet) appears a very
gallant and illustrious soul, exceeding many Christian Princes for his fidelity
to his Parole and promise. Divinity gives us leave to acknowledge, that those
high degrees of honor and felicity, which accompanied this great Prince, were
as a temporal recompense wherewith God was pleased to requite him, and so make
more renowned his Moral virtues. Oh that this Emperor (though a Turk) had
been alive to shame that dangerous Politian, who (though a Christian) had the
impudence to write and publish to the world; That wise Princes ought not to
observe their promises but when they tend to their utility and advantages. Who
would believe that one who wears a Turban, should be more moral then he who
bears a Christian Crown? The same Author says; If all men were honest, that
precept were not necessary; but because many are false and wicked, it is
therefore more tolerable, and for that reason, that they regard not their
Faith, Princes are not obliged to theirs; who can never want specious pretenses
for their failings. This Position is as wicked as that other; and his warrant
(though from the Scripture) is not Logical; it is true, David says, all men
are liars; but the Politician cannot conclude thence a dispensation for fraud
and infidelity; one man judges of another by his words or actions, but God
alone judges of the hearts. The Counsel of dissimulation, if it be consistent
with Policy, agrees not at all with Theological truth: And is not the being
(as well as the appearing) to be honest and just, requisi^e and necessary in a
Prince? Or have the Reigns of all good and virtuous Princes been miserable and
unfortuna^e? Or is there no other means to prevent miseries and ill, but by the
practice of a lesson (in it self) so damnable? Is there no other way to uphold
Crowns, and Monarchies but by such black, and damnable Maxims of State?
Another rule follows as dangerous, (as those which went before) which is, that
it is not necessary for Princes really to be what they seem, nor to keep Faith
in any thing, but what serves their turn. Oh what horror these Principles
contain in them? Let this dangerous Florentine poison the World as far as he
can with his infectious Principles; yet I dare to say, his Maxims are as empty
and void of reason as Religion. Fidelity is essential to any illustrious
Prince, without which, he can neither reign happily nor gloriously: and it is
certain, frequent dissimulations, and infidelity in Princes to their Paroles,
make sudden troubles, or admit but of short reigns; Therefore they ought to be
kept inviolable and with more sacred reverence, though compacted with the
greatest Enemies. For Princes are at liberty, before they promise, but once
engaged, ought to be subservient to their dictates, and desires of their own
wills: And who ever fails to keep his faith, loses his honor and common
honesty. And a being not obliged by the rules of Religion, gives a Check to
all Rights, both humane and divine. But I see a great Champion, and an
illustrious Commander contradicting this proposition, and urges that no rule
is so general, but admits of some exception. Great Scanderbeg gained so
famous a reputation in the World, that he merits not to be condemned before his
reasons be heard, and his noble Actions rightly considered. John Castriot his
Father being dead, and his Children being hostages in the hands of Amurath the
Turkish Emperor; this Barbarous Prince imprisoned them, thereby the better to
secure the Kingdom of Albania to himself. Now as the rare valor of George
Castriot, (whom the Turks called Scanderbeg) was infinitely necessary, he
omitted not the least occasion, which might advantage his particular interest,
and therefore feigned a willingness and resolution to surrender the Kingdom to
Amurath, with privy design more exactly to sound and bottom his intentions:
And (at length) meeting with a fit opportunity, when the Turks gave battle to
the Christians, he quitted the Turkish Armies, and faceing about charged
fiercely with the Christians against the Turks, and having given them many
desperate overthrowes, he recovered his estate (at last) and the Throne of his
Father. Amurath enraged with Choler and despatched one of his Janissaries
(Chaoux) to reproach Great Scanderbeg, for his falsenesse to his Parole and
promise, and to charge him with his infidelity: See here this famous Commanders
Apology, and reasons to justify his actions to all the World: And that it is
not dishonorable nor inglorious, to break promise with those who keep not
Faith, but are perfideous.

portrait of Scanderbeg GEORGE CASTRIOT, otherwise called Scanderbeg Prince of
Epirus, Scourge of the Turks. He slew Fera Bassa with his own hand, Chief
Com^ander of Amuraths army, Overran the country of Madedonia, Overthrew ye
Turks army consisting of 40000, still remaining victor in many battles by his
valor and policy

SCANDERBEG TO HIS COUNCEL OF OFFICERS AND COMMANDERS.
THE Ambassador of Amurath (having reproached me in the behalf of the Emperor
his Master) has dared to charge my reputation, with the ugly crimes of
Perfidiousnesse, and Treasons: which scandalls and accusations my Soul scorns
and abhorrs; If all men in the World should not be as equally guilty of those
errois, as my self; And seeing Alexander the Great loved not glory it self,
but with scrupulous Curiosity, and he bravely affirmed, that he inwardly
abhorred, to steal a Victory, by surprising it in obscurity or the night: I
presume I may be admitted to conclude, that I hate the thoughts, to have stolen
that glory away, which I possess, had I not acquired it by noble and
illustrious means. Be you then my Judges in this point, (although my Officers
and Subjects) examine my actions with the greatest rigor, that the severity of
Justice, or the brightness of true generosity can exact or require, and be not
partial (for so I conjure you) whether or no, those may forfeit the glory of
their valor and faith justly, who have been provoked by actions of infidelity
from others? and whether this reciprocal retaliation, may not be honorably
supported and grounded on the Basis and Foundation of reason. I know well, that
public Faith ought to be placed and ranked with the most choice, and sacred
things; but not to be sincere nor to keep Faith with him, who has first
violated that sacred bond, is not only lawful but commendable, and an Action
which seems guided with reason, and justice. This is the chiefest argument of
my discourse, which cannot but honorably patronize, what I shall maintain and
defend. The Laws of Nations (which doubtless) approach nearest to Nature and
Reason, have not ordaine^ punishment to him, who kills an Enemy when he
assaults and would assasinate, but they permit repulsion of Force by ^^^ce. And
is it not as equally just to punish and revenge those (who pretending to
protect innocence) have actually designed to ruin and destroy? Is not a
defense and preservation lawful, when Faith is first violated, and nothing but
mischief intended? Is power therefore just, because it is great? or may men do
mischief equitably, because they are able? and may not a self defense, or the
destruction of a perfidious Enemy be as equally tolerated? And (if we should
now pass from particular quarrels to open and publik Wars) is it not most
true, and that either in hostile invasions, or intestine broiles, that one
party is more criminous and unjust then the other; and so the first invader or
disturber of peace? To make more particular instance, seeing that Amurath has
invaded the Kingdom of his Allie, surprised his Towns, suborned his Subjects,
pillaged his Country, and has received the Prince and his Children Hostages,
and afterward broken and violated his Faith; are not these Provocations too
horrid and insufferable; and can they justly expect any recompense, but of
wrath and revenge, if a power offended, be rendered capable to make such a
requital? On these considerations, the world cannot but discharge me, from the
guilt of being either perfidious or traitorous. He who first violateth his
Faith, and is an invader of the Princely Sovereignty of his Neighbor,
authorizeth his Enemy to all endeavors, to make his highest revenges on him.
And he who before was criminous, and therefore punished, becomes innocent and
just; And that which the Enemy calls treason, is a sage conduct of affairs;
that which he terms Cruelty, becomes a natural and just defense. So then,
that which is permitted by the Laws of Nations to private persons, and which
injuries and bitter extremities have necessitated, cannot but be allowed to my
just and rational defense. To this purpose, I cannot but look on Amurath as my
particular enemy, causing the death of my Brothers whom he barbarously
poisoned, and so as the public and common enemy of my estate, which he had
most unjustly usurped. And if (in my own person) I have most miraculously
escaped, doubtless my comportment, guarded me more securely: For I respected
him ceremoniously as a great Prince, preventing his suspicions with my
prudence; and if I have learned to forfeit my Parole, I received that direction
from the infidelity and falsehood of Amurath; by which means I have found a way
open to revenge the death of my Brothers by slaying his Bassaws; and have
requited the ruins of my Country, with the defeats of his armies. Yet if you
will make a clearer inspection, and dive more deep to search the reasons of my
proceedings, I must put you in mind how ancient Macedonia (that famous City)
was assaulted by this puissant enemy; that Albania (formerly but a Province)
endured many of his violences, as other neighboring and vicine Territories. At
length King John my Father (tired with the continuance of the War, and touched
compassionately for the miseries of his people) resolved to render himself
tributary to his Empire, and to this purpose he committed his children
hostages, hoping, that when my Father died; this cruel Monster would have sent
one of his Sons to have been his Successor to have reigned over his Subjects:
But (O just heavens) at that very time when I was fighting for him, and
exposing my life for his service in the achievements of his glory and renown,
the King my Father dying, he dispatched Sebalick (his creature) with troops of
Horse and Foot to seize on the noble City of Croy, and all the rest of the
chief Towns of Albania; at which time he exiled the Queen my Mother to a poor
pittance and corner of the world, without respect unto her person, who as she
was a Queen, so she was the Daughter of the King of Triballieus; and if he
spared my person (in this juncture of affairs) it was not through any affection
or resentment to humanity, or Justice, but only for that reason, because he
conceived he might make great advantage by my conduct and employment in his
Wars and service: Which if I had pleased to quit, he might (happily) have lost
a considerable part of his Army. And hitherto, what has Scanderbeg done
against Amurath? Or rather what offices of love does not Amurath owe to
Scanderbeg? has his fidelity in any proportion been equal to mine? How could I
not (if I had thought fit) have refused his first employments, and continued my
repose within his Court? Hostages are more noble then to be treated as Slaves:
And if I had not been encouraged by the generosity of mine own spirit, I would
not have exposed my life or honor for his service: And seeing that (at that
time) he punctually kept conditions, agreed on by the King my Father, I had
cause to hope that he would continue a succession to his fidelity. Grounded on
this confidence, I resolved to gratify his Commands with my choicest
endeavors, expecting that when that Prince should die, to whom I was
successor, I might his ascend throne, and so by double obligations, he might be
more firmly bound to keep his Faith and Parole. It was this apprehension that
invited me to take the charge of Sangiac, and without being so much as a
Mohammedan, I forbore not to appear a rigid Turk. In the first troubles of Asia,
I commanded a party of five hundred men, with so good success, that the very
reputation of that service rendered me capable to be made General of his
second Army, wherewith I effected mavelous advantages to the Empire. You
cannot but remember how Amurath received, or rather slighted me at Andrinople,
then, after so famous a Victory I reconducted his Army, without the loss of
more then two hundred men, when the spoils of the enemies appeared so great,
that they amazed Amurath, as well as other spectators, to behold so great
riches, so many slaves, such a number of Flags, Ensigns, and bruised and
battered Arms recovered from the Enemies; then the multitudes could not be
restrained from calling me the Restaura^or of his Empire. Besides this (it may
be) you will remember in what fashion I preserved the honor of that Nation,
when that audacious and fierce Scythian presented a defiance to the Sultan, to
that end that one of his Court Champions might have accepted the Challenge, and
when no other person was found inclinable and resolute, I undertook the Combat;
and if I had not vanquished the insolent and furious Scythian by my
magnanimity, and valor, the disgrace and shame would have much reflected on
the Emperor. At the same time I hazarded my life to all other adventures and
dangers. At the taking of Nicomedia and of Prusia, I was as active and bold as
the meanest and desperatest Soldier: And when I thought of that prodigious
action of Alexander the Great in the City of Oxidraques, I leaped on the walls
of the Town, and thence descended with equal courage, and though I dare not
say I had the valor of that famous Hero (of whom I speak) and though I may be
censured over rash and bold, yet my confidence, and temerity were not without
equal success: For (without vain glory) I was then the chief and sole cause
of surprising that Town; and since then (may I speak it without ostentation)
what eminent things have I not done in Europe against the Christians, as well as
in Greece and Hungary? Wherein I have been a fortunate instrument, if not of
vanquishing the Christians, yet of defending the Turks against their powerful
Armies. Do all these actions merit neglect, or (much less) perfidious
infidelity? Or has my fidelity been so great, and my valor so succesfull, as
to cause Amurath to be perfidious to his promises? Has he no other reward
(after his solemn engagements and promises) but to usurp the Kingdom of my
Father, to exile the Queen my Mother, to poison my Brothers, and likewise to
design me to be an Illustrious slave? And not to suffer me longer to live;
then I might serve his advantages, and by the conduct of Wars be able to
defeat his enemies, and establish his Throne? Do you believe (after such
Treaties as these) that I can commit any act of Injustice in failing of my
faith to one who so basely and barbarously abused our royal Family? Yet
(perhaps) you will tell me, that Falsehood is a thing so detestable, as not to
be excused, much less justified. If that rule and maxim be general, and
admits no exception, the Military art must lose great part of it self. Then
there will be no farther use of Stratagems, nor Ambuscadoes; then Towns should
never be surprised, nor the Enemies interrupted with Alarums; then there would
be no Combats in the night, nor any occasion of Spies; we needed not feign
Retreats to engage an Enemy to fight, but it would be necessary to number the
Forces of both parties, to make the combats equal; and Judges would be
expedient in the Camp as well as at a Combat of Barriers, or Tournies; to see
that the Sun were not more splendent in the eyes of the one, then of the other:
Admit this absurdity and evil consequences, there would be no need of Generals
in Armies, but the valor of the vigorous and hardy Soldiers would be
sufficient to dispute and gain the Field, then the extraordinary prudence, and
juditious experience of the greatest Commanders would be useless and
impertinent. Another objection may arise, that these circumstances of War,
are not only tolerable but just, and necessary, against declared enemies. To
that I answer, Public contracts betwixt Crowns are more sacred and inviolable
then agreements betwixt private persons. And when an Emperor treats with a
Prince, and keeps not his Parole, he forces him to be his Enemy, and dares
him to the height of revenge by his perfidious actions, which are not only
resented by my self, but appear clearly to all the world how much I have been
injured, and abused by Amurath; for when my Father died, and Amurath had exiled
the Queen (my mother) and had poisoned my Brothers, in a fained manner,
pretending to Generosity, he seemed inclinable to offer me the Crown of Albania
with a reserved intention, if I accepted of it, to seize upon my person, or to
put me to death. These injust provocations as they summoned quickly my
apprehensions, so they justify me not to be criminal: And as for those
reproaches of perfidiousness and Treason, they reflect fully on him who was so
barbarous and false. As for my comportments (ever since I came to his Court)
did the misfortunes of my condition any whit lessen, or abate my courage? Might
I not think after so many actions of valor and gallantry, that my thoughts
prompted me to more high, and sublime successes? Ought he not to have thought
when he first usurped the Kingdom of my Father, and put my Brothers to death,
that he then effectively declared a War, and disingaged my fidelity, which I
might have owed him in the Quality of an Hostage; and that all these actions
authorized my endeavors to revenge? Could not he understand that one whose
ambition was so ^^gh as to aspire to Soveraigntie, and be a King, had that
passion which is so violent in all generous persons? But chiefly then when they
are assured of a lawful right to a Crown? Could he not foresee that it was
impossible for me to be faithful, or a friend to one who usurped my Kingdom?
All wars have not their Commencements from the proclamation of the Heralds
mouths. A single action of hostility may engage an Army. It is not in open War
as in private Combats. In these latter we challenge, and defy our Enemy; he
accepts the defiance and answers the challenge. But as for public Enemies
they make a Parley, and treat if they please; and Combats and Cessations of
Arms, are actions equally voluntary Generals of Armies are ever masters of
their wills regulated to no bounds nor circumstances, but what serves these
advantages. On these considerations Amurath might not think it strange (after
his Usurpation and Murder) if I should attend all advantages, and become his
open enemy. As for preparations of war (when Princes are in low condition)
they are not always visible. And when one is reduced to a deplorable
condition, the designs are only in the head, but no ingenious person can sleep
soundly, or rest securely, injured and removed from Sovereignty. And though I
was in the power of mine enemy, without an Army, without a Soldier, without
intelligence from any of mine own Subjects, out of mine own Country, without a
person that I might confide or trust in, and without any resistance to so great
a design, as I harbored in my bosom (excepting the hopes of heaven, and mine
own valor) yet, if Amurath had well observed my actions, he might have easily
discerned, that I cherished some great reserves within my soul. He might have
seen the violence of my desires in a daily aspiring after glory and renown, and
he might have read (by the symptoms of my heart) plainly in my countenance,
that I was not capable to renounce my right to the Throne, nor be contented to
be a slave all my life, though never so glorious, That love and friendship
which I made with the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, declared that I
designed some noble enterprise for my self, and perceiving that I was not an
unactive Coward, it was impossible, but that he should dream of my endeavors
to revenge his Injuries. Let him then not blame any but himself, if his policy
has been anticipated, nor reproach me as perfideous, for my desertion; of him
'twas his fault and injury, no crime of mine. For first, he ought to have been
in preparation to prevent all danger: And as for my self, I did nothing but
what became an open and noble Enemy. It was doubtless just in me how to
consult, to re-conquer Amuraths Usurpation, and by what way and means I might
attain to the King my Fathers Throne. If I had discovered my discontents to his
unjust proceedings, I had been in that moment made a Prisoner, and either
strangled or poisoned the same day. If I had resolved to send to my Subjects,
and to the Inhabitants of Croye to require their assistance, my designs might
have been discovered, and my Subjects thereby made more miserable, and possibly
less useful, or else, from being Subjects (by this means) might have been
terrified into enemies. Now to have an absolute confidence in the love of the
Mohammedan soldiers, (with which they courted my person) was a thing of great
danger in appearance; and to have debauched the Grand Seigniors guards, and
with them to have marched to the Christian Princes, to implore their aid and
succors, was an attempt too curious and perilous to be effected, and if I had
prevailed with them, it is uncertain, whether the Princes would have been
willing or able to commence a War of so great importance, and to expose their
lives and Estates, to hazard, to recover mine: And if they had been resolute,
the event might have been very doubtful against so formidable an Enemy. I
would then in this great juncture of misfortunes, propose a resolution to my
self, to be the sole Artizan of my successes; And if I surprised Amurath, and
converted his Forces to my service: I have not justly merited reproach and
blame, but rather deserved honor and renown. Seeing that I have not done any
thing but by the rules of Justice, nor enterprized any design but what Amurath
might expect, if ever able to recompense his injuries. The great Cheat, and
usurpation wherewith he affronted me in the eyes of all the World, prepared me
to study revenge equal (if possible) to his Cruelty, falsenesse and
Usurpations, only with this difference, when Amurath basely forfeited his
Faith with me, he violated all rights of honor and justice; And what I have
done, was on equal retortion to his merit, to which I was obliged, as bound by
nature to revenge the death of my Brothers, the liberty of my Country, mine
own glory: and of God also, who is Justice it self: And had I no other
consideration, but this last within my thoughts, may not I urge and assert
(noble Captains) that God was my Conductor in this action of revenge?
Wherefore to have been faithful to this Tyrant, (to whom I was not a Subject,)
would not have only Corroded my Conscience, but dishonored that religion I
profess. And should not I answer for my Subjects, if I suffered them to be
allured to the errors of Mahumatism? And shall not I be culpable, and guilty of
the demolition of all those Altars. which the Turks have destroyed, and as
criminous as if I had built those Mosques, wherewith the Turks have filled
those Towns which belong to me? If I had longer served Amurath, should I not
have made my own subjects greater Slaves, and so have contributed more
assistance to the Turks; farther to destroy those who adored the God of my
Fathers? Think you that the Lord of Hosts could endure, that he who had been
favored with such extraordinary good successes, in warlike affairs, should
not employ his best skill and strength against these infidells? and by
adventures to make themselves Martyrs, if not Conquerors? Oh no, the chief est
duty keeps us strictly in our fidelity to our Altars. Besides I am clearly
absolved from his reproaches, in the judgment of all the World: As for Amurath
he had no rules of Conscience, nor Religion to oblige his promises, but he
could dispense with all relations, though never so sacred. But these
obligations did not rest on me, for I was brought an infant to his Court and he
was engaged to my Father; which Conditions, did not (with his succession)
derive themselves on me. Now if after all those remarkable services, before and
since the death of my brothers, and those memorable victories, which he gained,
through my Counsels and valor in the reconquest of Russia, without much
effusion of his soldiers blood; if he were not touched with honor, nor guided
by reason: am I to be blamed if I exercise Justice to my self, which he would
not design to render me? or could I longer serve that Prince, who after so
many eminent Achievements of his Wars, complotted all ways and means for my
destrushion? Which to have undertaken publicly, might seem too dangerous,
because he knew I had gained much affection with the Souldies; And as for my
imprisonment I was too well beloved and guarded, to be so surprised, and my
previsions were more diligent then to be suddenly intrapped; having then
possibility to kill me neither by sword nor poison, he contrived a third way,
wherein he aimed to dispatch me more honorably. Not long after our last
return from victory, he proclaimed a summons to all the Noble Heroes of his
Empire, to attend his Court, where he made preparations for martial exercises
and famous Tournies: at which solemn meeting, he hoped that in the diverse
Combats wherein (possibly) I might make re-encounter, I might receive a foil
dishonourably, or fall fatally. (Brave Captains) I vow to Heaven, this Treason
is not in the number of any that can be excused, and serves my turn to be
justly more active in revenge: When I discerned the depth of this perfidions
action, as I was dispatched with the Army into Hungary: I took my resolutions
not long to fight for mine Enemy Amurath, and began to think of fighting for
my self; I resolved over my thoughts the power and interest of a General, and
what it was to march before, and command an Army: These Cogitations reflected
on me with shame to my self, who had so long a time been faithful to an
infidel: I began to have a horror, and to be dissuaded from drenching my
hands in Christians blood: In my march, I approached near to valiant Huniades,
who was a Commander in that Army, and he inspired into my ears, what shame
possessed his soul, marching under the Turkish Standard. These discontents
quickened my resolutions; and when I found my opportunity, I quitted the
Infantry, and withdrew from that Army: This is that which Amurath calls
Treason; but 'twas a just reward for a mortal Enemy, whom (I acknowledge) I
served no longer, and whom I found would prove eternally faithless and
ingrate. After the defeat, I retreated into my own Kingdom; you received me
honorably, assisted me courageously, to chase and destroy the Common Enemies.
And was there any blackness in this action? Did I contrive to take away the
life of Amurath ignobly? or by such base ways and means as he did mine? Did I
invade his Empire as heusurped my Kingdom? May it not be rather said to the
contrary, that revenge was never taken more gentely, and more justly. And since
I have made the Conquest of my Kingdom, if I have continued the War, or
refused the Treaties of peace from Amurath; it is not because I love not peace,
but because I cannot find fidelity in that Prince, with whom I am to treat; And
that his ends are not honorable, but to disarme an Enemy, whom he feared, and
so to surprise (if possible) his Credulity, who is not to be easily taken by
spetious pretenses. Do not I then rather deserve the reputation of being
faithful, then perfidious? who so clearly manifest truth to my Enemy? and yet
(to judge a little more exactly of this proceeding) recall into your memory
(valiant Captains) I conjure you, all those circumstances of my Comportment,
when I was in the head of the Armies of Amurath, adventuring my life to enlarge
his Conquests, and to advance his glory: had not you most friendly rebuked me
in secret, and murmured against me, and (not diving into the bottom of my
heart) doubted whether I deserved to have been the Son of so excellent a
Prince, and concluded that I had abandoned Christianity utterly; that the love
of my Country was extinguished, and rooted out of my Soul, and consequently,
that I was not affected with any sense of true nobleness, and honor? And yet
in your very repinings, you made Apologies for my actions, better then I knew
how to make for self: For you concluded that I had no other way to manifest my
self more clearly the Son of the King my Father, then by those heroic actions,
which I pursued in my employment. The world will confess, that men are not
equally obliged to be as faithful to perfidious Enemies as to faithful
Friends, to those who exercise artifice, and and fraud, as to those who love
sincerity. It is doubtless great unworthiness and baseness to forfeit faith,
and break Parole by malice, perfidiousnesse or mercenary interest; but to be
unfaithful to a Traitor, to an Usurper, to a Murderer, and to quit his service
for the recovery of a Crown and Kingdom, for the interest of a Country, and
preservation of Christianity, if this desertion may be censured perfideousnesse
by Amurath, in my sense, and in reason it rather deserves Elogies and
Panegyricks then injuries and reproaches. And if it be true, that Fortunate
usurpers advanced to eminent qualities, and attended with successes, in time
become acknowledged as legitimate Princes: Is it not more reasonable and true,
that that Prince (to whom a Crown does effectually appertain) deserves the
highest honor, who conquers and forces it from his hands, who has most
unjustly, and tyrannously usurped it? And are not all means used for the
recovery allowed? and as for the act, does it not rather merit the opinion of
glory and renown, then the accusation of a crime? No, no, the observation of
ones Parole ha^h as well its bounds and limitations as all other things. The
interest of ones Country and Religion are principal, and high concernments,
and admit of dispensations in some degrees. We read, that Rome has been
preserved, when Fathers have preferred her honor and safety before the lives
of their own children: But (some may say) this was unnatural and a cruel act,
yet the wise Romans not only permitted, but commended those Patriots who
reverenced their Country with so great estimation above their Children; and
that which seemed cruelty, and inhumanity in private relations, appeared as a
laudable sacrifice when it served (in this high obligation) to defend or
protect ones Country. It is certainly true, that those generous Fathers have
with great zeal and deep affection, most stoutly fought for the preservation of
their children, their liberties, lives, and honors (on other occasions) and
have not spared to hazard the last drop of their blood. But where the
consideration of ones Country is in competition with love to children, the
public interest has ever prevailed most powerfully, and affection to children
is less vigorous, and Fathers are encouraged to see their children die, when it
is for the service of the Republique, with less sorrow, and regret; and such
actions merit less of blame, and more of glory. Now if Fathers are pardonable,
exposing their children to death, how tolerable is it for me to violate my
Parole, for the redemption, and preservation of my Country? Yet you will tell
me, that a Pagan example does not necessarily produce a conclusion for a
Christian: But if Heathens have thus proceeded for the defense of their
Country, what may not Christians do for the interest of their Religion? which
bond is so sacred, as it ought to be the end and aim of all their best
endeavors: Besides what is fit to regulate the Sovereign actions of Princes,
but only Religion, which confineth rules to their Policy, and ought ever to
sit President in their Counsels. On these Principles, we repent not of our
pretenses to fidelity, having endured so long a servitude to obtain so good an
end; And we believe and resolve, that it is no dishonor nor injustice to be
unfaithful to an infidel Prince, who has given the occasion by the violation
of his Faith and Parole. Come on (brave Soldiers) then, let us march, without
remorse, and let us vanquish and destroy this common Enemy of Christianity, and
use all craft and art, as well as force of Arms. Let us not be so scrupulous
as Alexander the great (that invincible Conqueror) we are not assured of his
Fortune, nor of his Valor, and we know certainly, that we have not his
retinue and train: let us use all stratagems for our advantage, and be as
active in the night as in the day; and if we vanquish, the Sun will gloriously
show us the effects of our Conquests; and if we be worsted in our nocturnall
and more secret attempts. the darkness will give an umbrage, and obscure our
shame and Cowardice; as well as hide our misfortunes. To conclude (Generous
Captains) we are resolved to vanquish and effect our resolutions, and to
attain our Conquests; we must be heroic in our actions, danted with no
opposition, nor neglecting any occasion of advantage. Wherefore prepare your
selves to be practical in the military science, that you may be as successful
as valiant. For we are but feeble and few, and the enemies puissant, and
numerous, and if we do not surprise them as well as fight them, their vast
multitudes will suppress our Valor and Courage. Thus (valiant Captains) you
see that our designs are innocent and generous; and that infidelity it self to
a perfidious Tyrant (being well managed) may gain immortal honor and glory.

The Censure.
THE reason of Scanderbeg appear powerful and strong, yet amongst them all
there will be a general debility; if religion had not been his warrant and
justification for his actions. This Prince (through his incomparable valor)
attempted many thousand glorious actions, and effected wonders, to the
amazement of that age wherein he lived: he defeated Armies, which for their
vast multitudes could scarce be numbered; He dammed up that great Torrent which
stopped not, till it had ravaged the moiety and greater part of the World; he
caused one Emperor to die with shame, grief, and dishonor; He forced Mahomet
the second (who was the Conqueror of so many Empires and Kingdoms) to
testify, by that excessive joy, which he conceived of his death the
extraordinary fear he had of him during his life. And (not to flatter truth)
this great General Scanderbeg, was (doubtless) the greatest Hero of these
latter ages. Yet (not to speak partially) had not the interest of Religion been
considerable, all the glory of his latter actions, could not have excused the
violation of his Parole. For to face about and join with the Enemy, in a
Battle to faigne a flight for fear as being too weak, and to defeat those
Troops that he commanded, to serve the Enemy, are Circumstances so odious that
they had need of all the importance and Arguments of Christianity to help them
to plead for aspecious pretense, and to Apologize. I know well Saint Augustine
made his retractations, and that repentance of former crimes, is a most
essential part to Religion. I well remember that a Cannon of the Counsel of
Constance (where John Hus and Hierome of Prague were burnt.) discharges Faith,
and obliges it not to be kept with Heretics; and thence some frame the
argu-ments, that if Faith is not to be kept with them, much less with
infidells. But ^as this Cannon savoureth not of Orthodox Truth, so it is not
generally obliging, nor Catholic and Christian doctrine (secundum fundamenta)
The Question was in that Council concerning the Pasport of Princes given to
Heretics, and whether they could protect them in their addresses and returns
from Synods and Councels; where it seems Faction and not truth concludes in
the negative, asserting, that particular Pasports and Conducts oblige none to
keep faith but those who grant the Pasports, and not the Councels, which
consent not, and had a separated power of permission. It is true, if this
Cannon were received as a Conclusion of an Oecume nick, General Council, then
on all occasions a man might violate his Parole and faith to Infidels, but this
qu^stion is rather Theological then Moral, and Political. If this were true on
the pretense of Heresy, or Infidelity, no Faith would be kept, and so
(consequently) humane society and divine truth would be utterly destroyed. Now
as for Morality and Policy, they conclude, the Faith and Parole of Princes
ought to be inviolable and sacred, which if abused reflects ever upon the
violators, with the consequences of irreparable shame, or incomparable peril.
By virtue of this argument, the action of Scanderbeg is more liable to censure:
And if at present this Prince had drawn his sword against France in the Kingdom
of Naples, in favor of the King of Aragon, and wore a Red Scarf to
distinguish his resolutions against the white ones of France; and 'twere so,
that the Wars were yet continued betwixt both Nations, it might be concluded
from Scanderbegs own example, that it were lawful to be treacherous, and it
were no error to insist on those arguments which he used for his own purpose:
But now from Albania let us pass to the Kingdom of Polonie, and there see
Henry the third of France on that Throne of Polonie, where we shall meet with a
question very curious for its examination, and most important to be determined.
This Prince (being secretly advertised of the death of CHARLES the Ninth his
Brother) consulteth with his Ministers and chiefest Confidents, Whether he
ought to prefer (in his election) a peaceable, and quiet Kingdom before a
Kingdom full of Wars and Tumults, and humble and obedient Subjects, before
Subjects revolted. And whether it were just to deprive Polonie of his presence,
and to return to France, which he had so voluntarily abandoned. This is the
subject of the discourse, which this eloquent and ingenious Prince reasons as
it follows.

HENRY THE THIRD TO PIBRACK AND PHILIP, DESPOTES.
THose who only judge by outward appearances, and by the external pomp which
dazelleth Vulgar eyes, believe not that there can be any difficulty in the
choice and election of Crowns, and imagine nothing more easy then to part
with one Scepter to receive another, and to descend from one Throne to mount to
another more glorious; concluding, that the change of Diadems for others more
illustrious, is very acceptable; and that Sovereignty is agreeable with
generous minds, but chiefly then when the Domination is enlarged. Yet you shall
find it most certain, that it is more facile for a Prisoner and Slave to make
choice of his Irons (though all punishments are naturally unwelcome) then for
Kings to make an Election of different, and several Crowns. The Slaves know
that the lightest chains are always the least incommodious: But it is hard to
determine whether the most illustrious, and splendent Crowns, and the most
elevated, and sublime Thrones are most desirable. As Royal Crowns may invite,
so those sparkling Diadems ought not to dazzle the eyes of those who aspire
after them. Scepters are as well ponderous and weighty, as majestic and
glorious: The Thrones of Kings are seated in high elevations, and those who
ascend them ought to be sure that their Foundations are well laid, and the
stairs and degrees firm whereby they mount them. Now in the examination of
these occurrences, it becomes me to consider by what right I am King of
Polonie, and what Rights I have to the Crown of France. To this end, that I may
precisely determine to which of my Subjects I owe my presence, and to which of
these Kingdoms I may more properly bestow my assiduous and daily care; this
being the most principle motive that should oblige my resolutions justly to
afford them my presence, and the chiefest cause that may endear their loyalty
and obedience to their Prince. As for my Subjects of Polonie, I must confess
they have freely chosen me their King, and voluntarily submitted to my
Domination; and (not to silence their bounty) have presented me with that
Crown. My Birthright has done the same thing to me, and Princes elevated to
Sovereignty, owe nothing to their Subjects, but hold their Scepters only from
God. Subjects have the birth of Subordination and Servitude, and Princes are of
absolute Sovereignty* As for the Suffrages of the people in the election of a
King, they are bonds and chains of their absolute obedience, riveted by their
tongues in the acclamations which they cannot justly violate and break. And
nothing else but expressions and unanimous submissions to that power whom some
more eminent qualities and nobleness has set them above them; who though
eligible by their consent, yet cannot be deposed or deserted without the horrid
crimes of Rebellion and Treason. But I have not any cause to be jealous of my
Subjects unworthiness or disloyalty; for I am King in Polonie not only by
legitimate election, but in a continued approbation, being well assured, that
there passes not a day wherein I have not the constant Vows, Prayers, and
hearty Devotions of the people, supplicating the Heavens for a continuation of
my prosperity, and have a daily assurance, and ratification of their first
Election by constancy of their public Exultations. So that I reign as well in
my Subjects hearts as in the Kingdom of Polonie. They fear me reverently
because they love me; they obey me dutifully, because I am Master of their
affections; they strive to enlarge my Domination, and to strike a terror into
others, to make my Reign the more secure, and to present an impossibility to
all endeavors, to give a check to the present authority, peace, plenty, and
tranquillity. My Reign seems so solidly established, that no accident can
shake the Foundation of so well-grounded a Sovereignty. What then can a Prince
desire more then the fruition of a glorious Crown, attended with the Fidelity
of dutiful, and most loyal Subjects? What Authority more pleasant then to be
beloved of those whom we command? And to have no other thoughts nor care for
Justice, but in considerations how to recompense faithful Subjects, and
dutiful Servants; and to Reign so prosperously, as to have no cause to
exercise the Royal virtue of Clemency; but toward persons more unfortunate
then criminous? The ordinary means of establishing Peace is by the Ravages of
War, and the effusion of much blood; but that which is bought by others at so
hard a price, cost not my Subjects a tear since the first day of my Election
to the Crown. And they are so united Fraternally amongst themselves, that they
are equally linked in the common interest of their Princes breast. And as the
Scripture says, that God holds in his hands the hearts of Kings, so may I
say (but still with reverence) that the hearts of my Subjects are in the hands
of my self, their Prince.

All these reasons (first alleged) how can I with wisdom quit my Kingdom of
Polonie? And if ugly Ingratitude be so monstrous a crime even amongst private
persons, how detestable and odious should it appear in the eyes of a Prince?
who is in that sublime degree, and so far above others, as not only obliged
to gratify and recompense Civilities, but to heap honors and multiply
Favors freely on persons capable of Princely bounty and Generosity. To abandon
then those subjects, who so freely chose me their King, and that Kingdom which
is so abundant in peace, and plenty, cannot but affect my thoughts with much
trouble, and perplexity. And on the other side, to resolve to adventure to wear
that Crown, whose splendour is so much obscured, where the Kingdom is so much
divided, where those who recall me, fear me more then love me, or if they seem
to love me, do it more for their own ends then my service: And (Farther) where
there are to be found as many Rebels as Subjects, and a civil War devouring
the very heart of the Country, where in that great body no one part is entirely
sound, or free from the Epidemick disease of the State. These considerations
may retard and deter my resolutions from going to France. Besides the
Provinces of Poitou, Normandy, Dauphine and Languedock are in arms against
me: Great seditions shines, and heresies are insolently spread, and have
generally infected the Kingdom of France, and (perhaps) I may be forced to the
endeavors of a new Conquest, before I may hope for a quiet and peaceable
possession of the Kingdom; and that (usually) I should be forced to make my
entrance into the most Famous Towns of France, rather by the breaches which
the Cannons might make, then by the Gates of the Towns, loyally lying open.
And so, to march triumphantly, attended with such joyful acclamations as
usually accompany Princes in their fresh addresses, and entrances to their
Crowns. Imagine you what a strange and unwelcome alteration would that be, to
quit a Kingdom wherein all the Subjects are in repose, and humble and
affectionate toward their Prince, and to march into another, where the fields
are overstrewed with dead corpses, where the greatest part of the people
deserve rather the severest Punition, then pardon, or the grace of Clemency, as
having offended, (and that irrepentantly) the just authority of all divine and
humane rights. Might I not better constitute the Queen my Mother Regent of
France, and appoint my Lieutenant General for the Conduct of my Martial
affairs? For I must confess, though I am obliged to France for my Birth and
life: Yet I owe and hold my Scepter from Polonie: It is in the life and blood
of illustrious ^ap^t, whereby I may claim the Crown of France; but it is the
Frank and voluntary bounty of my Subjects hearts, whereby I hold the Scepter of
Polonie; And how shall I equally gratify the rights and merits which both
Crowns may challenge from me? If I go into France with hopes to terminate that
War, I may very probably raise a War in Polonie, where peace is so well
established; And may it be lawful to attempt an uncertain good with an
assurance certainly to cause some dangerous evil? (In this weighty
concernment) ought I not as well to reflect on my subjects, as on my self, and
in both relations, look up to Heaven to be better guided? If I consider the
love of my Subjects of Polonie, I must acknowledge they presented me with that
Crown: Yet I must not blaspheme, It is God alone that raises and pulls down
from the Throne, and he makes the elective as well as the hereditary Kings.
All Sovereignty and Crowns absolutely depend on his pleasure, and authority.
And it is a Law indispensable, that all Crowns owe their Homage and duty to
the King of Kings. As for the people who honor Kings with their acclamations,
they do no more in the Ceremony of inauguration, then to proclaim their own
obliga^ions to obedience: But it is God who gives the Sovereignty of
Kingdoms, who appoints his terrestrial vicegerents, and Ministers after his
Caelestiall Pattern, to exercise justice and mercy. It is he to whom alone
Kings owe account, and it is an inseparable Comitant to the Royal Office, to
succor the pressing necessities of the subject impartially, without the
distinction of Persons or qualities, or injury to the rules of Justice In these
considerations, it is evident to all the World, that whether I hold the Crown
of Polonie or the Crown of France, the tenure is chiefly and solely from God.
And as for the People of both Kingdoms, they swell with equal affections in
my heart: And whether I continue in Polony, or advance toward France, I am to
be as a common Father, and Parent to the Country, and without respects of
either repose in peace, or hazard in War, it is my duty to regard what is most
just and equitable; and as to either Kingdom what may be more commodious, and
more glorious. Let us see then (I beseech you) whether it be more reasonable to
quit a Kingdom where my presence is necessary, to prevent a War, or to go to
another, where it may be very doubtful, whether my person may recover and
establish a peace. It is not permitted to effect any evil, though with a good
end, much less in attempt of so uncertain an assurance. Those famous Acts
which great and hardy spirits attempt, in usurpations of Empires and Kingdoms,
are no less criminous before God, then the more common horrid crimes are
amongst men. And is it not as great an injury to robb a King from a Kingdom, as
a Kingdom from a King? It has arrived and fallen out sometimes, that Soldiers
have forsaken their Captains, and Captains their Generals, and Generals
their Princes and Masters, because they have been either base or false; But for
a generous and prudent Prince to have quitted his Faithful Subjects, and to
make a choice of others, of whose fidelity he has had no experience, but
rather danger, whether they would prove dutiful and loyal, is an accident,
which (perhaps) has never happened, unless in this example of my person.
Notwithstanding the tenderness and equity, which causes a Father to leave his
Children, who are not in danger to make have and run to deliver those that
are in eminent peril, encourages my resolutions, in this Conjuncture, and
invites me to leave them, now being more prosperous and happy, and more able to
succor others who are very miserable. When the Sea is calm, every ordinary
Pilot does presume to work at the Helm, or guide the ship: but when the Sea is
rough, and the Waves wanton and furious; the most skillfull Seaman observes
the Compass, and steeres the Course. It is he who chiefly grapples with the
tempest, when all the company (with trembling eyes and ears) attend his
Counsels, and his motions: It is he on whom they depend to preserve the Ship
from Rocks, and protect the Vessel from the fury of the Rolling Waves, and
(at last) to bring them safely to the Port, and Harbor. Do not you then so
much admire, if you hear me prefer War before Peace, and rather expose my
self to troubles, then to perpetuate that tranquillity, which I do now enjoy.
Polonie is furnished with many Noble Personages, who can easily preserve her
in that good Estate, wherein the Kingdom is now established: But Fair France
now is rich in nothing but broiles and troubles, which are (at present) so
highly inflamed, as probably not to be extinguished without the approach of my
person. A Prince is a star in himself so glorious, that it oftentimes obscures
by the beams of Majesty (though arising a far off) those l^sser and feeble
ligh^s, which (in his absence) shine bright in the Peoples eyes, and grow
conspicuous before some eminent deluded Grandees: But when that petty splendour
vanishes, their credit and reputation (which has shone in the night of
tumults and divisions) diminishes also. And then Revolts and Seditions
commonly shadow them selves under the Umbrage of more just protection, and
(recovered out of the clouds of Treason) submit to the brightness of true
Majesty, confiding there to find the Rays of Clemency. You see then my
resolutions are not unreasonable, and that a Prince in equity is not only
obliged to live where he can have most honor, ease, and plenty, but where he
may still increase his renown, and more gloriously exercise his royal
dignity. And whereas it may be objected, that Polonie may fall into the
miseries of War, and so consequently some evils attend that Kingdom, by reason
of my motions, and advance toward France; I answer, the General of an Army,
who has given and gained a Battle, is not responsible (by Martial
discipline) for the loss of three or four thousand men slain in that
re-encounter; and the Cries of the Widows and Orphans (on this occasion)
cannot hinder the Trophies and Triumphs of Victory and Joy, nor extinguish the
Bonefires of Exultation. Where (on the contrary) a private Captain having
rashly, or imprudently exposed his Company to great danger, and to no purpose,
and without order) has sometimes been sentenced not only to lose his place,
but also his life. Thus it is true, the least circumstance of dishonor and
imprudence changes the face of things. Now in Politic affairs it is
sufficient if the design be reasonable, though the effects succeed not; the
chief Commander, though failing in the enterprise, is free from blame: Good
Counsels, and good Intentions (though honest) are not always fortunate; and we
are not to judge of the actions of Princes by successes and usual events.

Notwithstanding I shall further add, that my removing to the Crown of France
may contribute greater advantage and safety to the State of Polonie: For think
you not that the Neighbor Princes will continue their power with more
moderation, or be in more fear, when they shall understand that he who was King
of Poland shall become absolute Master of the first, and greatest Kingdom in
Christendom? And that he and his Allies may be therefore more formidable to
all the Princes in the earth? Alexander the Great commanded Subjects (though
remote and distanced) in the farthest parts. The Senators of Rome, who never
budged out of that Royal City, made entire Provinces to tremble, which were no
nearer the Capitol then Cracovia is to Paris. If that great Conqueror
Alexander quitted the pleasant situation or Macedonia for the great riches and
glory of Persia, we may conclude then that Dangers are companions of honor,
and agree with illustrious minds. On this account I may be permitted to leave
Polonie, to go and reign in France. But you will tell me, the Macedonians
murmured when Alexander resolved to leave them, and advanced toward Persia. I
answer, Alexander aimed at the glory of that Empire, who was a stranger and no
Persian; but I have a more natural right to the Crown of France, which is not
only an apparent, and casual Interest, to ground my expectations and
designs, in the Government of that Illustrious Kingdom. Wherefore the
Polanders and French united in one Crown, are to be incorporated in the
mutual relations of aid and assistance. I cannot but esteem it a degree of
Inhumanity to abandon those, who presented me with a Royal Crown; and
therefore I have a contestation in my soul, how to deport my self in an equal
dispensation of Sovereignty and favor to both Kingdoms. It is not valor
alone that causes Princes to be renowned, but bounty, sweetness, gratitude,
and moderation. Virtues which make no great noise, but like deep streams glide
smoothly and gently, gain the Subjects hearts, makes the Sovereign more
glorious, his Government more acceptable, and his renown more immortal: And
the Historians have not been less industrious in the description of the
passages of Granica, and the Battle of Arbella, then of the great Armies of
the Macedonian Conqueror over the numberless Forces of Darius.

These things being so, why may I not expect the reward of Honor? being so
generous as not to resolve absolutely to quit those who love me; and still
reserve so much Equity and Justice due to them for their Election of me to be
their King, that I may not force them to repent of their Royal Favor: And if
I be so bounded in my moderation as rather to make choice of hardship and
trouble with hopes of doing better service, then of dalliance (in the abundance
of delicious plenty) where the Princes and Nobles are as fortunate and happy as
they can wish themselves; On this ground I make my resolution to advance
toward those parts, where true glory leads and conducts me, and every step of
my march (even from the first motion) shall be with design of equal honor to
Polonie and France; toward which we shall not make more haste to search out
the delicacies and pleasures of that Kingdom, but proposing a Method and
course of Moderation, resolve to expose our self to the fury of a Civil
War, with hopes to recover an established Peace in that distempered and
divided State. He who is resolute to leave repose to find out trouble, the
design of his actions being just, he must needs be attended, with honor and
glory, and in these occasions acting for the preservation of Religion, and
restoration of defaced Altars, fighting with ardour and zeal, cannot but be
famous; if he destroy that great Monster, which (at present) threatens the ruin
and desolation of France.

It is not then mine own will that induces me to leave my Subjects, but a
supernall, and heavenly interest that chiefly snatcheth me from them: And
Moral Generosity is obliged to give place, and yield to Divine Policy: And
since (to speak rationally) my Birth has made me a King, as to this latter
respect, I cannot with Justice and Honor quit the Privileges of my
Birthright, and being advanced to so glorious a Crown, I am not only obliged
to Reign, but to rule with Justice, and so to support that great luster, and
glory which is derived on me from my Predecessors. As for the quality of
Elected Kings, the Successors are not obliged to preserve the honor of those
who ruled before them; but Princes who come to their Crowns by Inheritance,
have Kings their Fathers, as well as their Predecessors; and being naturally
descended from them, they are not only to endeavor to be glorious, but
likewise engaged to support the splendor and renown of their Ancestors. And
the Scepter of France has been borne up by so many famous Princes, that as it
were ignominious in me to refuse so glorious a Birthright, so it were ignoble
not to endeavor by a signal emulation, to imitate (if not exceed) the chiefest
Virtues of those Illustrious Princes; which if I should not undertake, my
neglect would prove an inglorious declaration to all the world, that I tacitly
renounced a Royal Right and Scepter, and was unworthy or unable to wear so
splendent a Crown and Diadem, and had not in me the Valor and Virtues of
mine Ancestors: I must part, part (I say) my dear Friends) though with great
grief and reluctancie from those who have received us with so great joy, and
whose hearts are overwhelmed with sorrow, at our preparations to leave them. Oh
Heavens! what an unparalled conjuncture am I fallen into? I speak of my
departure from Poland, but do not well know how to find out the way and
means, being so environed with the affections of so many thousands, from whose
vigilant love I can scarce withdraw my self. My consultations are only with my
self, and you my Friends; and I am well assured that he who had so universal a
consent, and general acclamations, when he was crowned, shall not have one
vote or voice to quit his Crown: If he shall refer his resolution to the
public deliberation of the people. I can easily (if I will) stir up all the
Kingdom of Polonie into Arms, and engage them not to permit my departure. So
that I can say, I am free, and yet a Prisoner, and that which seems more
cruel, I cannot complain of my Guards, which have so great passion to obey my
commands, that (on the contrary) I am obliged to love them. And now (after all
this conflict, and debate, I must resolve to leave them, and that for ever: And
yet (which is more cruel) without giving them notice, or so much as saying,
adieu my Subjects, my Friends. Whoever read of an accident so strangely
tempered as this of mine is? I am grateful, and thankful in my soul to the
Polanders for their favors, and yet I must appear to them, and all the world,
uncivil and monstrous.

Fortune, in this occasion, seems to overthrow, and beat down all her former
favors, and has rather impoverished, then enriched me. I could rather wish
that she bad never presented me with the Crown of Polonie, then so to have
snatched, and ravished me from thence. But (after all this) I know that Kings
neither live, nor Reign for themselves, there is a fatal Law and Decree, which
guides them as well as inferior private persons; and they are as well bound up
to the rules of obedience, as Subjects to their Princes wills and pleasures.
Policy does often oppose Religion, but the latter ought to be the chiefest
Counselor of a King. Justice and Clemency require things, which seem
entirely different; the love of peace, and ambition of true Renown familiarly
oppose one another: to be a King, and in that Royal Quality more illustrious,
is certainly to be something above an ordinary person. Be not you then
startled at the diversity of my reasons, or difficulty of my resolutions in
this point. The paths which lead Princes to supremacy, are not so directly
beaten, as that they may not err, and deviate from the right way; then
principally when the affairs are sublime, important, and extraordinary.

Examples in Antiquity demonstrate the truth in this case, for to be a King
by election, and to be a King by birth, and to be beloved of the first
Subjects; and misapprehended and prejudicated (for the most part) by others, to
leave those who are experimentally faithful, and to address to others who are
tumultuous, insolent, and uncivil: to abandon the delights of peace, and to
make choice of the affairs of War; not to be able to quit the faithful
without grief, nor to relieve and succors others without certain infamy and
danger: To conclude, to be constrained to fly from a Kingdom, for fear of
being forced to reign Soveraignly: These are such different varieties of
concernments, as humane prudence rarely or never consulted with before: and in
which, the deepest policy will prove too shallow, to sound the bottom, and
make a resolution, what to choose or leave. But in the extremity and straight,
my own reason, and thoughts of true honor, must be our guides, what course to
steer, and no other Pilots (how skillfull soever) can be useful to me in this
nick of so great importances. I doubt not but that my return into France may
endanger to change, and alienate the affection of my subjects in Poland
(perhaps) into the quality of as great hatred as it was of kindness. For it is
the course and effect of love once irritated, to turn into fury. But if this
misfortune should attend me, I shall (at last) gain this advantage, that
posterity may better judge of the sweetness and temper of my domination, and
Reign by their resentment: and, that election and choice that they made of me,
wherein they might (possibly) have been abused. But my heart has been utterly
incapable of unworthiness, or unthankfullnesse to loyal and faithful
Subjects. See (noble friends) the reasons of my resolutions in the election of
an object so extremely rare, which have persuaded me to withdraw from the
Polish Court, and to address toward France. I have nothing more to add, but
only that I am a Prince, whom a Crown which nature has prepared for me,
cannot so absolutely comfort and encourage, as the loss of another, which
Fortune, and my own merits presented to me, does afflict and trouble me.

The Censure.
THE fancy and device of Henry the third, was two Crowns in an Escutcheon,
representing that of France, and that of Polonie: And this was the Soul and
life of the Motto: The last I look for in Heaven. But he that invented this
device, did not think to have made so sudden a change, nor so speedily to have
received the last, which his own invention and Mo^to seemed to foretell, and
Prophecy. On these and such like occasions, we may cry out with St. Paul, Oh,
the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, whose judgments
are incomprehensible, and his ways past finding out? Who is he that knows
the thoughts of the Lord, and who has been his Counselor? Who could have said
to Henry de Valois, when he acquitted his Crown of Polonie to return into
France, that in the ascent to his new Throne, he should find so sudden a
degree, of descent to his Tomb: and that his entertainment of that Scepter,
should prove a speedy means to the loss of his life, by so violent and so
unusual a death; And even then, (when his designs and Ambitions lead him to
have his head crowned with a glorious Diadem) he should loose the sight and
brightness of the Sun. The Prophet and foreteller of such infallible truth,
should have had neither Faith nor Favor for his reward. It Is true, he removed
from a Climate, where Ice, and Snow, and thick Foggs dwell eternally, and
returned to another air, which is more temperate, and pleasant, and the
diversity of seasons equally regulated. Whence man may see how the great
Creator of the Universe has made all things with weight, number, and measure.
In Polonie this Prince encountered with extremity and sharpness of cold: and
here in France he became reproached by his own Mother, who formerly so doted
and Idolized her Son: he acquitted the rough and savage Polanders, and returned
to a Country, where he met with less civilities: he succeeded a King, who was
not much loved, whose reign was violent in Civil Broiles. This Prince saw
(whilst he was Duke of Anjou) how he was the Peoples Darling, and the Kingdoms
delight. And therefore his reason might persuade him to return, where
(probably) those Flames of affection could not (as yet) be extinguished. So
that his Management (upon this occasion) seems to be most judicious, and his
choice equitable, and both these were confirmed to him, by the testimonies of
glory, and triumph, which did meet him, and attend on him on the Frontiers of
France, and seemed to promise to him a prosperous Reign, accompanied with much
Felicity. But, (oh the vanity of all Earthly Contentations) this temperate
Climate, and fair Kingdom, found no entertainment for her King, but outrages,
and tempestuous broiles: The Queen his Mother (who so passionatly loved the
Duke of Anjou) had no kindness for him when he was King of France. The People
civilized at some seasons, at his approach, became more barbarous then
Scythians: they endeavored to asperse his honor, and assaulted his life, and
(at last) forced him from his Throne, to which he never made (after his
misfortune) a re-ascent: his Reign was almost as bloody as that of his
Predecessors: before his death he discerned himself the object of the Peoples
scorn, and odium, whom formerly they had so hugged in their affections, and
extolled with admiration: and after a grappling with many mischievous
reencounters, he was unfortunately assassinated by an abominable Monster, a
Jacobin Friar. Kings by this example may learn to humble themselves before the
Throne of the great King of Kings; who elevateth them to their Royal
dignities. That God which foundeth, establishes, and preserves Empires, can
shake their foundations, dissipate their forces, and destroy their strength at
his pleasure; and no earthly power is so firm and puissant, but he can as
easily break to shivers as a Potters Vessel. A Royal Scepter is but a Reed in
comparison of that Iron Rod wherewith God chastizeth: And when Kings are thrust
out of Gods Providence, Grasshoppers, and Frogs, shall prove enemies too
formidable for their resistance: And there is nothing so feeble, amongst all
the creatures but shall be strong enough (when God is displeased) to ruinate
and destroy them. Let not then great ones affie in their subtilty, nor trust in
uncertain Riches, nor in the numbers of Forces and Armies. These are things so
far from securing Princes, that they do not only fail them, but serve to
pull down their authority. These attendants are of a mortal, and mutable
condition, and no security is to be sought, or settled but in God alone, who is
unchangeable. And to this purpose the Morals of the Evangile are better for
Princes then the profoundest rules of Aristotle, and the deepest Politicians;
and the dependency of a blessing from heaven transcendeth all Princely
experience, or humane Counsel. He who takes care for the Birds of the air,
forgets not Princes; but when they first offend and forget their Maker, their
ruin is (probably) not far off. To conclude, this name of Henry the third of
France transfers me to another of that name, Henry the eighth of England, who
found himself much streightened what to resolve; for having elevated Anne
Bullen to the Throne, and having repudiated Katherin, he found himself
constrained to put her to death for her Falsehood, and Incontinency: he seemed
to struggle with many difficulties, which gave a check to his resolutions, but
overruled by these reasons following, he caused the Lady to die, whom he
professed to have loved more dearly then his own Soul.

portrait of Henry VIII The mighty and most magnificent Prince, Henry the
eight, king of England, France, and Ireland. defender of the faith etc He
reigned 37. years, and 10 months, died at the age of 57. years. and lies
burie^ at Windsor.
F(...) D(...) Scu(...)
Are to be Sold by William Peake


HENRY the VIII TO THOMAS CROMWELL Lord High Chamberlain of ENGLAND.
AS I was Averse from their Councels, and yielded to my passion, when I
resolved to advance Anne Bullen to my Throne, so I ought no more to be
attentive to their Importunities, who endeavored to persuade me not to
sacrifice to my revenge, this oblation which I caused Crowned. For it is
expedient that this victime expiate her crime and mine: it being certain that I
have been no less culpable in too much loving and honoring her, then she has
been false and unworthy toward me. The nature of her crime is of such
deformity, that it is not capable of the beams of Clemency. I am well assured
that Agustus Caesar, who made this virtue to appear so illustrious toward the
latter end of his reign, repented of nothing more, but that he had elected the
punishment of Exile for the correction of the evil inclination of his daughter
Julia, and had not been more severe to so notorious a crime: which is most
odious in any of that sex, but more intolerable and impardonable in a Queen
then any others. If I were permitted to give that sin a name, I should be much
troubled how to describe it; it is so black and foul. Had Anne no other umbrage
to have shadowed her, and prevented her from that shameless choice, modesty
(the common protection of that sex) might have guarded her chastity: and she
might have been persuaded, that purity, and a spotless conversation would have
proved the greatest ornament and beauty to her; without which, beauty it self
becomes but an object of scorn and aversion, a loose and impudent garb
provoking rather an odium and detestation, then love and admiration: And as
Ladies have nothing else to observe and attend more then virtue and modesty,
and what may best and most grace their Conversation; seeing their thoughts are
not cumbred with the conduct of Armies, the charge of the Magistracy, nor the
hard study of Learning and Policy: their whole duty ought to be entirely
employed in a modest and virtuous comportment. It is that which renders them
most amiable and lovely, and continues daily a Creation of new Charms, to honor
and adore their beauty.

But besides this general reason, there are many others, which justify her
actions to have been most detestable: She was not only of that sex, to whom
Chastity and Modesty is a Virtue necessary and essential, but above these
degrees; she was a Queen, wife to a famous King; a Prince, who passionately
loved her, and so honored her as to put a Crown upon her head; toward which,
had not her Princes favor invited her she durst not have presumed to have
lifted up her eyes, A Throne is a place of Majesty, so highly elevated, that as
on the Sun, it is not to be looked on by a Subject, but with stupor and
admiration; and a Crime approaching toward it, is not to be endured. That
place is sacred, and not to be profaned; so base, so foul an attempt to come
near so illustrious a presence, cannot, ought not to be excused. Kings in their
greatest weakness may not digest so foul an injury: There are always some
pretenses at hand to shadow and cover faults and errors. If Princes be
debonaire, they are flattered as peaceful and gentle; if weak, as kind and
indulgent; if cruel, they are accounted more severe and jealous of their
Authority; if they have the Art to rule and reign, they are esteemed subtle; to
have much of the Fox, and to be prudent. Thus Kings in their authority are
attended with Apologies, and their Power brings to them fair glosses for all
their actions: But if a Queen lose her honor and reputation, there is no cure
for such a wound, there is nothing to be said more, but that she deserves to be
removed from the Throne and cast into her Tomb; where her crimes and infamy
may be buried with her: which were the more notorious in her, because she was
advanced from so low a Quality, to be so great a Princess: And having stained
her honor, nothing can be able to expiate her offense, but the streams of her
own blood. The love of her Prince was not passionate to an ordinary degree, but
to a kind of Idolatry; and consequently, her modesty should have respected the
majesty of the Throne. And if the quality of her husband had not been
sufficient to have obliged her to Virtue, and Fidelity; the abundance of his
ardent affection might have charmed her to mutual tenderness: And if this
passion could not prove predominant in her soul; the relations of her husband,
her servant, and her King, who had courted her with a Crown, might have
inveloped entirely, and swallowed up her ambition. And should not all these
Engagements have merited her acknowledgments; and preserved her from defiling
the Royal Bed, and so to dishonor her self and disoblige her Prince? No, all
these obligations were too feeble for this inconstant and immodest wretch. This
woman advanced to be a Queen, though the Sovereign mistress of my soul whom I
crowned gloriously with mine own hands, became an Infidel to my favors, and
her own faith; and fell so low, that she lodged within the Cabinet of her
heart, those unworthy persons, who deserve not to be named, but as to make up
an Aggravation in their mutual offenses. She (I say) who knew well with what
Contestations I wrestled to obtain her Coronation, and saw to what dangers and
scorn I exposed my self for the love of her: Neither considered the Laws of God
nor man; slighted the peace and prosperity of my Kingdom, regarded not the
repose of my People, but stained her own honor, and my content and Glory.
Although I repudiated Queen Katharine, who was a virtuous and Immaculate Lady;
and caused her Death by this second marriage, whereby I drew upon me the rage
and envy of the Emperor, irritated the Pope, and seemed to scorn the Alliance
with the Crown of France, proposed to me by the Cardinal of York, my Creature
and Favorite, whom I disobliged and provoked to desert my service; by whose
Ministry and conduct, I so mightily prospered: Though the exigencie of Affairs
transported my passion, and obscured my reason; so that I became A disturber of
Religion, Sacrilegious, violent, and cruel to my Subjects; and grew so resolved
as to serve mine own lusts and Inclinations, causing a violent change;
wherewith transported, I cruelly put to death one of the chiefest of all my
Subjects, the Lord Chancellor Sir Thomas More; and to prostrate all things in
my kingdom to the pleasure of my self and Mistress; and therefore renouncing
Justice and paternal tenderness, preferred Elizabeth daughter of Anne Bullen,
before Mary the daughter of Queen Katharine; And so carrying on my designs in a
tempest of Passion, I removed all things out of the way that might seem to
resist and oppose my expectations: I punished some with exile, others with
imprisonment, and some with death: Yet after all these Circumstances and
pledges of my love, this base and ingrate person razed me out of her affection;
forgot the debt she owed me, and which she ought to have paid to her own
honor, and violently forced me (which neither honor nor reason could resist)
to cause that head cut off which I had formerly crowned. But (O heavens) can
King Henry possibly consent, that she, whom he conducted to the Throne, should
ascend a Scaffold to lose her head? And that she who kept my heart soveraignly
in her power, should submit and lay down the greatest Beauty in my Kingdom to
be struck off by the hand of an Executioner? Oh no, these my thoughts are
terrible, the way forlorn, though the crimes are odious; the person is lovely
whom I once so honored; and cannot be sentenced to die, but with much regret.
It will be a sad spectacle to see her bathed in her own blood whom I have so
tenderly embraced; will it not be sufficient to imprison her person, who has
so wantonly abused her liberty? May not her life in a Prison afflict her, and
better teach her the difference which she enjoyed in the liberty and honor of
a Throne? Will not her remorse for her faults be to her as bitter as death, and
prove a Correction severe enough? It Is true, this use may be made of her
alteration: But shall I let slip or suffer to dye my former Princely
resolutions? No, I know too well, that offended honor grows implacable; her
satisfactions are impossible, she must perish, my Injuries must have revenge;
and her death must prepare my better repose, when she shall cease to be alive.
Time will raze her Image out of my memory, and then I shall be more free from
the passions of love and fear. Besides, the resolutions which I take, are not
only the effects of revenge, but rules and reasons of Policy: For there are a
sort of enemies, who either ought not to be accused, or if they be, they are
not to be pardoned: And prudent Princes are obliged to consider, whether those
whom they pardon can be ever able to hurt and offend them. Policy teaches them
to depend more securely on their own power, then on a penitent offenders
promise. And may I, in this case, regard the desires of Anne Bullen, and so
dissimulate her crime, and let her pass unpunished? Or having accused and
imprisoned this offender, were it not greater policy to destroy her? When I so
much doted, and adored her, she might have found opportunity to have been
malicious or desperate, to have used Poniard or Poison to my person: Perhaps
she may make an escape out of Prison, and (with her Partisans) levy Arms
against me in some part of my kingdom. But you will tell me that Anne is
committed to an inaccessible Tower, where the Guards are as faithful and
courageous as vigilant, that she is rather hated then loved of my Subjects; who
never had the least approbation, but rather odium and scorn for her marriage,
and therefore (probably) she may be less dangerous and offensive. Yet the Tower
where she is committed, though strong, may be too weak to keep her: As for the
guards, they may be suborned and corrupted. The Artifice and Enchantments of a
woman, and she a Queen, and miserable, and unfortunate, are temptations too apt
to provoke her to all malicious inventions, and hardly to be resisted in her
sex (too inclinable to mischief and revenge:) Besides, Compassion operateth on
the most obdurate hearts; And Female tears, like soft drops (constantly
distilling) will in time work into tempers as hard as stones. And (I believe)
it is far more easy to guard securely the wildest Tigers and most Savage
Lions, then a fair and beautiful Lady: These fierce creatures are safe if their
Cages and Dens be strongly traversed with iron bars, strong doors, and locks:
But a Beauty, the more she is loaded with chains, the more she moves her
Keepers and Guards to compassion: Her tears (in her affliction) her groans and
sighs will prove no less possible to corrupt and inchant her Jailors, then the
greatest rewards and recompenses: and therefore her hopes will be fresh every
day to gain her enlargment, if not from my clemency, yet from her corruptible
and compassionate Guards. Besides, since her advance to the Throne, she has
had golden opportunities to heap up vast sums of treasure; which (perhaps) she
has secretly prepared to supply her misfortunes, in case they should assault
her. And it is true, Keys made of gold do often open iron gates; and it is to be
suspected that beams of beauty, attended with sad complaints of injury, sighs
and tears, promises and presents, may open strong doors, intoxicate vigilant
Soldiers, and by female craft and subtle devises, Anne may procure her
liberty, and so gain more opportunity to endeavor mischief, and raise future
troubles. I know well that my people love her not, and if she could escape her
Prison, she could not but with much difficulty find any succor or Azile, yet
my jealousy and reason tells me, that if the people have no kind ness for her,
the Grandees of my Kingdom would be glad to countenance and engage in a Faction
with her. And I do not think it possible, that if this perfidious and ingrate
soul should address to any part of my kingdom, but that she might endanger the
most faithful of my subjects either to compassion or compartnership in some
new and disloyal design against me: my reign has not been so free and calm
from troubles, but that a little breath of potent malice and discontent might
quickly stir up the Waves and Billows of violent Commotions. And if this fair
Beauty should prostrate her self to the most loyal Governor within any Forts of
my Kingdom; when he should see a Queen at his feet, with tears in her eyes,
blub bering Beauty it self, and a heart ready to break with discontent;
breathing out nothing but sighs and groans, he could not possibly but be apt to
believe, and then tenderly to relieve a distressed Lady; The same force and
sweetness enchanting his heart, which bewitched mine. From this tenderness,
kindness and respect would spring; and from that, ardent desires to serve her:
And then Hope and Ambition, the two wings that support new aspirings, might
transform loyalty to observation of Anne: And this error (not resisted) nor
weighed in the balance of Reason) may change a loyal Subject of Henry the
eighth, into a Vassal and Slave of Anne Bullen. The confusions and ruins of
Kingdoms arrive not always through the ambition of Neighbour-Princes, or
through the hatred or division of the People; Fond love and violent passions
have their share often in great disorders; And they who extinguish not the
sparks of these fi^es (if the flames grow high) are apt to put Kingdoms into as
great Combustion, as the most formidable Invasions. We resolve then to take a
course with this enemy; and disarming her, render her incapable not to offend
us. The suborning of my Guards, and seducing my Subjects, is not only the
disservice that she may prove capable to effect: for who knows (if I suffer her
to live) but that in process of time, I may grow so feeble, as to dote on that
beauty, which I so much admired, and be inamoured with her; and admitting her
discourse, be charmed with her Syrenian voice? And yiedling a delightfulness to
her company, be so transported with affection, as to forget all her Injuries
and Treason, which never appeared in her countenance nor deceitful looks. She
is still fair and lovely; and though she has lost her prosperity, has
guarded her beauty: and my heart has been so long subject to her Laws, that
she may have a possibility to be as great a Tyrant over me as ever; and then
(in that condition) what revenge might not her malice execute? Judge then (my
Lord) how great would be my shame, and how odious my infamy; what my People
would say, and how bitterly murmur: certainly excusing her as innocent, and
condemning my self as most Tyrannical and unjust. If I should admit of such a
vicissitude, and suffer Anne to be admitted to my company, and to return to the
Throne. No, (my Lord) we resolve not to expose royal Majesty to any such
unworthy hazard and adventure. That which I permitted and approved in my first
grace and favor, is an example warranted by many Illustrious Princes, and not
excepted against by the most scrupulous and most virtuous Moralists. The
Emperor Theodosius courted Athenais to his royal Throne, who was the daughter
of an humble and grave Philosopher: This was not the first time when Beauty was
crowned by the hands of Love and Fortune; yet the same Theodosius, upon a mere
suspicion and slight conjecture, made no difficulty to put Paulina his wife to
death, whom he had loved so passionately, and to exile the Empress
notwithstanding the appearance of her Innocence. It is so true that Purity and
Chastity are so absolutely necessary in Princes. If Theodosius then thus
proceeded with his Athenais: What? may I not justify my severest displeasure
against Ann Bullen, being one whose crime is notorious; and those who were her
Partisans now imprisoned equally guilty? Whose crimes were as friendless as
foul; and could not find an Intercessor for Clemency; much less Orators and
Advocates to plead for their Justification. Let us not forget then (in this
re-encounter) how there ought to be no tenderness for odious offenders; and
that the glory of a State ought to be the principal aim and end of Royal
Actions. If this injurious and unworthy Queen had made a Faction, and publicly
raised a party against me in my Kingdom, or had attempted my person openly, her
crime might have been more pardonable: I might have looked upon her as a person
of greater spirit, and therefore less capable to brook the conceit of an
injury; and possibly her reconciliation might have been more safe and glorious:
All subjects who make revolts (either seduced or being fomenters) are not
always exterminated. Those who adventure in Conspiracies and (in their black
designs) aim at taking away the life of the Prince, do not always perish;
there are reasons why (in some Conjunctures) crimes are winked at, and
dissimulated, and sometimes pardoned as well as punished. But as for the
ugliness of this offense, it has not only injured the Prince, but profaned
his Throne, dishonored Royalty, violated Divine and Humane Laws, and by her
Incest and Adultery, she has so corrupted the Fountain that the streams will
glide with nothing but shame and sin from age to age, to the last posterity.
This is an evil which cannot be tolerated, an Ulcer so incureable, that
nothing but her life and blood (which caused it) can satisfy: all other
remedies are unserviceable, and not to be administered. In this occurrence it is
aequitable that I be Judge and Accuser in the same thing: and it is as
absolutely necessary that I abandon pity and forget all former affection; and
close mine eyes from the rays of that Beauty, and my ears from that Harmonious
voice which so mightily had enchanted me. It is for this reason that I resolve
not to look on that lovely object, whose crimes had so soiled her former
purity, that I shall raze her memory out of my heart: and (at least) by that
means cause, that posterity shall not continue my shame and her offense. By all
these reasons we may easily judge that the life of this unthankful creature,
could neither be for my content nor honor. Besides these, there is a principal
respect due to my People; which is not of an inconsiderate consequence: their
importunities are for a Successor, a King: they fear (if I die) that they shall
have a Queen to reign over them: and (notwithstanding) their ardent desires for
a Prince of Wales) I believe they are not passionate to have that Prince the
son of Anne Bullen. This is another consideration of such Importance, as I
cannot but take care to remove this invincible obstacle, intending so much the
public felicity of the People: so that it is impartially necessary that she
perish to prepare a way to the Peoples greater good, and the Kings greater
glory. There is this advantage more in this design, that little or no trouble
will survive to revenge her death. As for those who opposed her marriage, they
will not rank themselves in Arms to fight her quarrel; and seeing Death is
accustomed to disarm Beauty, that of Anne Bullen can do no more then a beam of
the Sun when it is ready to set, shine a while, and be no more seen. In such a
dress She and her Beauty will go together to the Grave, and there be buried in
oblivion and dust. But what shall I say? I cannot but be assured that her
Memory and Image will be much in my Fancy and Presence, though she be absent,
and interred in obscurity. May I not then fear, least I should repent the
Sentence, and sorrow for the Execution? The Policy of Herod was no less
fortified then mine, and his heart no less tender; his fancy was wounded,
which represented unto him his Mariamne, who was less criminal then her, of
whom I have so justly complained. Notwithstanding he repented of her death, he
wept, he grieved; his Fancy was ever followed with her Image; he lost all
content and repose, and (at last) submitted to wish, that Death had fallen on him
which he executed upon her. I may then justly fear the exposing of my self to
such a continued torment of my Fancy and Imagination; and not rashly pronounce
that sentence (which executed) is irrevokable. And yet there is a great
difference and distinction betwixt the proceedings of this Politician and my
self: Mariamne was not only his wife, but his Sovereign and Queen; and though
he were her love and husband, yet he was her subject, and a Tyrant, and
(consequently) he ought to have had more regard and remorse, and not to have
acted but with greater Wisdom, and more sage precaution: but (on the contrary)
I am a King, her Love, and a husband enraged and abused, by one who was my
Subject, and to whom I gave a Crown: finding then my spirit not capable to
digest so great affronts, I will banish the suspicions of fear; and being a
King (though a Husband) I shall take heed that I fall not into such a base and
ignoble repentance. No, no, my soul is now free from the irregular passion of
Love, and will not admit those false delusions to trouble my Fancy: Her crime
has destroyed her innocence, and her offense will more probably appear before
my memory, then her Beauty so foulely stained. I shall look upon her (as I
ought) without prejudice to Justice and Glory; and therefore conclude, that it
is necessary she die; yet if I should deprive her of the Crown without the
retrenchment of her head, and so render her into her first condition, it may be
that Love which I had once for her, might plead for the continuance of her
life; but as she is a Crowned Queen, and Mother to my Daughter Elizabeth, I
cannot safely depose her from the Throne, but I must force her to her Tomb; and
when she descends from the one, she must not stop till she fall into her Grave.
I doubt not but posterity will be divided in their judgment in the examination
of this Action: some will say that Henry was cruel, others that he was stout
and generous; but after the variety of Censures, it is certain that Kings must
act as Glory councels them; which ought to be far above, and out of the reach
of Fear and Scandal. It appears then to all the world that it was not by a
violent precipitation, which hatred might suggest that I have proceeded to this
resolution; Jealousy did not so enrage me as to have recourse to Poison, or a
Poniard; so to have dispatched this infamous Woman by mine own hand: no, if she
dye, the Laws do judge her, and her own crime condemn her; and if I have
contributed any thing to her fall, it is a progress without injustice or
reproach; seeing that I was so passionate for her, as to choose her Mistress of
my Heart, there to serve her; and in that affection my heart commanded my hand
to set a Crown upon her head. These circumstances (doubtless) do declare and
manifest Anne more culpable to all the World. But my first and last actions
were not grounded on the same intentions; I proposed the Crown (which I
bestowed upon her) should have made her glorious, not infamous; and should have
inspired into her the apprehensions of a Queen, and not have rendered her a
person odious and abominable: but seeing I am deceived in my Conjectures, it is
just that I be punished for my error, which her beauty caused me to fall into.
Clemency (on this occasion) is a virtue too indulgent, and not to be used,
unless Justice were to be extruded out of doors; and pity, in this case, were
to disarm and disgrace Royal Authority. It Is true, Severity is terrible, but
Indulgence and an inclination to Clemency more dangerous: when a Prince is
injured, and great Estates may be destroyed by either, unseasonably practiced,
and (as we see) how the most gentle Rivers do very great mischief when they
overflow their bounds, as well as impetuous and violent Torrents: So (in like
manner) excessive Clemency may be as offensive as the severest Cruelty. As I am
not then in this action justly to be accused of too much fondness, so, nor of
too much fury: for if Anne Bullen had not changed, I had been the same as I was
in my espousals, and when I solemnized her Coronation with so much honor and
joy; and if she had not fallen to be disloyal, she should not have found her
Grave so suddenly. Now as to the two Virtues, Justice and Clemency; the first
most firmly supporteth the Kings Throne, and without it the Royal Authority is
shaked to nothing in an instant, and she is most essential to support the Crown
and Scepter: Clemency may be sometimes called to the Council, but the presence
of Justice is more absolutely necessary. In this Act then (my Lord) admire not
if I proceed as the glory and renown of a King requires, as the Laws ordain;
and with that resolution which my passion and reason cannot be admitted to
plead against. It must be so then, that this miserable wretch cannot be
exempted from the punishment she has merited; she must not longer have any
harbor in my heart, there being no person or Argument to intercede for her
defense; her most detestable Brother has shamefully confessed his horrid crime,
his companions are become his Accusers, her own conscience convinces her, my
great favors aggravate her reproaches, the memory of her prosperity does
torment her, the fear of her punishment does cause her to tremble, the
representation of her fault (so shameless and unparalled) covers her with
confusion: what remains then, but to bring her to Execution, where she may make
(if possible) reparation to mine honor: where let the ungrateful wretch have
an ignominious death, and die with such disadvantage, as to have no monument in
my memory, but what she has with all the World, Scorn and Hatred: let her blood
deface those Characters of Love, which were so profoundly engraved in my soul,
and (forgetting all her dalliances of Love and Beauty) let us sacrifice her and
them to our Honor and Renown.

The CENSVRE.
AS for this particular Action toward Anne Bullen, it meets with double
Censures; as well of those who approve, as those who condemn and dislike the
Action. As to the Parallel betwixt this Prince and Herod, and so betwixt
Mariamne and Anne Bullen, it seems not so just and reasonable; for Herod was
not as Henry, a King by birth, but by Mariamnes means and favors; and as for
the two Queens, Mariamne was innocent and virtuous, but Anne criminous and
guilty. And therefore this violent Prince was less unjust (though severe)
because Majesty was so offended. The Royal Bed ought to be kept as sacred and
inviolable as the Imperial Throne; and of the two, the first is to be attended
with stricter and more vigilant Guards: as for the Scepter, it may be wrested
and forced out of the Princes hand without dishonor; and it may be recovered
again with advantage of greater renown: but the the Royal Bed once stained,
does not only enrage the Prince, but the People; and that injury spreads to a
poison, which can find no Antidote: and it staineth Majesty so deeply, as the
Spot never to be washed out. Therefore the Romans concluded, that it was not
only necessary for Caesar's Queen to be chaste and innocent, but free from
Calumny and all Censure, and above the reach of Scandal, which is an
inseparable companion of Suspicion. And if Julius Caesar repudiated his Queen
on a bare jealousy, how intolerable is reproach and infamous scandal? much
more odious then, is the crime of looseness and incontinency; The only Spot that
stuck on Augustus his Successor (when he was mounted far out of the reach of
the cruel decrees of the Triumvirate) 'twas that he espoused Livia, being she
was great with child, and after she was divorced from Drucius Nero her husband,
from thence sprang that tart ralliarie amongst the Romans, That all those whom
Fortune favors, may have such successes as to have children within three
months after marriage. Tyberius his adopted son and Successor to the Empire,
was more sensible of his honor; who repudiated Julia, Augustus daughter,
banished her from Rome; and having branded her name with the mark of eternal
infamy, condemned her to dye an exile, and there to bury her crime and shame.
This Grand Politician well understood that all injuries to Princes are
intolerable, but crimes of such infamy and dishonor, are to be punished with
the most seasonable and severest revenge: and that the least favor or
mitigation to offenses of this nature, are as impardonable, as odious and
dangerous. There is nothing so much obscureth the Sun, as when it is eclipsed
by the Moon: and the disgrace is as great as the discontent, when a Queen is
false to her Lord and Sovereign. Besides, the dangers are imminent, and
consequences very fatal. The extravagant marriage of Caligula manifests this
to all the world; who having espoused Cesonia, his Court was speedily corrupted
with great disorders, which introduced and brought in shameful consequences in
the Government of the Empire: but if impudency ever swelled to an excess and
outcry, and that vice met with equal stupid patience to tolerate it, if not to
give it countenance; it was when that immodest and vicious Messalina was the
espouse and wife of dull and ignoble Claudius; during whose reign, her
deportment was as lascivious and vile, as he was unworthy and altogether base.
And History only takes notice of them as horrid disgraces to the times they
lived in. And this was not all, Messalina dared to quit Claudius and married
another, which high affront the Emperor endured: but after a long and
prodigious insensibility, he awaked at last, and put Messalina to death; and so
terminated her life and her dishonor. If Marcus Aurelius the Philosopher were
more uxorious and kind to his wife Faustina (though she was a most irregular
and extravagant woman) it is to be thought that his Philosophy was too much
Stoical; and such dull stupidity became not an Emperor, who had the Domination
of the World. We may then conclude, that Henry the Eight did not act against
the maxims of Policy, Justice, or Reason in punishing this infamous offender,
and if he gave occasion to the world to blame him for his six marriages; and by
reason of his outrages toward Churchmen, and great troubles in the change of
Religion; yet in this lawful revenge* as well as in many other Acts of famous
memory) he merits the testimony of honor and renown; and seeing that for his
book against Luther, the Pope honored him with the glorious title of Defensor
Fidei: It is an argument that the Actions of great Kings, are not to be
censured with rashness and precipitation: for they are as some eminent Stars
which move in such a Sphere, as all the world do not perceive; and as their
condition is separated and transcendent to others, so these visible Earthly
Gods have their reasons and resolutions apart. Such another was that famous
Prince Pepin King of France, who has been censured and condemned, and his
means and ways reputed as unjust, and utterly unlawful to the Throne, and his
reign an Usurpation: but if we will listen to the reasons which he spoke for
his defense, and as an Apology for the great change of affairs; we may
(perhaps) alter our judgments, and not prejudicate Princely actions. Let us
then leave the discourse of Henry the Eighth of England, and hear what Pepin
pleads for his justification, who took the Crown of France from off the head
of the last of the race of Clovis the Grand, and place that Royal Diadem on his
own head.

King PEPIN TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF MAIENEE.
THE Acclamations of the People were so general and loud; then, when you
anointed me and gave me the Crown as a present from the States and Grandees of
the Kingdom, that those Echoes of joy and exulation resounded throughout all
Europe, and all parts of the Earth are well satisfied that Childrick (being not
longer able to support the Royal Scepter) I was impetuously constrained to take
it into my hands, and forced with a kind of violence, to endeavor the
preservation of that Glorious and Royal Throne; and not to suffer it to fall
with shame and infamy. And yet (perhaps) many thousands are not satisfied with
those Motives and Reasons which pressed me to those high resolutions: and it is
a debate judiciously to be examined, Whether I was rather to accept, or refuse
the Supreme and Sovereign power of this Kingdom; the action not merely
reflecting upon my self, but likewise with the effects of much good or evil on
the people; and so consequently, with glory or dishonor redundant to my self
in those mighty undertakings. In this Conjuncture, a Prince ought to be
furnished with all advantages of Prudence as well as of Valor and Resolution.
Those who only judge of content by the external appearance of glistering
objects, ambitiously and rashly reach at any thing that appears Glorious; but
an Imperial Diadem is not to be accepted, but by such great Heroes whose
virtues can more illustrate a glorious Crown. We see that Infants and ignorant
persons cannot gather the blushing Roses without danger of pricking their
fingers with those little Thorns; which like natural Guards, wait on those
scarlet flowers. As for me (whose Ancestors have employed their lives to
support the Throne, whereon I am seated) I am not ignorant how that all their
endeavors were entirely devoted for the preservation of the self same Crown.
And I cannot but confess, that I am obliged to be as diligent and active, and
so most strictly to examine my abilities in managing the high affairs of a
Kingdom, in which I shall not leave out any Circumstance that may render my
self more capable, or the Throne more honorable. It Is true; I am not so
fortunate as Augustus, who had the friendship and council of Mecaenas and
Agrippa, to advise in the danger of my weighty occasions: And yet I shall not
fail to examine up, and search into every corner of my soul, to present my
condition more fit for so Princely an Office; and balance all reasons
judiciously, which may either persuade me to, or remove my thoughts from the
acceptance of the Royal Robe; and I shall severely scan all probable disputes,
that my judgment and reason may gain the greater victory: and if I have
received the Crown, I doubt not but I shall make it appear that my Virtues have
merited much, as well as my birth; and it is not an Addition to be slighted,
that in receiving of the Diadem, I have had so long and so serious a
contestation with mine own soul. You know well, the solemn days of Triumph are
better Registered, then easily to slip out of memory; and you were then my
Remembrancer, that I should declare my resentment and reasons, why I embraced
the Crown; that the people as well as my self, might more clearly understand
why I became their Sovereign, and they my Subjects. To satisfy this great
curiosity (I confess) when I look upon the height of the Royal condition and
quality of a King, I beheld it as those who have in their view a dangerous
precipice; and I did not lightly and ambitiously so much aspire to more
transcendent Eminency; but likewise prudently consider the varieties of
dangers of so high a place: and when I held the Scales of both Honor and
Danger in my hands, and poised them both together; I discerned so many troubles
and cares, travels, hardships, wars, and so many secret discontents following
Royalty at her heels, that through mine own contestations and debates, without
farther disputes, I found it most rational to repulse the motion and
proposition of the Supreme Dignity, and beheld it as an enemy to my private
repose, and no friend (probably) to my future Glory. But in a second reflection
(the first notions being corrected by the latter) when I considered that what
was proposed, aimed at the conservation of a mighty Monarchy, I could not but
admit my reason to farther consultation, resolving if any misfortune should
arrive through my faults and errors, I should be only responsible to the great
Governor of all the Universe; who requires from none an account, but of those
Talents that he bestows upon them, and in this trust I resolved not to fail. I
began then more closely and attentively to pursue those great affairs; but in
this Commencement, I considered with my self, as my Grandfather Pepin, and
illustrious Charles my Father, consulted with themselves: The first would never
be persuaded to entertain the thoughts of Soveraigntie; and the second did
refuse it with the title of King; and would not accept of it but to be styled
The French Prince: these times and symptoms seemed to presage an alteration;
and yet there was no appearance that the Subjects were willing to change their
Master. Besides, for many years the Throne was not enjoyed but by Princes of
more incapable and weaker judgments to reign and govern: so that from the reign
of Dagobert the first, whose justice valor, and piety, were more
considerable; the Clovises, the Clotairs, the Childericks, the Theodoricks, and
the Childeberts, and Dagobert himself the second, rendered the State into such
pitiful conditions, that if the Major of the Palace had not been found more
capable to rule and govern, it had not been, but that the Kingdom had fallen
oftener then once into the hands of Foreigners, Strangers, or Enemies.
Notwithstanding Pepin was contented to serve his Master, and to obscure and
support his infirmities. It may be there are some who would say, that this
service was for self advantage, and to lay the foundations of his own Royal
Family; but what could he do otherwise, but as a good and faithful Subject,
causing Justice and Piety to flourish; and so to attribute the Renown to his
Prince during his reign. But a continuation of this service was impossible;
neither would the People be satisfied, where the Prince was so dull, and such
errors and dishonor in the Government. It was by my means that the Duke of
Fryze (that Pagan) was vanquished; and afterward obliged to be baptized, and
become Christian: that the Bishop of Utrecht was reestablished, whom Ebroin
had chased from his Episcopal Chair; and that the Almains (on both sides the
Rhein) who levied their Forces against the Crown of France, were subdued: and
what endeavors were not used to keep the Monarchy from an utter desolation;
and to restore it to its Pristine Splendour and Honor. And if Pepin (in all
these actions) did not propose and fancy Royalty in the success of so many
achievements; he were ingrate as well to his fortunes as to his virtues.
Charles Martel was not so confined, who (what ever he did) conceived he merited,
and expected honor both from Prince and People. And yet whilst these affairs
were in action the ways and means were facile and easy to him to have mounted
the Throne. And it is true that incomparable Valor accompanied with Prudence,
Justice, Generositie, Clemency, Moderation, Piety, and good Success, may
boldly attempt any thing: Notwithstanding some may say, that he drove a nail
into the Wheel of Fortune; and (maugre the Infirmity of Dagobert, C^ilprick,
and Chiderice, (under whom he served) or (to speak more properly) under whom he
reigned) he made then a scruple to entertain and take a Scepter out of their
hands, from whom God himself had seemed to snatch it; having given them over to
their vices and irregularities: which introduced all vileness into the Kingdom,
and therefore threatened a fatal desolation. I do solemnly profess the two
examples of my Grandfather and my Father had almost prevailed with me, to make
me resolve to die, and lay my fortune at Childricks feet, though I saw the
Throne in an apparent ruin; and if I had not been charmed from those thoughts
by the importunity and universal suffrages of the people, I had certainly
perished, and been buried under the Ruins of that Throne. The injuries which I
must act to my lawful Prince (though he were never so weak, and therefore less
reverenced by his Subjects) did torment my thoughts, and I could not but
conjecture that the end might be as miserable, as the way and means unjust and
injurious; and if I attempted to ascend the Throne by the Deposing of my lawful
Prince, I should not be of better reputation with the people, then an Usurper:
and it is a vulgar conclusion, He who is an Usurper to his Master, cannot but
be a Tyrant to his Subjects. Besides, the people will then censure that all the
services of Pepin my Grandfather, and Charles my Father, were nothing else but
politic Arts and means to undermine the Crown; and so more easily to derive
it on their posterity. These thoughts allayed the heat of my ambition, and
retarded that violence which hurrieth most men's desires in the obtaining of
Sovereign power. Besides, if I assume the Title of King, may not those hands
who lift me up, pull me lower then ever I was? may they not dispute against my
merits and qualities as not agreeing with Princely dignity? or may they not be
outrageous, and charge me with ignobleness and ingratitude, and murmur at all
rewards, as not proportionable to their demerits and service? if so many
admirable qualities are necessary for a legitimate and lawful Prince, what
abilities can render a Subject fit to reign? As for those who were my equals in
condition and merit, though they have carried me on their shoulders and lifted
me to the Crown, they cannot but speedily repent, unless they therefore
elevated me to so high a precipice, that my fall might be more certain, more
sudden, and more dangerous: and who have been born and lived with me under the
same Prince, and same Laws, (the Subjects common birthright) how can they
submit that I should be their Supreme and Head, who have been my superiors or
companions? may not such an ambition stain the reputation of all my former
services with dishonor and infidelity? and that instead of concealing or
supporting the infirmities of Childrick, I intended nothing but a direct
establishment of Tyranny in Pepin. Besides all this, will not these courses
give a special advantage to neighbor Princes for Invasions, and raise immortal
Factions with the Grandees of this Kingdom; and would not this way foment and
cherish a foreign and a civil War? and did I not by these actions provoke the
whole world to an odium of me, and to devise conjurations against my life,
honor, and posterity? I am not ignorant that many Sages (mentioned in
Antiquity) have refused royal Crowns. And when I come to consider my self, if I
receive the Scepter, I cannot but lose the fidelity of my choicest friends,
because they are not now my equals, and of friends they must be rendered
flatterers, and slaves to my Fortunes; and if I shall expose my self to be
seduced by their cunning Artifice, who inveagle and inviron Kings with their
smooth Arguments, and so be corrupted to admit injuries and injustice: I shall
but prepare every one whom I should command, to curse me with their Tongues, or
strike me with their hands. Moreover seeing Princes are subject to all errors
and misfortunes in Government, I may lose my reputation, and be branded with
the vices of cruelty and violence; or else be accused and thought guilty of
rashness, ignorance, and imprudence. These consequences cannot but provoke
great numbers of secret, as well as public enemies; and ('it is often seen) that
discontents can unite all parties in the destruction of an object generally
hated. These reasons may deter my resolutions from the acceptance of a Crown;
which high degree is too apt, not only to raise many enemies, but to create
their rage and envy to be implacable: and if subjects interpret the greatest
bounty of their Prince but a debt or (perhaps) a reward too little to satisfy
their expectation: how insatiable will the Subjects be in their demands from
such a Prince, whom they have advanced from their own condition? They commonly
conclude that Kings are but the great Treasurers of their Kingdoms, and
therefore are obliged to largeness and bounty; and it is usual that a denial or
a repulse (in the least or greatest matter) provokes bitter murmurings or
public outrages. Nay, they conclude that Kings are obliged (by Divine Right)
to give all that they possess, and as the Ocean receiving her vast Tributes
from the Inland Rivers, returns the waters by secret passages, which break up
in boiling Fountains and pearling Springs; so they argue, Princes who receive
the public Tributes of the People, are but trusted to preserve them until
they be to be refunded and more abundantly paid back again. In this similitude
it is observable, that although the Sea do give leave that some few Fountains
do break up, and so water some places of the earth, yet she is unthankful as to
the general; and leaves many vast parts, for want of moisture, to be
altogether steril and barren: and thus Princes, though they may oblige some
friends and favorites with the Dew and drops of their bounty; yet the many
thousands of the people not relishing of their liberality, rather become their
enemies then humble and obliged Subjects. In this argument what froward
apprehensions will possess the People, who are too resolute to interpret a
right of all things in themselves; and that their Prince, as the Sea, is
obliged to return the waters more clear and sweet, which his vast power has
imbittered and rendered less pleasant and more unwholesome. And although I have
alleged so many reasons for my refusal of a Crown; yet these which follow,
appear more of force, farther to dissuade my Resolutions: for as I am not a
King, so neither am I the son of one; which I conceive as the greatest obstacle
in this design: I know that I have some drops of Royal blood streaming in my
veins; and (though far remote) can claim a relation of kindred to Clovis the
Grand: and though I may not be so near in blood, yet I am not so remote from
his virtues and merit as Childerick: which consideration does a little more
suppress all scruple and niceness. But how can I dare to approve the
acclamations of the People, in that which I fear and dislike in my self? my
Ambition is to thin a cover to disguise and veil the Truth it self; and my
inquietude (in this contestation) as it is restless in my breast, so it is
unexpressible in my language; And on one side, I see a Throne staggering and
ready to fall; a feeble and vicious Prince, who through his Vices and weakness
has shaken the foundations of a Royal Kingdom: I see the People generally in
Commotions, and the more Courageous already armed; and in their jealousies and
indignation. I saw their eyes chiefly fixed and directed toward me, and all
their Motions point toward my self as the Center of Royalty, and they were
great with expectation for a Sovereign and King, worthy of their obedience and
so glorious a Diadem. In this Conjuncture I cannot but observe the Symptoms of
a mighty change; and in those apprehensions, I must not be injurious to my own
fortunes: And (on the other side) I feel equitable intentions toward the
People in the motions of mine own soul, concurring with their desires in my
advance. And if in this great expectation I still supported the Debillities of
my Master, I was not certain whether the people would longer suffer me to serve
under his name: which consideration (if not prevented) as it might prove a
certain ruin to Childrick; might (probably) hazard mine own Person, and the
Kingdoms Peace. Seeing then the disorders of his life, and his Affairs were so
irregular, and caused the Grandees to grow into Factions, and the Commons to
murmur; and both resolved to quit and change their Master; I cannot find, but
for the Kingdoms happiness (as well as for mine own renown) to use my utmost
endeavors to govern so great a Kingdom; and so to preserve it from desolation.
If we look upon the whole Universe, all Countries and Kingdoms make up but one
great body, and every particular Member is obliged to aid and assist the whole.
It is thus in any one Royal Kingdom; all the Subjects are unanimously engaged
to preserve the common good: and the Members cannot but be in confusion, and
sick, if the Head be unsound; and if we consider those enormious vices of those
two Princes, to whom my Grandfather Pepin, and Charles my Father did such
eminent services; and what were the virtues of Charles and Pepin: it cannot but
be confessed that our family has most highly merited, both from King and
People: and though the Descent, and right in blood ought to be inviolable, and
not to be interrupted; yet the vices and inability of Kings, may as well
determine their reigns, as desolate and dissolve their Kingdoms: and the King
of Kings who first advanced Princes to reign, can, when he pleases set a
period to their successors. And as to my self, I am so well satisfied with the
favor of fortune, that as Subjects ought not to aspire to Crowns; so it agrees
with my honor not to refuse such a Dignity. The vanity may be as well in him
who Stoically scorneth the splendour of Glory, as in him who ambitiously gapeth
after it. And History tells us, that those who did not accept Alexanders
Presents, were as deeply accused of Pride, as (if they had received them) they
might have been taxed with Avarice. Seeing then that I am premonished by the
prevision of an universal desolation, that I am encouraged by the popular
acclamations of the Subjects, that the people desire it, and the Kingdom is in
a necessity and exigencie; I cannot but wrestle with some considerable Rights,
and embrace the Sovereignty, which is so sweet a Bait to human Ambition; and
where the necessity is so absolute, I rather resolve (though with some
injustice) to ascend the Throne, then see the Kingdom perish. And when I call
to mind how this Monarchy was founded by the valor and courage of Pharamond,
so much augmented by Meroijee, and rendered so formidable by Clovis the Grand;
and after so many incomparable Princes, now ready to be ruined, and to fall
into the barbarous hands of Saracens and Pagans: I am not longer amazed at my
own boldness, nor can I plead against my own ambition, if I take upon me to be
the Sovereign. And if Childrick must lose it, no Subject can be fitter then
Pepin to wear the Crown of France; whose Ancestors (as well as himself) have so
successfully served their Princes, and so affectionately gained the Peoples
hearts. But I must yet examine, and have a scrutiny in the corner of mine own
heart; whether I, who have been so faithful and good a subject, may not prove a
Tyrannous and insufferable King; and so may not be suspected of injury and
injustice to all the People, who have undermined and been so unworthy to my own
Prince. To this I answer, The Prince ought to be as transcendent in worth above
others, as he is in place and degree; and to strip himself of all predominant
passions, to love the Peoples good above his own; to do nothing injust, and not
so much as to desire his own renown, but by the noble ascents of virtue: Kings
ought to take pains and travail to make their Subjects repose more secure and
sweet, to undertake the dangers of War; but with no other end, but better to
establish and settle a peace; and to employ that peace, not in Riot and Luxury;
but for a more exact course of Equity and Justice; and thereby to cause the
kingdom to flourish, and virtues to shine and be triumphant. Likewise it is the
office of Kings to try before they trust, least flatterers creep into great
employments, and endanger the Ruin of Prince and People; their power must not
countenance them to be severe; nor their Plenty to be too indulgent, secure,
and too much inclined to clemency. The desires of a Throne ought to be
principally for the Peoples good, and with no other design, but for the Princes
honor and renown; which as the Sun, should send light and heat communicatively
over all his Domination. And he who is invested with Majesty, ought to have
none but clear and innocent intentions, and a soul, not by assed with sinister
and ignoble ends; but with honorable inclinations to chastise the wicked, and
to prefer and recompense virtuous and meritorious persons. For he whose
Sovereignty sets him above the Laws, ought to have a soul more sublime and
spiritual, then to be tainted with the gross Lees and feculencie of low and
base things, as having wisdom and courage to confirm those bonds of humane
Society, and so not to fear or violate those rules of peace and justice, which
his own power has formed or submitted unto. And as the Prince is to live above
the reach of envy and fear, so is he not to prostitute his royal condition to
Sycophants and flatterers, who are a kind of poisonous flies, which will cause
the sweetest odours and ointments quickly to stink; and if I now discern (as
being near the Throne) the breath of so much subtle poison; what Arts and
Craft will not be undertaken to deceive and delude, with golden language of
Treachery and dissimulation, when I have the royal Scepter in my hand? As to
this instant, I never met with any person, who dared to say to me; Accept not
of the Crown. And if all persons have bin so compliant before my advancement to
the Throne, how officious and obsequious will they appear, when I have the
Scepter in my hands?

In the debate of these affairs, I meet with many invincible objections to
dissuade and discourage my resolutions; but fortune and my own ambition have
put wings to my expectations, and kindled such a fire in my heart, as I cannot
extinguish; and therefore I resolve to hazard my life, honor, and repose and
abandoning fear, and suspicion of dangers or dishonor, determine to accept the
Crown, and wear the royal Robes; so to commend my self and successes to the
favors of fortune: Those who are in the peril of naufrage, and to be
shipwrackt in these tempestuous times, will be well pleased if by working at
the helm, I preserve them from perishing in the angry waves: and if I be not so
happy as to deliver them from danger, they will honor me for my adventures and
endeavors. And if it so happen and fall out, that my reign be more prosperous,
then the irregular Government of Childerick, I shall be esteemed more innocent
as well as more renowned; and those who have been my equals, will more
contentedly become my humble and loyal Subjects; as for Competitours and Rivals
in my fortune (if any) as I am able to step a degree before them, so I shall be
more enabled (in that quality) to curb their insolency, or chastise their
discontents: though the action be not justifiable, yet successful events may
render it noble and honorable in the reputation of the world; and if the
posterity of Pepin degenerate, grow effeminate, foolish and base, yet Pepin
will be commended for his high attempts; and the weakness and misgovernment of
Childerick and his Ancestors, will be a step to mount Pepin's honor to a
higher estimation in all the Universe. It is true, I see not such Princely
indowments in Charles my son, as to merit to wear a Crown, (though his natural
parts are tolerable) and it will prove a greater task for Charles to follow
Pepin, then for Pepin to follow Childerick; but who knows whether Pepin may not
so deeply plant the foundations of respect in his subjects hearts, as not only
to reign himself, but to make fair way for Charles to be his successor; and if
he improve not himself by his virtues and merits, nor cannot winn their
suffrages; it is not inglorious for Pepin to be a King, though his son succeed
him not: and yet I doubt not but to be able to remove that difficulty; for when
I find my self to grow old or indisposed, I shall surrender the Crown to
Charles, and his possession of so royal a fortune will (probably) raise him
strength and forces to support his Soveraingty; and when I am not fit to march
in the field, I shall become his Councellor for the better conduct of his great
affairs; and now if by deposing an unworthy and luxurious Prince, I be ranked
amongst the usurpers of Crowns, the dishonor is the less, because the Kingdom
required an alteration, and I cannot but reign with more security and less
hatred. And if I have ascended by an usurpation, yet it was effected without a
war, or violence, or causing a desolation to the Kingdom: And if Pharamond
founded the Monarchy, and Meroije enlarged the domination, and Clovis
demolished the Idol Altars; yet I shall be renowned for the protection of
justice, innocence and virtue, and for the abandoning of the distructive vices
of a luxurious Court and Kingdom. I propose these glorious designs to my
self, which cannot but make my renown as immortal as that of the Cesars, when
the subjects shall confess, that Pepin does not only reign but gloriously, and
that he is not so much feared as loved; and that he did not ambitiously mount
himself, but that the people passionately carried and lifted him up to the
throne of Childericke; and that it was not Pepin that made himself a King, but
that the weakness of unworthy Princes, the misgovernment and miseries of their
reign, the services of Pepin's Ancestors, the suffrages of the People, together
with Pepins own virtues, and the will of Heaven, set the Crown on Pepins head:
see (Sage Prelate) what were Pepins thoughts before he held the Royal Scepter,
what were his resolutions when he sat on the Throne, and what he would have
the world to think of him, when he had descended to his Tomb.

The CENSVRE.
How strong soever the Arguments, and reasons of Pepin may appear, yet the
effects of his intentions will prove better warrants for his actions, then his
alegations and discourse for to get a Crown, to which none ought to dare to
aspire* but he who is a man after Gods own heart; as it was David's case, in
deposing of wicked Saul The Privileges of a royal birth are attended with
somany difficulties, that whosoever overcomes them cannot but be more then an
extraordinary person. It Is true, the people are mutable and given to change, and
voluntarily to seek new Masters, their judgment is not so profound, as to
foresee what they usually lose by those alterations; a capricious angry
wantonness quickly armeth them against their ancient Kings, but commonly they
fight for others and not for themselves; and under the pretense of gaining
greater privileges, like Flies in the Spiders web, are more entangled: and as
for Princes, who have surreptitiously gained the Crown of others, it is
impossible but that they must have as great dangers in the enjoyment of them,
as they had difficulties in ascending to them; for a Royal Scepter is only
supported by his hand, who measures the earth, and weighs the mountains in
the Scales, without whose Providence a certain ruin is inevitable. New Princes
cannot but disoblige new subjects, whether they are of the civil or martial
garb and order; the Soldiers are necessary to watch and guard to keep out
fear and dangers; and their humors are generally very insolent, and not
satisfied with common rewards, and therefore will be apt to murmur and grow
mutinous; the civil part of the people will cry out as oppressed with new
taxations, which are the necessary consequences of war, and therefore will
incline to be seditious. Thus new dominations bring along with them the train
of miserable and provocative effects. A great Politician said (long since) that
a Prince usurping a Throne, makes all whom he injureth to be his enemies, and
he is hardly able to preserve an amity even with those who have advanced him to
the Throne, because their expe^^ation is insatiable; and as for to use violent
remedies, it is impossible where his suspicions are so many, and his
obligations so great. Subjects are apt to frown and murmur to see him who was
once their equal, so highly elevated above them; and (although superiority have
been the commencement of Monarchies long since, and are of a Divine foundation)
yet to interrupt or suppress a roy^l linnage, cannot be undertaken without the
fear of as much danger as dishonor: And whereas Pepin and Hugh Capet (being so
highly born, and so great Generals) were so hardy and bold; It is to be
conjectured, that they had rather an inspiration then ambition, whereby to
follow the decrees of Heaven; and so free from common vanity, they rather
referred themselves to divine providence, then to an undiscreet desire to
reign. The Royal Throne is so far above the fortune of a private person, that
he who admits that ambitious indiscreet design to be predominant in his
soul, does but gripe at Thrones, walk on a precipice, strives against the
stream; and although he sail with the breath of fortune, and more violently for
the present, yet his obstacles are so many and so certain, that the foundations
of a Crown exceeds Hercules labors, and under whose weight the greatest Hero
is apt to lie down, and to be ground to powder. Atilla, who was styled the Rod
of God, as bad he was, may teach us that all Power comes from God, and that it
continues no longer then he pleases. The Assyrians, Persians, Greeks,
Parthians, and Romans have reigned, and their vicissitudes instruct us, that he
who never changes, causes an alteration of all things else according to his
pleasure; and these great mutations arive for reasons unrevealed to us, and
that God alone foreseeth all things who is invisible; let us then adore, on
such occasions, whom we cannot comprehend: and seeing that we guide not the
Helm of the great vessel of providence, let us adore and honor him who rules
all things: It is he who puts the mighty from their seat, and exalts the
humble and meek. Thus alterations succeed in Empires and Kingdoms; and we may
conclude that greater bodies (when God is pleased to permit it) have their
revolutions and changes, as well as the least and smallest Creatures. Now the
discourse changes to Tamberlane the Emperor of the Tartars, who so tormented
and ill treated Bajazet; which History acquainteth us with a more visible
certainty of this truth, That God will have the proud humbled, and the humble
exalted.

portrait of Tamerlane TAMERLANE Emperor of Tartarie called the wrath of God
and terror of the World, He overthrew and took prisoner BAJAZET Great
Emperor of ye Turks, shutting him up in an Iron Cage: His Army consisting of
100000. men. He also Conquered Mesepotamia, Babylon, with the Kingdom of
Persia. He died 1402

TAMBERLANE EMPEROR OF THE TARTARS, TO AXALLA HIS LIEVT. GENERAL.
YOU have effected such noble Atchievments under my Standard Royal, or (to
speak ingeniously) I have gained so much by your proper valor, that I cannot
but be much amazed, that you who have been so great an instrument of my Glory,
and so free a sharer in all my successes and triumphs, have not been so
friendly as to take notice of me in my proceedings; and so to tax me of less
judgment, who have sometimes been so extremely severe and rigorous, and
sometimes so excessively merciful and indulgent. You might justly demand from
me, what reasons persuaded me to imprison Bajazet within an iron Cage; and (at
that time) to be so gentle to his sons, as not to inchain nor confine them, but
to give them their Liberty, and treat an Emperor as a common Slave;
notwithstanding I so frankly remitted all those Prisoners and Slaves which I
took at Caramania. I answer, (Axalla) you have been my General, my Companion,
and my Friend; yet you have not so deeply sounded and fathomed the bottom of my
heart, as to pry into the secrets of all my Councels and Resolves: and
therefore your admiration may be the greater, not discerning the cause and
reasons of such contrarieties, which (upon several circumstances) forced me to
such extremities, and either to be v^olently severe, or most abundantly
merciful. It is true you may wonder that I treated a Captive Prince with as
much rigor, as if he had been the meanest Vassal; (and, you may say) that the
Conqueror is obliged to respect the qualities of his Prisoners; and so ought
to use personages of highest condition, though enemies) with honor and
civility. I answer, I have not (in this occasion) acted with Capricious
levitie, nor malicious cruelty: as for my clemency and severitie, they are not
certain rules of my prudence and policy; I regard neither hatred nor pity to
my actions; Reason alone is my guide, which teaches me to give punishment,
pardon, or promotion, as I shall judge fit. And Reason alone which caused me to
chain and imprison Bajazet, directed me to set the Prisoners and Slaves at
Liberty. But perhaps you will say those that are born in a Country where there
is little learning, are less civil, and have not much veneration any where, and
their policy is but rude and savage; which though it inviteth them to approve
their own actions, and that which their passion does inspire: but such
proceedings relish neither of honor nor equity. I must confess (Axalla) that
part of Europe (where you were bred) has a great advantage for education in
relation to those colder Climates; for Genoa is in Italy, and Italy is (at this
day) what Greece was in ancient times, the Mother of Sciences, and Fountain of
Learning: yet it is true, that I am not altogether ignorant of the Royal
Science which teaches Princes to reign with Justice, or to punish without
Cruelty, and to pardon without weakness and fear; and so to act the one or the
other, as it shall tend more to mine advantage, or mine honor. Policy
(without doubt) is a thing which may be learned from books, but Experience is a
more certain Mistress, and teaches her Scholars more effectually. Now to
persuade you to believe what I say, as a matter not falling out by mere chance,
but by serious and laborious studies; I must put you in mind that this insolent
and proud Prince Bajazet, was sometimes called the Shepherd, by a tart
Ralliarie; because of those abundant of flocks of sheep which he fed in his
Country, a condition not agreeing with the royalty of his birth. Yes (Axalla)
you cannot but remember, how at the age of fifteen, the King of Sachatay my
Father, gave me a Kingdom to govern; and when I was but sixteen, I undertoke
the management of the Wars against the Muscovites; who when they were ranged in
Battalia, were forced to yield, and I slew no less then forty thousand of mine
enemies: and that memorable day reduced them to be my tributaries. After that,
you know how the grave Cham of Tartary mine Uncle, caused me to espouse his
daughter, and thought me not unworthy to be his Successor: notwithstanding in
my absence ambitious Calix aspired to the Empire; and knowing me (to be at such
a distance) leavied Arms, and drew into his parties the people of Catay; but
after this injury, I had the good fortune to vanquish this enemy, and take him
Prisoner; and in conclusion, resolving that his crimes should not be
unrevenged, I drenched his rebellion in his blood, and caused him to lose his
head, thus to fix more securely the Crown upon mine own: and I resolved then
not to pardon, lest I should have lost my self. (Axalla) you are not ignorant
when I waged War against the King of China, how at last I made my self Master
of that long and prodigious Wall, which the Chinaists had erected to separate
themselves insocially from the Tartars: how I forced the Towns of Paquinfow, of
Paquinohu, of Teauchenoy, and of Pannihu; and that I gave him three great
battails and lost none. In the last battle I made him my Prisoner, and in this
success finding that the practice of generosity would not be dangerous; I made
a notable example of my Clemency, and restored to him his Kingdom, and his
Liberty; contenting my self with a moderate tribute, as a testimony and memory
to my victories. Since this effect (most generous Axalla, whom I equally honor
as my self) you know that it was through your prayers and Councels, that I
condescended to grant those succors and auxiliaries to the Emperor of Greece,
to enable him to resist the injust invasion of cruel Bajazet, from that Prince
(I say) who gloried in the renunciation of all humanity, and concluded that
Sovereignty was given to Kings for no other end, but to practice the highest
injustice and cruelty, without all impunity; who was as well pleased to sluice
out the blood of the Mahometans, as the Christians, and loved more to see
Innocence suffer, then to punish Vice: Whose ambition was such, as not limited
with any bounds, of either Reason, Religion, Alliance with neighbors, or any
other sort of humane Rights; and whose cruelty was so implacable, as not
satisfied with revenge and blood, though it were of his own brothers, or
dearest friends. This (Axalla) is that enemy which you councelled me to
encounter, and to give protection to the Emperor of the Greeks; you aided me
in the fight, when I vanquished and made him prisoner; but I profess solemnly,
you were not of my Counsel to have him fettered and bound in chains; you were
privy to that secret, when the Greek Emperor (of whom I spoke and relieved on
your interest) conceiving himself obliged to my protection, sent to me the
offer of his Empire, how that I refused it. You know at the same time, when I
imprisoned Bajazet, I delivered and set free Desp^te de Servia, without so much
as ransom, whom I took in the same Battle; and how I treated the children of
Bajazet with kindness and honor, and that the Mahometans and Christians were
equally satisfied in me, as to their present condition. Besides all this, you
remember how I revenged my self on the Sultan of Egypt, who assisted Bajazet,
and having almost entirely conquered the Ottoman Empire, how I took in
Damascus, Damietta, Alexandria, Grand Caire, and the most considerable places
of his Estate; and having been victorious in two Royal Battails, I forced him
and his scattered Troops to fly, resolving to give him neither Truce nor
Peace, nor a Cessation of Arms: you cannot likewise but remember that Arabia
Felix, and a part of Africa, having voluntarily submitted to me as I marched,
how I treated them with all sweetness possible, and how the Persians resisting,
I combated with them, beat, and subdued them; and having conquered the insolent
numbers of that Grand Empire, I subjugated to my power all the Glanture, and
all the Tampestan; and having mastered the great Town of Tauris, I placed you
my Lieutenant General there, as my Vice Roy in those parts; (and to your
greater astonishment yet) passing by the Ardevel, on my return to Semarcant
with an infinite number of Slaves of Caramania, and of all the vicine Nations;
you cannot but recall to your thoughts how that Cheqsapy, a person of great
virtue (whom I honored with a visit) begging liberty for all his Slaves, I
accorded without repugnancie, consenting with much joy, conceiving it just not
to refuse his request, who was so noble to ask so much for others, and so
little or nothing for himself. After all this experience of War, Conquest, and
Success; you cannot (faithful Axalla) but conclude that I have gained the Art
and Science how to reign and rule; and that my reasons are valid and strong for
the variety of my different Conduct in such great Affairs; and if I have
pardoned humble Slaves, and punished a most superb and insolent Emperor, I
have learned this way of Policy in the head of my Army, and from the
impetuosity of mine enemies, that it is most proper for Majesty to humble the
proud, and pardon the submiss. This practice is not only necessary in the times
of War, but in the times of Peace; a Rule to be observed at all times and all
places. Lawful Princes ought to regard this qualification; and as for Usurpers,
they cannot reign without it, this being a means to stop the rage of Civil
Wars, and more promptly to conclude foreign Invasions. By this way Justice will
flourish and resist a greater inundation of popular vices; and this will make
Kings as well feared as loved. Yes (noble Axalla) the just mixture of sweetness
and severity is the secret, which renders Royalty more formidable and less
hateful: for a Prince who always is inexorable, imprinteth nothing but fear
and terror into his Subjects: and he who is too meek and mild, does with
pardons and familiarity more easily provoke disloyalty and disobedience.
Wherefore a prudent Prince with these two qualities, will keep the world in
suspense, and make them always serve his present purpose, without rashly
falling into either extremity. It is not fit that any person who is proud
should not be corrected by the chastisements of Royal Power; and those who are
penitent and cordially humbled, should not be cherished with the hopes of a
gracious remission. In this case Kings ought to imitate Thunderbolts, which
pass by humble shrubs, but shatter audacious and proud Oaks, whose high tops
aspire to touch the Clouds. The Lion could not have merited that glorious
quality as to be styled the King of Beasts, but because he exercises his fury
against the most insolent creatures: he sooner passes by the feeble and gentle
Lamb, then the force and fierceness of Bulls, and the rage of Tigers. Those
Princes who would conserve their Estates in better security, cannot find a more
certain way then by their circumspection toward the Grandees of their Kingdom,
and to see that they approach not so near to the Throne, as to have but one
step more to ascend, and so to mount to Majesty. A wise King will always keep
as great a distance between him and his Lords, as they are to make between them
and the people, if they intend to preserve their honor: if the Prince intend a
super-elevation to any of his Subjects, his foresight of their humility ought
to be the first step to their advancement; or if they be too superb and
haughty, their pride is to be punished with severity and vindicative justice,
that their disgrace might teach them more humble obedience. Now if this Maxim
be necessary for a Prince, who is contented with the inheritance of his
Ancestors, and there to govern his Subjects in Tranquillity; it is much more
important to him who desires to enlarge his Territories, and is ambitious to
add Victories, Triumphs, and Conquests to the Achievements of his Ancestors.
For if a Prince in Battalia kill the General, he is in great possibility to be
Conqueror; and it arrives very rarely that fortune admits these to triumph,
whose General and Head she has suffered to be taken away: Thus if a Prince
assault the Capital City of a Kingdom, and chance to become Master; all
inferior Towns (probably) render themselves with greater facility. It is then
most certainly true, that it tends to greatest advantage to encounter with
objects of greatest difficulty. When an Army marches through an Enemies
Country, It stays not before every Town and Village of less importance, but
rather advances to such a place that may be worthy, or recompense a siege: and
when the taking in of one Town may be an occasion to reduce an hundred. That
which I said before of War and Justice in general, I may now say of the
reputation of Princes in particular: it is from the head, the highest and most
noble part whereon the fortune, felicity, and glory of Kings depends. It may be
if I had not taken off the head of Calix seasonably, who insolently revolted
against me; that sole Traitor might have proved an invincible obstacle to my
designs. It might have fallen out then, that I might not have been King of
Sachetay, nor have commanded the Tarters, nor have defeated Bazajet; I might
possibly not have vanquished so great a part of Egypt, nor so mightily have
subdued Persia; and if I had not been successful in the Protection of the
Grecian Emperor (perhaps) I might have been a vassal to him whom I have
confined to his Chains. Do not admire then (brave Axalla) if I do not pardon
the insolency of Bajazet; my severity in this grand example, cannot but make my
Conquest more glorious and renowned: you know that this Prince was not only in
the view of all the earth, but likewise in his Reign was the terror of all the
universe; what a noise then shall his chains make to all the world? what
security and advantage may not all men hope to themselves, by the imprisonment
of this horrid Monster? Those whom he so ill treated under his tirumphant and
victorious Banners, will account themselves eternally obliged to me, that I
have chastised their enemy and taken revenge on him, from whom they had
received so many evils: those who are yet mine enemies, will cease to be severe
in their designs against me, least they draw that upon their own heads, which
Bajazet contracted on his, by his unparalleled cruelties: To conclude, I am
well assured, if I should admit the suffrages of all men into deliberation with
me, I should find that none would plead for his ease or a relaxation, but
rather an augmentation of his shame and punishment, and to dispatch away his
life with the most exquisite tortures. (Besides) in the abasing of the proud,
two considerable effects succeed; the one in causing a small number of criminous
persons to suffer, proves the means to preserve infinite multitudes; who
either cease to be malicious, or prevent themselves to be offenders. A second
advantage is, that in the remission of an injury, to those who humbly repent,
much glory is gained without any danger: for as in the multitudes of men,
greater numbers are more fearful then hardy and audacious; so many thousand
mouths will be quickly open to praise the clemency of the Prince; when perhaps
one or some few malicious discontents, will murmur and repine against his
severity: to give you an example, these great numbers of slaves, whom I have
set at liberty, and who are now on their return to their several Provinces, are
gone to gain me the hearts of their fellow Citizens, and so to establish my
conquests by their promulgations of my celmency; where (on the contrary)
Bajazet alone, being more unfortunate, will scarce have any companion to join
with him in complaints: thus consequently, I have not acted against reason,
when I commanded the Prison gates to be set wide open for the Slaves of
Caramania; and (at the same time) commanded stronger Bars of Iron to confine
and Cage up Bajazet: the insolency of a revolted subject is ever insupportable,
the same is as equally difficult in a proud enemy, who has his arms in his
hand; but if that insolency be exorbitant in a vanquished enemy, he deserves
the highest punition; if it be not permitted for one in Triumph to vapor and
insult over those, whom he has surmounted; how intolerable then think you is
the violent precosity of a Prisoner of war, who holds his life from him who
has made him his Captive, which he can take away at his pleasure. No, no,
(Axalla) constancy of courage, and insolency of pride are not the same things;
It may well become prisoners of war, to carry their Irons with nobleness of
mind, and not to lose their hearts, though they have lost the victory: Martial
discipline never permitted a lessening of that respect, which the Captive owes
the Conqueror, and to retort upon him with reproach and injury is a higher
crime; a Conqueror may justly reflect upon himself seated in the Chair of
Majesty and Triumph, whilst Captives and Prisoners are to follow the royal
Train with humble looks, and misfortunate Comportments: so that it is not
allowed for any Captive (though never so great) to act as did insolent Bajazet;
whose Pride was as vainly elevated, as his fortune miserably abased. The King
of China, whom I read mitted to his Crown and Kingdom, acted nothing (after
his misfortunes) unworthy of his royal condition: as he was not base, he was
not proud and insolent; when he treated with Tamberlane, he spoke with boldness
and generosity, yet not fiercely, or impudently without respect, he did nothing
unlike a King, nor any thing that exceeded the fortune of his present quality;
therefore I had reason to treat him otherwise then Bajazet: and I am to be more
honored, if I have been indulgent to the one, and not to the other. What do
you think, would not this Tiger have attempted in his rage, if he should have
been loosed from his Chains? he would certainly first have adventured to have
torn him in pieces who gave him his liberty (if he had power) and railing
equally against all men (would, if he were able) become the public Enemy of
the Universe: He would tell the world his Subjects had betrayed him, that his
Soldiers had forsaken him, that his Enemies had evilly treated him: thus
resuming his Scepter in rage and malice, he would have designed a desolation to
all the earth, or (at least) would have sought the means. (No, no, Axalla) he
who will not be a good Prince (shall being a Captive) whether he will or no,
become a real Slave, without hopes to return to a Throne of Majesty: of which
cruelty has rendered him unworthy, and made him more fit to carry Chains and
Irons. Clemency, on this occasion, might introduce too many dangers, and the
interest of so many people concerned, is not inconsiderately to be passed over.
Severity to Bajazet is more necessary then royal Civility, to make Bazajet to
see the ugliness of his own vices (and if possible) to cause an alteration in
his savage humors. Besides, who may not expect Pardon, if Bajazet should escape
with any grace or lenity; he who is the curse and execration of all the world
(and who, though vanquished) speaks and acts such things as are able to inflame
the most calm and gentle soul with rage and fury. As for the slaves I pardoned,
they were not capital, but subordinate enemies, engaged in a party who were
against me; perhaps those men in their private condition quietly disposed, and
unwilling and incapable voluntarily to offend; and consequently such persons
were proper objects for a Princes Clemency: such an action as this carries
along with it the presence of splendor and honor; nay there is a kind of
equity which pleads pardon for those who humbly beg for Clemency, and policy
is not against the proceedings, if it foresee not peril and danger in the
consequence. The true bounds which are to be given to clemency or severity, are
to be measured and examined by the rule of justice; and she is to be observed
how far she suffers the one or the other to appear: some crimes are so horrid,
as justice will not allow them to pass unpunished; as she will not admit
virtues to be deprived of their reward and recompense. Now in this
consideration, we ought to judge whether Clemency may be of more disadvantage,
or severity more serviceable; so discerning whether to employ and exercise the
one or the other, thus guided to undertake nothing but for the public interest
or sovereign glory. The chiefest mark and note of majesty is, the loyal
submission of subjects, and the highest mark of victory is, the humble
prostration of the vanquished, who do not only cast down their arms, but
their lives and liberties at the Conquerours feet; whereas on the contrary,
those who oppose the divine Character of Princes in their Sovereignty, are born
up with the excess of Pride and Arrogancy: and that provocation is more
intolerable which springs from the insolency of a Captive, then from the
defiance of an enemy. Be not then longer astonished (Axalla) if you have
observed me, sometimes so gracious, and at other times so severe; but be
persuaded that I have ever been guided by the hand of Reason, I have pardoned
where I could, and not prejudiced the advancement of my Conquests; I have been
inflexible, and not to be moved, when I foresaw that my Clemency might not
only prove unjust, but dangerous; either as to the peoples good, or to my own
designs. It is an observation in Nature, that she opposes those things that do
resist her, and gently yields to those things which courteously offer place; so
then from the simple motions of nature we cannot but accord to that which is
here asserted. Join then with me (Axalla in this Conclusion, and say, That
whoever considers the person of Bajazet, that then cruelty her self ceased to
be cruelty; and that it is true that his humor was insupportable, bloody,
insolent, and unnatural, and therefore merited least compassion; it was then a
judicious resolution to detain him within bars of iron, whom reason could not
persuade nor be predominant with. To these resolutions, let us perpetuate a
continuation, so not think it irrational to pardon cheerfully those who humbly
submit to our power, and to punish with severity those whom neither
misfortunes, nor captivity can reduce to a submission. Let not our pardons be
granted out of fear and feebleness, and let not our chastisements be provoked
through preoccupation and hatred. Thus to wind up the clew of this discourse,
let us resolve neither to pardon nor punish, but when reason shall conduct us
for the ends of the peoples greater good, or the Princes more illustrious
renown.

The CENSVRE.
ANger is a passion which reigns too much in every breast, but principally
most with Kings, who are so high that they ought to be above those storms and
tempests which are condensed and formed in the middle Region of the air; as
Princes surmount all others in their titles, so they ought to transcend them in
their virtues, so to be less transported with the heat of passion. He who
invented the fable of Minerva, who broke her Pipe or Ho-boy, when she saw her
visage in the Crystal Fountain; does tell us that beholding her cheeks puffed
and swelled, (which caused her deformity and ugliness) prudently brake that
instrument which disfigured her beauty, and so changed her countenance. This
pretty Story represents that great change and alteration which untamed passion
transmitteth suddenly into the soul, which if she be wise) she presently
abandoneth, and on the sight of the deformity, avoideth or suppresseth more
carefully. In effect, those people who caused their children to look on their
slaves, when they were debauched and drunken, to imprint into them the horror
of that ugly vice, did likewise cause them to look on their slaves in their
rage and choler, to make them apprehend more perfectly the deformities of
passion, and so to cause in them a greater caution and detestation of such
vicious infirmit^es. Such a humor consistent of Sulphur and Salt peter, becomes
not a prudent soul; nor is to converse with a sage and rational Man. Xerxes who
threatened to set bounds to the Sea, and level the Mountains (if they did not
facilitate a passage to his Army) appeared to all the World more ridiculous
then formidable in the extravagancie of his passion. Hippocrates (the Prince of
Physicians) says, That it is a signal token of a great Malady to see the
countenance much altered; and to this purpose Plutarch used these words, that
before a man go out of the Bath he ought to behold himself in a glass; if he
blush at his nakedness when he has parted with his clothes; how ought he to
be ashamed at his passions, when he has parted with his reason. But after all
these virtues and vices though they have some near resemblances, are not to be
rudely mixed in confusion. Those who are valiant are not to be esteemed rash,
nor those who are liberal profuse and prodigal, nor those who are severe
utterly unjust and cruel. We read that Nemesis and Adrastia were as well
Deities as Jupiter, and that necessity as well required Goddesses of revenge,
as of power and patronage; it is true, that Justice as well as Clemency is a
Divine Attribute; and that the one as well as the other is necessary for Kings,
who present on earth the Image of God.

When Alexander asked Porus his generous Prisoner how he would treat him, if
Alexander could be unfortunate: Porus answered he would treat him like a King.
Thus did Tamberlane yield to the shining Sun, when no blustering Tempest could
bend his inclinations. It is true, as Sophocles says in his Tragedy of
Antigone, That Reason and Understanding hardly dwell with men in misery, or at
least bears not company so much with them in their misfortunes; for though men
be sage and stout in their prosperity, yet adversity is able to diminish and
weaken their best abilities. It is Seneca, who speaks in his Epistles, that
he is a perfect good man whom no accident ca^ render evil. And the same Author
says in his Book De Ira, That Virtue ought never to have recourse to Vice. In
his second Book De Clementia, That a Wise man ought always to act as intending
the common good of all men. And from all these instances we may conclude, that
(on several occasions) to punish and to pardon are equally necessary. A Prince
is to proceed in his great affairs as a skilful Musician with his different
Notes; which (according to the Air) he changes at pleasure, high or low, to
briefs, longs, or flats, providing that all alterations intend to effect better
harmony, and a sweeter composure in the Government of the Estate: thus the
proceedings of Tamberlane are more justifiable, and the severe punishments he
inflicted on Bajazet were chastisements becoming his insolency, who so
imprudently and outragiously provoked so triumphant a Conqueror. Hence we learn
that the examples of extreme severity and clemency may in their seasons be
equally important in the affairs of Princes. She who in the Scripture is styled
fair as the Moon, and bright as the Sun, is immediately termed terrible as an
Army with Banners. Words which instruct Kings to have always the two Royal
Supporters of Clemency and Justice to bear up their Throne; these great virtues
are not to be abused with Passion, but to be guided by reason in all their
actions. And now we are from Tartary returned to France, where we may see Hugh
Capet, who after he had abrogated the office of the Major of the Palace,
constituted the high trust and dignity of the Constable of France, which is a
degree that so nearly approaches to Sovereignty it self. Here follow the
reasons of his resolutions in a matter of so high concernment. This Hugh was
the first and chief of the third race of the Kings of France.

HUGH CAPET TO FREDERICK COUNT OF METS.
I Do not doubt but that the high design, I have in hand, does much astonish
you, and that after my discharge of the Major of the Palace (which office I
have suppressed) yet thought it not fit to conferr that place on my son,
thereby to remove all pretention and expectation from the Grandees of my
Kingdom, in the management and disposal of my affairs, that I have created the
Authority and Office of the Constable of France; which is a degree and quality
wherein a Subject seems to approach exceeding close and near to Sovereignty it
self. Perhaps some may say, that in the Creation of this Supreme Officer, my
hand is tired, and that I am not longer able to sway and support my Royal
Scepter; or that my elevation to the Throne has so ravished my sense and
reason with the splendor of Majesty, that I cannot rule without some immediate
assistance; and that because I judged the Majors of the Palace (in their
office) to be less glorious to their Prince; therefore I caused a suppression
of that more intolerable Authority, which so much usurped over the royal
quality of some of my Ancestors in their weaker abilities, who did precede
famous Pepin; and in which office I gained so much honor and power under Lewis
the fifth. But this suppression of the Major of the Palace did not utterly
remove my thoughts from all approbation of one to be advanced to more signal
and high trust: For as the virtues of the Subjects are great advancers of
virtues and worth in their Prince; so are the wisdom and parts of a prudent
Councellor or chief Minister of State, of an absolute necessity for the more
glorious transaction of the illustrious affairs of Kings. From these
considerations, I wish that the Kings of France may not be without an eternal
Competitor, whose abilities may heighten and advance their Prince to more
glorious endeavors; thereby to incline the Revolution of their Crown toward
their children, or (if they should be incapable) toward themselves. This
Emulation in a Subject (springing from nothing but true renown) cannot but make
the Prince and the Royal Family more industrious and diligent, the better to
execute the Royal Function: and though I create an Office and Order of an high
and great trust, yet I doubt not, but with good success; and presume that hand
of Providence which has established this Throne (although sometimes possessed
by personages of greater weakness) will still continue his protection, maugre
the malice of all enemies whomsoever. Now to satisfy the world that I act not
without reason, I must let you know that Royalty (which is the first and Primum
Mobile in an Estate or Kingdom) ought to be fortified and coroborated with some
vicine and near assistance; into which the Prince may infuse and impart his
pleasure and power: and that effected, there may succeed an activity and
influence to cause a communication to all inferior and subordinate orbs and
motions to facilitate the Government of greater affairs. An eminent person or
Prince of quality nearly approaching to the condition of his Sovereign, is so
necessary, as without the Councels and assistance of a chief Minister of State
it is almost impossible to enjoy or see a prosperous Reign in the Negotiations
of so great a kingdom. The glorious body of the bright Sun cannot (at the same
instant) communicate his beams, and be radiant to all cantons and corners of
the earth; and if the Sun did not participate his lumination to the inferior
Stars, the Semicircle and Moiety of the World would ever be enveloped in
obscurity and darkness. Thus it is not possible for a Prince to Regulate and
honorably Govern his Estate without a communication of his power, being as the
Sun, to radiate and shine over all the parts of his Kingdom at the same time.
And as it is with God, so it is with Princes, who bear his Image; the Divine
power does operate by second and subordinate causes in the Government of the
Universe; where so many different concurrences do meet, and a Kingdom (being a
vast Body) where so many varieties of dissenting affairs do convene. A Prince
cannot effectually operate in them all without a participation of his trust and
power to some noble and faithful assistant. Besides, a Prince is to the Body
Politic and Kingdom, what the Soul is in the Body Natural; and the chief
Minister of State, is to be as the most noble, chiefest part and organ to
convey his Princes royal pleasure with more ease and honor into all the
inferior parts and members. Thus whosoever observes accurately, and considers
judiciously the office and obligations of supreme Power, must rationally
conclude, that Kings are not only above their subjects in honor and dignity,
but in their pains and cares: not only conducting their affairs, but protecting
their persons, directing their people how to enrich themselves; governing and
guarding their lives and fortunes from foreign as well as from unnatural and
civil wars. It belongs to the Princes care to pardon as well as to punish; to
see that Piety and Peace may prosper, and that Justice flourish. The least of
these duties is (almost) a burden too insupportable for the shoulders of any
one, (though never so well qualified.) Therefore for a more happy tranquillity,
public welfare and repose, such a creature is absolutely necessary, in whose
person his Prince may confide; who transferring a great share of weighty
affairs to his transaction and abilities, the Prince may rule with more honor,
and the people enjoy more public advantages. But as a chief Minister may be
serviceable to the State, so it infinitely concerns the Prince to be discreet
and most judicious in his choice: the most noble and sagest of the Subjects
best meriteth to be elevated and called to his Royal Dignity and Trust. For it
is certain the Prince very plainly presageth the success and prosperity of his
affairs and Government, by his election and choice of his chief Councellor and
Minister of State: who, if of greater worth, virtue, and illustrious qualities,
does more dignifie his Master, and better gratify and content his Subjects.
But this care is ever to be used, that the Prince preserve his distance, lest
his Ministers grow too insolent, which might endanger to lessen the splendour of
Majesty, or occasion injury and injustice toward the people. 'Twas for this
reason why I resolved to remove and discharge the Office of the Major of the
Palace, who (commonly) so much entrenched and encroached on the Privileges
belonging to Royalty. Now in the creation of this Order of a Constable of
France, I intend nothing else but an Office of Conveniencie; which may prove of
great use to the Prince and to the Kingdom: and if the Major of the Palace had
lived under Princes, who had been able to rule according to the high
privileges of Sovereignty, that Office might (to this day) have been more
toierable; but the Princes infirmities having given way to them to grow
insolent, and too much to usurp on Majesty, their discharge and a constitution
of a new Order of Constable is more proper and agreeable; which place is not
inalterable, his Being depending on his Princes pleasure. Yet it is sound
Policy rather not to elevate to high places, then after a Commission sealed
for trust and honor, to disgrace and remove. Wherefore the Prince is not to
choose his prime Minister of State in a tumult of passion, or according to the
common delusions of popular vogues and suffrages: but after a serious
consultation with his own Reason, having first glanced at the commendations and
advice of his best and ablest Counselors. It is true, those who by eminency of
their birth are born near to the Throne, being of Royal alliance and blood,
having their education proportioned accordingly to render them more illustrious
and capable, may expect before others (who are not their Peers, neither in
worth or birth) the honor of this high privilege: but if their virtues be
answerable to their birth, equity is bound to plead for their dignities and
merits. Such a condition is more preferrable, because their persons and estates
are so nearly twisted in the interest of the Crown, that they must necessarily
flourish with it, or else fall, and so be buried under the same misfortunate
and fatal Ruins. And (to confess truth impartially) it were a kind of injury,
where birth and worth meet, that such persons should not be graced with the
greatest Trust, the chiefest Honor, and highest qualities; nay, to exclude
such illustrious Capacities, were not only a discouragement to their Noble
Persons, but to Virtue and Majesty it self, which requires the service and
attendance of the greatest magnificence. Yet this great concernment ought to be
of such importance and care that the Prince take notice, how it is more
absolutely necessary that the person honor more his place and office with his
virtues and abilities, then his place honor him. Therefore an impartial
judicious choice is most chiefly to be used; and if those of more noble birth
and extraction (degenerating from the virtues of their Ancestors, and utterly
void of their great abilities) are incapable, and merit not so near a relation
to Sovereignty: the Prince may make his choice where a more virtuous ability
and a more noble capacity primely appears amongst others of his Subjects. For
as the King has his privilege to choose at his pleasure amongst so many
thousands of his people; so each one of them, who is ingenious and virtuous is
capable of his Princes Election and favor. Now as for the persons whom the
Prince advances to so high employment, they are as Rivers whose Channels are
deep and profound, whose Banks are distanced and large, to that end that the
fierce Torrents, falling and streaming down, they may not cause an inundation,
and so a destruction and sterility; but gently watering the fields, may cause
them to be more fruitful and luxuriant: for it is most commodious if great
Rivers swell and make their banks and borders full, all the excess in the
Current is to fructify the Country where the stream runs, then (at last) to
empty it self with greater fullness into the vast and mighty Ocean. Thus the
chief Minister is like a pleasant stream to enrich the State, and in the end,
to flow more abundantly with advantages and prosperous returns to Majesty. Yet
if it so fall out that the Prince be so unfortunate in his choice, that he whom
he imployeth be not of a fit capacity, he may justly fear those disasters in
Government, which are ordinary in the course of Nature; and that confusion in
the State, which an inundation causes in the Country when the Banks are broken
down; where, if the breaches cannot speedily be repaired, an inevitable danger
may succeed to the whole Kingdom. On the contrary, if the chief Counselor be
fortunate in his conduct of affairs, and that this employment falls into the
hands of an Heroic and Noble soul; a person in whom prudence and all the
virtues eminently appear, and who has gained the true Maxims of Policy by a
long experience, and whose ambition is inflamed entirely for his Masters
service and the peoples welfare; in such a condition the Prince may be
confident of his own and of his peoples safety. Then heaping honors upon his
Creature, he may daily communicate to him greater power. In effect, if
celestial providence had not removed from the Throne the latter Kings, who were
leg itimate in their birth; but unworthy to descend from Charlemain by their
ignoble qualities, I might yet have been there subject: and what authority
soever, and charge, to be Major of the Palace, and to be Count of Paris,
Prince of France, together with the merits of Hugh Le Grand my Father gave me,
I should never have adventured to ascend the Throne if the right heir to the
crown had not descended thence, and if Charles of Lorain had not by his actions
renounced that right to which he might have pretended. All these Circumstances
accompanied with the universal suffrages of the people and puissant Sovereignty
united, has invited me to accept what I could not honorably refuse and
resist. Let not Princes fear then to impart and communicate their Authority,
but when it is evident, and they apprehend it may tend to their dishonor and
disadvantage. Princes are subject to error as well as other men, and therefore
not without their fears and jealousies. Now it is impossible but that a Prince
conferring his trust into the hands of such eminent persons; their chiefest
business will be to respect their Masters, to observe their Laws, and to reduce
or continue their people to their obedience. Now as Kings are the Images of
God, so the chief Ministers of State are the Images of their Princes; we must
not think then that the honor bestowed on them is a derogation or diminution
of their Sovereignty. No, rather the more highly the chief Counselor is
dignified, the more the Prince himself is honored. For as Antiquity
reverenceth the Oracles, and those who were injurious to them affronted the
Gods; so the same veneration and respect ought the Subjects attribute to him,
who is so highly trusted as well for their own as their Princes service. These
mutual respects are the Nerves of the State wherewith the Prince move^^ the
whole body of the Kingdom with greater facility. And as the General of an Army
disperseth his Orders and discovers his design to a faithful Officer,
(selected from the rest) for a more prosperous march and conduct to the Army:
so does a Prince intimate his directions (perhaps) but by a Whisper) to his
Minister, whereby he moves all the parts of the Kingdom in a course clean
contrary to common and general expectations. Therefore such an Officer is
necessary, that the Prince may not only be eased and disburthened of so great a
charge, and thereby be able to refresh and solace himself, but likewise Policy
teaches him to prepare a shelter betwixt him and the outrageous tempests of
the peoples envy and reproaches, who act in that sort, that if the Prince be
indulgent to any one person, they become an eternal enemy to such near
approaches to Royalty; and the Minister of State receiving the beams of
Authority from his Prince, ought to be like the Moon, thought less luminous yet
ever splendent in one degree or other; and though by his motions he casually
eclipse the splendour of the Sun, as to the eye of the people, yet as toward
his Prince he is still to reflect with honor, and his orb is speedily to move
to a more luminous satisfaction of the World: And when it so happens that a
King enjoys such an extraordinary person, who knows as equally to obey his
Prince, as to command his people: the loss of ten Battails ought to be less
considerable then of one so eminent and so incomparable a creature. This Office
of the Constable I have constituted as an aid and succor to my self; and that
of the Marshals of France, as Assistants to the Constable. And if Princes be so
injudicious and resolute, as in so great a Kingdom not to admit a Minister of
State, but wrestle alone with those vast employments, they will find those
different affairs which follow the Sovereignty, as the shadow does the body,
will infinitely oppress the Princes soul; who if he mind his own honor and the
peoples repose, a defatigation and dispiritedness will accompany that
oppression; and that will produce vexation and melancholy, which is provoked
ordinarily into choler; and that commonly prepares high acts of injustice:
therefore to keep up the vigor of the Prince in an equal proportion, the
prudence and fidelity of a chief Minister of State is incomparably necessary.
Sovereign Princes are like the Captains and chief Commanders in the Galleys,
where the service of the Pilot is of the chiefest importance to guide the
course; it is his office to foresee the tempests, to discover the winds, to
avoid the shelves and rocks; and they rarely or never govern the Helm, but when
the Pilot is disobedient, or a necessity forces: they (at pleasure) observe
the Carte, though neither furle the Sails, handle the Ropes, nor tug at an Oar:
it is enough for the Captains to give their orders, to reserve themselves for
their more noble functions, which are to fight and vanquish the enemies: yet in
necessity the Captain ought to be capable to exercise any place in all the
Vessel; either of a skilful Pilot, or a private Seaman. Thus as an exact
Pilot, the chief Minister of State is to be prudent and active, either in the
quiet and calms, or storms and tempests, when they arise in the State. If God
would have Kings made so perfect and absolute as that they should need no
assistance or Councellor, then they had been more by their birth then men; they
might have penetrated their Subjects hearts, and been incapable of being
deceived: but seeing it has pleased the Divine Power to make them equal in
their infirmities to the meanest of their Subjects, they have great reason to
fortify their disabilities by addition of the most rational helps and
assistances: now as some objects, so the affairs of Kingdoms may be better seen
by a multiplied Light. I know well that History (which passes for the best and
most impartial Describer of the Universe) teaches Kings something; that more
obscurely and imperfectly in comparison of effective experience. I may add also
that Customs, Manners, and Kingdoms, change as well as times. The Macedonians
are not now those noble persons, who fought under Philip and Alexander the
Great; the Romans of our age are grown more soft and delicate, and are not such
who lived under Romulus and Numa Pompillius; the French themselves, though hot
and fiery, have left that hardship and fierceness which they had under the
reign of Pharamond and Meroije, under Clodion and Clovis, their courage was
then formidable to all Nations. Princes born in the Purple Chamber of Royalty,
usually travail into other Countries by their Maps and Charts; and seldom march
into other Territories, but with puissant Armies to enlarge their Conquests and
Dominions. It is then most advantageous to a Prince to have a confidence in
some eminent person who may satisfy his curiosity with truth, and can
experimentally describe by his travails, the Kingdoms and Countries of his
Enemies, it being almost impossible to make his advantages without the advice
of those who have seen those places with their own eyes. And whereas Princes by
reason of their superabundant affairs cannot be so contemplative, nor so much
converse with Books; and that Prudence is much gained with travail and
conversation with strangers: a learned Counselor of Estate may in his
discourse be used as a walking Library. Besides, Splendour, Pomp, and Pleasure,
deprive a King of a great part of his life; so that it may be said in some
kind, It Is necessary for a Prince to have some others to live for him; to
advise him on all occasions, and to instruct him in those things which his
interrupted condition permits him not to understand. And who think you is so
fit to report to his Prince those bold truths and free expressions, which it is
necessary he should understand, but he to whom he has given Commission, and in
whom he has placed his confidence. There are many angry truths, which Kings
ought to know, and yet are not to be related to them, but seasonably, and by a
skilful and learned faithful Counselor; who having first digested the
dangers, may direct his Master to avoid the extremities. For the same relations
reported from an ignorant or an injudicious mouth may occasion great
distempers, and many evils: so that a faithful Minister completely qualified
with all virtues, is the chiefest guard to the person of his Prince. When I
look on the Court, I see it full of flatterrers and male contents; some
endeavoring to raise dissentions, others laboring to corrupt with Sycophancie
and adulation: therefore in consideration of those two different dangers and
inconveniences; addresses are rather to be applied first to the chief
Minister, then to the Prince; who as he is a guard, so he is a buckler and spy
to all intentions that may surprise the King; and these obligations indear his
fidelity to his Master together with his own fortune, his life, and honor. Now
as touching my self, these Reasons have been my Directors, and I desire my
Successors may practice that which I have given them in example. The Laws shall
be my guide and rules, and the Constable and Marshals of France, on whom I have
conferred the Military affairs, shall force and command them to an observation.
It is by them whereby I shall support my Throne, whereunto I am ascended; and
it is by this discourse which I have made, whereby I shall prevent my
Successors from an evil explication of my resolutions; and that they may
believe that my suppression of the Major of the Palace, was to make them more
absolute in the Regal Office, I wish my Successors may reign with full
Authority; but I desire also that they debar not themselves from the prudence
of a faithful Councellor. I would not have them slaves to their chief Minister,
and yet I advise them to submit to Experience and Reason; and having found
sage, moderate, faithful, and virtuous servants, that they love them,
recompense, and protect them, and that they measure their friendshid, favors,
and bounty, with their virtue, excellency, and perfection of their services.

THE CENSVRE.
KINGS are Gods, so says the Scripture; but they are such Gods, of whom Homer
and Ovid speaks, who are subject to anger, fear, hatred, love, and all humane
Passions. As happy as Kingdoms and Princes may be, they are content to observe
the Latin Proverb, which teaches them, that two eyes see more then one; and
therefore commit not their affairs absolutely to the dictates of their own
will, matters of weight: Regal and high affairs require counsel and
assistance; which if Kings refuse and scorn their condition grows desperate and
dangerous. All Wisdom comes from above, says Ecclesiasticus, and it is for
this reason why Kings ought not to be ashamed of their consultations, meeting
with so many difficulties. The nobleness of birth renders Kings illustrious and
worthy of great esteem, and most sublime admiration: and it is true, Where the
King is, there is the Court, though it be but in a Cottage. But seeing they are
men as well as Kings, Monarchs were unreasonable if they refused Council and
advice: S. Paul teaches that Princes are to be obeyed though evil and wicked;
yet he never taught, That Princes ought not to hearken to the wisdom of the
aged, to those who have more experience then they. It is their duty to do right
to the Meanest as well as to the Mightiest. This is an instruction given to all
the Grand Masters of the earth. And how shall Princes obey the Commandments of
heaven if they be ignorant of what is right, and will not hear their Councels
who can advise them? Plato says in the second Book of his Republique, That it
is a high injustice to appear Righteous, and not really to be so. He adds
farther, He is equally injust who takes Council from none but himself; as
Lewis the Eleventh of France, who wedded himself resolutely to his own opinion.
Alexander the Great, who was so noble in his resolutions, that in the Olimpyan
Games he would contest and exercise with none but Kings, yet he refused not to
consult with Aristotle, who was no King, but a sage Philosopher. The sublimity
of his condition did not make him scorn or disdain the wisdom of his Council.
Solomon says, In the multitude of Counselors consists safety. And that
which he taught he practiced; first choosing able and faithful Councillors,
and then depending on their fidelity. Wisdom establishes a firm foundation
(says the infallible Oracle) and to have such an assurance, faithful
Councillors are to be embraced. And though the danger may be great, when a
Councellor proves unable or unfaithful; yet it is greater prudence to adventure
such a danger, then to walk headlong in a certain path of ruin and
destruction. It is true, Princes unfortunately, sometimes meet with such false
and perfidious Councillors as Sejanus; but there are to be found likewise
upright and judicious Mordeca's, Agrippa's, Maecenas's, and Bellisarius, that
is, such incomparable Worthies, who having no single and private Interest,
regard nothing above their Masters glory and his Kingdoms good. Such men as
these are fit to sit at the Council Tables with Kings; of whom it may be
heartily said, as the Oracle did of Lycurgus, (though by the mouth of a
Sorcerer) that such as he were beloved of the Gods, and were rather (indeed)
Gods then Men: and as for Princes, their ruin is never more certain and near,
then when they despise wholesome Council. Therefore the Wise man said, Rebuke
the wise and he will give thee thanks. Now as the Prince is to hearken to his
faithful Minister; so is he to premeditate and guard his lips, that they utter
no perverse or indiscreet thing before the Prince; but by wisdom to show
himself worthy to stand before Kings, and to approve his worth in so high a
trust; and so a skilful Pilot in so dangerous a Navigation and Voyage. It is
requisite his Theorie be great but that his Practice exceed that. He is to keep
himself within the bounds of awful obedience to his Prince, to understand that
the Supreme power of Kings is not limited, their anger is as the roaring of a
Lion, and their Sovereignty is as the heart of man, where every wound is mortal
It is with Sovereignty as with the Ark of the Covenant, which none ought to
presume to touch, though it were to support it. Having now seen the reasons of
Hugh Capet and his election of a Constable of France, let us travail more
Northerly, and look on a famous Hero, that formidable Conqueror, whom we may
style as that Turkish Emperor Gulderum, that is, the Lightning from Heaven;
who when he had passed over the Baltic Sea, and set his feet in Germany being
in the head of his Army; he commonly exposed himself to the dangers of a
private Soldier, not considering his quality of being a King, but (when he had
occasion) to show his Royal Grace and Mercy to his humbled and vanquished
Enemies. And therefore his sage and faithful Chancellor presumed to take the
liberty to reprehend his Majesty. See here follow the reasons of this
Lion-like courageous Prince, to authorize and justify his Gallantry and
hardship in what he usually attempted.

portrait of Gustavus Adolphus The Most Illustrious Puisant, and Victorious
Prince, GVSTAVVS ADOLPHVS, by the grace of GOD, King of the Swethens, Goths,
and Vandals, great Prince of Finland. Duke of Esthonia and Carelia, Lord of
Ingria etc
Tho: Cecill sculp.

Gustavus Adolphus TO HIS GREAT CHANCELLOR OXERSTERN.
IF the Councels which you have given me for a safer guard to my self, had not
been as dangerous, as my enemies to my renown and honor; I could have so much
valued your wisdom and fidelity, as to have hearkened to your Policy and
Advice; but my honor was more precious to me then the consideration of my
Estate and life, and more nearly touches my heart. Wherefore I think it fit to
satisfy your curiosity (in matters so highly important:) I presume the valor
of Kings is not a quality to be confined or locked up within the narrow bounds
of any limits; much less within the prescriptions which your Policy persuades.
It is absolutely defended (as an infallible rule) that Kings (if they intend a
victory or Conquest) are to appear in the front and head of the Battle. You
well know it is most difficult in all the Course of Nature, to establish one
certain and infallible rule. The same circumstances are not commonly used to
the same events, but distinct and different means often compass the same ends.
One Ship may come safely to the Harbor by the Tide, and another as
prosperously (though against the Tide) by a good gale of wind. As all Kings are
not alike, neither in their persons, nor Kingdoms; so their interests leave
them to the choice and exercises of several actions and undertakings. There are
many Circumstances most materially considerable in them, as their age, their
humor, their inclination. And it is to be observed that the people are of one
temper, and the Soldiers of another; those love to loiter and shelter
themselves in Plenty and Peace; these delight to hear the sound of Trumpet and
Drums, and are more ambitious of honor then of riches. To these observations a
particular regard must be used to the affairs of War, to the nature of the
Enemy, and to the designs of Conquest and Victory. And according to the
variety of those objects in these several circumstances; the life of man (in
order to those ends he aims at) is to be more or less valued. To this purpose a
King is to consider, whether it may not be as necessary (on some occasions) to
appear (as well) a valiant and stout Soldier, as a great Commander and
General. But not to stay you any longer from the more substantial Reasons, I
hope you will yield rationally, that Valor is a quality, as essential to a
King, as either Justice or Prudence; and that (in some degrees) it is more
advantageous and serviceable to the People, then to the Prince, who chiefly
gains honor and renown; but as for other Conveniences, they are as equally
communicable to the Subjects (who freely share in them) as to the Sovereign. It
is true, Policy and Prudence may effect Victories with less danger, and without
effusion of blood; and those Conquests may be both glorious and commodious: yet
I shall speak freely and without fear, although Justice and Prudence are chief
preservers of a State in peace, yet the Valor and fortitude of the Prince is
as equally considerable; and contributeth not the least share of advantage to
the prosperity of a Kingdom. Nay, more valor chiefly gives the life, success,
and fortune, and with magnanimity and courage the noblest minds do ever keep
company; it is this virtue which makes the greatest spirits and Worthies most
remarkable; she (above all others) advances Kings and Princes. It is by her
renown that Kingdoms and Empires are constituted and formed; and whereby
Conquerours all Illustrious Heroes are reputed worthy to merit Crowns and
Diadems: for if we examine the ways and motions of these latter ages; we shall
find that men who never were disciplined in the Rules of Morality and Policy,
out of an instinct and direction from Nature, judged none worthy to command,
but those whom they conceived most daring and valiant. So true it is, that
valor is a quality most essential to Royalty, and consequently those who are
not endowed with this great virtue, are utterly unworthy and incapable of
Crowns and Scepters. If Kings were only obliged to be their Subjects Lords and
Masters, Prudence and Justice might be solely requisite to such relations of
Government; but their royal office obliges them farther to adventure for their
defense, not only by their Commands, but in their Persons. And it is through
this noble quality that they gain the glorious titles of victorious Conquerors,
and to be styled the Protectors and Liberators of the People. It was in favor
to this more eminent virtue, that the ancient Romans (who were such equal
dispensators of Glory) conferred honors, and gave triumphs to those, who by
their illustrious Achievements had merited such high renown. But you will tell
me, all men confess valor to be a great ornament and Princely requisite in a
Sovereign: but it is rendered less useful if not limited with moderation and
guided with discreet restraints. To answer, I shall not peremptorily make a
contradiction; yet I shall boldly affirm, that all the virtues when idle and
less active, either cease to be virtues, or (at least) appear not so to be.
What where Clemency if she never snatched a sacrifice from the Altar of
Justice? and what were Justice if she remitted all her victims to Clemency?
There is then a kind of necessity which generally obliges them to a
Consistency in action; and each particular is to act according to its Nature;
and to manifest it self to the people, as that virtue which is most eminent in
the Prince, and chiefly seated in his natural inclinations. Now if the Prince
discerns that his Subjects do more honor him, his Soldiers grow daily more
valiant, and his Enemies more fear him; it cannot but be necessary, that he
make proofs of his courage to increase the subjects loyalty and the Soldiers
valor, that the Enemies may be possessed with more terror and fear, and the
Estate be established in a greater security. Besides, where nature has
imprinted this noble heat and ardour of spirit, it is proper to augment and
inflame this natural spark, by an exercise and frequency of noble actions; and
he who passes his days without peril, is too rash or vain*glorious, if he
brag much of his courage. It is not enough for a Prince to hear the noise of
the Cannons, and to see the smoke and flashes of fire from the Ramparts and
Battalians: but valor leads a gallant spirit within the midst of the flaming
clouds, and mingleth him boldly with the enemies troops; where he can look on
death without fear, and seeks glory when he scorns the world: and so walking
betwixt the living and the dead, gathers Laurels and Trophies with his own
hands, which he has besprinkled with the sweat and blood of his
irreconcilable Enemies. If this noble boldness were not admitted to a Prince,
his own Army might as well doubt as the Enemies themselves of the Princes
valor; and the Soldiers and Officers might justly challenge to themselves the
victory which crowns Kings. This high quality is not only necessary for a
Prince in the Theorie and Speculation, but likewise in the Practice: some other
vertuos are commendable, but this not only so, but essential in a Prince.
Justice and Prudence may be inspired by the advice of faithful Councillors,
but valor must lodge in the Princes heart, which gives life and motion (as
the most noble part) to all the other Members. And how can a Prince who feels
not in himself the height of vigor and courage manage his affairs in either
Peace or Wars? First if he live in the softness of Plenty, and a peaceful
Estate, how apt will such a Prince be to be opposed and affronted by the
injustice and insolency of his own Subjects? how will his neighbor Princes and
Estates domineer and encroach on his Royal Rights and Privileges? and it he
fall into the tempest and broils of a Civil War, or an invasion from foreign
Enemies; how will he be able to preserve his own honor, or his subjects Rights
and Liberties? and what noble spirit will freely adventure his life in his
service, who dare not as freely hazard his own? or how can he be capable of
Generous Council, who has not courage nor valor to put it in execution? and
how dare that person think himself worthy of the Title of King, who has not a
heart to fight (if fortune should oblige him) in a single Duel with his equal)
for the honor and preservation of his Crown? By this time (I think) I may
impartially conclude, that valor is the most Princely and most Royal ornament,
and has the precedence (on the Throne) above all other virtues, which without
this could not render any person fit to wear a glorious Crown. In all great
Battails she alone has made the Conquerors most illustrious and fortunate. You
cannot then (noble Chancellor) but acknowledge that as this virtue is necessary
and glorious for the Prince: so it is of chiefest advantage for the Peoples
good and universal happiness. Now this foundation laid, let us see how this
quality is to be used; and whether to be unactive and out of all employment; So
proposing to forget no circumstance that may justify our courage in these
actions, which I have or shall undertake in exposing my life to the most
eminent perils of War. It is most certain, that if it ought (at any time) to
shine more eminently in a Prince, it should be at the Commenceme^t of his life,
of his reign, and of his conquests: this is the chiefest instance, when a
Prince makes the luster of his Crown to shine, and when he imprinteth the marks
of honor in the hearts of his friends and enemies; his courage amazing the
one, and animating the others: Whoever has a hand valiant enough to serve
gloriously with his Sword, need not fear or doubt but that he may sway the
Grandeur of a Scepter; and to this purpose (on all occasions) a Noble Prince is
obliged to give solemn testimonies of his valor. As for all other virtues,
they cannot appear so eminently in him: Justice and Clemency may flow from his
invisible orders; but valor is immediately transcient from his person.
Experience makes grand Politicians and great Captains; but they can never gain
the reputation of valor without their own personal appearance. This is a way
to honor, to which an illiterate and private Soldier may be admitted to
climb. And how shall a Prince render himself commendable to his Subjects, or
formidable to his Enemies; who is not furnished with this glorious quality?
Kingly affairs admit not always leisure to books, nor solitary hours of study
and contemplation. His office is ever to be active, and valor is a Native
quality which increases with exercise. This is a gift of nature, and falls
from the hand of Heaven, and is imbodied in the life of man; so consequently,
being a natural inclination, instructs that Prince so qualified, that he
employ the virtue thereof for the good of his Estate, and the glory of his
Renown. If Nature had intended otherwise, Prudence or Justice might have bin a
more early quality then Valor; but we see the contrary, and the youngest
Infants sooner learn to show their courage, then to express the vigor of any
other virtues. The order which is established in all the Universe is too just
to be contradicted; and men can never do more judiciously then by following the
rules of natural and primitive intentions. Agriculture (how fertile and
fruitful soever it improves) expects not the flower before the blossom, nor the
fruit before the flower. The skilful Gardner endeavors to hasten the maturity
of his fruits; but not to change or disorder their Nature. Those who approach
near the Thrones of Princes, ought not to presume to infuse the Rules of
Prudence into their Princes ears, before they have given him firm assurances of
their courage; Crowns though they are to be attended with Councillors, yet not
with Cowards: and Princes make their best advantage, when (following the
direction of Nature) their Valor is first discerned and most illustrious in
them. The suspicion of not being courageous, may disanimate the stoutest
Subjects, and encourage the basest and lowest Enemies. And if Valor alone
effects such noble enterprises, what will not the prudently Courageous be
able to atcheive? In effect, that noble report which dilateth it self at the
Commencement of a Princes reign, is mavelous important to all the
concernments of his life. As for renown, she will take more pleasure in
proclaiming of his valor, then of his bounty; and flying round the world, will
more divulge and blazon his honor, and the effects of his courage, then those
of his Prudence and Justice. History will charge her self voluntarily with the
memory of his Victories which he has gained over his Enemies, and make them to
shadow his errors (if any) and the infirmities of his passion. The rest of his
virtues clad in a more silent robe, or lapt up in private Panegyricks will
shine as they are shadowed from the Pencils of private persons. But as for all
the circumstances of his valor, they shall swell in Volums of universal
History. His other qualities may be contented to be confined to the borders of
his own Dominions and Countries: but his valor will constantly travail over
all the Universe. His friends and his enemies will both talk; these out of
love, those out of fear; both will speak his honor, and so immortalize the
glory of a valiant Prince: so that no person shall be able to detract or
derogate from his renown. In the Conduct of War, much is (ofttimes) attributed
to the experience of the General, or to the Result of Council: but no
dimunition can rob a valiant spirit of his honor. Aristotle added something to
the Glory of Alexander, by the infusion of sweetness and moderation, as
Plutarch did in that kind, in that of Trajan; but neither the one nor the other
inspired their valor and generosity. All the Tracts which were ever written,
cannot present the gifts of fortitude. Heaven and Nature concur in the
plantation of that quality in the hearts of men. The Battle of D'Issus, and
that of Arbella, were so much Alexanders; and that of Daces so much Trajans,
that the Combats and the Victories were their own entirely: where no person
durst presume to claim a share or part in those honorable enterprises. It was
(without doubt) that the Illustrious Macedonian (on this sole occasion) would
not admit that Ephestian should be named with Alexander in that action; it
being certain that Valor is the only Mistress, of which all noble Heroes are
tender and jealous. Now if it be advantageous to a Prince to be valiant being
young, it is much more rational to be courageous when he is first a King. As
for my self, If I had not rendered my reign more memorable by my first actions
against the Polanders and the Muscovites, it might well have been that I should
not have caused (at this present) the Empire, and all Germany to tremble: but
on the contrary (perhaps) I might have seen all mine own Territories invaded,
or my self forced to a shameful exile, or confined to a base imprisonment. It
is certain that the most important actions of a King (in all his life) are
those when he first mounteth toward his Throne; and then when he declares a
War against a formidable and puissant Enemy. And yet not to leave the interest
of that noble Subject (of which we speak) when conjunctures grow dangerous, and
innovations threaten a change of Government; the Prince is then to be most
vigorous, and to fortify his designs with his courage. In the suspicion of
great revolutions, terror and fear are excellent means to keep the world close
to their duty; and on the contrary, timidity, slow and dull consultations do
but prepare and promote Revolts, and encourage factions and seditions. For
though valor do not always act with her sword in her hand; yet she has a
constant influence and continued operation over all the people. She enters into
the Councels as well as Prudence, and though Prudence give advice, it is valor
that receives and acts the bold and hardy resolutions; and she is the
chiefest cause that inclines Princes to clemency. If Jul. Caesar had not bin
truly valiant, he could not have pardoned his greatest enemies. As for Fear it
suffers not those to live whom true Valor scorns, great and terrible Murders
had followed in the battails of Pharsalia. If that great Emperor had not
scorned death, he would have caused slain the greatest number of the Romans.
Augustus forbore his proscriptions and Massacres on the Triumvirats only on
this ground, being certain that his valor and courage did so transcend, that it
could cause his inclinations to mercy. It was this that preserved Cinna from
perishing, when his conspiracies had trained him to such perils, and Livia so
much solicited against him for his ruin. All noble Heroes have done nothing
worthy, their memory wherein their valor has not bin most prevalent in their
persuasions and resolutions As for Cowards they dare not resolv whether to
punish or pardon, but in a suspense; fearing the accomplices or the conspirators,
they less incline to pardon: and cruelty being their natural inclination, their
fears increase only, and they desire to ruin all; provided that that
desolation might render security and repose to themselves. This Passion does
worse become Kings, whom if the Subjects once discern to be timorous, they
speedily grow insolent and probably cause their Scepter to fall out of their
trembling hands. But on the contrary a Prince should rather endeavor not only
to be terrible in the apprehension of his own Subjects, but he is to make his
courage to appear formidable to all the earth, especially then when he sits
upon a Throne. At that time this glorious quality imprinteth his respect with
his Grandees and Nobles, and disperseth an awful submission in the hearts of
his people; and thus his courage commanding both the one and the other, Peace
and public Tranquillity proves the result and consequence. Will a Prince
pardon a great and eminent person, let him do it franckly without any regard to
the suspicion of his Train or Party, and look on him as an object of his mercy,
not of his fear. And when he resolves to punish a potent and eminent offender,
let him effect it with equal courage, and let his valor surmount all
opposition and repugnancie: let him as little fear death by the hand of an
assassinate, as from the Army of an Enemy. He has true repose of spirit who
preserves his reason entire, and neither lies down nor rises up in fear: For
Valor makes him vigilant and suspicious, not base and timorous. In this
condition, whether he has Peace or War, his Valor will make him worthy to be
a King, and to be attended with honor. There is a time when young and tender
age tolerates a Prince if he be not prudent and politic (that virtue is not
gained but with riper years, and some experience:) but it is a great
imperfection (if not a vice) for a Prince even from his Cradle, not to manifest
the seeds of valor. It must be then confessed clearly, that no occasion must
be omitted that may manifest the beauty of this incomparable virtue, which is
so precious at all seasons. And if a Prince may be permitted at any time to
take off the edge, and so suspend the splendor of his courage; it is
principally then, when he has achieved his conquests; then, when he reapeth
the full harvest of his victories; but in his attempts he is to be as hardy and
terrible as a Lion, that by a fortunate beginning he may make his passage easy
and facile to his greatest future enterprises, and so to be rendered formidable
and victorious: it is not only necessary to fight by Commission, but in person,
as well to encourage their own Armies, as terrify and amaze the Enemies. By
such a Gallant deportment the Reputation of a Prince will march far before the
Prince himself, and proclaim farther the glory of such a General, then the
sound of Drums or Trumpets. His luster will be seen farther then his Ensigns
and Banners; and so the very terror of his great and noble Name will batter
the Walls, and open the gates of the strongest Forts and greatest Towns. As for
those quiet and sleepy Princes, who have no other thoughts, but for their own
defense; and no other ambition but to guard their own Dominions from the
Invasion of their Enemies; a lesser proportion of this noble quality may serve
such thrifty persons: yet this high virtue, if planted in breasts of Sovereign
Power, ought not to be confined to such narrow bounds; for if there be no
occasion to enlarge their Domination, there cannot be wanting some excellent
and honorable motive to exercise their courage in relieving of some Noble
Princes enduring an oppression or usurpation. But as for such who after the
example of Alexander the Great, mind Heroic and Noble enterprises; they think
it glorious to quit their own Countries, preferring danger before a Bed of
Down, and the glory of the Camp before the delicacies of the Court: they can
seat Majesty as high in strange Countries as well as in their own; and create
and elevate a Throne with a few clods and earthie turfs, and make that as
terrible as covered all over with gold. Such noble and magnanimous spirits
adventure to seek Death abroad, and resolve either to gain glory and an Empire,
or to scorn Danger and trample Death under foot. Such invincible minds as
these, are more active and courageous, they shake off dull and drowsy humors,
kiss their Sword as their Mistress, look on Fame as their Herald and servant,
and expect honor as their reward. These Martial Heroes abandoning fear will
adventure their own persons (which are above and far more precious then all
things else) to gain what they aim at, and those who will be superabundantly
and tediously wise, are seldom more fortunate or more illustrious then what
their birth and their Fathers valor has made them. Besides these Arguments,
if I shall consider the three ages of Man, his youth, his manhood, and his old
age; the season wherein I have chiefly exercised courage is most suitable and
proper, which is equally distanced from the infirmities of the one, and the
debilities of the other. When the strength of body accompanied the vigor of the
mind, at which conjuncture it were a thing more irrational, and a kind of an
affront and abuse to Nature, not to be then more sprightful and active; and
consequently more ambitious of an immortal and a glorious name. If Experience
be so perfect a guide in great and famous enterprises, ought I not then to do
now as I have already, so often having so well succeeded? you know how that
when I was but seventeen years of age; I was constrained (on the same day) to
take my Scepter with one hand, and my Sword in the other, and so forced to
defend my Crown: how I was (at those years) invaded by the Danes, Polanders,
and Muscovites; and while these Wars continued I found it most agreeable with
my honor as well as with my affairs to be with the first in the field, and with
the last at the retreat. I believe you cannot forget those eminent effects
which I accomplished in all these several Countries, and with what
precipitation and honorable danger I have been (ofttimes seen) to pass the
Frontiers of Denmark, to those of Muscovie, and from those of Muscovie to those
of Polony: and if I had on those occasions so much need, I have (at present)
equal invitation to the greatest activity of my personal valor. For as the
design is more high and noble, so ought all circumstances which aim at it.
Besides some permission is due to my natural inclinations, that I may regulate
my conduct according (to my prevision and foresight) with better successes. And
if I should continue with the main body of my Army I might (probably) not only
endanger and hazard my self, but all. No, it is more proper that I go my self
and view the countenance and squadrons of my Enemies, if I intend to vanquish
them. I shall thereby put more life and resolution into my own Soldiers; and
when they fight I shall the more ably discern how to take a more perfect
advantage on the Enemies forces, or feebleness, with whom I am to combat. And
as I have considered what is most necessary in Order to mine own interest, so I
am to discern the inclinations of the People and Soldiers who follow me. All
Climats produce not the same tempers, and my Soldiers being of a more
Northerly birth and education, expect a more vigorous and active example for
their conduct. Not but that they are valiant, stout, and hardy; yet withal,
they like the adventures better, when their Commanders are in the Vanguard, and
the General in the Front of the Battle: and it were great shame and
imprudence, not to be forward where one noble Example may so elevate their
courage and resolution. The coldness of the Climate has some communication
with theit Nature, which being warmed and thoroughly enflamed by their Princes
valor, the Soldiers scorn Death and Danger, and grow as ambitious of
vanquishing the Enemies, as the Prince himself; and if their courage be not
somewhat quickened and advanced by some eminent and notable action of their
Prince, it may fall out that they may fail in their duty; and the Prince may
(possibly) lose his honor, with his life, and all that is dear unto him. To
these reasons I may farther add, that Prince who finds himself not at the head
of an Army, consistent of an hundred thousand men, but only commands a lesser
number of Troops and Regiments, in case his Soldiers march slowly, and advance
fearfully; such a Prince ought to be able roundly to tell his timorous and
daunted Soldiers, that his Royal Person is as considerable as the vast numbers
of the Enemies forces; otherwise he had done more discreetly not to have
commenced a War, but rather lived securely in peace. And it is also as true
when a Prince takes a view of his Army, and examineth his Magazines of
Ammunition, he ought at the same time to consult with his own heart, and not
so much depend on the numbers of his Soldiers, or the strength and terror of
his Engines, as on his own courage and magnanimity. Moreover, if we consider
well who our Enemies are, we shall find they are the very same, who fought so
stoutly, and caused so many Roman Legions to perish and fall. Yes, they are the
very same People with whose force and power Grand Arminius (that noble Captain)
did so many things. Most, or all other Nations are clean changed from those
Martial and Warlike humors, wherewith they were so illustrious for their
hostility. Rome is not now what it was in Julius Caesar's reign, but is grown
more effeminate and delicate. Or if it still continue glorious, it is more for
the Arts and Sciences which flourish best in Peace, then for the exercise of
War; and more honors (at present) the Rules of Mercury, then of Mars. The
noble Macedonians are grown dispirited and servile slaves; and the Empire of
Greece, is not what it was under the reign of Philip and Alexander the Great,
but they lead the lives of humble Vassals, contented with servitude and
besotted ignorance. But Germany is still the same, the People as courageous and
warlike as in the times of the Romans; as able and resolute for resistance, and
so successful with their valor as never entirely subdued and conquered by that
mighty Empire. That very place where Varrus lost his life as well as the
Battle, continues still peopled with as many stout and brave minds as it was,
when it opposed all the Roman Forces. There is only this difference, that our
Arms and undertakings are more justifiable then theirs; and therefore if we
intend to vanquish them we must take the same course which they used who
conquered the World, committing our selves and fortunes voluntarily to
Providence; and courageously exposing our selves (without all fear) with hopes
to attain that glorious end, at which our valor aims. It is for the
liberties of all Germany, that we have taken up our Arms; it is for the repose
and safety of our Friends and Allies, it is for a just revenge upon our
Enemies, and true glory and renown, that we desire victory: and consequently,
such great Achievements must be attended with all diligent and noble
Circumstances that may procure and facilitate our Conquests. To this purpose
(if there be occafior) I must not refuse to be General of the Army, Martial of
the field, Major General, an ordinary Captain, Engineer, Canoneer, or a private
Soldier, as well as a King; and thus according to the diversions of my
affairs, I am to proceed and act as an experienced and forward Prince, who know
my own business as well or better then any who fight or follow me. Those who
conclude that a Prince is the life and soul of his Army, are surely of my
judgment, and resolve where the undertakings are so great and illustrious, the
way cannot but be dangerous, and therefore requires greater courage as well as
policy. The soul (we know) est tota in toto, as the Philosopher says, and so
must the Prince be in every part of his Army, giving life and operation to
every member; so causing the feet to march, the hands to fight, the ears to
hearken, the eyes to watch, and all parts to perform their several duties: have
you not observed with what order and courage my Soldiers have followed me,
when I have marched in the head of my army; specially then, when I lead them
toward the very mouth of danger: And think you that if they lead me and I
followed them, that they would have advanced with equal courage? No, no, I know
that one stroke with my Sword strikes the Enemy as deep as a thousand of
others of lower quality: And What does not shame, example, emulation, hope of
honor, expectation of Reward, and recompense from the hands of a King. What (I
say) does not such means effect and operate? This Intuition and care moves
effectually every particular person in the Army, and causes each one to do his
duty impartially; so that some may rudely interpret that temerity which proves
greatest prudence: but (perhaps) you may tell me; if the Enemy understand that
I am daringly in the head of my Army, they will aim at none so much, as at my
self; and therefore multiply their volleys against me: to that I answer, It is
no small degree of honor to be such an object of terror, and such a noble
mark, which scorneth the enemies forces, though never so numerous. Besides, my
Soldiers who see my valor, cannot but be so ambitious of my preservation, as
to guard me with the wishes of their hearts, as well as defend me with the
stoutness of their hands; and whatever shall succeed, the presence of majesty
cannot but make them fight like Lions, when they see their Prince engaged, and
compassed about with equal danger; as for mine Enemies, such courageous On-sets
would make them faint and fly, or gallantly force their Pikes and Swords to
fall from their hands. Now as my presence will inspire courage into those of my
Army, so it will dispoil and strip the Enemy of that noble quality, and so
force them to submit to our invincible spirit and courage: where, if I should
proceed less generously, I might probably rather give encouragement, then gain
so many conquests of mine Enemy. I know the way to honor is full of
difficulties, but it is true, as rich mines lie deep and dangerous; beautiful
Lyllies grow in the midst of Thorns; so is it with true Renown and Glory. I am
not Ignorant, that death oft-times attends and arests as familiarly the
greatest Generals and Princes, as the meanest Soldiers; but such a death is
most honorable, and the Echo thereof resoundeth to all the Corners of the
Earth. As for mine own resolution and humor, I had rather lose the battle,
where I have the honor to fight my self, then to gain a battle where I have
not fought with mine own hands. Cease then (noble Chancellor) to set any
farther limits, and to confine my courage with any bounds, leave me to the
vigor and activity of this noble virtue, which so much animateth all the
faculties of my soul. Our Troops are feeble, our Enemies strong, our designs
great, the eyes of all the earth observe our Motion, and superintend our
Actions; it becomes not us then, to be slow or short in any part of our duty;
let us fight courageously, let us fall upon our Enemies like a violent Torrent,
with thunder and lightning; and not like a gentle River move slowly and
timerously; our pretentions are not ordinary, therefore our actions must be
generous: Let us march through all Germany, and manifest our courage through
every part of it; and if it shall so arrive, that our valor be recompensed
with a direful sad unfortunate conclusion, we doubt not, but that our death
will be glorious, and our name immortal; and if we do not perfect our
Conquests, the world cannot (in justice) but rank us in the number and order of
the most illustrious Conquerours.

THE CENSVRE.
MUch veneration and honor is due to the memory of this great Prince, he is to
be looked on as a most noble Hero, and invincible Worthy, as the marvel and
wonder of his age: yet it is true, that Sovereign Princes having such eminent
fortunes, and so many great affairs merely attending their persons; it does
most infinitely concern them, for the general good of their subjects and
Soldiers, to be careful and preservative of themselves. That famous, but sad
day, wherein the King was slain, has verified (but too cruelly) this truth,
when this Prince lost his life, by the violence and Ardor of his own opinion;
when his valor marched so forwardly in the Van. Though fortune had oft-times
presented him with successes and victories, yet she is not always constant in
her friendship. It is to be feared he was too much assured of the continuation
of her favors, and it may be he depended too little on prudence, and too much
on the Roman Proverb; which said, that Destiny does all; or on Predestination,
which (as some say) orders and determines both means and ends, which is the
Doctrine of the Calvinists and the Turks. Though it is rather true, that every
one is the Artist of his own fortune. Philosophy tells us as well as Poetry,
that sapiens dominabitur astris; a wise man is able to resist the influence of
the Stars; which though they incline, yet do not force nor constrain the
disposition. This King, though a most illustrious Prince for his valor,
condescended very low, and appeared too excessively courageous in the office of
a common Trooper: the head and the hand have two different functions; fortune
is not always propitious, nor does she make every Conqueror her darling, as
she did Alexander: that which she did for him in the Town of Oxidragues, and on
many re-encounters, are not examples to others to adventure on Alexanders
dangers, or to hope for his successes; for her favors to him may rather be
accounted Prodigies and Wonders, then common degrees of fortunes courtesies.
Homer who was so judicious in his Epithites, and knew how properly to place
them throughout his Illiads, commonly gives that of Sage or Prudent to
Agamemnon; but that of Brave or Valiant to Achilles: to note the difference,
which in the conduct of Armies, ought to be betwixt a royal Prince and a
private person. It is true, that a bed of honor is as glorious and acceptable
to a noble Prince, as a throne of Ivory or Gold, and to dye Tryumphantly and
win the battle, is to live eternally in the memory of men. As for this Prince,
if he did not (before he dyed) confine his valor to greater moderation, it was
rather to be imputed his misfortune, then his error; for having enjoyed so
many glorious fruits of his dangers, his victories and his tryumphs; why might
he not still have presumed on the same success? all the world did favor him
with Apologies; nay, gave him the testimony of honor and commendations, when
he sostoutly assaulted the Isle of Rugen, and at that great attempt gave so
grand a reputation to his Armies, that he seemed to have effected
impossibilities. Now if that course which was so fortunate in so many
re-encounters, was not so successful at the fatal battle of Lutzen: let the
whole Earth confess it was not great Gustavus want of conduct but of fortune:
he had already conquered above Ten Provinces, and subdued Three hundred Towns:
why might not this day have given him leave to survive his Enemies, and to have
enjoyed the Triumphs of his victories? but in some kind it may be said of Wars,
as it is of Plays: Old Gamesters think it not fit to hazard, and adventure all
they have gained at one stake. But seeing things past can not be revoked; let
us not farther trouble this immortal Hero, nor interrupt the repose of his
Glorious Sepulcher. The great worth of this unparalleld Prince is out of the
reach of envy, and (probably) of imitation. His name is too bright and glorious
to be spotted with derogation, and it is fit for none to approach near his Ashes,
but such who bedew their eyes with tears, and force an amazedness on their
souls with sighs, for the loss of so great a Champion: whose Trophies are so
illustrious, and magnificent, that whoever considers his great Achievements,
may not only have an abundance of satisfaction for his curiosity, but be
astonished with admiration.

FINIS.
Tuesday 6. December, 1653. At the Council of State at Whitehal.
ORDERED,
That Mr Thurloe be appointed by the Council, to assign such persons as he
shall think fit, to print the Book, entitled, CURIA POLITIAE; and that no
other Person whatsoever do presume to print the same without leave first had
from Mr. Thurloe, for the doing thereof.

JOHN THVRLOE* Secr'

I Do appoint Humphrey Moseley to print this Book, and that none else do print
the same.

John Thurloe.
13 December. 1653.

