March 30. 1663.

Let this Collection of Letters, and other Discourses, be Printed.

HENRY BENNET.
SCRINIA CECILIANA: MYSTERIES OF State and Government: IN LETTERS Of the late
Famous Lord Burghley, And other Grand Ministers of STATE: In the Reigns of
Queen ELIZABETH, and King JAMES.

Being a further Additional Supplement of the CABALA.

AS ALSO Many Remarkable Passages faithfully Revised, and no where else
Published.

With two exact Tables; The one of the Letters, The other of Things most
Observable.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop,
at the Middle-Temple-gate in Fleetstreet. 1663.

The Stationers To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
ALthough it be a received Position, That Merit is worthier than Fame, yet duly
considered, they ought to be inseparable; the one being the just Guerdon of the
other: Upon that account we have presumed to make Public these ensuing
Memorials, or Letters, being Monuments of some late Eminent Patriots and Hero's
of this Nation, Who whilst they were Actors in such grand Affairs as suited
with their high Service under their Sovereigns, were deservedly Dignified here,
and Renowned abroad. The first of these Worthies being Sir William Cecil, Lord
Burghley, who was an unparalled Minister of State; And (as we conceive) of
the longest continuance that any Prince then, or ever since with such Success
enjoyed, a person always peaceable and moderate, free from Covetousness, or
Ambition, in the course of his Service, rather willing to endure the Burden,
than desiring the fruition of Honor or Profit; profound in Judgment, assisted
with great Experience; and therefore worthily celebrated both here and abroad,
as Pater Patriae, and an indefatigable Votary to the Crown. And for the matters
and designs in the Letters themselves, we shall be silent, hoping the Fame of
the person will be motive sufficient for you to purchase this Jewel. Concerning
the Times, they were wheeled about, with new, and great Revolutions and
Divisions, not only at Home, but also in France, Scotland, the Low Countries,
and generally in most of the other Kingdoms, and States abroad (For As Pugnae,
intus Timores) Conspiracies, Invasions, and Insurrections amongst our selves,
War, Devastations and Massacres amongst our Neighbors, for the most part
shadowed with the Veil of Religion, many Princes of the Blood, and persons of
great Authority being sacrificed on either part; turbulent Times, and of great
mutations, proper to try the Ability and Fidelity of a State Atlas, wherein
with what Wisdom he acquitted himself, is referred to you to determine. The
next is Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, Ambassador in France for Queen Elizabeth, in
the Infancy of her Reign; we have nothing here of his remains, but only his
Letter to Her Majesty, touching a free passage for the Queen of Scots through
England, wherein you will find variety of Politic Reasons pressed on each part
with smart Judgment. In the third place, is Sir Philip Sidney, that choice
Darling of the Muses, whom we suppose you will freely grant to have been Tam
Marti, quam Mercurio, in whom England, Netherland, the Heavens, and the Arts,
the Soldiers, and the World did emulate a share; here we have only a
dissuasive Letter to the Queen, touching Her Marriage with Mounsieur of France,
fortified with many pressing and effectual Reasons against that match; and
penned with a Politic and Ingenuous Style. And in the last place we present
you with some Pieces of the inimitable Viscount St. Alban, some in the Reign of
the late glorious Queen, and others in the Halcyon days of the late King
James, never before (to our best knowledge) made Public; decked with many
grateful Flowers of Philosophy, History, and Policy, the Fall of the Earl of
Somerset, and the immediate Advance of the Duke of Buckingham, with many other
passages of moment (and here you may observe the memorials of other worthy
persons, although the Title point only at Sir William Cecil) for we conceive it
not imaginable, That such experienced, and sure Masters of Knowledge, would
employ their thoughts in any thing slight, or superficial. However we dare not
assume that boldness, as to write Encomiasticks of such great Personages, that
Right (we suppose) is much better performed by more quaint Pens already; Lunae
Radiis non maturescit Botrus: And their Names and Honor still live in fresh
memory. Here you may safely turn Necromancer, and consult with the dead, or
rather with the living, for such Monuments as these survive Marble.

Dignum laud virum
Musa vetat mori.
These are not like Augustus his two infamous Daughters, or his unworthy Nephew
Posthumus Agrippa, Impostumes, (as he termed them) that broke from him; but
pure and legitimate Issue of the nobler part, which is with care exposed to
public View, for the better accommodation of those that have been pleased to
purchase the two former Volumes of the like Nature and Quality.

Temple-gate. June 18. 1663. G. B.
T. C.

A TABLE of the LETTERS, contained in this COLLECTION.
B.
SIR Francis Bacon to the Lord Treasurer Burghley. Page 1. Sir Francis Bacon to
the Lord Treasurer Burghley. p. 2. Sir Francis Bacon in recommendation of his
Service, to the Earl of Northumberland, a few days before Queen Elizabeth's
death. p. 4. Sir Francis Bacon, to Mr. Robert Kempe, upon the death of Queen
Elizabeth. p. 5. Sir Francis Bacon, to Mr. David Fowls in Scotland, upon the
entrance of His Majesty's Reign. ibid. Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, upon
presenting his Discourse, touching the Plantation of Ireland. p. 6. Sir Francis
Bacon, to the Lord Chancellor, touching the History of Britain. p. 7. Sir
Francis Bacon, to the King, upon the sending unto him a beginning of a History
of His Majesty's time. p. 9. Sir Francis Bacon, to the Earl of Salisbury, upon
sending him one of his Books of Advancement of Learning. ibid. Sir Francis
Bacon, to the Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, upon the same occasion, of sending his
Book of Advancement of Learning. p. 10. A Letter of the like Argument, to the
Lord Chancellor. ibid. Sir Francis Bacon, of like Argument, to the Earl of
Northampton, with Request to present the Book to His Majesty. p. 11. Sir
Francis Bacon, his Letter of Request to Dr. Plafer, to Translate the Book of
Advancement of Learning into Latin. ibid. Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir Thomas
Bodley, upon sending him his Book of the Advancement of Learning. p. 13. Sir
Francis Bacon, to the Bishop of Ely, upon sending his Writing entitled,
Cogitata and visa. ibid. Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir Thomas Bodley, after he had
imparted to him a Writing entitled, Cogitata and visa. p. 14. Sir Francis
Bacon, to Mr. Matthew, upon sending him part of Instauratio Magna. p. 15. Sir
Francis Bacon, to Mr. Matthew, touching Instauratio Magna. p. 16. A Letter to
Mr. Matthew, upon sending his Book, De Sapientia Veterum. p. 17. Sir Francis
Bacon, to Mr. Savill. ibid. Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, touching the
Sollicitors place. p. 18. Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, his Suit to succeed
in the Attorneys place. p. 20. Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir George Carry in France,
upon sending him his Writing, In foelicem memoriam Elizabethae. p. 21. A Letter
to Sir George Villiers, touching the difference between the Courts of Chancery,
and Kings Bench. p. 22. Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, concerning the
Praemunire in the Kings Bench against the Chancery. p. 23. A Letter to the
King, touching matter of Revenue and Profit. p. 27. Sir Francis Bacon, the
Kings Attorney, to the King, touching the proceeding with Somerset. p. 28. Sir
Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to Sir George Villiers, concerning the
proceeding with Somerset. p. 30. Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, giving
account of an Examination taken of Somerset at the Tower. p. 32. Sir Francis
Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to Sir George Villiers, touching the proceeding with
Somerset. p. 34. Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to Sir George Villiers,
of Account and Advice to His Majesty, touching Somerset's Arraignment. p. 35.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, and some great Lords Commissioners,
concerning the persuasion used to the Lord of Somerset to a frank Consession.
p. 36. Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, upon some inclination of His Majesty,
signified to him for the Chancellors place. p. 38. Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings
Attorney, returned with Postils of the Kings own Hand. p. 39. The Copy of a
Letter, conceived to be written to the late Duke of Buckingham, when he first
became a Favorite to King James, by Sir Francis Bacon, afterward Lord
Verulam, and Viscount St. Alban: Containing some Advices to the Duke, for his
better direction in that eminent place of the Favorite; Drawn from him at the
entreaty of the Duke himself, by much importunity. p. 43. Sir Francis Bacon, to
Sir George Villiers, of Advice concerning Ireland, from Gorambury to Windsor.
p. 67. Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney General, to the Master of the
Horse, upon the sending of his Bill for Viscount, sc. p. 69. Sir Francis Bacon,
to Sir George Villiers, upon the sending his Pattent for Uiscount Villiers to
be Signed. p. 70. Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, about a Certificate of my
Lord Coke's. p. 72. A Letter to the King, touching the Lord Chancellors place.
ibid. A Letter to the King, of my Lord Chancellors amendment, and the
difference begun between the Chancery and Kings Bench. p. 75. Sir Francis
Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to the King, giving some account touching the
Commendams. p. 76. Sir Francis Bacon his Advertisement, touching an Holy War,
to the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, Lord Bishop of
Winchester, and Councellor of Estate to His Majesty. p. 78. Sir Francis Bacon,
to the King, about the Pardon of the Parliaments Sentence. p. 81. Sir Francis
Bacon, to King James, of a Digest to be made of the Laws of England. p. 82. Sir
Francis Bacon, to the Right Honourabl^ (...) very good Lord, the Earl of
Devonshire, Lord Lieutenant of (...). p. 87. A Discourse touching Helps for the
intellectual Powers, by Sir Francis Bacon. p. [97.] Sir Francis Bacon, to the
King. p. [101.]
C.
Certain Copies of Letters written by Sir William Cecil Knight, Secretary of
Estate to Queen Elizabeth, to Sir Henry Norris Knight, Ambassador for the said
Queen, Resident in France; Beginning the 10th, of February, 1566. and ending
the 26th. of September, 15^0. p. 105. The Lord Coke, to King James, touching
trial of Duels out of England. p. 193.
H.
The History of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth,
Queen Mary, and part of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. p. 194.
I.
A Copy of a Letter from His Majesty, to the Lords, read at Board, Nov. 21.
1617. touching the abatement of His Majesty's Household Charge. p. 198. A Copy
of His Majesty's second Letter. p. 199. A Letter from the King, to his
Lordship, by occasion of a Book; It was the Organon. p. 200. To Our Trusty and
Well-beloved, Thomas Coventry, Our Attorney General. ibid.
S.
A Letter written by Sir Philip Sidney, unto Queen Elizabeth, touching her
Marriage with Mounsieur. p. 201. My Lord Sanquir 's Case. p. 209. My Lady
Shrewsburies Case. p. 212.
T.
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, then Ambassador in France, to Queen Elizabeth,
touching a free Passage for the Queen of Scots, through England into Scotland.
p. 214.
Books Printed for, and sold by, G. Bedell, and T. Collins.
Folio's.
Complete AMBASSADOR, Letters and Negotiations of the Lord Burleigh, and Sir
Francis Walsingham, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Collected by Sir Dudly
Diggs. Bishop Andrews Sermons. Halls Politics. Lord Bacons History of King
Henry 7th. * D'Avila's Civil Wars of France. * Bishop Ushers Annals of the
World. * Titus Livius Roman History in English. * Dr. Hammond on the New
Testament. * -- Paraphrase on the Psalms. * Howes Chronicle of England. * Lord
Hobarts Reports, with a large Table, by Sir H. Finch. * Bulstrodes Reports in
Three Parts. * Crooks Reports in Three Volumes. * Lord Cooks Pleadings in
English. * Wingats Maxims of the Law. * Styles Reports. * Leonards Reports,
Second Part.
Quarto's.
Mountagues Essays. Sennault's Christian Man. Potters Number of the Beast,
666. Grand Seignieurs Seuaglio. Ross against Coparnicus, touching the Earths
motion. French Letters, touching His Majesty's stedfastness in the Protestant
Religion, in French and English. Character of CHARLES II. Articles, or Treaty
of Peace, betwixt France and Spain. Discourse for a King and Parliament. Fumi
Fugium, A Discourse of the Air and Smoke of London, by John Evelin Esquire Lord
Cooks Reading, and Denshalls Reading on the Statute of Fines. The Judges
Arguments on the Liberty of the Subject. Three Readings, on Wills, Jointures,
and forcible Entry. Mr. Durhams Assize Sermon. Dr. Thomas, his Assize Sermon.
Plays.
* D'avenant's Wits. * -- Platonic Lovers. * Faithful Shepherdess, by
Fletcher. Marriage of the Arts, by Barten Hollyday. The Bastard. A Tragedy. The
Martyr. A Tragedy. The Just General. Horratius in English. A Tragedy.
Michaelmas Term. Combat of Love and Friendship.
Octavo's.
Gosses Tragedies. Lucretius in Latin and English. Faushawes La Fida Pastora.
Duke of Rohans Memoires, and Discourses, English. Hyppolito and Isabella. Three
Romances. The Nuptial Lover. Triumphant Lady. Waterhouse his Apology for
Learning. -- Idem, His Divine Tracts. -- Idem, His Discourse of Arms and
Armory. Botelers Sermons, Complete on several Subjects. Instructions for a
Library, by Naudeus, English. Reliquiae Carolinae. Dr. Tailors Offices, or
Liturgy. Sheppard of Courts. -- Of Corporations. Lambords Archeion. White of
the Laws. Parsons Law, the last Edition. Claytons Reports. Fleetwoods Justice.
Stones Reading on the Statute of Bankrupts. Wingats Body of the Law. Noyes
Maxims. D'avenport's Abridgment, of Cook on Littleton. Abridgement of Acts.
Twelves.
Complete Justice. Davis's Abridgement of Cooks Reports. Tylenus Second Part
against Baxter. Jacksons Evangelical Temper. Of Liberty and Servitude. Haywards
Edward 6th. St. Chrysostom of Education. Guuton of External Worship.
Supplementum Lucani, per May. Thuan's Politic Maxims. Mayerns Experiments. Dr.
Stuarts Sermons. Ladies Cabinet. Gees steps, in four and twenties.
SIR FRANCIS BACON'S Letters, etc.
Sir Francis Bacon to the Lord Treasurer Burghley.
My Lord,
WIth as much confidence as mine own honest and faithful devotion unto your
service, and your honorable correspondence unto me and my poor estate, can
breed in a man, do I commend my self unto your Lordship. I wax now somewhat
ancient; one and thirty years is a great deal of sand in the hourglass: My
health, I thank God, I find confirmed, and I do not fear that action shall
impair it, because I account my ordinary course of study and meditation to be
more painful then most parts of action are. I ever bear a mind (in some middle
place, that I could discharge) to serve her Majesty; not as a man born under
Sol, that loves Honor; nor under Jupiter, that loves business (for the
contemplative Planet carries me away wholly;) but as a man born under an
excellent Sovereign, that deserves the dedication of all men's abilities.
Besides, I do not find in my self so much self-love, but that the greater parts
of my thoughts are to deserve well (if I were able) of my friends, and, namely,
of your Lordship, who being the Atlas of this Commonwealth, the Honor of my
House, and the second founder of my poor estate, I am tied by all duties, both
of a good Patriot, and of an unworthy Kinsman, and of an obliged servant, to
employ whatsoever I am, to do you service. Again, the meanness of my estate
does somewhat move me: for, though I cannot accuse my self, that I am either
prodigal, or sloathful, yet my health is not to spend, nor my course to get.
Lastly, I confess, that I have as vast contemplative ends, as I have moderate
civil ends; for I have taken all knowledge to be my providence; and if I could
purge it of two sorts of Rovers, whereof the one with frivolous disputations;
confutations, and verbosities; the other with blind experiments, and auricular
traditions and impostures, has committed so many spoils; I hope I should bring
in industrious Observations, grounded Conclusions, and profitable Inventions
and Discoveries, the best state of that providence. This, whether it be
curiosity, or vainglory, or nature, or (if one take it favorably)
Philanthropia, is so fixed in my mind, as it cannot be removed: And I do easily
see, that place of any reasonable countenance does bring commandment of more
wits then of a man's own, which is the thing I greatly affect; And for your
Lordship, perhaps you shall not find more strength, and less encounter, in any
other. And if your Lordship shall find now, or at any time, that I do seek or
affect any place, whereunto any that is nearer unto your Lordship shall be
concurrent, say then, that I am a most dishonest man. And if your Lordship will
not carry me on, I will not do as Anaxagoras did, who reduced himself, with
contemplation, unto voluntary poverty: But this I will do, I will sell the
inheritance that I have, and purchase some lease of quick revenue, or some
Office of gain that shall be executed by Deputy, and so give over all care of
service, and become some sorry Book-maker, or, a true Pioneer in that Mine of
Truth, which (he said) lay so deep. This which I have writ unto your Lordship,
is rather thoughts then words, being set down without all Art, disguising, or
reservation. Wherein I have done honor, both to your Lordships wisdom, in
judging that that will be best believed of your Lordship, which is truest; and
to your Lordships good nature, in retaining nothing from you. And even so I
wish your Lordship all happiness, and to my self, means and occasion to be
added to my faithful desire to do you service.

From my Lodging at Gray's Inn.
Sir Francis Bacon to the Lord Treasurer Burghley.
My singular good Lord,
YOur Lordships comfortable Relation of her Majesty's gracious opinion and
meaning toward me, though, at that time, your leisure gave me not leave, to
show how I was affected therewith: yet upon every representation thereof, it
enters, and strikes more deeply into me, as both my Nature and Duty presses
me, to return some speech of thankfulness. It must be an exceeding comfort and
encouragement to me, setting forth, and putting my self in way toward her
Majesty's service, to encounter with an example, so private and domestical, of
her Majesty's gracious goodness and benignity, being made good and verified in
my father, so far forth, as it extends to his Posterity.

Accepting them as commended by his service, during the Nonage (as I may term
it) of their own deserts, I, for my part, am very well content, that I take
least part, either of his abilities of Mind, or of his worldly advancement;
both which he held, and received, the one of the gift of God immediately, the
other of her Majesty's Gift: Yet in the loyal and earnest Affection which he
bear to her Majesty's service, I trust, my portion shall not be with the least,
nor in proportion with the youngest Birth. For, methinks, his president should
be a silent charge, upon his blessing, unto us all, in our degrees, to follow
him afar off, and to dedicate unto her Majesty's service, both the use and
spending of our lives. True it is, that I must needs acknowledge my self
prepared and furnished thereunto with nothing but with a multitude of lacks and
imperfections; but calling to mind, how diversely, and in what particular
providence, God has declared himself to tender the state of her Majesty's
Affairs, I conceive and gather hope, that those whom he has, in a manner,
pressed for her Majesty's service, by working and imprinting in them a single and
zealous mind to bestow their duties therein, he will see them accordingly
appointed of sufficiency convenient for the Rank and standing where they shall
be employed; so as under this her Majesty's blessing, I trust, to receive a
larger allowance of Gods Graces. And as I may hope for this, so I can assure
and promise for my Endeavor, that it shall not be in fault; but what diligence
can entitle me unto, that, I doubt not, to recover. And now, seeing it has
pleased her Majesty to take knowledge of this my mind, and to vouchsafe to
appropriate me unto her service, preventing any desert of mine with her
Princely liberality; first, I humbly do beseech your Lordship, to present to
her Majesty my more than humble thanks for the same: And withal, having regard
to mine own unworthiness to receive such favor, and to the small possibility
in me to satisfy and answer what her Majesty conceives; I am moved to become
a most humble suitor to her Majesty, that this benefit also may be affixed unto
the other, which is, That if there appear in me no such towardness of service,
as it may be, her Majesty does benignly value and assess me at, by reason of my
sundry wants, and the disadvantage of my nature, being unapt to lay forth the
simple store of those inferior gifts which God has allotted unto me, most to
view; yet that it would please her Excellent Majesty, not to account my
thankfulness the less, for that my disability is great to show it; but to
sustain me in her Majesty's grecious opinion, whereupon I only rest, and not
upon any expectation of desert, to proceed from my self, toward the
contentment thereof. But if it shall please God to send forth an occasion
whereby my faithful affection may be tried, I trust, it shall save me melibour
for ever making more protestation of it hereafter. In the mean time, howsoever
it be not made known to her Majesty, yet God knows it, through the daily
solicitations wherewith I address my self unto him in unfeigned Prayer for the
multiplying of her Majesty's prosperities: to your Lordship also, whose
recommendation, I know right well, has been material to advance her Majesty's
good opinion of me, I can be but a bounden servant. So much may I safely
promise, and purpose to be, seeing public and private bonds vary not, but that
my service to her Majesty and your Lordship draw in a line; I wish therefore
to, show it with as good proof, as I can say it in good faith, etc.

Your Lordships, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon in recommendation of his service, to the Earl of
Northumberland, a few days before Queen Elizabeth's death.
It may please your good Lordship,
AS the time of sowing of seed is known, but the time of coming up and
disclosing is casual, or according to the season; So I am a witness to my self,
that there has been covered in my mind a long time a seed of affection and
zeal toward your Lordship, sown by the estimation of your virtues, and your
particular honors and favors to my brother deceased, and to my self; which
seed still springing, now bursteth forth into this profession. And to be plain
with your Lordship, it is very true, and no winds or noyses of civil matters
can blow this out of my head or heart, that your great capacity and love
toward studies and contemplations, of an higher and worthier nature then
popular, a Nature rare in the world, and in a person of your Lordships quality
almost singular, is to me a great and chief motive to draw my affection and
admiration toward you: and therefore, good my Lord, if I may be of any use to
your Lordship by my Head, Tongue, Pen, Means, or Friends, I humbly pray you to
hold me your own: and herewithal, not to do so much disadvantage to my good
mind, nor partly, to your own worth, as to conceive, that this commendation of
my humble service proceeds out of any streights of my occasions, but merely
out of an election, and indeed, the fullness of my heart. And so wishing your
Lordship all prosperity, I continue.

Sir Francis Bacon to Mr. Robert Kempe, upon the death of Queen Elizabeth.
Mr. Kempe.
This alteration is so great, as you might justly conceive some coldness of my
affection toward you, if you should hear nothing from me, I living in this
place. It is in vain to tell you, with what a wonderful still and calm this
wheel is turned round, which whether it be a remnant of her felicity that is
gone, or a fruit of his reputation that is coming, I will not determine; for I
cannot but divide my self, between her memory and his name. Yet we account it
but as a fair morn before Sun rising, before his Majesty's presence; though,
for my part, I see not whence any weather should arise. The Papists are
contained with fear enough, and hope too much. The French is thought to turn
his practice upon procuring some disturbance in Scotland, where Crowns may do
wonders. But this day is so welcome to the Nation, and the time so short, as I
do not fear the effect. My Lord of Southampton expects release by the next
dispatch, and is already much visited, and much well wished. There is continual
posting, by men of good quality, toward the King, the rather, I think, because
this Spring time it is but a kind of sport. It is hoped, that as the State
here has performed the part of good Attorneys, to deliver the King quiet
possession of his Kingdom; so the King will re-deliver them quiet possession of
their places, rather filling places void, than removing men placed, So, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon to Mr. David Fowls in Scotland, upon the entrance of His
Majesty's Reign.
SIR,
The occasion awaketh in me the remembrance of the constant and mutual good
offices which passed between my good brother and your self; whereunto, as you
know, I was not altogether a stranger, though the time and design (as between
brethren) made me more reserved. But well do I bear in mind the great opinion
which my brother (whose Judgment I much reverence) would often express to me of
the extraordinary sufficiency, Dexterity and temper, which he had found in you,
in the business and service of the King our Sovereign Lord. This latter bred in
me an election, as the former gave an inducement, for me to address my self to
you, and to make this signification of my desire, toward a mutual
entertainment of good affection, and correspondence between us; hoping that
some good effect may result of it, toward the Kings service; and that, for our
particulars, though occasion give you the precedence, of furthering my being
known by good note unto the King; so no long time will intercede, before I, on
my part, shall have some means given to requite your favors, and to verify
your commendation. And so with my loving commendations (good Mr. Fowls) I
leave you to Gods goodness.

From Graies Inn; this 25th of March.
Sir Francis Bacon to the King, upon presenting his discoursetouching the
Plantation of Ireland.
It may please your excellent Majesty,
I know no better way how to express my good wishes of a New-year to your
Majesty, then by this little book, which in all humbleness I send you. The
style is a style of business, rather then curious or elaborate; And herein I
was encouraged by my experience of your Majesty's former Grace, in accepting of
the like poor field-fruits, touching the Union. And certainly I reckon this
action as a second brother to the Union. For I assure my self, that England,
Scotland and Ireland, well united, is such a Trifoil, as no Prince except your
self (who are the worthiest) wears in his Crown, Si Potentia reducatur in
actum. I know well, that for me to beat my brains about these things, they be
Majora quam pro fortuna, but yet they be Minora quam pro studio and voluntate.
For as I do yet bear an extreme zeal to the memory of my old Mistress Queen
Elizabeth, to whom I was rather bound for her trust, than for her favor; so I
must acknowledge my self more bound to your Majesty, both for trust and favor:
whereof I will never deceive the one, as I can never deserve the other. And so
in all humbleness kissing your Majesty's Sacred hands, I remain;

Sir Francis Bacon, to the Lord Chancellor, touching the History of Britain.
It may please your good Lordship,
SOme late act of his Majesty, referred to some former speech which I have
heard from your Lordship, bred in me a great desire, and by strength of desire
a boldness, to make an humble Proposition to your Lordship, such as, in me, can
be no better than a wish; but if your Lordship should apprehend it, it may take
some good and worthy effect. The Act I speak of, is the order given by his
Majesty for the erection of a Tomb or Monument for our late Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth: wherein I may note much, but this at this time, That as her Majesty
did always right to his Majesty's hopes, so his Highness does, in all things,
right to her memory; a very just and Princely retribution. But from this
occasion, by a very easy ascent, I passed further, being put in mind, by this
representative of her person, of the more true and more perfect representative,
which is, of her Life and Government. For, as Statues and Pictures are dumb
Histories, so Histories are speaking Pictures; wherein (if my affection be not
too great, or my reading too small) I am of this opinion, That if Plutarch were
alive to write Lives by Parallels, it would trouble him, for Virtue and Fortune
both, to find for her a parallel amongst Women. And though she was of the
Passive Sex, yet her Government was so active, as, in my simple opinion, it
made more impression upon the several States of Europe, than it received from
thence. But, I confess unto your Lordship, I could not stay here, but went a
little further into the consideration of the times which have passed since King
Henry the Eighth; wherein I find the strangest variety, that, in so little
number of Successions of any hereditary Monarchy, has ever been known; the
Reign of a Child; the offer of an Usurpation, though it were but as a diary
Ague; the Reign of a Lady married to a Forreigner, and the Reign of a Lady
solitary and unmarried: So that, as it comes to pass, in massive bodies, that
they have certain trepidations and waverings, before they fix and settle; so it
seems, that, by the Providence of God, this Monarchy (before it was to settle
in his Majesty and his Generations, in which I hope it is now established for
ever) has had these preclusive changes in these barren Princes. Neither could
I contain my self here (as it is easier for a man to multiply, than to stay a
wish) but calling to remembrance the unworthiness of the History of England, in
the main continuance thereof, and the partiality and obliquity of that of
Scotland, in the latest and largest Author that I have seen; I conceived, it
would be honor for his Majesty, and a work very memorable, if this Island of
great Britain, as it is now joined in Monarchy for the Ages to come, so it were
joined in History for the times past; and that one just and complete History
were compiled of both Nations. And if any man think, it may refresh the memory
of former discord, he may satisfy himself with the Verse, Olim haec meminisse
juvabit. For, the case being now altered, it is matter of comfort and
gratulation, to remember former troubles. Thus much, if it may please your
Lordship, was in the Optative Mood, and it was time that I should look a little
into the Potential; wherein the hope that I received was grounded upon three
Observations: The first, of these times, which flourish in Learning, both of
Art, and Language; which gives hope, not only that it may be done, but that it
may be well done. Secondly, I do see, that which all the World sees, in his
Majesty, a wonderful Judgment in Learning, and a singular Affection toward
Learning, and Works which are of the mind, and not of the hand. For, there
cannot be the like honor sought in building of Galleries, and planting of Elms
along Highwayes, and the outward ornaments wherein France now is busy (things
rather of Magnificence, than of Magnanimity) as there is in the uniting of
States, pacifying of Controversies, nourishing and augmenting of Learning and
Arts, and the particular action appertaining unto these; of which kind Cicero
judged truly, when he said to Caesar, Quantum operibus tuis detrahet vetustas,
tantum addet laudibus. And lastly, I called to mind, that your Lordship, at
some times, has been pleased to express unto me a great desire, that something
of this matter should be done, answerable, indeed, to your other noble and
worthy courses and actions; joining, and adding unto the great services toward
his Majesty (which have, in small compass of time, been performed by your
Lordship) other great deservings, both of the Church, and Commonwealth, and
particulars: So as the opinion of so great and wise a man does seem to me a
good warrant, both of the possibility, and worth of the matter. But all this
while, I assure my self, I cannot be mistaken by your Lordship, as if I sought
an Office or employment for my self; for no man knows better than your
Lordship, that if there were in me any faculty thereunto, yet neither my course
of life, nor profession would permit it. But because there be so many good
Painters, both for hand and colors, it needs but encouragement and
instructions to give life unto it. So, in all humbleness, I conclude my
presenting unto your Lordship this wish, which if it perish, it is but a loss
of that which is not. And so craving pardon, that I have taken so much time
from your Lordship, I remain, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, upon the sending unto him a beginning of a
History of his Majesty's time.
It may please your Majesty,
HEaring that you are at leisure to peruse story, a desire took me to make an
experiment what I could do in your Majesty's times, which, being but a leaf or
two, I pray your pardon, if I send it for your recreatiou, considering, that
love must creep, where it cannot go. But to this I add these petitions: First,
that if your Majesty do dislike any thing, you would conceive I can amend it
upon your least beck. Next, that if I have not spoken of your Majesty
encomiastically, your Majesty will be pleased only to ascribe it to the Law of
an History, which does not clutter together praises, upon the first mention of
a name, but rather disperseth them, and weaveth them throughout the whole
Narration: And as for the proper place of commemoration (which is in the period
of life) I pray God I may fiever live to write it. Thirdly, that the reason why
I presumed to think of this oblation, was, because whatsoever my disability be,
yet I shall have that advantage which almost no writer of History has had, in
that I shall write the times, not only since I could remember, but since I
could observe. And lastly, that it is only for your Majesty's reading.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the Earl of Salisbury, upon sending him one of his books
of advancement of Learning.
It may please your Good Lordship,
I present your Lordship with a work of my vacant time, which if it had been
more; the work had been better. It appertains to your Lordship (besides my
particular respects) in some propriety, in regard you are a great Governor in a
Province of Learning; and (that which is more) you have added to your place
affection toward Learning, and to your affection judgment, of which, the last
I could be content were (for the time) less, that you might the less
exquisitely censure that which I offer to you. But sure I am, the Argument is
good, if it had lighted upon a good author; but I shall content my self to
awake better spirits; like a bell-ringer which is first up, to call others to
Church. So, with my humble desire of your Lordships good acceptance, I remain,

Sir Francis Bacon, to the Lord Treasurer Buckhurst, upon the same occasion, of
sending his book of Advancement of Learning.
May it please your good Lordship,
I have finished a work touching the advancement or setting forward of
learning, which I have dedicated to his Majesty, the most learned of a
Sovereign, or temporal Prince, that time has known. And upon reason not
unlike, I humbly present one of the books to your Lordship, not only as a
Chancellor of an University, but as one that was excellently bred in all
learning; which I have ever noted to shine in all your speeches and behaviors.
And therefore your Lordship will yield a gracious aspect to your first love,
and take pleasure in the adorning of that wherewith your self are so much
adorned. And so humbly desiring your favorable acceptance thereof, with
signification of my humble duty, I remain,

A Letter of the like Argument, to the Lord Chancellor.
May it please your good Lordship,
I humbly present your Lordship with a work, wherein as you have much
commandment over the Author, so your Lordship has also great interest in the
argument. For to speak without flattery, few have like use of Learning, or like
judgment in learning, as I have observed in your Lordship. And again, your
Lordship has been a great planter of Learning, not only in those places in the
Church which have been in your own gift, but also in your commendatory Vote, no
man has more constantly held, Detur digniori; and therefore both your Lordship
is beholden to Learning, and learning beholden to you. Which makes me presume,
with good assurance, that your Lordship will accept well of these my labors,
the rather because your Lordship in private speech has often begun to me, in
expressing your admiration of his Majesty's Learning, to whom I have dedicated
this work; and whose virtue and perfection in that kind did chiefly move me to
a work of this nature. And so, with signification of my most humble duty and
affection toward your Lordship, I remain, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon, of like argument, to the Earl of Northampton, with request
to present the book to his Majesty.
It may please your good Lordship,
HAving finished a work touching the Advancement of Learning, and dedicated the
same to his sacred Majesty, whom I dare avouch (if the records of time err
not) to be the learned King that has reigned; I was desirous, in a kind of
congruity, to present it by the learned Councellor in this Kingdom, to the
end, that so good an argument, lighting upon so bad an Author, might receive
some reparetion, by the hands into which, and by which, it should be delivered
And therefore I make it my humble suit to your Lordship to present this mean,
but well meant writing to his Majesty, and with it my humble and zealous duty;
and also my like humble request of pardon, if I have too often taken his name
in vain, not only in the dedication, but in the voucher of the authority of
his speeches, and writings. And so I remain, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon, his Letter of request to Doctor Plafer, to translate the
book of Advancement of Learning into Latin.
Mr. Doctor Plafer,
A great desire will take a small occasion to hope, and put in Trial that which
is desired. It pleased you a good while since, to express unto me, the good
liking which you conceive of my book, of the advancement of Learning, and that,
more significantly (as it seemed to me) then out of courtesy, or civil respect.
My self, as I then took contentment in your approbation thereof, so I should
esteem and acknowledge, not only my contentment increased, but my labors
advanced; if I might obtain your help in that nature which I desire. Wherein
before I set down in plain terms my request unto you, I will open my self, what
it was which I chiefly sought, and propounded to myself, in that work, that you
may perceive that which I now desire to be pursuant thereupon. If I do not
err, (for any judgment that a man makes of his own doings had need be spoken
with a Si nunquam fallit Imago,) I have this opinion, that if I had sought my
own commendation, it had been a much fitter course for me, to have done as
Gardners use to do, by taking their Seeds and Slips, and re ring them first
into plants, and so uttering them in pots, when they are in flower, and in
their best state. But for as much as my end was, merit of the state of
Learning, to my power, and not glory; and because, my purpose was rather to
excite other men's wits, then to magnify my own, I was desirous to prevent the
incertainess of my own life and times, by uttering rather seeds then plants;
nay and further, as the Proverb is, by sowing with the Basket, then with the
hand. Wherefore, since I have only taken upon me to ring a Bell; to call other
wits together; (which is the meanest office) it cannot but be consonant to my
desire, to have that Bell heard, as sarre as can be. And since that they are
but sparks, which can work but upon matter prepared; I have the more reason to
wish, that those sparks may fly abroad; that they may the better find, and
light upon those minds, and spirits, which are apt to be kindled. And therefore
the privateness of the language considered, wherein it is written, excluding so
many readers, (as on the other side, the obscurity of the argument, in many
parts of it, excludes many others) I must account it a second birth of that
work, if it might be translated into Latin, without manifest loss of the sense
and matter. For this purpose, I could not represent to my self any man, into
whose hands I do more earnestly desire that work should fall, then your self;
for by that I have heard and read, I know no man a greater Master in commanding
words to serve matter. Nevertheless, I am not ignorant of the worth of your
labors, whether such as your place and profession imposes on you, or such as
your own virtue may, upon your voluntary election, take in hand. But I can lay
before you no other persuasions, then either the work it self may affect you
with, or the honor of his Majesty, to whom it is dedicated, or your particular
inclination to my self; who, as I never took so much comfort in any labors of
my own, so I shall never acknowledge my self more obliged in any thing to the
labor of another, then in that which shall assist this. Which your labor if I
can, by my place, profession, means, friends, travel, word, deed, requite unto
you; I shall esteem my self so straightly bound thereunto, as I shall be ever
most ready, both to take and seek occasions of thankfulness. And so leaving it,
nevertheless, Salva amicitia (as reason is) to your own good liking, I remain,
etc.

Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir Thomas Bodley, upon sending him his Book of the
advancement of Learning.
SIR,
I Think no man may more truly say with the Psalmist, Multum incola fuit anima
mea. For I do confess, since I was of any Understanding, my mind has, in
effect, been absent from that I have done; and in absence, Errors are
committed, which I do willingly acknowledge, and amongst the rest, this great
one that led the rest; that knowing my self by inward Calling to be fitter to
hold a Book, than to play a part, I have led my life in civil Causes; for which
I was not very fit by nature, and more unfit by the pre-occupation of my mind.
Therefore, calling my self home, I have now for a time enjoyed my self; where
likewise I desire to make the World partaker. My labors (if so I may term that
which was the comfort of my other labors) I have dedicated to the King;
desirous, if there be any good in them, it may be as fat of a Sacrifice,
incensed to his Honor; and the second Copy have I sent unto you, not only in
good Affection, but in a kind of Congruity, in regard of your great and rare
desert of Learning: For Books are the Shrines where the Saint is, or is
believed to be. And you having built an Ark, to save Learning from deluge,
deserve, in propriety, any new instrument or engine, whereby Learning should be
improved or advanced. So, etc.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the Bishop of Ely, upon sending his writing entitled,
Cogitata and visa.
My very good Lord,
NOW your Lordship has been so long in the Church and the Palace, disputing
between Kings and Popes, methinks you should take pleasure to look into the
field and refresh your mind with some matter of Philosophy; though that Science
be now, through age, waxed a child again, and left to boys and young men. And
because you are wont to make me believe you took liking to my writings, I send
you some of this Vacation fruits, and thus much more of my mind and purpose. I
hasten not to publish, perishing I would prevent. And I am sorced to respect as
well my times, as the matter; For with me it is thus, and I think with all men,
in my case: If I bind my self to an argument, it loadeth my mind; but if I rid
my mind of the present Cogitation, it is rather a recreation: This has put me
into these Miscellanies, which I purpose to suppress, if God give me leave to
write a just and perfect Volume of Philosophy, which I go on with, though
slowly. I send not your Lordship too much, lest it may glut you. Now, let me
tell you what my desire is, If your Lordship be so good now, as when you were
the good Dean of Westminster, my request to you is, that not by Pricks, but by
Notes, you would mark unto me whatsoever shall seem unto you, either not
current in the style, or harsh to credit and opinion, or inconvenient for the
person of the writer. For no man can be Judge and party; and when our minds
judge by reflection on our selves, they are more subject to error. And though,
for the matter it self, my judgment be in some things fixed, and not accessible
by any man's judgment that goes not my way, yet even in those things the
admonition of a friend may make me express my self diversely. I would have come
to your Lordship, but that I am hastening to my house in the Country. And so I
commend your Lordship to Gods goodness.

Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir. Thomas Bodley, after he had imparted to him a
Writing entitled, Cogitata and visa.
SIR, in respect of my going down to my house, in the Country, I shall have
miss of my Papers, which I pray you therefore return unto me. You are, I bear
you witness, sloathful, and you help me nothing; so as I am half in conceit,
that you affect not the Argument; I or my self, I know well you love and
affect. I can say no more to you, but, Non canimus surdis, respondent omnia
silvae. If you be not of the Lodgings chaulked up (whereof I speak in my
Preface) I am but to pass by your door. But if I had you but a Fortnight at
Gorambury, I would make you tell me another Tale, or else I would add a
Cogitation against Libraries, and be revenged on you that way, I pray you send
me some good news of Sir Thomas Smith, and commend me very kindly to him. So I
rest.

Sir Francis Bacon, to Mr. Matthew, upon sending him part of Instauratio Magna.
Mr. Matthew,
I plainly perceive by your affectionate writing: touching my work, that one
and the same thing affects us both, which is the good end to which it is
dedicated: For as to any ability of mine, it cannot merit that degree of
approbation: For your Caution for Churchmen, and Church Matters, (as for any
impediment it might be to the applause and celebrity of my work) it moves me
not; but as it may hinder the fruit and good which may come of a quiet and
calm passage to the good Port to which it is bound, I hold it a just respect,
so as to fetch a fair wind, I go not too far about: But troth is, I shall have
no occasion to meet them in my way, except it be, as they will needs
confederate themselves with Aristotle; who, you know is intemperately magnified
with the Scholemen, and is also allied (as I take it) to the Jesuits by Faber,
who was a companion of Loyola, and a great Aristotelian. I send you at this
time, the only part which has any harshness, and yet I framed to my self an
opinion, that whosoever allowed well of that Preface, which you so much
commend, will not dislike, or at least ought not dislike, this other speech of
Preparation; For it is written out of the same spirit, and out of the same
necessity. Nay, it does more fully lay open, that the question between me and
the Ancients is not of the virtue of the race, but of the rightness of the way.
And to speak truth, it is to the other but as Palma to Pugnus, part of the same
thing more large. You conceive aright, that in this, and the other, you have
Commission to impart, and communicate them to others, according to your
discretion: other matters I write not of: My self am like the Miller of
Huntington, that was wont to pray for peace amongst the willowes; for while the
winds blew, the wind-mills wrought, and the water-mill was less customed. So I
see that Controversies of Religion much hinder the advancement of Sciences. Let
me conclude with my perpetual wish toward your self, that the approbation of
your self by your own discreet and temperate carriage may restore you to your
Country, and your friends to your society. And so I commend you to Gods
goodness.

Graies Inn, this 10th of October, 1609.
Sir Francis Bacon, to Mr. Matthew, touching Instauratio Magna.
Mr. Matthew,
I heartily thank you for your Letter of the 10th of Feb. and am glad to
receive from you matter both of encouragement and advertisment, touching my
writings. For my part, I do wish that since there is almost no lumen siccum in
the world, but all, Madidum, Maceratum, infused in affections, and bloods, or
humors, that these things of mine had those separations that might make them
more acceptable; so that they claim not so much acquaintance of the present
times, as they be thereby the less like to last. And to show you that I have
some purpose to new mould them, I send you a leaf or two of the Preface,
carrying some figure of the whole work. Wherein I purpose to take that which is
real and effectual of both writings; and chiefly, to add pledge, if not
payment, to my promise. I send you also a Memorial of Queen Elizabeth, to
requite your Elogie of the late D. of Florences felicity. Of this, when you
were here, I showed you some Model, though at that time, me-thought you were as
willing to hear Julius Caesar, as Q. Elizabeth commended. But this which I send
is more full, and has more of the Narrative; and further, has one part that I
think will not be disagreeable, either to you, or that place, being the true
tracts of her proceeding toward the Catholics, which are infinetly mistaken.
And though I do not imagine they will pass allowance there, yet they will gain
upon excuse. I find Mr. Lezure to use you well (I mean his tongue, of you)
which shows you either honest or wise. But this I speak merely; For in good
faith, I conceive hope, that you will so govern your self, as we may take you
as assuredly for a good Subject, and Patriot, as you take your self for a good
Christian; and so we may again enjoy your Company, and you your Conscience, if
it may no otherwise be. For my part, assure your self, (that as we say in the
Law) Mutatis mutandis, my love and good wishes to you are not diminished. And
so I remain.

A Letter to Mr. Matthew, upon sending his Book De Sapientia Veterum.
Mr. Matthew,
I do very heartily thank you for your Letter of the 24th of Aug. from
Salamanca; and in recompense thereof, I send you a little work of mine, that
has begun to pass the world. They tell me my Lattin is turned into Silver, and
become current. Had you been here, you had been my Inquisitor, before it came
forth. But I think the greatest Inquisitor in Spain will allow it. But one
thing you must pardon me, if I make no have to believe, that the world should
be grown to such an ecstasy, as to reject truth in Philosophy, because the
Author dissenteth in Religion; no more then they do by Aristcle, or Averrois.
My great work goes forward, and after my manner, I alter ever when I add. So
that nothing is finished till all be finished. Th s I have written in the midst
of a Term and Parliament, thinking no time so precious, but that I should talk
of these matters with so good and dear a friend. And so, with my wonted wishes,
I leave you to Gods goodness.

From Grayes-Inne, Febr. 17. 1610.
Sir Francis Bacon, to M. Savill.
Mr. Savill,
Coming back from your Invitation at Eaton, where I had refreshed my self with
company which I loved, I sell into a consideration of that part of Policy
whereof Philosophy speaks too much, and Laws too little; And that is, of
education of youth; whereupon fixing my mind a while, I found straitwayes, and
noted, even in the discourses of Philosophers, (which are so large in this
argument,) a strange silence concerning one principal part of that subject. For
as touching the framing and seasoning of youth to moral virtues, tolerance of
labor, continency from pleasures, obedience, honor, and the like, they handle
it: but touching the improvement and helping of the intellectual powers, as of
conceit, memory, and judgment, they say nothing; whether it were that they
thought it to be a matter wherein Nature only prevailed; or that they intended
it, as referred to the several and proper Arts which teach the use of Reason,
and speech. But for the former of these two reasons, howsoever it pleases them
to distinguish of habits, and powers, the experience is manifest enough, that
the motions and faculties of the will and memory may be not only governed and
guided, but also confirmed and enlarged, by custom and exercise duly applied;
as, if a man exercise shooting, he shall not only shoot nearer the mark, but
also draw a stronger bow. And as for the latter, of comprehending these
precepts within the Arts of Logic and Rhetoric, if it be rightly considered,
their office is distinct altogether from this point; for it is no part of the
doctrine of the use, or handling of an instrument, to teach how to whet or
grind the instrument, to give it a sharper edge, or how to quench it, or
otherwise, whereby to give it a stronger temper. Wherefore finding this part of
knowledge not broken, I have but tanquam aliud agens, entered into it, and
salute you with it, dedicating it after the ancient manner; first, as to a dear
friend, and then as to an apt person; forasmuch as you have both place to
practice it, and judgment, and leisure, to look deeper in it, then I have done.
Herein you must call to mind, ^. Though the argument be not of great height and
dignity, nevertheless, it is of great and universal use. And yet I do not see,
why (to consider it rightly) that should not be a learning of height, which
teaches to raise the highest and worthiest part of the mind. But howsoever
that be, if the world take any light and use by this writing, I will, that the
Gratulation be to the good friendship and acquaintance between us two. And so I
commend you to Gods divine protection.

Sir Francis Bacon to the King, touching the Sollicitors place.
HOW honestly ready I have been (most gracious Sovereign) to do Your Majesty
humble Service to the best of my power, and in a manner beyond my power (as I
now stand) I am not so unfortunate, but Your Majesty knows: For both in the
Commission of Union (the labor whereof, for men of my Profession, rested most
upon my hand) and this last Parliament in the Bill of the Subsidy (both body
and preamble) in the Bill of Attainders of Tresham, and the rest; in the matter
of Purveyance in the Ecclesiastical Petitions, in the Grievances, and the like;
as I was ever careful (and not without good success) sometimes to put forward
that which was good, sometimes to keep back that which was not so good; so Your
Majesty was pleased to accept kindly of my Services, and to say to me, such
Conflicts were the wars of Peace, and such Victories, the Victories of peace;
And therefore such servants that obtained them, were by Kings that Reign in
Peace, no less to be esteemed than services of Commanders in the Wars. In all
which, nevertheless, I can challenge to my self no sufficiency, but that I was
diligent and reasonably happy to execute those directions which I received
either immediately from Your Royal Mouth, or from my Lord of Salisbury; At
which time it pleased Your Majesty to promise and assure me, that upon the
remove of the then Attorney, I should not be forgotten, but brought into
ordinary place. And this was, after, confirmed to me by many of my Lords, and
toward the end of the last Term, the manner also in particular was spoken of;
that is, that Mr. Solicitor should be made Your Majesty's Sergeant, and I
Solicitor; for so it was thought best, to sort with both our gifts and
faculties, for the good of your Service. And of this resolution, both Court and
Country took knowledge. Neither was this any invention or project of mine own,
but moved from my Lords; and I think, first, from my Lord Chancellor. Whereupon
resting, Your Majesty well knows, I never opened my mouth for the greater
place, though I am sure I had two Circumstances, that Mr. Attorney that now is,
could not allege. The one, nine years service of the Crown; The other, being
Cousin-German to the Lord of Salisbury, whom Your Majesty esteems and
trusts so much. But for the less place, I conceived it was meant me. But
after that Mr. Attorney Hubbert was placed, I heard no more of my Preferment,
but it seemed to be at a stop, to my great disgrace and discouragement. For
(graciousSovereign) if still when the waters are stirred, another shall be put
before me, Your Majesty had need work a Miracle, or else I shall be still a
lame man to do Your Majesty Service. And therefore my most humble Suit to Your
Majesty, is, That this which seemed to me was intended, may speedily be
performed And I hope my former Service shall be but beginnings to better, when
I am better strengthened: For sure I am, no man's heart is fuller (I say not but
many have greater hearts, but I say, not fuller) of Love and Duty toward Your
Majesty, and Your Children, as, I hope, time will manifest against Envy and
Detraction, if any be. To conclude, I most humbly crave pardon for my boldness,
and rest.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, his suitc to succeed in the Atturneys place.
It may please your Majesty,
YOur great and Princely favors toward me in advancing me to place, and that
which is to me of no less comfort, your Majesty's benign and gracious
acceptance from time to time of my poor services, much above the merit and
value of them, has almost brought me to an opinion, that I may sooner
perchance be wanting to my self in not asking, then find your Majesty's
goodness wanting to me, in any my reasonable and modest desires. And therefore,
perceiving how at this time preferments of Law fly about mine ears, to some
above me, and to some below me, I did conceive your Majesty may think it rather
a kind of dullness, or want of Faith, than Modesty, if I should not come with
my Pitcher to Jacobs well, as others do. Wherein I shall propound to your
Majesty, that which tends not so much to the raising of my Fortune, as to the
settling of my mind, being sometimes assailed with this Cogitation, that by
reason of my slowness to sue and apprehend sudden occasions, keeping on one
plain course of painful service, I may (in fine dierum) be in danger to be
neglected and forgotten. And if that should be, then were it much better for me
now while I stand in your Majesty's good opinion (though unworthy) and have
some reputation in the world, to give over the Course I am in, and to make
Proof to do you some honor by my Pen; either by writing some faithful
Narrative of your happy (though not untraduced) times, or by recompiling your
Laws, which, I perceive, your Majesty labors with, and has in your head,
(as Jupiter had Pallas) or some other the like work (for without some endeavor
to do you honor I would not live) then to spend my wits and time in this
laborious place, wherein now I serve, if it shall be deprived of those outward
ornaments, and inward comforts, which it was wont to have in respect of an
assured succession to some place of more dignity and rest, which seems now
to be a hope altogether casual, if not wholly intercepted. Wherefore (not to
hold your Majesty long) my suit (then the which I think I cannot well go lower)
is, that I may obtain your royal promise to succeed (if I live) into the
Atturneys place, whenever it shall be void, in being but the natural, and
immediate step and rise, which the place I now hold has ever (in sort) made
claim to, and almost never failed of. In this suit I make no friends to your
Majesty, but rely upon no other motive than your Grace, nor any other
assurance but your word, whereof I had good experience when I came to the
Solicitors place, that they were like to the two great Lights, which in their
motions are never Retrograde. So, with my best prayer for your Majesty's
happiness, I rest.

Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir George Carry in France, upon sending him his writing,
In foelicem memoriam Elizabethae.
My very good Lord,
BEing asked the question by this bearer, an old servant of my brother Anthony
Bacon, whether I would command him any service into France, and being at better
leisure then I would, in regard of sickness, I began to remember, that neither
your business nor mine, (though great and continual) can be, upon an exact
account, any just occasion why so much good will as has passed between us,
should be so much discontinued as it has been. And therefore, because one must
begin, I thought to provoke your remembrance of me, by my Letter. And thinking
how to fir it with somewhat besides salutations, it came to my mind, that this
last summer by occasion of a factious Book that endeavored to verify Misera
Foemina (the addition of the Popes Bull) upon Queen Elizabeth; I did write a
few lines in her memorial, which I thought you would be well pleased to read,
both for the argument, and because you were wont to bear affection to my pen.
Verum, ut aliud ex alio, if it came handsomely to pass, I would be glad the
President de Thou (who has written a History, as you know, of that fame and
diligence) saw it; chiefly because I know not, whether it may not serve him for
some use in his Story; wherein I would be glad he did right to the truth, and
to the memory of that Lady, as I perceive by that he has already written, he
is well inclined to do; I would be glad also, it were some occasion (such as
absence may permit) of some acquaintance or mutual notice between us. For
though he has many ways the precedence (chiefly in worth) yet this is common
to us both, that we serve our Sovereigns in places of Law eminent, and not our
selves only, but that our Fathers did so before us; and lastly, that both of us
love Learning, and Liberal Sciences, which was ever a bond of Friendship, in
the greatest distances of places. But of this I make no farther request, then
your own occasions and respects (to me unknown) may further or limit; my
principal purpose being to salute you, and to send you this Token, whereunto I
will add my very kind commendations to my Lady. And so commit you both to Gods
holy protection.

A Letter to Sir Geo. Villiers, touching the difference between the Courts of
Chancery and Kings Bench.
Sir,
I Received this morning from you two Letters by the same bearer, the one
written before the other, both after his Majesty had received my last. In this
difference between the two Courts of Chancery and Kings Bench (for so I had
rather take it at this time, then between the persons of my Lord Chancellor,
and my Lord Chief Justice) I marvel not, if rumor get way of true Relation;
for I know Fame has swift wings, specially that which has black feathers; but
within these two days (for sooner I cannot be ready) I will write to his
Majesty both the Narrative truly, and my opinion sincerely, taking much
comfort, that I serve such a King, as has Gods property, in discerning truly
of men's hearts. I purpose to speak with my Lord Chancellor this day, and so to
exhibit that Cordial of his Majesty's grace, as I hope this other accident will
rather rowse and raise his spirits, then deject him, or incline him to a
relapse; Mean while, I commend the wit of a mean man that said this other day;
Well (says he) next Term you shall have an old man come with a besom of
Wormwood in his hand, that will sweep away all this. For it is my Lord
Chancellor his fashion, especially toward the Summer, to carry a posie of
Wormwood. I writ this Letter in haste, to return the Messenger with it. God
keep you, and long and happily may you serve his Majesty.

Your true and affectionate servant.
Feb. 19. 1615. POSTSCRIPT. Sir, I humbly thank you for your inward Letter: I
have burned it as you commanded, but the flame it has kindled in me will never
be extinguished.



Sir Francis Bacon to the King, concerning the Praemunire in the Kings Bench
against the Chancery.
It may please your most Excellent Majesty,
I Was yesterday in the Afternoon with my Lord Chancellor, according to Your
Commandment, which I received by the Master of the Horse, and find the old man
well comforted, both toward God, and toward the world. And that same middle
comfort, which is a divine and humane proceeding from your Majesty being Gods
Leiutenant on earth, I am persuaded has been a great cause, that such a
sickness has been portable to such an age. I did not fail in my conjecture,
that this business of the Chancery has stirred him. He shows to despise it,
but yet he is full of it, and almost like a young Duelist that finds himself
behind hand.

I will now (as your Majesty requires) give you a true relation of that which
passed; neither will I decline your Royal Commandment, for delivering my
opinion also, though it be a tender subject to write on. But I that account my
being but an accident to my service, will neglect no duty upon self-safety.
First, it is necessary I let your Majesty know the ground of the difference
between the two Courts, that your Majesty may the better understand the
Narrative.

There was a Statute made 27. Ed. 3. Cap. 1. which (no doubt) in 27 E. 3. Cap.
1.
the principal intention thereof, was ordained against those that sued to Rome,
wherein there are words somewhat general, against any that questioneth or
impeacheth any judgment given in the Kings Courts, in any other Courts. Upon
these doubtful words (other Courts) the Controversy grows; For the founder
interpretation takes them to be meant of those Courts which though locally
they were not held at Rome, or where the Popes Chair was, but here within the
Realm, yet in their jurisdiction had their dependency upon the Court of Rome,
as were the Court of the Legate here, and the Courts of the Archbishops and
Bishops, which were then but subordinate judgment seats, to that high Tribunal
of Rome.

And for this Construction the opposition of the words, (if they be well
observed) between the Kings Courts and other Courts, makes very much; For it
imports as if those other Courts were not the Kings Courts. Also the main
scope of the Statute sortifieth the same; and lastly the practice of many ages.
The other interpretation (which cleaves to the letter, expounds the Kings
Courts to be the Courts of Law only, and other Courts to be Courts of Equity,
as the Chancery, Exchequer-Chamber, Duchy, etc. though this also flies indeed
from the letter; for that all these are the Kings Courts.

There is also another Statute which is but a simple Prohibition, and not with
a penalty of Praemunire as the other is, That after judgments 4 H. 4. Cap. 23.
given in the Kings Courts, the parties shall be in Peace, except the judgments
be undone by Error, or Attaint, which is a legal form of reversall. And of
this also, I hold the sounder interpretation to be, to settle possessions
against disturbances; and not to take away remedy in equity, where those
judgments are obtained ex rigore juris, and against good Conscience.

But upon these two Statutes, there has been a late conceit in some, that if
a judgment pass at the Common Law against any, he may not after sue for
relief in Chancery; and if he do, both he and his Council and his Solicitor,
yea and the Judge in Equity, himself, are within the danger of those Statutes.
There your Majesty has the true state of the question, which I was necessarily
to show you first, because your Majesty calls for this relation, not as news,
but as business. Now to the Historical part; It is the Course of the Kings
Bench, that they give in Charge to the Grand Jury offenses of all natures to be
presented within Middlesex where the said Court is; and the manner is to
enumerate them, as it were in Articles. This was done by Justice Crook, the
Wednesday before the Term ended, and that Article, if any man after a judgment
given had drawn the said judgment to a new examination in any other Court, was
by him especially given in Charge, which had not used to be given in Charge
before. It is true, it was not solemnly dwelt upon, but as it were, thrown in
amongst the rest.

The last day of the Term (and that which all men condemn) the supposed last
day of my Lord Chancellors life) there were two Indictments preferred of
Praemunire, for suing in Chancery after judgment at Common Law; The one by
Richard Glanvile, the other by William Allen; the former against Courtney the
party in Chancery; Gibb the Councellor, and Deurst the Clerk. The latter
against Alderman Bowls, and Humphry Smith, parties in Chancery; Sergeant Moor
the Councellor, Elias Wood Solicitor in the Cause, and Sir John Tindall Master
of the Chancery, and an Assessor to my Lord Chancellor. For the Cases
themselves, it were too long to trouble Your Majesty with them; but this I will
say, If they were set on that preferred them, they were the worst Workmen that
ever were that set them on; for there could not have been chosen two such
Causes, to the honor and advantage of the Chancery, for the justness of the
Decrees, and the foulness and scandal both of fact and person, in those that
impeach the Decrees.

The Grand Jury consisting (as it seems) of very substantial and intelligent
persons, would not find the Bills, notwithstanding that they were much
clamoured by the parties, and twice sent back by the Court; and in Conclusion,
resolutely 17 of 19 found an Ignoramus; wherein, for that time, I think
Ignoramus was wiser than those that knew too much.

Your Majesty will pardon me, if I be sparing in delivering to You some other
circumstances of aggravation, and concurrences of some like matters the same
day, as if it had been some fatal constellation. They be not things so
sufficiently tried, as I dare put them into Your ear.

For my opinion, I cannot but begin with this Preface, That I am infinitely
sorry that Your Majesty is thus put to salve and cure, not only accidents of
time, but errors of servants. For I account this a kind of sickness of my Lord
Cooke's, that comes almost, in as ill a time, as the sickness of my Lord
Chancellor. And as I think it was one of the wisest parts that ever he played,
when he went down to Your Majesty to Royston, and desired to have my Lord
Chancellor joined with him: So this was one of the weakest parts that ever he
played, to make all the World perceive that my Lord Chancellor is severed from
him at this time.

But for that which may concern Your Service, which is my end, (leaving other
men to their own ways) First, my opinion is plainly, that my Lord Cook, at
this time, is not to be disgraced, both because he is so well habituate for
that which remains of these capital Causes, and also for that which I find is
in his breast touching Your Finances, and matters of repair of Your Estate. And
(if I might speak it) as I think it were good his hopes were at an end in some
kind, so I could wish they were raised in some other. On the other side, this
great and public Affront, not only to the Reverend and well-deserving person
of Your Chancellor (and at a time when he was thought to lie a dying, which was
barbarous) but to Your High-Court of Chancery (which is the Court of Your
absolute power) may not (in my opinion) pass lightly, nor end only in some
formal atonement; but use is to be made thereof, for the settling of Your
Authority, and strengthening of Your Prerogative, according to the true Rules of
Monarchy. Now to accommodate and reconcile these Advices, which seem almost
opposite.

First, Your Majesty may not see it (though I confess it be suspicious) that my
Lord Cook was any way aforehand privy to that which was done, or that he did
set it, or animate it, but only took the matter as it came before him, and that
his Error was only that at such a time he did not divert it in some good manner.

Secondly, If it be true (as is reported) that any of the puisne Judges did
stir this business, or that they did openly revile and menace the Jury for
doing their Conscience (as they did honestly and truly) I think that Judge is
worthy to lose his place. And to be plain with Your Majesty, I do not think
there is any thing a greater Polycreston, ad multa utile, to Your Affairs, than
upon a just and fit occasion, to make some example against the presumption of a
Judge, in Causes that concern Your Majesty; whereby the whole body of those
Magistrates may be contained in better awe; and, it may be, this will light
upon no unfit subject, of a person that is rude, and that no man cares for.

Thirdly, If there be no one so much in fault (which I cannot yet affirm either
way, and there must be a just ground, God forbid else) yet I should think, that
the very presumption of going so far in so high a Cause, deserves to have that
done, which was done in this very case, upon the Indictment of Sergeant Heal
in Queen Elizabeth's time, that the Judges should answer it upon their knees
before Your Majesty, or Your Council, and receive a sharp admonition; at which
time also, my Lord Wrey being then Chief Justice, slipped the Collar, and was
forborne.

Fourthly, for the persons themselves, Glanvile and Allen, which are base
Fellows, and turbulent, I think there will be discovered and proved against
them (besides the preferring of the Bill) such combination, and contemptuous
speeches and behavior, as there will be good ground to call them, and perhaps
some of their petty Counselors at Law, into the Star Chamber.

In all this which I have said, Your Majesty may be pleased to observe, That I
do not engage you much in the main point of the Jurisdiction, for which I have
a great deal of reason, which I now forbear. But two things I wish to be done;
the one, That Your Majesty take this occasion to redouble unto all Your Judges
Your ancient and true Charge and Rule; That You will endure no innovating in
the point of Jurisdictions; but will have every Court impaled within their own
Presidents, and not assume to themselves new Powers, upon conceits and
inventions of Law: The other, That in these high Causes that touch upon State
and Monarchy, Your Majesty give them strait charge, That upon any occasions
intervenient hereafter, they do not make the vulgar party to their
contestations, by public handling them, before they have consulted with Your
Majesty, to whom the reglement of those things appertains. To conclude, I am
not without hope, That Your Majesty's managing this business, according to Your
great wisdom, unto which I acknowledge my self not worthy to be Card-holder, or
Candle-holder, will make profit of this accident, as a thing of Gods sending.

Lastly, I may not forget to represent to Your Majesty, That there is no
thinking of Arraignments, until these things be somewhat accommodated, and some
outward and superficial Reconciliation, at least, made between my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Chief Justice; for this accident is a Banquet to all
Somersets friends. But this is a thing that falls out naturally of it self,
in respect of the Judges going Circuit, and my Lord Chancellors infirmity, with
hope of recovery. And although this protraction of time may breed some doubt of
mutability, yet I have lately learned out of an excellent Letter of a certain
King, That the Sun shows sometimes watery to our eyes, but when the Cloud is
gone, the Sun is as before. God preserve Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and most bounden Servant.
Febr. 21. 1615. Your Majesty's Commandment speaks for pardon of so long a
Letter; which yet I wish may have a short continuance, and be punished with
fire.



A Letter to the King, touching matter of Revenue and Profit.
It may please your Majesty,
I May remember what Tacitus says, by occasion that Tiberius was often and
long absent from Rome, In Urbe, and parva and magna negotia Imperatorem simul
premunt. But says he, in recessu, dimissis rebus minoris momenti, summae rerum
magnarum magis agitantur. This makes me think, it shall be no incivility to
trouble your Majesty with business, during your abode from London, knowing your
Majesty's Meditations are the principal wheel of your estate, and being
warranted by a former commandment, which I received from you.

I do now only send your Majesty these papers enclosed, because I greatly
desire so far forth to preserve my Credit with you, as thus: That whereas
lately (perhaps out of too much desire which induces too much belief) I was
bold to say, that I thought it as easy for your Majesty to come out of want,
as to go forth of your Gallery, your Majesty would not take me for a dreamer,
or a projector. I send your Majesty therefore some grounds of my hopes. And for
that paper which I have gathered of increasments sperate; I beseech you to give
me leave to think, that if any of the particulars do fail, it will be rather
for want of workmanship in those that shall deal in them, than want of
materials in the things themselves. The other paper has many discarding cards;
and I send it chiefly, that your Majesty may be the less surprised by
projectors, who pretend sometimes great discoveries and inventions, in things
that have been propounded, and perhaps after a better fashion, long since. God
Almighty preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted Servant and Subject.
April 25 1610.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to the King, touching the proceeding
with Somerset.
It may please your most excellent Majesty,
AT my last access to your Majesty, it was sit for me to consider the time, and
your journey; which makes me now trouble your Majesty with a remnant of that I
thought then to have said, besides your old Warrant, and Commission to me, to
advertise your Majesty, when you are aux champs, of any thing that concerned
your service, and my place. I know your Majesty is Nunquam minus solus quam
cum solus; and, I confess, in regard of your great judgment (unto which nothing
ought to be presented, but well weighed) I could almost wish, that the manner
of Tiberius were in use again, of whom Tacitus says, Mos erat quamvis
praesentem scripto adire; much more, in absence.

I said to your Majesty, that which I do now repeat, that the Evidence, upon
which my Lord of Somerset stands indicted, is of a good strong thread,
considering impoysoning is the darkest of offenses; but, that the thread must be
well spun, and woven together. For, your Majesty knows, it is one thing to
deal with a Jury of Middlesex and Londoners, and another to deal with the
Peers, whose objects, perhaps, will not be so much what is before them in the
present Case (which, I think, is as odious to them as to the vulgar) but what
may be hereafter. Besides, there be two disadvantages, we that shallgive in
evidence shall meet with, somewhat considerable: the one, that the same things,
often opened, lose their freshness, except there be an aspersion of somewhat
that is new; the other is, the expectation raised, which makes things seem less
then they are, because they are less then opinion. Therefore I were not your
Attorney, nor my self, if I should not be very careful, that in this last part,
which is the pinnacle of your former Justice, all things may pass sine
offendiculo, sine scrupulo. Hereupon I did move two things, which (having now
more fully explained my self) I do in all humbleness renew. First, That your
Majesty will be careful to choose a Steward of Judgment, that may be able to
moderate the Evidence, and cut off Digressions; for I may interrupt, but I
cannot silence: The other, That there may be special care taken, for the
ordering of the Evidence, not only for the knitting, but for the list, and (to
use your Majesty's own word) the confining of it. This to do, if your Majesty
vouchsafe to direct it your self, that is the best; if not, I humbly pray you,
to require my Lord Chancellor, that he, together with my Lord Chief Justice,
will confer with my self, and my sellows, that shall be used for the
marshalling and bounding of the Evidence; that we may have the help of his
opinion, as well as that of my Lord Chief Justice, whose great travels as I
much commend; yet that same Plerophoria, or over-confidence, does always
subject things to a great deal of chance.

There is another business proper for me to crave of Your Majesty at this time
(as one that have in my eye a great deal of Service to be done) concerning Your
casual Revenue; but considering times and persons, I desire to be strengthened
by some such form of Commandment under Your Royal Hand, as I send You here
enclosed. I most humbly pray Your Majesty, to think that I understand my self
right well in this which I desire, and that it tends greatly to the good of
Your Service. The Warrant I mean not to impart, but upon just occasion. Thus,
thirsty to hear of Your Majesty's good health, I rest.

Jan. 22. 1615.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to Sir George Villiers, concerning the
proceeding with Somerset.
SIR,
I Thought it convenient to give His Majesty an account of that which His
Majesty gave me in charge in general, reserving the particulars for His coming.
And I find it necessary to know His pleasure in some things, ere I could
further proceed.

My Lord Chancellor and my self, spent Thursday and Yesterday, the whole
Forenoons of both days, in the Examination of Sir Robert Cotton, whom we find,
hitherto, but empty, save only in the great point of the Treaty with Spain.

This Examination was taken before His Majesty's Warrant came to Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, for communicating unto us the Secrets of the Pensions; which
Warrant I received Yesterday morning, being Friday, and a meeting was appointed
at my Lord Chancellors, in the Evening, after Council: Upon which Conference,
we find matter of further Examination for Sir Robert Cotton, of some new
Articles, whereupon to examine Somerset, and of entering into Examination of Sir
William Mounson.

Wherefore, first for Somerset, being now ready to proceed to examine him, we
stay only upon the Duke of Lenox, who, it seems, is fallen sick, and keeps
in; without whom, we neither think it warranted by His Majesty's direction, nor
agreeable to His intention, that we should proceed; for that will want, which
should sweeten the Cup of Medicine, he being his Country man and Friend.
Herein then we humbly crave His Majesty's direction with all convenient speed,
whether we shall expect the Dukes recovery, or proceed by our selves; or that
His Majesty will think of some other person (qualified according to His
Majesty's just intention) to be joined with us. I remember we had speech with
His Majesty of my Lord Hay, and J, for my part, can think of no other, except
it should be my Lord Chancellor of Scotland; for my Lord Binning may be thought
too near allied.

I am further to know His Majesty's pleasure concerning the day: For my Lord
Chancellor and J, conceived His Majesty to have designed the Monday and Tuesday
aftet St. Georges Feast; and, nevertheless, we conceived also, That His Majesty
understood, that the Examinations of Somerset about this, and otherwise,
touching the Spanish practices, should first be put to a point; which will not
be possible, as time comes on, by reason of this accident of the Dukes
sickness, and the cause we find of Sir William Mounsons Examination; and that
diverse of the peers are to be sent for from remote places.

It may please His Majesty therefore, to take into consideration, whether the
days may not well be put off till Wednesday and Thursday after the Term, which
ends on the Monday, being the Wednesday and Thursday before Whitsontide; or,
if that please not His Majesty, (in respect it may be His Majesty will be then
in Town, whereas these Arraignments have been still in His Majesty's absence
from Town) then to take Monday and Tuesday after Trinity-Sunday, being the
Monday and Tuesday before Trinity Term.

Now for Sir William Mounson, if it be His Majesty's pleasure that my Lord
Chancellor and I shall proceed to the examination of him (for that of the Duke
of Lenox differs, in that there is not the like cause as in that of Somerset)
then His Majesty may be pleased to direct his Commandment and Warrant to my
Lord Chief Justice, to deliver unto me the examinations he took of Sir William
Mounson, that those, joined to the information which we have received from Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, may be full instructions unto us for his examination.
Further, I pray, let His Majesty know, that on Thursday in the evening my Lord
Chief Justice and my self attended my Lord Chancellor at his house, for the
settling of that scruple which His Majesty most justly conceived in the
Examination of the Lady Somerset; at which time, resting on His Majesty's
opinion, That that Evidence, as it stands now unclear'd, must, Secundum leges
sanae Conscientiae, be laid aside; the question was, Whether we should leave it
out? or try what a Re-examination of my Lady Somerset would produce? Whereupon,
we agreed upon a Re-examination of my Lady Somerset, which my Lord Chief
Justice and I, have appointed for Monday morning. I was bold, at that meeting,
to put my Lord Chief Justice a posing question, which was, Whether that opinion
which his Brethren had given upon the whole Evidence, and he had reported to
His Majesty, viz. (That it was good Evidence, in their opinions, to convince my
Lord of Somerser) was not grounded upon this part of the Evidence now to be
omitted, as well as upon the rest? Who answered confidently, That, no: and they
never saw the exposition of the Letter, but only the Letter.

The same Thursday evening, before we entered into this last matter, and in the
presence of Mr. Secretary Winwood (who left us when we went to the former
business) we had conference concerning the frauds and abusive Grants passed to
the prejudice of His Majesty's State of Revenue; where my Lord Chief Justice
made some relation of his collections which he had made of that kind; of which
I will say only this, that I heard nothing that was new to me, and I found my
Lord Chancellor, in diverse particulars, more ready then I found him. We grew to
a distribution both of times, and of matters: For we agreed what to begin with
presently, and what should follow; and also we had consideration what was to be
helped by Law, what by Equity, and what by Parliament: Wherein, I must confess,
that in the last of these (of which my Lord Chief Justice made most account) I
make most doubt. But the Conclusion was, That upon this entrance, I should
advise and conferr at large with my Lord Chief Justice, and set things on work.
The particulars I referr till His Majesty's coming.

The learned Council have attended me now twice at my Chamber, to confer upon
that which His Majesty gave us in Commandment for our opinions upon the Case
set down by my Lord Chancellor, whether the Statutes extend to it or no.
Wherein, we are more and more edified and confirmed, that they do not, and
shall shortly send our Report to His Majesty.

Sir, I hope you will bear me witness I have not been idle; but all is nothing
to the Duty I owe His Majesty for his singular favors past and present;
supplying all with love and prayers, I rest.

Your true Friend, and devoted Servant.
April 13. 1616.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, giving account of an Examination taken
of Somerset at the Tower.
SIR,
I Received from you a Letter of very brief and clear directions, and I think
it a great blessing of God upon me and my labors, that my directions come by
so clear a Conduit, as they receive no tincture in the passage.

Yesterday, my Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Lenox, and my self, spent the whole
afternoon at the Tower, in the examination of Somerset, upon the Articles sent
from his Majesty, and some other additionals, which were in effect contained in
the former, but extended to more particularity, by occasion of somewhat
discovered by Cottons examination, and Mr. Vice-Chamberlains information.

He is full of protestations, and would fain keep that quarter toward Spain
clear, using but this for Argument; That he had such fortunes from his Majesty,
as he could not think of bettering his conditions from Spain, because (as he
said) he was no military man. He comes nothing so far on (for that which
concerns the Treaty) as Cotton, which does much aggravate suspicion against
him. The further particulars I reserve to his Majesty's coming.

In the end, tanquam obiter, but very effectually, my Lord Chancellor put him
in mind of the state he stood in for the imprisonment; but he was little moved
with it, and pretended carelessness of life, since ignominy had made him unfit
for his Majesty's service. I am of opinion, that the fair usage of him, as it
was fit for the Spanish examinations, and for the questions touching the Papers
and Dispatches, and all that; so it was no good preparative, to make him
descend into himself touching his present danger: and therefore my Lord
Chancellor, and my self, thought not good to insist upon it at this time.

I have received from my Lord Chief Justice the examinations of Sir William
Mounson: with whom we mean to proceed to further examination with all speed.

My Lord Chief Justice is altered touching the re-examination of the Lady, and
desired me that we might stay till he spoke with his Majesty, saying, it could
be no casting back to the business; which I did approve.

My self, with the rest of my fellows, upon due and mature advice, perfected
our Report touching the Chancery; for the receiving whereof, I pray you, put
his Majesty in mind, at his coming, to appoint some time for us to wait upon
him all together, for the delivery in of the same, as we did in our former
Certificate.

For the Revenue matters, I reserve them to his Majesty's coming; and in the
mean time, I doubt not but Master Secretary Winwood will make some kind of
Report thereof to his Majesty.

For the conclusion of your Letter, concerning my own comfort, I can say but
the Psalm of Quid retribuam? God, that gives me favor in his Majesty's eyes,
will strengthen me in his Majesty service. I ever rest,

Your true and devoted Servant.
April 18. 1616. To requite your Postscript of excuse for scribbling, I pray
you excuse that the Paper is not gilt, I writing from Westminster Hall, where
we are not so fine.



Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to Sir George Villiers, touching the
proceeding with Somerset.
SIR,
I Have received my Letter from his Majesty, with his marginal notes, which
shall be my directions, being glad to perceive I understand his Majesty so
well. That little Charm, which may be secretly infused into Somersets ear some
few hours before his Trial, was excellently well thought of by his Majesty, and
I do approve it, both for matter, and time; only, if it seem good to his
Majesty, I would wish it a little enlarged: For, if it be no more but to spare
his blood, he has a kind of proud humor, which may over-work the Medicine.
Therefore I could wish it were made a little stronger, by giving him some hope
that his Majesty will be good to his Lady and child; and that time (when
Justice, and his Majesty's Honor, is once salved and satisfied) may produce
further fruit of his Majesty's compassio; which was to be seen in the example
of Southampton, whom his Majesty, after attainder, restor d; and Cobham and
Gray, to whom his Majesty (notwithstanding they were offenders against his own
person) yet spared their lives; and for Gray, his Majesty gave him back some
part of his estate, and was upon point to deliver him much more; he, having
been so highly in his Majesty's favor, may hope well, if he hurt not himself
by his public misdemeanor.

For the person that should deliver this message, I am not so well seen in the
Religion of his friends, as to be able to make choice of a particular; my Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Knolles, or any of his nearest friends, should not be
trusted with it; for they may go too far, and perhaps, work contrary to His
Majesty's ends. Those which occur to me, are my Lord Hay, my Lord Burghley (of
England, I mean) and Sir Robert Carr.

My Lady of Somerset has been re-examined, and His Majesty is sound, both a
true Prophet, and a most just King, in that scruple he made: For now she
expounds the word He, that should send the Tarts to Helwish's wife, to be of
Overbury, and not of Somerset; But for the person that should bid her, she
says, it was Northampton or Weston, not pitching upon certainty, which gives
some advantage to the evidence.

Yesterday being Wednesday, I spent 4 or 5 hours with the Judges whom His
Majesty designed to take consideration with the four Judges of the Kings Bench,
of the Evidence against Somerset. They all concur in opinion, that the
questioning him, and drawing him on to trial is most honorable and just, and
that the Evidence is fair and good.

His Majesty's Letter to the Judges concerning the Commendams was full of
magnanimity and wisdom. I perceive His Majesty is never less alone, then when
he is alone; for I am sure there was no body by him to inform him, which made
me admire it the more.

The Judges have given day over, till the second Saturday of the next term; so
as that matter may endure further consideration for His Majesty, not only not
to lose ground, but to win ground.

To morrow is appointed for the examination of Somerset, which by some
infirmity of the Duke of Lenox, was put off from this day. When this is done,
I will write more fully, ever resting,

Your true and devoted servant.
May 2. 1616.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to Sir George Villiers, of Account and
Advice to His Majesty, touching Somerset's Arraignment.
SIR,
I Am far enough from opinion, that the Redintegration or Resuscitation of
Somersets fortune can ever stand with his Majesty's honor and safety; and
therein I think I expressed my self fully to his Majesty in one of my former
letters: and I know well any expectation or thought abroad will do much hurt.
But yet the glimmering of that which the King has done to others, by way of
talk to him, cannot hurt, as I conceive; but I would not have that part of the
Message as from the King, but added by the Messenger, as from himself. This I
remit to His Majesty's Princely judgment.

For the person, though he trust the Lieutenant well, yet it must be some new
man; for in these cases, that which is ordinary, works not so great
impressions, as that which is new and extraordinary.

The time I wish to be the Tuesday, being the even of his Ladies Arraignment.
For as His Majesty first conceived, I would not have it stay in his stomach too
long, lest it sour in the digestion; and to be too near the time, may be
thought but to tune him for that day.

I send herewithal the substance of that which I purpose to say nakedly, and
only in that part which is of tenderness; for that I conceive was His Majesty's
meaning.

It will be necessary, because I have distributed parts to the two Sergeants
(as that Paper does express) and they understand nothing of His Majesty's
pleasure, of the manner of carrying the Evidence, more than they may guess by
observation of my Example (which they may ascribe as much to my nature, as to
direction) therefore that His Majesty would be pleased to write some few words
to us all, signed with His own Hand, that the matter it self being Tragical
enough, bitterness and insulting be forborne; and that we remember our part, to
be to make him Delinquent to the Peers, and not odions to the People. That part
of the Evidence of the Ladies Exposition of the Pronoun (He) which was first
caught hold of by me, and after by His Majesty's singular Wisdom and
Conscience, excepted to, and now is by her Re-examination retracted, I have
given order to Sergeant Montague (within whose part it falls) to leave it out
of the Evidence.

I do yet crave pardon, if I do not certify touching the point of Law for
respiting the Judgment, for I have not fully advised with my Lord Chancellor
concerning it; but I will advertise it in time.

I send His Majesty the Lord Stewards Commission in two several instruments;
the one to remain with my Lord Chancellor, which is that which is written in
Secretary hand for his Warrant, and is to pass the Signet; the other, that,
whereunto the great Seal is to be affixed, which is in Chancery hand. His
Majesty is to sign them both, and to transmit the former to the Signet, if the
Secretaries either of them be there; and both of them are to be returned to me
with all speed. I ever rest,

Your true and devoted Servant.
May 5. 1616.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, and some great Lords Commissioners,
concerning the persuasion used to the Lord of Somerset to a frank Confession.
It may please Your Majesty,
WE have done our best endeavors to perform Your Majesty's Commission both in
matter and manner, for the examination of my Lord of Somerset, wherein that
which passed (for the general) was to this effect; That he was to know his own
Case, for that his day of Trial could not be far off; but that this days work
was that which would conduce to Your Majesty's Justice little or nothing, but
to Your Mercy much, if he did lay hold upon it; and therefore might do him
good, but could do him no hurt: For as for Your Justice, there had been taken
great and grave opinion, not only of such Judges as he may think violent, but
of the most saddest and most temperate of the Kingdom, who ought to understand
the state of the proofs, that the Evidence was full to convict him, so as there
needed neither Confession, nor supply of Examination. But for Your Majesty's
Mercy (although he were not to expect we should make any promise) we did assure
him, That Your Majesty was compassionate of him, if he gave you some ground
whereon to work; that as long as he stood upon his Innocence, and Trial, Your
Majesty was tied in Honor to proceed according to Justice, and that he little
understood (being a close Prisoner) how much the expectation of the World,
besides Your love to Justice it self, engaged Your Majesty, whatsoever Your
inclination were; but nevertheless, that a frank and clear Confession might
open the gate of Mercy, and help to satisfy the point of Honor.

That his Lady (as he knew, and that after many Oaths, and Imprecations to the
contrary) had nevertheless in the end, been touched with remorse, confessed,
that she that led him to offend, might lead him likewise to repent of his
offense. That the confession of one of them could not fitly do either of them
much good; but the confession of both of them might work some further effect
toward both. And therefore, in conclusion, we wished him not to shut the gate
of your Majesty's mercy against himself, by being obdurate any longer. This was
the effect of that which was spoken, part by one of us, part by another, as it
fell out: adding further, that he might well discern who spoke in us, in the
course we held; for that Commissioners of Examination might not presume so far
of themselves.

Not to trouble Your Majesty with Circumstances of his Answers, the sequel was
no other, but that we found him still not to come any degree further on to
confess; only his Behavior was very sober and modest, and mild (differing
apparently from other times) but yet, as it seemed, resolved to expect his
Trial.

Then did we proceed to examine him upon diverse Questions touching the
Impoysonment, which indeed were very material, and supplemental to the former
Evidence; wherein either his Affirmatives gave some light, or his Negatives do
greatly falsify him, in that which is apparently proved.

We made this further observation, That when we asked him some Question that
did touch the Prince, or some Foreign practice (which we did very sparingly at
this time) yet he grew a little stirred; but in the Questions of the
Impoysonment, very cold and modest. Thus not thinking it necessary to trouble
Your Majesty with any further particulars, we end with Prayer to God ever to
preserve Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most Loyal, and Faithful Servant, etc.
If it seem good unto Your Majesty, we think it not amiss some Preacher (well
chosen) had access to my Lord of Somerset, for his preparing and comfort,
although it be before his Trial.



Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, upon some inclination of His Majesty,
signified to him for the Chancellors place.
It may please your most Excellent Majesty,
THe last day when it pleased Your Majesty to express your self toward me in
favor, far above that I can deserve, or could expect, I was surprised by the
Princes coming in; I most humbly pray Your Majesty, therefore, to accept these
few lines of acknowledgement.

I never had great thoughts for my self, further then to maintain those great
thoughts which I confess I have for your service. I know what honor is, and I
know what the times are; but I thank God, with me my service is the principal;
and it is far from me, under honorable pretenses, to cover base desires, which
I account them to be, when men refer too much to themselves, especially serving
such a King. I am afraid of nothing, but that the Master of the Horse, your
excellent servant, and my self, shall fall out about this, who shall hold your
Stirrup belt: but were Your Majesty mounted, and seated without difficulties
and distastes in your business, as I desire and hope to see you, I should ex
animo, desire to spend the decline of my years in my studies, wherein also I
should not forget to do him honor, who besides his active and politic
virtues, is the best pen of Kings, and much more the best subject of a pen. God
ever preserve Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and more and more obliged Servant,
April. 1. 1616.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, returned with Postils of the Kings own
Hand.
It may please Your most Excellent Majesty,
YOur Majesty has put upon me a work of providence in this great Cause, which
is to break and distinguish future events into present Cases, and so to present
them to your Royal Judgment, that in this action which has been carried with
so great Prudence, Justice and Clemency, there may be (for that which
remains) as little surprise as is possible, but that things duly foreseen may
have their remedies and directions in readinss; wherein I cannot forget what
the Poet Martial says; O! quantum est subitis casibus ingenium! signifiing,
that accident is many times more subtle then foresight, and overreacheth
expectation; and besides, I know very well the meanness of my own Judgment, in
comprehending or forecasting what may follow.

It was Your Majesty's pleasure, also, that I should couple the suppositions
with my opinion in every of them, which is a harder task; but yet Your
Majesty's commandment requires my obedience, and your trust gives me
assurance.

I will put the case which I wish; That Somerset should make a clear Confession
of his offenses, before he be produced to Trial. In this case, it seems your
Majesty will have a new consult. The points whereof will be, (1) whether your
Majesty will stay the Trial, and so save them both from the Stage, and that
public Ignominy. Or, (2) whether you will (or may sitly by Law) have the
Trial proceed, and stay or reprieve the Judgment; which saves the Lands from
forfeiture, and the blood from corruption. Or, (3) whether you will have both
Trial and Judgment proceed, and save the blood only, not from corrupting, but
from spilling. REX. I say with Apollo, Media tutius itur, if it may stand with
Law; and if it cannot, when I shall hear that he confesses, I am then to make
choice of the first, or the last.

These be the depths of your Majesty's mercy which I may not enter into; but
for honor and reputation, they have these grounds.

That the blood of Overbury is already revenged by diverse Executions. That
Confession and Penitency are the footstools of Mercy, adding this circumstance
likewise, that the former offenders did none of them make a clear confession.
That the great downfall of so great persons carries, in it self, a heavy
punishment, and a kind of civil death, although their lives should not be
taken.

All which may satisfy honor, for sparing their lives.

But if your Majesty's mercy should extend to the first degree, which is the
highest, of sparing the Stage and the Trial; Then three things are to be
considered.

REX. This Article cannot be mended in point thereof. First, that they make
such a submission or deprecation, as they prostrate themselves, and all that
they have, at your Majesty's feet, imploring your mercy. Secondly, that your
Majesty, in your own wisdom, do advise what course you will take, for the utter
extinguishing of all hope of resuscitating of their fortunes and favor;
whereof if there should be the least conceit, it will leave in men a great deal
of envy, and discontent. And lastly, whether your Majesty will not suffer it
to be thought abroad, that there is cause of further examination of Somerset,
concerning matters of Estate, after he shall begin once to be a Confessant, and
so make as well a Politic ground, as a ground of Clemency, for further stay.

And for the second degree of proceeding to Trial, and staying Judgment, I must
better inform my self, by presidents, and advise with my Lord Chancellor.

The second Case is, if that fall out which is likest (as things stand, and
which we expect) which is, that the Lady Confess: and that Somerset himself
plead not guilty, and be found guilty. In this Case, first, I suppose your
Majesty will not think of any stay of judgment, but that the public process
of Justice pass on. REX. If stay of Judgment can stand with the Law, I would
even wish it in this Case; In all the rest this Article cannot be mended.
Secondly, for your Mercy to be extended to both, for pardon of their
execution, I have partly touched, in the considerations applied to the former
Case; whereunto may be added, that as there is ground of mercy for her, upon
her penitency and free Confession, and will be much more upon his finding
guilty, because the malice on his part will be thought the deeper source of the
offense; So there will be ground for Mercy, on his part, upon the nature of
the proof, because it rests chiefly upon Presumptions. For certainly, there may
be an Evidence so balanced, as it may have sufficient matter for the
Conscience of the Peers to convict him, and yet leave sufficient matter in the
Conscience of a King upon the same Evidence, to pardon his life; because the
Peers are astringed by necessity, either to acquit or condemn; but Grace is
free. And for my part, I think the evidence in this present Case will be of
such a nature. Thirdly, It shall be my care so to moderate the manner of
charging him, as it might make him not odious beyond the extent of Mercy. REX.
That danger is well to be foreseen, lest he upon the one part commit
impardonable Errors, and I on the other part seem to punish him in the spirit
of revenge. Lastly, all these points of Mercy and favor are to be understood
with this limitation, if he do not, by his contemptuous and insolent carriage
at the Bar, make himself incapable and unworthy of them. The third Case is, if
he should stand mute, and will not plead, whereof In this case, I should think
fit, that, as in public, both my self, and chiefly my Lord Chancellor
(sitting then as Lord Steward of your Majesty knows there has been some
secret question. England) should dehort and deter him from that desperation; so
nevertheless, that as much should be done for him, as was done for Weston,
which was to adjourn the Court some days, upon a Christian ground, that he may
have time to turn from that mind of destroying himself; during which time your
Majesty's further pleasure may be known. REX. This Article cannot be mended.
The fourth Case is that, which I should be very sorry should happen; but it is
a future contingent, that is, if the Peers should acquit him, and find him not
guilty. In this Case, the Lord Steward must be provided what to do. For as it
has been never seen, (as I conceive it) that there should be any rejecting of
the Verdict, or any respiting of the judgment of the acquittal, so on the other
side, this Case requires, that because there be many high and heinous offenses
(though not Capital) for which he may be questioned in the Star Chamber, or
otherwise, that there be some touch of that in general, at the conclusion, by
my Lord Steward of England. And that therefore: he be remanded to the Tower, as
close Prisoner. REX. This is so also.

For matter of examination, or other proceedings, my Lord Chancellor, with my
advice has set down.

Tomorrow, being Monday, For the Re-examination of the Lady.

Wednesday next, for the meeting of the Judges, concerning the Evidence.

Thursday, for the Examination of Somerset himself, according to Your Majesty's
Instructions.

Which three parts, when they shall be performed, I will give Your Majesty
advertisement with speed, and in the mean time be glad to receive from Your
Majesty (whom it is my part to inform truly) such directions, or significations
of Your pleasure, as this advertisement may induce, and that with speed,
because the time comes on. Well remembering who is the person whom Your Majesty
admitted to this secret; I have sent this Letter open unto him, that he may
take Your Majesty's times to report it, or show it unto You, assuring my self,
that nothing is more firm than his Trust, tied to Your Majesty's Commandments.

Your Majesty's most humble, and most bounden Subject and Servant.
April 28. 1616.
The Copy of a Letter, conceived to be written to the late Duke of Buckingham,
when he first became a Favorite to King James, by Sir Francis Bacon,
afterward Lord Verulam, and Viscount St. Alban: Containing some Advices unto
the Duke, for his better direction in that eminent place of the Favorite;
Drawn from him at the entreaty of the Duke himself, by much importunity.
Noble SIR,
WHAT you requested of me by word, when I last waited on you, you have since
renewed by your Letters. Your requests are commands unto me; and yet the matter
is of that nature, that I find my self very unable to serve you therein, as you
desire. It has pleased the King to cast an extraordinary eye of favor upon
you, and you express your self very desirous to win upon the Judgment of your
Master, and not upon his Affections only. I do very much commend your noble
ambition herein; for, Favor so bottomed, is like to be lasting; whereas, if it
be built upon the sandy foundation of personal respects only, it cannot be
long-lived.

Yet in this you have erred, in applying your self to me, the most unworthy of
your servants, to give assistance upon so weighty a subject.

You know, I am no Courtier, nor versed in State Affairs,; my life, hitherto,
has rather been contemplative, then active; I have rather studied Books, then
Men; I can but guess, at the most, at these things, in which you desire to be
advised: Nevertheless, to show my obedience, though with the hazard of my
discretion, I shall yield unto you.

Sir, In the first place, I shall be bold to put you in mind of the present
condition you are in; you are not only a Courtier, but a Bedchamber man, and
so are in the eye and ear of Your Master; but you are also a favorite; The
Favorite of the time, and so are in his bosom also; The world has so voted
you, and does so esteem of you, (for Kings and great Princes, even the wisest
of them, have had their friends, their Favorites, their Privadoes, in all
ages; for they have their affections, as well as other men) of these they make
several uses: sometimes to communicate and debate their thoughts with them, and
to upon their judgments thereby; sometimes to ease their cares by imparting
them; and sometimes to interpose them, between themselves and the envy or
malice of their people (for Kings cannot err, that must be discharged upon the
shoulders of their Ministers; and they who are nearest unto them must be
content to bear the greatest load;) Truly Sir, I do not believe or suspect that
you are chosen to this eminency, out of the last of these considerations; for
you serve such a Master, who by his Wisdom and Goodness, is as free from the
malice or envy of His Subjects, as, I think I may say truly, ever any King was,
who has sat upon His Throne before him: But I am confident, his Majesty has
cast His eyes upon you, as finding you to be such as you should be, or hoping to
make you to be such as he would have you to be; for this I may say without
flattery, your outside promises as much as can be expected from a Gentleman:
But be it in the one respect, or other, it belongs to you to take care of
your self, and to know well what the name of a Favorite signifies; If you be
chosen upon the former respects, you have reason to take care of your actions,
and deportment, out of your gratitude, for the Kings sake; but if out of the
latter, you ought to take the greater care, for your own sake.

You are as a new-risen star, and the eyes of all men are upon you; let not
your own negligence make you fall like a Meteor.

The contemplation then of your present condition must necessarily prepare you
for action; what time can be well spared from your attendance on Your Master
will be taken up by suitors, whom you cannot avoid, nor decline, without
reproach; for if you do not already, you will soon find the throng of suitors
attend you; for no man, almost, who has to do with the King, will think
himself safe, unless you be his good Angel, and guide him, or, at least, that
you be not a Malus Genius against him; so that, in respect of the King Your
Master, you must be very wary, that you give him true information; and if the
matter concern him in his Government, that you do not flatter him; if you do,
you are as great a Traitor to him, in the Court of Heaven, as he that draws his
sword against him; and in respect of the suitors which shall attend you, there
is nothing will bring you more honor and more ease, then to do them what right
in justice you may, and with as much speed as you may; for believe it, Sir,
next to the obtaining of the suit, a speedy and a gentle denial (when the case
will not bear it) is the most acceptable to suitors; they will gain by their
dispatch; whereas else they shall spend their time and money in attending; and
you will gain in the ease you will find being rid of their importunity. But if
they obtain what they reasonably desired, they will be doubly bound to you for
your favor; Bis dat qui cito dat, it multiplies the courtesy, to do it with
good words, and speedily.

That you may be able to do this with the best advantage, my humble advice is
this; when Suitors come unto you, set apart a certain hour in a day to give
them Audience: If the business be light and easy, it may by word only be
delivered, and in a word be answered; but if it be either of weight, or of
difficulty, direct the Suitor to commit it to writing (if it be not so already)
and then direct him to attend for his Answer at a set-time to be appointed,
which would constantly be observed, unless some matter of great moment do
interrupt it; when you have received the Petitions (and it will please the
Petitioners well, to have access unto you to deliver them into your own hand)
let your Secretary first read them, and draw lines under the material parts
thereof (for the matter, for the most part, lies in a narrow room.) The
Petitions being thus prepared, do you constantly set apart an hour in a day to
peruse those Petitions, and after you have ranked them into several Files,
according to the subject matter, make choice of two or three Friends, whose
judgments and fidelities you believe you may trust in a business of that
nature, and recommend it to one or more of them, to inform you of their
opinions, and of their reasons for or against the granting of it; and if the
matter be of great weight indeed, then it would not be amiss to send several
Copies of the same Petition to several of your Friends, the one not knowing
what the other does, and desire them to return their Answers to you by a
certain time, to be prefixed in writing; so shall you receive an impartial
Answer, and by comparing the one with the other, you shall both discern the
Abilities and Faithfulness of your Friends, and be able to give a judgment
thereupon as an Oracle. But by no means trust not your own judgment alone, for
no man is omniscient; nor trust only to your Servants, who may mislead you, or
misinform you; by which they may perhaps gain a few Crowns, but the Reproach
will lie upon yourself, if it be not rightly carried.

For the facilitating of your dispatches, my Advice is further, that you divide
all the Petitions, and the matters therein contained, under several Heads,
which, I conceive, may be fitly ranked into these eight sorts.

1. Matters that concern Religion, and the Church and Churchmen.

2. Matters concerning Justice, and the Laws, and the Professors thereof.

3. Counselors, and the Councel-table, and the great Offices, and Officers of
the Kingdom.

4. Foreign Negotiations and Embassies.

5. Peace and War, both Foreign and Civil, and in that the Navy and Forts, and
what belongs to them.

6. Trade at home and abroad.

7. Colonies, or Foreign Plantations.

8. The Court, and Curiality.

And whatsoever will not fall naturally under one of these Heads, believe me,
Sir, will not be worthy of your thoughts, in this capacity we now speak of. And
of these sorts, I warrant you, you will find enough to keep you in business.

I begin with the first, which concerns Religion.

1. In the first place, be you your self rightly persuaded and settled in the
true Protestant Religion, professed by the Church of England; which doubtless
is as sound and orthodox in the Doctrine thereof, as any Christian Church in
the World.

2. In this you need not be a Monitor to Your gracious Master the King; the
chiefest of His imperial Titles, is, to be The Defender of the Faith; and His
Learning is eminent, not only above other Princes, but above other men; be but
his Scholar, and you are safe in that.

3. For the Discipline of the Church of England by Bishops, etc. I will not
positively say, as some do, that it is Jure Divino; but this I say, and think,
ex animo, that it is the nearest to Apostolical Truth; and confidently I shall
say, it is fittest for Monarchy, of all others: I will use no other Authority
to you, than that excellent Proclamation set out by the King Himself in the
first Year of His Reign, and annexed before the Book of Common Prayer, which I
desire you to read; and if at any time there shall be the least motion made for
Innovation, to put the King in mind to read it Himself: It is most dangerous in
a State, to give ear to the least alterations in Government.

4. Take heed, I beseech you, that you be not an instrument to countenance the
Romish Catholics; I cannot flatter, the world believes that some near in blood
to you are too much of that persuasion; you must use them with fit respects,
according to the bonds of nature; but you are of kin, and so a Friend to their
Persons, not to their Errors.

5. The Archbishops and Bishops, next under the King, have the Government of
the Church, and Ecclesiastical Affairs; be not you the mean to prefer any to
those places, for any by-respects; but only for their Learning, Gravity and
Worth; their Lives and Doctrine ought to be exemplary.

6. For Deans, and Canons or Prebends of Cathedral Churches: In their first
institution they were of great use in the Church; they were not only to be of
council with the Bishop for his revenue, but chiefly for his Government in
causes Ecclesiastical; use your best means to prefer such to those places who
are fit for that purpose, men eminent for their learning, piety, and
discretion, and put the King often in mind thereof; and let them be reduced
again to their first institution.

7. You will be often solicited, and parhaps importuned to prefer Scholars
to Church-living; you may further your friends in that way, caeteris paribus;
otherwise, remember, I pray, that these are not places merely of favor, the
charge of souls lies upon them; the greatest account whereof will be required
at their own hands; but they will share deeply in their faults, who are the
instruments of their Preferment.

8. Besides the Romish Catholics, there is a generation of Sectaries, the
Anabaptists, Brownists, and others, of their kinds; they have been several
times very busy in this Kingdom, under the color of zeal for reformation of
Religion: The King your Master knows their disposion very well; a small touch
will put him in mind of them; he had experience of them in Scotland, I hope he
will beware of them in England; a little countenance or connivency sets them on
fire.

9. Order and decent ceremonies in the Church, are not only comely, but
commendable; but there must be great care, not to introduce innovations, they
will quickly prove scandalous, men are naturally overprone to suspicion; the
true Protestant Religion is seated in the golden mean; the enemies unto her,
are the extremes on either hand.

10. The persons of Churchmen are to be had in due respect, for their works
sake, and protected from scorn; but if a Clergy man be loose and scandalous,
he must not be patronized nor winck't at, the example of a few such, corrupt
many.

11. Great care must be takan, that the patrimony of the Church be not
sacrilegiously diverted to lay uses: His Majesty in his time has religiously
stopped a leak that did much harm, and would else have done more. Be sure, as
much as in you lies, stop the like upon all occasions.

12. Colleges and Schools of learning are to be cherished, and encouraged,
there to breed up a new stock to furnish the Church and Commonwealth, when the
old store are transplanted. This Kingdom has in latter ages been famous for
good literature; and if preferment shall attend the deservers, there will not
want supplies.

Next to Religion, let your care be to promote Justice. By Justice and mercy is
The Kings throne established.

1. Let the rule of Justice be the Laws of the Land, an impartial arbiter
between the King and his people, and between one Subject and another: I shall
not speak superlatively of them, lest I be suspected of partiality, in regard
of my own profession; but this I may truly say, they are second to none in the
Christian world.

2. And, as far as it may lie in you, let no Arbitrary power be intruded; the
people of this Kingdom love the Laws thereof, and nothing will oblige them
more, then a confidence of the free enjoying of them; What the Nobles, upon an
occasion, once said in Parliament, Nolumus leges Angliae mutari, is imprinted
in the hearts of all the people.

3. But because the life of the Laws lies in the due execution and
administration of them, let your eye be, in the first place, upon the choice of
good Judges; These properties had they need to be furnished with; To be learned
in their profession, patient in hearing, prudent in governing, powerful in
their elocution to persuade and satisfy both the parties and hearers, just in
their judgment: and, to sum up all, they must have these three Attributes;
They must be men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness; An ignorant
man cannot, a Coward dares not be a good Judge.

4. By no means be you persuaded to interpose your self, either by word or
letter, in any cause depending, or like to be depending in any Court of
Justice, nor suffer any other great man to do it where you can hinder it, and
by all means dissuade the King himself from it, upon the importunity of any for
themselves or their friends; If it should prevail, it perverts justice; but if
the Judge be so just, and of such courage (as he ought to be) as not to be
inclined thereby, yet it always leaves a taint of suspicion behind it; Judges
must be as chaste as Caesar's wife, neither to be, nor to be suspected to be,
unjust; and Sir, the honor of the Judges in their judicature, is the Kings
honor, whose person they represent.

5. There is great use of the service of the Judges in their circuits, which
are twice in the year held throughout the Kingdom; the trial of a few causes
between party and party, or delivering of the gaols in the several Counties,
are of great use for the expedition of justice; yet they are of much more use
for the government of the Counties through which they pass, if that were well
thought upon.

6. For if they had instructions to that purpose, they might be the best
intelligencers to the King of the true state of his whole Kingdom of the
disposition of the people, of their inclinations, of their intentions and
motions; which are necessary to be truly understood.

7. To this end, I could wish, that against every Circuit, all the Judges
should, sometimes by the King himself, and sometimes by the Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper, in the Kings Name, receive a charge of those things which the
present times did much require: and at their return, should deliver a faithful
Account thereof, and how they found and left the Counties through which they
passed, and in which they kept their Assizes.

8. And that they might the better perform this work, which might be of great
importance, it will not be amiss that sometimes this Charge be public, as it
uses to be in the Star Chamber at the end of the Terms next before the Circuit
begins, where the Kings care of Justice, and the good of his People, may be
published; and that sometimes also it may be private, to communicate to the
Judges some things not so fit to be publicly delivered.

9. I could wish also that the Judges were directed to make a little longer
stay in a place than usually they do; a day more in a County would be a very
good addition (although their wages for their Circuits were increased in
proportion) it would stand better with the Gravity of their employment; whereas
now they are sometimes enforced to rise over-early, and to sit over-late, for
the dispatch of their business, to the extraordinary trouble of themselves, and
of the people, their times indeed not being horae juridicae; And, which is the
main, they would have the more leisure to inform themselves (quasi aliud
agentes) of the true estate of the Country.

10. The attendance of the Sheriffs of the Counties, accompanied with the
principal Gentlemen, in a comely, not a costly equipage, upon the Judges of
Assize at their coming to the place of their sitting, and at their going out,
is not only a Civility, but of use also: It raises a Reverence to the persons
and places of the Judges, who coming from the King Himself on so great an
Errand, should not be neglected.

11. If any sue to be made a Judge, for my own part, I should suspect him; but
if either directly or indirectly he should bargain for a place of Judicature,
let him be rejected with shame; Uendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.

12. When the place of a chief Judge of a Court becomes vacant, a puisne Judge
of that Court, or of another Court, who has approved himself fit and
deserving, would be sometimes preferred, it would be a good encouragement for
him, and for others, by his example.

13. Next to the Judge, there would be care used in the choice of such as are
called to the degree of Sergeants at Law (for such they must be first, before
they be made Judges) none should be made Sergeants, but such as probably might
be held fit to be Judges afterward, when the experience at the Bar has fitted
them for the Bench: Therefore by all means cry down that unworthy course of
late times used, that they should pay moneys for it: It may satisfy some
Courtiers, but it is no Honor to the person so preferred, nor to the King who
thus prefers them.

14. For the Kings Council at the Law, especially His Attorney and Solicitor
General, I need say nothing; their continual use for the Kings Service, not
only for His Revenue, but for all the parts of His Government, will put the
King, and those who love His Service, in mind to make choice of men every way
fit and able for that Employment; they had need to be learned in their
Profession, and not ignorant in other things; and to be dextrous in those
Affairs whereof the dispatch is committed to them.

15. The Kings Attorney of the Court of Wards is in the true quality of the
Judges; therefore what has been observed already of Judges, which are intended
principally of the three great Courts of Law at Westminster, may be applied to
the choice of the Attorney of this Court.

16. The like for the Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, who partakes of both
qualities, partly of a Judge in that Court, and partly of an Attorney General,
for so much as concerns the proper Revenue of the Duchy.

17. I must not sorget the Judges of the four Circuits in the twelve Shires of
Wales, who, although they are not of the first Magnitude, nor need be of the
degree of the Coyfe (only the Chief Justice of Chester, who is one of their
number, is so) yet are they considerable in the choice of them, by the same
Rules as the other Judges are; and they sometimes are, and fitly may be,
transplanted into the higher Courts.

18. There are many Courts (as you see) some superior, some provincial, and
some of a lower orb: It were to be wished, and is fit to be so ordered, that
every of them keep themselves within their proper spheres. The harmony of
Justice is then the sweetest, when there is no jarring about the Jurisdiction
of the Courts, which methinks wisdom cannot much differ upon, their true bounds
being for the most part so clearly known.

19. Having said thus much of the Judges, somewhat will be fit to put you in
mind concerning the principal Ministers of Justice; and in the first, of the
High-Sheriffs of the Counties, which have been very Ancient in this Kingdom, I
am sure before the Conquest: The choice of them I commend to your care, and
that at fit times you put the King in mind thereof; that as near as may be,
they be such as are fit for those places, for they are of great Trust and
Power; the Pesse Comitatus, the Power of the whole County, being legally
committed unto him.

20. Therefore it is agreeable with the intention of the Law, that the choice
of them should be by the commendation of the great Officers of the Kingdom, and
by the Advice of the Judges, who are presumed to be well read in the condition
of the Gentry of the whole Kingdom: And although the King may do it of himself,
yet the old way is the good way.

21. But I utterly condemn the practice of the latter times, which has lately
crept into the Court (at the Back-stairs) that some who are pricked for
Sheriffs, and were fit, should get out of the Bill, and others who were neither
thought upon, nor worthy to be, should be nominated, and both for money.

22. I must not omit to put you in mind of the Lords Lieutenants, and deputy
Lieutenants, of the Counties: their proper use is for ordering the military
affairs, in order to an invasion from abroad, or a rebellion or sedition at
home; good choice should be made of them, and prudent instructions given to
them, and as little of the Arbitrary power as may be left unto them; and that
the Muster-Masters, and other Officers under them, incroach not upon the
Subject; that will detract much from the Kings service.

23. The Justices of peace are of great use; Anciently there were Conservators
of the peace, these are the same, saving that several Acts of Parliament have
altered their denomination, and enlarged their jurisdiction in many
particulars: The fitter they are for the Peace of the Kingdom, the more heed
ought to be taken in the choice of them.

24. But negatively, this I shall be bold to say, that none should be put into
either of those Commissions with an eye of favor to their persons, to give
them countenance or reputation in the places where they live, but for the Kings
service sake; nor any put out for the dis-favour of any great man: It has been
too often used, and has been no good service to the King.

25. A word more, if you please, to give me leave, for the true rules of the
moderation of Justice on the Kings part. The execution of Justice is committed
to his Judges; which seems tobe the severer part; but the milder part, which
is mercy, is wholly left in the Kings immediate hand: And Justice and Mercy are
the true supporters of his Royal Throne.

26. If the King shall be wholly intent upon Justice, it may appear with an
over-rigid aspect; but if he shall be over remiss and easy, it draws upon
him contempt. Examples of Justice must be made sometimes for terror to some;
Examples of mercy, sometimes, for comfort to others: the one procures fear, and
the other love. A King must be both feared and loved, else he is lost.

27. The ordinary Courts of Justice I have spoken of, and of their Judges and
judicature, I shall put you in mind of some things, touching the High Court of
Parliament in England, which is superlative; and therefore it will behove me to
speak the more warily thereof.

28. For the institution of it, it is very ancient in this Kingdom: It
consists of the two Houses, of Peers and Commons, as the Members, and of the
Kings Majesty, as the head of that great body; By the Kings Authority alone,
and by his Writs, they are Assembled, and by him alone are they Prorogued and
Dissolved; but each House may Adjourn it self.

29. They being thus Assembled, are more properly a Council to the King, the
great Council of the Kingdom, to advise his Majesty in those things of weight
and difficulty, which concern both the King and People, then a Court.

30. No new Laws can be made, nor old Laws abrogated or altered, but by common
Consent in Parliament, where Bills are prepared and presented to the two
Houses, and then delivered, but nothing is concluded but by the Kings Royal
assent; They are but Embryos, it is he gives life unto them.

31. Yet the House of Peers has a power of Judicature in some cases; properly,
to examine, and then to affirm; or if there be cause to reverse the judgments
which have been given in the Court of Kings Bench, (which is the Court of
highest jurisdiction in the Kingdom, for ordinary judicature) but in these
cases it must be done by Writ of Error in Parliamento: And thus the rule of
their proceedings is not absoluta potestas, as in making new Laws (in that
conjuncture as before) but limitata potestas; according to the known Laws of
the Land.

32. But the House of Commons have only power to censure the Members of their
own House, in point of election or misdemeanors, in or toward that House; and
have not, nor ever had power, so much as to administer an oath to prepare a
judgment.

33. The true use of Parliaments in this Kingdom is very excellent; and they
would be often called, as the affairs of the Kingdom shall require; and
continued as long as is necessary, and no longer; for then they be but burdens
to the people, by reason of the privileges justly due to the Members of the
two Houses and their attendants, which their just rights and privileges are
religiously to be observed and maintained; but if they should be unjustly
enlarged beyond their true bounds, they might lessen the just power of the
Crown, it borders so near upon popularity.

34. All this while I have spoken concerning the Common Laws of England,
generally, and properly so called, because it is most general and common to
almost all cases and causes, both civil and criminal: But there is also another
Law, which is called the Civil or Ecclesiastical Law, which is confined to some
few heads; and that is not to be neglected: and although I am a professor of
the Common Law, yet am I so much a lover of truth and of Learning, and of my
native Country, that I do heartily persuade that the professors of that Law,
called Civilians (because the Civil Law is their guide) should not be
discountenanced nor discouraged; else whenever we shall have ought to do with
any foreign King or State, we shall be at a miserable loss, for want of
Learned menin that profession.

III. I come now to the consideration of those things which concern Counselors
of State, The Council Table, and the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom,
which are those who for the most part furnish out the honorable Board.

1. Of Counselors, there are two sorts: The first, Consiliarii nati, (as I may
term them) such are the Prince of Wales, and others of the Kings Sons (when he
has more;) of these I speak not, for they are naturally born to be Counselors
to the King, to learn the Art of Governing betimes.

2. But the ordinary sort of Counselors are such as the King, out of a due
consideration of their worth and abilities, and withal, of their fidelities to
his person and his Crown, calls to be of Council with him, in his ordinary
Government. And the Council Table is so called from the place where they
ordinarily assemble and sit together; and their Oath is the only ceremony used,
to make them such, which is solemnly given unto them, at their first admission:
These honorable persons are from thenceforth of that Board and Body: They
cannot come until they be thus called, and the King at his pleasure may spare
their attendance; and he may dispense with their presence there, which at their
own pleasure they may not do.

3. This being the quality of their service, you will easily judge what care
the King should use, in his choice of them; It behooves that they be persons of
great trust and fidelity, and also of wisdom and judgment, who shall thus
assist in bearing up the Kings Throne; and of known experience in public
affairs.

4. Yet it may not be unfit to call some of young years, to train them up in
that trade, and so fit them for those weighty affairs, against the time of
greater maturity; and some also for the honor of their persons; But these two
sorts not to be tied to so strict attendance, as the others from whom the
present dispatch of business is expected.

5. I could wish that their number might not be so over great, the persons of
the Counselors would be the more venerable. And I know that Queen Elizabeth,
in whose time I had the happiness to be born, and to live many years, was not
so much observed, for having a numerous, as a wise Council.

6. The duty of a Privy Councellor to a King, I conceive, is, not only to
attend the Council Board, at the times appointed, and there to consult of what
shall be propounded; But also to study those things which may advance the Kings
honor and safety, and the good of the Kingdom, and to communicate the same to
the King, or to his fellow Counselors, as there shall be occasion. And this,
sir, will concern you more then others, by how much you have a larger share in
his affections.

7. And one thing I shall be bold to desire you to recommend to His Majesty:
That when any new thing shall be propounded to be taken into consideration,
that no Councellor should suddenly deliver any positive opinion thereof; it is
not so easy with all men to retract their opinions, although there shall be
cause for it: But only to hear it, and at the most but to break it, at first,
that it may be the better understood against the next meeting.

8. When any matter of weight has been debated, and seems to be ready for a
Resolution; I wish it may not be at that sitting concluded (unless the
necessity of the time press it) lest upon second Cogitations there should be
cause to alter, which is not for the Gravity and Honor of that Board.

9. I wish also that the King would be pleased sometimes to be present at that
Board, it adds a Majesty to it: And yet not to be too frequently there, that
would render it less esteemed, when it is become common; Besides, it may
sometimes make the Counselors not to be so free in their Debates in His
Presence, as they would be in His Absence.

10. Besides the giving of Council, the Counselors are bound by their Duties,
Ex vi termini, as well as by their Oaths, to keep Council; therefore are they
called, De Privato Consilio Regis, and a secretioribus Consiliis Regis.

11. One thing I add in the Negative, which is not fit for that Board, the
entertaining of private Causes, of Meum and Tuum, those should be left to the
ordinary course and Courts of Justice.

12. As there is great care to be used for the Counselors themselves to be
chosen, so there is of the Clerks of the Council also, for the secreting of
their Consultations; and methinks it were fit that His Majesty be speedily
moved to give a strict Charge, and to bind it with a solemn Order (if it be not
already so done) that no Copies of the Orders of that Table be delivered out by
the Clerks of the Council, but by the Order of the Board; nor any not being a
Councellor, or a Clerk of the Council, or his Clerk, to have access to the
Councel-Books: And to that purpose, that the Servants attending the Clerks of
the Council, be bound to Secrecy as well as their Masters.

13. For the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom, I shall say little; for
the most of them are such, as cannot well be severed from the Councellorship;
and therefore the same rule is to be observed for both, in the choice of them;
In the general, only, I advise this, let them be set in those places for which
they are probably the most fit.

14. But in the quality of the persons, I conceive it will be most convenient,
to have some of every sort, (as in the time of Queen Elizabeth it was) one
Bishop at the least, in respect of questions touching Religion, or Church
Government; one or more skilled in the Laws; some for Martial affairs; and some
for I orreign affairs: By this mixture, one will help another, in all things
that shall there happen to be moved; But if that should fail, it will be a safe
way, to consult with some other able persons well versed in that point which is
the subject of their Consultation, which yet may be done so warily, as may not
discover them in end therein.

IV. In the next place, I shall put you in mind of Foreign Negotiations and
Embassies, to or with Foreign Princes or States, wherein I shall be little
able to serve you.

1. Only, I will tell you what was the course in the happy days of Queen
Elizabeth, whom it will be no dis-reputation to follow: she did vary, according
to the nature of the employment, the quality of the persons she employed; which
is a good rule to go by.

2. If it were an Embassy of Gratulation or Ceremony (which must not be
neglected) choice was made of some noble person, eminent in place, and able in
purse, and he would take it as a mark of favor, and discharge it without any
great burden to the Queens Coffers, for his own honors sake.

3. But if it were an Embassy of weight, concerning affairs of State, choice
was made of some sad person of known judgment, wisdom and experience, and not
of a young man, nor wayed in State-matters: nor of a mere formal man,
whatsoever his title or outside were.

4. Yet in company of such, some young towardly Noblemen or Gentleman were
usually sent also, as assistance or attendants, according to the quality of the
persons; who might be thereby perpared and sitted for the like employment, by
this means, at another turn.

5. In their company were always sent some garve and sad men, skilful in the
Civil Laws, and some in the Languages, and some who had been formerly
conversant in the Courts of those Princes, and knew their ways; these were
assistance in private, but not trusted to manage the affairs in public; that
would decract from the honor of the Principal Ambassador.

6. If the Negotiation were about Merchants affairs, then were the persons
employed for the most part Doctors of the Civil Law, assisted with some other
discreet men; and in such the charge was ordinarily defrayed, by the Company or
Society of Merchants, whom the Negotiation concerns.

7. If Legier Ambassadors or Agents were sent to remain in or near the Courts
of those Princes or States (as it was ever held fit, to observe the motions,
and to hold correspondency with them, upon all occasions) such were made choice
of, as were presumed to be vigilant, industrious, and discreet men, and had the
Language of the place whither they were sent; and with these were sent such as
were hopeful to be worthy of the like employment at another time.

8. Their care was, to give true and timely Intelligence of all Occurrences,
either to the Queen her self, or the Secretaries of State, unto whom they had
their immediate relation.

9. Their charge was always born by the Queen, duly paid out of the Exchequer,
in such proportion, as, according to their qualities and places, might give
them an honorable subsistence there: But for the reward of their service, they
were to expect it upon their return by some such preferment as might be worthy
of them, and yet be little burden to the Queens Coffers or Revenues.

10. At their going forth, they had their general Instructions in writing,
which might be communicated to the Ministers of that State, whither they were
sent; and they had also private instructions upon particular occasions; and at
their return, they did always render an account of some things to the Queen her
self, of some things to the body of the Council, and of some others to the
Secretaries of State; who made use of them, or communicated them, as there was
cause.

11. In those days there was a constant course held, that by the advice of the
Secretaries, or some principal Counselors, there were always sent forth, into
several parts beyond the Seas, some young men, of whom good hopes were
conceived of their towardliness, to be trained up, and made fit for such
public employment, and to learn the Languages. This was at the charge of the
Queen, which was not much, for they traveled but as private Gentlemen; and as
by their industry their deserts did appear, so were they farther employed or
rewarded. This course I shall recommend unto you, to breed up a nursery of such
public Plants.

V. For peace and war, and those things which appertain to either; I in my own
disposition and profession am wholly for peace, if it please God to bless the
Kingdom therewith, as for many years past he has done: and,

1. I presume I shall not need to persuade you to the advancing of it; nor
shall you need to persuade the King your Master therein, for that he has
hitherto been another Solomon, in this our Israel, and the Motto which he has
chosen (Beati Pacifici) shows his own judgment: But he must use the means to
preserve it; else such a jewel may be lost.

2. God is the God of peace (it is one of his Attributes) therefore by him
alone we must pray, and hope to continue it: there is the foundation.

3. And the King must not neglect the just ways for it. Justice is the best
Protector of it at home, and providence for war is the best prevention of it
from abroad.

4. Wars are either Foreign or Civil; for the Foreign war by the King upon
some Neighbor Nation, I hope we are secure; the King, in his pious and just
disposition, is not inclinable thereunto, his Empire is long enough: bounded
with the Ocean, as if the very Situation thereof had taught the King and
People to setup their rests, and say, Ne plus ultra.

5. And for a war of invasion from abroad; only we must not be over-secure;
that's the way to invite it.

6. But if we be always prepared to receive an enemy, if the ambition or malice
of any should incite him, we may be very confident we shall long live in peace
and quietness, without any attempts upon us.

7. To make the preparations hereunto the more assured: In the first place, I
will recommend unto you the care of our out-work, the Navy Royal and Shipping
of our Kingdom, which are the walls thereof: and every great Ship is an
impregnable fort, and our many safe and commodious Ports and Havens, in every
of these Kingdoms, are as the redoubts to secure them.

8. For the body of the Ships, no Nation of the World does equal England for
the Oaken Timber wherewith to build them; and we need not borrow of any other,
Iron for Spikes, or Nails to fasten them together; but there must be a great
deal of Providence used, that our Ship-Timber be not unnecessarily wasted.

9. But for Tackling, as Sails and Cordage, we are beholden to our Neighbors
for them, and do buy them for our money; that must be foreseen, and laid up in
store against a time of need, and not sought for when we are to use them: But
we are much too blame that we make them not at home, only Pitch and Tar we have
not of our own.

10. For the true Art of building of Ships for Burden and Service both, no
Nation in the World exceeds us: Ship-wrights, and all other Artisans belonging
to that Trade, must be cherished and encouraged.

11. Powder and Ammunition of all sorts we can have at home, and in Exchange
for other Home-Commodities, we may be plentifully supplied from our Neighbors,
which must not be neglected.

12. With Mariners and Seamen this Kingdom is plentifully furnished, the
constant Trade of Merchandising will furnish us at a need; and Navigable Rivers
will repair the store, both to the Navy Royal, and to the Merchants, if they be
set on work, and well paid for their Labor.

13. Sea-Captains, and Commanders, and other Officers, must be encouraged, and
rise by Degrees, as their Fidelity and Industry deserve it.

14. Our strict League of Amity and Alliance with our near Neighbor; the
Hollanders, is a mutual strength to both; the shipping of both in conjuncture,
being so powerful, by Gods blessing, as no Forrainers will venture upon: This
League and Friendship must inviolably be observed.

15. From Scotland we have had in sormer times some Alarms and Inro esinto the
Northern parts of this Kingdom; but that happy Union of both Kingdoms under one
Sovereign, our gracions King, I hope, has taken away all occasions of breach
between the two Nations; let not the cause arise from England, and I hope the
Scots will not adventure it; or if they do, I hope they will find, that
although to our King they were His firstborn Subjects, yet to England belongs
the Birthright: But this should not be any cause to offer any injury to them,
nor to suffer any from them.

16. There remains then no danger, by the blessing of God, but a Civil War,
from which, God of his mercy defend us, as that which is most desperate of all
others. The Kings Wisdom and Justice must prevent it, if it may be; or if it
should happen, quod absit, he must quench that Wildfire with all the diligence
that possibly can be.

17. Competition to the Crown, there is none, nor can be, therefore it must be
a fire within the bowels, or nothing, the cures whereof are these, Remedium
praeveniens, which is the best physic, either to a natural body, or to a
State, by just and equal Government to take away the occasion; and Remedium
puniens, if the other prevail not: The service and vigilance of the Deputy
Lieutenants in every County, and of the High Sheriff, will contribute much
herein to our security.

18. But if that should not prevail, by a wise and timous Inquisition, the
peccant humors and humorists must be discovered, and purged, or cut off; mercy
in such a case, in a King, is true cruelty.

19. Yet if the Heads of the Tribes can be taken off, and the misled multitude
will see their error, and return to their obedience, such an extent of mercy is
both honorable and profitable.

20. A King, against a storm, must foresee, to have a convenient stock of
treasure; and neither be without money, which is the sinews of war, nor to
depend upon the courtesy of others, which may fail at a pinch.

21. He must also have a Magazine of all sorts, which must be had from foreign
parts, or provided at home, and to commit them to several places, under the
custody of trusty and faithful Ministers and Officers, if it be possible.

22. He must make choice of expert and able Commanders to conduct and manage
the War, either against a foreign invasion, or a home rebellion; which must
not be young and giddy, which dare, not only to fight, but to swear, and drink,
and curse; neither fit to govern others, nor able to govern themselves.

23. Let not such be discouraged, if they deserve well, by misinformation, or
for the satisfying the humors or ambition of others, perhaps, out of envy,
perhaps, out of treachery, or other sinister ends: A steady hand, in governing
of Military affairs, is more requisite then in times of peace, because an error
committed in war, may, perhaps, prove irremediable.

24. If God shall bless these endeavors, and the King return to His own House
in Peace, when a Civil war shall be at an end, those who have been found
faithful in the Land must be regarded, yea, and rewarded also; the traitorous,
or treacherous, who have misled others, severely punished, and the neutrals,
and false-hearted friends and followers, who have started aside like a broken
bow, be noted, Carbone nigro; and so I shall leave them, and this part of the
work.

VI. I come to the sixth part, which is Trade; and that is either at home or
abroad. And I begin with that which is at home, which enableth the Subject of
the Kingdom to live, and lays a foundation to a foreign trade by traffic
with others, which enableth them to live plentifully and happily.

1. For the Home-trade, I first commend unto your consideration the
encouragement of Tillage, which will enable the Kingdom for Corn for the
Natives, and to spare for Exportation: And I myself have known, more than once,
when, in times of Dearth in Queen Elizabeth's days, it drained much Coin of the
Kingdom, to furnish us with Corn from Foreign Parts.

2. Good Husbands will find the means, by good Husbandry, to improve their
Lands, by Lime, Chalk, Marl, or Sea-sand, where it can be had: But it will not
be amiss, that they be put in mind thereof, and encouraged in their Industries.

3. Planting of Orchards in a Soil and Air fit for them, is very prositable, as
well as pleasurable: Sider and Perry are notable Beverage in Sea-Voyages.

4. Gardens are also very profitable, if planted with Artichokes, Roots, and
such other things as are fit for food; whence they be called Kitchin-Gardens,
and that very properly.

5. The planting of Hop-yards, sowing of Woad, and Rape-seed, are sound very
profitable, for the Planters, in places apt for them, and consequently
profitable for the Kingdom, which for diverse years was furnished with them from
beyond the Seas.

6. The planting and preserving of Woods, especially of Timber, is not only
profitable, but commendable, therewith to furnish posterity, both for building
and shipping.

7. The Kingdom would be much improved, by draining of drowned lands, and
gaining that in from the overflowing of salt waters and the sea, and from
fresh waters also.

8. And many of those grounds would be exceeding fit for Daries, which, being
well houswived, are exceeding commodious.

9. Much good land might be gained from Forests and Chases, more remote from
the Kings access, and from other commonable places, so as always there be a due
care taken, that the poor Commoners have no injury by such improvement.

10. The making of navigable Rivers should be profitable; they would be as so
many in-draughts of wealth, by conveying the commodities with ease from place
to place.

11. The planting of Hemp and Flax would be an unknown advantage to the
Kingdom, many places therein being as apt for it, as any foreign parts.

12. But add hereunto, that it be converted into Linen Cloth, or Cordage, the
commodity thereof will be multiplied.

13. So it is of the Wools and Leather of the Kingdom, if they be converted
into manufactures.

14. Our English Dames are much given to the wearing of costly Laces; and, if
they be brought from Italy, or France, or Flanders, they are in great esteem:
whereas, if the like Lace were made by the English, so much thread as would make
a yard of Lace being put into that manufacture, would be five times, or
perhaps, ten, or twenty times the value.

15. The breeding of cattle is of much profit, especially the breed of Horses,
in many places, not only for travel, but for the great saddle; the English
horse, for strength, and courage, and swiftness together, not being inferior
to the horses of any other Kingdom.

16. The Minerals of the Kingdom, of Lead, Iron, Copper, and Tynn, especially,
are of great value, and set many able-bodied subjects on work; it were great
pity they should not be industriously followed.

17. But of all Minerals, there is none like to that of Fishing, upon the
coasts of these Kingdoms, and the seas belonging to them: our neighbors,
within half a days sail of us, with a good wind, can show us the use and value
thereof; and, doubtless, there is sea-room enough for both Nations, without
offending one another; and it would exceedingly support the Navy.

18. The Realm is much enriched, of late years, by the trade of Merchandise
which the English drive in Foreign parts; and, if it be wisely managed, it
must of necessity very much increase the wealth thereof, care being taken, that
the exportation exceed in value the importation, for then the balance of trade
must of necessity be returned into Coin, or Bullion.

19. This would easily be effected, if the Merchants were persuaded, or
compelled, to make their returns in solid commodities, and not too much thereof
invanity, tending to excess.

20. But especially care must be taken, that Monopolies, which are the Cankers
of all trading, be not admitted, under specious color of public good.

21. To put all these into a regulation, if a constant Commission, to men of
honesty and understanding, were granted, and well pursued, to give order for
the managing of these things, both at home and abroad to the best advantage;
and that this Commission were subordinate to the Councel-board; it is
conceived, it would produce notable effects.

VII. The next thing is that of Colonies and foreign plantations, which are
very necessary, as out-lets, to a populous Nation, and may be profitable also,
if they be managed in a discreet way.

1. First, in the choice of the place, which requires many circumstances; as,
the situation, near the Sea, for the commodiousness of an intercourse with
England; the temper of the air and climate, as may best agree with the bodies
of the English, rather inclining to cold, then heat; that it be stored with
Woods, Mines, and Fruits; which are naturally in the place; that the soil be
such as will probably be fruitful for Corn, and other conveniences, and for
breeding of Cattle; that it has Rivers, both for passage between place and
place, and for fishing also, if it may be; that the Natives be not so many, but
that there may be elbow-room enough for them, and for the Adventives also: All
which are likely to be found in the West Indies.

2. It would be also such as is not already planted by the Subjects of any
Christian Prince, or State, nor over-neerly neighboring to their Plantation.
And it would be more convenient, to be chosen by some of those Gentlemen or
Merchants which move first in the work, then to be designed unto them from the
King; for it must proceed from the option of the people, else it sounds like an
exile; so the Colonies must be raised by the leave of the King, and not by his
Command.

3. After the place is made choice of, the first step must be, to make choice
of a fit Governor, who, although he have not the name, yet he must have the
power of a Viceroy; and if the person who principally moved in the work, be
not fit for that trust, yet he must not be excluded from command; but then his
defect in the Governing part must be supplied by such Assistants as shall be
joined with him, or as he shall very well approve of.

4. As at their setting out they must have their Commission, or Letters
Pattents from the King, that so they may acknowledge their dependency upon the
Crown of England, and under His Protection; so they must receive some general
Instructions how to dispose of themselves when they come there, which must be
in nature of Laws unto them.

5. But the general Law by which they must be guided and governed, must be the
common Law of England; and to that end it will be fit, that some man,
reasonably studied in the Law, and otherwise qualified for such a purpose, be
persuaded (if not thereunto inclined of himself, which were the best) to go
thither as a Chancellor amongst them at first; and when the Plantations were
more settled, then to have Courts of Justice there, as in England.

6. At the first Planting, or as soon after as they can, they must make
themselves defensible, both against the Natives, and against Strangers; and to
that purpose, they must have the assistance of some able Military man, and
convenient Arms and Ammunition for their defense.

7. For the Discipline of the Church in those parts, it will be necessary, that
it agree with that which is settled in England; else it will make a schism, and
a rent, in Christ's coat, which must be seamless; and, to that purpose, it will
be fit, that by the Kings supreme power in Causes Ecclesiastical, within all
his Dominions, they be subordinate under some Bishop and Bishopric of this
Realm.

8. For the better defense against a common Enemy, I think it would be best,
that foreign Plantations should be placed in one Continent, and near together;
whereas, if they be too remote the one from the other, they will be dis-united,
and so the weaker.

9. They must provide themselves of houses, such as, for the present, they can,
and, at more leisure, such as may be better; and they first must plant for corn
and cattle, etc. for food and necessary sustenance; and after, they may enlarge
themselves for those things which may be for profit and pleasure, and to
traffic withal also.

10. Woods for shipping, in the first place, may doubtless be there had, and
minerals there found, perhaps of the richest; howsoever, the mines out of the
fruits of the earth, and seas, and waters adjoining, may be found in abundance.

11. In a short time they may build Vessels and Ships also, for traffic with
the parts near adjoining, and with England also, from whence they may be
furnished with such things as they may want, and in exchange or barter, send
from thence other things, with which quickly, either by Nature, or Art, they
may abound.

12. But these things would, by all means, be prevented; That no known
Bankrupt, for shelter; nor known murderer, or other wicked person, to avoid the
Law; nor known Heretic, or Schismatic, be suffered to go into those
Countries; or, if they do creep in there, not to be harbored, or continued:
else, the place would receive them naught, and return them into England, upon
all occasions, worse.

13. That no Merchant, under color of driving a trade thither, or from thence,
be suffered to work upon their necessiries.

14. And that to regulate all these inconveniences, which will insensibly grow
upon them, that the King be pleased to erect a subordinate Council in England,
whose care and charge shall be, to advise, and put in execution all things
which shall be found fit for the good of those new Plantations; who, upon all
occasions shall give an account of their proceedings to the King, or to the
Council Board, and from them receive such directions as may best agree with the
Government of that place.

15. That the Kings reasonable profit be not neglected, partly, upon
reservation of moderate rents and services; and partly, upon Customs, and,
partly upon importation and exportation of Merchandise: which, for a convenient
time after the Plantation begin, would be very easy, to encourage the work;
but, after it is well settled, may be raised to a considerable proportion worthy
the acceptance.

VIII. I come to the last of those things which I propounded, which is, the
Court, and Curiality.

The other did properly concern the King, in his Royal capacity, as Pater
patriae; this more properly, as Pater familias: And herein,

1. I shall, in a word, and but in a word only, put you in mind, That the King
in his own person, both in respect of his Household, or Court, and in respect of
his whole Kingdom, (for a little Kingdom is but as a great Household; and a
great Household, as a little Kingdom) must be exemplary, Regis ad exemplum, etc.
But for this, God be praised, our charge is easy; for your gracious Master,
for his Learning and Piety, Justice and Bounty, may be, and is, not only a
president to his own subjects, but to foreign Princes also; yet he is still
but a man, and seasonable Memento's may be useful; and, being discreetly used,
cannot but take well with him.

2. But your greatest care must be, that the great men of his Court (for you
must give me leave to be plain with you, for so is your injunction laid upon
me) your self in the first place, who is first in the eye of all men, give no
just cause of scandal, either by light, or vain, or by oppressive carriage.

3. The great Officers of the Kings Household had need be both discreet and
provident persons, both for his Honor, and for his Thrift; they must look both
ways, else they are but half-sighted: Yet in the choice of them, there is more
latitude left to affection, then in the choice of Counselors, and of the great
Officers of State, before touched, which must always be made choice of merely
out of judgment, for in them the public has a great interest.

4. For the other ministerial Officers in Court (as, for distinction sake, they
may be termed) there must be also an eye unto them, and upon them; they have
usually risen in the Household by degrees, and it is a noble way, to encourage
faithful service: But the King must not bind himself to a necessity herein, for
then it will be held ex debito; neither must he alter it, without an apparent
^^^use for it: but to displace any who are in, upon displeasure, which for the
most part happens upon information of some great man, is, by all means, to be
avoided, unless there be a manifest cause for it.

5. In these things you may sometimes interpose, to do just and good offices;
but for the general, I should rather advise, meddle little, but leave the
ordering of those Household affairs to the white-staffs which are those
honorable Persons, to whom it properly belongs, to be answerable to the King
for it, and to those other Officers of the Green-cloth, who are subordinate to
them, as a kind of Council, and a Court of Justice also.

6. Yet for the Green-cloth Law, (take it in the largest sense) I have no
opinion of it, further then it is regulated by the just Rules of the
Common-Laws of England.

7. Toward the support of His Majesty's own Table, and of the Princes, and of
his necessary Officers, His Majesty has a good help by purveyance, which
justly is due unto him; and, if justly used, is no great burden to the
subject; but by the Purveyors, and other Underofficers, is many times abused.
In many parts of the Kingdom, I think, it is already reduced to a certainty in
money; and if it be indifferently and discreetly managed, it would be no hard
matter to settle it so throughout the whole Kingdom; yet to be renewed from
time to time; for that will be the best, and safest, both for the King, and
People.

8. The King must be put in mind, to preserve the Revenues of his Crown, both
certain, and casual, without diminution, and to lay up treasure in store
against a time of extremity; empty coffers give an ill sound, and make the
people many times forget their Duty, thinking that the King must be beholden to
them for his supplies.

9. I shall by no means think it fit, that he reward any of his servants with
the benefit of forfeitures, either by Fines in the Court of Star Chamber, or
High Commission Court, or other Courts of Justice, or that they should be
farmed out, or bestowed upon any, so much as by promise, before Judgment given;
it would neither be profitable, nor honorable.

10. Besides matters of serious consideration, in the Court of Princes, there
must be times for pastimes and disports: When there is a Queen, and Ladies of
Honor attending her, there must sometimes be Masks, and Revels, and
Enterludes; and when there is no Queen, or Princess, as now, yet at Festivals,
and for entertainment of Strangers, or upon such occasions, they may be fit
also. Yet care would be taken, that, in such cases, they be set off more with
wit and activity, then with costly and wasteful expenses.

11. But for the King and Prince, and the Lords and Chivalry of the Court, I
rather commend, in their turns and seasons, the riding of the great Horse, the
Tilts, the Barriers, Tennis, and Hunting, which are more for the health and
strength of those who exercise them, then in an effeminate way to please
themselves and others.

And now the Prince grows up fast to be a man, and is of a sweet and
excellent disposition; it would be an irreparable stain and dishonor upon you,
having that access unto him, if you should mislead him, or suffer him to be
misled by any loose or flattering Parasites: The whole Kingdom has a deep
interest in his virtuous education; and if you, keeping that distance which is
fit, do humbly interpose your self, in such a case, he will one day give you
thanks for it.

12. Yet Dice and Cards may sometimes be used for recreation, when field-sports
cannot be had; but not to use it as a mean to spend the time, much less to
mispend the thrift of the Gamesters.

SIR, I shall trouble you no longer; I have run over these things as I first
propounded them; please you to make use of them, or any of them, as you shall
see occasion; or to lay them by, as you think best, and to add to them, as you
daily may, out of your experience.

I must be bold, again, to put you in mind of your present condition; you are
in the quality of a Sentinal; if you sleep, or neglect your charge, you are an
undone man, and you may fall much faster then you have risen.

I have but one thing more to mind you of, which nearly concerns your self; you
serve a great and gracious Master, and there is a most hopeful young Prince,
whom you must not desert; it behooves you to carry your self wisely and evenly
between them both: adore not so the rising Son, that you forget the Father, who
raised you to this height; nor be you so obsequious to the Father, that you
give just cause to the Son, to suspect that you neglect him: But carry your
self with that judgment, as, if it be possible, may please and content them
both, which, truly, I believe, will be no hard matter for you to do; so may you
live long beloved of both, which is the hearty prayer of,

Your most obliged, and devoted Servant.

Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir George Villiers, of Advice concerning Ireland, from
Gorambury to Windsor.
SIR,
BEcause I am uncertain whether His Majesty will put to a point some
Resolutions touching Ireland, now at Windsor; I thought it my Duty to attend
His Majesty by my Letter, and thereby to supply my Absence, for the renewing of
some former Commissions for Ireland, and the framing of a new Commission for
the Wards, and the Alienations, which appertain properly to me, as His
Majesty's Attorney, and have been accordingly referred by the Lords. I will
undertake that they are prepared with a greater care, and better application to
His Majesty's Service in that Kingdom, than heretofore they have been, and
therefore of that I say no more. And for the Instructions of the new Deputy,
they have been set down by the two Secretaries, and read to the Board, and
being things of an ordinary nature, I do not see but they may pass. But there
have been three Propositions and Councels, which have been stirred, which seem
to me of very great importance, wherein I think my self bound to deliver to His
Majesty my Advice and Opinion, if they should now come in question. The first
is, touching the Recusant Magistrates of the Towns of Ireland, and the
Commonalties themselves, and their Electors, what shall be done; which
Consultation arises from the late Advertisements from the two Lord Justices,
upon the instance of the two Towns Limrick and Kilkenny; in which
Advertisements, they represent the Danger only, without giving any light for
the Remedy; rather warily for themselves, than agreeable to their duties and
places. In this point, I humbly pray His Majesty to remember, that the refusal
is not of the Oath of Allegiance (which is not enacted in Ireland) but of the
Oath of Supremacy, which cutteth deeper into matter of Conscience.

Also that His Majesty, will out of the depth of His Excellent Wisdom and
providence, think, and as it were calculate with himself, whether time will
make more for the Cause of Religion in Ireland, and be still more and more
propitious; or whether differing remedies will not make the Case more
difficult. For if time give His Majesty the advantage, what needs
precipitation of extreme remedies; but if the time will make the Case more
desperate, then His Majesty cannot begin too soon. Now in my opinion, time will
open and facilitate things for Reformation of Religion there, and not shut up
or lock out the same. For first, the plantations going on, and being
principally of Protestants, cannot but mate the other party in time. Also His
Majesty's care in placing good Bishops, and good Divines, in amplifying the
College there, and looking to the education of Wards, and such like; as they
are the most natural means, so are they like to be the most effectual and
happy, for the weeding out of Popery, without using the temporal sword, so that
I think I may truly conclude, that the ripeness of time is not yet come.

Therefore my advice is, in all humbleness, that this hazardous course of
proceeding to tender the Oath to the Magistrates of Towns, proceed not, but die
by degrees. And yet to preserve the authority and reputation of the former
Council, I would have somewhat done, which is, that there be a proceeding to
seizure of liberties, but not by any act of power, but by quo Warranto, or
Scire Facias, which is a legal course, and will be the work of three or four
Terms; by which time the matter will be somewhat cool.

But I would not (in no case) that the proceeding should be with both the Towns
which stand now in contempt, but with one of them only, choosing that which
shall be most fit. For if His Majesty proceed with both, then all the Towns
that are in the like case, will think it a common Cause, and that it is but
their case to day, and their own to morrow. But if His Majesty proceed but with
one, the apprehension and terror will not be so strong; for, they may think, it
may be their case to be spared, as well as prosecuted. And this is the best
Advice that I can give to His Majesty in this strait; and of this opinion
seemed my Lord Chancellor to be.

The second Proposition is this; It may be, His Majesty will be moved to reduce
the number of His Council of Ireland (which is now almost fifty) to twenty, or
the like number, in respect that the greatness of the number does both imbase
the Authority of the Council, and divulge the business. Nevertheless, I hold
this Proposition to be rather specious and solemn, than needful at this time;
for certainly it will fill the State full of coffeehouse, which, in a
growing and unsettled State, ought not to be. This I could wish, that His
Majesty would appoint a select number of Counselors there, which might deal in
the improvement of His Revenue (being a thing not to pass through too many
hands) and the said selected number should have days of sitting by themselves,
at which the rest of the Council should not be present; which being once
settled, then other principal business of State may be handled at these
sittings; and so the rest begin to be disused, and yet retain their countenance
without murmur or disgrace.

The third Proposition, as it is moved, seems to be pretty, if it can keep
promise; for it is this, That a means may be found to re-enforce His Majesty's
Army by five hundred, or a thousand men, and that without any Penny increase of
charge. And the means should be, That there should be a Commandment of a local
removing, and transferring some Companies from one Province to another,
whereupon it is supposed, that many that are planted in House and Lands, will
rather lose their entertainment, then remove; and thereby new men may have
their Pay, yet the old be mingled in the Country for the strength thereof. In
this Proposition two things may be feared; the one, discontent of those that
shall be put off; the other, that the Companies shall be stuffed with Novices
(Tirones) instead of Veterani. I wish therefore, that this Proposition be well
debated, before it be admitted. Thus having performed that which Duty binds me
to, I commend you to Gods best preservation.

Your most devoted, and bounden Servant.
July 5. 1616.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney General, to the Master of the Horse,
upon the sending of his Bill for Viscount, sc.
SIR,
I Send you the Bill for His Majesty's Signature, reformed according to His
Majesty's amendments, both in the two places (which, I assure you, were altered
with great judgment) and in the third place, which His Majesty termed a
question only. But he is an idle body, that thinks His Majesty asks an idle
question; and therefore His Majesty's questions are to be answered, by taking
away the cause of the question, and not by replying.

For the name, His Majesty's Will is a Law in those things; and to speak the
truth, it is a well-sounding, and noble name, both here and abroad; and being
your proper name, I will take it for a good sign, that you shall give honor to
your dignity, and not your dignity to you. Therefore I have made it Viscount
Villiers; and for your Barony, I will keep it for an Earldom. For though the
other had been more orderly, yet that is as usual; and both alike good in Law.

For Ropers place, I would have it by all means dispatched, and therefore I
marvel it lingreth. It were no good manners, to take the business out of my
Lord Treasurers hands; and therefore I purpose to write to his Lordship, if I
hear not from him first, by Mr. Deckome; but if I hear of any delay, you will
give me leave (especially since the King named me) to deal with Sir Joseph
Roper my self; for neither I, nor my Lord Treasurer, can deserve any great
thanks in this business of yours, considering the King has spoken to Sir Jo.
Roper, and he has promised; and besides, the thing it self is so reasonable,
as it ought to be as soon done, as said. I am now gotten into the Country to
my house, where I have some little liberty, to think of that I would think of,
and not of that which other men hourly break their head withal, as it was at
London. Upon this you may conclude, that most of my thoughts are to His
Majesty, and then you cannot be far off. God ever keep you, and prosper you. I
rest always,

Your true, and most dutiful Servant.
The 5. of August, one of the happiest days.
Sir Francis Bacon, to Sir George Villiers, upon the sending his Pattent for
Viscount Villiers to be Signed.
SIR,
I Have sent you now your Patent, of Creation of Lord Bletchly of Bletchly, and
of Viscount Villiers. Beltchly is your own, and I liked the sound of the name
better then Whaddon; but the name will be hid, for you will be called Viscount
Villiers. I have put them in a Patent; after the manner of the Patent for
Earls, where Baronies are joined; but the chief reason was, because I would
avoid double prefaces, which had not been fit; nevertheless the Ceremony of
Robing, and otherwise, must be double.

And now, because I am in the Country, I will send you some of my Country
fruits, which with me are good Meditations, which, when I am in the City, are
choked with business.

After that the King shall have watered your new Dignities, with the bounty of
the Lands which he intends you, and that some other things concerning your
Means, which are now likewise in intention, shall be settled upon you; I do not
see, but you may think your private Fortunes established; and therefore it is
now time, that you should refer your Actions to the good of your Sovereign, and
your Country. It is the life of an Ox or Beast, always to eat, and never
exercise; but men are born (and specially Christian men) not to cramb in their
Fortunes, but to exercise their Virtues; and yet the other has been the
unworthy, and (thanks be to God) sometimes the unlucky humor of great Persons
in our times: Neither will your future Fortune be the further off, for, assure
your self, that Fortune is of a Woman's nature, and will sooner follow by
sleighting, than by too much wooing. And in this dedication of your self to the
Public, I recommend unto you principally, that which, I think, was never done
since I was born; and which, because it is not done, has bred almost a
Wilderness and Solitude in the Kings Service; which is, That you countenance
and encourage, and advance able men, in all kinds, degrees and professions. For
in the time of the Cecils, the Father and the Son, able men were, by design,
and of purpose, suppressed; and though of late, choice goes better, both in
Church and Commonwealth, yet money, and turn-serving, and cunning canvasses,
and importunity, prevails too much. And, in places of moment, rather make
able and honest men yours, than advance those that are otherwise, because they
are yours. As for cunning and corrupt men, you must (I know) sometimes use
them, but keep them at a distance; and let it appear rather, that you make use
of them, than that they lead you. Above all, depend wholly (next unto God) upon
the King, and be ruled (as hitherto you have been) by His Instructions, for
that is best for your self. For the Kings care and thoughts for you, are
according to the thoughts of a great King; whereas your thoughts concerning
your self, are, and ought to be, according to the thoughts of a modest man. But
let me not weary you, the sum is, That you think Goodness the best part of
Greatness; and that you remember whence your rising comes, and make return
accordingly. God keep you.

August 12. 1616.
Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, about a Certificate of my Lord Coke's.
It may please Your Excellent Majesty,
I Send your Majesty, enclosed, my Lord Coke's answers; I will not call them
rescripts, much less Oracles. They are of his own hand, and offered to me (as
they are) in writing, not required by me to have them set down in writing,
though I am glad of it, for my own discharge. I thought it my duty, as soon as
I received them, instantly to send them to Your Majesty, and forbear, for the
present, to speak further of them. I, for my part, (though this
Muscovia-weather be a little too hard for my constitution) was ready to have
waited upon Your Majesty this day, all respects set aside; but my Lord
Treasurer, in respect of the season, and much other business, was willing to
save me. I will only conclude, touching these Papers, with a Text divided; I
cannot say, Oportuit haec fieri, but I may say, Finis autem nondum. God
preserve Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble, and devoted Subject and Servant.
Feb. 14. at 12. a Clock. I humbly pray Your Majesty, to keep the Papers safe.



A Letter to the King, touching the Lord Chancellors place.
It may please Your most Excellent Majesty.
YOur worthy. Chancellor, I fear, goes his last day. God has hitherto used
to weed out such Servants as grew not fit for Your Majesty; but now he has
gathered to himself a true sage, or salvia, out of Your Garden; But Your
Majesty's service must not be mortal.

Upon this heavy Accident, I pray Your Majesty in all humbleness and sincerity,
to give me leave to use a few words. I must never forget, when I moved Your
Majesty for the Attorneys place, it was your own sole act; more then that,
Somerset, when he knew Your Majesty had resolved it, thrust himself into the
business for a Fee. And therefore I have no reason to pray to Saints.

I shall now again make oblation to your Majesty, first of my heart, then of my
service, thirdly, of my place of Attorney (which I think is honestly worth
16000 l. pound per annum) and fourthly, of my place of the Star Chamber, which
is worth 1600 l. per annum, and with the favuor and countenance of a
Chancellor, much more.

I hope I may be acquitted of presumption, if I think of it, both because my
Father had the place, which is some civil inducement to my desire: And I pray
God your Majesty may have twenty no worse years in your Greatness, then Queen
Elizabeth had in her Model, (after my Fathers placing) and chiefly, because, if
the Chancellors place went to the Law, it was ever conferred upon some of the
Learned Council, and never upon a Judge. For Audley was raised from K.
Sergeant, my Father from Attorney of the Wards, Bromley from Solicitor,
Puckering from Sergeant, Egerton from Master of the Rolls, having newly left
the Attorneys place. Now I beseech Your Majesty, let me put you the present
case, truly. If you take my Lord Coke, this will follow; first, Your Majesty
shall put an overruling nature into an overruling place, which may breed an
extreme: Next, You shall blunt his industries in matter of financies, which
seems to aim at another place. And lastly, popular men are no sure Mounters
for Your Majesty's Saddle. If you take my Lord Hubbart, you shall have a Judge
at the upper end of Your Councel-board, and another at the lower end: Whereby
Your Majesty will find your Prerogative pent. For though there should be
emulation between them, yet as Legists they will agree, in magnifying that
wherein they are best; He is no Statesman, but an Occonomist, wholly for
himself. So as Your Majesty (more then an outward form) will find little help
in him, for the business. If you take my Lord of Canterbury, I will say no
more, but the Chancellours place requires a whole man. And to have both
Jurisdictions, Spiritual and Temporal, in that height, is sit but for a King.

For my self, I can only present Your Majesty with Gloria in obsequio: yet I
dare promise, that if I sit in that place, Your business shall not make such
short turns upon You, as it does; but when a direction is once given, it shall
be pursued and performed; and Your Majesty shall only be troubled with the true
care of a King, which is, to think what You would have done in chief, and not
how, for the passages.

I do presume also, in respect of my Fathers memory, and that I have been
always gracious in the Lower House, I have interest in the Gentlemen of
England, and shall be able to do some good effect, in rectifying that Body of
Parliament Men, which is Cardo rerum. For let me tell Your Majesty, that that
part of the Chancellors place which is to Judge in equity, between party and
party, that same Regnum judiciale (which since my Fathers time is but too much
enlarged) concerns Your Majesty least, more then the acquitting your
Conscience for Justice. But it is the other part of a Moderator, amongst your
Council, of an Overseer over your Judges, of a planter of fit Justices, and
Governors in the Country, that imports your affairs and these times most.

I will add also, that I hope by my care, the inventive part of your Council
will be strengthened, who now commonly, do exercise rather their Judgments,
then their inventions: And the inventive part comes from projectors, and
private men, which cannot be so well; In which kind, my Lord of Salisbury had
a good method, if his ends had been upright.

To conclude, if I were the man I would be, I should hope, that as Your Majesty
has of late won hearts by depressing; you should in this leese no hearts by
advancing. For I see your people can better skill of Concretum, then
Abstractum, and that the waves of their affections flow rather after persons,
then things. So that acts of this nature (if this were one) do more good then
twenty Bills of Grace.

If God call my Lord, the Warrants and Commissions which are requisite for the
taking the Seal, and for the working with it, and for the reviving of Warrants
under his hand, which dye with him, and the like, shall be in readiness. And in
this time presses more, because it is the end of a Term, and almost the
beginning of the Circuits: So that the Seal cannot stand still. But this may be
done, as heretofore, by Commission, till Your Majesty has resolved of an
Officer. God ever preserve Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and bounden Servant.
Febr. 12. 1615.
A Letter to the King, of my Lord Chancellors amendment, and the difference
begun between the Chancery and Kings Bench.
It may please your most Excellent Majesty,
I Do find (God be thanked) a sensible amendment in my Lord Chancellor, I was
with him yesterday in private Conference about half an hour, and this day
again, at such time as he did seal, which he endured well almost the space of
an hour, though the vapor of the wax be offensive to him. He is free from a
Fever, perfect in his powers of memory and speech, and not hollow in his voice
nor looks. He has no panting, or laboring respiration, neither are his Coughs
dry or weak. But whosoever thinks his disease to be but Melancholy, makes no
true judgment of it; for it is plainly a formed and deep Cough, with a pectoral
surcharge, so that at times, he does almost animam agere. I forbear to
advertise Your Majesty of the care I took to have Commissioners in readiness,
because Master Secretary Lake has let me understand he signified as much to
Your Majesty. But I hope there shall be no use of them for this time.

And as I am glad to advertise Your Majesty of the amendment of Your
Chancellors person, so I am sorry to accompany it with an advertisement of the
sickness of Your Chancery Court; though (by the Grace of God) that cure will be
much easier than the other. It is true, I did lately write to Your Majesty,
that for the matter of Habeas corpora (which was the third matter in Law you
had given me in charge) I did think the communion of service between my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Chief Justice, in the great business of examination,
would so join them, as they would not square at this time. But pardon me (I
humbly pray Your Majesty) if I have too reasonable thoughts. And yet that which
happened the last day of the Term concerning certain Indictments, in the nature
of Praemunire, preferred into the Kings Bench, but not found, is not so much as
is noised abroad (though I must say, it was Omni tempore nimium, and hoc
tempore alienum) And therefore I beseech Your Majesty, not to give any
believing ear to Reports, but to receive the Truth from me that am Your
Attorney General, and ought to stand indifferent for Jurisdictions of all
Courts; which account I cannot give Your Majesty now, because I was then
absent, and some are now absent, which are properly and authentically to inform
me, touching that which passed. Neither let this any way disjoint Your other
business; for there is a time for all things, and this very accident may be
turned to good; not that I am of opinion, that that same cunning Maxim of
Separa and Impera, which sometimes holds in persons, can well take place in
Jurisdictions; but because some good occasion by this excess may be taken, to
settle that which would have been more dangerous, if it had gone on by little
and little. God preserve Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject, and most bounden Servant.
Febr. 15. 1615.
Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney, to the King, giving some Account
touching the Commendams.
It may please Your most Excellent Majesty,
I Am not swift to deliver anything to your Majesty, before it be well weighed.
But now that I have informed my self of as much as is necessary, touching this
proceeding of the Judges, to the Argument of the Commendams (notwithstanding
your Majesty's pleasure signified by me upon your Majesty's Commandment, in
presence of my Lord Chancellor and the Bishop of Winchester, to the contrary) I
do think it fit to advertise your Majesty what has passed; the rather, because
I suppose the Judges, since they performed not your Commandment, have at least
given Your Majesty their reasons of their failing therein; I begin to answer
for the doing of Your Majesty's Commandment, and they for the not doing.

I did conceive, that in a cause that concerned Your Majesty and your Royal
power, the Judges having heard your Attorney General argue the Saturday before,
would of themselves have taken further time to be advised.

And (if I fail not in memory) my Lord Coke received from Your Majesty's self,
as I take it, a precedent commandment, in Hillary term; That both in the Rege
inconsulto, and in the Commendams, your Attorney should be heard to speak, and
then stay to be made of further proceeding, till my Lord had spoken with your
Majesty.

Nevertheless, hearing that the day appointed for the Judges Argument h^ld,
contrary to my expectation, I sent on Thursday in the evening, (having received
Your Majesty's Commandment but the day before, in the afternoon) a Letter to my
Lord Coke, whereby I let him know, that upon some Report of my Lord of
Winchester (who by Your Commandment was present at my Argument) of that which
passed, it was Your Majesty's express Pleasure, that no further proceeding
should be, until Your Majesty had conferred with Your Judges; which Your Majesty
thought to have done at Your being now last in Town; but by reason of Your many
and weighty occasions, Your Princely times would not serve: and that it was
Your Pleasure he should signify so much to the rest of the Judges, whereof his
Lordship might not fail. His answer, by word, to my Man, was, That it were good
the rest of the Judges understood so much from my self. Whereupon, I (that
cannot skill in scruples, in matter of Service) did write on Friday, three
several Letters of like Content, to the Judges of the Common Pleas, and the
Barons of the Exchequer, and the other three Judges of the Kings Bench,
mentioning in that last, my particular Letter to my Lord Chief Justice.

This was all I did, and thought all had been sure, insomuch as the same day
being appointed in Chancery, for Your Majesty's great Cause (followed by my
Lord Hunsdon) I writ two other Letters to both the Chief Justices, to put them
in mind of assisting my Lord Chancellor at the hearing. And when my Lord
Chancellor himself took some notice upon that occasion, openly in the Chancery,
that the Commendams could not hold, presently after I heard the Judges were
gone about the Commendams; which I thought, at first, had been only to adjourn
the Court: But I heard after, that they proceeded to Argument.

In this their doing, I conceive they must either except to the nature of the
Commandment, or to the credence thereof, both which, I assure my self, Your
Majesty will maintain.

For if they should stand upon the general ground. Nulli negabimus, nulli
differemus Justitiam, it receives two Answers. The one, that reasonable and
mature advice may not be confounded with delay; and that they can well allege,
when it pleases them. The other, that there is a great difference between a
Case merely between Subject and Subject, and where the Kings interest is in
question directly, or by consequence. At for the Attorneys Place and
Commission, it is as proper for him to signify the Kings Pleasure to the
Judges, as for the Secretary to signify the same to the Privy Council, and so
has it ever been.

These things were a little strange, if there came not so many of them
together, as the one makes the other seem less strange: But Your Majesty has
fair occasions to remedy all with small aid. I say no more for the present.

I was a little plain with my Lord Coke in these matters; and when his answer
was, That he knew all these things, I said, he could never profit too much, in
knowing himself and his duty.

Sir Francis Bacon his Advertisement, touching an Holy War, to the Right
Reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, Lord Bishop of Winchester, and
Councellor of Estate to His Majesty.
My Lord,
AMongst consolations, it is not the least, to represent a man's self like
examples of calamity in others. For Example gives a quicker impression then
Arguments; and besides, they certify us of that which the Scripture also
tendereth for satisfaction, That no new thing is happened unto us. This they do
the better, by how much the Examples are liker, in circumstances, to our own
case, and more especially, if they fall upon persons that are greater and
worthier then our selves. For as it savoureth of vanity, to match our selves
highly, in our own conceit; so, on the other side, it is a good sound
conclusion, That if our betters have sustained the like events, we have the
less cause to be grieved.

In this kind of consolation, I have not been wanting to my self, though, as a
Christian, I have tasted (through Gods great goodness) of higher remedies.
Having therefore, through the variety of my reading, set before me many
examples, both of ancient, and latter times, my thoughts, I confess, have
chiefly stayed upon three particulars, as the most eminent, and the most
resembling; all three, persons, that had held chief place of Authority in their
Countries; all three ruined, not by war, or by any other disaster, but by
Justice and Sentence, as Delinquents, and Criminals; all three famous Writers:
Insomuch, as the remembrance of their calamity is, now, as to posterity, but as
a little Picture of Night-work, remaining amongst the fair and excellent Tables
of their Acts and Works: and all three, (if that were any thing to the matter)
fit examples to quench any man's ambition of rising again, for that they were,
every one of them, restored with great glory, but to their further ruin and
destruction, ending in a violent death. The men were, Demosthenes, Cicero, and
Seneca, persons that I durst not claim affinity with, except the similitude of
our fortunes had contracted it. When I had cast mine eyes upon these examples,
I was carried on further to observe, how they did bear their fortunes, and,
principally, how they did employ their times, being banished, and disabled for
public business; to the end, that I might learn by them, and that they might
be as well my Counselors, as my Comsorters. Whereupon I happened to note, how
diversely their fortunes wrought upon them, especially, in that point at which I
did most aim, which was, the employing of their times and pens. In Cicero, I
saw, that during his banishment (which was almost two years) he was so softened
and dejected, as he wrote nothing but a few womanish Episiles: And yet, in mine
opinion, he had least reason of the three to be discouraged; for that although
it was judged, and judged by the highest kind of judgment, in form of a
Statute, or Law, That he should be banished, and his whole estate confiscated
and seized, and his houses pulled down, and that it should be highly penal for
any man to propound his repeal; yet his case, even then, had no great blot of
ignominy, but it was thought but a tempest of Popularity which overthrew him.
Demosthenes, contrary-wise, though his case was foul, being condemned for
bribery, and not simple bribery, but bribery in the nature of Treason and
disloyalty; yet, nevertheless, he took so little knowledge of his fortune, as,
during his banishment, he did much busy himself, and intermeddle with matters
of State, and took upon him to counsel the State, as if he had been still at
the Helm, by Letters, as appears by some Epistles of his which are extant.
Seneca, indeed, who was condemned for many corruptions, and crimes, and
banished into a solitary Island, kept a mean: for, though his Pen did not
freeze, ye he abstained from intruding into matters of business; but spent his
time in writing Books of excellent Arguments, and use for all Ages, though he
might have made better choice, sometimes, of his Dedications.

These examples confirmed me much in a resolution (whereunto I was otherwise
inclined) to spend my time wholly in writing, and to put forth that poor Talent,
or half-talent, or what it is, that God has given me, not, as heretofore, to
particular exchanges, but to ranks or Mounts of Perpetuity, which will not
break.

Therefore, having not long since, set forth a part of my Instauration, which
is the work that, in mine own judgment (Si nunquam fallit Imago) I may most
esteem, I think to proceed in some few parts thereof. And although I have
received, from many parts beyond the Seas, testimonies touching that work,
such, as beyond which I could not expect at the first, in so abstruse an
Argument; yet, nevertheless, I have just cause to doubt, that it flies too much
over men's heads: I have a purpose, therefore, (though I break the order of
time) to draw it down to the sense, by some patterns of a Natural Story, and
Inquisition. And again, for that my Books of Advancement of Learning may be
some preparative, or Key, for the better opening of the Instauration, because
it exhibits a mixture of new conceits, and old, whereas the Instauration gives
the new unmixed, (otherwise then with some little aspersion of the old, for
tastes sake,) I have thought to procure a Translation of that Book into the
general Language, not without great and ample additions, and enrichment
thereof, especially in the second Book, which handles the partition of
Sciences; in such sort, as, I hold it, may serve in lieu of the first part of
the Instauration, and acquit my promise in that part. Again, because I cannot
altogether desert the civil person that I have borne, (which, if I should
forget, enough would remember) I have also entered into a work touching Laws,
propounding a Character of Justice in the middle Term, between the speculative
and reverend discourses of Philosophers, and the writings of Lawyers, which are
tied, and obnoxious to their particular Laws. And although it be true, that I
had a purpose to make a particular Digest, or re-compilement, of the Laws of
mine own Nation; yet because it is a Work of assistance, and that that I cannot
master, by my own forces and pen, I have laid it aside. Now having in the work
of my Instauration, had in contemplatio^ the general good of men, in their very
being, and dowries of nature; and in my work of Laws, the general good of men
in Society, and the dowries of Government, I thought in duty I owed somewhat
unto mine own Country, which I ever loved; insomuch, as although my place has
been far above my deserts, yet my thoughts and cares concerning the good
thereof, were beyond, and over, and above my place. So now, being as I am, no
more able to do my Country service, it remained unto me to do it honor, which
I have endeavored to do, in my Work of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. As
for my Essays, and some other particulars of that Nature, I count them but as
the Recreations of my other Studies; and in that sort I purpose to continue
them, though I am not ignorant, that those kind of Writings would, with less
pains and embracement, perhaps, yield more luster and reputation to my Name,
than those other which I have in hand. But I account the use that a man should
seek, of the publishing of his own Writings before his death, to be but an
untimely anticipation of that which is proper to follow a man, and not to go
along with him.

But revolving with myself my Writings, as well those I have published, as
those which I had in hand, methought they went all into the City, and none into
the Temple; where, because I have found so great consolation, I desire likewise
to make some poor oblation. Therefore I have chosen an Argument, mixed of
Religious and Civil Considerations; and likewise mixed between Contemplative and
Active: For, who can tell, whether there may not be an Exoriere aliquis? Great
matters, (especially if they be Religious) have (many times) small beginnings,
and the Platform may draw on the Building. This Work, because I was ever an
enemy to flattering Dedications, I have dedicated to your Lordship, in respect
of our ancient and private acquaintance, and because, amongst the men of our
times, I hold you in especial Reverence.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the King, about the Pardon of the Parliaments Sentence.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
BEfore I make my Petition to your Majesty, I make my Prayers to God above,
pectore ab imo, That if I have held anything so dear as your Majesty's service,
(nay) your hearts ease, and your honor, I may be repulsed with a denial. But
if that has been the principal with me, That God, who knows my heart, would
move your Majesty's royal heart to take compassion of me, and to grant my
desire.

I prostrate my self at your Majesty's feet; I, your ancient servant, now sixty
four years old in age, and three years and five months old in misery: I desire
not from your Majesty, means, nor place, nor employment; but only, after so
long a time of expiation, a complete and total remission of the sentence of the
Upper House, to the end that blot of ignominy may be removed from me, and from
my memory with posterity, that I die not a condemned man, but may be to your
Majesty, as I am to God, Nova creatura. Your Majesty has pardoned the like to
Sir John Bennet, between whose case and mine, (not being partial to my self,
but speaking out of the general opinion) there was as much difference, I will
not say, as between black and white, but as between black and gray, or
ash-colored. Look therefore down (dear Sovereign) upon me also in pity. I
know, your Majesty's heart is inscrutable for goodness; and my Lord of
Buckingham was wont to tell me, you were the best natured man in the world; and
it is Gods property, that those that he has loved, he loves to the end. Let
your Majesty's grace, in this my desire, stream down upon me, and let it be out
of the fountain and springhead, and ex mero motu, that living or dying, the
print of the goodness of King James may be in my heart, and his praises in my
mouth. This my most humble request granted may make me live a year or two
happily; and denied, will kill me quickly. But yet the last thing that will die
in me, will be the heart and affection of

Your Majesty's most humble; and true devoted servant,
Fr. St. Alban. July 30. 1624.
Sir Francis Bacon, to King James, of a Digest to be made of the Laws of
England.
Most Excellent Sovereign,
AMongst the Degrees and Acts of Sovereign, or rather Heroical Honor, the
first, or second, is the person and merit of a Lawgiver. Princes that govern
well are Fathers of the People: But if a Father breed his Son well, and allow
him well, while he lives, but leave him nothing at his death, whereby both he,
and his Children, and his Childrens Children, may be the better, it is not in
him complete. So Kings, if they make a portion of an Age happy by their good
Government; yet if they do not make Testaments (as God Almighty does) whereby a
perpetuity of good may descend to their Country, they are but mortal, and
transitory benefactors. Domitian, a few days before he dyed, dreamed, that a
golden Head did rise upon the Nape of his Neck; which was truly performed in
the golden Age that followed his times, for five Successions. But Kings, by
giving their Subjects good Laws, may, if they will, in their own time, join and
graff this golden Head upon their own necks, after their death: Nay, they make
Nabuchodonosors Image of Monarchy, golden from head to foot. And if any of the
meaner sort of Politics, that are sighted only to see the worst of things,
think, That Laws are but Cobwebs, and that good Princes will do well without
them, and bad will not stand much upon them; the discourse is neither good nor
wise. For, certain it is, That good Laws are good Bridles to bad Princes, and
as a very Wall about Government. And if Tyrants sometimes make a breach into
them, yet they mollify even Tyranny it self, as Solons Laws did the Tyranny of
Pisistratus; and then commonly they get up again, upon the first advantage of
better times. Other means to perpetuate the memory and merits of Sovereign
Princes, are inferior to this. Building of Temples, Tombs, Palaces, Theaters,
and the like, are honorable things, and look big upon Posterity: But
Constantine the Great, gave the name well to those works, when he used to call
Trajan, who was a great Builder, Parietarius, because his name was upon so many
walls. So that, if that be the matter, that the King would turn Wall-flower, or
Pelitory of the Wall, with cost he may. Adrians vein was better, for his mind
was to wrestle a fall with Time; and being a great Progressor over all the
Roman Empire, when ever he found any decays of Bridges, or Highways, or cuts
of Rivers and Sewers, or Walls, or Banks, or the like, he gave substantial
order for their Repair. He gave also multitudes of Charters and Liberties for
the comfort of Corporations, and Companies in decay; so that his Bounty did
strive with the ruins of time. But yet this, though it were an excellent
disposition, went but, in effect, to the Cases and Shells of a Commonwealth; it
was nothing to Virtue, or Vice. A bad man might indifferently take the benefit
and ease of his Ways and Bridges, as well as a good; and bad people might
purchase good Charters. Surely the better works of perpetuity in Princes, are
they that wash the inside of the Cup; such as are foundations of Colleges and
Lectures, for learning, and education for youth; likewise foundations and
institutions of Orders and Fraternities, for Nobleness, Enterprise and
Obedience, and the like: But yet these also are but like Plantations of
Orchards and Gardens in plats and spots of ground here and there; they do not
Till over the whole Kingdom, and make it fruitful, as does the establishing of
good Laws and Ordinances, which make a whole Nation to be as a well ordered
College or Foundation.

This kind of work, in the memory of time, is rare enough to show it excellent;
and yet not so rare, as to make it suspected for impossible, inconvenient, and
unsafe. Moses, that gave Laws to the Hebrews, because he was the scribe of God
himself, is fitter to be named for Honors sake to other Lawgivers, then to be
numbered and ranked amongst them. Minos, Lycurgus, and Solon, are examples for
Themes of Grammar-Scholars. For ancient Personages, and Characters, now a days,
use to wax children again. Though that Parable of Pindarus be true, The best
thing is water; for common and trivilal things are many tmies the best, and
rather despised upon pride, because they are vulgar, then upon cause or use.
Certain it is, that the Laws of those three Lawgivers had great prerogatives;
the first, of fame, because they were the pattern among the Grecians; the
second, of lasting, for they continued longest without alteration; the third, a
spirit of reviver, to be often expired; and often restored.

Amongst the seven Kings of Rome, there were four Lawgivers: For it is most
true that a Discourse of Italy says, There was never State so well swadled in
the infancy, as the Roman was, by the virtue of their first Kings; which was a
principal cause of the wonderful growth of that State in aftertimes.

The Decemvirs Laws were Laws upon Laws, not the Original; For they graffed
Laws of Graecia upon the Roman stock of Laws and Customs: But such was their
success, as the twelve Tables which they compiled were the main body of the
Laws which framed and welded the great Body of that State. They lasted a long
time, with some supplementals, and the Pretorian Edicts in Albo, which were, in
respect of Laws, as Writing-tables in respect of Brass, the one to be put in
and out, as the other is permanent. Lucius Cornelius Sylla reformed the Laws of
Rome: For that man had three singularities, which never Tyrant had but he; That
he was a Lawgiver; that he took part with Nobility; and that he turned private
man, not upon fear, but upon confidence.

Caesar, long after, desired to imitate him only in the first; for otherwise,
he relied upon new men; and for resigning his power, Seneca describes him
right, Caesar gladium cito condidit, nunquam posuit: And himself took it upon
him, saying in scorn, of Sylla's resignation, Sylla nescivit liter as, dictare
non potuit. But, for the part of a Lawgiver, Cicero gives him the Attribute,
Caesar, si ab eo quaereretur quid egisset in Toga, leges se, respondisset,
multas and praeclar as tulisse. His Nephew Augustus did tread the same steps,
but with deeper print, because of his long Reign in peace; whereof one of the
Poets of his time, says.

Pace data terris, animum ad Civilia vertit;
Jura suum legesque tulit justissimus Author.
From that time, there was such a race of Wit and Authority, between the
Commentaries and Decisions of the Lawyers, and the Edicts of the Emperors, as
both Laws and Lawyers were out of breath: whereupon Justinian, in the end,
re-compiled both, and made a Body of Laws, such as might be wielded, which
himself calls glorious, and yet not above truth; the edifice or structure of
a sacred Temple of Justice, built indeed out of the former ruins of Books, as
materials, and some novel constitutions of his own.

In Athens they had sex viri, as AEschines observes, which were standing
Commissioners; who did watch to discern what Laws were unproper for the times,
and what new Law did, in any branch, cross a former Law, and so, ex officio,
propounded their Repeal.

King Edgar collected the Laws of this Kingdom, and gave them a strength of a
Faggot bound, which formerly were dispersed; which was more glory to him, than
his sailing about this Island with a great Fleet; for that was, as the
Scripture says, Via Navis in Mari, it vanished; but this lasts.

Alphonso the Wise, the Ninth of that Name, King of Castile, compiled the
Digest of the Laws of Spain, entitled, The six Partidas; an excellent Work,
which he finished in seven years: And, as Tacitus notes well, That the
Capitol, though built in the beginnings of Rome, yet was sit for the great
Monarchy that came after; so that building of Laws suffices the greatness of
the Empire of Spain, which since has ensued.

Lewis the Eleventh had in his mind, though he performed it not, to have made
one constant Law of France, extracted out of the Civil Roman Law, and the
Customs of Provinces, which are various, and the Kings Edicts, which with the
French are Statutes. Surely he might have done well, if, like as he brought the
Crown (as he said himself) horse de Page, so he had brought his people from
Lacquay, not to run up and down for their Laws, to the Civil Law, and the
Ordinances of Courts, and Discourses of Philosophers, as they use to do.

King Henry the Eighth, in the Twenty seventh year of his Reign, was authorized
by Parliament to nominate Thirty two Commoners, part Ecclesiastical, part
Temporal, to purge the Common Law, and to make it agreeable to the Law of God,
and the Law of the Land; but it took not effect: For the Acts of that King
were, commonly rather proffers and fames, then either well grounded, or well
pursued. But I doubt I err, in producing so many examples: for, as Cicero, said
to Caesar, so may I say to Your Majesty, Nil vulgar, te dignum videri possit,
though, indeed, this, well understood, is far from vulgar; for that the Laws of
both Kingdoms and States have been, like buildings, of many pieces, and patched
up, from time to time, according to occasions, without frame or model.

Now for the Laws of England, if I shall speak my opinion of them, without
partiality, either to my profession, or Country, for the matter and nature of
them, I hold them wise, just, and Moderate Laws; they give to God, they give to
Caesar, they give to the Subject, what appertains. It is true, they are as
mixed as our Language, compounded of British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman
customs; and surely, as our Language, is thereby so much the richer, so our
Laws are likewise, by that mixture, the more complete. Neither both this
attribute the less to them, then those that would have them to stand out the
same, in all mutations. For no tree is so good first set, as by transplanting
and graffing. I remember what happened to Calisthenes, that followed Alexders
Court, and was grown into some displeasure with him, because he could not well
brook the Persian adoration: At a Supper (which with the Grecians was a great
part) he was desired, the King being present, because he was an eloquent man,
to speak of some Theme; which he did, and chose for his Theme, the praise of
the Macedonian Nation. Which, though it were but a filling thing, to praise men
to their faces; yet he performed it with such advantage of truth, and avoidance
of flattery, and with such life, as was applauded by the Hearers. The King was
the less pleased with it, not loving the man, and by way of discountenance,
said, It was easy to be a good Orator in a pleasing Theme: But, says he to
him, turn your style, and tell us now of our faults, that we may have the
profit, and not the praise only. Which he presently did, with such quickness,
that Alexander said, That Malice made him Eloquent then, as the Theme had done
before. I shall not fall into either of these extremes iu this Subject of the
Laws of England: I have commended them before for the matter; but surely, they
ask much amendment for the Form; which, to reduce and perfect, I hold to be one
of the greatest Dowries that can be conferred upon this Kingdom; which Work,
for the Excellency, as it is worthy Your Majesty's Acts and Times, so it has
some Circumstance of propriety agreeable to Your person. God has blessed Your
Majesty with posterity, and I am not of opinion, that Kings that are barren are
fittest to supply perpetuity of generations by perpetuity of noble acts; but
contrariwise, that they that leave posterity, are the more interessed in the
care of future times, that as well their Progeny as their people may
participate of their merit. Your Majesty is a great Master in Justice, and
Judicature, and it were pity, the fruit of that your virtue should not be
transmitted to the ages to come. Your Majesty also reigns in learned times,
the more, no doubt, in regard of your own perfection in learning, and your
Patronage thereof; and it has been the mishap of works, that the less learned
time has sometimes wrought upon the more Learned, which now will not be so. As
for my self, the Law was my profession, to which I am a debtor; some little
help I have of my Arts, which may give form to matter; and I have now by Gods
merciful chastisement, and by his special providence, time and leisure to put
my Talent, or half Talent, or what it is, to such exchanges, as may perhaps
exceed the Interest of an active life. Therefore as in the beginning of my
troubles, I made offer to Your Majesty to take pains in the story of England,
and in compiling a Method, and Digest of your Laws, so have I performed the
first (which rested but upon my self) in some part. And I do in all humbleness
renew the offer of this Letter (which will require help and assistance) to Your
Majesty, if it shall stand with your good pleasure to employ my service therein.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the Right Honorable his very good Lord, the Earl of
Devonshire, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
IT may please your good Lordship, I cannot be ignorant, and ought to be
sensible of the wrong which I sustain, Common speech, as if I had been false or
unthankful, to that noble, but unfortunate Earl, the Earl of Essex: and for
satisfying the vulgar sort, I do not so much regard it; though I love a good
name; but yet as a handmaid and attendant of honesty and virtue. For I am of
his opinion, that said pleasantly, that it was a shame to him that was a Suitor
to the Mistress, to make Love to the Waiting Woman. And therefore, to Woo or
Court common fame, otherwise then it follows upon honest courses, I, for my
part, find not my self fit nor disposed. But on the otherside, there is no
worldly thing that concerns my self, which I hold more dear, then the good
opinion of certain persons, amongst which there is none I would more willingly
give satisfaction unto, then to your Lordship. First, because you loved my Lord
of Essex, and therefore will not be partial toward me, which is part of that I
desire; next, because it has ever pleased you, to show your self to me an
honorable friend; and so no baseness in me to seek to satisfy you. And
lastly, because I know your Lordship is excellently grounded in the true rules
and habits of duties and moralities, which must be they which shall decide this
matter: wherein (my Lord) my defense needs to be but simple and brief;
namely, that whatsoever I did concerning that action and proceeding, was done
in my duty and service to the Queen, and her State; in which I would not show
my self falshearted nor faint-hearted, for any man's sake alive. For every
honest man, that has his heart well planted, will forsake his King, rather
than forsake God; and forsake his Friends, than forsake his King; and yet will
forsake any earthly Commodity; yea, and his own life, in some cases, rather
than forsake his Friend. I hope the world has not forgotten his degrees; else
the Heathen saying, amicus usque ad aras, shall jndge them: and if any man
shall say, that I did officiously intrude my self into that business, because I
had no ordinary place; the like may be said of all the business, in effect,
that passed the hands of the learned Council either of State or Revenue, these
many years, wherein I was continually used; for, as your Lordship may remember,
the Queen knew her strength so well, as she looked her word should be a
Warrant; and after the manner of the choicest Princes before her, did not
always tie her trust to place, but did sometimes divide private favor from
office. And I, for my part, though I was not unseen in the world, but I knew
the condition was subject to envy and peril; yet because I knew, again, she
was constant in her favors, and made an end where she began; and especially,
because she upheld me with extraordinary access, and other demonstrations,
confidence and Grace, I resolved to endure it in expectation of better. But my
scope and desire is, that your Lordship would be pleased to have the honorable
patience to know the truth, in some particularity of all that passed in this
cause, wherein I had any part; that you may perceive how honest a heart I ever
bare to my Sovereign, and to my Country, and to that Nobleman who had so well
deserved of me, and so well accepted of my deservings; whose fortune I cannot
remember without much grief. But for any action of mine toward him, there is
nothing that passed me in my lifetime that comes to my remembrance with more
clearness, and less check of Conscience: For, it will appear to your Lordship,
that I was not only not opposite to my Lord of Essex, but that I did occupy the
utmost of my wits, and adventured my Fortune with the Queen, to have
redintegrated his; and so continued faithfully and industriously, till his last
fatal impatience (for so I will call it) after which day, there was not time to
work for him, though the same my affection, when it could not work upon the
subject proper, went to the next, with no ill effect toward some others, who
(I think) do rather not know it, than not acknowledge it. And this I will
assure your Lordship, I will leave nothing untold that is truth, for any enemy
that I have to add; and on the other side, I must reserve much which makes for
me, upon many respects of Duty, which I esteem above my Credit: And what I have
here set down to your Lordship, I protest, as I hope to have any part in Gods
favor, is true.

It is well known, how I did, many years since, dedicate my travels and studies
to the use, and (as I may term it) service of my Lord of Essex; which, I
protest before God, I did not, making election of him as the likeliest mean of
my own advancement; but out of the humor of a man that ever from the time I
had any use of Reason (whether it were reading upon good Books, or upon the
example of a good Father, or by Nature) I loved my Country more then was
answerable to my Fortune; and I held, at that time, my Lord to be the fittest
instrument to do good to the State: and therefore I applied my self wholly to
him, in a manner, which I think happens rarely amongst men. For I did not
only labor carefully and industriously in that he set me about, whether it
were matter of advice, or otherwise; but neglecting the Queens Service, mine
own Fortune, and in a sort, my Vocation, I did nothing but devise and ruminate
with my self, to the best of my understanding, Propositions and Memorials of
any thing that might concern his Lordships Honor, Fortune or Service. And
when, not long after I entered into this course, my Brother, Mr. Anthony Bacon,
came from beyond the Seas, being a Gentleman, whose abilities the World takes
knowledge of, for matter of State, specially Foreign, I did likewise knit his
Service to be at my Lords disposing. And, on the other side, I must, and will
ever acknowledge my Lords love, trust and favor toward me; and last of all,
his liberality, having enfeoffed me of land which I sold for 1800 l. to Mr.
Reynold Nicholas, and I think was more worth, and that at such a time, and with
so kind and noble circumstances, as the manner was as much as the matter:
Which, though it be but an idle digression, yet because I will not be short in
commemoration of his benefits, I will presume to trouble your Lordship with the
relating to you the manner of it.

After the Queen had denied me the Sollicitors place, for the which his
Lordship had been a long and earnest Suitor on my behalf, it pleased him to
come to me from Richmond to Twilknam Park, and brake with me, and said, Mr.
Bacon, the Queen has denied me the place for you, and has placed another: I
know you are the least part of your own matter; but you fare ill, because you
have chosen me for your mean and dependence; you have spent your time and
thoughts in my matters: I die (these were the very words) if I do not somewhat
toward your Fortune; you shall not deny to accept a piece of land which I will
bestow upon you. My answer, I remember, was, That for my Fortune, it was no
great matter; but that his Lordships offer made me call to mind what was wont
to be said when I was in France, of the Duke of Guise, That he was the greatest
Usurer in France, because he had turned all his Estate into Obligations;
meaning, that he had left himself nothing, but only had bound numbers of
persons to him: Now, my Lord (said I) I would not have you imitate this course,
nor turn your state thus by greatest gifts into obligations, for you will find
many bad Debtors. He bade me take no care for that, and pressed it; whereupon I
said, I see my Lord, that I must be your Homager, and hold land of your gift;
but do you know the manner of doing Homage in Law? always it is with a saving
of his faith to the King, and his other Lords; and therefore, my Lord (said I)
I can be no more yours than I was, and it must be with the ancient savings;
and, if I grow to be a rich man, you will give me leave to give it back a gain
to some of your un-rewarded followers.

But to return: Sure I am, (though I can arrogate nothing to my self, but that
I was a faithful Remembrancer to your Lordship) that while I had most credit
with him, his fortune went on best; and yet in too many points we always
directly, and condradictorily differed; which I will mention to your Lordship,
because it gives light to all that followed. The one was, I always set this
down, That the only course to be held with the Queen, was, by obsequiousness
and observance; and I remember, I would usually gage confidently, that if he
would take that course constantly, and with choice of good particulars to
express it, the Queen would be brought in time to Ahasuerus Question, to ask,
What should be done to the man that the King would honor? meaning, that her
goodness was without limit, where there was a true concurrence, which I knew in
her nature to be true: My Lord, on the other side, had a settled opinion, that
the Queen should be brought to nothing, but by a kind of necessity and
authority; and I well remember, when by violent Courses at any time he had got
his Will, he would ask me; Now Sir, whose Principles be true? and I would again
say to him, My Lord, these Courses be like to hot waters, they will help at a
pang, but if you use them, you shall spoil the stomach, and you shall be fain
still to make them stronger and stronger, and yet in the end they will lose
their operation; with much other variety wherewith I used to touch that string.
Another point was, That I always vehemently persuaded him from seeking
greatness by a Military dependence, or by a Popular dependence, as that which
would breed in the Queen, Jealousy; in himself, Presumption, and in the State,
Perturbation; and I did usually compare them to Icarus two wings, which were
joined on with wax, and would make him venture to soar too high, and then fail
him at the height. And I would further say unto him, My Lord stand upon two
feet, and fly not upon two wings. The two feet are the two kinds of Justice,
commutative and distributive; use your greatness, for advancing of merit and
virtue, and relieving wrongs and burdens, you shall need no other art of
sineness; but he would tell me, that opinion came not from my mind, but from my
robe. But it is very true, that I that never meant to enthrall my self to my
Lord of Essex, nor any other man, more than stood with the public good; did
(though I could little prevail) divert him by all means possible from Courses
of the Wars and Popularity: for I saw plainly, the Queen must either live or
dye; if she lived, then the times would be, as in the declination of an old
Prince; if she died, the times would be, as in the beginning of a new; and that
if his Lordship did rise too fast in these Courses, the times might be
dangerous for him, and he for them. Nay, I remember I was thus plain with him
upon his Voyage to the Islands, when I saw every spring put forth such actions
of charge and provocation, that I said to him, My Lord, when I came first to
you, I took you for a Physician that desired to cure the diseases of the State;
but now I doubt you will be like to those Physicians which can be content to
keep their Patients long, because they would always be in request: which
plainness he nevertheless took very well; as he had an excellent care, and was
patientissimus very, and assured me the case of the Realm required it; and I
think this speech of mine, and the like renewed afterward, pricked him to
write that Apology which is in many men's hands.

But this dfference in two points, so main and material, bred, in process of
time, a discontinuance of privateness (as it is the manner of men seldom to
Communicate where they think their courses not approved) between his Lordship
and my self, so as I was not called, nor advised with, for some year and a half
before his Lordships going into Ireland, as in former time; yet nevertheless
touching his going into Ireland, it pleased him expressly, and in a set manner,
to desire mine opinion, and Counsel; at which time I did not only dissuade, but
protest against his going, telling him, with as much vehemence and asseveration
as I could, that absence in that kind would exulcerate the Queens mind, whereby
it would not be possible for him to carry himself so, as to give her sufficient
contentment, not for her to carry herself so, as to give him sufficient
countenance, which would be ill for her, ill for him, and ill for the State.
And because I would omit no Argument, I remember I stood also upon tbe
difficulty of the action, setting before him out of Histories, that the Irish
was such an enemy, as the ancient Gauls or Britains, or Germans were, and that
we saw how the Romans who had such Discipline to govern their Soldiers, and
such Donatives to encourage them, and the whole World in a manner to levy them;
yet when they came to deal with enemies which placed their felicities only in
liberty, and the sharpness of their Sword, and had the natural and elemental
advantages of Woods and Boggs, and hardness of bodies, they ever found they had
their hands full of them, and therefore concluded, that going over with such
expectation as he did, and through the churlishness of the enterprise, not like
to answer it, would mightily diminish his reputation and name; other reasons I
used, so as I am sure, I never in any thing in my lifetime, dealt with him in
like earnestness by speech, by writing, and by all the means I could devise.
For, I did as plainly see his overthrow, chained, as it were, by destiny to
that Journey, as it is possible for any man to ground a Judgment upon future
Contingents. But, my Lord, howsoever his ear was open, yet his heart and
resolution was shut against that advice, whereby his ruin might have been
prevented.

After my Lords going I saw how true a Prophet I was, in regard of the evident
alteration which naturally succeeded in the Queens mind, and thereupon I was
still in watch to find the best occasion, that, in the weakness of my power, I
could either take, or minister, to pull him out of the fire, if it had been
possible; and not long after, me thought I saw some overture thereof, which I
apprehended readily; a particularity which I think to be known to very few, and
the which I do the rather relate to your Lordship, because I hear it should be
talked, that while my Lord was in Ireland, I revealed some matter against him,
or I cannot tell what; which if it were not a mere slander, as the rest is, but
had any, though never so little color, was surely upon this occasion. The
Queen one day being at Non-such, a little, (as I remember) before Cuffers
coming over, where I attended her, showed a passionate distaste of my Lords
proceedings in Ireland, as if they were unfortunate, without Judgment,
Contemptuous, and not without some private end of his own, and all that might
be, and was pleased, as she spoke of it to many that she trusted less, so to
fall into the like speech with me; whereupon I that was still awake, and true
to my grounds which I thought surest for my Lords good, said to this effect:
Madam, I know not the particulars of Estate, and I know this, that Princes
occasions must have no abrupt periods or conclusions; but otherwise, I would
think that if you had my Lord of Essex here with a white staff in his hand, as
my Lord of Leicester had, and continued him still about you, for society to
your self, and for an honor and ornament to your attendance and Court, in the
eyes of your people, and in the eyes of Foreign Ambassadors, then were he in
his right Element: for to discontent him as you do, and yet to put Arms and
Power into his hands, may be a kind of temptation to make him prove combersome
and unruly. And therefore, if you would imponere bonam clausulam, and send for
him, and satisfy him with Honor here near you, if your Affairs (which as I
have said) I am not acquainted with, will permit it, I think were the best way;
which course, your Lordship knows, if it had been taken, then all had been
well; and no contempt in my Lords coming over, nor continuance of these
jealousies which that employment of Ireland bred, and my Lord here in his
former greatness: well, the next news that I heard, was, that my Lord was come
over, and that he was committed to his Chamber, for leaving Ireland without the
Queens License: this was at Non-such, where (as my Duty was) I came to his
Lordship, and talked with him privately about a quarter of an hour, and he
asked my opinion of the course that was taken with him; I told him, My Lord,
Nubecula est, cito transibit, it is but a mist: but shall I tell your Lordship?
it is as mists are, if it go upwards, it may happily cause a shower; if
downward, it will clear up; and therefore good my Lord, carry it so, as you
take away by all means, all umbrages and distastes from the Queen, and
especially, if I were worthy to admonish you (as I have been by your Lordship,
thought, and now your question imports the continuance of that opinion) observe
three points. First, make not this cessation or peace which is concluded with
Tyrone as a service wherein you glory, but as a shuffling up of a prosecution
which was not very fortunate; next, represent not to the Queen any necessity of
State, whereby, as by a coertion or wrentch, she should think her self enforced
to send you back into Ireland; but leave it to her. Thirdly, seek access,
importune, opportune, seriously, sportingly, every way. I remember, my Lord was
willing to hear me, but spoke very few words, and shaked his head sometimes, as
if he thought he was in the wrong; but sure I am, he did just contrary in every
one of these three points. After this, during the while my Lord was committed
to my Lord Keepers, I came diverse times to the Queen, as I had used to do,
about cause of Her Revenue and Law business, as is well known: by reason of
which accesses, according to the ordinary charities of Court, it was given out
that I was one of them that incensed the Queen against my Lord of Essex. These
speeches I cannot tell, nor I will not think that they grew any ways from her
own speeches, whose memory I will ever honor: if they did, she is with God,
and miserum est ab illis laedi, de quibus non possis queri. But, I must give
this testimony to my Lord Cecill, that one time, in his house, at the Savoy, he
dealt with me directly; and said to me, Cousin, I hear it, but I believe it
not, that you should do some ill office to my Lord of Essex; for my part, I am
merely passive, and not active in this action, and I follow the Queen, and that
heavily, and I lead her not; my Lord of Essex is one that in nature I could
consent with, as with any one living; the Queen indeed is my Sovereign, and I
am her creature; I may not lose her; and the same Course I would wish you to
take; whereupon, I satisfied him how sarre I was from any such mind. And, as
sometimes it comes to pass, that men's Inclinations are opened more in a Toy,
than in a serious matter: A little before that time, being about the middle of
Michaelmass Term, her Majesty had a purpose to dine at my lodging at Twitnam
Park, at which time I had (though I prosess not to be a Poet) prepared a
Sonnet, directly tending to draw on her Majesty's reconcilement to my Lord,
which I remember also I showed to a great person, and one of my Lords nearest
friends who commended it: this though it be (as I said) but a toy, yet it
showed plainly in what spirit I proceeded, and that I was ready not only to do
my Lord good offices, but to publish and declare my self for him; and never was
I so ambitious of any thing in my life time, as I was to have carried some
token or favor from her Majesty to my Lord, using all the art I had, both to
procure her Majesty to send, and my self to be the Messenger; for as to the
former, I feared not to allege to her, that this proceeding toward my Lord
was a thing toward the people very implausible; and therefore wished Her
Majesty, howsoever she did, yet to discharge her self, and to lay it upon
others; and therefore that she should intermixed her proceeding with some
immediate graces from her self, that the world might take knowledge of her
Princely nature and goodness, lest it should alienate the hearts of her people
from her; which I did stand upon, knowing very well that if she once relented,
to send or visit, those demonstrations would prove matter of substance for my
Lords good: And to draw that employment upon my self, I advised her Majesty,
that when soever God should move her to turn the light of her favor toward my
Lord, to make signification to him thereof; that Her Majesty, if she did it not
in person, would at the least use some such mean as might not entitle
themselves to any part of the thanks, as persons that were thought mighty with
her, to work her, or to bring her about; but to use some such as could not be
thought but a mere Conduct of her own goodness; but I could never prevail with
her, though I am persuaded she saw plainly whereat I levelled; but she had me
in jealousy that I was not hers entirely, but still had inward and deep
respects toward my Lord, more then stood at that time with her will and
pleasure.

About the same time, I remember an answer of mine in a matter which had some
affinity with my Lords Cause; which, though it grew from me, went after about
in others names; for her Majesty being mightily incensed with that Book which
was dedicated to my Lord of Essex, being a story of the first year of King
Henry the fourth, thinking it a seditious prelude to put into the peoples heads
boldness and faction, said, she had an opinion there was treason in it, and
asked me if I could not find any places in it that might be drawn within Case
of Treason: Whereto I answered; for treason, sure I found none; but for felony,
very many. And when her Majesty hastily asked me, wherein? I told her, the
Author had committed very apparent theft; for he had taken most of the
sentences of Cornelius Tacitus, and translated them into English, and put them
into his text. And another time, when the Queen could not be persuaded that it
was his writing whose name was to it, but that it had some more mischievous
Author, and said with great indignation, that she would have him racked to
produce his Au thor; I replied, Nay, Madam, he is a Doctor, never rack his
person, but rack his style; let him have pen, Ink, and paper, and help of
books, and be enjoined to continue the story where it breaks off, and I will
undertake, by collating the styles, to judge whether he were the Author, or no.
But for the main matter, sure I am, when the Queen at any time asked my opinion
of my Lords Case, I ever, in one tenor, said unto her, that they were faults
which the Law might term Contempts, because they were the transgression of her
particular directions and Instructions: but then, what defense may be made of
them in regard of the great Interest the person had in Her Majesty's favor, in
regard of the greatness of his place, and the ampleness of his Commission, in
regard of the nature of the business, being action of war, which in common
cases cannot be tied to strictness of Instructions, in regard of the distance
of the place; having also a Sea between his demands and Her Commands; must be
subject to wind and weather, in regard of a Council of State of Ireland, which
he had at his beck to avow his actions upon; and lastly, in regard of a good
Intention that he might allege for himself, which, I told her, in some
religions, was held to be a sufficient dispensation for Gods Commandments, much
more for Princes: In all these regards I besought her Majesty to be advised
again and again, how she brought the Cause into any public question: Nay, I
went further, for I told her my Lord was an eloquent and well spoken man; and
besides his eloquence of nature or art, he had an eloquence of accident, which
passed them both, which was, the pity and benevolence of his hearers; and
therefore when he should come to answer for himself, I doubted his words would
have so unequal passage above theirs that should charge him, as would not be
for her Majesty's honor, and therefore wished the Conclusion might be, that
they might wrap it up privately between themselves, and that she would restore
my Lord to his former attendance, with some addition of honor, to take away
discontent; But this I will never deny, that I did show no approbation
generally of his being sent back again into Ireland, both because it would have
carried a repugnancy with my former discourse, and because I was in mine own
heart fully persuaded, that it was not good, neither for the Queen, nor for the
State, nor for himself; and yet I did not dissuade it neither, but left it ever
as locus lubricus. For this perticularitie I do well remember, that after your
Lordship was named for the place in Ireland, and not long before your going, it
pleased her Majesty at Whitehall, to speak to me of that nomination: at which
time I said to her, Surely Madam, if you mean not to employ my Lord of Essex
thither again, your Majesty cannot make a better choice; and was going on to
show some reason, and her Majesty interrupted me swith great passion; Essex
(said she) whenever I send Essex back again into Ireland, I will marry you!
claim it of me: Whereunto I said, well Madam, I will release that Contract, if
his going be or the good of the State. Immediately after the Queen had thought
of a Course (which was also executed) to have somewhat published in the
Star Chamber, for the satisfaction of the World, touching my Lord of Essex his
restraint, and my Lord not to be called to it, but occasion to be taken by
reason of some Libels then dispersed; which when her Majesty propounded unto
me, I was utterly against it, and told her plainly, That the People would say,
that my Lord was wounded upon his back, and that Justice had her balance taken
from her, which ever consisted of an accusation and defense, with many other
quick and significant terms to that purpose; insomuch, that I remember, I said,
that my Lord, in foro famae, was too hard for her; and therefore wished her, as
I had done before, to wrap it up privately. And certainly, I offended her at
that time, which was rare with me; for I call to mind, that both the
Christmas, Lent, and Easter-Term following, though I came diverse times to her
upon Law-businesses, yet methought her face and manner was not so clear and
open to me, as it was at the first: And she did directly charge me that I was
absent that day at the Star Chamber, which was very true; but I alleged some
indisposition of body to excuse it; and during all the time aforesaid, there
was altum silentium, from her to me, touching my Lord of Essex causes. But
toward the end of Easter Term Her Majesty brake with me, and told me that she
had found my words true; for that the proceeding in the Star Chamber had done
no good, but rather kindled factious bruits (as she termed them) then quenched
them, and therefore that she was determined now, for the satisfaction of the
world, to proceed against my Lord in the Star Chamber by an Information ore
tenus, and to have my Lord brought to his Answer: howbeit, she said she would
assure me, that whatsoever she did, should be toward my Lord, ad
castigationem, and non ad destructionem, as indeed she had often repeated the
same phrase before: Whereunto I said (to the end utterly to divert her,) Madam,
if you will have me to speak to you in this Argument, I must speak to you as
friar Bacon's head spoke, that said; first, Time is, and then Time was, and
Time would never be; for certainly (said I) it is now far too late, the matter
is cold, and has taken too much wind; whereat she seemed again offended, and
rose from me, and that resolution for a while continued; and after in the
beginning of Midsomer Term, I attending her, and finding her settled in that
resolution (which I heard of also otherwise) she falling upon the like speech,
it is true, that seeing no other remedy, I said to her slightly, Why, Madam,
if you will needs have a Proceeding, you were best have it in some such sort,
as Ovid spoke of his Mistress, Est aliquid luce patente minus; to make a
Councel-table matter of it, and end; which speech again she seemed to take in
ill part, but yet I think it did good for that time, and helped to divert that
Cause of Proceeding by Information in the Star Chamber: Nevertheless,
afterward it pleased her to make a more solemn matter of the Proceeding, and
some few days after, when order was given that the matter should be heard at
York-House, before an Assembly of Counselors, Peers and Judges, and some
Audience of men of Quality to be admitted; then did some principal Counselors
send for us of the learned Council, and notify her Majesty's Pleasure unto us;
save that it was said to me openly, by some one of them, That her Majesty was
not yet resolved whether she would have me forborne in the business or no. And
hereupon might arise that other sinister and untrue speech that I hear is
raised of me, how I was a Suitor to be used against my Lord of Essex at that
time; for it is very true, that I that knew well what had passed between the
Queen and me, and what occasion I had given her both of distaste and distrust
in crossing her disposition, by standing steadfast for my Lord of Essex, and
suspecting it also to be a stratagem arising from some particular emulation, I
writ to her two or three words of Complement, signifying to her Majesty, That
if she would be pleased to spare me in my Lord of Essex's Cause, out of the
Consideration she took of my obligation toward him, I should reckon it for one
of her highest Favors; but otherwise desiring her Majesty to think that I knew
the degrees of Duties, and that no particular obligation whatsoever to any
Subject, could supplant or weaken that entireness of Duty that I did owe and
bear to her and her Service; and this was the goodly Suit I made, being a
respect no man that had his wits could have omitted; but nevertheless, I had a
further reach in it; for I judged that days work would be a full period of any
bitterness or harshness between the Queen and my Lord; and therefore if I
declared my self fully according to her mind at that time, which could not do
my Lord any manner of prejudice, I should keep my credit with her ever after,
whereby to do my Lord Service.

Hereupon, the next news that I heard was, that we were all sent for again, and
that her Majesty's pleasure was, we should have all parts in the business; and
the Lords falling into distribution of our parts, it was allotted to me that I
should set forth some undutiful carriage of my Lord, in giving occasion and
Countenance to a seditious Pamphlet, as it was termed, which was dedicated unto
him, which was the book before mentioned, of King H. 4. Whereupon I replied to
that allotment, and said to their Lordships, that it was an old matter, and had
no manner of Coherence with the rest of the Charge, being matters of Ireland,
and therefore that I having been wronged by bruits before, this would expose me
to them more: and it would be said, I gave in evidence mine own tales. It was
answered again, with good show, that because it was considered how I stood tied
to my Lord of Essex, therefore that part was thought fittest for me which did
him least hurt; for that whereas all the rest was matter of Charge and
Accusation, this only was but matter of Caveat and admonition; wherewith though
I was in mine own Conscience little satisfied, because I knew well a man were
better to be Charged with some faults, then admonished of some others: yet the
Conclusion binding upon the Queens pleasure directly, volens nolens, I could
not avoid that part that was laid upon me; which part, if in the delivery I did
handle not tenderly (though no man before me did in so clear terms free my Lord
from all disloyalty as I did) that your Lordship knows must be ascribed to
the superior duty I did owe to the Queens fame and honor in a public
proceeding; and partly, to the intention I had to uphold my self in credit and
strength with the Queen, the better to be able to do my Lord good offices
afterward; for as soon as this day was past, I lost no time, but the very next
day following (as I remember) I attended her Majesty, fully resolved to try and
put in use my utmost endeavor, so far as I in my weakness could give
furtherance, to bring my Lord speedily again into Court, and into favor; and
knowing (as I supposed at least) how the Queen was to be used, I thought that
to make her Conceive that the matter went well then, was the way to make her
leave off there: and I remember well, I said to her, you have now, Madam,
obtained victory over two things, which the greatest Princes in the world
cannot at their wills subdue: the on is, over fame; the other is, over a great
mind; for surely the world is now, I hope, reasonably well satisfied; and for
my Lord, he did show that humiliation toward Your Majesty, as I am persuaded
he was never in his life time more fit for Your Majesty's favor then he is
now: therefore if your Majesty will not mar it by lingering, but give over at
the best (and now you have made so good a full point, receive him again with
tenderness) I shall then think that all that is past, is for the best. Whereat,
I remember, she took exceeding great Contentment, and did often iterate and put
me in mind, that she had ever said, that her Proceeding should be ad
reparationem, and not ad ruinam; as who says, that now is the time I should
plainly perceive that that saying of hers should prove true. And further, she
willed me to set down in writing all that passed that day; I obeyed her
Commandment, and within some few days after brought her again the Narration,
which I did read unto her in two several Afternoons: And when I came to that
part that set forth my Lords own Answer (which was my principal care) I do well
bear in mind that she was extraordinarily moved with it, with kindness and
relenting toward my Lord, and told me afterward, (speaking how well I had
expressed my Lords part) that she perceived old love would not be forgotten:
Whereunto I answered suddenly, that I hoped she meant that by her self. But in
Conclusion, I did advise her, that now she had taken a representation of the
matter to her self, that she would let it go no further: (for, Madam, said I)
the Fire blazeth well already, what should you tumble it? And besides, it may
please you keep a convenience with your self in this Case; for since your
express direction was, there should be no Register nor Clerk to take this
Sentence, nor no Record or Memorial made up of the Proceeding, why should you
now do that Popularly, which you would not admit to be done Judicially?
Whereupon she did agree, that that Writing should be suppressed; and, I think,
there were not five persons that ever saw it. But from this time forth, during
the whole latter end of that Summer, while the Court was at Non-such and
Oatland, I made it my task and scope to take and give occasions for my Lords
redintegration in his Fortunes. Which my intention I did also signify to my
Lord, as soon as ever he was at Liberty; whereby I might without peril of the
Queens indignation write to him; and having received from his Lordship a
courteous and loving acceptance of my good will and endeavors, I did apply it
in all my accesses to the Queen, which were very many at that time, and
purposely sought and wrought upon other variable pretenses, but only and
chiefly for that purpose. And on the other side, I did not forbear to give my
Lord from time to time faithful advertisement, what I found, and what I wished.
And I drew for him, by his appointment, some Letters to her Majesty, which
though I knew well his Lordships gift and style was far better then mine own,
yet because he required it, alleging, that by his long restraint he was grown
almost a stranger to the Queens present conceits, I was ready to perform it;
and sure I am, that for the space of six weeks, or two months, it prospered so
well, as I expected continually his restoring to his attendance. And I was
never better welcome to the Queen, nor more made of, then when I spoke fullest
and boldest for him: in which Kind the particulars were exceeding many,
whereof, for an example, I will remember to your Lordship one or two; as at one
time, I call to mind, her Majesty was speaking of a Fellow that undertook to
cure, or at least to ease my Brother of his Gout, and asked me how it went
forwards? And I told her Majesty, that at first he received good by it, but
after, in the course of his Cure, he found himself at a stay, or rather worse:
The Queen said again, I will tell you, Bacon, the Error of it; The manner of
these Physicians, and especially these Empiricks, is, to continue one kind of
medicine, which, at the first, is proper, being to draw out the ill humor; but
after, they have not the discretion to change their medicine, but apply still
drawing medicines, when they should rather intend to cure and corroborate the
part. Good Lord, Madam (said I) how wisely and aptly can you speak and discern
of Physic ministered to the body, and consider not that there is the like
reason of Physic ministered to the mind; as now, in the case of my Lord of
Essex, your Princely word ever was, that you intended ever to reform his mind,
and not ruin his Fortune: I know well, you cannot but think you have drawn the
humor sufficiently; and therefore it were more then time, and it were but for
doubt of mortifying or exulcerating, that you did apply and minister strength
and comfort unto him; for these same gradations of yours, are fitter to
corrupt, than to correct any mind of greatness. And another time, I remember,
she told me for News, that my Lord had written to her some very dutiful
Letters, and that she had been moved by them; and when she took it to be the
abundance of his heart, she found it to be but a preparative to a Suit for the
renewing of his Farm of sweet Wines: Whereto I replied, Alas Madam, how does
your Majesty construe of these things, as if these two could not stand well
together, which indeed nature has planted in all Creatures? for there are but
two sympathies, the one toward Perfection, the other toward Preservation;
That to Perfection, as the Iron tends to the Loadstone; that to Preservation,
as the Vine will creep unto a Stake or Prop that stands by it, not for any love
to the stake, but to uphold it self. And therefore Madam, you must distinguish,
my Lords desire to do you service, is as to his perfection, that which he
thinks himself to be bound for; whereas, his desire to obtain this thing of
you, is but for a sustentation; and not to trouble your Lordship with many
other particulars like unto this, it was at the same time that I did draw, by
my Lords privitie, and by his appointment, two Letters, the one written as from
my brother, the other, as an answer returned from my Lord; both to be by me in
secret manner showed to the Queen; which it pleased my Lord very strangely to
mention at the bar: the scope of which were but to represent and picture forth
unto her Majesty my Lords mind to be such as I know her Majesty would fainest
have had it; which Letters whosoever shall see (for they cannot now be
retracted or altered, being by reason of my brother, or his Lordships servants
delivery, long since come into diverse hands) let him judge, specially if he
knew the Queen, and do remember those times, whether they were not the labors
of one that sought to bring the Queen about for my Lord of Essex his good. The
truth is, That the issue of all this dealing grew to this, that the Queen, by
some slackness of my Lord, as I imagine, liked him worse and worse, and grew
more incensed toward him: Then, she remembering belike the continual and
incessant, and confident speeches and courses that I had held on my Lords side,
became utterly alienated from me, and for the space of at least three months,
(which was between Michaelmas and New Years tide following) would not so much
as look on me, but turned away from me with express and purpose-like
discountenance wheresoever she saw me, and at such time as I desired to speak
with Her about Law business, ever sent me forth very slight refusals; insomuch
as it is most true, that immediately after New-years-tide I desired to speak
with her, and being admitted to Her, I dealt with her plainly, and said: Madam,
I see you withdraw your favor from me; and now I have lost many friends for
your sake, I must lose you too; you have put me like one of those that the
French men call Infans perdus, that serve on foot before horsemen, so have you
put me into matters of envy without place or without strength; and I know, at
Chess a pawn before the King is ever much played upon: a great many love me not,
because they think I have been against my Lord of Essex; and you love me not,
because you know I have been for him: yet will I never repent me that I have
dealt in simplicity of heart toward you both, without respect of Cautions to
my self, and therefore vivus vidensque pereo: If I do break my neck, I shall do
it as Dorrington did, which walked on the Battlements of the Church many days,
and took a view and survey where he should fall; and so, Madam (said I) I am
not so simple, but that I take a prospect of my own overthrow; only I thought I
would tell you so much, that you may know, it was faith and not folly that
brought me into it; and so I will pray for you: upon which speeches of mine,
uttered with some Passion, it is true, Her Majesty was exceedingly moved, and
accumulated a number of kind and gracious words upon me, and willed me to rest
upon this, Gratia mea sufficit, and a number of other sensible and tender words
and demonstrations; such as more could not be: but as touching my Lord of
Essex, ne verbum quidem. Whereupon I departed, resting then determined to
meddle no more in the matter, as that that I saw would overthrow me, and not be
able to do him any good. And thus I made mine own peace, with my own
Confidence, at that time; and this was the last time I saw her Majesty before
the eighth of February, which was the day of my Lord of Essex his misfortune:
After which time, for that I performed at the Bar in my public service, your
Lordship knows, by the rules of duty, I was to do it honestly, without
prevarication: but for any putting my self in it, I protest before God, I never
moved the Queen, nor any person living, concerning my being used in the
service, either of evidence or of examination; but it was merely laid upon me
with the rest of my fellows. And for the time that passed between the
arraignment and my Lords suffering, I well remember I was but once with the
Queen, at what time, though I durst not deal directly for my Lord, as things
then stood, yet generally I did both commend her Majesty's mercy, terming it to
her as an excellent balm, that did continually distill from her Sovereign
hands, and made an excellent odor in the scents of her people; and not only
so, but I took hardiness to extenuate, not the fact (for that I durst not) but
the danger, telling her, that if some base or cruel-minded persons had entered
into such an action, it might have caused much blood and combustion; but it
appeared well, they were such as knew not how to play the Malefactors, and some
other words, which I now omit. And as for the rest of the carriage of my self
in that service, I have many honorable witnesses that can tell, that the next
day after my Lords arraignment, by my diligence and information, touching the
quality and nature of the offenders, six of nine were stayed, which otherwise
had been attainted, I bringing their Lordships Letter for their stay, after the
Jury was sworn to pass upon them; so near it went: and how careful I was; and
made it my part, that whosoever was in trouble about that matter, as soon as
ever his case was sufficiently known and defined of, might not continue in
restraint, but be set at liberty; and many other parts, which I am well assured
of, stood with the duty of an honest man. But indeed, I will not deny, for the
case of Sir Thomas Smith of London, the Queen demanding my opinion of it, I
told her I thought it was as hard as many of the rest; but what was the reason?
because at that time I had seen only his accusation; and had never been present
at any examination of his; and the matter so standing, I had been very untrue
to my service, if I had not delivered that opinion. But afterward, upon a
re-examination of some that charged him, who weakened their own testimony; and
especially hearing himself viva voce, I went instantly to the Queen, out of the
soundness of my Conscience, not regarding what opinion I had formerly
delivered, and told her Majesty, I was satisfied and resolved in my Conscience,
that for the reputation of the Action, the Plot was to countenance the Action
farther by him in respect of his place, then they had indeed any interest or
intelligence with him; it is very true also, about that time her Majesty taking
a liking of my Pen, upon that which I formerly had done concerning the
Proceeding at York-house, and likewise upon some former Declarations, which in
sormer times by her appointment I put in writing, commanded me to pen that Book
which was published for the better satisfaction of the World, which I did, but
so as never Secretary had more particular and express directions and
instructions in every point, how to guide my hand in it; and not only so, but
after that I had made a first draught thereof, and propounded it to certain
principal Counselors, by her Majesty's appointment it was perused, weighed,
censured, altered, and made almost a new Writing, according to their Lordships
better consideration, wherein their Lordships and my self both were as
religious, and curious of truth, as desirous of satisfaction: and my self,
indeed, gave only words and form of style, in pursuing their directions: And
after it had passed their allowance, it was again exactly perused by the Queen
her self, and some alterations made again by her appointment; nay, and after it
was set to Print, the Queen, who, as your Lordship knows, as she was
excellent in great matters, so she was exquisite in small, and noted that I
could not forget my ancient respect to my Lord of Essex, in terming him ever my
Lord of Essex, in almost every Page of the Book, which she thought not fit, but
would have it made Essex, or the late Earl of Essex: whereupon, of force, it
was Printed de novo, and the first Copies suppressed, by her peremptory
Commandment. And this, my Lord, to my furthest remembrance, is all that passed,
wherein I had part, which I have set down as near as I could in the very words
and speeches as were used, not because they are worth the repetition, I mean
those of mine, but to the end your Lordship may lively and plainly discern
between the face of Truth, and a smooth Tale. And the rather also, because in
things that passed a good while since, the very words and phrases did sometimes
bring to my-remembrance the matters, wherein I refer me to your honorable
Judgment, whether you do not see the traces of an honest man; and had I been as
well believed, either by the Queen or my Lord, as I was well heard by them
both, both my Lord had been fortunate, and so had my self in his Fortune.

To conclude therefore, I humbly pray your Lordship to pardon me, for troubling
you with this long Narration, and that you will vouchsafe to hold me in your
good opinion, till you know I have deserved, or find that I shall deserve the
contrary; and even so I continue,

At your Lordships honorable Commandments, very humble, F. B.

A Discourse touching Helps for the Intellectual Powers, by Sir Francis Bacon.
I Did ever hold it for an insolent and unlucky saying, Faber quisque fortunas
suas; except it be uttered only as an hortative, or spur, to correct sloth: For
otherwise, if it be believed as it sounds, and that a man enters into an
high imagination that he can compass and fathom all Accidents, and ascribes
all Successes to his drifts and reaches, and the contrary to his errors and
sleepings; it is commonly seen, that the Evening fortune of that man is not so
prosperous, as of him that, without slacking of his industry, attributes much
to Felicity and Providence above him. But if the Sentence were turned to this,
Faber quisque ingenii sui, it were somewhat more true, and much more
profitable; because it would teach men to bend themselves to reform those
imperfections in themselves, which now they seek but to cover; and to attain
those virtues and good parts, which now they seek but to have only in show and
demonstration. Yet, notwithstanding, every man attempteth to be of the first
Trade of Carpenters, and few bind themselves to the second; whereas,
nevertheless, the rising in Fortune seldom amendeth the mind; but, on the other
side, the removing of the stones and impediments of the mind, does often clear
the passage and current to a man's Fortune But certain it is, whether it be
believed or no, that as the most excellent of Metals, Gold, is of all others
the most pliant, and most enduring to be wrought; so of all living and
breathing substances, the perfectest, Man, is the most susceptible of help,
improvement, imprestion, and alteration, and not only in his Body, but in his
Mind and spirit; and there again, not only in his Appetite and Affection, but
in his powers of Wit and Reason.

For, as to the Body of Man, we find many and strange experiences, how Nature
is over-wrought by custom, even in actions that seem of most difficulty, and
least possible. As first, in voluntary motion, which though it be termed
voluntary, yet the highest degrees of it are not voluntary; for it is in my
power and will to run, but to run faster than according to my lightness, or
disposition of body, is not in my power nor will. We see the industry and
practice of Tumblers and Funambulo's, what effects of great wonder it brings
the body of man unto. So for suffering of pain and dolor, which is thought so
contrary to the nature of man, there is much example of Penances, in strict
Orders of Superstition, what they do endure; such as may well verify the
report of the Spartan Boys, which were wont to be scourged upon the Altar so
bitterly, as sometimes they died of it, and yet were never heard to complain.
And to pass to those Faculties which are reckoned more involuntary, as long
fasting and abstinency, and the contrary extreme, voracity; the leaving and
forbearing the use of drink for altogether, the enduring vehement cold, and the
like; there have not wanted, neither do want, diverse examples of strange
victories over the body, in every of these. Nay, in respiration, the proof has
been of some, who by continual use of diving and working under the water, have
brought themselves to be able to hold their Breath an incredible time; and
others, that have been able, without suffocation, to endure the stifling breath
of an Oven or Furnace, so heated, as though it did not scald nor burn, yet it
was many degrees too hot for any man, not made to it, to breath or take in: And
some Impostors and Counterfeits likewise, have been able to wreath and cast
their bodies into strange forms and motions; yea, and others to bring
themselves into Trances and Astonishments. All which Examples do demonstrate,
how variously, and to how high points and degrees the body of man may be (as it
were) molded and wrought. And if any man conceive, that it is some seeret
propriety of Nature that has been in those persons which have attained to
those points, and that it is not open for every man to do the like, though he
had been put to it; for which cause, such things come but very rarely to pass:
It is true, no doubt, that some persons are apter than others; but so, as the
more aptness causes perfection, but the less aptness does not disable; so that
for Example, the more apt Child that is taken to be made a Funambulo, will
prove more excellent in his Feats; but the less apt will be Gregarius Funambulo
also. And there is small question, but that these abilities would have been
more common; and others of like sort not attempted, would likewise have been
brought upon the Stage, but for two Reasons: The one, because of men's
diffidence, in prejudging them as impossibilities; for it holds in these
things, which the Poet says, Possunt, quia posse videntur; for no man shall
know how much may be done, except he believe much may be done: The other Reason
is, because they be but practices base and inglorious, and of no great use, and
therefore sequestered from reward of value; and on the other side painful, so as
the recompense balanceth not with the travel and suffering.

And as to the Will of man, it is that which is most manageable and obedient,
as that which admits most Medicines to cure and alter it. The most sovereign
of all is Religion, which is able to change and transform it in the deepest and
most inward inclinations and motions. And next to this, Opinion and
Apprehension, whether it be infused by Tradition and Institution, or wrought in
by Disputation and Persuasion. And the third is Example, which transforms the
Will of man into the similitude of that which is most observant and familiar
toward it. And the fourth is, when one affection is healed and corrected by
another. As when Cowardice is remedied by Shame and Dishonor; or Sluggishness
and Backwardness by Indignation and Emulation, and so of the like. And lastly,
when all these means, or any of them, have new framed or formed humane Will,
then does Custom and Habit corroborate and confirm all the rest: Therefore it
is no marvel, though this faculty of the mind (of Will and Election) which
inclines Affection and Appetite, being but the inceptions and rudiments of
Will, may be so well governed and managed, because it admits access to so
diverse Remedies to be applied to it, and to work upon it. The effects whereof
are so many, and so known, as require no enumeration; but generally they do
issue, as Medicines do, into kinds of Cures; whereof the one is a just or true
Cure, and the other is called Palliation; for either the labor and intention
is, to reform the affections really and truly, restraining them, if they be too
violent, and raising them, if they be too soft and weak, or else it is to cover
them; or if occasion be, to pretend them, and represent them. Of the former
sort, whereof the Examples are plentiful in the Schools of Philosophers, and in
all other Institutions of Moral Virtue: And of the other sort, the Examples are
more plentiful in the Courts of Princes, and in all Politic Traffic; where it
is ordinary to find, not only profound dissimulations, and suffocating the
affections, that no note or mark appear of them outwardly, but also lively
simulations and affectations, carrying the Tokens of Passions which are not; as
Risus jussus, and Lachrymae coactae, and the like.

Of Helps of the Intellectual Powers.
The Intellectual Powers have fewer means to work upon them, than the Will, or
Body of Man; but the one that prevails, that is Exercise, works more
forcibly in them than in the rest.

The ancient Habit of the Philosophers; Si quis quaerat, in utramque partem, de
omni Scibili. These that follow. are but indigested Notes.


The Exercise of Scholars, making Verses ex tempore.

Stans pede in uno.

The Exercise of Lawyers, in Memory Narrative.

The Exercise of Sophists, and Io, ad oppositum, with manifest effect.

Artificial Memory greatly helped by Exercise.

The Exercise of Buffons, to draw all things to Conceits Ridiculous.

The Means that help the Understanding, and faculties thereof, are not Example,
(as in the Will, by conversation; and here, the conceit of Imitation, already
digested; with the consutation, Obiter, si videbitur, of Tullies Opinion,
advising a man to take some one to imitate. Similitude of faces analalysed.)

Arts, Logic, Rhetoric; The Ancients, Aristotle, Plato, Thaestetus, Gorgias,
Litigiosus, vel Sophista, Protagoras, Aristotle, Schola sua. Topics, Elenchs,
Rhetoricks, Organon, Cicero, Hermogenes.

The Neotericks, Ramus, Agricola, Nil sacri Lullius. His Typocosmia, studying
Coopers Dictionary; Matthaeus Collections of proper Words for Metaphors.
Agrippa, de Vanitate, etc.

Quaer. If not here, of Imitation.

Collections preparative. Aristotle's similitude of a Shooe-makers Shop full of
Shoes of all sorts: Demosthenes Exordia Concionum: Tullies Precept of Theses
of all sorts preparative.

The relying upon Exercise, with the difference of using and tempering the
Instrument: And the similitude of prescribing against the Laws of Nature, and
of Estate.

Five Points.
1. That Exercises are to be framed to the life; that is to say, to work
Ability in that kind, whereof a man in the course of Action shall have most use.

2. The indirect and oblique Exercises, which do per parts, and per
consequentiam, enable these Faculties; which perhaps direct Exercise at first,
would but distort. And these have chiefly place, where the Faculty is weak; not
per se, but per Accidents: As if want of Memory, grow through lightness of Wit,
and want of stayed Attention; than the Mathematics, or the Law helps;
because they are things, wherein if the mind once roam, it cannot recover.

3. Of the Advantages of Exercise; as to dance with heavy Shoes, to march with
heavy Armor and Carriage; and the contrary Advantage (in Natures very dull and
unapt) of working Alacrity, by framing an Exercise with some delight or
affection.

-- Veluti pueris dant Crustula blandi
Doctores, Elementa velint ut discere prima.
4. Of the Cautions of Exercise; as to beware, left by evil doing, (as all
beginners do weakly) a man grow not, and be inveterate in an ill Habit; and so
take not the advantage of Custom in perfection, but in confirming ill.
Slubbering on the Lute.

5. The Marshalling and Sequel of Sciences and Practices; Logic and Rhetoric
should be used to be read after Poesy, History and Philosophy; first, Exercise
to do things well and clean; after, promptly and readily.

The Exercises in the Universities and Schools, are of Memory and Invention,
either to speak by heart that which is set down verbatim, or to speak ex
tempore; whereas, there is little use in Action of either of both: But most
things which we utter, are neither verbally premeditate, nor merely extemporal;
therefore Exercise would be framed to take a little breathing, and to consider
of Heads, and then to fit and form the Speech ex tempore. This would be done in
two manners, both with Writing in Tables; and without, for in most Actions it
is permitted and passable to use the Note; whereunto if a man be not
accustomed, it will put him out.

There is no use of a Narrative Memory in Academies, viz. with Circumstances of
Times, Persons and Places, and with Names; and it is one Art to discourse, and
another to relate and describe: And herein use and actionis most conversant.

Also to Sum up and Contract, is a thing in action of very general use.

Sir Francis Bacon, to the King.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
IN the midst of my Misery, which is rather assuaged by Remembrance, than by
Hope, my chiefest worldly Comfort is, to think, That since the time I had the
first Vote of the lower House of Parliament for Commissioner of the Union,
until the time that I was this Parliament chosen by both Houses, for their
Messenger to Your Majesty in the Petition of Religion (which two, were my first
and last Services.) I was evermore so happy, as to have my poor Services
graciously accepted by Your Majesty, and likewise not to have had any of them
miscarry in my hands. Neither of which points, I can any ways take to my self;
but ascribe the former to Your Majesty's Goodness, and the latter to Your
prudent Directions, which I was ever careful to have, and keep: For, as I have
often said to Your Majesty, I was toward you but as a Bucket, and a Cestern to
draw forth and conserve, and Your Self was the Fountain. Unto this comfort of
Nineteen years Prosperity, there succeeded a Comfort even in my greatest
Adversity, somewhat of the same Nature, which is, That in those Offenses
wherewith I was charged, there was not any one that had special Relation to
Your Majesty, or any Your particular Commandments: For as toward Almighty God,
there are Offenses against the first and second Table, and yet all against God;
so with the Servants of Kings, there are Offenses more immediate against the
Sovereign, although all Offenses against Law, are also against the King. Unto
which Comfort, there is added this Circumstance, That as my Faults were not
against Your Majesty, otherwise than as all Faults are, so my Fall is not Your
Majesty's Act, otherwise than as all Acts of Justice are Yours. This I write
not to insinuate with Your Majesty, but as a most humble Appeal to Your
Majesty's gracious Remembrance, how honest and direct You have ever found me in
Your Service, whereby I have an assured Belief, That there is in Your Majesty's
Princely Thoughts, a great deal of Serenity, and Clearness to me, Your
Majesty's now prostrate, and cast-down Servant.

Neither (my most gracious Sovereign) do I by this mentioning of my Services,
lay claim to Your Princely Grace and Bounty, though the Privilege of Calamity
do bear that Form of Petition. I know well, had they been much more, they had
been but my bounden Duty; nay, I must also confess, That they were from time to
time far above my Merit, super-rewarded by Your Majesty's Benefits, which You
heaped upon me. Your Majesty was, and is, that Man to me, that raised and
advanced me Nine times, Thrice in Dignity, and Six times in Office. The places
indeed were the painfullest of all Your Service, but then they had both Honor
and Profit, and the then Profits, might have maintained my now Honor, if I had
been wise. Neither was Your Majesty's immediate Liberality wanting toward me
in some Gifts, if I may hold them. All this I do most thankfully acknowledge,
and do herewith conclude, That for any thing arising from my self to move Your
Eye of Pity toward me, there is much more in my present Misery, than in my
past Services; save that the same Your Majesty's Goodness, that may give Relief
to the one, may give Value to the other.

And indeed, if it may please Your Majesty, This Theme of my Misery is so
plentiful, as it need not be coupled with any thing else. I have been some
body, by Your Majesty's singular and undeserved Favor, even the prime Officer
of Your Kingdom, Your Majesty's Arm has been often over mine in Council, when
You preceded at the Table, so near I was, I have born Your Majesty's Image in
metal, much more in heart, I was never in Nineteen years Service chidden by
Your Majesty, but contrari wise often overjoyed, when Your Majesty would
sometimes say, I was a good Husband for you, though none for my Self.
Sometimes, That I had a way to deal in business, suavibus modis, which was the
way which was most according to Your own heart; and other most gracious
Speeches of Affection and Trust which I feed on till this day: But why should I
speak of these things which are now vanished, but only the better to express my
Downfall? For now it is thus with me, I am a year and a half old in misery,
though (I must ever acknowledge) not without some mixture of Your Majesty's
Grace and Mercy; for I do not think it possible, That any you once loved,
should be totally miserable. My own means, through mine own improvidence, are
poor and weak, little better than my Father left me: The poor things which I
have had from Your Majesty, are either in Question, or at Courtesy. My
Dignities remain marks of your past Favor, but yet burdens withal of my
present Fortune. The poor Remnants which I had of my former Fortunes, in Plate
or Jewels, I have spread upon poor men unto whom I owed, fearce leaving my self
bread; so as to conclude, I must pour out my misery before Your Majesty, so far
as to say, Si deseris tu, perimus.

But as I can offer to Your Majesty's Compassion, little arising from my self
to move You, except it be my extreme misery, which I have truly laid open, so
looking up to Your Majesty, Your Self, I should think I committed Cains fault,
if I should despair. Your Majesty is a King, whose heart is as unscrutable for
secret motions of Goodness, as for depth of Wisdom. You are Creator like,
Factive, and not Destructive; You are a Prince, in whom I have ever noted an
avertion against any thing that savoured of a hard heart; as on the other side,
Your Princely Eye was wont to meet with any motion that was made on the
relieving part: Therefore, as one that has had the happiness to know Your
Majesty's near hand, I have (most gracious Sovereign) faith enough for a
Miracle, much more for a Grace, That Your Majesty will not suffer Your poor
Creature to be utterly defaced, nor blot that Name quite out of Your Book, upon
which Your Sacred hand has been so ost, for new Ornaments and Additions. Unto
this degree of Compassion, I hope, God above, of whose mercy toward me, both
in my Prosperity and Adversity, I have had great Testimonies and Pledges
(though mine own manifold and wretched unthankfulness, might have averted them)
will dispose Your Princely heart, already prepared to all Piety: And why should
I not think, but that Thrice Noble Prince, who would have pulled me out of the
fire of a Sentence, will help to pull me (if I may use that homely Phrase) out
of the mire of an abject and sordid Condition in my last days? And that
excellent Favorite of Yours (the goodness of whose Nature contendeth with the
greatness of his Fortune, and who counts it a prize, a second prize to be a
good Friend, after that prize which he carries to be a good Servant) will kiss
Your hands with joy for any work of Piety You shall do for me: And as all
commiserating persons (specially such as find their hearts void of malice) are
apt to think, that all men pity them. I assure my self, that the Lords of the
Council (who out of their Wisdom and Nobleness cannot but be sensible of humane
Events) will in this way which I go, for the Relief of my Estate further, and
advance Your Majesty's goodness toward me; for there is, as I conceive, a kind
of Fraternity between great men that are, and those that have been, being but
the several Tenses of one Verb: Nay, I do further presume, that both Houses of
Parliament will love their Justice the better, if it end not in my Ruin; for I
have been often told, by many of my Lords (as it were in excusing the severity
of the Sentence) that they knew they left me in good hands. And Your Majesty
knows well, I have been all my life long acceptable to those Assemblies, not
by Flattery, but by Moderation, and by honest expressing of a desire to have
all things go fairly and well.

But (if it may please Your Majesty) for Saints, I shall give them Reverence,
but no Adoration; my Address is to Your Majesty, the Fountain of Goodness. Your
Majesty shall by the Grace of God, not feel that in Gift, which I shall
extremely feel in Help; for my Desires are moderate, and my Courses measured to
a life orderly and reserved, hoping still to do Your Majesty Honor in my way:
Only I most humbly beseech Your Majesty to give me leave to conclude with those
words, which Necessity speaks, Help me dear Sovereign, Lord and Master, and
pity me so far, as I, that have born a Bag, be not now in my Age, forced in
effect, to bear a Wallett; nor I that desire to live to study, may not be
driven to study to live. I most humbly crave pardon of a long Letter, after a
long silence: God of Heaven ever bless, preserve and prosper Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's poor Ancient Servant and Beadsman. Fr. St. Alban.

Certain Copies of Letters written by Sir William Cecil Knight, Secretary of
Estate to Queen Elizabeth, to Sir Hen. Norris Knight, Ambassador for the said
Queen, Resident in France.
SIR,
I Am constrained to use the hand of my servant in writing unto you, because I
find it somewhat grievous to use mine own at this present: The Queens Majesty
has received your letters with very good contentation, and allows your
manner of beginning and proceeding, as well, I dare assure you, as your self
could devise; which I do not in words only speak, but wish you to take them
for as good a truth as I can inform.

The rare manner of your entertainment has moved the Queens Majesty to Muze
upon what course it should be, being more then has Entertainment above
ordinary.
been used in like cases to her Ambassadors; and such as besides your own
report has been by others very largely advertised; and for that in such things
guesses be but doubtful, I pray you by your next advertise me what your self
does think of it; and in the mean time, I know you are not untaught to judge of
the difference of fair words from good deeds, as the sayingis, Fortuna cum
adblanditur captum advenit: The Queens Majesty means to require this
Ambassador expressly to write unto the King there, in how good part she takes
this manner of grateful acceptance of you her servant there, giving him to
understand how good report you have made thereof, and how much comforted you
are, by this manner, to proceed in her service there.

I would have had her Majesty to have written her own letters to the King,
hereof; But her Majesty made choice rather to speak with the To know the cause
thereof.
Ambassador, which she will do tomorrow, who comes hither, and La Croq which
comes out of Scotland, and departs shortly from hence thither into France,
having been a good time in manner as an Ambassador with the Scottish Queen.

Monsieur Moret is, I think, on the way coming hither out of Scotland; my Lord
of Bedford, who came long ago out of Scotland, arrived here but of late, and
has brought us good report from the Scottish Queen, of her good disposition to
keep peace and amity with the Queens Majesty.

Of late Shane Oneal has made means to the Lord Deputy of Ireland, to be
received into Grace, pretending that he has not meant any manner of
unlawfulness unto the Queen; by which is gathered, that he grows weary of his
lewdness; and yet I think he is not otherwise to be reformed, then by sharp
prosecution, which is intended to be followed no whit the less for any his fair
writings, as reason is.

Of the troubles of the Low Countries, I think you be as well advertised there
as we can be here; and of the likelihood of the Kings not coming into the Low
Countries.

I cannot tell whether you are yet acquainted with Captain Cockburne, whose
humor when you know, as I think Barnaby can show you, I doubt not but you shall
have of his hand no lack of intelligence, which you must credit as you shall
see cause by proof of the event; he writes almost weekly to me, and looks
for as many answers, which I cannot have leisure to make him; but I pray let
him understand that I accept his writing in very good part.

The manner of the dealing with them there for the particular causes contained
in your instructions is very well to be liked; and I wish the success of the
answers to prove as good as the beginning has appearance, and especially for
the relief of the poor Prisoners in the Galleys, whose stay, I fear, will grow
indirectly by Monsieur de Foix, to get thereby the acquital of Lestrille, whom
surely he is bound in honor to see restored.

Since I had written thus much by my servants hand, and meant yester-night to
have ended the letter; I thought good to stay until this present, that I knew
by the French Ambassador, what De la Crocq should do here; and amongst other
things, the Queens Majesty has very earnestly expressed to the Ambassador her
good liking and estimation of your Honorable entertainment, whereof you did
advertise her Majesty; and contrary to her former determination, did tell La
Crocq, that he should carry her Majesty's letters to the French King, of
special thanks for the same; besides words of visitation, nothing passed this
day otherwise; and therefore meaning not to keep your servant any longer, I
end, with my very hearty commendations to your self, and my Lady, and wish as
well to you and all yours, as to my self:

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Feb. 10. 1566.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Hen. Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador in France.
SIR,
THe Queens Majesty continues her good liking of your manner of negotiation,
and your advertisements to her Majesty, which she wishes you to continue: She
also allows your discretion, in writing apart to me, in matters containing
trouble and business, and to her of Advice; of all other things, she most
marvelleth at the answer sent you by Monsieur De Foix, who seems not disposed
to perform his promise made to the Queens Majesty, by a cavillation, alleging
it to have been for his Master; wherefore you shall do well to say to him. That
upon his answer reported hither, the Queens Majesty seems to make doubt that
you have not rightly conceived it; and therefore she has re-charged you to
speak with himself, and to require his answer; for you may say, her Majesty
advertised you that she cannot be well persuaded that you will forget your
promise firmly made to her self, for the safe delivery of Lestrille; and when
he was escaped of your advertisement, that he was taken, and that he should be
returned into England; and if such a promise be no otherwise kept, being made
unto her, you may say her Majesty shall find it strange how to credit an
Ambassador; and so her Majesty would that you should charge him in fair words,
and good manners, the best you can, to obtain Lestrille. You may do well to
learn how many prisoners do remain in the Galleys.

The strange news of the death of the King of Scots will be come thither before
these letters; but by your son you shall know as much as I have.

The Queens Majesty would fain have a Tailor that had skill to make her
Apparel, both after the French and Italian manner; and she thinks that you
might use some means to obtain some one such there as serves that Queen,
without mentioning any manner of request in the Queen Majesty's name. First, to
cause my Lady, your wife, to use some such means to get one, as thereof
knowledge might not come to the Queen Mothers ears, of whom the Queens Majesty
thinks thus, That if she did understand that it were a matter wherein her
Majesty might be pleasured, she would offer to send one to the Queens Majesty:
Nevertheless, if it cannot be so obtained by this indirect means, then her
Majesty would have you devise some other good means to obtain one that were
skillful.

I have staid your Son from going hence now these two days, upon the Queens
Majesty's Commandment; for that she would have him to have as much of the truth
of the circumstances of the murder of the King of Scots as might be; and
hitherto the same is hard to come by, otherwise then in a generality, that he
was strangled, and his lodging razed with Gunpowder; his Father was first said
to have been slain; but it is not true, for he was at Glasco at that time. It
is constantly affirmed that there were thirty at the killing of him.

We look hourly for Robert Melvin from the Queen of Scots, by whom we must
have that which he has order to report.

The Queens Majesty sent yesterday my Lady Howard, and my wife, to the Lady
Lenox to the Tower, to open this matter unto her, who could not be by any means
kept from such passions of mind, as the horriblness of the fact did require.
And this last night were with the said Lady, the Dean of Westminster, and
Doctor Huick; and I hope her Majesty will show some favorable compassion of
the said Lady, whom any humane nature must needs pity. After I had written thus
far, Master Melvin came hither from Scotland, by whom we looked that we should
have heard many of the circumstances of this murder; but he cannot, or may
not, tell us any more then we heard before; the most suspicion that I can hear,
is, of the Earl Bothwell; but yet I would not be the Author of any such report,
but only do mean to inform you, as I hear, and as I mean, when I shall have
more.

The Queens Majesty caused the French Ambassador to be informed of the answer
made to you by Monsieur de Foix concerning Lestrille, who says, when he has
spoken with the Queens Majesty here, he will advertise the King then thereof.
He seemed to understand, first, how some bargain might be made for Lestrille.
Secondly, whether the Queens Majesty could not be pleased to have him delivered
to you; but the messenger answered him, that he knew no other, but to have him
returned hither according to the promise; and so you may do well therein to
persist.

Now seeing I am come to no more knowledge from Scotland, I will stay your Son
no longer, wishing him well to come to you, and long to enjoy both you and my
Lady;

Yours assuredly, W. Cecill.
From Westminster, 20. Feb. 1566. Postscript.

I thank you for your offer, to send me the Book de translation' de Religion',
which I have, but if there be any particular Charts newly printed, I pray you
send me a Callender thereof, and of any new Books, where: upon I may chance
crave of you some.



To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
AFter my very hearty commendations, I send you herewith a Letter from the
Queens Majesty, by which you shall understand what her pleasure is for you to
deal with the French King; whereunto you may add, as you see occasion, That you
are informed, very credibly, that Monlues Company, now at their return, are
suffered to make Port sale of all that they have brought home from the Isles of
Medera. And therefore, if it might please his Majesty to give direct order and
charge, for due restitution of that which was spoiled from the Queens Subjects;
It is likely the parties shall be able enough to make recompense, my meaning
herein is, that the French King and his Council may perceive that it is well
known, how these Pirates are suffered to do what they will, notwithstanding
contrary Proclamations; and yet you shall so utter this matter, as not that you
find fault with this manner of sufferance, for that ought properly to be to
the Spanish or Portugal Ambassador, with whom you may sometime deal, to
understand how they do know what is done, and how they do interpret it.

You shall shortly hear of some special person, that shall be sent thither in
Embassage, to join with you for the demanding of Callis, which is due, by the
Treaty of Cambray, to be restored to the Queens Majesty the second day of April
next; but who it is that shall come, as yet I cannot advertise.

The manner of the death of the King of Scots is not yet discovered to us, for
the knowledge of the Author thereof; but there has been Proclamation made,
that whosoever would reveal the offenders shall have two thousand pound
Scottish; and if he were a party, should have his pardon and five hundred
pounds; the day after a Bill was set up in Edinburgh, in this sort, I,
according to the Proclamation, have made inquisition for the slaughter of the
King, and do find the Earl Bothwell, Mr. James Bafour, Parson of Flisk, Mr.
David Chamber, and Black Mr. John Spence, the principal devisers thereof; and
if this be not true, spir at Gilbert Bafour. There were also words added, which
I am loath to report, that touched the Queen of Scots, which I hold best to be
suppressed: Further, such persons anointed are not to be thought ill of without
manifest proof.

The next day following, a second Proclamation was made, repeating the former
Bill, willing the party to subscribe his name, and he should be pardoned, and
have the money according to the first Proclamation. The next day, being the
nineteenth of February, a second Bill was set up in the former place, offering
to compear and avow the matter; so as the money might be put into indifferent
hands; and that Sir Francis Bastine, Joseph and Moses Mishe be taken; and then
he the exhibitor of the Bill would avow the whole matter, and declare every
man's act. Thus far things passed till that day, and since that, I hear that
much unquietness is like to grow about that matter; and the common speech
touches the Earls, Bothwell and Huntly, who remain with the Queen; but how
true the accusations are, I will not take upon me to affirm the one or the
other; neither would I have you to utter any of these things, to make
condemnation of any of them, but as reports, not doubting but shortly God will
cause the truth to be revealed. There do adhere together with the Earl of
Lenox, the Earls of Argile, Morton, Athell, Morrey, Catness, and Glencarne,
who mean to be at Edinburgh very shortly, as they pretend, to search out the
malefactors.

Of late you wrote unto me of one King an Euglishman, who does misuse himself
very much, of whom if you would write unto me somewhat more particularly, for
the proof his Traitorous speeches, whereby there might be some good ground
made, how to have him demanded, you shall hear more thereof, and so shall
(percase) by the next, though I do not hear from you; and so fare you heartily
well.

Yours assuredly W. Cecil.
Westminster. 5. March, 1566. Postscript.
Because I have not presently leisure to write to Mr. Man, Ambassador in Spain,
I pray you to let him understand of such advertisments as I send you, and such
other things as you shall think meet; And to convey the letters by the Spanish
Ambassadors means, Resident there in that Court.



To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
I wrote of late to you, that Sir Thomas Smith should come shortly thither, but
I think he shall not be there now so speedily as was meant; for he shall first
secretly pass over to Callis, to be there the 3. April, to demand the Town, not
that we think the Governor will deliver it, But to avoid all Cavillation which
they might invent (for by Law it must be demanded at the very place, and being
not delivered, the sum of five hundred thousand pounds is forfeited;) Master
Winter shall pass secretly with him to take possession thereof, if they shall
deceive our expectation; but not past three of the Council knows of Winters
going.

The common fame in Scotland continues upon the Earl Bothwell, to be the
principal Murderer of the King, and the Queens name is not well spoken of; God
amend all that is amiss: We heard before your writing, of the French attempt
for the Prince.

We have no news, but all well here; the matters of Flanders go very hard for
the Protestants; and if God do not provide for their safety, I look for their
ruin. I heard this day, that Danvile should be slain: fare you well.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 21. March 1566.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
BY the Queens Majesty's letters, and by this bearer, you shall understand how
earnestly her Majesty is inclined to help the Count Rocandolse; and since the
writing of her Majesty's letters, she has commanded me that you should make it
a principal part of your request to the King, and the Queen mother; that
considering the Count is a stranger born, and is of the Order of France, that
his cause might be heard and ordered by the King, and the others of the same
order; and to that end you shall prosecute your request, that the whole cause
may be removed from the Court of Parliament at Paris; wherein her Majesty would
have you by all good means to persist, as in a request that of it self is
honorable, and sometimes, as she thinks, usual. At the least such as if any
the like person being a stranger in her Realm, and being honored with the Order
of the Garter, if he would require to have his causes, (wherein his life or
honor were touched) to be heard by her Majesty, and her Knights of her Order;
he should not be denied, nor should be by any other Judges molested.

Thus I report to you her Majesty's good pleasure; and thereto do add my poor
private request, to beseech you not to be weary in the prosecution of this suit.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 9. March, 1567.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, Her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
YEsterday Mr. Smiths Son arrived with some Letters from you and him,
containing your troublesome negotiation, whereof we hear thought very long. He
says he was constrained to tarry six days at Hull, and that his Father would
be here this night; you shall hereafter hear of some ill news out of Ireland;
and though it be not of great moment, thanks be to God, yet by report of ill
friends, they will be amplified. Indeed the 21. of April, a Fire happened in a
little Fort upon the Sea side, at a place called the Dirrye, which Mr.
Randolphe first took, in such sort as the houses being all covered with Straw,
the soldiers were forced to abandon it, being two hundred, and with their
Captain Mr. Sentlo, came by Sea to Knockvergus a Castle of the Queens; but for
all this it is meant to take again the place, or a better, and to prosecute the
Rebel, who is in declination.

The Queen of Scots, I think, will be wooed to marry the Earl Bothwell; the
principal of the Nobility are against it, and are at Sterling with the Prince.
Fare ye well; and as I wrote by Mr. Shute, so assure your self of me, as you
mean your self to me:

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
May 12. 1567.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
BY your last Letter of I understand of the intelligence was given unto you, of
preparation of eight Ships, to be set out to the Seas, which seems very
strange; and therefore the Ambassador here, who could not get Audience of the
Queens Majesty, although he often demanded it, since Mr. Smiths return, was
sent for to come to the Council, and was roundly charged with certain
depredations committed upon English Merchants in the West; and also with this
new preparation, and therewith warned to advertise his Master, that we could
not long suffer such attempts unrevenged; and being somewhat amazed with the
charge, he denied the things very flatly, and promised to write very earnestly
therein to the King his Master. And for conclusion, we said, that we would
write unto you, to move the King to make restitution, and to prohibit the going
to the Seas of any other but of those that were good Merchants in this time of
peace, according to the Treaty; of which our negotiation you shall hear more
shortly by Letters from the Council, although I thought it good, by this my
private Letter, somewhat to touch it unto you.

This speech with the Ambassador was on Saturday, the fourth of this present;
and upon importunity of the Ambassador, he had Audience of the Queens Majesty
this day, to whom he showed a Letter from the King, that Percivall coming over
with Letters of late thither, was stayed at Deip; and the King hearing that he
had Letters from the Queens Majesty, ordered to dismiss him, and willed the
Ambassador to pray the Queen to think no offense in it, for the said Percivall
was to be Arrested in France for great debts which he owed there; besides that,
as the Ambassador says, he is to be charged there with a murder. After he
showed this Letter to her Majesty, she called the Lord Chamberlain and me to
her in his presence, being no more of her Council then; and in very round
speeches told the Ambassador, that she did not take the French Kings answer,
for the matter of Callis, in good part; and so much the worse, because the
Queen Mother, by her Letters sent by Mr. Smith, wrote that her Son had given
very benign Audience, and so reasonable an answer, as ought well to content her
Majesty. In which manner of speech, she says, she is not well used,
considering the answer was altogether unjust and unreasonable; and if hereof
the Ambassador shall make any sinister report, you may, as you see cause, well
maintain the Queens answer to be very reasonable, as having cause to mislike
the manner of writing of the Queen thereon; which, nevertheless, you may impute
to the unadvisedness of the Secretaries, for so the Queens Majesty here did
impute it.

Upon Sunday last I received Letters from Barnaby, your Secretary, who therein
did very well advertise me of the staying of Percival at Deip, and indeed I do
find that the cause has grown from the Ambassador here, either of
displeasure, or of suspicion that he has against the State To. Condulphe, for
whom he knew Percival was specially sent; and finding this day the Ambassador
very earnest in private speech with my Lord of Leicester and my self, that
Percivall would be Arrested in France, after that he had delivered the Queens
Letters; I advised him to write to the contrary; for otherwise he might provoke
us to do the like with his Messengers; and surely, if I may be suffered, so
will I use them.

I have no more to write unto you; But I can assure you that the Queen of Scots
was married the 15. of this May, and the Nobility therewith so offended, as
they remain with the Prince, and keep apart from her; what will follow, I know
not. My Lady your Wife is safely arrived, and was long with the Queen on
Sunday: I thank you for the little French Book which she brought me, the like
whereof I had before.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
May 27. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
THe matters of Scotland grow so great, as they draw us to be very careful
thereof; I think not but you do hear of them by the reports; but briefly these
they be: The best part of the Nobility has confederated themselves, to follow,
by way of Justice, the condemnation of Bothwell and his Accomplices, for the
murder of the King; Bothwell defends himself by the Queens maintenance and the
Hambletons, so as he has some party, though it be not great. The 15. of this
month he brought the Queen into the field, with her power, which was so small,
as he escaped himself without fighting, and left the Queen in the field; and
she yielding her self to the Lords, flatly denied to grant Justice against
Bothwell; so as they have restrained her in Lothleven, until they may come
unto the end of their pursuit against Bothwell.

The French Ambassador, and Villeroy, who is there, pretend to favor the Lords
with very great offers, and, it may be, they do as much on the other side.

At this time I send unto you certain Packets of Letters, left here by Mr.
Melvin, who lately came hither from the Queen of Scots; the sending of those to
my Lord of Murray requires great haste, whereof you may not make the Scottish
Ambassador privy; but I think you may make Robert Steward privy, with whom you
may confer, for the speedy sending away of the same letters.

His return into Scotland is much desired of them; and for the Weal both of
England and Scotland, I wish he were here; and for his manner of returning,
touching his safety, I pray require Mr. Steward to have good care.

Our Wars in Ireland are come to a good pass; for the Arch-Traytor Shane-Oneale
is slain by certain Scots in Ireland, of whom he sought aid (one murderer
killed by many murderers) hereby the whole Realm, I trust, will become quiet;
I pray you, of those things that our Ambassador in Spain, by your letters, may
be advertised, whereof I cannot at this time make anyspecial letter unto him,
for lack of leisure; and so, I pray, advertise him from me: I am pitifully
overwhelmed with business.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton is shortly to pass into Scotland, to negotiate there
for the pacification of those troubles.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Richmond, 26. June 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
THis your Lackquey brought me letters from you, and also from your servant Mr.
whom he left at Rye; for such business asby his letter he has certified me,
whereof I have informed the Queens Majesty, wherein she also well allows of
your circumspection; and I wish all to succeed as you advise, for otherwise the
peril were great. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton has been somewhat long in going
into Scotland, and entered by Berwick on Monday last; I think the two Factions
of the Hambletons and the Lenox's shall better accord then your neighbors where
you now live would; if Bothwell might be apprehended, I think the Queen, there,
shall be at good liberty, for the Nobility.

My Lord of Pembrooke perceiving likelihood of troubles there in that Country,
would gladly have his Son Mr. Edward Herbert to return home; and so, I pray,
with my hearty commendations to him, declare my Lord his Fathers mind; and if
my Lord of Murray should lack credit for money, my Lord Steward would have his
Son give him such credit as he has, for my Lord allows well of his
friendship. I am sorry that at present I am unfurnished to help you with a
Secretary; my servant Windebanke is sick, Mr. Summers will not be induced to
leave his place. So as, nevertheless, if I can procure you any other meet
person, by the next Messenger, you shall hear.

I thank you for the Chart of Paris, and for a written Book to the Queens
Majesty, whereof her Majesty would gladly know the Author; And so I end.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Richmond, 14. July, 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
AT my last writing by Master Jenny, I did not make any mention of answer to
your request for the provision of a Secretary, Because I heard that you meant
to place one Molenenx, if he might be recommended by me; and truly if he be
meet for the place, I do well allow thereof; for howsoever he did in times past
misuse me, I have remitted it, and wish him well.

My Lord Keeper prays you to use some good means, to inquire by the way of
Orleans, of Sir Ralph Pawlet, what is become of him, and where he is, and how
he does.

It is certain, on the 29. of July, the Prince of Scotland was Crowned King at
Sterling, with all the Ceremonies thereto due, and with a general applause of
all sorts; the Queen yet remains where she was.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Windsor, 5. Aug. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOu shall perceive by the Queens Majesty's Letter to you, at this present, how
earnestly she is bent in the favor of the Queen of Scots; and truly, since the
beginning, she has been greatly offended with the Lords; and howsoever her
Majesty might make her profit by bearing with the Lords in this Action, yet no
council can stay her Majesty from manifesting of her misliking of them; So as,
indeed, I think thereby the French may and will easily catch them, and make
their present profit of them, to the damage of England; and in this behalf her
Majesty had no small misliking of that Book which you sent me, written in
French, whose name yet I know not; but howsoever I think him of great Wit, and
acquaintance in the affairs of the world: It is not in my power to procure any
reward, and therefore you must so use the matter, as he neither be discouraged,
nor think unkindness in me.

When all is done, I think my Lord of Murray will take the Office of Regency;
and will so band himself with the rest, as he will be out of peril at home. And
as for External power to offend them, I think they are so skillful of other
Princes causes and needs, as I think they will remain without fear.

We are occupied with no news greater then this of Scotland; We begin to doubt
of the King of Spains coming out of Spain, finding it more likely for his Son
to come.

In Ireland all things proceed smoothly, to make the whole Realm obedient; the
Deputy has leave to come over to confer with the Queens Majesty upon the
affairs.

My Lord of Sussex wrote from Augusta, the 24. of July, that he meant to be at
Vienna the last of July, and also that the Emperor meant to be there at the
same time.

I must heartily pray you to bear with my advice, that in your expenses you
have consideration not to expend so much as by your Bills brought to me by your
servant Cartwright it seems you do; for truly I have no Warrant to allow
such several Fees as be therein contained, neither did I know any of the like
allowed to any of your predecessors; and in the paying for your intelligences,
if you be not well ware, you shall; for the most part, have counterfeited ware
for good money.

In matters of importance, or when you are precisely commanded to prosecute
matters of weight, it is reason your extraordinary charges be born; but as to
the common Advisees of the Occurrents abroad, they are to be commonly had for
small value, and many times as news for news; for at this day the common
Advisees from Venice, Rome, Spain, Constantinople, Vienna, Geneva, Naples, yea
and from Paris, are made so current, as every Merchant has them with their
letters from their Factors. If I did not know your good Nature, I would not
thus plainly write; and yet if I should not hereof warn you, your expenses
might increase, and I know not how to procure your payment; and yet hereby I
mean to do my best at all times to help you to allowance for all necessary
expenses; and so take my leave.

Yours assuredly. W. Cecil.
From the Manor of Guilford, 19. Aug. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
I Have had no good Messenger of good time to write unto you; the Queens
Majesty has been abroad from Windsor these twenty days, and returned on
Saturday very well.

Lignerolls is come out of Scotland with very small satisfaction, as I think;
he could not speak with the Queen, no more then Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, who
also is returning.

The Hambletons hold out, the Earl of Murray is now Regent; the Queens Majesty
our Sovereign remains still offended with the Lords, for the Queen, the
example moves her.

In Ireland all things prosper and be quiet; Sir Henry Sydney shall come only
to confer, and shall return to keep a Parliament in Ireland.

My Lord of Sussex was honorably received the fifth of August, lodged and
defrayed by the Emperor, had his first Audience on the eight; the Archduke
Charles was looked for within five days; and now we daily look for Sir Henry
Cobham to come in Post, at the least, within these ten days.

All things are quiet within this Realm, thanked be Almighty God.

I have presently a paper sent me from Antwerp in French, very strange,
containing an Edict, to compel all Judges, Governors, all Officers and
Counselors, to give Attestation of the Catholic Faith; if it should be true,
it should be a hazard to make a plain civil war.

My Lady your Wife came this night hither to Windsor, whom I have warned to
write to you by this bearer.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Septem. 3. 1567.
To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOu may perceive by the Queens letter, how this noble man is partly of his own
mind, partly by persuasion stayed; and surely, if either the French King or
the Queen should appear to make any force against them of Scotland, for the
Queens cause, we find it, credibly, that it were the next way to make an end
of her; and for that cause her Majesty is loath to take that way, for avoiding
of standers that might grow thereby.

I had provided a young man for you, which could have served very well for
writing and speaking of French and English; but I durst not allow him to serve
you in your negotiations, although I know no thing in him to the contrary; but
hearing that you have men that can both speak and write French, and perceiving
by the superscription of your letters, that you have one who writes a good
Secretary hand, I have thought fit to forbear to deal further with the said
party.

I thank you for your offer to send me any Charts that I should name; and if
you would send me a note of the names of the Charts that are thought newest,
and of the Author of their setting forth, and the places where they be printed,
I may chance to trouble you with craving of some.

I would be glad to have from you a note of the names of the chiefest Nobility
of France, and with whom they be married; adding thereto any other thing that
may belong to the knowledge of their Lineage and Degrees, as you shall think
meet: And so for this time I end.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Windsor, 27, Sept. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
AFter my very hearty Commendations, with my like thanks for all your courteous
letters to me, and specially for the friendly trust which I see you put in me,
to the due answering whereof you shall never find me wanting.

My Lady, your good Wife, can sufficiently report to you all things from hence,
so as I need write nothing presently, but my hearty commendations.

And where it seems you think some hardness, in not allowance of your
expenses, expressed in sundry your Bills; surely it is not lack of my good will
that stays me, but power; for truly I never subscribed so many extraordinary
Bills for any, as I have done for you; and, as I understand by your servant
Cartwright, I have subscribed more in some of them then will be as yet paid.
Generally, I will subscribe all charges reasonable for carriage of Letters; but
concerning entertainment of men to continue at the Court, or for rewards, given
extraordinarily, I never did, nor could allow them; and yet I wish them paid,
being laid out in the service of her Majesty. And, in this manner, I heartily
pray you to interpret my good will to the best; for surely if you were either
my Brother or Son, I have no more power to show you and yours good will, then I
do.

The Duke of Chastilherant is at Deip, and means within these ten days to be
here, as his servants report; I think he shall not be able to annoy the Lowth,
as he and his, I see, do desire.

Bothwell is not yet taken, to our knowledge, though it be said he should
should be taken on the Seas, by a Ship of Breme: And so I end, as I began.

Yours, as your own, W. Cecil.
Windsor, 2. October. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur servant Jenny arrived here yester-day, with your Letters of the first day
of September; by which the Queen was greatly satisfied, for that we had
received diverse brutes of the troubles of France, whereunto we know not what
credit to give; and now considering the Ice is thus broken, you must think we
shall daily be molested with uncertain reports.

The Queens Majesty advertised the French Ambassador, and Monsieur de
Pasquiers, of as much as she heard from you, who were not a little troubled
before, by reason of strangers news spread abroad, and more dangerous; for
otherwise they had heard no manner of thing of credit out of France, although
of late time they had sent three several Messengers; so as I do guess that the
passages be stopped to them, and I wish they be not also to you too.

I find her Majesty disposed, upon the next hearing from thence, to send some
special Gentlemen thither; before which time, her Majesty being moved by me
according to your desire, yet will not agree to send to you any Currier.

My Lady, your Wife, was ready to depart toward you upon Wednesday last, and
would not be stayed from her journey by any persuasion; what she will do now
upon your servants coming, I know not; but, in my opinion, she shall do well to
forbear the venture.

This Letter which I do write, I do send by your Footman, wherein I dare, as
the time is, write nothing but that which may be seen of all sorts.

That which you wrote of late to me touching Jenny your servant, I assure you
ought not to be imputed to him, but to such in Scotland, to whom being uttered
for their good, they could not use it as was meet.

We have nothing in Scotland, but all things therein be quiet since the last of
September, at which time the Castle of Dunbar was rendered to the Earl of
Murray; and one name the Lord Wawghton, follower of the Earl Bothwell, which
kept the Castle as long as he could, was adjudged to pay for the charges of
them which besieged it; and the charge of the Carriage of the Ordnance back to
Edinburgh, a new kind of punishment, sufficient enough for such a beggar. And
so wishing that we may hear often from you; I end with this also, that it shall
behove you, to take good heed whose reports you credit in this variety.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
9. Oct. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
I Heartily thank you for your gentle letters sent to me by your two last
Messengers, William Wade, and Crips; both which persons come to me, being at
London, because it was Term time, where I am for the more part, saving Sundays
and Holidays; by which occasion, I have at both times sent your letters to the
Queens Majesty, so as I have not had the commodity to see your advertisements;
nevertheless, you shall do well to continue your accustomed manner of
advertising her Majesty as fully as you can; for in these troublesome times,
the accidents being so diversely reported as they are, it is meet that her
Majesty should be largely Her Majesty much mislikes of the Prince of Conde and
Thadnur Lords of France.
advertised; and because it may be that your letters may come in this Term time
whiles I am at London; I pray let me have some repetition of your advises in
such letters as you shall write to me. This bearer, your servant Crips, can
make full report to you of all matters here. The Lords of the Council do all
they can to cover the same.


My Lady your Wife also has been very careful to have him return to you, and
would have some other of more weight; but the Queens Majesty Her Majesty being
a Prince her self is doubtful to give comfort to subjects.
forbeareth to send any, because of the uncertainty of the time ^ Dover A 1 ^
in misliking o^ ^ and of F wherein all is done that can be by B, to cover the
same, and as I think the principal is for that A is 42 91 ^, and doubtful of
giving ^ 25. 5^ subjects; nevertheless, Our Ambassador to comfort them,
nevertheless, as occasion serves. Expectation of the Queens marrying with the
Archduke Charles In Scotland all quiet, the Scottish Queen still in Loughlevin
and in health.
you shall do well as occasion shall serve 5^ ^ For this we here well perceive
that ^ is ^ we look daily to hear a certainty of the ^, howsoever, percase,
they there mean to let it.

In Scotland all is quiet, the Queen continues in Lough-Levin, in very good
health; and the Earl of Murray rules quietly as Regent; and so I end, Murray
rules quietly as Regent.


Yours assuredly as your own, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 3. Nov. 1567
To the Right Honorable, Sir Hen. Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
BEfore Mr. Bridges came, who arrived here on Saturday last, with your letters
dated the 16. We were much troubled with variety of reports, of the encounter
betwixt the Constable and the Prince; and by him we are well satisfied to hear
that we think to be truth, although otherwise men report on the other side.

Your servant Crips was sent hence, and, as I hear, was stayed for lack of
wind to pass, six or seven days at Rye; but seeing Mr. Bridges met him so near
Paris, I think he came in safety to you. And now, for your further
satisfaction, I send this Bearer Mr. Jenny, whom truly I think honest and
careful, and in the matter imputed unto him, I take him to be clear.

Mr. Bridges shows himself toward you very friendly, and, in his reports, very
wise and discreet; surely I do like him well.

The oftener you can send, the better it is, in this busy time.

The French Ambassador persuades us, that all our Merchants at Rohan are by
his means at good liberty to use their Trade; which if they be, I know the
thanks belong to you.

I wish to have a Callender of them which are with the Prince, and also to see
the Edicts that have lately passed from the King against them.

Yours assuredly, to command, W. Cecil.

To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
AFter my very hearty commendations, my Lady, your Bedfellow, having not heard
from you this good while, has thought good to send over one of hers purposely
to see you, and to bring her word again from you; by whom I would not fail to
write these few words unto you; not having any thing to write at this time, but
of the prosperous state of all things on this side. The last letters from you
hither were by your servant Henry Crips, who was dispatched home again toward
you the fourth of this month; the want whereof is not imputed to be in you,
for lack of diligence and good will to write, but partly to the dangerous time,
and hard means to send when you would, and partly, for lack of knowledge of the
doings of the contrary part, which in such a time are not easily known; but, as
you may, you shall do well to advertise how things pass there, at the full.

The French Ambassador was with the Queens Majesty on Wednes- the 12. of this
present, who had no great news to impart to her Majesty, but came only, as he
said, to see her Majesty. His last letters out of France, he said, were of the
27. of October; In talk with me he told me, that by his letters he understood,
that the King had sent for you at the time of the sending away of his dispatch,
whereby he judged that you might have occasion to write hither shortly; and
that your Messenger was, in likelihood, on the way hitherwards; so as if he be
not hindered by the way, your letters are looked for very shortly; or for lack
of his coming, it will be, indeed, thought that he is stayed; your next
advertisement will show it, which is daily looked for: And thus I wish you, in
this dangererous time, all safety and health.

Your very assured loving friend, W. Cecil.
From the Court at Hampton Court, 15. Nov. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOu must think, that seeing all the parts of Christendom are intentive to hear
of the matters of France; we cannot be careless, to whom the same belongs next
of all, whatsoever the end thereof shall be.

Your last letters brought hither came with good speed; being dated the 28. of
December, they came the fourth of this January. Of the news therein contained,
mentioning the encounter betwixt Mountgomery and the Kings Vantguard, about the
23. of December. I had letters dated in Paris the 20. which did express the
same more particularly, but I dare not credit them.

Your good advice given to her Majesty in the said letter, is well to be
commended. Of the state of our things here, there is no new thing to write; all
things, thanked be God, are quiet.

In Scotland they have ended their Parliament; wherein, as I hear, they have
Enacted the Coronation of the King, the Authority of the Regent to be good, and
have noted the Queen to be privy to the murder of her husband.

My Lady, your wife, has been a little sick, but is now well recovered, and
has instantly required me to send away this bearer, because she had writings
to send you; otherwise I would have had him stayed two days to have heard some
more news from thence.

I thank you for the Articles which you last sent me; but lacking the Articles
of the other side, I could not well understand those which you sent me: And so
I end,

Westminster. 8. Jan. 1567. Yours assuredly to use or command, W. Cecil.

To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador Resident in France.
SIR,
IT is to us here thought very long since we heard from you, your last being of
the fourth of this month, sent by young Cornwallis, specially because we are
troubled with such diversity of reports, that what may be taken for truth, is
uncertain. Beside this, I cannot but let you understand, that the Lords of the
Council are desirous to hear more largely and particularly how things do pass;
wherein they seem to require such a diligence as Sir Tho. Smith was wont to
use, who sought to understand, and so continually did write what was done,
almost every other day, making, as it were, a Journal or a Diarium. But, in my
opinion, I have showed them that it is not so easy for you to do it in this
time, considering the Armies and their accidents are far from Paris, and as I
think, very great heed given, that no advertisements should be given you, but
such as you should not think worthy of writing: Nevertheless, for their
contentations, I wish you would write of as many things as you can, whereby
they shall both be content; and what they hear from other places of the same
things, they shall better discern what to think true.

^ 5. m. 3. to the disadvantage of R. All things here are in quietness, I think
Master Vice-Chamberlain shall be Deputy of Ireland, for that Sir H. Sydney is
sore vexed with the Stone in the Bladder; and so I take my leave, thanking you
for the offer you have made me to provide for me certain Charts, of the which I
am bold to name nine, as I have noted them in the paper included.

Yours assured, W. Cecil.
26. January, 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
AFter my hearty commendations, the Queens Majesty, and my Lords of her
Council, have been reasonably well satisfied of late by your two dispatches,
wherein you have largely and well written, the last being of the 29. sent
hither by the means of Glover of Rohan; the other of the 23. brought hither by
this bearer your servant; before the coming whereof, we had plenty of uncertain
news brought hither, by the means of the passages, sometimes from Diep,
sometime from Bulloigne; but comparing them with yours, we make them as refuse,
and yours as clean metal. And truly I find that to be true which you write,
that you see good cause to forbear writing of every thing there, finding by
experience that the greater part of reports brought thither proved not the
truest. I am glad there is no occasion here to requite you with any news, for
God blesses us with continuance in our accustomed quietness, for the which, I
wish, we might but yield half the thanks.

The Queens Majesty is in good health, and was purposed of late to have gone
abroad for her Pastime, as she did this time twelve months, but the foulness
of the weather has let it.

There were certain Scots, which newly returned into Ireland, about November
last, but they found themselves disappointed of such aid as they looked for,
and so are gone, and scared, whereby the Realm remains quiet.

The Earl of Desmond, and his brother Sir John, be here in the Tower,
chargeable rather with disorders for private quarrels then for any untruth;
whereupon some think, that whilst they remain here, good order may be better
stablished there.

In Scotland things are quietly Governed by the Regent, who does acquit himself
very honorably, to the advancement of Religion and Justice, without respect of
persons.

My Lord of Sussex, by his last letters of the 27. of January, looked for his
resolute answer in such sort at that time, as he hoped to be at Antwerp, before
the end of this month. What his answer is like to be, I assure you on my
Faith, neither do I know, nor can likely conjecture.

I perceive by some of your letters of late, that you were somewhat troubled
with light reports of news from hence, and therein you thought it strange that
you could not hear thereof from me. You may be sure that in such a case I would
have given you some knowledge, if any thing had happened.

More as yet I have not at this present, but heartily to thank you for the
young horse you have bestowed upon me; wherein you see my overmuch boldness of
your friendship, as in many other things; and so I heartily take my leave: I
wish to have a Bill of the names of the principal persons, with the place.

Yours assured, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 12. Feb. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters be dated the 10. of Feburary, by which they I perceive you
did, two days before, make earnest suit on the behalf of the poor men at
Marsciles, wherein surely you did very charitably; besides that, it touches
the Queens Majesty, in honor, to have them deliveed; and so her Majesty
allows your doings therein, and therefore you may do well to continue it.

I doubt the former answer will be renewed, that is, to have the interest of
D'Estrill fully remitted, which belongs properly to some of the Queens
Subjects, who have spent a great deal of money in the pursuit thereof, by
attendance only for that purpose upon this Court, more then two or three
years, which of my own knowledge I understand to be true; insomuch as they have
been forced to be relieved out of prison, for very debt grown by this their
suite.

Of late they of Rye took certain Fishers of Diepe, which had come upon our
shore in the night, and Fished with sundry Netts of unlawful size, such as are
both by the Ordinances of France and England, on both sides, condemned; and
being kept in Ward by them of Rye, the Ambassador made earnest suite for them;
but after the Nets were brought up, and some of the parties also, and plainly
proved before them, that they were far unlawful; It was agreed by my Lord
Steward and the Officers of the household, here, in the favor of them, That they
should be released, and have their Nets, with faithful promise, never to use
the same again upon our Coast: Hereof it may be you shall hear; but I assure
you, considering the unreasonableness of their Nets, I think they had too much
favor, in that the Nets were not burned.

The Queens Majesty, this morning, willed me to write unto you, that you should
obtain license of the French King, to send for, by safe conduct, your Nephew
Champernoune, which is with the Count Mountgomery, whom his father thought to
have remained in Normandy with the Countess; but now since dinner, I perceive
by Sir Arthur Champernoune, he would be loath to seem to send for him; and
therefore you may do herein as Sir Arthur Champernoune shall by his letter sent
unto you, at this time, move you; for indeed I think the Count Mountgomery
would be very loath to part with him, for opinion sake. The Lord of Arbroth came
lately out of Scotland this way, and spoke with the Queens Majesty, pretending
to go into France to solicit aid for the delivery of the Queen of Scots; he
came out of Scotland without license or knowledge of the Regent there ^ this
way of late, but I trust shortly to hear from ^ of such things as he carried
with him. Your admonition of O was well allowed of, but about that matter we
are otherwise occupied, if things may fall out as are meant, whereof I cannot
write any more, because as yet the Iron is not in the Forge.

I thank you for the Edicts published and printed in Paris, which you sent me,
praying you that you will hereafter continue, in the same mauner, to send me
any thing that is there published.

Having not heard of any thing from you since the 9. of this month, (this
being the 26) I am in some perplexity what to think of matters there; for
howsoever rumors and news be brought from the Sea coast; neither do I believe
any for the truth, but such as are confirmed by you; And hereby you may
perceive that the oftener you write, the more pleasure you do me.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
West. 26. Feb. 1567. Postscript.
I hear that Glover of Rohan is very ill used. I wish you could help him, as
you shall understand his grief.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters that have come to my hands, were of the 12. of Feb. brought
hither by one Bogg, of the French Kings Guard, who having tarryed, as he said,
fourteen days at Diep for lack of passage; by that means came very slowly
hither; and therefore you must think we be here much troubled for lack of
certain advertisements from you, whilst we hear from other parts reports so
diversely: Nevertheless, I do think and affirm, that there be some letters
dispatched from you since the date aforesaid. Those which you wrote last to the
Queens Highness, were well and amply written; and so I wish you should do with
the rest hereafter.

You may perceive by the Queens Majesty's letter, which I send at this time,
her sincere meaning, which if it be well taken, it is well bestowed; and yet I
think she should not find the like courtesy and good meaning, if she had need
of the like, from the which I pray God long keep her.

Her Majesty is well disposed to send some thither, if she thought she might do
good toward the peace, against which I think, plainly, all Ambassadors but
your self are vehemently disposed; and so it appears by the fruits of their
Councils; and if you told the Queen mother, so as of your own head, as a thing
you hear spread abroad in the world, I think you might do well and speak
truly; for as for the Popes Ministers, their profession is to prefer the State
of their corrupted Church before the Weal of any Kingdom in the earth; and
whatsoever come of any thing they look only to the continuance of their own
ambitious ruling; and as for other Ministers of Princes, or for men of War; it
is a truth infallible, the more they do impoverish that Monarchy of France, the
better they think their own estates; and if the Queen Mother and other good
Counselors of the King, do not understand this, you may say, if you can in
good terms, Oculos Habent and non vident.

Our matters here in England remain as hitherto they have long done, by the
goodness of God, in great quietness.

This day I had letters from my Lord of Sussex, of the first of this month,
from Antwerp, who, I perceive, means to pass over the Seas hitherwards this
night, so as, I think, he will be here by Monday, what he brings, I know not
at all.

Bredrood is dead at Collen; the Count of Berry, eldest son to the Prince of
Orange, is in Zealand, ready to be carried into Spain; it is doubted that the
Counts of Egmond and Horn shall follow.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
March, 6. 1567.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOu have done very well, in this doubtful time, to write so often hither as
you have done; for that the Queens Majesty has been in great expectation, what
to judge to be the truth in the midst of so many diverse advertisements; for
howsoever we be from other places advertised, we measure the same even by yours.

The last letters which you sent, were dated the 30. of March, which came
hither yesterday, being the 7. And considering the last accident happened the 29.
by a treachery to have supplanted the good meaning of the peace, I am in
opinion that the Prince and his should have a reasonable occasion offered unto
them to mend their bargain, in certain points tending to their own surety;
which surely if they do not better foresee, me thinks, their danger will not be
far off; I pray you to continue your vigilance in exploring of ^. wherein you
may do very well to procure that the R may be induced to withstand that
enterprise, as being a matter very prejudicial to the whole ^ London 2 ^ Paris,
etc.

Here has been of good long time, one Emmanuel Tremelius, who heretofore, in
King Edwards time, read the Hebrew Lecture in Cambridge; and has now been sent
hither by the Count Palatine the Elector, to inform the Queens Majesty of the
proceedings of the said Elector, in sending his son into France, without
intention to offend the King and the Realm, or to assist the Prince of Conde in
any thing; but only in the defense of the common cause of Religion, who now
upon the ending of these causes in France will depart hence; and truly, in my
opinion, the said Elector has showed himself to be a Prince of great honor in
this Action.

The Prince of Orange, has also sent hither a special Gentleman, to declare
unto her Majesty his innocence in such causes as are objected against him,
touching any part of his duty toward the King of Spain: And further, also, to
show good cause why he does not return into the Low Countries, to appear before
the Duke of Alva, whom he notes to be a Judge not competent, because he has
already notorionsly broken the Laws and ancient privileges of the same
Countries.

Out of Scotland, I hear, that the Hambletons continue in that Faction against
the Regent; and I believe they be nourished out of France, by means of the
Abbot of Arbroth, who lately came thorough this way.

Of my Lady, your wifes, dangerous sickness (out of the which she was newly
escaping, when your Son arrived here) I doubt not but you are well advertised;
so as I need not to write any other thing, but only to rejoice, with you, that
she is so well amended.

You see, by my writing, that this Country, thanked be God, is as barren of
news, as that of France is plenteous.

Sir Ambrose Cave is departed this life, and as yet it is not known who shall
succeed him; some name Mr Vice-Chamberlaine, some Sir Henry Sydney, some Sir
Ralph Sadler, some Sir Nic. Throckmorton; her Majesty can make no ill choice of
any of these: And so trusting ere this letter can come to your hands, I shall
receive some of yours, containing the resolution of this long lingering peace.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
April, 8. 1568.
SIR,
THis evening, Harcourte arrived here with your letters, which were long looked
for, and be now welcome; for your satisfaction, by this bearer, you shall
understand of the recovery of my Lady your Wife.

The Gentleman that lately came hither, named Monsieur de Beamont, one of the
late disorder of France, passes into Scotland, which is not much to be liked.

The book which you sent, of the peace, has not printed in it certain
Articles, by way of request, made to the King by the Commissaries on the
Princes part; what answers Marginal of the King. I fear much the surety of the
Prince and his Colleagues.

I hear by him that came last, now, of strange news at Diep, of the King and
Prince of Spain; I pray you, if there be any of moment, send us word.

Here is an Ambassador arrived from Portugal, for to brawle about Merchants and
Maritime matters: For haste, I can write no more.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
April, 14. 1568. Postscript.
I send you the beginning of the Parliament of Scotland; when I have more you
shall have more sent you.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters brought hither, are of the 18. of April, which came hither
the 29. of the same month, by which I looked to have heard where the Prince
and the Admiral was, and what they did; and how they intended to prosecute the
enjoying of the peace, for here we are troubled with very many fond tales; and
I never make good resolution of doubts without your advertisment; and
therefore, I pray, write from time to time, what is done on both parts: You
shall do well to give good respect to the ^ pretending to ^ ^ wherein surely
may be seen the very intent of the practicers.

I heartily thank you, Sir, for your plentiful present of so many Countries, as
you lately sent by Harcourte, who indeed did in former times serve me, and with
my good favor departed from me; but if he may serve you, I am glad, for I never
knew but good honesty by him: ^2^p^5. oV is not a little afraid of these ^ G
and H.

We hear newly of great attempts toward Flanders; and so having nothing more
to write, I am by business forced to end, being assured, that both by your Son,
and otherwise, you are advertised of all our seen matters here. From Greenwich
the first of May, which is become a very cold day, 1568.

Yours assured at all times, W. Cecil.

To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
BY the Queens Majesty's letter you may perceive what is her pleasure at this
time; Beaton is passing thither, so as I think he will be at the Court before
the coming of this bearer: In your speaking with the King, you may not by your
speech, seem to utter that you know of Beatons coming for aid there, upon
advertisement given from hence; for he being advised not to seek aid there, and
promised aid here, for his Mistress, has in words allowed thereof; and says,
that he will forbear to require aid from thence, and will only but notify
the Queens liberty. But yet, surely I am not bound to believe him; but he has
required us here to say nothing of that which he, at his first coming, told us,
That the Queen his Mistress sent him to France, to require aid of one thousand
Harquebusiers, and a sum of money, with some Ordnance.

Wherefore, except you shall learn there that he demands aid, you shall not
speak thereof; but if he do, then shall ye do well to make mention thereof to
the King.

I hear daily of the evil observation of the last peace toward the Protestants.

In Flanders and the Low Countries, I see things will prosper too well in hurt
of the Religion; and only for lack that the Prince of Orange his party has of
money.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Greenwich, 16. of May, 1568. Postscript.
And I think Mr. Vice-Chamberlaine shall be Controller, Mr. Sydney Treasurer,
Mr. Throckmorton Vice-Chamberlain, and Sir Ralph Sadler Chancellor of the Duchy.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
AAfter our very hearty commendations, we being made privy to such Letters and
Message as you lately sent by this bearer your Secretary, to me Sir William
Cecil, have well considered the same, and do well allow of the good ^ because ^
the ^ And do not mislike the overture, made to you by Paris ^ for the diverting
of the ^ Low ^ good ^ Callis and Dover; and although there is no likelihood of
the sequel of this overture for sundry respects; yet we do allow so well
thereof, as we wish you would make such answer to the said party, as ^: And to
that end we are content that you may, if need so require, ^ the ^ giving him to
understand, that we will gladly if the matter shall ^ the ^ to us, use our
credit toward xx the A ^, who we hope surely neither can nor will but accept
the good will of ^ in every good part; and so we require you to further that
matter with all ^ that you can; and on our part you may assure the party that
it shall be also xx ^ low ^. the ^. And so far ye well heartily.

Your assured loving friends, Pembroke, R. Leicester, W. Cecil.
From the Court at Greenwich, 28. of June, 1568.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador
Resident in France.
SIR,
YEsterday being the 12. of this month, Mr. Bridges came to the Court as we
were going from London toward Havering, in such sort, as the Queens Majesty
her self seeing him, and knowing that you would not have sent him but with
matter of some importance, commanded me forthwith to decipher your letter,
which I did, and showed her Majesty; whereupon she comfortably and constantly
seemed not to fear any such Devilish practice; but yet she is earnest in the
further discovery of the matter, and likes well of your advertisement: But she
marvelleth that you did not advise more particularly of more special means, to
know the ^, for as he is described to be of chiefest ^ with the ^ as also with
^ we cannot truly hit of no man; for as there be 4. or 5. that do sometime
accompany the ^ so are there men of that Nation, but they do resort to the ^
wherefore it is necessary that you speak again with the party that gave you
this intelligence; and if the matter be of truth, and disguising to some other
purpose, he can as well obtain you the knowledge of the party in certainty, as
this to give a guess at him; for as he has his intelligence of the matter
which he uttered to you (if it be true) so may he attain to a more perfect
knowledge; and if the matter be true, and shall be discovered by his means, you
may promise him reward of the Queens Majesty, as of a Prince of honor, and so
indeed shall he have it; on the other side, if the matter be not true, but a
device, surely he and they that do participate with him are much too blame;
wherefore, Sir, I earnestly require you to use all the speed you can herein,
and advertise as plentifully as you can, to the satisfaction of her Majesty;
For though her Highness words have comfort, yet it cannot be but she shall rest
perplexed until more certainty be had.

Likewise her Majesty would have you cause diligent inquisition to be made of
the other matter concerning the vi ^ prepared by ^ where and when, and to what
end the prepation shall be.

We marvail that you write nothing at this time of the Prince of Conde, etc.
For the French Ambassador reports that he shall come to the King to Gallian,
the Cardinal Burbous house; and that the Cardinal of Lorrein shall depart from
the Court, which to me is unlikely for truth.

The Scottish Queen is ordered to remove from Carlisle, to a Castle of the Lord
Scroops in the edge of Yorkshire next Cumberland called Bolton; for where she
was appointed to come to Tutbury; the Queens Majesty, finding her great
misliking therein, has forborne the same.

Her desires are these, in sundry degrees: First, to come to the Queens
Majesty's person, and to have present aid to be restored: Secondly, if that
cannot be, to have license to pass into France; and to these it has been
answered, until her cause may appear more probable for her innocence, the
Queens Majesty cannot with honor receive her personally; but if the Queen will
by any manner of means, honorable, let her cause appear to be void of the
horrible crime imputed to her for the murdering of her husband; she shall be
aided, and used with all honor; whereunto she will give no resolute answer,
other then that, if she may come personally to the Queens Majesty, then she
will let it appear how she stands in the cause: Hereupon we stand at a brawl;
she much offended that she has not her requests, and we much troubled with the
difficulties, finding neither her continuance here good, nor her departing
hence quiet for us. We here speak of one La Mote that should come hither.

Yours assured, W. Cecil.
From Havering, the 13. of July, in haste. Postscript.
And for ^ and x, I pray you put them in comfort, that if extremity should
happen, they must not be left; for it is so universal a cause as none of the
Religion can separate themselves one from another; we must all pray together,
and stand fast together; and further, etc.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
AFter my hearty commendations, though here be no great cause of present
dispatch to you; yet for the return of this bearer your servant Darrington,
having been long here; and also to let you understand of the Queens Majesty
proceedings with the Queen of Scots since her being in this Realm, and since my
last letters to you, I have taken this occasion to return him to you.

The Queen of Scots having long labored the Queens Majesty, both by Messages
and Letters, to have aid of her Majesty against the Lords of Scotland, and by
force to restore her to her Realm; her Majesty could not find it meet in honor
so to do, but rather to seek all other good means to compass it with quiet and
honor; wherein much travailing has been spent. Finally, the Queen of Scots
has agreed that her matter shall be heard in this Realm, before some good
personages, to be deputed by the Queens Majesty, to meet with some of the Lords
of Scotland, about New Castle, or Durham, or near this way, as shall be found
fit; and so to be reported to her Majesty. This way being now resolved upon,
and accepted of all parts, the Earl of Murray has offered to come himself in
person (if her Majesty find it good) accompanied with others of meet
condition, to any place, and at any time that her Majesty will appoint; and
because the Lord Herreys, having long been here for the Queen of Scots, and
lately gone to her, has on his Mistrisses behalf required that speed might be
used in this matter; the Queens Majesty has by her special letters required
the Earl of Murray, that all expedition may be made, either for his own, or
else that some others may come chosen, to be persons of wisdom and dexterity,
and void of all particular passion in such a cause as this is; and upon his
answer of the persons that shall be thus appointed there, the Queens Majesty
will, with all speed, send like fit personages from hence to meet with them;
and in the mean time where they the Lords of Scotland had summoned a Parliament
of their three Estates, to assemble in this next August; her Majesty has
required them to suspend the holding of the Parliament, until the issue of
this matter to be heard by her Majesty, may come to some end. In this meeting
the Queens Majesty does not mean to charge the Queen of Scots, but will hear
what the Lords can allege for themselves, to defend all their doings and
proceedings, for imprisoning and deposing their Queen, and other matters
published by them; and thereof to cause report to be made to her to be
answered; and likewise to carry such matters as are to come from her, against
them; and upon hearing of all parts, as matters shall in truth fall out, so
does her Majesty mean to deal further therein, as honor will lead and move her
to do.

Whilst these things have been in doing, the Queens Majesty has been
advertised, though not from the Queen of Scots, that she has deputed the whole
Government of her Realm of Scotland to the Duke of Chastilheraulte, thereby
both to make a party (as may be supposed) betwixt him and the Earl of Murray;
and also to be the earnester to procure Foreign aid for his maintenance,
whereof her Majesty is informed there is a great appearance, having obtained of
the French King good numbers of Harquebuziers and others, ready to embarque for
Scotland; which being true, her Majesty has good cause to let the said King
understand, that it is against his promise, as your self knows best. And so
has also the said Queen assured her Majesty, that she will not procure any
Strangers to come into Scotland for her use, until it may appear what will
ensue of this meeting; But if the contrary fall out, either by her own means,
or by the procuring of the said Duke of Chastilherault in France; the Queens
Majesty will not only forbear to deal any further for the benefit of the Queen
of Scots, as hitherto her Highness has done with all honor and sincerity,
having had as great care of her cause, as she her self could have; but shall be
justly moved to do otherwise then the said Queen or her friends abroad would
wish. Thus much I thought good to impart unto you of these matters, to the end
that if you (being there) find indeed, that the said Duke does obtain any such
aid there to be sent into Scotland, you may take occasion to deal therein with
the King, or with such as you know fittest, for the stay thereof.

The Queen is now removed lately from Carlisle to Bolton Castle, a house of the
Lord Scroops, about 30. miles within the land, fitter in all respects for her
to lie at then Carlisle, being a Town for Frontier and War; the Queens Majesty
does cause her to be very well and honorably used and accompanied. And thus
having no other present matter to write unto you, I thought good herewith to
return your servant to you, wishing you right heartily well to do. From the
Court at Endfield, the 25. of July, 1568.

After the end of this letter, your servant Wall arrived here with your letters
to the Lord Steward, the Earl of Leicester, and to me, for answer to the letter
which we wrote to you; which letter, after I had caused to be deciphered, I
sent to the Court; to them my self being at my house near Waltham, not well at
ease, nor in case to go to Court.

I long much to hear answer of letters sent by your Lackque, touching the
matter of an Italian, whereof I doubt the Queens Majesty is more careful to
hear then she does here express; at this time, I have received a letter from an
Italian there with you, who subscribed his name, who seems very importune to
have answer, because he may be entertained; and if he be the party of whom you
writ about a month past, surely, as I did advertise you, the Queens Majesty
will in no wise hear of any such offers, which she thinks are but chargeable,
without fruit, although I had earnestly moved her Majesty to have adventured
some small piece of money upon such a man; therefore I see no remedy but to pay
him as well as may be with goods words. And thus I wish you better to fare,
then I did at the writing here.

Your assured loving friend, W. Cecil.

To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador Resident in France.
SIR,
BY yours of the 23. of the last month, for answer of mine of the 13. of the
same, I find that you have very diligently and circumspectly travailled in the
great dangerous matter, to satisfy the Queens Majesty, whereof you gave before
that intelligence; and though I perceive that you can come to no more
understanding therein, for further satisfaction of her Majesty, yet she is very
well satisfied with your diligence and care; and so has specially willed me to
give you knowledge of her allowance of your doings therein. Methinketh the
parties which tell you such pieces of tales, if the whole were true, might as
well tell you the whole as such obscure parts; which if they do not, you might
well allege them to be but devices to breed unquietness and suspicion; and as
I wrote before unto you, they might be tempted with offer of rewards, that the
troth of the matter might be disclosed.

The Queens Majesty, as I am informed (for presently I am not at the Court, by
reason of my sickness) means to have the matter between the Queen of Scots
and her subjects heard in this Realm, and compounded (as I think) with a
certain manner of restitution of the Queen, and that limited with certain
conditions, which how they shall be afterward performed, wise men may doubt;
the Queen of Scots her self, at length, seems content to commit the order of
this cause to her Majesty; wherein if her Majesty's own interest should not be
provided for, the world might think great want in her self, which I trust, she
will regard.

I am willed by her Majesty to require you to continue your diligence in
inquisition, what preparations are meant or intended in that Country to sent
into Scotland; and as you shall find any, to give speedy knowledge thereof, as
I know you would do if you were not thus advertised.

There is coming out of Spain a new person to be Resident Ambassador here, who
is a Commendatory of an Order; in whom I wish no worse conditions, then I have
found in this man, for maintenance of amity.

Our whole expectation (as yours there is) rests upon the event and success
of these matters in the Low Countries, which as they shall fall out, so are
like to produce consequences to the greater part of Christendom; and therefore,
I beseech God, it may please him to direct them to his honor, and quietness (if
it may be) of his universal Church here in earth; and so I end, being
occasioned to use the hand of another my self, being very unable to write, and
fully wearied with inditing thus much: Fare you heartily well, from my house in
Cheston, the 3. of August, 1568.

Sir, This bearer, Mr. Hudleston, acknowledges himself so much be-holden to
you, as he is desirous to return thither to spend his time, where he may show
himself thankful to you, and to that end has requested me to write to you by
him; he has required to be accepted into my service; but I think him worthy of
some better Master, and my self am overburthened with numbers, or else I would
gladly have accepted him.

Yours assured, W. Cecil.

SIR,
MY late sickness has been cause of my rare writing, and I am sorry to hear of
your lack of health; which I trust you have ere this time recovered.

Your letters sent by the Frenchman of Southwark came one day only before
Cockborne, who came also safely with your letters on Saturday last; I have made
the Queens Majesty privy to both your letters; and as to the unhappy news of
Flanders, we had the same worse reported by the Spanish Ambassador here, then
yours did there, who has made a triumphant story thereof, as far uncredible as
any in Amadis de Gaul; for in the fighting continually one whole day, there
were on Lodowicks part slain and devoured 8000. and on the other part but
eight, so every one of them killed ten hundred.

I understand, that within these three days we shall have the report more
reasonable; for I also hear that the greater number of the men slain were of
the Dukes part, which I wish to be true ^ is in words content to commit ^ Dover
^ A but yet x does not omit to stir new troubles in v.

Touching the ^ whereof you have often writ, order is taken to deal with ^
Paris; and surely methinks still since the informers will not be known of the
particulars in more certainty, that these things are intended to bring us into
their play; but yet no diligence is to be omitted. I think the Duke of Norfolk,
my Lord of Sussex, and Sir Walter Mildmay, shall be Commissioners to treat in
the North, betwixt the Queen of Scots, and her subjects. And so I end,

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Dunstable, 10. August. 1568.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
THe sufficiency of the bringer hereof is such, as I need not to write any
thing to you by him of importance, to whom any thing may be well committed; He
can best tell you upon what occasion the Queens Majesty sends this Message to
the French King at this time, which because it is long and of great importance,
the Queens Majesty would have you first translate it into French, and well
digest it with your self; so as you may very perfectly and readily express it
in such sort as it is conceived; And I think, if you would, in the translating
thereof, distribute it into sundry members, by way of Articles, you should the
better carry it in your mind, making thereby an account with your self of the
better delivery thereof; and you shall do well, to let some such as favor the
intention of the Queens Message, to see the Copy of the letter, whereby they
may, per-case, being called to give advice to the King, further the cause, to
the benefit of them of the Religion.

This day I received your letters, of the date of the 20. of this month by
Glover, who of late time dwelt in Roan, whom I take to be a good honest person;
but of the matter of the Jewels, whereof you wrote, upon his report, I my self
know no certainty.

As for the occurrents of Scotland, you shall understand, that where the Queens
Majesty has determined with the Queen of Scots, to hear the whole matter, and
(as it seems) to the advantage of that Queen, she took such comfort thereof,
as she made the Earl of Arguile Lieutenant in one part, and the Earl of Huntly
in another; and the Duke of Chastilherault over all; so as they forthwith
leavyed Forces, and by Proclamation threatened the Regent, and all his, with
fire and sword, who upon the Queens request had forborne hostility, until the
matter might be heard; and upon the 16. day of this month, the said Regent
beginning a Parliament, which was appointed six weeks before, and quietly
holding the same without any Arms; about the 19. word came to him that the
Earl of Arguile was come to Glasco with 2000. and the Earl of Huntley coming
out of the North with a great power to join with Arguile, and so to come to
Sterling, to surprise both the place, and the King; upon which occasion, the
Earl of Murray brake up the Parliament, and sent all the power that he had, to
stay their joining together; and (as I heard) the Earl of Huntley is put to the
worse, and so fled home-ward, hereof the Queen of Scots makes great complaint
to the Queens Majesty; you may do well, when you have done your great Message,
as you see cause, you may charge the Queen Mother with the breach of promise,
if the Duke of Chastilherault be gone forwards toward Scotland with power.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Bissiter, 27. Aug. 1568. Postscript.
I have boldly received from you sundry books; and I am bold to pray you to
provide for me a book concerning Architecture, entitled according to a paper
here included, which I saw at Sir Tho. Smith's; or if you think there is any
better of a late making, of that argument.



To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, Her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur Lackquey arrived here on Friday in the afternoon; and because the Bishop
of Reins has not yet his audience, I stay your servant Wall, to bring the
knowledge of that shall pass.

The Ambassador sent his Nephew Willcob to require Audience, and that it might
be Ordered to have her Majesty's Council present at the Bishops Missado; Her
Majesty answered that they forgot themselves, in coming from a King that was
but young, to think her not able to conceive an answer without her Council; and
although she could use the advice of her Council as was meet; yet she saw no
cause why they should thus deal with her being of full years, and governing her
Realm in better sort then France was; so the audience being demanded on
Saturday, was put off until Tuesday, wherewith I think they are not contented.
The Cardinal Castillon lies at Shene ^ Paris, the rather to displease ^ for
Callis. I think ^ for E London ^ demanded.

The Duke of Norfolk, etc. are gone to York, where the Diet shall begin the
last of this month.

It is ^ Callice ^ 90: ^ London ^ to the contrary ^ shall be there any ^ 9: 7: 3
590-0 Dover, etc. The success of the matters for good ^.

Sir, I pray advertise me what you may reasonably think of ^ practices what ^
or any like to him.

I thank you for the book you sent me of Architecture; but the Book which I
most desired, is made by the same Author, and yet entitled, Novels per bien
bastir, per Phileont de L'orn. I thank you for your Placarts, and instruments
that you sent me by your Lackquey,

Yours assuredly, as your brother, W. Cecil.
Septem. 27. 1568. Postscript.
And is well used by A the rather to displease all Papists, I think he has or
shall shortly have such comfort for E as Steward demanded.

It is not meant if x shall be proved guilty of the Murder, to restore her to
V. howsoever her friends may brag to the contrary; nor yet shall there be any
haste made of her delivery, until the success of the matter of F and F be
seen: I pray you, Sir, advertise me what you may reasonably think of Sir Robert
Staffords practices with D or any like him.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
AFter the letters of the Queens Majesty were closed up at Bissiter, her
Majesty stayed your Son, that he might carry with him a letter for the Marshall
Montmorancis wife, for thanks for favor to my Lord Chamberlains daughter; and
for a token which her Majesty now sends by your Son, being a Ring with a
pointed Diamond. I beseech you cause the letter to her to be indorsed as you
shall think meet: for I know not whether she be entitled Madam, Lady, Duchess
of Calsho, or Montmorancy, or otherwise. I write this upon the 20. being Sunday
in the afternoon in Rycot, where the Queens Majesty is well lodged, to her
great contentation, as she has commanded me to write to you; lacking only the
presence of your self, whom she wishes here until Thursday, that she shall
depart from hence; of which Message I pray you take knowledge, and give her
Majesty thanks, for she bad me to write thus very earnestly; and so fare you
well from your own house, where also I am better lodged then I was in all this
Progress, We are truly certified by our own Ambassador from Spain, who is on
the way thorough France to return, that the Prince is suddenly dead; but by
what occasion it is doubtful.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
29. Aug. 1568.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
I Have, as I lately signified unto you, stayed this bearer, John Wall, your
servant, to the time that this Bishop of Rhemes should have his Audience and be
answered; he was heard on Tuesday, and at his departure was required, briefly
to put in writing the sum of his speech, which he did, as shall appear by the
Copy herewith sent unto you: and yet in his speech he touched an offense in the
latter end of your Message, notingthe Doctrine of Rome to be contrary to
Christ's; wherein he amplified before the Queens Majesty, that seeing his Master
holds the Doctrine of Rome, therefore your Majesty should repute him no
Christian; which speech, he said, was hardly born by the king in an open
Audience; whereunto some answer has been made, as you may see, to salve the
matter, by turning the sense, that the Doctrine of Rome was contrary to Christ's
in derogating, etc. Only in this was some difference made, although, indeed,
your writing was warranted by the Queens Majesty's letter; and therefore no
fault in any wise found in your doings.

I do send you, herewith, the copy of the Bishops writing exhibited, and the
answer of her Majesty thereto, which being put in French was yesterday, before
the Ambassador, were admitted to her Majesty's presence, read unto them by one
of the Clarks of the Council, in the presence of the Council; and afterward
they were brought unto her Majesty, who did confirm her former answer, and so
they departed without further debate thereof.

It was thought they would have used some speeches concerning the Cardinal
Castillon, whom they find very well and courteously used here by the Queens
Majesty's order; but they have not hitherto spoken a word of him.

At their first being here, on Tuesday, they told the Queens Majesty, that they
had newly received letters out of France, by which they were given to
understand, that Martignes pursued Dandelot, and overthrew all his force, and
made him to fly; which news was only heard and not credited; insomuch, as the
next day following, we heard credibly that Martignes had indeed pursued certain
followers of Dandelot, at the passage of Leyer, which Dandelot had before
safely passed with all his Forces, Footmen and Horsemen; and perceiving that
Martignes had used some cruelty upon a small number of simple people that
followed Dandelot, he returned over the water with his Horsemen, and avenged
the former injury upon Martignes, and from thence went to Rhemes; where finding
certain of the Presidents or Judges, which had given order to destroy all that
could be found of the Religion, he executed their own Law upon some of them,
and hanged some of the Judges; which news being brought unto us the day after
he had given us the other for a farewell, he was this day welcomed with these;
the rather because they touched his own Town of Reins; and I wish them to be
true, to cool their heating of lying.

The Cardinal Castillons wife is come over, whom I think the Queen means to use
very well.

The Duke of Chastilherault comes hither to morrow to the Queens Majesty, but I
think he shall not be permitted to go to the Queen of Scots very hastily.

If by the next letters it shall not appear, that you can have Rowland
delivered, and your letters restored, I perceive the Queens Majesty will be
well content that some one of theirs shall be stayed in the like manner: And so
I end,

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Windsor, 1. Oct. 1568. Postscript.
I pray send me word whether you thought ^ diot ^ to be suspected of the matter
concerning the ^ or no. ^ By the next, which shall be by my Lady your wise, I
will change my Cipher.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
THis present, being the 18. your servant came with your letters of the 12.
which I longed much for, not having of a great time heard from you.

The Prince of Orange passing the and his proceeding cannot be unknown to you;
and therefore I leave to write thereof.

The French Ambassador promised once to write favorably in this poor man's
behalf; but this morning he sent his Nephew to me, declaring that considering
he perceived much favor showed by us to the King his Masters Rebels, he could
not, without some misliking, write in favor of our Countrymen; I required of
him, whom, in particular, he could name as Rebels, that had favor of us; he
would name none; I told him, we accepted the Cardinal Chastillon as a Nobleman,
and a good faithful subject and Councellor to the King; for that upon pride and
inveterate malice done to him by the Cardinal of Lorrein, he was by him and his
so persecuted, as he could not live in France without danger of his life; and I
told him we had the more cause to favor him, and all such, because the said
Cardinal Lorrein was well known to be an open enemy to the Queens Majesty, our
Sovereign. So he departed, with no small misliking, and I well contented to
utter some round speeches.

The Queens Majesty is resolved to set out certain of our Ships to Britain and
Guyen, to preserve our Bordeaux Fleets from depredations; whereupon I think
there will be some misliking uttered there to you, But considering the frequent
Piracies already committed; and the menacing of the Pirates to our Bordeaux
Fleet, we can do no other, and so you may answer.

I think this Ambassador will advertise many devices of suspicions, of our
aiding of the Prince with Money, Shot, and Powder; but the King shall never
find her Majesty to do any thing therein to be reprehended, If in case of
Merchandise for Salt or Wine, the Princes Ministers can borrow things of our
Merchants; I know not how to remedy secret bargains, where Merchandise is in
use. The Treaty of York shall cease for a while, for that some of the
Commissioners on either side are sent for hither, to confer with her Majesty.
The Queen of Scots case appears not defensible by her own In so much as they
intend another course, to make the Duke of Chastilherault their head, and
provide for themselves.

And so having no more at this present, I end with my hearty thanks for your
kind accepting of my friendly good will that I bear you.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 28. Oct. 1568.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
IT seems long since I heard from you, trusting that my Lady and your Son
came safely to you, although their passage was very hard at Rye.

We hear many diverse news of the matters in France; But I give no credit,
until you shall play the Bishop and confirm them.

Our Commissioners at York have heard the Queen of Scots complaint, and the
answer of the other part; wherein they have forborne to charge the Queen with
the murder, upon some reasonable respects, not knowing what end they will make
if they should charge and prove her guilty; hereupon the Queens Majesty has
sent for some on either part.

Sir Ra, Sadler came hither yesterday, and the Bishop of Ross, and the Lord
Harris for the Scottish Queen came this day, and so shall Liddington and
Mackgill for the Prince. It is mentioned to have a composition, whereto the
Scottish Queen, as they say is very willing, ^ Dover ^ But A and B, for the more
part, are earnestly disposed ^ and if ^ as it is thought very probable, then so
to be ^ 7: ^ for other wise quietness will never long continue.

The Queens Majesty finding her subjects continually spoiled by the French upon
the Seas, is forced to send Mr. Winter to the Seas with 4. Ships of her
Majesty's, and two Barks; I know how many tales will be spread of his going; but
truly you may avow that his going is wholly to preserve our Fleet at Bordeaux
from Piracy, and therefore he is appointed to go toward Bordeaux ^ with ^ A
has agreed ^ and for the son to have ^.

I hear say, that some of our Merchants in London have bargained with certain
Merchants of Rochell, and thereabout, to buy a quantity of Salt, wherewith it
is likely that the King there, when he shall hear thereof, will be very
suspicious; but in such cases Merchants must be permitted to make their
bargains, and so you shall have reason to maintain their doings.

The Cardinal Chastillion shows himself so quiet a person, and in all his
languages so faithful a servant to the King his Master, as he meriteth great
commendations; he medleth in nothing here, but wholly occupied in exercise of
his Religion; he continually lamenteth, that grave Counselors persuading peace
are not of more power and credit in the Court.

Whatsoever this French Ambassador shall report of him, he cannot truly report
any evil of him: I hear La Mot is on his way, at Callis, to come hither.

I think surely some of yours are on the way. I pray send me a Register or List
of the Chieftains on the Kings part, and also on the contrary. Sir, I do send
you herewith a new Cipher.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.

To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters that came to my hands, were of the 29. of the last month;
by which you signified to me the advertisements which you then had of the
taking of Angulesme; since which time sundry reports are brought hither of
Battles that should be betwixt the parties, whereof lacking advertisements from
your self; I do give credit unto none, by reason of the diversities of the
reports.

On Sunday last La Mot was presented by Mounsieur de la Forest, the former
Ambassador, whom the Queens Majesty has admitted as Ambassador for the French
King, and seems to like well of his wisdom; whereof hitherto, for mine own
part, I have not had any proof.

The cause of the Queen of Scots is now to be heard here; for which purpose the
Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Sussex, are sent for from York, and are to be
here within these two days; and presently the Earl of Murray, the Earl Morton,
with certain other Noble men of his part, are already come; and on the Queens
part the Bishop of Ross, and the Lord Herryes be at London, and do daily look
for some other Commissioners to join with them; because her Majesty means to
have the whole matter advisedly heard, she has appointed an Assembly, not
only of her whole Council, but of all the Earls of the Realm, to be here the
18. of this month; at which time her Majesty means to have this cause of the
Queen of Scots fully heard, and therein to take such resolution and end as she
shall be advised unto by her said Council and Estates.

The last letters which you sent unto the Queen, wherein, as her Majesty says,
you made declaration of your Message done to that King, concerning the Cardinal
Chastillons being here, was by her Majesty casually let fall in the fire, and
so burnt; whereupon her Majesty being sorry for that she had not advisedly
perused it, willed me to write unto you for the copy of the same letter again,
which I pray you to send me by the next.

I would be glad to hear a brief, or, as they call it, a list of the names of
the principal persons that have a charge now in these wars in France on both
parts, with the contents, as near as you can, of their numbers.

After the writing hereof this present evening, as the bearer hereof can tell,
Mr. Edmonds came hither with your letters to the Queens Majesty, by which I am
satisfied for those reports that were made of the great sights at Angulesme;
and of that which has been here reported by the French Ambassador, of the
overthrow of Mouvans, which I am glad is not true as he reported; and so
finding nothing else to be answered, I thought good to dispatch this bearer
with this my letter, to the intent we might the sooner hear of your news,
whereupon depends the whole expectation of the Christian world.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court 16. Nov. 1566. Postscript.
Before Mr. Edmonds came you may see what I wrote of the ^.



To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
BY your last letter sent to me by this bearer your servant, I perceived how
good hap it was, for our satisfaction here, that your letters came not away
with the report of the victory, whereof the King there advertised you by a
special Messenger, until you had also knowledge of the truth thereof, by
Villeroys coming from the Camp after the first message; for like as the former
part of your letters made mention of a great Victory for the King, and an
overthrow of the Princes whole Infantry; So have many letters been written
hither from Paris and other places, according to the partial affections of the
Writers, in affirmance thereof, adding for their confirmation, certain
solemnities by Processions, and such like, used at Paris for the same;
nevertheless, I account the truth to be as in the latter part of your letter,
you write that there was no such manner of battle, but certain skirmishes,
wherein there was no great inequality; and yet because I hear it also credibly
reported that the Prince of Conde lodged and kept the field, where the
skirmishes were, I think his losses were less then the others; whereof I think,
within a while, to know the truth more particularly.

This matter of the Queen of Scots began to be heard and treated on at
Westminster the 25. of the last month, since which time there has been
sittings five or six several days; and yesterday the Queen of Scots
Commissioners, having matter to answer, whereby the Queen their Mistress was
charged with the murder of her husband; they alleged that they would go no
further, being so commanded by letters from her, received since the beginning
of this Commission; and have required to speak with the Queens Majesty, of whom
they pretend they will desire to have the Queen their Mistress to come to the
presence of her Majesty, and answer these causes her self; whereunto how they
shall be answered, I cannot tell; but for that purpose, and others, her
Majesty, has presently sent for her Council, who be here at present; and so
shall the Queen of Scots Commissioners be to morrow; and hereafterward, as
matters shall fall out, I will advertise you further, and so take my leave.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 2. December. 1568.
To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
SInce my last writing by your servant Buffin, I have forborne to write, because
I thought both to hear somewhat more from you; and to have also somewhat here
to write unto you. Since which time, I have received no letters from you, but
such as the poor Merchants of Ireland brought me, being dated the 25. of the
last month, which came hither on Saturday last, being the 11. of this month;
and considering the multitude of tales reported here to us, of the conflict
about the 18. I was nothing satisfied with the said last letters; because
touching that matter they did refer me to your former, against which the French
Ambassador here has precisely given unto us news, in the name of the King his
Master, wholly to the disadvantage of the Prince; and therefore, I wish you had
written thereof now at the latter time somewhat more particularly.

I did of late write to you for the copy of the letter which you wrote unto the
Queens Majesty, touching the speech that was uttered unto you by the King
there, concerning the Cardinal Chastillon, for that, as I wrote unto you, the
same letter by casualty was burned before it was thoroughly read and perused,
and hitherto I have not heard your answer to the same.

We have been here of late much occupied, in the conference with the
Commissioners of Scotland, wherein there has been eight or nine several
Sessions; the sum of the matter is this, the Queens party began at York to
accuse the Regent and his party, whereunto they made their answer and defense;
after which the Queens party, by replication, maintained their accusation, and
then the conference there stayed; whereupon the Regent being here with the
Queens Majesty, vehemently charged, was driven, for his defense, to disclose a
full Fardel of the naughty matter, tending to convince the Queen as devisor of
the murder; and the Earl of Bothwell her Executor; and now the Queens party
finding the burden so great, refuse to make any answer, and press that their
Mistress may come in person to answer the matter her self, before the Queens
Majesty, which is thought not sit to be granted, until the great Blots of the
marriage with her husband the murderer, and the evident charges by letters of
her own, to be the deviser of the murder, be somewhat razed out or recovered;
for that as the matters are exhibited against her, it is far unseemly for any
Prince, or chaste ears, to be annoyed with the silthy noise thereof; and yet,
as being a Commissioner, I must and will sorbear to pronounce anything herein
certainly; although as a private person, I cannot but with horror and trembling
think thereof.

In your letters of the 25. you recommended unto me a cause of your own between
you and one Brabrook, wherein you write, that one Tettersall your Attorney
should have informed me; but herein I have not a good while now dealt withal,
but whenever any shall, I shall be glad to show you my friendship to my
power, and sic de caeteris.

I am sorry to understand of the sickness of your Son, Mr. William Norris, and
therefore I would be glad to hear from you of his recovery, for indeed I do
heartily like him and his condition.

I have also dealt with my Lord of Norfolks grace in your matter, for your
right to the Lord Dacres Lands, wherein his Grace, at the Council Table, openly
promised his favor.

I pray you, Sir, commend me to my good Lady your wife; if there be any good
Charte of France, made since Mr. Oliver Trunkets impression having no date; I
would be glad to have one, to behold therein the particular voyages and
passages of these contrary powers: And so I end.

Yours as your own, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 14. December. 1568.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambessador, resident in France.
SIR,
THis bearer your servant came hither the last of December, with your letters
of the 25. and 26. of the same, wherein he used good diligence; and for the
contents thereof, her Majesty is very well satisfied with the diligence of your
advertising, being before by reason of contrarious reports in great suspense
what to think; for this French Ambassdor now being here, uses an ordinary
manner to write unto her Majesty, in a certain general sort of the news of that
Country, as favorably as he may on the Kings behalf, as reason is he should;
but yet not without danger of discrediting himself by reporting: untruths. As I
conjecture by your advertisements, it is likely that God has already permitted
some great effect to be wrought about this Christmas time, by some Battle
stricken betwixt the two Armies; and howsoever it is, I do not doubt but you
will advertise; and therein the will of God is to be obeyed with thanks, or
with patience, as it pleases him to give his grace, or to chastise.

By your letters also, it appeared that the Prince of Orange, at the writing
thereof, was still in the French Kings Dominions; and yet the common report at
the same time was that he was departed toward Germany, whereof the Duke of
Alva's friends, in the Low Countries, began to make some triumph.

The matter of the Queen of Scots remains in these terms; upon the accusation
produced by her Commissioners, against the Earl of Murray, they have for their
defense showed so much matter to charge her with the procuring of the murder
of her husband, as thereupon motion is made, on her behalf, for covering of her
honor, to have some appointment betwixt her and her subjects, which is communed
of secretly by two or three manner of ways; that is to say, That she should
affirm her resignation of her Crown to her Son, as it has been made, and live
here in England.

Or else her self and her Son to join in Title, and the Earl of Murray to
remain Regent: Or, thirdly, her self to remain in Title Queen, and to live here
in England secluded, and the Earl of Murray to continue Regent; which matters
have so many pikes, as the venture is great to take hold of any one of them;
nevertheless in the mean time outwardly she offers to prove her self
innocent, so she may be permitted to come to the Queens presence and answer for
her self; which is thought to be the more earnestly required, because it is
also thought assured it will be denied; and now what is like to grow to be the
end thereof, surely I cannot well guess; for as for my self, I find my
insufficiency to wade so deep, and the violence of the stream so great, as
without good company assisting in Council, I dare not venture to make any
passage; and so wishing you and my Lady, and yours, a fortunate good year, I
end. Here is a stay made of certain treasure that came out of Spain to pass
into Flanders, which we take to be Merchants, and not the Kings, as is
alleged; if it shall prove Merchants, we may be bolder to take the use of it,
upon good Bonds, for an interest.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Jan. 3. 1568.
SIR,
I Heartily thank you for the last letters of the first of this month, wherein
you did well deliver us from some perplexity, being by the French Ambassador
here otherwise advertised, to the advantage of the Cardinalists; his letters
are dated the 30 of December from the King; and I marvel to perceive by your
letters that the skirmish should be the 23. and the advice should not come to
you before the 28. for thereby it seems the Camp should be so far off, as in
four or five days tidings could not come; but this I think may be said, that
evil news are brought to that Court slowly, at the least they are uttered
slowly. Of this accident of Arrest, you shall be by her Majesty's letters fully
advertised; at the signing whereof, her Majesty said that she would have sent a
Gentleman expressly to the King; but she considered that being sent by Sea, the
journey in this Winter time will be very dangerous and uncertain, and to send
him through France, where the troubles are such as she could not (either without
mistrust of the French King, because the party should pass through Gascoigne,
and the Queen of Navarrs (ountry, or without certain danger by soldiers:) and
thereupon you shall so advertise that Ambassador of Spain, and require him to
make advertisement accordingly; whereunto you may add, that her Majesty has
thought of three or four meet persons to be sent thither, for one of them to be
an Ambassador Resident; but none will be gotten, that with good will will
serve, in respect of Mr. Man's strange and hard handling; which things her
Majesty would have you set out more plainly to him, that the King may find
that only to be the cause why there is no Resident Ambassador there. And thus
I end, having willed Harcourte to take some of the Proclamations, if they be
ready printed in French.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil,
Jan. 8. 1568. Postscript.
I find, in a Bill of Petitions, beginning from the 28. of August to December,
sundry sums of money pressed by you for carriage of Packets, to whom I have not
answered; and therefore, hereafter, I pray you write expressly, of what you do
there, for avoiding of double charge.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
SInce the writing the other letter, dated the 8. of January, my Lady caused
her servant to stay for a Pasport for two Geldings; and sithence my other
letter, we have here news from Flanders ^ 5. V. ^ touching R and therefore we
are in a continual expectation what were the very news of a matter that was
reported to have happened the 23. of December.

The more particulars you write hither, and the oftener, the more thankful is
your service; and surely I see nothing so meet for us to understand, as to be
often advertised from you, which considering, you may write in your Cipher, the
oftener you hazard your letters, the less is the peril.

We have no news from Scotland, but that their Parliament is ended; and amongst
other things they have all assented, by Act, to decline the Queen of Scots
obtaining to be lawful, because she was privy to the murder of her husband.
There were none of the Nobillity absent, but such as were of the Hambletons.
And thus I end my sudden letter, being in a great longing to hear from you.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
January 10. 1568.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, Her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
AFter, I had written my other letters sent in this Packet unto you, which I
was to have sent away by one of your Footmen; your servant this bearer, Henry
Crispe, came hither upon Thursday last with your letters, dated the 22. of this
month; and perceiving him earnestly disposed to return unto you, I thought
best to stay the sending away of your Footman; and to send, as I do, this
dispatch by this bearer, which is partly because my former letters shall seem
to bear so old a date.

And herewith I send unto you, which was not ready before, a memorial, in the
Spanish tongue, of the matters passed concerning this late Arrest; which
memorial her Majesty would have you procure with her letters to the King of
Spain; and therefore after you have perused it, I wish you should retain a Copy
thereof, either in Spanish or in French, for your better instruction; and that
done, to use all the expedition you may for the conveyance of her Majesty's
letters and the said Memorial to the King of Spain.

Since the finishing of the said memorial, you shall understand that D'
Assondeville has been here a good time, being not as yet accepted as an
Ambassador; for that he has no special letters nor Commission from the King,
but from the Duke of Alva; And all that he can say for himself, is, That he
comes in the Kings name, as one of his Privy Council, and whatsoever he shall
do shall be confirmed by the King, before he will depart out of the Realm. He
would also privately confer with the Spanish Ambassador, which has been
hitherto denied, for that it is meant that the misbehaviors of the said
Ambassadors should be openly disclosed to D' Assonleville, thereby to let it
appear how unmeet a man he is to be a Minister for Amity here, which yesterday
was declared to D' Assonleville at my Lord Keepers house, where he came to
these of the Council following, my Lord Keeper, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl
of Leicester, the Lord Admiral, my self, Mr. Sadler, and Mr. Mildmay; and that
done, he seemed sorry for things past, and yet pressed still to speak with the
Ambassador, which was not then granted by us, for that we did intend that
resolution should grow from her Majesty, which, though it be not yet known, I
think he shall not be denied. In these matters we have cause to be somewhat
slow to satisfy them, lest they should, according to their accustomed manner,
grow too audacious; what will be the end thereof, I cannot judge, but I trust
it will appear that they have begun upon a wrong ground; and, as it falls
out, I think they shall be found to be behind hand with us. Yesterday, word
came to London, that all the English Fleet, which were feared should have been
Arrested in Spain, came home safe; and this day I have heard for certainty that
Hawkins is arrived at Mounts Bay, with the Queens Ship the Minnion, having in
her the Treasure, which he has gotten by his Trade in the Indies, and by rigor
of the Spaniards near Mexico was forced to leave the Jesus of Lubeck upon a
Leek; which also he destroyed, that they took no profit thereof; hereafter I
will write unto you, as I shall learn the further truth of this matter, with
what cruelty he was used, under pretense of friendship, and of a compact made
betwixt him and the Viceroy of the Indies, and Pledges delivered on both sides
for the performance thereof. The Queen of Scots was removed from Bolton, by my
Lord Scrope, and Mr. Vice-chamberlain, on Wednesday last; so as I think, on
Monday or Tuesday, she shall be at Tetbury, where the Earl of Shrewsbury is
already, and there shall take the charge of her; and with him shall Mr. Hen.
Knollis, brother to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, remain to assist him. Of late the
Queens Majesty understanding out of Scotland, that the Queen of Scots faction
there had published sundry things, being very false and slanderous (meaning
thereby to withdraw the Earl of Murrays friends from him, and to bring the
Queens Majesty doings into some question, whereof we also be credibly informed)
the Queen of Scots, by her letters, was the very cause; thereupon her Majesty
ordered to have the contrary notified upon her Frontiers, for maintenance of
the truth, as by the same you shall understand, which I send you herewith in
Print. The advertisements which you gave both to my Lord of Leicester, and me,
of the secret cause of the Kings going to Metz, seems to be of such
importance, as it is found very needful to provide with speed some remedy, and
so we here, for our part, will do our best as ^ serve, which you may consider ^
considering the ^; and therefore I pray you attempt all the means you can to
advise all parts that shall take the harm. I have no more to write to you,
meaning to expect, within three or four days, somewhat from you; and then I
will write by one of your Footmen, and so I take my leave.

The French Ambassador has been informed of the stay of our Ships at Rhoan,
and on Thursday last my Lords of the Council sent Mr. Hampton to him to move
him, that they might be released within 15. days, or else we must do the like;
his answer was, that he would do his best; and he trusted they should be,
imputing the cause to our sufferance of the Prince of Conde his party on the
Sea to make Portsale in our Havens, which surely is not by us permitted; and
therefore for his satisfaction, we did yesterday write letters to all Officers
of Ports, to prohibit utterly the vent of any Commodities brought in by such
men; and besides this, the Ambassador has required that you would be earnest
with the King for the release of our Ships, which we told him was not neglected
by you; and so, I doubt not, but you do your best therein.

This day the Ambassador sent his Secretary unto me to complain, that the
Currier of Callis carrying his Packet from hence should be searched, and
certain Packets of letters taken from him, which I told him was true; and the
cause thereof such, as we had more reason to complain thereof then he; For true
it is, that the said Currier having but one small Packet of the French
Ambassadors, under pretense thereof, had carried with him two great Fardels of
letters of the Merchants of the Low Countries, who were here Arrested with
their goods, a matter also whereof the said Ambassador was forewarned; and so
is the matter to be proved by the letters of the said strangers, which I at
present have in my custody; and so the Post was permitted freely to depart with
all manner of letters, which he had of the said Ambassador. And so I pray you to
make answer therein, as you shall see cause, for so is the truth, and no
otherwise.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil,
Hampton Court, Jan. 30. 1568.
To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
OF late I have received three several letters from you, the first of the 11.
the second of the 13. and the last of the 15. of February, although that of the
13 of February was written to be in January, but I am sure to be mistaken. By
the first it appeared, that you could not obtain of Mounsieur Morviller the
names of any Ships or Merchants of that party which were stayed here; although
they pretended the stay of ours at Rhoan to be for that cause: In the same
letter you make mention of two dis-courtesies, or as I may rather say, injuries
done unto you; the one by taking Rogers your servant, the other by imprisoning
the Physician to my Lady your wife; of which two matters, you may see by the
answer made to the French Ambassador, I have made mention. The second letter,
of the 13. which was brought to me by this bearer, contains matter of
burthening you by the Queen Mother for soliciting the Queens Majesty, to take
some enterprise for Callis or Rochel, wherein I think your wisdom sufficient to
satisfy your self what to think; for if you had so done, as I know not that
you have, it were not unlike, but they there would invent and set abroach, for
their advantage, the like matter, if the circumstances were theirs, as they be
ours. And where you are charged with conveyance of the Rebels letters (as they
call them) in your Packets; I think the same and the former part are fed with
one humor, which is, that though you do not in this sort, yet they surely would
so do in the like; wherefore I wish you to be no ways troubled herewith; but as
the end of the verse is, Contra audentior ito; and yet to hold this rule, to be
a Minister of good amity betwixt the Princes, usque ad aras, that is, as far
forth as it be not against the honor of God, and the safety of the Queen our
Sovereign.

By your letter of the 15. which was written after you had closed up the Packet
brought by this bearer, you advertised me of the news which you had of Monsieur
Gengez; and of the joining together of the Prince of Orange and the Duke
Pipantine, whereof, saving your advertisements, otherwise we hear nothing, but
rather the contrary, being spread so by the French Ambassador here, with
affirmations of great credit. In the latter end of your letter of the 13. it
appears you had not then sent away the Queens Majesty's letters to the King
of Spain, whereof I am very sorry, for her majesty makes an assured account,
that they had been in Spain by this time, which I see you did not, because the
Spanish Ambassador was not at Court, but at Paris; for remedy whereof, all
speed possible would be used to send them by a special man to the Ambassador at
Paris, with some excuse to him of sending the same so late. You shall
understand that Monsieur D' Assenleville, who came only from the Duke of Alva,
has been here of long time, hovering to have had access to the Queen as an
Ambassador, which her Majesty would not allow of, nor would so much prejudice
her self in respect of the unkind usage of the Duke of Alva; and yet
nevertheless allowed unto him as much conference as he would with her Council;
to whom although he did open, as we think, the sum of his negotiation, yet he
pretended to have somewhat more to her Majesty, if he might have audience of
her, which, otherwise, he said he could open to no body.

As to that which he opened to the Council, which was a request to have the
money released, and the Arrest set at liberty; It was answered, That the money
belonged to Merchants, and that he could not deny, but added that it was meant
to have been lent unto the Duke of Alva in the Low Countries, and so as they
termed it, designed to the Kings use; as to the restitution of the money, and
putting the Arrest at liberty, she would neither deny nor grant the same to
him, considering he lacked authority to make sufficient contract thereupon; but
when the King himself should send one sufficiently authorized, both to
understand, and to redress the injuries done by the Duke of Alva to her
Majesty's subjects; it should well appear that the King should be reasonably
satisfied on her Majesty's behalf, and amity and peace should be conserved
according to the Treaties. And besides this, it was added, that seeing the Duke
of Alva began the Arrest first, it was reason they should also begin the
release; and so in the end D'Assonle ville appearing to be much miscontented,
was licensed to depart, and so is gone, having used all good gentle speech that
could be, during his being here; notwithstanding the report of his great
bravery made at Callis before his coming, which either was not true, or else
purged his choler upon the Seas coming hither. Thus having, as time could serve
me, enlarged my letter, I end, with my hearty thanks to you for the Charts of
France which I perceive are of the like as I had seen before, so as I think
there is no newer printed.

Yours assuredly, as your own, W. Cecil.
Westminster. March, 7. 1568. Postscript.
I would gladly know, whether the paper you sent me, containing the Emperors
answer to the French Kings demand, be to be allowed as true.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight etc
SIR,
BY the Queens Majesty's letters you shall perceive in what sort the French
Ambassador has sought to frame a tale of slander against you, her Majesty has
answered for you, and as long as no other thing can be produced to touch you,
it is reason that her Majesty should answer as she does.

Your servant Madder came safely hither four days past, and I have heard from
my Lady, of Hearts taking, and the Queens Majesty's letters from him. Whereof,
as I know upon her advertisement to you, you will use some roundness of speech
by way of complaint there; so have we here not forborne to charge the Ambassador
with these dis-courteous dealings, who promises earnestly to write to the King
thereof. The French Ambassador gives out store of News of the overthrow of
Montgomery, the taking of his brother, of Gonliss death, of the Duke of Bipots
sickness; of his want of money to go to the Field, but we heard of many
contraries to these; and so I wish you your hearts desire.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 14. March. 1568.
To the Right Honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador,
Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur servant Crips came hither yesternight, as I perceive, constrained to
follow and accompany Monsieur de Montassyer, who this day was brought to the
Queens Majesty's presence to report the Victory which God had given to the
French King by a Battle, as he termed it, wherein was slain the Prince of
Conde; whereunto, as I could conceive, her Majesty answered, that of any good
Fortune happening to the King, she was glad; but she thought it also to be
condoled with the King, that it should be counted a Victory to have a Prince of
his blood slain; and so with such like speech, not fully to their contentation.

Before the coming of your letters, we could not firmly believe the reports of
the Prince of Conde's death, but now the will of God is to be interpreted in
this and all things to the best.

I am sorry to see you so troubled, whereof her Majesty is so informed, as she
told the French Ambassador, that if he will not procure the King his Master to
cause you and yours to be otherwise entreated, she will revoke you; In the mean
season I pray you keep your former courage, and contra audentior ito.

I have been, and yet am, not in sure health, as your Son can inform you,
whereby I am not able to write any long letter; when Madder was here, I gave
him a Memorial of sundry things, of which I trust he has by this time informed
you at length.

We have heard nothing from Rochel since this re-encounter at Cognac, but from
Paris we hear, that saving the loss of the Princes person, the other part has
the greater loss in numbers; and that the Admiral did defeat forty Ensigns of
Mounsieurs Army that offered to besiege him in Cognac, hereof shortly the truth
will be known. I note that this 13. of March last past had two sundry great
effects; for upon that day, when the Regent of Scotland should have fought with
the Duke of Chastilherault, they did notably accord the same day in this sort,
that the Duke acknowledged the young King, and went with the Regent to
Sterling; and with him, besides other Noblemen, the Lord Herryes, who had been
here a vehement Commissioner for the Queen of Scots.

Besides, it is accorded, that for redress of all private quarrels, there were
four Noblemen named of either part to end all, who should come to Edinburgh the
tenth of April to treat thereupon; and this was unwilling to the Queen of
Scots, who must needs be greatly perplexed therewith; what will follow, I know
not, but the Regent is now well obeyed; the same day we see what was done in
Poytiers, wherein Gods judgments are not to be over much searched.

I send you within the Queens Majesty's letter, a paper in a new Cipher to ^
which he desires forasmuch as all power egal to be ^ which I pray you do.

And thus I find my self not able to endure any longer writing, and therefore
end.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 6. April, 1568.
SIR,
AFter I had closed up this other Packet, I had occasion to stay the bearer,
partly by indisposition of my health, and also within a day after, by reason of
the coming of your Son, John Norris, with your letters of the 15. of this
month, who gave us here to understand of certain discomfortable news which
were told him at Abeville; and as it appears, were in great haste sent before
him by the Marshal de Cosse to the French Ambassador, containing an absolute
Victory by the Kings brother, in a battle besides Cognac; in which it was
written, that the Prince of Conde, and the rest of the Nobility with him,
saving the Admiral and Dandelot (who were fled) were all slain; and this news
being here dispersed abroad, I thought good to stay the sending away of this
bearer, until we might better understand what to think truth herein; which
being now four days, and therein no confirmation of the aforesaid news, but a
doubtful maintenance of them; whereby it is thought that either no part was
true, or not in such sort as was reported; and therefore knowing the necessity
of your man's service, I do return him unto you.

We understand certainly out of Scotland, that there has been an accord by
certain Articles made betwixt the Regent and the Duke of Chastilherault and his
party, wherein the obedience to the King is acknowledged, and a Surcease until
the tenth of April; at which time the Duke and eight more, chosen on both
parts, shall meet at Edinburgh, to confer of the estate of the Queen of Scots,
how she shall be reputed; and likewise of recompenses for the losses on both
parts sustained in these civil wars; and for performance of this Treaty, the
Duke, the Earl of Cassels, and the Lord Herryes, remain with the Regent,
until they put in their Sons for Hostages; and the Regent in the mean time
intends to use his force to subdue the Outlaws upon our Frontiers.

I received letters even now out of Ireland, by which it is written of the
defeat of four hundred Irish and Scots, only by sixscore Englishmen; I shall
continually hearken for your letters, to declare to us the truth of this great
tale of the Battle of Cognac. We hear that the Count Meighen is newly departed
and fled into Germany upon fear.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
27. March, 1568. Postscrip.
The time serves me not to write to you of your self, for your motion of
leaving that place.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, etc.
SIR,
SInce the coming hither of Harcourt, who came hither on St. George his day, as
it seems, with good haste; we here have been much unsatisfied, for that we
could not imagine what to conceive to be the cause that in so long space we
heard not from you; having in the mean time so many diverse tales, as we were
more troubled with the uncertainty, then glad of the news; and toadd more
grief, we could not hear from Rochel since the Re-encounter, until now by a
Merchant that came hither within these two days past, by whom we are more
ascertained then before; by him we understand, that the loss of the Prince is
more in reputation then in deed, for that now the whole Army is reduced to
better Order then it was before. The Vidame of Charles is come to Plymouth and
his wife, as it is thought, not being well liked of amongst the Nobility,
because he married so meanly; indeed it must needs be some reproof to him to
come away when service is requisite. Since the accord made in Scotland the 13.
of March, at Easter last, the Duke of Chastil-herault and his part, hearing, as
it is thought of the death, of the Prince of Conde, and by brute, that the
Admiral and all that party were utterly subverted, did go back from their
agreement, which was, to acknowledge the young King and the Regent; whereupon,
as we hear, the Duke himself, the Archbishop of St. Andrew, the Lord Herryes,
and the Lord Rosbim, are committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, what will follow
I know not; God stay these troubles that increase so near us; I think you do
hear from Mr. Killigrew, who is sent to the Palsgrave of Rheine, and so I end.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
April, 27. 1569. Postscript.
Sir, to avoid some length of my own writing, I do send you herewith the sum of
the Negotiation lately with the French Ambassador, and thereto have adjoined
the Copy of the Proclamation, that is meant to be made by the Queens Majesty,
which is mentioned in the other writing; and a Copy also of a clause contained
in the French Kings Proclamation; by all means you may, well understand that
which has passed in this matter, and shape your own speech there accordingly.

>W. Cecil.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, Ambassador in France.
SIR,
YOu have much satisfied us here with your letters sent by Madder, who is able
to explicate the affairs very sensibly; and now I have thought good to address
to you, Hartcourte knowing that he is very serviceable unto you. And as for any
news to make recompense to you, I have not, and glad I am that our Country does
not yield any such as France; and yet in the way of Christian charity, I do
lament the misfortune of France, marvailling that a Country that has had so
many wise men, able to offend other Countries, has none to devise help for
themselves. I wish that you would learn of the Spanish Ambassador there,
whether he sent the letters which you delivered to him from the Queens Majesty.

There is some secret means made hither, to come to accord with the Low
Countries, and therein I see the most doubt will be in devising assurance how
to continue the accords.

Our Navy has been ready these fourteen days at Harwich, to go with the
Merchants Fleet of Wool and Cloth to Hamburgh; and our Fleet that was
appointed to Rochel is, as we think, there, by means of the Easterly winds that
h^th hindered and stayed the other Fleet. God send them both a good return, for
they are no small offense to our neighbors; that to Hamburgh, to the Duke of
Alva; and the other, to the French.

The French Ambassador continues a suitor, that no Ambassador be sent to
Rochell; and that our Merchants cannot forbear, specially for Salt which cannot
be had in other places, although even now great likelihood is of sufficiency to
be had, within these 12. months, in England.

The Earl of Murray proceeds still in uniting to him the Lords that were
divorced from him; and specially, of late, the Earl of Arguile is reconciled to
him; and the like is looked for of the Earl of Huntley. I have no more, but to
end with my commendations.

Yours assured at command, W. Cecil.
Greenwich, 15. May, 1569.
SIR,
YOur last letters, that came hither to my hands, were written the 27. by
which, amongst other things, you wrote of the brute, of the impoisoning
Dandelot by the means of an Italian, of which matter we were here advertised
almost ten days before; the report was in part before he was sick, such
assurance have these Artizans of their works; the will of God be fulfilled, to
the confusion and shame of such as work them, and such great iniquities. We
have certain news from Rochell, that Original lettere intercepted by persons of
credit in the French ourt, of Advertisement concerning the Q of Scots and Duke
of Anjou.
Dandelot, being opened, the very poison was manifestly found in him.

The Queens Majesty, of late, was very credibly advertised by sight of original
letters, of persons of no small reputation in that Kings Court, which have
entreated of the matter, whereof heretofore your self has advertised
concerning the ^ D and ^ for the transterring ^ 3. And now her Majesty would
That the said Scottish Queen should transfer her Title on the said Duke.
have you use all good means that you can possible, to learn some more truth
hereof, and thereof with speed to advise her Majesty; for it is so precisely
denied on the other part here, as nothing can be more. The French Ambassador
continues complaining of lack of restitution in To learn more truth hereof,
and advertise with speed.
general; yet I assure you he never is refused restitution upon any particular
demand; where, contrariwise, our Merchants are daily evil used at Rhoan, and
specially Callis; and, as it seems, the Governor of Callis This precisely
denied by the other side.
regards not the Ambassadors speeches or promises here; or else it is
Covenanted betwixt them to Boulster out their doings.

Mr. Winter departed from Harwich the 19. of May, and came to Hamburgh the 23.
remained there until the 28. and returned safe to Harwich the first of June,
all in good safety, with the Queens Ships, leaving two there to return with our
Merchants. It is found that all the Ships in the Country dare not deal with six
of the Queens, being armed as they are; motion is made of accord betwixt us and
the Low Countries. The Earl of Murray has no resistance in Scotland.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Greenwich, 4. June, 1569. Postscript.
SIR,
IT is now accorded, that three of the Merchants shall pass over to Rohan, to
prove what restitution the French will make there, and the like shall be here.

Because I doubt your slack servants, I do presently send away this bearer;
otherwise I would have staid him to have seen what manner of news this
Ambassador has to declare upon Tuesday next, at which time he has required to
be heard.

I am ready, as I told your Son, Mr. William Norris, to do any thing in my
power to pleasure you in your particular causes or suites here; as the last
Term, I did deal for you in such as I was required;

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters are of the 8, of June, brought by a Merchant residing at
Rhoan; and now our daily expectation is to hear, either of the joining of the
Duke Vypont with the Admiral, or else that they have been kept asunder by
sight; we have no news here, being contented with continuance of quietness,
which we think to possess, except the motions of the contrary shall come from
thence, whereof we have great cause to fear, and the like to prevent. Upon a
Reprizal made by Mr. Winter here of certain Portugals goods, We hear, for
certainty, that King of Portugal has Arrested the goods of our Merchants
there, whereof will follow some ja^^, which we think our foes will increase.

The Queen of Scots has sent one Borthick, by whom, at his request, I wrote
yesterday, and her Secretary Rowlye, into France, co procure from the King and
his brother (...), some satisfaction to the Queens Majesty, for avoiding of the
opinion conceived of her transaction, with Mounsieur D' Anjou; how they shall
well satisfy her Majesty, I cannot tell; but, as of late I wrote to you, her
Majesty would have you explore, by all means that you can, what has been in
truth done heretofore in that case, besides the advertisement; for her Majesty
has seen letters passed betwixt no mean persons of Authority there, being
adversaries to the Religion; by which it manifestly appears, that such
matters have been secretly concluded; and yet the more trials are made hereof,
the better it is.

We have, at length, accorded with the French Ambassador here, as as you shall
see by a Copy of writing herewith sent you, and so I take my leave of you. I
wish that you would always when you send any with your letters, write what you
impressed to them for their charges, for I make full allowance to them all: And
so with my hearty commendations to you and my Lord, I end. Our Progress is like
to be to Southampton.

Your assured friend at command, W. Cecil.
Greenwich, 18 June 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henrry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
THis bearer Mr Borthick, servant to the Queen of Scots, has required me to
have my letters unto you, to signify the cause of his coming; wherein I can
certify, of my knowledge, no other than thus; the Queen of Scots, of late
time, amongst other things, to move the Queens Majesty to be favoureble unto
her in her causes, offered to do any thing reasonable to satisfy her Majesty,
concerning her surety in the right of this Crown, as she now possesses it to
her self and her issue; whereupon answer was given, that though there was no
need, for the Queens Majesty's assurance, to have any Act pass from her, yet as
things were understood, the Queen of Scots was not now a person able or meet to
contract therein; for it was understood that she had made a Concession of all
her Title to this Crown, to the Duke of Anjou; with which answer we find the
Queen of Scots much moved as a thing devised by her enemies in France; and
thereupon she advertiseth the cause to be of the sending of her (...) into
France to the King his Brother, Uncles, etc. to make perfect testimony in what
sort this surmise is untrue; and so, as I am informed this is the occasion of
the coming of Mr. Borthick this Bearer, who, truly, I have found always a good
servant to the Queen his Mistress, and a tractable Gentleman at all times; and
so I pray you accept him upon my commendations.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Westminster. 16. June, 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur advertisement of the Duke of Bipont came hither so speedily, as until
seven days after the French Ambassador could not understand thereof; but when
he did, he used no sparing to divulge it abroad; where the Count Ernest of
Mansfelt is, we cannot as yet understand; but from Rochell we hear that he is
well allowed of the Army, and not inferior in knowledge to the Duke. The will
of God must be patiently received and obeyed; and what shall ensue hereof to
his glory; we must, if it be good, affirm it to: be beyond our deserts; if
otherwise, not so evil as we have deserved.

Of late, about the 15. of June, a Rebellion began in the West part of Ireland
about Cork; wherein we care not for the force of the inhabitants, so they be
not aided with some Spainards or Portugals, whereof we are not void of
suspicion; and therefore we do presently send certain Captains with a Force by
Sea from Bristoll to Cork, meaning to provide for the worst, as reason is.

Our Rochell Fleet is safely returned with Salt; and I think the Merchants have
not as yet brought their whole accomplement.

Upon your last advertisement of the delays used in giving you Pasports, I did
peremptorily admonish the French Ambassador, That if he did not procure you
some better expedition at the Kings hands there, he should have the like
measure there; and therefore I think you shall hear some what, whereof I pray
you advertise me: And so I take my leave.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
(...) Postscript.
An unfortunate Accident is befaln to my Lord of Shrewsbury, being first
stricken with a Palsy, and now stricken lamentably with a Frenzy, God
comfort him; It is likely the Queen of Scots shall remove to Belvoir, in the
charge of my Lord of Bedford.



To the right honorable, Sir Henrry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
AS my leisure is small to write much, so have I not much matter to write unto
you at this time; but only to send away this bearer your servant unto you,
because I think in this time you have cause to use them all. Your Son, Mr. John
Norris, I think shall be the next by whom you shall understand all our matters
here better then I can express in my letters; and therefore I do forbear to
write diverse things at this present unto you, which by him you shall more
certainly understand; only at this time I wish that you could find the means
to send some trusty person to ^ there to understand the certainty To send a
trusty person to Marcells.
of the matter, whereof you did last advertise her Majesty concerning the ^ For
herein it is necessary to be better ascer^ained, then by reports, lest some may
inform you of things to move us here, to enter further then will be allow^ble.
Your constancy in opinion for the maintenance of Gods cause is, here, of good
Counselors much liked, and in that respect I assure you, I do earnestly
commend you.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Greenwich, 11. July, 1569. Postscript:
I pray tha^^ may be commended to my good Lay, whom I see void of fear of Wars,
for love of your company.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters brought unto me by the French Ambassadors Secretary were of
the 9. of this month, the advertisement wherein being in Ciphers contented me
so much, as I wish you could by the next make me good assurance of the truth
thereof; and if the same be true, met(...) the contrary party should not
forbear to take advantage of the time. This (...) the Frenth Ambassador had to
dinner with him, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl o(...) the Earl of Leicester, my
Lord Chamberlain, and my self; having invited us four or five days past; where
my Lord of Leicester and I had privately reported the misusage of you by them
of your house by the Parisians, who seemed to be ignorant thereof, imputing the
same to their insolency, reporting, for example, their late boldness in
executing of the two Merchants which the King had pardoned, whereof your self
also of late wrote unto the Queens Majesty. Afterward he entered more privately
with me in discoursing of the causes why you were misliked there, to be only
for the intelligence which you had with his Masters Rebels; a matter, as he
said, if he should attempt the like here, he knew that I would so mislike, as
he could not be suffered to remain here as an Ambassador. I told him that for
any thing to me known therein, he did as much here to his power; but we had no
such cause of suspicion as they had, and therefore he heard nothing of us. I
confess that I thought you as well-willing to the cause of Religion, as any
Minister the Queen had, and I liked you the better. neither would I ever
consent that any other manner of person should be sent to be our Ambassador
there. In the end, he required me to write earnestly (...)to you, by way of
advice, that you would for-bear your manner of dealing with the Kings Rebels;
and I told him that so I would, and durst assure him that you would deal with
none whom you could account as Rebels; percase, you would wish well to the
Kings good servants, that were afflicted for their consciences; and so after
such like advisings, we went to dinne. When(...) I consider by whom I send this
letter, I mean your Son, I find myself ensured of writing, being also, as he
knows, oppressed at present with business; I am bold to end, with my
heartiest commendations to you, and my Lady; I thank you for your good
entertainment of Mr. Borthick, for he has written thereof very well.

W. Cecil:
20. July, 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
SInce the time that we first sent the Merchants to Rhoan, to confer with the
Marshall de Cross, for restitution to be made on either side, we never heard
from them but once; at which time they advertised us, that the Merchants
pretended ignorance of those things which the Ambassador here had alleged both
in the Kings name, and in his, nevertheless he entreated them well; and caused
them to stay until he might send and have answer from the King, which they
did; and since that time we have not heard of them; but making report thereof
to the Ambassador, he would not seem to believe our Merchants; pretending the
mistaking of the Marshals words; and so in the end, by his frequent
solicitation, the Queens Majesty has accorded; by advice of her Council, in
such manner as you perceive, by a Copy hereof in writing sent herewith; the
like whereof is sent at this present unto the said Merchants remaining at
Rhoan. In which accord, you shall see a division of the matters in question
according to their natures; That is, for things plainly and openly Arrested and
staid, to be restored within a time, without suit in Law; the rest of the
things to be restored, by order of Law, with favorable expedition; whereas the
Ambassador would have had the accord made, that all things, of what nature
soever they were, being proved to have been taken by any the Queens subjects;
or any other that should be proved to have brought the same into any Port or
Creek of this Realm, that immediate restitution or recompense should be made
for the same, whereby you can guess what matters he meant to have drawn to
their advantage, by such large words. Thus much of this matter I have thought
good to write unto you for your information; and for the enlargement thereof, I
have at present written to the Merchants, to advertise you of their proceedings.

We have report come to us from Callis, that the King there is come to Paris,
and that his brother, with his Army, is at Orleance, with many other things, to
the advantage of the Prince of Navarr; but hereof I make no certainty nor
account, until I may hear from you.

You shall, perchance, hear of some troubles in Ireland, which also may be by
our ill-willers increased; and therefore I have thought good to impart unto you
briefly the state of those matters, Fitz Morris of Desmond, one that pretends
title to the Earldom of Desmond, has traitorously conspired with diverse Rebels
in the South-West part, with one Mac Cartemore, late time made Earl of
Clancarty, to withstand the Authority of the Queens Majesty; and pretends to
make a change of Religion, being provoked thereto by certain Friars, that have
offered to get him aid out of Spain and Portugal; and upon comfort hereof,
has with a Rebellious number overrun diverse parts in the West; and especially
made great spoil upon certain Lands belonging to Sir Warham St. Ledger, near
Cork. And besides this, I have procured the Earl of Ormonds younger brethren
to commit like riotous acts, pretending, on their part, that they do the same,
not of any disobedience to the Queen, but to maintain their private Titles and
Lands against Sir Peter Carew, whom indeed the Lord Deputy there finds very
serviceable against them; and in that respect, it seems, they would cover
their disorders, But thanked be God, the brothers powers are dispersed, and
they driven into desert places; and the Deputy was the 27. of the last month
in a Castle of Sir Edward utlers, which was taken by force, and from thence
marched with his Army against the other Rebels, who also fled from him. And
so, although indeed it be a matter to be pitied, to have any such disorder to
be begun, yet with Gods goodness there is great likelihood of due avenge to be
had of them all; and no small profit to grow to the Queens Majesty, by the
forfeitures and escheats of their Lands, wherewith the better subjects may be
rewarded.

The French Ambassador has been here this day, and showed the Queens Majesty,
that the King is come to Paris to levy money for increase of his Army, and that
there are coming six thousand more Switzers to his service.

The 25. of the last, the Earl of Murray began a convention at St. John's Town,
and means to send, as I think, the Lord Lydlington hither with his mind
concerning the Queen of Scots; and so I end with my hearty commendations, both
to your self, and my Lady.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil,
Otlands, 3. Aug. 1569. Postscript.
^ here is very desirous that ^ might be ^ hither.



To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters brought hither to my hands came by Mr. Huddleston, whom
surely I think you shall find an honest servitor; I have no matter presently
to write of, but to take occasion to send away this bearer your servant, and I
wish to hear from you of some good success at Pcictiers; I do lie in wait for
the Italian, of whom you lately made mention in your letters, that is sent
hither to attempt his devilish conclusions.

Out of Ireland, since my last, I have heard nothing of any moment, but I trust
all shall be in quiet there; and so is the state of this Realm also, howsoever
any other shall report, having a disposition of malicious prophesying.

In Suffolk, a lewd Varlet, not disposed to get his living by labor, moved a
number of light persons to have made a rout in manner of Rebellion, to have
spoiled the richer sort; but the matter was discovered, and the offenders taken
before they did attempt any thing more then had passed by words; so as thereby
they are punishable, but as conspirers by words, and not as actual Rebels.

The convention of St. Johns-Town in Scotland was dissolved about the second of
this month; and one Wednesday last came hither one Alexander Hume from the
Regent, with letters, declaring that he had an universal obedience in Scotland,
and that the States there would not consent to any thing concerning the Queen
of Scots restitution by any manner of Degree; wherewith her Majesty is not well
pleased, because she has a disposition to have her out of the Realm, with some
tolerable conditions to avoid peril, which is a matter very hard, at the
least to me, to compass; I think you shall hear someways of an intention of ^
and ^.

Certainly, if the Queens Majesty may or shall be thereto persuaded, I think it
likely to succeed; it has so many weighty circumstances in it, as I wish my
self as free from the consideration thereof, as I have been from the
intelligence of the devising hereof; I thought not good to have you ignorant; I
know has not allowed of it.

Sir, I thank you for the French story which you lately sent me by Huddleston;
the next that shall come to you, I think, will be Mr. William Norris.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Fernham, 13. August, 1569. Postscript.
Immediately after your last servant departed with letters to you, making
mention of our accord with the French Ambassador, came the two Merchants,
Patrick and Offly, to London, with an accord propounded by the Marshall de
Cross, but not accepted, for that thereby was required a general restitution of
all things, which on our part indeed cannot be; and now the French Ambassador
will not be here on Wednesday, to eater into a new communication. I send you a
late Proclamation, which you may impart there as you list.



SIR,
ALthough the bearer hereof, Mr. Norris, your Son, is well able to satisfy you
of all our Occurrents here, both because of his continual attendance about the
Court, and for his understanding; yet in one only thing I am most fit to
inform you; That his stay here of long time has been principally by my
occasion, whom I have at all times, of late, when he has desired to come over
unto you, moved to stay, upon expectation to have some matter of more weight to
be by him imparted unto you; but finding the same not so to fall out, and
perceiving him the more importune to resort unto you, since the repair of
Harcourte, by whom he understood of your sickness, I have thought it good no
longer to defer him; and therefore without any other great matter, but to send
him where he would be, he now comes; and if I should enter into writing of any
particular things here past; he is as well able to express the same, of his own
knowledge, as I am by writing; and therefore you shall justly hold me excused,
if I forbear my writing, having so sufficient a person to make report of all
things, as well such as are meet for letters, as also not meet, for some
respects. Of the matters of Ireland, he shall make you full report. Of Scotland
he can do the like; of our Trade to Hamburgh, he is not ignorant; of the
matters betwixt us and France for Arrests of Merchandises, I have made him
Privy; and for the matters in this Court, he has seen and understands as much
thereof as I doubt not but shall satisfy; so as he shall serve you at this
time in stead of many long letters: And so I end, with a good hope that he
shall find you well amended; whereof I shall also be glad to hear, wishing
that the same might be joined with the winning of Poictiers, of which we here
live, on all sides, in no small expectation, though with sundry meanings.

Your assured friend at command, W. Cecil.
Southampton, 9. Sept. 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
SInce your Sons departing from Southampton, I have deferred to write until
this time, perceiving some likelihood of some greater matters to ensue, and yet
the event thereof draws out at some length, which has moved me to defer the
same until now; and doubting that otherwise rumors may be brought unto you, I
have thought good to send away this bearer. You shall understand, that
according as your Son was able to inform you, the Duke of Norfolk departed
toward London about the 16. of this month, promising to return to the Court
within 8. days; the Queens Majesty having showed her self toward him offended
with his dealing in the marriage, was newly offended with his departure; but
being by me assured (as I earnestly thought) that he would return, her Majesty
was quieted; contrary hereunto, notwithstanding that he wrote on Thursday the
23. that he would be at the Court before Monday, yet he went away secretly from
London to Reninghale that same night, whereof we had no knowledge until Sunday
in the morning, that his own letters written on Friday at night at Reninghale
came hither; by which he signified the cause of his departure to be a vehement
fear, that he conceived by reports made to him, that he should be committed to
the Tower; and therefore he did withdraw himself, to have means to seek the
Queens Majesty's favor, which he offered to do as a quiet humble subject.
Hereupon, the same Sunday Mr. Edmund Garret was sent to him, who found him at
Reninghale on Monday at night, in a servent Ague; so as the Duke required
respite, until Friday; with which answer Mr. Garret returned, and therewith
the Queens Majesty was offended, and began, by reason also of other lewd tales
brought to her Majesty, to enter into no small jealousy, and therefore sent
again Mr. Garret, with a peremptory commandment, that he should come
notwithstanding his Ague; and so even now, whilst I am writing, I have word,
that Mr. Garret coming on Thursday at night, found him ready to come of his own
disposition, and surely is now on the way, whereof I am glad; First, for the
respect of the State, and next for the Duke himself, whom of all subjects I
honored and loved above the rest, and surely found in him always matter so
deserving. Whilst this matter has been in passing, you must not think but the
Queen of Scots was nearer looked to then before; and though evil willers to our
State would have gladly seen some troublesome issue of this matter; yet, God be
thanked, I trust they shall be deceived. The Queens Majesty has willed my Lord
of Arundel, and my Lord of Pembroke, to keep their lodgings here, for that they
were privy of this marriage intended, and did not reveal it to her Majesty; but
I think none of them so did with any evil meaning; and of my Lord of Pembroke's
intent herein, I can witness that he meant nothing but well to the Queens
Majesty; my Lord Lumly also is restrained; the Queens Majesty has also been
grievously offended with my Lord Leicester; but considering he has revealed
all that, he says, he knows of himself, her Majesty spares her displeasure
the more toward him; some disquiets must arise, but I trust not hurtful, for
that her Majesty says, she will know the truth, so as every one shall see his
own fault, and so stay. Thus have I briefly run over a troublesome passage full
of fears and jealousies; God send her Majesty the quietness that she of her
goodness desires. My Lord of Huntington is joined with the Earl of Shrewsbury,
in charge for the Scottish Queens safety. This 3. of October, the Duke is come
to Mr. Paul WentWorths house, where Sir Henry Nevill has charge to attend upon
him; I hope, as I know no offense of untruth in him, so the event of things
will be moderate; and so, for my part, I will endeavor all my power, even for
the Queens. Majesty's service.

I know there will be in that Court large discourses hereupon, but I trust they
shall lack their hope. The Plague continues in London, the Term is prorogued
until All-halloutide.

All the former part of this letter has been written these three days, and
stayed until the Dukes coming.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
3. October. 1569.
To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
EVen when this bearer was departing, I heard that Crips, your servant, was
come from you as far as Amiens or Abberville, and there was fallen sick; but
whether he has any letters of yours, or no, I cannot tell; I do mean to send
one thither to see his estate, and to bring your letters, which will come very
late: and therefore I think we shall also have some later from you as soon as
they shall come to my hands. This bearer seems to be in Religion good enough,
but yet you know how he politickly serves the French King. Howsoever any evil
bouts shall come thither, at this present all the Realm is, as yet, as at any
time it has been; and no doubt of the contrary, and yet the Duke of Norfok is
in custody, and so are the Earl of Arundel, and Lord Lumley, but the Lord
Steward only keeps his Chamber in the Court, and I trust shall shortly do
well; And so I end.

Your assured friend, W. Cecil.
Windsor-Castle, 10. Oct. 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
AS you have with grief written your advises, so have they with grief been
received of us, and yet in all these accidents of the world, we must accept,
with humbleness, the Ordinances of Almighty God, and expect his further favor
with patience, and with prayer, and intercession to move the Majesty of God to
draw his heavy hand over us, which is provoked by our sins.

Of our late matters here, by the Queens Majesty's letter you shall further
understand, which being as you see, long, I know you will well consider and
advise how to express the same to the French King in the French tongue; wherein
we have this disadvantage, that their Ministers speak in their own tongue, and
we in theirs.

Whatsoever you shall hear by lewd reports from hence, assure your self that I
know no cause to doubt, but that all things are and will continue quiet.

The Queen of Scots, I trust, is and shall be so regarded; as no trouble will
arise thereof; the Duke of Norfolk does humbly accept the Queens Majesty's
dealings with him; and I know of none that are thought to have favored his
part, but either they plainly alter their opinions, and follow the Queens; or
if they do not so inwardly, yet outwardly they yield to serve and follow her
Majesty order.

Before you sent us your letters which you received from Spain concerning
Ireland, we had knowledge of the same from the same place, and much more, and
have made provision to our power. These your sinister accidents in France will
cause some that were in a slumber here to awake; and so beseeching you to
pardon me, if my letter be hasty and very short;

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Windsor-Castle, 26. Oct. 1566.
To the Right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
THis bearer, your Footman, having brought your letters hither a good while
since is desirous to return, though I think both the season of the year and the
weather will not suffer him to make much haste, yet I have thought good to let
you partly to understand of the state of things here.

About the midst of the last month, the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, assembling themselves with some Companies (after refusal to come
in to the Lord President) came to Duresme, where they have made Proclamations,
in their own names, for reformations of the disorders of the Realm (as they
termed it) and for restitution of the ancient Customs and liberties of the
Church, and so directed the same generally to all of the old and Catholic
Religion. In their Companies they have Priests of their Faction, who, to please
the people thereabouts, give them Masses, and some such trash of the spoils and
wastes where they have been; and upon the sudden having levied of all sorts (as
it is thought) of Footmen about four thousand, simply appointed for the wars,
and of Horsemen about a thousand, wherein indeed all their strength is; and
with these numbers (before the Earl of Sussex could gather numbers meet to
resist them, they came down to Todcaster, Ferry-brigs and Doncaster, being
twelve miles, or thereabouts, wide from York, and were not indeed resisted,
until at Doncaster the Lord Darcy of the North, with certain numbers, which he
was leading to York, did very valiantly repulse a number of them; hereupon
they are retired to Richmondshire, and know not what to enterprise by their
straggling in this sort.

The Earl of Sussex is at York, where Sir Ralph Sadler is, and has levied the
power of Yorkshire against them; the Lord Hunsdon is sent to Berwick, and to
the Borders, to levy the like there; Sir John Forster to do the like in his
marches, the Lord Scroope also in his Wardenry, the Earl of Cumberland and the
Lord Wharton, to join with their Forces in Westmerland, and that side; and
besides, the Lord Admiral with the Forces of Lincolnshire, and the Earl of
Warwick, with other numbers of Nottinghamshire, Darbyshire, Warwickshire, and
other parts of the South, are appointed Lieutenants of the Army, who are to
join with my Lord of Sussex; and to do further as shall be found meet. And by
this means you shall hear shortly, I doubt not, of the confusion of this
Rebellious enterprise, who, as you may perceive, by the Queens Majesty's
Proclamation, are proclaimed thorough the Realm, as they have behaved
themselves.

The Queens Majesty has, besides, ready upon all occasions an Army of fifteen
thousand near to her own person.

The Queen of Scots is removed from Tutbery to Coventry, where attends on her
the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Huntington.

Under the Conduct of the Army of the Southern parts is the Viscount Hereford,
with the power of Staffordshire, very well appointed; and diverse Gentlemen of
credit and service of the Court, and other places, of themselves, are gone
thither to serve under the said Lieutenants.

In company with those said Rebels are not many Gentlemen of name, but Norton
an old man, who carries the Cross, Markinfield, Swynbourne, and an Uncle of
the Earl of Westmerland, named Christopher Nevill; all the Realm, and all the
Nobillity, besides these only two Rebels, are as obedient as ever they were,
and surely so like to be, whatsoever our ill-willers may report.

Yours assured, W. Cecil.
2 November. 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
SIR,
I Have forborne these two or three days to write unto you, because I could not
by occasion of some sickness use my own hand, and also because I would not
detain here any longer this bearer Mr. Rogers, who is both serviceable for you,
and desirous to be returned thither. I have thought good to dispatch him
toward you, who can inform you of such news as we have here; and that he may
the better do it, I have imparted to him such things as I think meet for you to
know; and for that I am not well able at present to write any more, I trust you
will be for this time satisfied with such declaration as this bearer shall make
unto you. Thus fare you heartily well, From Windsor the 10. Nov. 1569.

I think long to hear from you, because I have not received any letters from
you since the tenth of the last month, which D'amons brought; but I doubt not
but some of yours be on the way, whereby we may understand how things pass
there.

Since the writing hereof, came yesterday your Lackqueywith letters of the of
wherein you make mention that Lodowick the Count Nassau should be slain, which
I trust is not so, because of other letters which I have seen, that came hither
by the way of Rochell, that testify nothing of his death, but great praise of
his service, the day of the battle. At this present I am unable to write by
reason of some sick ness, as this bearer can report. Herewith I send you a copy
in writing of such things as after long debate betwixt the French Ambassador
and us has been here accorded; which I wish may be as well performed on their
part as they have promised. I pray you, Sir, commend me to my good Lady, and
your Sons.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
12. November. at night.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
SIR,
THough I think this bringer will deliver you my letter, yet I know not with
what readiness he will impart to you our state here; and therefore have thought
good to advertise you thus much, that, thanked be God, our Northern Rebellion
is fallen flat to the ground and scattered away. The Earls are fled into
Northumberland, seeking all ways to escape, but they are roundly pursued; Sir
John Forster and Sir Henry Percy in one company, my Lord of Sussex in another.
The 16. hereof they broke up their sorry Army, and the 18. they entered into
Northumberland, the 19. into the Mountains, they scattered all their Footmen,
willing them to shift for themselves; and of a thousand Horsemen there fled but
five hundred. By this time they be fewer, and I trust either taken or fled into
Scotland, where the Earl of Murray is in good readiness, to chase them to their
ruin; yesternight came Mr. Madder; and upon the next letters from my Lord of
Sussex, I will send away Crips or some other. The Queens Majesty has had a
notable Trial of her whole Realm, and subjects, in this time, wherein she has
had service readily of all sorts, without respect of Religion.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Windsor, 24. December.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
SIR,
I Have long time determined to send away this bearer, your servant, Henry
Crips, but my delay has grown of a desire that I had to see some good issue of
this Rebellion, which as it has had a time of declination, and is now
suppressed; so could I not well before this time send this bearer away, who now
brings her Majesty's letters unto you, by which you shall understand how her
pleasure is, that you should impart the events thereof in that Court; and
indeed hitherto we have no certain and manifest proofs that it should have any
other ground, but as it is expressed in her Majesty's letters; nevertheless, we
have discovered some tokens, and we hear of some words uttered by the Earl of
Northumberland, that makes us to think this Rebellion had more Branches, both
of our own and strangers, then did appear; and I trust the same will be found
out, though, perchance, when all are known in secret manner, all may not be
notified.

Of all other Occurrents, I know your Son, Mr. William, and other your servants
hereto does advertise you; and therefore I pray you to bear with my shortness,
for I am almost smothered with business. We look to hear of the apprehension of
more of the Rebels; I send you extracts of our letters out of the North, as of
late time they have come.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Windsor-Castle, 7. Jan. 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
Advertisements from Lyexham, 22. December. 1569.
THe two Rebellious Rebels went into Liddesdale in Scotland yester-night, where
Martin Elwood, and others, that have given pledges to the Regent of Scotland,
did raise their forces against them; being conducted by black Ormeston, an
Outlaw of Scotland, that was a principal murderer of the King of Scots, where
the fight was offered, and both parties lighted from their horses; and in the
end, Elwood said to Ormeston, he would be sorry to enter deadly send with him
by bloodshed; but he would charge him and the rest before the Regent, for
keeping of the Rebels; and it he did not put them out of the Country, the next
day he would do his worst against them; whereupon the two Earls were driven to
leave Liddesdale, and to fly to one of the Armestronges a Scot upon the
batable on the borders between Liddesdale and England; the same day the
Liddesdale men stole the horses of the Countess of Northumberland, and her two
women, and ten others of their Company; so as the Earls being gone, the Lady of
Northumberland was left there on foot at John of the Sides house in a Cottage,
not to be compared to many a Dog-kennel in England; at their departing from
her, they went not above fifty horse, and the Earl of Westmerland, to be the
more unknown, changed his Coat of Plate and sword with John of the Sides, and
departed like a Scottish Borderer. The rest of the Rebels are partly taken in
the West Borders of England, and partly spoiled by the English and Scottish
Borderers.

By letters of the 24;

The Rebels be driven to change their names, their Horses and apparel, and to
ride like Liddesdale men.

The Regent of Scotland will be this night upon the Borders of Liddesdale.

The Earl of Cumberland, the Lord Scroop, and Mr. Leonard Dacre have showed
themselves very Honorable and diligent in their service at the Rebels entering
into the West Marches; and upon the scaling of the Rebels, there be great
numbers of them taken there.

There be in every of the Marches against Scotland sundry Bands of Horsemen,
and shot laid, if they shall enter into the Realm again.

By letters of the last of December.

The Regent of Scotland is gone from Jedworth to Edinburgh, and has taken the
Earl of Northumberland, and six of his men with him.

Before his departure from Jedworth he sent for the Gentlemen of Tividale, to
come before him, where all came saving the Lord of Farnehurst, and the Lord of
Bucklugh, whereupon the Regent rode toward them, but they hearing thereof
suddenly rode away.

Robert Collingwood, Ralph Swynton, with others of their company, were taken in
East Tividale, and delivered to the Regent, who re-delivered them to their
takers, and charged them for their safe keeping; Egremont Ratcliff with certain
with him remain about Liddesdale.

And it is thought the Countess of Northumberland, the Earl of West-merland,
Norton, Markenfield, Swynborne, and Tempest, are removed out Liddesdale to the
Lords of Fernhurst and Buckclugh.

SIR,
I Doubt not but the report of the cruel murder of the Regent in Scotland will
be diversely reported in those parts; and diversely also received, by some with
gladness, and by some with grief, as I am sure it shall be of you; the manner
of it was thus (as I have been advertised) the 22. of the last month, the
Regent coming thorough the Town of Lithgo, which is in the midway between
Sterling and Edinburgh, having in his company about a hundred persons, was
stricken with a Courrier about the Navell, with the Pellet coming out about his
Hucklebone, which also slew a horse behind him; and of this wound he dyed the
next day afterward within night; the murderer was one Hambleton of
Bothwell-Hall, who lay secretly in a house to attempt this mischief, having
shut the doors toward the street in such sort, as no man could enter on the
foreside to take him; and so he escaped on the backside, where he had a horse
to serve his turn, although he was pursued; what is like to follow miserably to
that Land, I dare not judge; but do fear that the death of so good a man will
prove Initium multorum malorum. At the writing hereof, I know not what is done
or intended; but some write from thence, That the Earls of Mar and Morton, and
other friends to the young King, are come to Edinburgh, and do in the Kings
name preserve the State, and do purpose to have the Land ruled by four Regents;
and one to be a Lieutenant for the wars to execute their directions; a matter
more probable in talk than in effect; as I shall hereafter understand more, so
will I write; It happend that at this time, Sir Henry Gates, and the Marshal of
Berwick were at Edinburgh, having been at Sterling with the Regent, the Friday
before, for the demanding in the Queens Majesty's name, of the Earl of
Northumberland, and other the Rebels, and by direction of the Regent they
attended at Edinburgh for answer to be given the day of his death, which now
is, as our Lawyers call it, sine die.

Mr. Randolph went from hence toward Scotland, the 29. upon knowledge of the
hurt and doubt of his life.

The same day also came Montlnet to her Majesty's presence with the French
Ambassador, bringing his letters dated the 27. of December, at which time I
think they understand not of the stay of our Rebellion. The sum of Montlnets
message consisted upon these two heads, request for restitution, and liberty of
the Queen of Scots, and a declaration of the Kings inclination to peace with
his subjects, and their disguising with him by treating and suing for peace,
and yet amassing of new Forces in Almaine, and seeking also to surprise the
Kings Towns, as Bordeaux, and otherlike, whereupon the King requires the
Queens Majesty not to favor his Rebels if they should seek any further succors
from hence, as they have done, as persons unworthy of any favor.

They have made great instance to be answered for the first matter, but the
Queens Majesty has hitherto deferred them; but I think upon Monday next they
shall have audience.

I forgot to show you, that in the request for the Queen of Scots, he desired
liberty to go to her, and from thence to pass into Scotland, which thing would
not be granted unto him.

Upon the death of the Regent, the Earl of Sussex and Mr. Sadler were
admonished to stay there, for that it was thought good that Mr. Sadler should
have gone from thence into Scotland; but they both being come upon former
license near the City on the way, upon desire to see her Majesty, came hither
yesterday unlooked for; and although in the beginning of this Northern
Rebellion her Majesty sometimes uttered some misliking of the Earl, yet this
day she meaning to deal very Princely with him, in presence of her Council,
charged him with such things as she had heard, to cause her misliking, without
any note of mistrust toward him for his fidelity; whereupon, he did with such
humbleness, wisdom, plainness, and dexterity, answer her Majesty, as both she
and all the rest were fully satisfied, and he adjudged by good proofs to have
served in all this time faithfully, and so circumspectly, as it manifestly
appears, that if he had not so used himself in the beginning, the whole North
part had entered into the Rebellion.

Vsque ad 3. Febr.

We have now letters out of Scotland, that the Nobility which favoreth the
young King have assembled themselves, and made a reconciliation of diverse
persons that had particular quarrels one against another; and as they pretend,
they will all join firmly in the revenge of the Murder, and defense of their
King; the Lord Grange, who keeps the Castle of Edinburgh, is reconciled to
the Earl Moreton, and become one of this Bond, and so does Leddington also
offer to be another.

The Duke of Chastilherault is streighter kept then he was before; and it is
commonly reportd, that the Hambletons were the workers of this murder; thus
much being known of certain, that the murderer was a near kinsman of the
Dukes; and that the Piece wherewith he murdered the Regent, and the spare
horses whereupon he escaped, did all belong to the Abbot of Arbroth, the Dukes
second Son, and the murderer was received into Hambleton the Dukes house; all
which, I trust, God will see revenged.

The Rebellion moved in the West parts of Ireland this last Summer, being also
cherished with comfort out of Spain, is fully suppressed; and the Country
reduced to such quietness and obedience, as the like has not been in those
parts these many years, the heads being all taken and reduced to obedience,
saving one only, named Fitz Maurice, who wandreth in the deserts without any
succor, making means to be received to mercy, but he is of so little value, as
it is refused unto him.

For your own revocation from thence, I am not unmindful, but have attempted
the same; and so mean to continue it, as I hope you shall shortly receive
comfort.

Vsque ad 5. Febr.

This day, the 6. of Febr. the French Ambassador came with Montlovet to her
Majesty, to require answer to their demands, which were three; First, to have
the Queen of Scots delivered and restored; Secondly, that Montlovet might
repair to the Queen of Scots; Thirdly, that he might repair into Scotland: To
all these her Majesty, having her whole Council in her presence, That, for the
first, she said, she had used the Queen of Scots with more honor and favor,
then any Prince, having like cause would have done; and though she was not
bound to make account to any Prince of her doings, yet she would impart to the
King, her good brother, some reasonable consideration of her doings; and so she
ended her answer to that. The other two requests depended so upon the first, as
she said she could not accord thereunto; and so though she used good loving
speech to satisfy him, yet in brief they departed without obtaining their
requests, as shortly you shall understand more at length by the next Messenger,
and letters, which in this behalf shall be sent unto you. We hear that two
Ships of war of St. Malloes, under the conduct of the Lord Flemings brother,
arrived in Don Brittons Frith the tenth of January, and have, as I think,
victualled the Castle of Don Britton, whereof will follow some further
annoyance to Scotland. And thus I am forced to end for the present, by reason
of multitude of other affairs.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, Feb. 7. 1568.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident with the French King.
SIR,
AFter all the other letters in this Packet were sealed up, your honest
servant, Mr. Rogers, arrived here with your letters; of the contents whereof,
concerning the crazed shaken Treaty of peace betwixt the King and his subjects,
I had plainly heard four or five days past from Rochel. Your intelligences
accord with the like, as I have received from Rochel; and as you do express to
us the dangerous practices of our Adversaries there, so I assure you the same
are not by Counselors here neglected, although I can give no assurance how
they shall be avoided; and yet I would not doubt, but with Gods goodness, their
whole designs should prove frustrate if our Councels might take place.

I have named to the Queens Majesty two to be your successors, both to be well
liked, if their livelihoods were answerable to their other qualities; the one
is Mr. Francis Walsingham, the other is Mr. Hen. Killigrew, who is indeed in
livelihood much inferrior. If I can procure that either of them, or some other,
might relieve you, I assure you there shall not lack any good will in me.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 7. Febr. 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
YOur last letters are thus come to my hands; Crips came with those of yours
the 9. then Neal with those of the 25. of the last month, and yesterday came
the French Ambassadors Secretary with those of the first of March; by all which
is manifest the inward natural care that you take for the Queens Majesty, and
therein her Highness accepts your zeal and duty most thankfully. And yet, I
know not by what means, her Majesty is not much troubled with the opinion of
danger; nevertheless, I and others cannot be but greatly fearful for her, and
do, and will do, that in us may lie to understand, thorough Gods assistance,
the attempts; as for ^ D many here, and the most of this Council think the
peril no less, but rather greater, if ^ D forasmuch should ^ Since the death of
the Regent, the Borderers have maintained our Rebels, and invaded England;
wherefore for which purpose my Lord of Suffev is now ordered with an Army to
invade them and make revenge; whereof the Scots hearing do make all means they
can to be reconciled, but they must feel the sword and the firebrand; and
because I will end my letter, I will deliver to this bearer a short memorial of
words to serve him for informing of you of the things of our State; and so with
my most hearty commendations, I end, being sorry that as yet I cannot perfect
my intent for your return.

Your assured friend, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 22. March, 1569.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
SIR,
BY the Queens Majesty long letter you shall perceive her Majesty's meaning in
such sort, as I need not to repeat or enlarge the same; and the sooner that her
Majesty may have answer hereof, the better she will be content, especially if
the answer shall be good.

I send to you the Copies of the advertisements of my Lord of Sussex journey
into Scotland the 17. of April, and returning the 22. his Lordship entered the
27. to besiege (as I think) Hume Castle; for the same has been the receptacle
of all the Rebels; but at the writing hereof, I am not ascertained what his
Lordship has done.

Of late the Bishop of Ross caused one of his servants secretly to procure the
printing of a Book in English, whereof before eight leaves could be finished,
intelligence was had; which Book tends to set forth to the world, that the
Queen of Scots was not guilty of her husbands death, a parable in many men's
opinion; next, that she is a lawful heir to the Crown, and herewith such
reasons inserted as make unsound conclusions for the Queens Majesty's present
state.

Besides this, a notable lie is there uttered, That all the noble men that
heard her cause, did judge her innocent; and therefore made suite to her
Majesty, that she might marry with my Lord of Norfolk.

With these and such like enterprises, her Majesty has been grieved with the
said Bishop, whereupon she has the longer kept him from her presence; but I
think he will be spoken withal to morrow, and so within two or three days, it
is likely, he shall have access to her Majesty.

The Secretary in Scotland has so discovered himself for the Queen of Scots,
as he is the instrument to increase her party, having such credit with Grange,
who keeps Edinburgh Castle, as the Duke of Chastilherault, the Lord Herries,
etc. are now at liberty, and thereby the party for the King is diminished, you
can judge what is meant to be done; and I wish her Majesty to take such a way
herein, as may preserve her estate, the device and execution whereof is found,
upon consultation, very difficult; and yet in all evils the least is to be
chosen.

My Lord of Worcester and my Lord of Huntington are chosen Knights of the Order.

I cannot procure any resolution for your revocation, until it may be seen
what will fall out there of the war betwixt the King and his subjects, whereof
daily there is expectation of some issue; and the French Ambassador does
constantly affirm that the peace shall follow: And so I end.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 4. May, 1570.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident with the French King.
A note of a journey into Tividale by the Earl of Sussex, her Majesty's
Lieutenant in the North, begun the 17. of April, 1570. and ending the 22. of
the same.
THe 17. of April, 1570. the Earl of Sussex, and the Lord Hunsdon, Governor of
Berwick, with all the Garrisons and power of the East Marches, came to Warke,
and entered into Tividale in Scotland the 18. at the break of the day, and
burnt all Castles and Towns as they went, until they came to the Castle of
Moss, standing in a strong Marsh, and belonging to the Lord of Fernhurst, which
they burnt and razed, and so burnt the Country until they came to Craling.

The same day, Sir John Foster, with all the Garrisons and force of the middle
marches, entered into Tividale and Expesgate head 16. miles from Warke, and so
burnt all the Country, until they came to a strong Castle, called in the
possession of the mother of the Lord of Fernhurst, which he burnt and razed,
and so burnt all other Castles and Towns, until he came to Craling, where both
Companies met, and so went up the River of Tivit, and burnt and threw down all
the Castles and Towns upon that River, until they came to Godworth, where they
lodged.

This day the Lord of Chesford, Warden of the middle marches, with the
principal men of his kind, who had never in person received the Rebels, nor
invaded England, and yet had evil men that had done both, came in to the Lord
Lieutenant, and submitted himself, and offered to abide order for his men's
offenses, whereupon he was received as a friend, and he and all his were free
from any hurt.

The 19. the Army was divided into two parts, whereof the one did pass the
River of Tivit, and burnt and razed the Castle of Fernhurst, and all other
Castles and Towns of the Lord of Fernhurst, Hunthill, and Bederoll, and so
passed on to Minte; and the other part of the Army burnt in like sort on the
other side of the River Tivit, until he came to Hawick, where it was intended
to have lodged that night, for that the Bailiffs had the same morning offered
to receive the Army, and had therefore their Town assured; but at the coming
thither of the Army they had unthetched their houses, and burnt the Thetch in
the streets, and were all fled, so as no person could well enter for smoke,
which caused lack of victuals, lodging, and horsemeats; and therefore the fire
began by themselves in the Straw burnt the whole Town, aftersaving Donn
Lamorecks Castle, which for his sake was spared, and all the goods of the Town
in it. The 20. the Army went to Branshaw, the Lord of Buckloughs house, which
was wholly overthrown with Powder, and there divided and burnt, on the North
the River of Tivit, more into the inland, all the Castles and Towns in that
Country, which belonged wholly to the Lord of Bucklough and his kinsmen, and
returned that night to Jedworth. The 21. the Army divided, and one part went to
the River of Bowbeat, and burnt all on both sides of that River; and the other
part went to the River of Caile, and burnt all on both sides of the River, and
met near to Kelsaw, where the Lord Lieutenant lodged that night of purpose to
beset Hume Castle in the night, and the Lord Hunsdon and the other part went to
Warke, to bring the Ordnance thence in the morning, which was disappointed by
the negligence of such as were left in charge, who suffered the carriage horses
to return after the Ordnance was brought thither; so as for lack of horses to
draw the Ordnance, the Army was forced to return to Berwick the 22. All which
time there was never any show of resistance. And the same time the Lord Scroope
entered Scotland, from the West Marches, the 18, etc. During which time the
Marches in all places were so guarded, as the Scots that did not show
themselves to offer fight in the field, durst not offer to enter into England;
so as in the absence of the Army there was not one house burnt, nor own Cow
taken in England; and it is conceived by such as know the enemies part of
Tividale, that there is razed, overthrown, and burnt in this journey, above
fifty strong Castles and Piles, and above 300 Villages; so as there be few in
that Country that have received the Rebels, or invaded England, that have
either Castle for themselves, or houses for their Tenants, besides the loss and
spoils of their other goods, wherein nothing is reckoned of that was done in
the other parts by the Lord Scroope, for that it was not done within the County
of Tividale, etc.

The Rode of the Lord Scroope, Warden of the West marches of England, into
Scotland.
Who the 17. of April at ten of the clock at night, with three thousand Horse
and Foot, came to Ellesingham on the Wednesday at night, and burned that Town
in the morning, being from Carlisle twenty miles.

On Thursday he burned besides Hoddom the Maymes, the Town and all the houses,
which is the Lord Herryes, and from Carlisle sixteen miles.

That day they burned Trayle-trow, which is the Lord Maxwells, from Carlisle 16.
miles.

They burned the Town of Reywell, which is the Lord Coplands, and the Lord
Homeyn's, from Carlisle eighteen miles.

They burned the house of Copewell, and the Demesne of the Lord Coplands, from
Carlisle nineteen miles.

They burned the Town of Blackshieve, which is the Lord Maxwells, from Carlisle
20. miles.

Item, The Town of Sherrington, of the same Lords, twenty miles.

Item, The blank end of the same Lords, twenty miles.

Item, The Town of Lowzwood of the same Lords, twenty miles.

Goods taken the same Rode, one thousand Neat, and one thousand Sheep and Goats.

Of the Scots, are taken one hundred Horsemen, within a mile of Dunnforest? Some
say that Swynborne is taken.

SIR;
BY letters from my Lords of Sussex and Hunsdon of the 29. of April, it is
advertised that the Castle of Hume being besieged by them, and the Battery laid
the 27. of April, the day following the Captain sent out a Trumpet to desire a
Parlie, which granted; the Castle desired license to send a Messenger to the
Lord Hume to know his pleasure what they should do, whereupon it was agreed a
Messenger should pass; and one was sent with him to see that no delay should be
used, the Messenger at his return brought Commission from the Lord Hume to
deliver the Castle, simply, without condition, trusting to their Honors for a
favorable dealing with his men; whereupon the Castle was received, and all the
Armor and Weapons, and the people licenced to depart without Bag or Baggage;
and now the same remains newly fortified, to the Queens Majesty's charge,
more stronger then it was before, to the intent the Rebels may not have their
refuge thither as they had before. By other letters of the first of May from my
Lord of Sussex, it is advertised, that the most part of the March of East
Tividale, Esdale, Ewesdale, Wawcopdale, and other parts upon the Borders from
the East to the West Seas, affirm their continuance of obedience to their King,
desire the Amity betwixt both Realms, offer to spend their lives in the
resisting of any Foreign power that shall offer the disturbance of either;
refuse dependence upon the French; offer to depend upon the Queens Majesty;
and in their actions have refused to receive the Rebels, or to assist the
invaders of England; the like whereof all others do offer that acknowledge that
authority. The contrary part openly receive the Rebels, maintain the invaders
of England, share in their actions and ill meaning to England, and seek
dependence and maintenance of the French. The Earls of Morton, Murray, and
Glencarne, with others of the Kings Council, prepared to be at Edinburgh the
29. of the last, whereupon the Duke of Chastilherault and Huntley went to
Lithgo the 28. to stop their meeting; and the 29. Morton went out of Edinburgh
with a thousand men to meet the other Earls a By-wayl, and so came together
that night to Edinburgh with all their Forces, or to fight for it; in which
time the Lords of Hume and Liddington be entered the Castle with Grange; so as
it is likely they will try shortly by the sword which side shall have the
Authority.

W. Cecil,

IT may please you to be advertised, according to my Lord Lieutenants
direction, I entered into Scotland on Tuesday at night last, the 18. of this
April, and on Wednesday at night encamped at Heclesengham, within Hoddom,
distant from Carlisle 18. miles, and within Scotland 12. miles; and on Thursday
in the morning I sent forth Simon Musgrave, appointed by me as General of the
Horsemen, to burn and spoil the Country, and to meet me at a place called
Cambretreys; and the said Simon burnt the Towns of Hoddome and the Maynes,
Troltrow, Rovel and Calpoole, the Town of Blackshaw, Sherrington, the Banck
end, within three miles of Dumfriese, Lowgher, and Lowgherwood, and
Hecklsengham, which Towns were of the Lands of the Lord Herryes and Maxwell,
the Lord of Cockpoole, and the Lord of Holmends; and as the said Simon and his
company came to old Cockpool, there was the Lord Maxwell with his Forces, and
the Inhabitants of Dumfriese assembled, and skirmished with the Couriers, and
compelled them to return unto the said Simon; and then the said Simon marched
unto the Town of Blackshaw with his Company, where the Lord Maxwell was in
order, and his Forces; and the said Simon and Fargus Graime, with the number,
of a hundred Horsemen, did give the charge upon the said Lord Maxwell, and
made him flee, and his Company also; In which fight there were a hundred
prisoners taken, whereof the principal was the Alderman of Dumfriese, and 16.
of the Burgesses thereof, the rest were Footmen; the chase was followed within
one mile of Dumfriese; after which conflict, the said Simon returned to
Blackshaw aforesaid, and burnt it, and seized a great number of Cattle, and
delivered the same unto certain Gentlemen and others to convey unto me; and he,
the said Simon, Rode with a hundred Horsemen to burn the Banck end Lowgher and
Lowgherwood; and as the said Gentlmen, with their Company, came to a straight
place near unto Old-Cockpool, the said Lord Maxwell, the Lord Carlisle, the
Lords of Holme-ends, Closburne Lorgg, Hempsfeild, Cowhill, and Tenoll, with the
number of four hundred horsemen, and six hundred footmen, charged them very
sore, and forced them to alight and draw their company to a strong place, to
abide the charge of their enemies; and so they remained until the said Simon
came unto them, and alighted, and put his Company in Order, and set his Horse
between his Company and the Sea, and so stood in order to receive the enemy;
and in this sort continued charging, and receiving their charges, the space of
three hours, I being at Cambretreys, aforesaid, a place before appointed
between me and the said Simon for his relief (being distant from him three
miles) understanding of some distress sent my Band of Horsemen, with my brother
Edward Scroope, and a hundred and fifty shot with Mr. Awdley, and Mr. Herbert,
to their relief; and the said Simon, upon the coming of the said Band of
horsemen and Shot, gave the enemies the charge with all his Forces, whereupon
they fled; in which flight there was taken a hundred prisoners, whereof some
were of the petty Lords of the Country; but the Lord Maxwell, the Lord Carlisle,
the Lord Johnson, and the rest before named, escaped by the strength of the
Lord of Cockpools house, and a great Wood, and a Mauress that was near there
adjoining; and so the said Simon repaired to me with his Company, and so we
returned home. And thus, for this time, I commit you to the Almighty.

Yours assured to command, H. Scroop.
Carlisle, 21. April, 1570. Postscript.
Drumlangricks servants and Tenants, whom I had given charge that they should
not be dealt withal, for that he favored the Kings faction, and the Queens
Majesty's, were as cruel against us as any others. Sir, I have written to my
Lord Lieutentant for 500. men, but for fourteen days; and with them, I will
undertake to march to Dumfriese, and lie in that Town, and burn and spoil it,
if the Queen Majesty's think it good; for the open receipt of her Majesty's
Rebels is there manifest.



SIR,
MY leisure serves me as I was wont to have it, all my time at command of
others, and none for my self, and little for my private friends; by the Queens
Majesty's letter, you may perceive the state of things here; God send her
Majesty a good issue of this Scottish matter, whereinto the entry is easy, but
the passage within doubtful, and I fear the end will be monstrous. By your
letters of late time, it has seemed that the opinion was for the Queens
Majesty to be delivered of the Scottish Queen; but surely few here among us
conceive it feasible with surety.

My Lord of Suffex uses his charge very honorably and circumspectly upon the
Frontiers, where indeed he has made revenge; and that only, almost, upon the
guilty. I do send you herewith a printed thing or two sent me from Scotland;
and so take my leave, wishing, for your own sake, that peace might be seen
there, so as you might bring it; for which purpose I trust surely her Majesty
will send one for you.

Yours most assured, W. Cecil.
23. May, 1570.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
SIR,
THis bearer came hither with good speed I do send you herewith a note of my
Lord of Sussex his last letters from Berwick. I do also send you in writing the
Copy of that which the French Ambassador lately sent thither, containing the
sum of that which lately passed here betwixt the Queens Majesty and him,
wherein truly he has not much differed from that which was accorded. The
Bishop of Ross departed on Friday last to the Scottish Queen to deal with her,
that some of her part might come hither out of Scotland to treat of her cause,
and that Arms might cease on both sides. Since his going thither, the Queens
Majesty understands of a Practice, that he had two days before his
departure, with a noble man of this Realm, being a professed Papist, contrary
to his manner of dealing with the Queens Majesty, whereupon her Majesty is not
a little moved against him; and therefore I think she will not deal with him at
his return. We look daily that peace will there be made, though we see not how
it shall continue; but I trust thereby you shall be revoked, and I think Mr.
Walfingham shall come in your place, I have no more at this present. I
received, yesterday, a letter from Paris of the 19. of May, but I did before
that receive another of the 24.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Hampton Court, 8. June, 1570.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
By Letters from Berwick, 3. June.
THe Marshal of Berwick, being at Edinburgh with certain Forces, dealt with the
Earls of Grange and Liddington, to procure a surcease of Arms, which taking no
effect, he went with the Noblemen of Scotland, that joined with him, to Glasco;
from whence the Duke and his Associates fled upon their setting forth; from
thence the Marshal sent to the Bishop of St. Andrews, and the Lords, who were
in Dumbarton Castle, to Parley with them, to procure an abstinence of Arms, who
appointed to meet them the next day at a Village half way betwixt Glasco and
Dumbarton; where missing them at the time appointed he went nearer to
Dumbarton, whereof he sent them word; and thereupon they returned his
Messenger, and appointed to meet and speak with him out of the Castle, so as he
would bring but one or two with him, and to put away his company; and so soon
as he had so done, and that he was within their Shot, they sent him word to
look to himself, and that they would not come to him; and as he turned his
Horse, diverse Harquebusiers, laid for the purpose, shot at him, and they
discharged a Falcon at him out of the Castle, but he escaped without hurt;
hereupon the Noblemen which were with him, burnt the Country thereabouts that
belonged to the Hambletons, burnt the Town of Hambleton, and razed the Castle
of Hambleton, and two other principal houses of the said Dukes, one in Lithgo,
and another called Kennell; they have also thrown down the Abbot of Kilwrenings
house, and in effect all the principal houses of the Hambletons, and have dealt
with no other persons but with an Hambleton; and so the Marshall is returned to
Berwick, etc.

SIR,
YEsterday did Crips arrive with your letters from Argenton, and two days
before came Rogers. The Queens Majesty takes the Kings answer, doubtful, for
his sending of Forces into Scotland, and therefore has caused the French
Ambassador to understand, and to advervise the King, that if the King will send
Forces thither, she will take her self free from; her promise of delivering the
Q. of Scots, of which matter I think he will advertise the King; and as you
have occasion, you may take knowledge thereof; for already her Majesty has
revoked her Forces out of Scotland, leaving only in Hume and Fast Castle a
small Garrison, where our Rebels were most maintained when they invaded
England, until her Majesty may have some amends for her subjects losses.

My Lord of Sussex has fully avenged the wrongs, but yet our people have not
recompense.

Mr. Drury, the Marshall, with a thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, has so
plagued the Hambletons as they never had such losses in all the wars betwixt
England and Scotland these forty years.

The Queens Majesty has hurt her Foot, that she is constrained to keep her
Bedchamber; and therefore the French Ambassador could not yesterday have
Audience when he required, but is willed to write that he has to say; I am
sorry that your servants when they come tarry so long here as they do, for it
is not my fault, and so I end.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Oatlands, 22. June, 1570. Postscript.
The Earl of Southampton lately being known to have met in Lambeth Marsh with
the Bishop of Ross, is for his foolish audacity committed to the Sheriff of
London, closely to be there kept. The fond Lord Morley, without any cause
offered him, is gone like a noddy to Lorrein.



SIR,
I Stayed this bearer two days longer then first I intended, because the French
Ambassador required Audience, affirming that he had answer from the French
King, wherewith the Queens Majesty would be satisfied; and yesterday he was
here, and showed her Majesty the French Kings letters to him, and thereof gave
her Majesty a copy, which I have, and do send to you herewith an extract of a
clause tending to the matter, the letter being of it self long and full of good
words, purporting his desire to have the Scottish Queen restored, and concord
established betwixt the two Queens; the letter is dated the 10. of June, and I
note that your letter is dated the 15. and by his aforesaid letter, King
writes that he will within two days speak with you at Alansen.

Now how the Kings promise will be kept, a short time will declare; or how, if
he break it, there shall be some ^avillations found, wherein, I doubt that they
will seek illusions, for that we do yet keep Hume Castle, and Fast Castle,
which are kept with not past fourscore men; and being the houses of the Lord
Hume, the Warden, who aided our Rebels with his Forces, to invade, burn, and
spoil England; and therefore is by the Laws of the Borders answerable to the
subjects of England; it is reason they be kept until he will return, or
authorize some for him to make answer, or to take order with the complainants,
which being done, the Queen Majesty will readily restore them: Thus much I have
thought meet to impart.

Yours assuredly, W. Cecil.
Oatlands, 25. Inn 1570,
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Norris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, etc.
SIR,
I Am thrown into a Maze at this time, that Iknow not how to walk from dangers,
Sir Walter Mildmay and I are sent to the Scottish Queen, as by the Queens
Majesty's letters you may see. God be our guide, for neither of us like the
Message.

I trust, at my return, when Mr. Walsingham shall be returned, to help you
home, your sufficient is sufficient to impart unto you all our Occurrents; and
so I end.

Your assured friend, W. Cecil.
Reading, 26. Sept. 1570.
To the right honorable, Sir Henry Notris Knight, the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador, Resident in France.
The Lord Coke to King James, touching trial of Duels out of England.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
I Have received a commandment by Mr. Solicitor from your Majesty, 19. Febr.
1616.
consisting upon two parts; First, to answer whether I informed not your
Majesty, that if two of your Subjects should go over beyond Sea, to fight in a
Foreign Kingdom, and there in fight the one kills the other; that in this
case, the same might be punished by appeal before the Constable and Marshal of
England. Secondly, if I made any such information, what authority and reason I
had to maintain it.

To the first, the truth is, that I did inform your Majesty so, and I well
remember, I said then, that it was Dowties Case, your Majesty then speaking of
Duels.

To the second, this is by authority of an Act of Parliament made in the first
year of King Henry the Fourth, the 14th. Chapter, in these words:

For many Inconveniences and Mischiefs that have oftentimes happened by many
Appeals made within the Realm before this time; It is ordained and established
from henceforth, That all Appeals to be made of things done within the Realm,
shall be tried and determined Note, before this Statute, Criminal Causes were
often adjudged in Parliament.
by the good Laws of this Realm, made and used in the time of the Kings noble
Progenitors; And that all Appeals to be made of things done out of the Realm,
shall be tried before the Constable and Marshal of England for the time being;
And that no Appeals be from henceforth made, or in any wise pursued in
Parliament in any time to come.

In the late Queens time, a Case fell out upon this Statute; Sir Francis Drake
having put Dowtie to death beyond Sea, the Brother and Heir of Dowtie sued by
Petition to the Queen, that she would be pleased to appoint a Constable hac
vice, to the end, he might have an Appeal against Sir Francis Drake, for the
death of his Brother.

This Petition the Queen referred to Sir Thomas Bromley, and the two chief
Justices, and others; And it was resolved of by them (which I being of Council
with Dowtie, set down briefly for my Learning) That if two Englishmen go beyond
Sea, and in Combat the one kills the other, this offense may be determined
before the Constable and Marshal of England, and so was the Statute of 1 Henr.
4. to be intended.

But after upon the true circumstance of the Case, the Queen would not
constitute a Constable of England, without whom no Proceeding could be.

And I take this resolution to be well warranted by the Statute, and no small
inconvenience should follow, and a great defect should be in the Law, if such
bloody offenses should not be punished, and Your Majesty should lose a flower
of Your Crown, in losing this Power, to punish these growing and dangerous
offenses. I showed to Mr. Solicitor, my Report and Memorial of Dowtie's Case,
and I shall ever remain,

Your Majesty's Loyal, and Faithful Subject, Edw. Coke.
19. Febr. 1616.
The History of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth,
Queen Mary, and part of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
THE books which are written, do in their kinds represent the faculties of the
mind of man; Poesy, his Imaginations; Philosophy, his Reason; and History, his
Memory, of which three facuities, least exception is commonly taken to memory,
because Imagination is often times idle, and Reason litigious. So likewise
History of all writings deserves least taxation, as that which holds least
of the Author, and most of the things themselves. Again, the use which it
holds to man's life, if it be not the greatest, yet assuredly it is the freest
from ill accident or quality. For those that are conversant much in Poets, as
they attain to greater variety, so withal they become concieted; and those
that are brought up in Philosophy and Sciences, do wax (according as their
nature is) some of them too stiff and opinionative, and some others too
perplexed and confused; whereas History possesses the mind with conceits which
are nearest allied unto action, and imprinteth them, so as it does not alter
the complexion of the mind, neither to irresolution, nor pertinacity? But this
is true, that in no sort of writings there is a greater distance between the
good and the bad, no not between the most excellent Poet, and the vainest
Rimer; nor between the deepest Philosopher and the most frivolous Schoolmen;
then there is between good Histories, and those that unworthily bear the same,
or the like title. In which regard, having purposed to write the History of
England, from the beginning of the Reign of King H. 8. of that name, near unto
the present time wherein Queen Elizabeth Reigns in good felicity; I am
delivered of the excuse wherewith the best writers of Histories are troubled in
their Poems, when they go about (without breaking the bounds of modesty) to
give a reason why they should write that again, which others have written well,
or at least tolerably before. For those which I am to follow, are such, as I
may fear, rather the reproach of coming unto their number, than the opinion of
presumption, if I hope to do better than they: But in the mean time it must be
considered, That the best of the ancient Histories were contrived out of diverse
particular Commentaries, Relations and Narrations, which it was not hard to
digest with ornament, and thereof to compound one entire Story. And as at
first, such Writers had the ease of others labors; so since, they have the
whole Commendation, in regard their former writings are for the most part lost,
whereby their borrowings do not appear. But unto me, the disadvantage is great,
finding no public memories of any consideration or worth, that the supply must
be out of the freshness of memory and tradition; and out of the Acts,
Instruments, and Negotiations of State themselves, together with the glances of
Foreign Histories; which, though I do acknowledge to be the best Originals and
Instructions, out of which to write an History, yet the travel must be much
greater, than if there had been already digested any tolerable Chronicle, as a
single Narration of the Actions themselves, which should only have needed out
of the former helps to be enriched with the Councels and Speeches, and notable
Particularities. And this was the reason, while I might not attempt to go
higher to more ancient times, because those helps and grounds did more and more
fail; although if I be not decieved, I may truly affirm, that there have no
things passed ever in this Nation, which have produced greater Actions, nor
more worthy to be delivered to the Ages hereafter: For they be not the great
Wars and Conquests (which many times are works of Fortune, and fall out in
barbarous times) the rehearsal whereof, makes the profitable and instructing
History; but rather times refined in policies and industries, new and rare
variety of accidents and alterations, equal and just encounters of State and
State in forces, and of Prince and Prince in sufficiency, that bring upon the
stage, the best parts for observation. Now if you look into the general natures
of the times (which I have undertaken throughout Europe, whereof the times of
this Nation must needs participate; you shall find more knowledge in the World,
than was in the Ages before; whereby the wits of men (which are the shops
wherein all actions are forged) are more furnished and improved: Then if you
shall restrain your Consideration to the state of this Monarchy; first, there
will occur unto you Changes rare, and altogether unknown unto Antiquity in
matters of Religion, and the State Ecclesiastical. Then to behold the several
Reigns of a King that first, or next the first, became absolute in the
Sovereignty; of a King, in minority; of a Queen, married to a Forreigner; and
lastly, of a Queen that has governed without the help, either of a marriage,
or of any mighty man of her blood, is no small variety in the affairs of a
Monarchy; but such, as perhaps in four Successions in any State at any time is
hardly to be found. Besides, there have not wanted examples within the compass
of the same times, neither of an Usurpation, nor of Rebellions under heads of
greatness, nor of Commotions merely popular, nor of sundry desperate
Conspirators (an unwonted thing in hereditary Monarchies) nor of Foreign Wars
of all sorts, invasive, repulsive, of Invasion open and declared; covert, and
underhand, by Sea, by Land, Scottish, French, Spanish Succors, Protections,
new and extraordinary kinds of Confederations with Subjects: Generally, without
question, the State of this Nation had never a longer reach to import the
unusual Affairs of Europe, as that which was in the former part of the time the
Counterpoise between France and Spain; and in the latter, the only encounter
and opposition again Spain. Add hereunto, the new Discoveries and Navigations
abroad, the new provisions of Laws and Presidents of State at home, and the
Accidents mememorable, both of Sat, and of Court, and there will be no doubt,
but the times which I have chosen, are of all former times in this Nation; the
fittest to be registered, if it be not in this respect, that they be of too
fresh a memory; which point, I know very well, will be a prejudice, as if this
story were written in favor of the time present. But it shall suffice unto me,
without betraying mine own name and memory, or the liberty of a History, to
procure this commendation to the time with the Posterity; namely, That a
private man living in the same time, should not doubt to publish an History of
the time, which should not carry any show or taste at all of flattery; a point
noted for an infallible Demonstration of a good time.

King Henry the Seventh of that name, after he had lived about 52. years, and
thereof Reigned 23. and some months, deceased of a Consumption the 22. day of
April, in the Palace which he had built at Richmond, in the year of our
redemption, 1504. This King attained unto the Crown, not only from a private
fortune, which might endow him with moderation; but also from the fortune of an
exile man, which had quickened in him all seeds of observation and Industry. His
times were rather prosperous, than calm; for he was assailed with many
troubles, which he overcame happily; a matter that did not less set forth his
wisdom, than his fortune; and yet such a wisdom, as seemed rather a dexterity
to deliver himself from dangers when they pressed him, than any deep foresight
to prevent them afar off; Jealous he was over the greatness of his Nobility, as
remembering how himself was set up. And much more did this humor increase in
him, after he had conflicted with some such Idols and Counterfeits, as were
Lambert Symnell, and Perkine Warbeck. The strangeness of which dangers made him
think nothing safe; whereby he was forced to descend to the employment of
secret Espials, and suborned Conspirators, a necessary remedy against so dark
and subtle practices, and not to be reprehended, except it were true which
some report, That he had intelligence with Confessors, for the revealing
matters disclosed in Confession; and yet if a man compare him with the King his
Concurrents in France and Spain, he shall find him more politic than Lewis
the Twelfth of France, and more entire and sincere than Ferdinando of Spain;
upon whom, nevertheless, he did handsomely bestow the envy of the death of
Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick. Great and devout reverence he bear to
Religion, as he that employed Ecclesiastical men in most of his affairs and
negotiations, and as he that was brought hardly and very late, to the
abolishing of the privileges of Sanctuaries in case of Treason, and that not
before he had obtained it by way of suit from Pope Alexander; which Sanctuaries
nevertheless had been the forges of most of his troubles. In his Government he
was led by none, scarcely by his Laws; and yet he was a great observer of
formality in all his proceedings, which notwithstanding, was no impediment to
the working of his will(...) the suppressing and punishment of the Treasons,
which during the whole time of his Reign, were committed against him; he had a
very strange kind of interchanging of very large and unexpected pardons, with
severe executions; which his Wisdom considered could not be imputed to any
Inconstancy or Inequality, but to a discretion, or at least to a principle that
he had apprehended, that it was good, not obstinately to pursue one course, but
to try both ways. In his Wars, he seemed rather confident than enter prizing;
by which also he was commonly not the poorer, but generally he did seem
inclinable to live in peace, and made but offers of War to mend the conditions
of peace; and in the quenching of the commotions of his Subjects, he was ever
ready to atchieve those Wars in Person, sometimes reserving himself, but never
retiring himself, but as ready to second. Of nature he coveted to accumulate
treasure, which the People (into whom there is infused for the preservation of
Monarchies, a natural desire to discharge their Princes, though it be with the
unjust Charge of their Counselors and Ministers) did impute unto Cardinal
Morton, and Sir Reynold Bray, who, as it after appeared, as Counselors of
ancient Authority with him, did so second his humor, as nevertheless they
tempted it, and refrained it; whereas Empson and Dudley that followed, being
persons that had no reputation with him, otherwise than the servile following
of his own humor, gave him way, and shaped him way, to these extremities,
wherewith himself was touched with remorse at his death, and with his Successor
disavowed. In expending of Treasure, he never spared Charge that his Affairs
required; and in his Foundations, was Magnificent enough, but his Rewards were
very limited; so that his Liberality was rather upon his own state and memory,
than toward the deserts of others. He chose commonly to employ cunning
persons, as he that knew himself sufficient to make use of their uttermost
reaches, without danger of being abused with them himself.

The rest is wanting.
A Copy of a Letter from His Majesty, to the Lords, read at Board, November. 21.
1617. touching the abatement of His Majesty's Household Charge.
MY Lords, no worldly thing is so precious as Time: Ye know what task I gave
you to work upon, during my absence; and what time was limited unto you, for
the performance thereof. This same Chancellor of Scotland, was wont to tell me
twenty four years ago, that my house could not be kept upon Epigrams; long
discourses, and fair tales, will never repair my estate. Omnis vertus in
Action consistit. Remember that I told you, the shoe must be made for the
foot, and let that he the Square of all your proceeding in this business. Abate
super-fluities in all things, and, multitudes of unnecessary. Officers, where
ever they be placed. But for the household Wardrope, and Pensions, cut and carve
as many as may agree with the possibility of my means. Exceed not your own rule
of 50000 l. for the household. If you can make it less, I will account it for
good service. And that you may see I will not spare mine own person, I have
sent with this bearer, a note of the superfluous charges concerning my mouth,
having had the happy opportunities of this Messenger, in an errand so nearly
concerning his place. In this I expect no answer in word, or writing, but only
the real performance, for a beginning to relieve me out of my miseries. For now
the Ball is at your feet, and the world shall bear me witness, that I have put
you fairly to it; and so praying God to bless your labors, I bid you heartily
farewell.

Your own. James R.

A Copy of His Majesty's second Letter.
MY Lords, I received from you yesternight the bluntest Letter, that I think,
ever King received from his Council. Ye write, that the Green Cloth will do
nothing, and ye offer me advice. Why are ye Counselors, if ye offer no
Council? an ordinary Messenger might have brought me such an answer; It is my
pleasure, that my charges be equalled with my Revenue; and it is just and
necessary so to be. For this a project must be made, and one of the main
branches thereof, is my house.

This Project is but to be offered unto you, and how it may be best laid, then,
to agree with my honor and contentment, ye are to advise upon, and then have
my consent.

If this cannot be performed without diminishing the number of the Tables,
diminished they must be; and if that cannot serve, two or three must be thrust
into one. If the Green Cloth will not make a Project for this, some others must
do it. If ye cannot find them out, I must: Only remember two things, That time
must no more be lost, and that there are twenty ways of abatement, besides the
house, if they be well looked into. And so farewell.

James R.

A Letter from the King, to his Lordship, by occasion of a Book; It was the
Organon.
MY Lord, I have received your Letter, and your Book, then which ye could not
have sent a more acceptable Present unto Me; how thankful I am for it, cannot
better be expressed by Me, then, by a firm resolution I have taken, first to
read it through, with care and attention, though I should steal some hours
from My sleep, having otherwise as little spare time to read it, as ye had to
write it; and then to use the liberty of a true friend, in not sparing to ask
you the question in any point thereof, I shall stand in doubt, Nam ejus est
explicare cujus est condere: As for the other part, I will willingly give a due
Commendation to such places, as in My Opinion, shall deserve it. In the mean
time, I can with Comfort assure you, that ye could not make choice of a Subject
more befitting your place, and your universal and Methodick knowledge; and in
the general, I have already observed, that ye jump with me in keeping the
middle way, between the two extremes; as also in some particulars, I have found
that ye agree fully with my opinion; and so praying God to give your work as
good success, as your heart can wish, and your labors deserve, I bid you
heartily farewell.

James R.

To Our Trusty and Well-beloved, Thomas Coventry, Our Attorney General.
TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well; whereas our Right Trusty, and
Right Well-beloved Cosen, the Viscount of St. Alban, upon a sentence given in
the Upper-house of Parliament full three years since, and more, has endured
loss of his place, Imprisonment and Confinement also for a great time, which
may suffice for the satisfaction of Justice, and example to others. We being
always graciously inclined to temper Mercy with Justice, and calling to mind
his former good services, and how well and profitably he has spent his time
since his Troubles. are pleased to remove from him that blot of Ignominy which
yet remains upon him, of incapacity, and disablement; and to remit to him all
penalties whatsoever inflicted by that sentence, having therefore formerly
pardoned his Fine, and released his Confinement. These are to will and require
you to prepare for Our Signature, a Bill containing a Pardon in due Form of
Law, of the whole sentence: For which, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

A Letter written by Sir Philip Sidney, unto Q. Elizabeth, touching her
Marriage with Mounsieur.
MOst Feared and Beloved, most Sweet and Gracious Sovereign, To seek out
excuses of this my Boldness, and to arm the acknowledging of a Fault with
reasons for it, might better show, I knew I did amiss, than any way diminish
the Attempt; especially in your Judgment, who being able to discern lively into
the nature of the thing done: it were Folly, to hope, by laying on better
Colors, to make it more acceptable. Therefore carrying no other Olive Branch
of Intercession, than the laying of my self at your Feet; nor no other
Insinuation, either for Attention or Pardon, but the true vowed Sacrifice of
unfeigned Love, I will in simple and direct terms (as hoping they shall only
come to your merciful Eyes) set down the overflowing of my mind, in this most
important matter: Importing, as I think, the continuance of your Safety; and
(as I know) the Joyes-of my life. And, because my words, (I confess, shallow;
but, coming from the deep Wellspring of most Loyal Affection) have delivered
unto your most Gracious Ears, what is the general Sum of my traveling Thoughts
therein; I will now but only declare, what be the Reasons that make me think,
That the Marriage with Mounsieur, will be unprofitable to you: Then, will I
answer the Objections of those Fears, which might procure so violent a Refuge.
The Good or Evils that will come to you by it, must be considered, either
according to your Estate, or Person. To your Estate: What can be added to the
being an Absolute born, and accordingly, Respected Princess? But as they say,
The Irish men were wont to call over them that dye, They are Rich, they are
Fair, what needed they to dye so cruelly? Not unfitly to you, endowed with
Felicity above all others, a man might well ask, What makes you in such a Calm,
to change Course? To so healthful a Body, to apply so unsavory a Medicine?
What can recompense so hazardous an Adventure? Indeed, were it but the altering
of a well maintained, and well approved Trade: For, as in Bodies Natural, every
sudden Change is full of peril: So, this Body Politic, whereof you are the
only Head, it is so much the more dangerous, as there are more humors, to
receive a hurtful impression. But hazards are then most to be regarded, when
the nature of the Patient is fitly composed to occasion them.

The Patient I account your Realm, the Agent Mounsieur, and his Design; for
neither outward Accidents do much prevail against a true inward strength, nor
does inward weakness lightly subvert it self, without being thrust at by some
outward force.

Your inward force, (for as for your Treasures, indeed the Sinews of your
Crown, your Majesty does best and only know) consists in your Subjects,
generally unexpert in warlike defense. And as they are divided now into mighty
Factions (and Factions bound upon the never dying knot of Religion) The one of
them to whom your happy Government has granted the free exercise of the
Eternal Truth; with this by the continuance of time, by the multitude of them,
by the principal Offices and strength they hold: and lastly, by your dealings
both at home and abroad against the Adverse party, your State is so entrapped,
as it were impossible for you, without excessive trouble, to pull your self out
of the party so long maintained. For such a course once taken in hand, is not
much unlike a Ship in a tempest, which how dangerously so ever it be beaten
with waves, yet is there no safety or succor without it: These therefore, as
their souls live by your happy Government, so are they your chief, if not your
sole strength. These, howsoever the necessity of humane life make them lack,
yet can they not look for better Conditions then presently they enjoy: these,
how their hearts will be galled, if not aliened, when they shall see you take a
Husband, a French man, and a Papist; in whom (howsoever fine wits may find
further de lings or painted excuses) the very common people well know this,
that he is the son of a Jezabel of our Age; that his brother made oblation of
his own sisters Marriage, the easier to make massacres of our brethren in
belief. That he himself, contrary to his promise and all gratefulness, having
had bis liberty, and principal estate by the Hugonites means, did sack
Lacharists, and utterly spoil them with fire and sword: This I say, even at the
first fight, gives occasion to all truly Religious to abhor such a Master, and
consequently to diminish much of the hopeful love they have long held to you.

The other Faction (most rightly indeed to be called a Faction) is the Papists,
men, whose spirits are full of anguish; some being infested by others, whom
they accounted d^mnable; some having their Ambition stopped, because they are
not in the way of Advancement; some in Prison, and Disgrace; some, whose best
Friends are banished Practisers; Many thinking you are an Usurper; many
thinking also, you had disannulied your Right, because of the Popes
Excommunication: All burdened with the weight of their Conscience; Men of
great Numbers, of great Riches (because the Affairs of State have not lain on
them) of united minds (as all men that deem themselves oppressed, naturally
are) with these I would willingly join all discontented persons, such as want
and disgrace keeps lower than they have set their hearts. Such as have resolved
what to look for at your hands; such, as Caesar said, Quibus opus est Bello
civili; and are of his mind, Malo in acie quam in foro cadere: These be men so
much the more to be doubted, because, as they do embrace all Estates, so are
they, commonly, of the bravest and wakefullest sort; and, that know the
advantage of the World most. This double Rank of People, how their minds have
stood, the Northern Rebellion, and infinite other Practices have well taught
you: Which, if it be said, it did not prevail, that is true indeed; for, if
they had prevailed, it were too late now to deliberate. But, at this present,
they want nothing so much as a Head, who, in effect, needs not but to receive
their Instructions, since they may do mischief enough only with his
Countenance. Let the Sigingniam in Henr. 4. Time; Perkin Warbeck in your
Grandfathers: But of all, the most lively and proper, is that of Lewis the
French Kings Son in Henr. 3. Time, who having at all no show of Title, yet did
he cause the Nobility, and more, to swear direct Fealty and Vassalage, and they
delivered the strongest Holds unto him. I say, let these be sufficient to
prove, That occasion gives minds and scope to stranger things than ever would
have been imagined: If then the Affectionate side have their Affections
weakened, and the Discontented have a Gap to utter their Discontent; I think, it
will seem an ill preparative for the Patient, I mean your Estate, to a great
sickness.

Now the agent party, which is Mounsieur, whether he be not apt to work upon
the disadvantage of your estate, he is to be judged by his will and power: His
will to be as full of light ambition as is possible; Besides the French
disposition, and his own Education, his inconstant attempt against his brother,
his thrusting himself into the Low Country matters: His sometime seeking the
King of Spains Daughter, sometimes your Majesty, are evident testimonies of his
being carried away with every wind of hope: Taught to love greatness any way
gotten: And having for the motioners and Ministers of the mind, only such young
men as have showed, they think evil contentment a ground of any Rebellion: who
have seen no Commonwealth but in faction, and diverse of which have defiled
their hands in odious Murders; with such fancies, and favorites what is to be
hoped for? or that he will contain himself within the limits of your
conditions, since in truth it were strange, that he that cannot be contented to
be the second person in France, and heir apparent, should be content to come to
be second person, where he should pretend no way to Sovereignty? His power I
imagine is not to be despised, since he is come into a Country where the way
of Evil-doing will be presented unto him: Where there needs nothing but a head
to draw together all the ill-affected Members: Himself a Prince of great
Revenues, of the most popular Nation of the world, full of Soldiery, and such
as are used to serve without pay, so as they may have show of spoil; and
without question shall have his brother ready to help him, as well for old
revenge, as to divert him from troubling France, and to deliver his own
Country from evil humors: Neither is King Philips Marriage herein any example.
Since then it was between two of one Religion, so that he in England stood only
upon her strength, and had abroad King Henry of France, ready to impeach any
enterprise he should make for his greatness that way: And yet what events time
would have brought forth of that Marriage, your most blessed Reign has made
vain all such considerations. But things holding in present state, I think I
may easily conclude, that your Country, as well by long peace and fruits of
peace, as by the poison of division (wherewith the faithful shall by this means
be wounded, and the contrary enabled) made fit to receive hurt; and Mounsieur
being every way likely to use the occasions to hurt, there can almost happen no
worldly thing of more eminent danger to your estate Royal. And as to your
person, in the scale of your happiness, what good there may come by it to
balance with the loss of so honorable a constancy, truly yet I preceive not:
I will not show so much malice, as to Object the universal doubt, the Races
unhealthfulness, neither will I lay to his charge the Ague-like manner of
proceedings, sometimes hot, and sometimes cold in the time of pursuit, which
always rightly is most ferven. And I will temper my speeches from my other
unreverend disgracings of him in particular (though they might be never so
true) this only will say, that if he do come hither, he must live here in far
meaner reputation then his mind will well brook, having no other Royalty to
countenance himself with, or else you must deliver him the keys of your
Kingdom, and live at his discretion; or lastly, he must be separate himself
with more dishonor, and further disuniting of heart than ever before: often
have heard you with protestation say, No private pleasure nor self-affection
could lead you unto it; but if it be both unprofitable for your Kingdom, and
unple sant to you, certainly it were a dear purchase of Repentance: Nothing can
it add unto you, but the bliss of children, which I confess were a most
unspeakable comfort. But yet no more appertaining unto him, then to any other
to whom the height of all good haps were alloted, to be your Husband; and
therefore I may assuredly affirm, that what good soever can follow Marriage, is
no more his than any bodies; but the evils and dangers are peculiarly annexed
to his person and Condition. For as for the enriching of your Country with
treasure, which either he has not, or has otherwise bestowed it: or the
staying of your servants minds with new expectation and liberality, which is
more dangerous than fruitful, or the easing of your Majesty of cares, which is
as much to say, as the easing of you to be Queen and Sovereign; I think every
body perceives this way either to be full of hurt, or void of help. Now rests
to consider what be the motives of this sudden change, as I have heard you in
most sweet words deliver: fear of standing alone, in respect of foreign
dealings: and in them from whom you should have respect, doubt of contempt:
Truly standing alone with good foresight of Government both in peace and
warlike defense, is the honourablest thing that can be to a well established
Monarchy: Those buildings being ever most strongly durable, which lean to none
other, but remain from their own foundation.

So yet in the particulars of your estate presently, I will not altogether deny
that a true Massinissa were very fit to countermine the enterprise of Mighty
Carthage. But how this general truth can be applied unto Mounsier, intruth I
perceive not. The wisest that have given best rules where surest Leagues are to
be made, have said, That it must be between such as either vehement desire of a
third thing, or as vehement fear does knit their minds together. Desire is
counted the weaker Bond; but yet that bound so many Princes to the Expedition
of the Holy Land. It united that invincible Hen. 5. and that good Duke of
Burgundy: The one, desiring to win the Crown of France from the Dauphin: The
other, desiring to revenge his Fathers Murder upon the Dauphin; which both
tended to one. That coupled Lewis the Twelfth, and Ferdinando of Spain, to the
Conquest of Naples. Of fear, there are innumerable Examples: Mounsieurs
desires, and yours, how they should meet in Public matters, I think, no Oracle
can tell: For, as the Geometricians say, That Parallels, because they maintain
diverse lines, can never join; so truly, two having in the beginning contrary
Principles, to bring forth one Doctrine, must be some Miracle. He, of the
Romish Religion; and, if he be a man, must needs have that manlike property, to
desire that all men be of his mind: You the Erector and Defender of the
contrary; and the only Sun that dazleth their eyes. He French, and desiring to
make France great; Your Majesty English, and desiring nothing less then that
France should grow great. He, both by his own fancy, and his youthful
Governors, embracing all ambitious hopes, having Alexanders Image in his head,
but, perhaps, evil painted: Your Majesty, with excellent virtue, taught what
you should hope; and by no less wisdom, what you may hope; with a Council
renowned over all Christendom, for their well tempered minds, having set the
utmost of their Ambition in your Favor; and the study of their Souls in your
Safety.

Fear has as little show of outward appearance, as Reason, to match you
together; for in this estate he is in, whom should he fear? (...) Brother?
Alas! his Brother is afraid, since the King of Navar is to step into his place.
Neither can his Brother be the safer by his Fall; but he may be the greater by
his Brothers; whereto whether you will be an Accessory, you are to determine.
The King of Spain, certainly, cannot make War upon him, but it must be upon all
the Crown of France; which is no likelihood he will do. Well may Mounsieur (as
he has done) seek to enlarge the bounds of France upon his State; which
likewise, whether it be safe for you to be a Countenance to, any other way, may
be seen: So that if neither desire, nor fear, be such in him, as are to bind
any Public fastness; it may be said, That the only Fortress of this your
Marriage, is, of his private Affection; a thing too incident to the person
laying it up in such knots.

The other Objection of contempt in the Subjects, I assure your Majesty, if I
had not heard it proceed out of your Mouth, which of all other I do most dearly
reverence, it would as soon (considering the perfections both of body and mind,
have set all men's eyes by the height of your estate) have come to the
possibility of my Imagination, if one should have told me on the contrary side,
That the greatest Princes of the World should envy the State of some poor
deformed Pilgrim. What is there either withinyou, or without you, that can
possibly fall into the danger of contempt, to whom fortunes are tried by so
long descent of your Royal Ancestors? But our minds rejoice with the experience
of your inward Virtues, and our eyes are delighted with the sight of you. But
because your own eyes cannot see your self, neither can there be in the World
any example fit to blaze you by, I beseech you vouchsafe to weigh the grounds
thereof. The Natural causes are lengths of Government, and uncertainty of
Succession: The Effects, as you term them, appear by cherishing some abominable
speeches which some hellish minds have uttered. The longer a good Prince
Reigns, it is certain the more he is esteemed; there is no man ever was weary
of well being. And good increased to good, makes the same good both greater
and stronger; for it uses men to know no other cares, when either men are born
in the time, and so never saw other; or have spent much part of their
flourishing time, and so have no joy to seek other: in evil Princes, abuse
growing upon abuse according to the nature of evil, with the increase of time
ruins it self. But in so rare a Government where neighbors fires give us
light to see our quietness, where nothing wants that true Administration of
Justice brings forth, certainly the length of time rather breeds a mind to
think there is no other life but in it, then that there is any tediousness in
so fruitful a Government. Examples of good Princes do ever confirm this, who
the longer they lived, the deeper still they sunk into their Subjects hearts.
Neither will I trouble you with examples, being so many and manifest. Look into
your own estate, how willingly they grant, and how dutifully they pay such
subsidies as you demand of them? How they are no less troublesome to your
Majesty in certain requests, than they were in the beginning of your Reign: And
your Majesty shall find you have a people more then ever devoted to you.

As for the uncertainty of succession, although for mine own part I know well I
have cast the utmost Anchor of my hope, yet for Englands sake I would not say
any thing against such determination, but that uncertain good should bring
contempt to a certain good, I think it is beyond all reach of reason: nay,
because if there were no other cause (as there are infinite) common reason and
profit would teach us to hold that Jewel dear, the loss of which would bring us
to we know not what: which likewise is to be said of your Majesty's Speech of
the rising Sun, a Speech first used by Scilla to Pompey in Rome, as then a
popular City, where indeed men were to rise or fall, according to the Flourish
and breath of a many headed confusion. But in so Lineal a Monarchy, wherever
the infants suck the love of their rightful Prince, who would leave the Beams
of so fair a Sun, for the dreadful expectation of a divided Company of Stars?
Virtue and Justice are the only bonds of peoples love: and as for that point,
Many Princes have lost their Crowns whose own children were manifest
Successors; and some, that had their own children used as Instruments of their
ruin: not that I deny the bliss of children, but only to show Religion and
equity to be of themselves sufficient stays: Neither is the love was born in
the Queen, your Sisters daves, any contradiction hereunto; for she was the
Oppressor of that Religion which lived in many men's hearts, and whereof you
were known to be the Favourer; by her loss, was the most excellent Prince in
the World to succeed; by your loss, all blindness light upon him that sees not
our misery. Lastly, and most properly to this purpose, she had made an odious
Marriage with a stranger (which is now in question, whether your Majesty should
do or no) so that if your Subjects do at this time look for any after-chance,
it is but as the Pilot does to the Ship-boat, if his Ship should perish; drive
n by extremity to the one; but, as long as he can with his life, tendering the
other. And this I say, not only for the lively parts that be in you; but even
for their own sakes, since they must needs see what Tempests threaten them.

The last proof of this contempt, should be the venomous matter certain men
impostumed with wickedness should utter against you. Certainly not to be evil
spoken of, neither Christ's holiness, nor Caesar's might could ever prevent or
warrant: There being for that no other rule, then so to do, as that they may
not justly say evil of you; which whether your Majesty have not done, I leave
it in you, to the sincereness of your own Conscience, and wisdom of your
judgment; in the world, to your most manifest fruits and fame through Europe;
Augustus was told, that men spoke of him much hurt; it is no matter said he, so
long as they cannot do much hurt. And lastly, Charles 5th to one that told him,
Le Holladour parlent mal, mais Ilz. patient bien, answered Le. I might make a
Scholar-like reckoning of many such Examples. It suffices that these great
Princes knew well enough upon what ways they flew, and cared little for the
barking of a few Currs: And truly in the behalf of your subjects, I durst with
my blood answer it, That there was never Monarch held in more precious
reckoning of her people; and before God how can it be otherwise? For mine own
part, when I hear some lost wretch has defiled such a name with his mouth, I
consider the right name of Blasphemy, whose unbridled soul does delight to
deprave that which is accounted generally most high and holy. No no, most
excellent Lady, do not raze out the impression you have made in such a
multitude of hearts, and let not the scum of such vile minds bear any witness
against your subjects devotions: Which, to proceed one point further, if it
were otherwise, could little be helped, but rather nourished, and in effect
begun by this. The only means of avoiding contempt, are Love and Fear: Love as
you have by diverse means sent into the depth of their sousl; so if any thing
can stain so true a form, it must be the trimming your self, not in your own
likeness, but in new colors unto them: Their fear by him cannot be increased
without appearance of French Forces, the manifest death of your estate; but
well may it against him bear that face, which as the Tragic Seneca says,
Metus in Authorem redit, as because both in will and power he is like enough to
do harm. Since then it is dangerous for your State, as well because by inward
weakness (principally caused by division) it is fit to receive harm; Since to
your person it can no way be comfortable, you not desiring marriage, and
neither to person nor state he is to bring any more good than any body, but
more evil he may, since the causes that should drive you to this, are either
fears of that which cannot happen, or by this means cannot be prevented; I do
with most humble heart say unto your Majesty (having assayed this dangerous
help) for your standing alone, you must take it for a singular Honor God has
done you, to be indeed the only Protector of his Church; and yet in worldly
Respects your Kingdom very sufficient so to do, if you make that Religion upon
which you stand, to carry the only strength, and have aboard those that still
maintain the same course, who aslongas they may be kept from utter falling,
your Majesty is sure enough from your mightiest Enemies.

As for this man, as long as he is but Mounsieur in Might, and a Papist in
Profession, he neither can, nor will greatly shield you: And if he grow to be
King, his defense will be like Ajax shield, which rather weighed them down,
than defended those that bare it. Against Contempt, if there be any, which I
will never believe, let your excellent virtues of Piety, Justice and Liberality
daily, if it be possible, more and more shine; let such particular actions be
found out (which be easy as I think to be done) by which you may gratify all
the hearts of your people: Let those in whom you find Trust, and to whom you
have committed Trust in your weighty Affairs, be held up in the eyes of your
Subjects. Lastly, doing as you do, you shall be as you be, the Example of
Princes, the Ornament of this Age, the Comfort of the Afflicted, the Delight of
your People, and the most excellent Fruit of your Progenitors, and the perfect
Mirror of your Posterity.

My Lord Sanquir's Case.
IN this cause of the life and death, the Juries part is in effect discharged,
for after a frank and formal Confession, their labor is at an end; so that
what has been said by Mr. Attorney, or shall be said by my self, is rather
convenient than necessary.

My Lord Sanquire, your fault is great, it cannot be extenuated, and it cannot
be aggravated; and if it needed, you have made so full an Anatomy of it out of
your own feeling, as it cannot be matched by my self, or any man else out of
Conceit: So as that part of aggravation I leave.

Nay more, this Christian and penitent course of yours, draws me thus far, that
I will agree in some sort to extenuate it; for certainly as even in extreme
evils there are degrees; so this particular of your offense is such, as though
it be soul spilling of blood, yet there are more soul; for if you had sought to
take a way a man's life for his Vineyard, as Achab did; or for envy, as Cain
did; or to possess his bed, as David did; surely the murder had been more
odious.

Your temptation was revenge, which the more natural it was to man, the more
have Laws both divine and humane sought to repress it; Mihi vindicta. But in
one thing you and I shall never agree. That generous spirits (you say) are hard
to forgive; no, contrariwise generous and magnanimous minds are readiest to
forgive, and it is a weakness and impotency of mind to be unable to forgive;
Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni.

But howsoever Murder may arise from several motives, less or more odious, yet
the Law both of God and man involves them in one degree; and therefore you may
read that in Joabs case, which was a Murder upon revenge, and matcheth with
our case; he for a dear brother, and you for a dear part of your own body, yet
there was never a severe charge given, that it should not be unpunished.

And certainly the circumstance of time is heavy upon you; it is now five years
since this unfortunate man Turner, be it upon accident, or be it upon despite,
gave the provocation, which was the seed of your malice: all passions are
assuaged with time, love, hatred, grief, all; fire it self burns out with time,
if no new fuel be put to it. Therefore for you to have been in the gall of
bitterness so long, and to have been in restless Chase of this blood so many
years, is a strange example, and I must tell you plainly, that I conceive you
have sucked those affections of dwelling in malice, rather out of Italy, and
Outlandish manners where you have conversed, than out of any part of this
Island, England or Scotland.

But that which is fittest for me to spend time in, (the matter being
confessed) is, to set forth and magnify to the hearers, the Justice of this
day; first of God, and then of the King.

My Lord, you have friends and entertainments in Foreign parts; It had been an
easy thing for you to set Carlisle, or some other blood-hound on work, when
your person had been beyond the Seas, and so this news might have come to you
in a packet, and you might have looked on how the storm would pass; but God
bereaved you of this foresight, and bound you here under that hand of a King,
that though abundant in Clemenev, vet is no less ze lons of Justice.

Again, when you came in at Lambeth, you might have persisted in the denial of
the procurement of the fact. Carlisle, a resolute man, might perhaps have
cleared you (for they that are resolute in mischief, are commonly obstinate in
concealing their porcurers) and so nothing should have been against you but
presumption. But then also God, to take away all obstructions of Justice, gave
you the grace, which ought indeed to be more true comfort to you, than any
device (whereby you might have escaped) to make a clear and plain Confession.

Other impediments there were (not a few) which might have been an interruption
to this days Justice, had not God in his Providence removed them.

But now that I have given God the Honor, let me give it likewise where it is
next due, which is, to the King our Sovereign.

This Murder was no sooner committed, and brought to his Majesty's ears; but
his just indignation wherewith he first was moved, cast it self into a great
deal of care and prudence to have Justice done: First came forth his
Proclamation somewhat of a rare Form, and devised, and in esfect dictated by
his Majesty himself, and by that he did prosecute the Offenders, as it were,
with the breath and blast of his Mouth: Then did his Majesty stretch forth his
long Arms (for Kings have long Arms) when they will extend them; one of them to
the Sea, where he took hold of Gray shipped for Luedia, who gave the first
light of Testimony; the other Arm to Scotland, and took hold of Carlisle, ere he
was warm in his house, and brought him the length of his Kingdom under such
safe watch and custody, as he could have no means to escape, no nor to mischief
himself, no nor learn no lessons to stand mute, in which case perhaps this
days Justice might have received a stop; so that I may conclude, his Majesty
has showed himself Gods true Lieutenant, and that he is no Respecter of
persons; but English, Scottish, Noblemen, Fencer, are to him alike in respect
of Justice.

Nay, I must say further, That his Majesty has had in this, a kind of
Prophetical Spirit; for what time Carlisle and Gray, and you my Lord your self
were fled, no man knew whether, to the four winds; the King ever spoke in a
confident and undertaking manner, That wheresoever the Offenders were in
Europe, he would produce them forth to Justice; of which noble word God has
made him Master.

Lastly, I will conclude toward you my Lord, That though your Offense has
been great, yet your Confession has been free, and your behavior and speech
full of discretion; and this shows, That though you could not resist the
Tempter, yet you bear a Christian and generous spirit, answerable to the noble
Family of which you are descended. This I commend in you, and take it to be an
assured Token of God smercy and favor, in respect whereof, all worldly things
are but Trash, and so it is fit for you as your state now is, to account them;
and this is all I will say for the present.

My Lady Shrewsburies Cause.
Your Lordships do observe the Nature of this Charge.
MY Lady of Shrewsbury, a Lady wise, and that ought to know what duty
requires, is charged to have refused, and to have persisted in refusal to
answer, and to be examined in a High cause of State, being examined by the
Council Table, which is a Representative body of the King,

The nature of the cause upon which she was examined, is an essential point
which does aggravate and increase this contempt and presumption, and therefore
of necessity with that we must begin.

How graciously and Parent-like, His Majesty used the Lady Arbella before she
gave him cause of Indignation, the world knows.

My Lady notwithstanding extremely ill-advised, transacted the most weighty and
binding part and action of her life, which is her Marriage, without acquanting
His Majesty, which had been a neglect even to a mean Parent. But being to Our
Sovereign, and she standing so near to His Majesty as she does, and then
choosing such a Condition as it pleased her to choose, all parties laid
together, how dangerous it was, my Lady might have read it in the fortune of
that house wherewith she is matched; for it was not unlike the case of Mr.
Seymers Grandmother.

The King nevertheless so remembered He was a King, as He forgot not he was a
Kinsman, and placed her only sub libera custodia.

But now did my Lady accumulate and heap up this offense with a far greater
than the former, by seeking to withdraw her self out of the Kings Power into
Foreign Parts.

That this flight or escape into Foreign Parts might have been seed of trouble
to this State, is a matter whereof the conceit of a Vulgar person is not
capable.

For although my Lady should have put on a mind to continue her Loyalty, as
nature and duty did bind her; yet when she was in another sphere she must have
moved in the motion of that O b, and not of the Planet it self. And God forbid
the Kings felicity should be so little, as she should not have envy and enviers
enough in Foreign Parts.

It is true, if any forreigner had wrought upon this occasion, I do not doubt
but the intent would have been as the Prophet says, They have conceived
mischief, and brought forth a vain thing. But yet your Lordships know that it
is Wisdom in Princes, and it is a watch they owe to themselves, and to their
people, to stop the beginnings of evils, and not to despise them. Seneca says
well, Non jam amplius levia sunt pericula si levia videantur; dangers cease to
be light, because by delp^sing they grow, and gather strength.

And accordingly has been the practice both of the Wisest and stoutest Princes
to hold, for matter pregnant of peril, to have any near them in blood fly into
Foreign Parts. Wherein I will not wander, but take the example of King Hen. 7.
a Prince uot unfit to be paralleled with his Majesty; I mean not the particular
of Perkin Werbeck; for he was but an idol, or a disguise; but the example I
mean, is that of the Earl of Suffolk, whom that King extorted from Philip of
Austria. The story is memorable, That Philip after the death of Isabella coming
to take Possession of His Kingdom of Castilia (which was but Matrimonial to His
Father in Law Ferdinando of Arragon,) was cast by weather upon the Coast of
Tamouth, where the Italian story says, King Henry used him in all things else
as a Prince, but in one thing as a Prisoner; for he forced upon him a Promise
to restore the Earl of Suffolk that was fled into Flanders; and yet this I note
was in the 21. year of his Reign when the King had a goodly Prince at man's
estate besides his daughters, nay, and the whole line of Clarence nearer in
title; for that Earl of Suffolk was Descended of a Sister of Edward 4. so far
off did that King take his aim.

To this action of so deep consequence, it appears you (my Lady of
Shrewsbury) were privy, not upon Foreign suspicions or strained inferences,
but upon vehement presumptions, now clear and particular testimony, as has
been opened to you, so as the King had not only Reason to examine you upon it,
but to have proceeded with you upon it as for a great contempt, which if it be
reserved for the present, your Ladyship is to understand it aright, that it is
not defect of proof, but abundance of grace that is the cause of this
proceeding. And your Lady-ship shall do well to see into what danger you have
brought your self: All offenses consist of the fact which is open, and the
intent which is secret; this fact of Conspiring in the flight of this Lady, may
bear a hard, and gentler construction; if upon over much affection to your
Kinswoman, gentler; if upon practice or other end, harder; you must take heed
how you enter into such actions, whereof if the hidden part be drawn unto that
which is open, it may be your overthrow, which I speak not by way of charge,
but by way of caution.

For that which you are properly charged with, you must know that all subjects,
without distinction of degrees, owe to the King tribute and service, not only
of their deed and hand, but of their knowledge and discovery.

If there be any thing that imports the Kings service, they ought themselves
undemanded to impart it, much more if they be called and examined, whether it
be of their own fact, or of another, they ought to make direct answer; Neither
was there ever any subject brought into causes of estate to trial judicial, but
first he passed examination; for examination is the entrance of Justice in
criminal causes; it is one of the eyes of the Kings politic body; there are
but two, Information, and Examination; it may not be endured that one of the
lights be put out by your example.

Your excuses are not worthy your own judgment; rash vows of lawful things
are to be kept, but unlawful vows not; your own Divines will tell you so. For
your examples, they are some erroneous traditions. My Lord of Pembrook spoke
somewhat that he was unlettered, and it was but when he was examined by one
private Councellor, to whom he took exception. That of my Lord Lumley is a
fiction; the preheminences of Nobility I would hold with to the last grain;
but every days experience is to the contrary. Nay, you may learn duty of my
Lady Arbella her self, a Lady of the Blood, of an higher Rank than your self,
who declining (and yet that but by request neither to declare of your fact)
yields ingenuously to be examined of her own; I do not doubt but by this time
you see both your own error, and the Kings grace in proceeding with you in this
manner.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, then Ambassador in France, to Queen Elizabeth,
touching a free Passage for the Queen of Scots, through England into Scotland.
IT may please your Majesty to understand that the 17 of July I received your
letters at Poisey of the 14 of the same, by Francisco this bearer, and for that
I could not according to your Majesty's instructions in the same letters,
accomplish the contents of them, until Mounsieur d' Oysell had delivered your
letters to the French King, the Queen of Scotland, and the Queen Mother (who
did not arrive at this Court till the 20th of this present) I did defer to
treat with any of the Princes of your Majesty's answer to the said Mounsieur d'
Oysell. Nevertheless the 18th of this month I required Audience of the French
King, which was granted me, the same day in the afternoon I repaired to his
Court being at Saint Germans, and there the Queen Mother accompanied with the
King of Navarre, and sundry other great personages, was in the place of State
to hear what I had to say to the King her son who was absent; unto her I
declared your Majesty's pleasure according to my instructions, concerning your
acceptance of the Hostages already received, and hereafter to be received,
signified to me by your Majesty's letters of the 17 of June, and as I wrote to
your Majesty lately, brought to me by Mounsieur de Noailles the 16 of July, for
answer whereunto the Queen Mother said, Mounsieur l' Ambassador, we marvail
greatly how it comes to pass that the Queen your Mistress does not make more
stay to receive the King my sons Hostages, than she has done heretofore; for
from the beginning since the Hostages were sent into England, neither the King
my late Lord and Husband, nor the late King my Son, did either recommend the
sufficiency of their Hostages by their Letters, or cause their names to be
recommended unto you the Ambassador; but the presentation of them by our
Ambassador in England did suffice: thereunto I said, Madam, you know they be
Hostages for a matter of some moment, and if they should neither have the Kings
assurance for their Validity, nor the Queen my Mistress Ambassadors allowance
of their sufficiency, some personages might be sent which were neither meet for
the King to send, nor for the Queen my Mistress to receive; and yet Madam, the
Queen my Mistress does not require the manner of recommending the sufficiency of
the Hostages, for any doubt she has that unmeet persons should be sent; but
rather, because a friendly and sincere fashion of dealing should be betwixt her
good Brother and her, with whom her Majesty is so desirous to have a perfect
and assured Amity: I said also, That the King her Son has notified both to my
Lord of Bedford at his being here, and unto me the names of some of the
Hostages, as the Count of Benon before his going into England, as Mounsieur de
Sualt, who had the charge so to do, could well inform her; so as this motion
need not seem strange for the newness. The Queen answered, Mounsieur l'
Ambassador, we be well-pleased, seeing your Mistress does require it, that
from henceforth either the Hostages shall have the King my Sons Letters of
Recommendation, or else their names should be notified unto you, or any other
her Ambassador here; and I pray you Mounsieur l' Ambassador, quoth she, give
the Queen your Mistress my good Sister to understand from me, That if there be
any thing in this Country that may please her, she shall have it, if I may
know her liking; I told the said Queen, That I was sure your Majesty was of the
same mind toward her, for any pleasures to content her in your Realm, and so I
took my leave of her for that time.

It may farther please your Majesty, Having Intelligence that Mounsieur d'
Oysell had advertised the Queen of Scotland, by Rollot her Secretary, the 17th.
of this present, what answer your Majesty had made him; and hearing also of the
sundry Praises and discourses made here, of that your Majesty answered, I sent
to Dampier (a house of the Cardinal of Lorrains) the 19th. of this Month, to
the Queen of Scotland to require Audience of her, which she appointed me to
have the next day in the Afternoon at St. Germans; She was (accompanied) at
Domfier with her Unkles the Cardinals of Lorrain and Guise, and the Duke of
Guise; there was also the Duke of Nemours, who the same day arrived there in
Post out of Savoy, and visited the said Queen before he came to this Town.

The 20th of this present in the afternoon, I had access to the said Queen of
Scotland with whom I found Mounsieur d' Oysel talking when I entered into her
Chamber; she dismissed Mounsieur d' Oysel, and rose from her Chair when she saw
me; unto whom I said, Madam, whereas you sent lately Mounsieur d' Oysel to the
Queen my Mistress to demand her Majesty's safe conduct for your free passage by
sea into your own Realm, and to be accommodated with such favors as upon
events you might have need of upon the Coast of England, and also did farther
require the free passage of the said Mounsieur d' Oysel into Scotland through
England. The Queen my Mistress has not thought good to suffer the said
Mounsieur d' Oysel to pass into Scotland, nor to satisfy your desire for your
passage home, neither for such other favors as you required to be accommodated
withal at her Majesty's hand, in as much as you have not accomplished the
ratification of the treaty accorded by your Deputies in July, now twelve Months
ago at Edinburgh, which in honor you are bound many ways to perform; for
besides, that you stand bound by your hand and seal, whereby your Commissioners
were authorized, it may please you Madam to remember, that many promises have
been made for the performance thereof, as well in the King your Husbands time,
as by your self since his death, and yet not withstanding the Treaty remains
unratified, as before, a whole year being expired since the Accord thereof,
which by your Commissioners was agreed to have been ratified within sixty
days: So as upon this unamicable and indirect dealings, the Queen my Mistress
has refused you these favors and pleasures by you required, and has grounded
this her Majesty's strangeness unto you, upon your own behavior, which her
Majesty does ungladly, both for that your Majesty is as she is, a Queen, her
next Neighbor and next Kinswoman; nevertheless her Majesty has commanded me
to say unto you, Madam (quoth I) that if you can like to be better advised, and
to ratify the treaty, as you in Honor are bound to do, her Majesty will not
only give you and yours free passage, but also will be most glad to see you
pass through her Realm, that you may be accommodated with the pleasure thereof,
and such friendly conference may be had betwixt you, as all unkindness may be
quenched, and an assured perfect amity betwixt you both for ever Established.
Having said thus much unto her, the said Queen sat down, and made me sit also
by her; she then commanded all the audience to retire them further of, and
said, Mounsieur l' Ambassador, I know not well my own infirmity, nor how far I
may with my passion be transported: but I like not to have so many witnesses of
my passions, as the Queen your Mistress was content to have, when she talked
with Mounsieur d'Oysil; there is nothing that does more grieve me, then that I
did so forget my self, as to require of the Queen your Mistress that favor
which I had no need to ask I needed no more to have made her privy to my
Journey, than she does me of hers; I may pass well enough home into my own
Realm, I think, without her Passport or License; for though the late King your
Master (said she) used all the impeachment he could both to stay me, and catch
me when I came hither, yet you know Mounsieur le Ambassador, I came hither
safely, and I may have as good means to help me home again, as I had to come
hither, if I would employ my Friends: Truly (said she) I was so far from evil
meaning to the Queen your Mistress, that at this time I was more willing to
employ her Amity to stand me instead, than all the Friends I have, and yet you
know both in this Realm, and elsewhere, I have both Friends and Allies, and
such as would be glad and willing to employ both their Forces and Aid to stand
me instead; you have Mounsieur l' Ambassador (quoth she) oftentimes told me,
That the Amity between the Queen your Mistress and me, were very necessary and
profitable for us both; I have some Reason (quoth she) now to think that the
Queen your Mistress is not of that mind; for I am sure if she were, she would
not have thus refused me thus unkindly; it seems she makes more account of
the Amity of my disob^dient Subjects, than she does of me their Sovereign, who
am her equalind gree, though inferior in in Wisdom and experience, her
highest Kinswoman, and her next neighbor, and trow you (quoth she) that there
can be so good meaning between my Subjects and her, which have forgotten their
principal duty to me their Sovereign, as there should be betwixt her and me? I
perceive that the Queen your Mistress does think, that because my Subjects have
done me wrong, my Friends and Allies will forsake me also: indeed your Mistress
does give me cause to seek friendship where I did not mind to ask it; but
Mounsieur l' Ambassador, let the Queen your Mistress think that it will be
thought very strange amongst all Princes and Countries, that she should first
animate my Subjects against me, and now being widow, to impeach my going into
my own Country: I ask her nothing but friendship; I do not trouble her State,
nor practice with her Subjects: And yet I know there be in her Realm that be
inclined enough to hear offers; I know also they be not of the mind she is of,
neither in Religion, nor other things. The Queen your Mistress does say that I
am young, and do lack experience; indeed (quoth she) I consess, I am younger
then she is, and do want experience: But I have age enough and experience to
use my self toward my friends and Kinsfolks friendly and uprightly; And I
trust my discretion shall not so fail me, that my Passion shall move me to use
other language of her then it becomes of a Queen and my next Kinswoman. Well
Mounsieur l' Ambassador, I could tell you that I am as she is, a Queen allied
and friended, as is known; and I tell you also, that my heart is not inferior
to hers, so as an equal respect would be had betwixt us on both parts; but I
will not contend in comparisons: first you know (quoth she) that the accord was
made in the late King my Lord and Husbands time, by whom, as reason was, I was
commanded and Governed; and for such delays, as were then in his time used in
the said ratification, I am not to be charged; since his Death, my Interest
failing in the Realm of France, I left to be advised by the Council of France,
and they left me also to mine own Council; indeed (quoth she) my Unkles being
as you know of the affairs of this Realm, do not think meet to advise me in my
Affairs, neither do my Subjects, nor the Queen your Mistress think meet that I
should be advised by them; but rather by the Council of my own Realm; here are
none of them, nor none such ^s is thought meet that I should be Counseled by;
the matter is great, it touches both them and me; and in so great a matter it
were meet to use the advice of the wisest of them; I do not think it meet in so
great a matter to take the Counsel of private and unexpert persons, and such as
the Queen your Mistress knows be not most acceptable to such of my Subjects
as she would have me be advised by; I have (quoth she) often times told you,
that as soon as I had their advices, I would send the Queen your Mistress such
an answer as should be reasonable; I am about to haste me home as fast as I
may, to the intent the matter might be answered; and now the Queen your
Mistress will in no wise suffer neither me to pass home, nor him that I sent
into my Realm; so as Mounsieur l' Ambassador (quoth she) it seems the Queen
your Mistress will be the cause why in this manner she is not satisfied, or
else she will not be satisfied; but likes to make this matter a quarrel still
betwixt us, whereof she is the Author: The Queen your Mistress says that I am
young; she might well say that I were as foolish as young, if I would in the
State and Country that I am in, proceed to such a matter of my self without
any Counsel; for that which was done by the King my late Lord and husband, must
not be taken to be my act; so as neither in Honor, nor in conscience I am
bound, as you say I am, to perform all that was by my Lord and Husband
commanded to do; and yet (quoth she) I will say truly unto you, and as God
favors me, I did never mean otherwise unto her, than becomes me to my good
Sister and Cousin; nor meant her no more harm than to my self; God forgive them
which have otherwise persuaded her, if there be any such; what is the matter,
pray you, Mounsieur l' Ambassador (quoth she) that does so offend the Queen
your Mistress, to make her thus evil-affected to me I never did her wrong,
neither in Deed, nor Speech; it should the less grieve me, if I had deserved
otherwise than well; and though the World may be of diverse judgments of us and
our doings one to another, do well know, God that is in Heaven can, and will be
a true Judge both of our doings and meanings. I answered, Madam, I have
declared unto you my Charge commanded by the Queen my Mistress, and have no
more to say to you on her behalf, but to know your Answer for the Ratification
of the Treaty.

The Queen answered, I have aforetime showed you, and do now tell you again,
that it is not meet for to proceed in this matter without the advice of the
Nobles and States of mine own Realm, which I can by no means have until I come
amongst them. You know (quoth she) as well as I, there is none come hither
since the death of the King my late Husband and Lord, but such as are either
come for their private business, or such as dare not tarry in Scotland; but I
pray you Mounsieur l' Ambassador (quoth she) tell me how rises this strange
affection in the Queen your Mistress toward me; I desire to know it, to the
intent I may reform my self, if I have failed. I answered, Madam, I have by the
Commandment of the Queen my Mistress declared unto you the cause of her
miscontentation already: But seeing you so desirous to hear how you may be
charged with any deserving as one that speaks of mine own mind, without
instruction, I will be so bold Madam, by way of discourse to tell you; As soon
as the Queen my Mistress, after the death of her sister, came to the Crown of
England, you bore the Arms of England diversely quartered with your own, and
used in your Country notoriously the style and title of the Queen my Mistress,
which was never by you put in ure in Queen Mary's time; And if any thing can be
more prejudicial to a Prince, than to usurp the tide and interest belonging to
them, Madam, I do refer it to your own judgment; you see such as be noted
usurpers of other folks States, cannot patiently be born withal for such
doings; much more the Queen my Mistress has cause to be grieved (considering
her undoubted and lawful interest) with the offer of such injury; Mounsieur
l'Ambassadour, said she, I was then under the commandment of King Henry my
Father, and of the King my Lord and husband, and whatsoever was done then by
their order and Commandments, the same was in like manner continued until both
their deaths, since which time, you know I neither bore the Arms, nor used the
title of England; Me thinks (quoth she) these my doings might ascertain the
Queen your Mistress, that that which was done before, was done by commandment
of them that had the power over me; and also in reason she ought to be
satisfied, seeing I order my doings as I tell you; it were no great dishonor
to the Queen my Cosen your Mistress, though I a Queen also did bear the Arms
of England; for I am sure, some inferior to me, and that be not on every side
so well apparen^ed as I am, do bear the Arms of England. You cannot deny
(quoth she) but that my Grandmother was the King her Fathers sister, and I trow
the eldest sister he had; I do assure you Mounsieur l'Ambassadour, and do speak
unto you truly, as I think, I never meant, nor thought matter against the Queen
my Cousin. Indeed (quoth she) I know what I am, and would be loath either to do
others wrong, or suffer too much wrong to my self; and now that I have told you
my mind plainly, I pray behave your self betwixt us like a good Minister,
whose part is to make things betwixt Princes rather better than worse; and so I
took my leave of the said Queen for that time.

The same day after this my Audience, I required Audience in like manner of the
French King, which was assigned me on the 21. of this present at afternoon: At
which time, I did set forth, as well as I could, to the Queen Mother, the good
reasons and just occasions, according to your Majesty's instructions, why your
Majesty did refuse the Queen of Scotland your safe Conduct, for her free
passage into her Country; and declared at good length, the Causes why your
Majesty did not accommodate the said Queen of Scotland with such favors as she
required in her passage, not forgetting the reasons that moved your Majesty to
return Mounsieur d'Oysell back hither again.

The Queen Mother answered, Mounsieur l'Ambassadour, the King my Son, and I,
are very sorry to hear that the Queen my good Sister your Mistress, has
refused the Queen my Daughter free passage home into her own Realm; this may be
an occasion of farther unkindness betwixt them, and so prove to be a cause and
entry into War; they are Neighbors, and near Cosins, and either of them has
great Friends and Allies, so as it may chance, that more unquietness shall
ensue of this matter, than is to be wished for, or then is meet to come to
pass; Thanks be to God (quoth she) all the Princes of Christendom are now in
peace, and it were great pity that they should not so continue; and where (said
she) I perceive the matter of this unkindness is grounded upon the delay of
Ratification of the Treaty: The Queen my Daughter has declared unto you, That
she does stay the same, until she may have the advice of her own Subjects,
wherein methinks (said she) my Daughter does discreetly for many Respects; and
though she have her Unkies here by whom it is thought (as reason is) she should
be advised; yet considering they be Subjects and Counselors to the King my
Son, they be not the meetest to give her Counsel in this matter; the Nobles and
States of her own Realm, would neither like it, nor allow it, that their
Sovereign should resolve without their advice in matter of consequence:
Therefore Mounsieur l'Ambassadour, quoth she, methinks the Queen your Mistress
might be satisfied with this Answer, and accommodate the Queen my Daughter, her
Cousin and Neighbor with such favors as she demands. I answered, Madam, the
Queen my Mistress trusts, you will upon the reasons before by me declared, as
her good Sister and friend, interpret the matter as favorably on her part, as
on the Queen of Scotlands; and that you will also indifferently consider how
much it imports my Mistress not to suffer a matter so dangerous to her and
her State, as this is, to pass unprovided for; it seems by the many delays
which in this matter have been used, after so many fair and sundry promises,
that the Queen of Scotland has not meant so sincerely and plainly as the Queen
my Mistress has done; for by this time the said Queen might have known the
minds of her Subjects in Scotland, if she liked to propound the matter unto
them; There have been since the Death of the King your Son and her Husband, two
or three Assembli^s of the Nobles and States in Scotland, and this matter was
never put forth amongst them; Hither have come out of Scotland many of sandry
Estates, and some that the Queen did send with Commission thither, as the Lord
of Finliter to treat on her behalf with he Estates of that Realm, and of other
matters; so as if she had minded an end in this matter of the Treaty, before
this time she might have heard her Subjects advices. Thereto the Queen Mother
said, the King my Son and I would be glad to do good betwixt the Queen my
Sister your Mistress, and the Queen my Daughter, and shall be glad to hear that
there were good amity betwixt them; for neither the King my Son, nor I, nor
none of his Council will do harm in the matter, nor show our selves other than
friends to them both.

After this, I took my leave of the said Queen Mother, and addressed my Speech
to the King of Navarre, unto whom I declared, as I had done to the
Queen Mother, adding, That your Majesty esteemed his amity and friendship
entire; that you did not doubt of his good acceptance of your doings and
proceedings with the Queen of Scotland; and said further, That for your
Majesty's purpose to have reason at all times, and in all things of the Queen
of Scotland, it were better she were in her own Country than here; the said
King conceived that your Majesty needed not doubt that the King his Sovereign
would show himself in this matter more affectionate to the Queen of Scotland,
than to you his good Sister, and thereof he bade me assure your Majesty. Then
taking my leave of the said King of Navarre, I went to the Constable, and
declared unto him, as I had done unto the King of Navarre, on your Majesty's
behalf; the Constable humbly thanked your Majesty that you would communicate
your affairs with him, which argued your good opinion of him; he said, he
trusted that your expectation should not be deceived of him; but would rather
so behave himself toward your Majesty, as your good opinion of him should be
increased: As to the matter of the Queen of Scotland, he was sorry that the
occasions were such, as your Majesty could not bestow such kindness on her as
was meet betwixt Princes so near Neighbors and Kinsfolks; but he trusted that
time would repair these unkindnesses betwixt you; as for his part, he prayed
your Majesty to think that he would never give other advice to the King his
Sovereign, but such as should rather increase the good amity betwixt both your
Majesty's, than diminish it; and so prayed me to present his most humble
Commendation and Service to your Majesty, wherewith I took my leave of him. And
to the intent I might the better descipher whether the Queen of Scotland did
mind to continue her Voyage, I did the same 21 Of July (after my former
negotiations finished) repair to the said Queen of Scotland to take my leave of
her; unto whom I then declared, that in as much as I was your Majesty's
Ambassador, as well to her for the matters of Scotland, as to the French King
your good Brother, and hearing by common bruit that she minded to take her
Voyage very shortly, I thought it my Duty to take my leave of her, and was
sorry she had not given your Majesty so good occasion of Amity, as that I your
Minister could not conveniently wait upon her to her embarking. The said Queen
made Answer, Mounsieur l' Ambassador, if my preparations were not so much
advanced as they are, peradventure the Queen your Mistrisses unkindness, might
stay my Voyage; but now I am determined to adventure the matter, whatsoever
come of it; I trust (quoth she) the wind will be so favorable, as I shall not
need to come on the Coast of England; and if I do, then Mounsieur l'
Ambassador, the Queen your Mistress shall have me in her hands to do her will
of me; and if she be so hard-hearted as to desire my end, she may then do her
pleasure, and make sacrifice of me; peradventure that casualty might be better
for me, than to live; in this matter (quoth she) Gods will be fulfilled. I
answered, she might amend all this matter if she would, and find more Amity of
your Majesty and your Realm, than of any other Prince or Country. The Queen
answered, I have (me thinks) offered and spoken that that might suffice the
Queen my Sister, if she will take any thing well at my hand; I trust (said she)
for all this, we shall agree better than some would have us, and for my part I
will not take all things to the worst; I hope also (said she) the Queen my
Sister and Cousin, will do the like, whereof (quoth she) I doubt not, if
Ministers do no harm betwixt us: and so the said Queen embraced me.

This is the sum of my Negotiations at these my last Audiences with the French
King, the Queen Mother, the King of Navarre, the Queen of Scotland, and the
Constable; whereof I have thought meet to enlarge to your Majesty in such fort
as the same passed, and was uttered betwixt us. As far as I can perceive, the
said Queen of Scotland continues her Voyage still, and I hear that
Villageigmon and Octavian have the principal order of her said Voyage, and mean
to sail along the Coast of Flanders, and so to strike over to the North-part of
Scotland, as the wind shall serve; she did once mean to use the West-passage,
but now she dares not trust the Duke of Chastillerault, nor the Earl of
Arguile, and therefore dares not to pass by the West-Seas.

The said Queen, as I hear, desires to borrow of the French King a hundred
thousand Crowns, the same to be received again of her Dowry, which is twenty
eight thousand Crowns by the year; the Queen Mother is willing to help her; the
King of Navarre does not further the matter, but seeks to abridge the sum.
After I had done my Negotiations at the Court, I was constrained to dislodge
from Poissey, for the Assembly of the Clergy, who meet there to the end of this
month, and the Ambassadors are now appointed to lodge at Paris.

The Queen of Scotland departed from St. Germans yesterday 25. of July toward
her Voyage as she bruiteth it: she sends most of her Train strait to
New Haven to embark, and she herself goes such a way between both, as she will
be at her choice to go to New Haven, or to Callis upon the sudden what she will
do, or where she will embark, she will be acknown to never a Scotch man, and
but to few French. And for all these shows and boasts, some think she will not
go at all, and yet all her stuff is sent down to the Sea, and none other bruit
in her house but of her hasty going; if it would please your Majesty to cause
some to be sent privily to all the Ports on this side, the certainty shall be
better known to your Majesty that way by the laying of her vessels, than I can
advertise it hence. She has said, that at her coming into Scotland, she will
forthwith rid the Realm of all the English men there; namely, of your Majesty's
Agent there, and forbid mutual Traffic with your Majesty's Subjects; if she
make the haste to embark that she seems to do, she will be almost ready to
embark by that time this shall come to your Majesty's hands. Two or three days
ago, the French King was troubled with a pain in his head, and the same
begins to break from him by bleeding at the nose, and running at his ear, it
is taken to be the same disease in his head, whereof his brother died; but by
voiding it (which the other could not do, that organ being stopped) this King
is well amended.

At the dispatch hereof the King of Navarre was unquieted by a flux and a
vomit, and the Queen Mother with a Fever. I hear that in Gascony, the people
stir apace for Religion (as they do in many other places) and being there
assembled, to the number of four thousand, have entered a Town, thrown down the
Images, and put out the Priests, and will suffer no Mass to be said there.

My Lord of Levistou being ready to go homewards into Scotland through England,
went to the Queen of Scotland for his leave so to do; but she has commanded
him to tarry and wait on her, and to meet her at Abevillo, without letting him
know any thing else; he in doubt what she will do, is content to expect her
coming thither, and to do then as she shall command him; and seeing no
likelihood of her short passing, (which he sath is uncertain) but that she will
go to Callis, there to hover and hearken what your Majesty does to stop her,
and according thereunto to go or stay; he minds to get him home; he has
required my Letters of recommendations to your Majesty's Officers at his
landing in England; which for his good devotion toward your Majesty, and for
that he is one that wishes the same well, I have not refused him; and so
humbly beseech your Majesty's good favor toward him, at his coming to your
Majesty for his Passport. Here is a bruit, that the Turk is greatly impeached,
both by a sort of Jews within his own Country, and also by the Sophy. And
thus I pray God long to preserve your Majesty in health, honor and all
felicity; from Paris, July 26. 1561.

Your Majesty's most humble, and most obedient Subject and Servant, N.
Throckmorton.

FINIS.
The ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
B.
BAcon Sir Francis, not a man born under Sol, that loves Honor; nor under
Jupiter, that loves Business; place of any reasonable countenance, commands
more wits than a man's own. Page 1, 2. Assures the Lord Burleigh, that his
endeavors shall not be in fault, if diligence can entitle him unto it, and
wishes to show his Service with as good proof, as he can say it in good faith.
3, 4. Caresses the Earl of Northumberland. 4, 5. The entrance of King James, a
fair morning before the Sun rising. This State performed the part of good
Attorneys, in delivering the King quiet possession. 5, 6. No Reason the World
should reject Truth in Philosophy, although the Author dissents in Religion.
1^. Advice to the King, touching his Revenue. 27. The Kings Attorneys place,
and the value of it honestly. The Chancellors placo usually conferred upon the
Kings Council, and not upon a Judge. Reasons against the Lords, Cook and
Hubbart, and the Archbishop. The Body of Parliament men is Cardo rerum. Part of
the Chancellors place is Regnum Judiciale, and since his Fathers time but too
much enlarged. Page 73, 74. A Narration in several Letters of the differences
between the Chancery, and Kings Bench, and the grounds thereof stated to the
King. 22, 23, 75. The Proceedings against Somerset, and diverse private
Transactions touching that Business. 28. 29. 30, 31, 32, 33, etc. His advice to
Sir George Villiers concorning Ireland, wherein three Propositions are acutely
scanned. 1. Touching the Recusant Magistrates of Towns there. 2. About roducing
the Number of the Council, from Fifty to twenty. 3. That a means may be found
to re-enforce the Army by 500. or 1000. men, without increase of Charge. 67,
68, 69. From him to the Duke, when he first became a Favorite, with somo
directions or his demeanor in that eminent place, ranked into eight material
Heads, with an ample and quaint gloss upon each of them, most elegantly penned.
43, 44. Again to him, upon sending his Pattent for Viscount Villiers, with
several Avisoes, and incidently a Censure of the Cecils, the Father and the
Son. Page 70, 71. Sends the King a Certificate from the Lord Coke. 72. Sends to
the King an Essay of History of His Majesty's time. 9. Desires the History of
Britain may be written, for three Observations. 7, 8. Sixty four years old in
Age, and three years and five months in misery, desires neither means, place,
nor employment, but a total remission of the sentence of the Upper House, by
the example of Sir John Bennet. 81. To the King, touching the Plantation of
Ireland; as formerly of the Union, as being Brother thereunto. 6. To the Earl
of Salisbury, touching his Book of the advancement of Learning, saying, He is
but like a Bell-ringer, to awake better spirits. 9, 10. Several Letters to
great Personages, in sending unto them his Book of advancement of Learning, and
the presenting of it to the King. 10, 11. To Dr. Plafer, touching the
Translating of it into Latin, with many excellent Reasons to that Inducement.
11, 12. To Sir Thomas Bodley, upon sending the same Book. 13. To diverse
Friends, upon sending unto them some other of his Books. 13. 14, 15, 16. To Mr.
Savil, touching the Education of Youth, and the improving the Intellectual
Powers. Page 17. A Factious Book, stiling the Queen, Misera Faemina, the
addition of the Popes Bull. 21. The business of the Commendams, and the
carriage of the Judges therein, related to the King. 76, 77. Three Examples of
great Calamity, Demosthenes, Cicero, and Seneca: A Discourse concerning his own
Books. 78, 79, 80. A learned and ample Discourse, touching a Digest to be made
of the Laws of England; from 82. to 86. To the Earl of Devonshire, a Letter
Apologetical, touching a common fame, as if he had been false, or ungrateful to
the Earl of Essex, something long, but exquisitely penned; from 87. to 104. A
discourse touching Helps for the Intellectual Powers, by Sir Fran. Bacoa: Faber
quisque fortunae suae, an insolent saying, except it be interpreted as an
hortative to correct sl^th, and not as it sounds, an high imagination for any
man to fathom all Accidents: Faber quisque Ingenii sui, more true, and more
profitable: Diverse manner of instances in Improvements, not only in the body of
man, but in his mind, and spirit, and therein not only in his Appetite, and
Affection, but in his Powers of Wit, and Reason: The Will most manageable, and
admits most Medicines for Cure. The first is Religion. 2. Opinion, and
Apprehension. 3. Example. 4. When one affection is corrected by another: And
lastly a Confirmation of all, by custom and habit: Five Rules for exercises.
Page [97, 98, 99, 100] Sir Francis Bacon to the King modestly Apologetical,
intimating his former services, and his present low condition, after the
sentence pronounced against him by the Lords: Implores the King, that he that
has born a bag, may not in his age be forced to bear aWallet: nor he that
desired to live to study, may not be driven to study to live. [101, 102, 103,
104]
C.
CEcil Sir William, to Sir Henry Norris Ambassador in France, about his
Entertainment there, being Extraordinary, and what the Reason should be, Sha'ne
Oneal sues to be received into the Queens favor. 105, 106. Taxes Mounsieur de
Foix, for breach of promise, in not delivering Lestrille. The News of the death
of the King of Scots, and the manner of it. Earl Bothwell suspected. 107, 108.
Callice demanded to be restored to the Queen, according to the Treaty of
Cambray. More of the business of the murder of the King of Scots, words which
touched that Queen, but fit to be suppressed. Page 109, 111. If Callice be not
delivered, 50000 l. is to be forfeited. 110. Matters in Flanders go hard
against the Protestants. 111. Those of the Order of France (if life or honor
be touched) to be tried by Kings, and others of the same Order. ibid. Marriage
of the Queen of Scots to Bothwell, the prime of the Nobility against it. 112.
The French Kings Letter touching Callice, ill resented by the Queen. The Queen
of Scots married the 15th. of May. 113. Bothwell prosecuted for the murder,
defended by the Queen, and the Hambletons; the Queen under restraint. Sha'ne
Oneal slain in Ireland by certain Scots. 114. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton sent
into Scotland, to Negotiate a Pacification. The two Factions of the Hambletons
and Lenox's. 115. The Prince of Scotland Crowned at Sterling, the 29th. of
July. 116. Queen Elizabeth offended with the Scotch Lords. Murray like to be
made Regent. Advice to Sir Henry Norris, touching his Expenses. 117. Murray
made Regent, my Lord of Sussex with the Emperor, all Judges, Officers, etc. At
Antwerp compelled to attest the Catholic Faith. 118. Bothwell reported to be
taken at Sea. 119, 120. Dunbar rendered to the Regent, the Keeper thereof
adjudged to a new Punishment. Page 120. Expectation of Marriage between the
Queen, and the Archduke Charles. 121. Troubles in France between the Prince of
Conde, and the King. 121, 122. The Queen of Scots noted by the Parliament
there, to be privy to the murder of her husband. 123. The Earl of Desmond, and
his brother, in the Tower. 125. Fishermen of Diepe taken at Rye with unlawful
Nets. 126. The Popes Ministers prefer the State of their corrupt Church,
before the Weal of any Kingdom. 128. The Earl of Sussex his return. The Prince
of Orange his Son to be sent into Spain, and doubted Egmond, and Horn must
follow. ibid. Emanuel Tremelius sent into England, by the Elector Palatine. The
Prince of Orange refuses to be judged by the Duke of Alva. The Hambletons
continue their Faction. The death of Sir Ambrose Cave. 129. Beaton sent from
Scotland into France, for 1000. Harquebusiers, Money, and Ordnance. 131.
Devilish practice against the Queen. The Scots Queen removed to Bolton Castle,
her demands of the Queen denied. 133. The Queen of Scots submits her Cause to
be heard, and determined in England. 134, 135, 136, etc. What preparations in
France intended for Scotland. Great expectation of the success of matters in
the Low Countries. Page 137. Unhappy, but incredible News out of Flanders. The
Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, and Sir Walter Mildmay, Commissioners in
the North, about the Queen of Scots business. 138. She makes Arguile and
Huntley Lieutenants, and the Duke of Chastillherault over all. They raise
Forces against the Regent, are Routed. 139. A Courageous Answer from Queen
Elizabeth, to the French Ambassador, and the Audience adjourned. 140. She
sends a Ring to Marshal Montmorancy his wife. 141. The Bishop of Rhemes
Ambassador from France, is offended, that the doctrine of Rome is said to be
contrary to Christ's, deducing consequently, that his Mr. should be reputed no
Christian, and how that Speech was salved. The Cardinal Chastillons Wife comes
over. 141, 142. The Reason of the Cardinals coming into England. Ships sent by
the Queen, to preserve the Bourdeaux Fleet. The Queen of Scots Case not
defensible, and the Consequence thereof. 144. Matters about the Queen of Scots.
Chastillion highly commended. 144, 145. The Cause of the Queen of Scots to be
heard here. 146. Passages touching the differences between the King, and the
Prince of Conde. Page 147. Matters against the Queen of Scots very bad. 148.
Sir Henry Norris claims the Lord Dacres Lands. 149. Three manner of ways
proposed for ending the Scottish differences. 150. Spanish Treasure stayed.
ibid. 151, 156. The Parliament of Scotland declares the Queen of Scots privy to
the murder of her Husband. 152. D'Assonvill comes over Without Commission, and
desires Conference with the Spanish Ambassador, but denied. 153. Hawkins his
Return to Mounts Bay from the Indies with Treasure. The Queen of Scots at
Tetbury, under the charge of the Earl of Shrewsbury. 153. The French
Ambassadors Currier searched, and the Reason of it. 154. The Prince of Conde
slain in Battle against the King. 157. The 13th. of March had two great
Effects. 158. Differences in Scotland accorded. 159. But not observed. 160. Sir
William Cecil laments the misfortune of France, means made to accord with the
Low Countries. Scottish Nobility reconciled. 61. Original Letters intercepted
by persons of credit in the FrenchCourt, of advertisement concerning the Queen
of Scots, and the Duke of Anjou. Page 161. That the said Queen should transfer
her title on the said Duke, to learn more truth hereof, and advertise with
speed. The Queens Ships far excel others. 162. The Queen of Scots excuses her
Transaction with the Duke of Anjou. 163, 164. A Rebellion in the West-part of
Ireland, and the Spaniards aid feared. 164. My Lord of Shrewsbury stricken with
a Palsy, and a Frenzy. 165. The Parisians execute two Merchants whom the
King had pardoned. The English Ambassador taxed for dealing with the Kings
Rebels. 166. The Earl of Desmond's great Rebellion in Ireland, but dispersed.
167, 168. An Italian sent hither upon a Devilish attempt An Insurrection in
Suffolk. Queen Elizabeth desires to be rid of the Queen of Scots. 169. The
Queen offended at the Duke of Norfolk about his Marriage, Sir William Cecil his
good Friend therein, my Lords of Arundel, and Pembroke, confined to their
Lodgings about it, and so is the Lord Lumley. My Lord of Huntington joined with
the Earl of Shrewsbury in the custody of the Scots Queen. 172. The King of
Spains designs with the Irish. Page 173. The grand Rebellion in the North, and
the pretenses thereof, and their numbers and names. 174, 175. A Report of the
death of the Count Nassau, the Northern Rebellion scattered, and their
Ringleaders fled. 176. Extracts of Letters out of the north. The two
Rebellious Earls in Liddesdale; but flee from thence: The Countess of
Northumberland, and her attendants robbed in Scotland: The Earls flee with
about 50. horse. Westmerland changes his coat of plate and sword and travails
like a Scottish borderer, many others taken. 177, 178 The Regent of Scotland
takes the Earl of Northumberland, and others: The Lord Fernhurst, and Bucklugh
aiders of them. p. 178 The Murder of the Regent of Scotland, at Lithgo, by
Hambleton of Bothwell Hall; The Earl of Sussex his wise and noble carriage: The
Hambletons strongly suspected for the murder and why. 179, 180 The French
Ambassador makes 3 demands of the Queen, in behalf of the Queen of Scots. p.
181 Sir William Cecil names to the Queen, Mr. Francis Walsingham, and Mr. Henry
Killigrew, to succeed Sir Henry Norris in France. p. 182 The Earl of Sussex
goes again into Scotland: The Bishop of Ross writes a Book in defense of the
Queen of Scots, and dangerous against Queen Elizabeth. Page 183. The Earls of
Worcester, and Huntington, made Knights of the Order. p. 184 The Earl of
Sussex, and the Lord Hunsdon enter Scotland, with fire and sword: 50. Castles,
and 300 Villages burnt. p. 184, 185 The Lord Scroop, Warden of the West
Marshes, makes great devastation in Scotland: The Castle of Hume surrendered to
the Lords of Sussex, and Hunsdon, and well fortified for the Queens service: A
great part of the Scottish borderers obediently adhere to their King, and offer
dependence upon the Queens Majesty: The contrary part act rebelliously: A great
meeting of Lords on both sides at Edinburgh in Arms, to try who shall have the
authority. p. 186, 187 Simon Musgrage General of the horse, routs the Lord
Maxell: is in some distress by him, but is relieved by the Lord Scroop 's
forces, and the Maxwels, and several other Lords, escaped by flight;
Drumlangricks servants, and tenants (although pretended favorers of the King
and Queen) cruel to the English, Dumfriese a Receptacle of English Rebels. p.
187, 188 The Queen of Scots desires cessation of Arms: the Bishop of Ross
plots against the Queen. p. 189 Sir Henry Norris to be revoked, and Mr.
Walsingham to go in his place. ibid. The Marshal of Berwick betrayed by the
Bishop of St. Andrews, and other Lords, who under color and treaty with him,
intended to have slain him; he destroys the Hambletons Castles and houses. Page
190. The Earl of Southampton for compliance with the Bishop of Ross, is
committed close prisoner to the Sheriff of London; The fond Lord Morley
withdraws to Lovain. p. 191 The French King mediates for the Queen of Scots;
the Queen keeps some Castles in Scotland until her subjects of England should
have satisfaction. p. 191, 192 Sir William Cecil, and Sir Walter Mildmay are
sent Commissioners to the Scotch Queen, and they like not the message: The Lord
Coke to King James, touching trial of Duels out of England, occasioned by
putting to death of Doubty beyond the Seas by Sir Francis Drake, that crime
tryable only before the Constable, and Marshal of England. p. 193, 194
H.
THe History of the Reign of King Henry the 8th, King Edward the 6th, Queen
Mary, and part of Queen Eliz. p. 194, 195
I.
Exquisitely begun, but left imprfect; Two Copies of Letters from King James to
the Lords, touching abatement of his household charge, and the means of
redress. p. 198, 199 From the King to the Lord Bacon, in commendation of his
book, caled the Organon; To Sir Thomas Coventry Attorney General, commanding
him to prepare a pardon of the whole sentence, pronounced against my Lord
Bacon. p. 200, 201
S.
SIr Philip Sidney to the Queen, diswading her from her marriage with
Mounsieur, most elegantly, and judiciously penned. p. 201, 202, 203 A most
quaint Speech made by the Lord Bacon (then Solicitor General) at the
arraignment of the Lord Sanquir, as well in extenuation, as aggravation of the
murder of Turner. 209, 210, etc. The Countess of Shrewsburies Case, touching
the Marriage of the Lady Arabella, and her refusal to be examined therein. 212,
213.
T.
SIR Nicholas Throckmorton, Ambassador in France, to Q. Elizabeth, touching a
free passage for the Q of Scots, through England into Scotland, several
Politic Reasons urged on both sides, between him, the Queen of Scots, and the
Queen Mother of France. 214, 215, 216, etc.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 72. line 16. for bnt. read but. p. 89. l. 22. for Twilknam. r. Twitnam.
p. [97] l. 3. for fortunas suas. r. fortunae suae. p. 116. l. 3. for Moleneux.
r. Molineux. p. 120. in fine for name. r. named. p. 130. l. 9. for what. r.
with. and l. 7. for not. r. now. p. 137. l. 12. for to. r. to be. p 165. l. 6.
for there. r. here p. 173. l. 9. or 10. for over. r. fromus. p. 182. l. 14. for
inferrior. r. inferior. p. 208. l. 18. for Holladour. r. Hollander. and in the
same line, for le. r. he. p. 211. l. 21. for Luedia. r. Suedia. p. 224. l. 26.
for Abeville. r. Abbeville.


