The Challenge of R. F. Lewis Sabran, of the Society of JESUS, made out against
the Historical Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints.
The First Part.
AFter a tedious Expectation that has worn out three Months, there appears an
Answer to the Challenge I offered, in my Letter to a Peer of the Church of
England.

Of 26 Pages that relate to my Challenge, in that Work, what I intend to
consider amounts not to above 13, the rest being made up with scurrilous
Language, ill-natured Cavils, insipid and peevish Taunts, and with some
Personal Slanders; all this I shall pass by: And though I could with ease wipe
off all the Dirt which that foul Pen has bespattered me with, I shall wave all
his disingenuous Reflections upon my Person, in which the Public is
unconcerned, having now a Cause which is much dearer to me, to defend; to wit,
that of the blessed Saints now in Glory, the favorable Effects of whose
Intercession we daily experience; Of the Christians common Creed, which asserts
the Communion of Saints, of the Catholic Militant Church ever united by her
devout Addresses, to the Triumphant in Heaven; Of God's Veracity, approving by
unquestionable Miracles, from the Infancy of the Church to this her Age, her
recourse to the blessed Spirits that attend the Thr^ne of his Glory: Having
then returned to all his new Schemes of (...) guage, only this following
Sentence of S. Hierom; That Is the main st^^^gth Apol. 3. cont. Ruff.
of Herctics, that is of thy Fathers, when convinced of their treacherous
Dealings, to defend themselves by Slanders, I assure the Author, that I glory
in the very foulest of those which he has devised against me, for being
employed in so good a Cause, in which they shall curse, and you will bless me,
O Lord; And I come up to my Subject.

This Author having owned, That if the Roman Church had not proceeded farther
in her Devotion toward the blessed Saints, than the Fathers and the Catholic
Church of the Fourth and Fifth Century had warranted them by their Example, he
did not see how his Church could have divided it self from that Communion
without the guilt of a causeless Schism. I challenged him to show in what the
Catholic Church now (as ever) in Communion with the Sea of Rome, had varied
from those Primitive Times, on this Subject of the Invocation of Saints, or to
own his Congregation Schismatical as far as that Pretense colored the
Separation. To this Challenge he pretends now to Answer, and to show in what
Points the Devotion we now pay to God's blessed Saints, differs from the
Worship which those purest Ages allowed them.

I expected to have met in the very first Page with the Instances of this
Difference which I pressed for, but he wisely conceived much Dust was first to
be raised wherewith to cloud his Readers Eyes, that so he might more easily
impose upon them; and therefore he reserved the Answer to my Challenge to the
very last Leaf. Since then he ended where he was to begin, it is but reasonable
I should begin where he ends.

He states this Change and Corruption in three following Points, which he thus
delivers.

The First, That the Church of Rome does use a direct Invocation, or formal
Prayer to the Saints; whereas the Primitive Church used only such Addresses or
Requests as are made from one Friend to another.

The Second, Those Requests were made at the Memories (Shrines) of those
Martyrs, who were believed to be present there at that time, though invisible;
whereas the Invocations of the Church of Rome are made to such and such a Saint
in ten thousand different Places, which is to attribute to them an Omnipresence.

The Third, Those Requests and Interpellations to the Martyrs, were neither
Commanded by the Primitive Church (whereas the Church of Rome Enjoins them) nor
authorized by her General or Provincial, or any other Councils, nor used in the
public Offices of the Church. All this he says, and says it only; but I will
demonstrate his Mistakes in each Point.

Reader, I desire you here to observe what that Belief was, and those Practices
of the Primitive Church and Fathers which I had produced from their
unquestionable Works, and in their own words. These amongst others; That
whoever was in Affliction, had recourse to the Saints Intercession, that such
Prayers were heard, the Martyrs being the helpers of their Prayers, and most
powerful Ambassadors to God; That Gifts were brought in and hung at their
Shrines, in acknowledgment of miraculous Cures obtained; That whoever but
touched the Bones, or even the Monuments of the Martyrs, believed himself
sanctified thereby; That it was held as a great Favor to take up the Dust which
lay about their Monuments, the which was kept as a thing of high esteem; That
it was deemed by all an unexplicable happiness to apply those Relics to their
Eyes, their Mouths and all their Senses, whose Dust was believed to cast out
Devils, and to cure Diseases; That the Saints Bodies were divided amongst
several Cities, and esteemed the Preservers of the Inhabitants, Body and Soul;
That in their Translations they were carried by Bishops, reposited in Vessels
of Gold, the People making from Country to Country a Lane of continual Quires
singing the Praises of God, for them to pass through; That on such Occasions,
many by touching the Saints Garments were eased of their Infirmities, many
cured by the very Shadows of their Bodies, that even Handkerchiefs thrown upon
their Bodies, and immediately demanded back, were blessed with a Virtue that
made them Antidotes against any Distempers, God making thus the Dustof his
glorious Saints Bodies beneficial to all; That they fell down in Prayer before
the blessed Virgin, implored her to free them from all their Necessities, from
all the Temptations of the Devil, as their Reconciler, and asked her to admit
their Prayers, etc.

This a rigid Reformer would call a full Inventory of Popish Superstitions,
this outgoes far the most eager Devotion of the Catholics of these Days toward
God's blessed Saints; this, all this, our Answerer passes by, finding no
difference in these Points betwixt the present Catholic Church, and that of
Fourteen or Fifteen hundred years past. Now let us see how faithfully he
represents the Differences he offers.

As to the First, I say the Fathers of the Fifth and Fourth Century and
upwards, offered, with as formal an Invocation, as humble, submissive, and
devout Prayer to the Saints in Heaven, as any that are in present use amongst
Catholics. The fairest proof of this matter of Fact, is by plain Instances;
take these few in lieu of an infinity that could be produced.

St, Athanasius present in the first General Council, having first laid this De
Incar. verbiapud Cent. Cent. 4. c. 4.
Ground for his Practice, If you worship the Man Christ, because the Word of
God dwells there, at the same time worship also the Saints, on God's account,
who has his dwelling in them. He offers this Prayer to the blessed Virgin
Mother of God: Hearken, Daughter of David and Abraham, and stoop thy Ears to
our Prayers, and forget not thy People. We lift up our Voice to thee, remember
us, holy Virgin, which did remain after Childbirth a Virgin, and return us
for these inconsiderable Speeches, great Gifts, and the Riches of thy Graces,
you who are full of Grace; Hail, most Gracious, the Lord is with thee;
Intercede, O Mistress, O Lady, O Queen and Mother of God. I know not what he
will say to this Prayer, without he shares in the Impudence of his Brethren the
Centuriators of Magdeburge, who arraign for it S. Athanasius, saying, It Is
wonderful, that so great a Doctor could write thus. -- These words breathe
Idolatry.

St. Cyril in his own Name, and of the whole General Council of Ephesus, Hom.
6. cont. Nestorium.
thus Prays to the Mother of God: Hail in all our Names, holy Mother of God,
precious Thresor of the whole World, ever shining Lamp, Crown of Virginity;
Hail Virgin, by whose Mediation the holy Trinity is glorified and honored
through the whole World; in whom Heaven exults, Angels and Archangels rejoice,
by whom the Devils are put to flight.

St. Gregory Nyssen thus Prays to St. Theodore: Martyr, use the liberty you
Orat. de S. Theodor.
enjoy to speak for your Fellow Servants. You have conquered the World, but you
have not forgotten the Passions and the Necessities our human condition is
liable unto. Ask for Peace, that these public Meetings may continue, that the
enraged and wicked Barbarians may not plunder and destroy our Churches and
Altars, that no profane and impious Man tread the Holy things under foot: For
we that have been preserved untoucht and alive, do own our selves obliged to
you for that Blessing, and we ask your Protection and Security for the future.

The holy Father S. Gregory Nazianzen Prays thus to S. Basil: O sacred and
Divine Man, look down on us from Heaven, and either by your Prayers mortify
that Sting of the Flesh which God has given us for our Instruction, or move us
to bear it with a courageous Mind; and direct our whole Life to all that is
most fitting; and when we part out of this Life, receive us there in your
Tabernacles.

I know not whether he will replyto this Prayer what his Brethren the Calv. in
Clyp. Dial. 8.
Reformed Churches of France did: I will inform you that Gregory, when he spoke
thus, knew not what he said.

The same Father Prays thus to S. Cyprian: But you look benignly on us from
Heaven, feed this holy Flock, or help him that feeds it, both by directing us
as much as may be to the best in all other things, and by removing from us
those dangerous Wolves that catch at each word and syllable, and obtaining for
us a more full and clear Light from that holy Trinity, whose Presence you enjoy.

The holy Bishop Maximus thus Prayed to S. Agnes: O most shining to the Max.
Taurin. de S. Agn.
Eyes of Christ, most beautiful to the Eyes of the Son of God, most acceptable
to the Angels and Archangels, WITH WHAT FERVENT PRAYER WE CAN, we beg of you,
that you will vouchsafe to remember us, that he may grant us forgiveness of our
Sins, who has bestowed on you the reward of your Labors.

S. Hilary Bishop of Arles, thus Prays to S. Honorius: Ever remember us In vita
S. Honor.
in the Presence of that God which you attend, singing that new Song, and
following the Lamb whether ever he goes. You are OUR PATRON, the Interpreter of
our Prayers, an acceptable and powerful Protector; present the Prayers of your
Flock offered at your Monument, and obtain that in a perfect union both Bishop
and People may attain what you have ordered and delivered.

Nectarius, who preceded S. Chrysostom in the Patriarchal See of
Constantinople, Orat. in S. Theodor.
frighted with the Threats of Julian, thus Prays for help to S. Theodore: O
splendour of the Martyrs, and glory of the Saints; O worthy Gift of God, O
unconquered Keeper and Defender of the Faithful, be not unmindful of our
Poverty and Dejectedness, but vouchsafe thou always to Pray for us; nor do
thou, O most admirable Man, neglect us assaulted by Julian the Enemy of our
Souls; for we believe that thou do live after Death: Thou then who art yet
alive in Christ, and stand near unto him, endeavor by thy Prayer to make him
propitious unto us thy Servants.

I omit the most fervent Prayers offered to the Virgin Mary frequently by S.
Methodius, who suffered Martyrdom in Diocletian's Persecution, S. Ephrem the
Syrian, S. Athanasius, S Leo, and many others. The unquestionable Instances
which I have offered, being as devout Invocations, as humble and fervent
Prayers, as any now extant amongst Catholics; and most of them recited in the
presence of the fullest Congregations, to move them to make the like. I cannot
omit S. Gregory Nazianzen's Prayer to the Blessed Virgin, it being of the same
mould with that part of the Hail-Mary which the Reformers so abhor.

O venerable Virgin, chaste and most happy, hear my Voice benignly, and grant In
trag. chr. pat.
me that which is chief of all, to wit, that departing from this Life, I may
find thee to be my Patron.

But lest this Author should Retrench himself in that hard Cramp-word
Invocation, though I could cite him all the holy Fathers Alphabetically
practicing and recommending it in the very Term, yet because I offer this Sheet
to unprejudiced Readers, I conceive two or three will be a sufficient Evidence.

St. Gregory Nazianzen I produce first, and this his Evidence: The Christians
Orat in S. Theodor.(...).
call on the Martyr as on God's Minister, who being INVOCATED by them, is able
to impetrate for them what Favors he pleases.

Next (though he has precedence in Death) S. Basil: The Martyr called by his
Name, shows himself present to as many as call, by his Works. He uses the
same words by which the Prophet Zachary expresses the Invocation of God, They
shall call my Name, and I will hear them.

S. Augustine observing those words of Jacob blessing his Children, And Lib.
loquut. in Genesis Genesis 48. 16. (...).
my Name shall be called over them, bids us Note, that not only the word
Exaudition, but also Invocation is used in reference to Men as well as to God.

As for the Text How shall they invocated him in whom they have not believe,d I
am ashamed to rely so little upon the Capacity of the meanest of my Readers as
to suggest an Answer. No one can Invocate God as God, who believes not in him;
true: but what then? Will you infer therefore, whoever is Invocated, is
believed to be God? Then because no one can love God who believes not in him,
whoever loves his Neighbor, makes him a God. And indeed, since God is as
infinitely Good as Great, and expressly challenges that we love him with all our
Heart, with all our Soul, with all our Strength, whoever pretends that an
inferior Religious Worship or Invocation, gives to Creatures the Worship we owe
to God, must equally hold, that Charity to our Neighbor is injurious to God,
and deprives him of the Love which we owe him.

As to his Second Difference,, It Is most false that Saints and Martyrs were
called upon only where they were supposed to be present, though invisibly, at
their Shrines. This I prove thus unanswerably.

S. Augustine is so far from this Belief, that he assures us of the contrary. De
Cura pro Mort. c. 16.
The Solution of this Question is beyond the reach of my Understanding, how the
Martyrs help those WHICH MOST CERTAINLY ARE HELPED BY THEM. Whether or no they
be themselves present at one time in so different places, etc.

S. Gregory Nazianzen in a Sermon Preached before Fifty Bishops, Orat. 32.
teaches the contrary, assuring us, that not only the Martyrs who cure
Diseases, and put the Devils to flight, appear and bestow Revelations, but that
where their Bodies only are, the same Effect is bad as from their Souls,
whether they be touched or worshipped.

S. Ambrose condemns this prodigious, if not wilful Mistake, in these In not.
S. Naz and Celsi.
words: Have you Invocated the Martyr, He hears you every where, who is honored
in the Martyr, according to his Dispensation who weighs your Vows, and
dispenses his Gifts; in so much is a nearer Presence of the Intercessor
granted, as the Faith of the Client is more devout. In these words is fully
expressed the Catholic Faith on this Point, and how the charging this, with the
giving to the Martyrs an Omnipresence, can be excused from a black Calumny, I
do not see.

In fine, S. Gregory the Great is of so opposite a Belief, that he holds Dial.
lib. 2. cap. ult.
greater Miracles to be often wrought where the Saints Bodies are not, that our
Mind being fixed upon God, our Faith may have a greater Merit; forasmuch as we
know they repose not there, and yet believe that they fail not to hear end
grant our Requests.

But it is here observable, how the Answerer makes the Fathers of the first Ages
to attribute an Omnipresence to the Saints, by boldly asserting, that they
called upon them only where they supposed them, though invisibly, present; for he
cannot be so thoroughly ignorant, as not to know, that the Saints Bodies were
divided into different distant Places, honored in each, and that they wrought
Miracles in all; or if he be, he cites Fathers whom he never saw, who all
assert this frequently. I will cite one Instance or two.

S. Greg. Naz. Truth is in such Veneration, that a little Dust, the least
Splinter Jambic. de ve ritat.
of their decayed Bones, a Lock of their Hair, their Clothes, some Drops, though
almost worn off, of their Blood, have as much Worship paid them as the whole
Body. Nay, the calling a Place by the Martyrs Name, I know to have been of as
much efficacy, as if the whole Martyr had lay'n there.

Theodoret. Their Bodies are not each in their own Monument, but being divided
Sermon. 8. cont. Grec.
among the Cities and Villages, are by them esteemed the Preservers of their
Souls and Bodies, and called their Physicians, and honored as their Protectors
and Guards, and making use of their Intercession to God, they by them obtain
divine Benefits, and the divided Bodies, retain their Power entire.

S. Aug. l. 2. c. 8. de Civit. rehearses several Miracles wrought at the Relics
of S. Stephen in the different Places they were honored at.

S. German, to whom this Island owed the Expulsion of the Pelagian Heresy,
Beda Hist. l. 1. c. 18.
carried about him for his Protection in a Reliquary, the Relics of all the
Apostles, and many Martyrs, and took of the Dust that lay by S. Alban's
Monument: By the Intercession of those Saints whose precious Dust he had, and a
touch of the Relic case they were in, he restored Sight to a blind Woman.

As to the Third Difference he imposes First on his Readers, when he says the
Church of Rome Enjoins Prayers to Saints. I defy him to show any Canon of the
Council of Trent, or of any other, that Commands it as an Obligation of
Catholic Faith. Yet this Man wonders that we accuse him and his Brethren of
continual Misrepresentations. Secondly, His Assertion, that no Councils in the
Primitive Church authorized Praying to Saints, is very false. I offer these
following Proofs thereof, to which many more might be added.

The General Council of Calcedon authorized Invocation of Saints, by Act. 21.
practicing it; These were the Words, and the general Voice of all those Holy
Bishops there assembled, to the number of 630. Behold the Truth, Flavianus
lives after Death, that the Martyr Pray for us. Our Letanies, to which this
Answerer owes so ill a will, exceed not this Invocation.

S. Hierom tracing the Heretical Oppositions made to the Invocation of Hier.
cont. Vigil. Socrat. l. 2.
Saints, finds its original in Valentin the Heretic, whose Error Eustathius or
Eutactus renewed in Armenia, about the time of the First General Council of
Nice. The Council of Gangrae in Paphlagonia deposed him from his Episcopal
Dignity, though he offered at several Excuses to color his Error, and condemned
him and his Followers in these words: If any one through Conc. Gangrense Can.
20.
Pride, as believing himself perfect, (that is not needing the Intercession of
Saints) accuses those Meetings which are had at the Places where holy Martyrs
repose, or in their Churches, or believes that such Oblations as are made there
ought to be slighted, Be he accursed.

The Council of Laodicea, in the Year 320. four years before that of Can. 6.
and 34.
Gangrae, allows the Worshipping of the true Martyrs of Christ, mentions
Churches built in their Honor over their Monument, whither the Christians
resorted.

In fine, the Fourth (usually called the Fifth) Council of Carthage, in the
Can. 14.
Year 368. by the Voices of Thirty seven Bishops, authorizes the Meeting of
Christians, not only in Churches dedicated to Martyrs, but wherever any
Monument or certain Relics of a Martyr shall be; and commands those Altars to
be demolished, if of the Relics over which they are built there be not an
evident certainty: which evidently proves that it was to honor the Martyrs, and
to beg Favor through their Intercession, that the Christians met at those
Altars.

S. Augustine, the best Witness for the Devotion of his Age, in his 137th
Epistle, commends at large the Concourse of People to the Monuments of Martyrs,
there to ask miraculous Favors; and to some particular Saints for such and such
peculiar Graces; to others again for different ones.

The Last Part of this third Difference, to wit, that the Interpellations of
Saints were not used in the public Liturgies or Masses is a sly Imposture, if
he means to insinuate, that in the holy Mass we use now adays any Prayers
directed to the Saints; for the Mass being the Christian Oblation of Christ's
Sacrifice, and Sacrifice belonging to God only as a Divine Worship, the
Catholic Church, and particularly in the latter Ages, has been so cautious of
giving occasion to any Error, that not the least Collect or Prayer in holy Mass
is directed to any Saint or Angel, but all to God through Christ, though he be
prayed in them to accept of the Saints Prayers for us.

If he means, that Commemorations of Saints were not used in the ancient
Liturgies, or their Prayers were not craved in them, or offered to God for us,
all the Liturgies extant will convince him of an Error which he could scarce
fall into, but only pretend, to deceive others.

I shall not cite the Liturgies of S. Peter, S. James, S. Mark, etc. because
that by reason of several Additions made to them, they are no more properly
theirs: I will offer only such unquestionable Liturgies as cannot be rejected,
or other Testimonies of the Fathers, Greek and Latin as are undoubtedly theirs.

S. Cyril, Patriarch of Jerusalem, bears witness to this Prayer in the Liturgy.
Catech. 5.
We Pray to thee all of us, and offer thee this Sacrifice, so as to make a
Commemoration also of those who have slept before us, first of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that GOD THROVGH THEIR PRAYERS AND INTERCESSIONS
accept of our Prayers. Where he calls the holy Mass the unbloody Divine
Worship, over the Victim of Propitiation.

S. Basil's Liturgy has this Prayer: Sanctify our Souls and Bodies, and grant
us, O most Holy, that we may serve you all the days of our Life, through the
Intercession of the holy Mother of God, and of all the Saints which from the
beginning have glorified you.

S. Chrysostom's Liturgy has the following Prayers: In honor and memory of the
most blessed glorious Mother of God our Lady, and ever Virgin Mary, through
whose Intercession receive, O Lord, this Sacrifice on thy heavenly Altar. --
Visit us, O Lord, by the Supplications of S. John the Prophet, and Precursor,
and Baptist, of thy holy and most famous Apostles, and of the Saint we make a
Commemoration of, and of all your blessed Saints. There the Deacon thus speaks
to the People: Celebrating the Memory of the most holy and immaculate, most
blessed Mother of God our Lady, the ever Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let
us recommend our selves to one another Prayers, and our whole Life to Christ
our God. And the Priest prays thus: We humbly magnify thee, O undefiled
Virgin, according to our bounden Duty, having obtained thy help, and being
delivered from Evil by thy Intercession, and evermore defended by the Cross and
Passion of thy Son. Holy Mother of unspeakable Light, we honor and magnify
thee with Angelical Hymns. Thus the Greek Liturgies.

For the Latin, S. Augustine assures us, That we do not Commemorate the Tract.
84. in Joan.
Saints at the holy Table, as we do others who rest in Peace, that we may also
Pray for those, but more that they may Pray for us.

Pelagius, the second Predecessor to S. Gregory the Great, certifies, that Ep.
4. Decrer. ad Epist. Germ. Et Gall. to. 2. CC.
this following Preface had been of a most long continuance, ( diutissime) ever
us'd-in the Latin Liturgies. We most humbly beg of you, that, O Eternal
Shepherd, you abandon not your Flock, but by your holy Apostles that you
conserve it by a continual Protection, that it may be Governed by those same
Rectors, which as Vicars of your Action you have granted to be over it as
Pastors. To which S. Leo seems to allude in these following words: Peter now
more fully and Sermon. 2. de anni. suae assumpt. Sermon. 3.
more powerfully does effect those things committed to him, and he performs
now, and undergoes all the Offices and Cares, in him, by whom he is glorified,
-- never ceasing to Pray for us.

I omit many more like Instances, these being sufficient to convince any
unprepossess'd and unbiased Reader, that my Challenge is not at all Answered
by my Adversary, but the reasonableness of it evidently confirmed; and also
because a longer Discourse would over-burden the Attention of most Readers: on
which account I shall refer the full view of my Adversaries gross and continual
Mistakes to another Sheet. I have slighted all the little Arts of Rhetoric,
which are necessary only to a bad Cause, or a doubtful one. I have not
endeavored to blacken my Adversary, a very unchristian, though usual Method with
those of his Party, but exposed him and Truth naked to my Reader's Judgment, to
which I appeal.

Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam.
SVPERIORVM PERMISSV.
LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.


