THE SECOND PART OF THE COLLECTION OF POEMS ON Affairs of State, Viz.

A Dialogue between two Horses. On the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
presenting the l -- K -- and the D -- of Y -- with a Copy of their Freedoms,
Anno 1674. On the Prorogation of the Eighteen-years Parliament: Or, Club of
unanimous Voters. On the Dissolution of the Club of Voters, Anno 1678. On the
Lord Chancellor's Speech to the Parliament, March 1680. An Acrostick. The
Commons Address to the K --. The Answer to the Acrostick. On the D -- of Y -- s
Voyage into Flanders. Upon a Dispute in the Choice of Sheriffs. On the same
Occasion. Forewarned, Forearm'd. A Bill on the House of Commons Door, April 15.
1680. pursuant to a former Bill, Ian. 26. 1679. fixed there. On Nell. Justice in
Masquerade. A Copy of Verses flung into Justice S -- s's Chamber. The Pope's
Advice, with his Holiness's Benediction to his Judge and Jury in Vtopia. A
Satyr. On the Monument upon Fishstreet-hill. The D -- of M -- s Letter to the K
-- Transvers'd. The Answer to the D -- of M -- Letter.
By A -- M -- l and other eminent Wits. None whereof ever before Printed.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

A DIALOGUE Between two HORSES.
By A. M -- l, Esquire.
The Introduction.
We read in profane and sacred Records
Of Beasts, that have uttered Articular Words;
When Magpies and Parrots cry, Walk, Knaves, walk,
It is a clear Proof that Birds too may talk.
And Statues without either Wind-pipes or Lungs,
Have spoken as plainly as Men do with Tongues:
Livy tells a strange Story, can hardly be fellowed,
That a sacrificed Ox when his Guts were out, bellowed.
Phalaris had a Bull, which grave Authors tell you,
Would roar like a Devil with a Man in his Belly.
Friar Bacon had a Head that spoke, made of Brass;
And Balaam the Prophet was reproved by his Ass.
At Delphos and Rome, Stocks and Stones, now and then, S^srs,
Have to Questions returned Articular Answers.
All Popish Believers think somethings Divine,
When Images speak, possesses the Shrine:
But they that Faith Catholic never understood,
When Shrines give Answer, a Knaves on the Rood.
Those Idols never spoke, but are Miracles done
By the Devil, a Priest, a Friar and Nun.
If the Roman Church, good Christians, oblige ye
To believe Man and Beast have spoke in Effigy.
Why should we not credit the public Discourses
Of a Dialogue, lately between the two Horses
The Horses I mean of Wool-Church and Charing,
Who told many Truths worth a Man's Hearing,
Since V -- and O -- did buy, and provide 'em
For the two Mighty Monarchs that now do bestride 'em.
The stately br^ss Stallion, and white marble Steed
One Night came together by all is agreed:
When both King's weary of Sitting all Day,
Were stolen off Incognito each his own way.
And the two Jades after mutual Salute,
Not only discoursed, but fell to Dispute.
The Dialogue.
Woolch. Quoth the Marble Horse, it would make a Stone speak
To see a Lord Mayor and a Lumbard-street break:
Thy Founder and mine to treat one another,
When both K -- s agreed to be each others Brother.

Chair. Here Charing broke forth, and then he went on,
My Brass is provoked as much as thy Stone^
To see Church and State bow down to a Whore,
And the K -- 's chief Minister holding the Door.

Woolch. To see Dei Gratia writ on the Throne,
And the K -- 's wicked Life say, God there is none.

Chair. That he should be styled Defender of the Faith,
Who believes not a Word what the Word of God says.

Woolch. That the D -- should turn Papist, and that Church defy,
For which his own Father a Martyr did die.

Chair. Though he changed his Religion, I hope he is so civi^
Not to think his own Father is gone to the Devil.
To see a white Staff make a Beggar a Lord,
And scarce a wise Man at a long Council Board.

Woolch. That the Bank should be seized, yet the Chequer so poor,
Lord have Mercy, and a Cross might be set on the Door.

Chair. That a Million and half should be the Revenue,
Yet the K -- of his Debts pay no man a penny.

Woolch. That a K -- should consume three Kingdom's Estates,
And yet all the Court be as poor as Church Rats.

Chair. That of four Seas Dominion and Guarding,
No token should appear but a poor Copper Farthing.

Woolch. Our Worm-eaten Ships be laid up at Chatham,
(Not ou^ Trade to secure, but) for Fools to comeat'um.

Chair. And our few Ships abroad become Tripoli's scorn,
By pawning for Victuals their Guns at Leghorn.

Woolch. That making us Slaves by Horse and Foot Guard,

Chair. The basest ingratitude ever was heard;
But Tyrants ungrateful are always afraid.

Woolch. On Henry the Seventh's head, he that placed the Crown,
Was after rewarded by losing his own.

Chair. That Parliament Men should rail at the Court,
And get a good Preferment immediately for it.

Woolch. To the bold speaking Members of Bastards you add,
What a number of Rascally-Lords have been made.

Chair. That Traitors to their Country in a bribed House of C.
Should give away Millions at every Summons.

Woolch. Yet some of those Givers, such beggarly Villains,
As not to be trusted for twice fifty Shillings.

Chair. No wonder that Beggars should still be ^or giving,
Who out of what is given, do get a good living^

Woolch. Four Knights and a Knave, who were Publicans made,
For selling their Consciences were liberally paid.

Chair. Then base are the Souls of the low prized Sinners,
Who Vote with the Court for Drink and for Dinners.

Woolch. It Is they that brought on us this scandalous Yoke,
Of excising our Cups and Taxing our smoke.

Chair. But Thanks to the Whores who made the K -- dogged,
For giving no more the R -- are Prorogued.

Woolch. That a K -- should endeavor to make a War cease,
Which augments and secures his own profit and peace.

Chair. And Ple^potentiaries send into France,
With an addle-headed Knight, and a Lord without Brains.

Woolch. That the King should send for another F -- Whore,
When one already had made him so poor.

Chair. Enough dear Brother although we speak Reason;
Yet Truth many times being punished ^or Treason,
We ought to be wary, and bridle our Tongues,
Bold speaking has done both Men and Beasts wrongs:
When the Ass so boldly rebuked the Prophet,
Thou know what danger was like to come of it,
Though the Beast gave his Master never an ill Word,
Instead of a Cudgel Balaam wished for a Sword.

Woolch. Truth's as bold as a Lion, I am not afraid,
I Will prove every title of what I have said:
Our Riders are absent who is it that can hear;
Let Us be true to our selves, who then need we fear?

Chair. Where is thy K -- gone, ( Woolchurch) to see Bishop Laud?
To Cuckold a Scrivener in Masquerade?
On such Occasions he often s^rays away,
And returns to remount about break of Day.
In very dark Nights sometimes you may find him
With a Harlot got upon my Crupper behind him.

Chair. Paul ^rother a while, and calmly consider
What thou has^ to say against my Royal Rider.

Woolch. The Priest-ridden K -- turned desperate fighter
For the Surpli^e, Lawn-sleeves, the Cross and the Miter,
Till at last on a Scaffold he was left in the lurch
By Knaves, that cried up themselves for the Church.

Chair. Archbishops and Bishops, Archdeacons and Deans;
Thy K -- will never fight unless't be for Queans.

Woolch. He that dies for Ceremonies dies like a Fool.

Chair. The K -- on thy Back is a lamentable Tool.

Woolch. The Goat and the Lion, I equally Hate,
And Freeman alike value Life and State:
Though the Father and Son be different rods,
Between the two Scourgers we find little odds;
Both Infamous in three Kingdoms Votes,
This for picking our Pockets, that for cutting our Throats:
More tolerable are the Lion K -- s Slaughters
Than the Goat making Whores of our Wives and Daughters:
The Debauched and Cruel since they equally gall us,
I had rather bear Nero than Sardanapalus.

Woolch. De Wit and Cromwell had each a brave Soul,
I freely declare it, I am for Old Nol,
Though his Government did a Tyrant resemble,
He made England great and his Enemies tremble.

Chair. Thy Rider puts no Man to Death in his Wrath,
But is buried alive in Lust and in Sloth.
Woolch. What is thy Opinion of I -- D -- of Y --

Chair. The some that the Frogs had of I^piter's Stonk.
With the Turk on his Head, and the Pope in his Heart,
F^ther Patrick's Disciples will make England smart.
If ever he be K -- I know Britain's Doom,
We must all to a Stake, or be Converts to Rome.
Ah! Tudor, ah! Tudor, we have had enough:
None ever reigned like old Bess in the ^uff.
Her W^lsingham could dark Counsels unriddle,
And our Sir I -- ph write News-books and fiddle.

Woolch. Truth, Brother, well said, but that is somewhat bitter,
Hi^ pe^^umed Predecessor was never more fitter:
Yet we have one Secretary honest and wise;
For that very Reason, he is never to rise.
But can thou devise when things will be mended?

Chair. When the bad of the Line of the St -- are ended.

Conclusion.
If Speeches from Animals in Rome's first Age,
Prodigious Events did s^rely presage
That should come to pass, all Men may swear
That which two Inanimate Horses declare.
But I should have told you before the Jades parted,
Both galloped to White Hall, and there humbly farted:
Which Tyranny's down^al portended much mo^e
Than all that the Beasts had spoken before.
If the Delphick Sybil's Oracular Speeches
(as learned Men say) came out of their Breeches,
Why might not our Horses, since Words are but Wind,
Have the Spirit of Prophecy likewise behind?
Though Tyrants make Laws, which they strictly proclaim
To conceal their own Faults, and cover their own Shame;
Yet the Beasts in the Field, and the S^ones in the Wall,
Will publish their Faults and prophesy their Fall;
When they take from the People the Freedom of Words,
They teach them the sooner to fall to their Swords.
Let the City drink Coffee, and quietly groan,
(They that conquered the Fat^^r will not ^e Slaves to the Son)
For Wine and strong Drink make Tumults increase,
Chocolate, Tea, and Coffee are Liquors of Peace,
No Quarrel or Oaths amongst those that drink them,
It Is Bacchus, and the Brewer swear dam me and sink 'em.
Then C -- s thy Edict against Coffee recall,
There Is ten times more Treason in Brandy and Ale.
On the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, presenting the l -- K -- and D -- of
Y -- each with a Copy of their Freedoms, Anno Dom. 1674.
I.
THe Londoners Gent to the K -- do present
In a Box the City Maggo^;
It Is a thing full of weight, that requires the Might
Of whole Guild Hall Team to drag it.
II.
Whilst their Church's unbuilt, and their Houses undwelt,
And their Orphans want Bread to feed 'em;
Themselves they have bereft of the little Wit they had left,
To make an Offering of their Freedom.
III.
O ye Addle-brain'd Cits! who henceforth in their Wits
Would entrust their Youth to your breeding;
When in Diamonds and Gold you have him thus enrolled,
You know both his Friends and his Breeding?
IV.
Beyond Sea he began, where such a Riot he ran,
That every one there did leave him;
And now he will come over ten times worse than before,
When none but such Fools would receive him.
V.
He never knew, not he, how to serve or be free,
Though he has past through so many Adventures;
But ever since he was bound, (that is, he was crowned)
He has every Day broke his Indentures.
VI.
He spends all his Days in running to Plays,
When he should in the Shop be poring:
And he wastes all his Nights in his constant Delights,
Of Revelling, Drinking and Whoring.
VII.
Though out of Lumbard-street each Man he did meet,
He would run on the Score and borrow,
When they would asked for their own, he was broke and gone,
And his Creditors left to Sorrow.
VIII.
Though often bound to the Peace, yet he never would cease
To vex his poor Neighbor with Quarrels,
And when he was beat, he still made his Retreat,
To his Cleavelands, his Nels, and his Carwels.
IX.
Nay, his Company lewd were twice grown so rude,
That had not Fear taught him Sobriety,
And the House been well barred with Guard upon Guard,
They Would robbed us of all our Propriety.
X.
Such a Plot was laid, had not Ashley betrayed,
As had cancelled all former Disasters;
And your Wives had been Strumpets to his Highnesses Trumpets,
And Foot-Boys had all been your Masters.
XI.
So many are the Debts and the Bastards he gets,
Which must all be defrayed by London,
That notwithstanding the Care of Sir Th -- Pl -- r,
The Chamber must needs be undone.
XII.
His Word nor his Oath cannot bind him to Troth,
And he values not Credit or History;
And though he has served through two 'Prentiships now,
He knows not his Trade nor his Mystery.
XIII.
Then London rejoice in thy fortunate Choice,
To have made him free of thy Spices;
And do not mistrust he may once grow more just,
When he is worn of his Follies and Vices.
XIV.
And what little thing is that which you bring
To the D -- e, the Kingdom's Darling;
Ye hug it and draw like Ants at a Straw,
Though too small for the Gristle of Starling.
XV.
Is it a Box of Pills to cure the D -- 's Ills?
(He is too far gone to begin it)
Or that your fine Show in Processioning go,
With the Piss -- the Host within it.
XVI.
And who could swear, that he would forbear
To cull out the good of an Alien,
Who still does advance the Government of France,
With a Wife and Religion Italian.
XVII.
And now, Worshipful Sir, go fold up your Furrs,
And Vyner turn again, turn again;
I see who ever freed you, for Slaves are decreed
Until you burn again, burn again.
On the Prorogation of the Eighteen-years Parliament: Or, Club of unanimous
Voters.
PRorogued on Prorogation, Damned Rogues and Whores,
Who pick^d our Pockets, are now turned out of Doors^
Have we our Country plagued, our Trust betrayed,
Given Loans, Polls, Subsidies, and Royal Aid,
Hearth-money, Impost, and the Lawyers Fees,
Ruined all Trade, tormented all Degrees,
To b^ thus served at la^^^s
Have we more Money raised in twelve years space,
Than Norman Bastard had, and all his Race;
Hurried up Money Bills against Dutch and French,
And seen it spent upon a Dunghill Wench!
Were we content the Kingdom to undo;
To enrich an over-ridden Whore or two,
And all for this!
With Plague, War, and Fire was the Kingdom cursed;
Yet of all Plagues were we our selves the worst,
All just Elections nulled, and took such Pain
To make this Parliament a Rogue in Grain,
Healed Co -- y's ^lit Nose, and through our Fears,
Stood to be pissed on by the House of Peers.
Run to our Masters Cellar to Fox our Mace,
And hundred more humble Acts like these,
That we might not his Majesty displease,
To be thus served!
Well fare, true, V -- n, H -- d, O -- n, C -- rr,
L -- n, S -- r, and our great Man of War,
Will. G -- y, the Hector of our House,
That always fetched his Blow to kill a Louse;
For these great Patriots, Malecontent, did plot
Their Country's Good, till they had Places got,
Bluster'd and huff'd till they were officer'd,
But then of Country more the Devil a Word:
They need not hector more against Hogen Mogen,
And feel like Asses the Plague of a Prorogueing.
Damned B -- of a false Sire the Son,
Did we for this dismount old C -- n,
And set thee up the mighty Man of State,
And in thy Hands put the whole Kingdom's Fate?
Did we forget thou truck'd'st with what was Trump,
And paid'st Allegiance to the rotten Rump.
Did we continue spilling S -- y's Life,
That with more Freedom thou might Whore his Wi^e,
And all for this requite ungrateful Wretch,
May Pox and Plague and Devil hence thee fetch.
Let some prorogued, incensed Felton rather
Send't his cursed Son to find his guilty Father.
No other way could find to attain thy Ends,
Than by disgusting's Majesty with his best Friends;
Turn off a Parliament, never King before
Had such a one, or ever will have more?
Did we give Cause to Fear we would not do,
What ever K -- or thou command'st us to?
If standing Army 'twas thou would be at,
(As well as others) we could have raised that;
League Tripartite we could have broke, and dance
Framed to the Measures and the Pipes of France.
We could have yielded to have raised a Citadel,
More our own City, than the Dutch to quell,
Look through our Fingers, and sneer to behold
New London flaming as we did the Old.
We could Plots make like Oliver or Hewit,
And make them guilty often that never knew it.
And must we after all our Service done,
In Field for Father, and in House for Son,
Be thus cashiered to please a pocky Peer,
That neither Roundhead is, nor a Cavalier,
But of some middle Cut, some ill Shape, that
Fain would be something if he knew but what;
And like light Butterfly much fluttering make,
Sleep of one Judgment and another wake.
He all things is, but unto nothing's true;
All old things hates, yet can abide no new.
Had we but hearkened and the fore game played,
We had prevented our being thus betrayed.
But please your pocky Grace to give me leave,
To ask you why you did your Prince deceive.
Our first Prorogue might sure have stood till then,
'Twas time enough to have been prorogued then;
And not all in a Hurry seven Months before,
The former was expired to add six more.
Is Fob so full?
Nell's in again! though, we are out;
Methinks we might have met to give a Clout.
Well, now the sacred Cod-piece must keep Lent,
If Saints lend not, or Cash from France be sent.
Ah sweet Revenge! Let us but live to see,
Such Rogues prorogued to be as well as we^
Indulge our Envy but to see that Day,
Though we be ruined by 't as well as they.
We Tyrants love, if we can Tyrants be,
If not, next Wish is, We may all be free.
On the Dissolution of the Club of Voters. Anno 1678.
OH Heavens! we have Signs below,
To let us our Destruction know.
Eclipses, bearded Stars that range,
Are needless to presage our change.
When Monarchs frown upon the Wise,
And glibly swallow Romish lies;
When Demonstration cannot convince
A deaf and unbelieving Prince:
When K -- by evil Counsel's lead,
Crushes the Trunk to raise the Head,
And does the Members fiercely sever,
To make them calmly lie together;
When self ownness in State presides,
And Ignorance our Council guides;
When Y -- compounded of Ambition,
And the wrath of inquisition;
When by the heat of Heart and Tongue,
You Would guess a heap of Pigeons dung,
And by fierce deeds rash and amiss,
You Would think his Blood Spirit of Piss;
When he the stubborn Charioteer,
Takes his full uncheck'd Career;
Whilst Brother Thoughtless of his Crown,
Upon soft Carkase lays him down,
And he is Postilion to the Crown;
And on the Royal Lumber drives,
Prostestants defend your lives:
What can the Issue of this be,
But loss of Subject's Liberty?
When Crowns Revenue by bribes are wasted,
And on vile Pentioners exhausted,
When Honest Men receive disgrace,
Turned out of Offices and Place;
And Powers beckon from the Throne,
To let the Nation stand alone.
Thinks on new ways for new supplies,
And damns the Parliament as Spies^
Prorogues, and then dissolves their Heats,
And gives no time to try Court-cheats.
What can we think of these delusions,
But loss of safety, and Confus^on^
When K -- to Commons makes fine Speeches,
And draws his Reason from his breeches,
Declares our Nation wants but C --
Which must be paid with Subjects Money?
When Whores make Monarchs; Drunk, and Rule
By the idle grant of a dipped Fool^
And Dissolutions may be said
The Effect of Staggers in the Head,
And Government is a Diseas^
Made up of Vice and sensual E^se.
When Cavaliers in Public Wars
Against their bubled Governors,
Swear they will no Assistance bring,
To a lascivious Dildoe K --.
When C -- s by various Minds does draw,
Ruling by Letchery not by Law;
Who does his Pimps, not Statesmen trust,
Spending his brains upon his Lust:
When things are thus perversely sowing,
Poor Nineveh is surely going.
When French runs through the Prin^es Veins,
And he by theirs, not our Law Reigns.
When French c^eeps into Royal Bed,
First charming Codpiece, then the Head,
And Monarch Sw -- s on good behavior,
But as he will show dear Monsieur Favor.
When Female Buttocks dictate thus,
Good Lord! what will become of us?
Is there no end of Monarchs Itch,
That doats upon a fulsome Bitch,
Who ranker than the Adder grows,
Ferrets her Belly with his Nose?
And swears upon her bawdy Skin,
He Will let the Mass and French Troops in:
Assigns his Crown and Royal Power,
To be disposed of by a Whore^
Beware unthinking C -- s beware,
Consider and begin to fear;
For Pope and Lewis are untrue:
Whatever I -- declares to you,
He Is warranted by Holy Mother,
To sham and gull his Elder Brother;
When he is to work you to design,
He first will soak you well with Wine,
And then to your Incestuous Eyes,
He Will show again her H -- ss Thighs;
Strip her of greatness for the Cause,
And show her Scut to change the Laws;
But this is no immodest thing,
To have her Humbles viewed by K --,
She may expose on such occasion,
Her Popish A -- to the whole Nation.
Zeal wipes away all Impudence,
The greatest crimes are Innocence,
When for the Churches good intended;
And thus her H -- ss faults are mended,
And Catholic Modesty befriended;
This was a good attempt at first,
Showed she never bashfully was nursed;
But rather lived amongst shamble Crew,
Brought up in some Italian Stew;
A Duchess in our Country, known
A common Strumpet in her own.
From Dukes that are but little better,
From a Whore by Nation and by Nature,
From a King that Reigns by their direction,
From Subjects guided by the Devil's Protection,
From a soust Pilot at the Helm,
Good Lord deliver this poor Realm.
On the Lord Chancellor's Speech to the Parliament, March 1679.
This is the Time.
WOuld you send K -- to P -- l,
Great James to be a Cardinal,
And make Prince Rupert Admiral,
This is the Time.
Would you turn D -- out of Doors,
Banish Rebels and French Whores,
The worser sort of Common-shores,
This, etc.
Would you unravel Popish Plots,
Send L -- le amongst the Scots,
And rid the Court of Irish Sots.
This, etc.
Would you exalt the mighty Name,
Of Shaftsbury and B -- m,
And not forget Judge Sc -- s his Fame,
This, etc.
Would you our Sovereign dis-abuse,
And make his Parliaments of use
Not to be changed like dirty Shoes,
This, etc.
Would you extirpate Pimps and Panders,
Disband the rest of our Commanders,
Send M -- after Teague to Flanders.
This, etc.
Would you send Confessors to tell
P -- s, St -- d and A -- l,
They must prepare their Souls for Hell.
This is the Time.
Would you remove our Ministers
The cursed cause of all our Fears,
Without forgetting Turn-coat M -- s,
This, etc.
Would you hang those that take example
By C -- and Timber T --,
For all such Rascals merit Hemp well,
This, etc.
Would you once more bless this Nation,
By changing of P -- 's Vocation,
And find one fit for Procreation,
This, etc.
Would you let P -- try her chance^
Believe Oats, Bedloe, Dugdale, Prance,
And send Berillon into France,
This, etc.
Would you turn Papists from the Q --,
Cloister up fulsome M -- n,
Once more make Charles great again,
This is the time,
An Acrostick.
C lose wrapped in P -- 's Smock his Senses are;
H eadlong he runs into Circe's snares,
A nd by her Charms is so besotted grown,
R ather than quit her he will lose his Throne.
L eave her for shame, cast off those idle Charms;
E mploy your self, like neighboring Kings, in Arms,
S ecure your Nation and your self from harms.
The Commons Address to the K. A. D. 1670.
In all humility we crave
Our Sovereign to be our Slave,
Beseeching him that he would be
Betrayed by us most Loyally;
And if he please but once lay down
His Scepter, Dignity, and Crown,
We'll make him, for the time to come,
The greatest Prince in Christendom.
The Answer to the Acrostick. A. D. 1670.
C -- at this time having no need,
Thanks you as much as if he did.
The House of Commons are the People's God,
The Countrey's Scourge, the Nation's Iron Rod,
The Lord's Vexation, and the K -- by G -- d.
On the D. of Y's Voyage into Flanders.
R. H. they say, is gone to see
The Princess of the Hague;
But P -- h's left behind to be
The Nation's whorish Plague.
Some say he is diverted thence,
And sailed into France,
Because the Wind at's going hence
Stood Bedloe, Oats, and Prance.
Some think he went unwillingly,
And others say he is sent there,
But most affirm for certainty
He Is gone to keep his Lent there.
But those that can astrologize
Do swear nothing more true is,
The soleness of his Errand lies
To fetch his Cousin Lewis;
And both together, as they say,
(If one may dare to speak on it)
Through Heretics Blood will cut a way
To bring in I -- the Second.
By yea and nay, the Quaker cries,
How can we hope for better,
Truth's not in him that this denies,
Read Edward Coleman's Letter.
Gar, Gar, the Jockey swears fou thing,
Man, here is mickle work:
Deel split his Wem, he is never long King,
Whose name does rhyme to Pork
The Welshman swears, Cut splutter Nails,
God send her from her Foes,
Was never have a Prince of Wales
That wears a Roman Nose.
Whatever Pretenses offered be,
Sure somewhat is contriving;
And he is blind that cannot see
The Plot is still a driving.
Upon a Dispute in the Choice of Sheriffs there was a Paper spread abroad,
directed as follows,
To the worthy Citizens of London. Respice and Cave. Gentlemen,
Now is the time, acquit your selves like Men,
Else who can say you will ever see it again
Divide not, for your lives, their work is done;
Down must the Papists go, and mouth must run;
Let not his Imprecations us befool,
He Is worse than mad that trusts a Y -- Tool
Should he now choose us Sheriffs, and clodpate Juries,
We fall as Victims to their Popish Furies.
Oh, Heaven! direct us to unite, we pray;
Old England's Fate depends upon this day,
And those unborn to bless or curse us may.
On the same occasion.
Lewis of France has been the Prot'stant Scourge,
And Lewis of London is the Papists Drudge.
One plays the Tyrant to uphold his Lust,
And London's Villain does betray his Trust.
Tyrant and Traitor L -- is no less.
And N -- and Clod-pate makes up the Mess.
Close up the Poll, or L -- by this Light,
Your own shall off, to do the City right.
Fore-warned, Fore-arm'd.
M -- Ninny's Case looks desperate,
The Papists Cause the same,
The Traitors struggle with their Fate,
Then Patriots now beware their hate,
Look to your selves e'er't be too late,
Or all is on a flame.
A Country Hodge heard Tory say,
As he was walking home,
October's three and twentieth day
Began the bloody Irish Fray,
And then to Edgehill took its way;
Remember Forty one.
This trusty Roger told for true,
It Is odds he guesses right;
M -- had prepared his murdering Crew,
At unawares to murder you,
And by that blow the Land subdue,
As you sit late at Night.
Unless in time ye him prevent,
Be armed against those fears;
Never trust to Rowly's Compliment
When actions speak the ill intent,
Who never yet loved Parliament,
Whatever he says or swears.
What if it is said that M -- shall go,
The Fool the Knave may trust;
Stand on your guard, prevent this blow,
No matter whether he runs or no,
It Is you must Papists overthrow,
Let Devil do his worst.
A Bill on the House of Commons Door, April 15. 1680. pursuant to a former
Bill, Jan. 26. 1679. fixed there.
Gentlemen,
When last you were here the house ways to be let,
But now to the Pope and the Frenchmen it is set,
If you will club in amongst them, be quickly resolv'd^
Or else you must home again 'rog'd or dissolved.
We'll try for another may serve our intention,
That England will betray for Place or Pention,
That Is the life of the Cause, and the end of Invention.
We lost an old set would have done it no doubt,
But -- on ill luck, Rogue Tony was out;
Could we get them again, we'd hug and cologue 'em,
Nor D -- nor Duchess should ever prorogue 'em.
(And honest endeavor to make us all Slaves,
Pray which the worst evil, the Cause or the Knaves:)
Old Albion looks ill, she was heard to complain,
Her Head, O! her Head was the cause of her pain;
It Is all on a Lump, for it cannot discover
'Twixt its Catholic Foes, and the Protestant Lover,
Her Emp'ricks and Quacks, called Divine, and some Civil,
Advise her to bleed again for the King's Evil.
But better the Rogues were sent quick to the Devil:
What! bleed an old Woman, Spring, Winter, and Fall?
Don't you know she is too old to be practiced withal?
But if you do venture once more to attempt it,
It Is forty to one you're the first that repent it,
For your Plots, and your Murders, and Treasons she will try you,
Though the Monsieur, and Tories, and Devils stand by you.
On Nell.
Hard by Pell-mell lives a Wench called Nell,
K. C -- the s -- he kept her;
She has got a trick to
But never lays Hands on his Scepter;
All matters of State from her Soul she does hate,
And leave to the Politic Bitches.
The Whore's in the right, for it is her delight
To be scratching just where it itches.
Justice in Masquerade.
A Butcher's Son's Judge Capital
Poor Protestants for to enthrall,
And England to enslave, Sirs.
Lose both our Laws and Lives we must,
When to do Justice we entrust
So known an errant Knave, Sirs.
Some hungry Priests he did once fell
With mighty strokes, and them to Hell
Sent presently away, Sirs.
Would you know why, the reason's plain,
They had no English nor French Coin
To make a longer stay, Sirs.
The Pope to Purgatory sends,
Who neither Money have nor Friends,
In this he is not alone, Sirs:
For our Judge to Mercy's not inclined
Lest Gold change Conscience and his Mind,
You are infallibly gone, Sirs.
His Father once exempted was
Out of all Juries. Why? Because
He was a Man of Blood, Sirs.
And why the Butcherly Son forsooth,
Should now be Jury and Judge both
Cannot be understood, Sir.
The good old Man with Knife and Knocks
Made harmless Sheep and stubborn Ox
Stoop to him in his fury
But the bribed Son, like greasy Elfe,
Kneels down and worships Golden Calf,
And so do all the Jury.
Better thou would been at Father's Trade
An honest Livelihood to have made
In hampering Bulls with Collars,
Than to thy Country be unjust,
First sell, and then betray thy trust,
For so many hard Rix-dollars.
Priest and Physician thou did save
From Gallows, Fire, and from Grave
For which we cannot endure thee,
The one can never absolve thy sins,
And the other (though he now begins)
Of Knavery never can cure thee.
But lest we all should end his life,
And with a keen-whet Chopping knife
In a thousand pieces, cleave him:
Let the Parliament first him undertake,
The'll make the Rascal stink at stake,
And so like a Knave let us leave him.
Pars Secunda.
Since Justice S -- P -- and D -- did bail,
Upon the good Cause did turn his tail,
For 2000 pounds to buy Tent and Ale,
Which no body can deny.
The Jury and Judge to sham the Plot,
Freed the Traitors to prove it was not,
But old England will stand when the Rogues go to pot,
Which no body can deny.
S -- was at first a Man of the Blade,
And with his Father followed the Butcherly Trade,
But 'twas the Peter Pence made him a Jade,
Which no body can deny.
He Would stand by the Protestant's cause he said,
And lift up his eyes and cried we'er all betrayed;
But the Petty Fogger was then in a Maskquerade,
Which no body can deny.
When D -- mentioned to the King his name,
He said he had neither honesty nor shame:
And would play any sort of Game,
Which no body can deny.
He swears he would confound Bedlow and Oats,
And prove the Papist's Sheep and the Protestant's Goats,
And that they are all fools that on Property dotes,
Which no body can deny.
A Copy of Verses flung into Justice S -- Chamber.
Here Lives the Woolf Justice, and Butcherly Knave,
Who Protestants gaols, but the Papist's does save,
He Is a bold Persecutour, contrary to Laws,
Of all that dare write for the Protestant cause:
Since these were his Actions, in vain was his Prate,
And false Imprecations he printed of late,
'Twill one day be Proved (old clod pate) that you
Were Bribed by the Court and Portugal too;
When Parliament come to Town you will receive such a Check,
Not your Speech nor your Pardon) will save your Bull Neck:
In the Interim go on and play England's story,
You Will hang at the last as Tresilian before ye.
For we'll have the Plot -- come on it what can be
In spite of old clod Pate, Y --, L --, D --:
It Is not Prorogations shall serve the Rogues turn,
We'll dye at our doors e er in Smithfield we'll burn.
The Pope's Advice; with the Holiness's Benediction to his Judge and Jury in
Utopia.
Well done, my Sons, you have redeemed my Cause,
Beyond my expectation from the Jaws
Of my Cursed foe's, the Protestant's their Laws;
For had you not thus timely stepped between,
They had endangered both my Cause and Queen,
And then Past all Redemption had it been.
From Tyburn they more Martyrs had me sent,
Which I had rather Quick, to the Devil went,
Than my designs so well contrived be shent.
Go on and Prosper never change you notes,
The sign of the Cross direct your open throats
To cry not guilty, so you will baffle Oats.
Forsworn, no matter, if you Perjured be,
You are d^spenc't with, and ought to go free;
It Is mighty service to the Court and me:
Who will Requite it and for certain know
My Pardons and Blessings on you I bestow,
Besides the Gold you have received, I owe
Far greater Sums then ever the Court yet gave
To Pimp, or Cheat, to Traitor, Whore, or Knave,
Might satisfy our lust, or sinking Credit save.
But that is not all unless we do declare,
And set our mark upon our favorites fair,
That Heretics may know them which they are:
And first dear Coggs with thee we shall begin,
Although of late thou were a man of sin,
And did abuse those (for us) put ye in.
From which we now absolve ye as we are Pope,
And do allow that Butchers by the Rope;
Begin (not end) for that would mar our hope.
It Is true at first 'twas prudent, witty, quaint,
To counter^eit the Devil and the Saint,
With zealous thunder against the Jesuits complaint.
This gained your credit with the Rabble rout
Confirmed the choice to such who wished you out,
But now that is done it is time to look about:
And dare to act to set my vassals free,
You shall receive from holy James and me,
A Crimson Cap at least, my Legate be;
Provided you escape Tressilian's Triple tree.
Next hated Ralph thou leader of the van,
My Papal Power shall do all it can
To make the next Election senate Man:
And reason good, for then my cause would thrive,
If all prove such, the Heretics we'll drive
Till not a soul of them be left alive.
They Are all right Roman H -- H -- D -- town,
And D -- together B -- these H -- --
Sworn to be true but false as Jack of Leydon.
Next were two Judges B -- D -- never right
In rack and manger lay those Beast's delight
Next three were monsters, a very whale that is white:
Thus being coller'd, all together swore
To do such Justice, never was done before:
Prostrate their Wives to save the common Whore.
For which good service most did places gain;
One made the Whales unto Charles's wain,
And Tape maker, light man did obtain.
Three more had places to their hearts desire,
Which T -- afforded; made them each Esquire,
And all they were to do, was set the Land on fire.
Informing D -- that is Landlord to Sir W --
To save his Tenent Golden Pills did take,
Whose blessed guilt before did make him quake:
The rest had Gold dropped by the Fairy Queen,
Left in their shoon that she might pass unseen;
Which expelled poison as't had never been.
By this, my Sons, ye left them in the lurch,
And swept the scandal of our Holy Church;
Which e'rst stood tottering on a broken Crutch.
Strangely revived my Lordly Sons i^th' Tower,
Who now (transported) laugh to scorn the power
Of Lords and Commons, from whom they feared a shower.
And over the Heretics have 'dvantage got,
Who stopped the blessed proceedings of my Plot:
No oppositions left but the Fanatic sot.
For which good service debtors we remain,
Till we get Britain in our Fist again,
Then then be sure we'll well requite your pain.
Till then adieu, He Will have you in it is care,
And ever dictate what you say or swear;
May make you useful to St. Peter's Chair.
Rome July 22 d. Stylo Novo. 1679.
SATYR.
His Holiness has three grand friends,
O Great Britain's Shore,
That Prosecute his (and their own) ends;
A D -- a Judge, and a Whore.
The D -- is as true as steel
To the Pope that infallib'e Else,
Therefore no friend to the Commonweal,
Nor no friend unto himself.
The Judge is a Butcher's Son,
Yet hates to shed Innocent blood:
But for ten thousand Pound has done
the Pope a great deal of good.
He that villain W -- cleared,
Who was to have poisoned the King;
As it most plainly appeard,
For which he deserves a swing.
P -- that Pocky Bitch,
A damned Papistical Drab,
An ugly deformed Witch,
Eaten up with the Mange and Scab.
This French Hag's Pockey Bum
So powerful is of late,
Although it is both blind and dumb,
It rules both Church and State.
On the Monument upon Fish-street Hill.
When Hodge first spied the Labor in vain
Grown since he passed by Pudding Lane,
To reach his Chin up as he gazed,
Till level with his Forehead raised;
With Face that Horizontal lies,
With gaping Mouth and staring Eyes,
Supporting on his staff his Jaw,
He looked the hight of what he saw
As one that makes-an observation,
Chap-fallen he stood with admiration.
Hodge was (although to Cart confined)
A Virtuoso in his kind,
And long he stockt up in his Crown
Whatever he saw or heard in Town
Within his musty Fancy mewed,
Heated into similitude,
That whatsoever subject fell,
He bargains ready had to sell,
Though the similitude most pat
Show that Men say they know not what^
A new Spout to quench the fire,
Or else to draw the smoke up higher;
A model of a Pepper-box,
Or Microscope to view an Ox,
Or else a Candlestick to place a Light
For such as travel in the night;
Or Christmas Candle overgrown,
Not to show Light, but to be shown;
Or else a Torch with gilded flames,
To steer the Boats that row on Thames,
Or else a piece of Art and Labor,
Of Hook out Architecting Babor.
When long he thus himself had guessed,
Nor could the swallowed sight digest,
He asked a Wag at the next Stall,
To whom belongs this House so tall?
The City's Monument is this,
In token that our Mayor did piss;
It seems when London's Mayor does stale,
She by consent too lays her Tail;
Bodies so great may bear the expense
Of such a vast Sirreverence;
But it is a heap which would have rent
All but the City's Fundament.
The D. of M's Letter to the K. transvers'd.
Disgraced, and one forlorn, made Fortune's sport,
Banished the Kingdom first, and now the Court;
Out of my place turned, and out of doors,
And made the meanest of your Sons of Whores;
The scorn and laughter of the common chat
Of your salt Bitches, and your silly Brats;
Forced to a private life, to whore and drink,
On my past Grandeur and my Folly think.
Would I had been the Brat of some mean Drab,
Whom fear or shame had made her choke or stab,
Rather than be the Issue of a King,
And by him made so wretched, scorned a thing.
What little cause has Mankind to be proud
Of Honor, Birth, the Idols of the Crowd?
Have I abroad with Battles Honor wone,
To be at home dishonourably undone?
Mocked wit a Star and Garter, and made fine,
With all those gaudy trifles once called mine;
Your Hobby-horses, and your toys of State,
And now become the object of your hate,
But Damn me, Sir, I Will be legitimate
I was your Darling, but against your will,
Know, Sir, that I will be the People's still;
And when you're dead, I and my Friends, the Rout,
Will with my Popish Uncle try a bout,
And to my trouble this one comfort bring,
Next after you by G -- I will be King.
The Answer to the D. of M's Letter.
Ungrateful Boy, (I will not call thee Son,)
Thou have thy self ingloriously undone,
And thy complaints serve but to show the more,
How much thou have engaged thy Father's Whore;
Resent it not, shake not thy addle Head,
And be no more by Clubs of Rascals led.
Have I made thee the Darling of my Joys,
The prettiest and lustiest of my Boys?
Have I so often sent thee to the Coast of France,
To take new Dresses up, and learn to dance?
Have I given thee a Ribbon and a Star,
And sent thee like a Meteor to the War?
Have I done all that Royal Dad could do
And do you threaten me to be untrue?
Oh! that my P -- when I thy Dam did --
Had in some -- A --, or Cow's been stuck;
Then had I been, when that base deed was done,
Sure to have got no Rebel to my Son.
But say I did with thy fond Mother sport,
To the same kindness others did resort:
'Twas my good Nature, and I meant her Fame,
To shelter thee under my royal Name:
Alas! I never got one whelp alone,
My Riches are to every Fop well known,
And I still willing all their Brats to own.
I made thee once ('it is true) the Post of Grace,
And stuck upon thee every mighty Place,
Each glittering Office, till thy heavy Brow
Grew dull with Honor, and my Power low.
I spangled thee with Favors, hung thy Nose,
With Rings of Gold, and Pearls, till all grew Foes,
By secret envy to thy growing state,
I lost my safety when I made thee great.
There Is not the least injustice to be shown,
You must be ruined to secure my Throne.
Offices are but fickle Grace the Badge,
Bestowed by Fits, and snatched away in Rage.
And sure the Livery I give my Slaves,
I may take from 'em when my P -- raves.
Thou art a Creature of my own creation,
Then swallow this without Capitulation,
If you with feigned wrongs still keep a clutter,
And make the People for your sake to mutter,
For my own comfort, but your trouble, know
by G -- I Will send you to the Rout below.
FINIS.

