A SERMON Preached before the KING AT CHESTER, ON AUGUST xxviii. 1687.

Being the FEAST of S. AUGUSTINE, Doctor of the Holy Catholic Church.

By the Reverend Father, LEWIS SABRAN, of the Society of Jesus.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel; and are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch side, in Blackfriars. 1687.

2 TIMOTHY IV. vii. Bonum certamen certavi, cursum consummavi, fidem servavi. I
have fought a good Fight, consummated my Race, kept my Faith.
THis Character, Most Sacred Majesty, of an undaunted and unwearied Courage,
meeting Victory at last through all the Oppositions weak Nature can dread, and
faint under; of a steady and unalterable fixure in the Resolution once taken of
serving God; of an even and punctual Fidelity to his holy Grace; as it is the
noblest, so certainly it does but Justice either to the great Apostle S. Paul,
or to the great Doctor S. Augustine, whose Feast the holy Catholic Church
solemnizes this day: since it is given to the first by the Holy Ghost, moving
his Pen, when he writ it, against all the Opposition his Humility could make;
And applied to the second by that Church, which is ever guided by the same
unerring Holy Spirit. It Is no wonder one Character should serve them both, the
one having been so exact a Copy of the other. Nature had with an equally
liberal Hand richly qualified both; Education had refined their eminent Parts,
by an equally deep Knowledge Paul^ saevitia silvestre erat vitium, sed magnae
fertilitatis erat indicium. l. 22, c. 70. cont. Faust.
in all Human Literature; they opposed alike the Church of God, the one with
the Sword of Persecution, the other with his sharper and more dreadful Logic;
both misled by a blind and stormy Zeal, which yet argued their Abilities,
though misapplyed. Their Conversion was the immediate Work of Heaven, both
being retrieved by its miraculous Voice; their Learning inspired by the same
Spirit (though not in a like Degree of Certainty) guided all Christian Divines
in the Schools; by their Tongues the Spirit of God spoke most efficaciously in
their respective Ages, from the Pulpit; their Writings Numquid hoc est intra in
gaudium domini tui. l. 9. c. 10 conf.
have disarmed all Heretics and Schismatics that ever opposed the Church to
this Day; by their Apostolical Labors they outwent so far all those of their
different Ranks, that each could say with a just Title, I have labored more
than all; a Love of God frequently heightened into Rapts and Ecstasies, equally
inflamed both: They both had a Foretast here below of Heavenly Bliss; in a
Word, They were first the most absolute miraculous Conquest, and then the most
victorious Champions of the Grace of God. That I may the better set out S.
Augustine in both these Capacities, to Gods greater Glory in him, and to your
larger Spiritual Comfort and Benefit (Christian Auditors) join, I crave, your
Prayers with mine to obtain the Succor of that Divine Grace: If I presume not
to present them, without taking along the joint Intercession of the Mother of
God, I follow therein the Advice of S. Augustine, which I address to you in his
Words; Let us by the most tender Application of our Toto mentis affectu
b^atissimae v^rgin*s nos intercessionibus committamus. etc. Sermon. 35 de Sa^c.
whole Heart, recommend our selves to the most Blessed Virgin's Intercession;
let us all, with the greatest eagerness, strive to obtain her Protection; that
whilst with Assiduity we pay her our Devotions on Earth, she may entreat for us
in Heaven by her earnest Prayers; for undoubtedly she who brought forth the
Price of Redemption, has the greatest Right to intercede for those who are
redeemed.

Ave Maria.
LEst the Offers I seem to make at a Panegyric, should dull the Attention of
any in my Auditory, led by that common Apprehension, Either that Sermons of
Saints are like their vulgar Pictures which bear their Names indeed, and some
Symbols of them, but have in Lieu of their proper natural Features, such only
as are borrowed from the Painters Fancy; or that such sublime Virtues only and
rare Gifts of God are treated of in them, as lying far out of the Road and
Reach of most Christians, are of little Use for their Instruction and
Edification: to correct, I say, a Mistake that would so far prejudice, and even
defeat my whole Design, give me Leave first to protest, That I will not in this
Discourse even hint at any thing concerning this Saint, but what he owns of
himself in his Writings: His Humility having prompted him to lay open all his
Faults and Weakness in some of them; and in others, that Seraphic Love which
ever moved his Heart to a grateful Return of Thanks, having often unwarily
betrayed what singular Graces and Gifts he possessed, That the Mercy and Justice
De bonis men's, and de malis men's Deum la^dant, bonum and justum, atque in cum
excitant humanum intellectum and affectum l. 2. retract. c. 6. Non ego sed
gratia Dei mecum.
of God might receive due Praise, and Men's Minds and Hearts be raised to give
it, by the Knowledge of Gods Favors and of his Sins. Again, the only Mark I
level at, being Gods greater Glory in this his Saint, the Fight and Victory I
mean to speak of, is of the Divine Mercy and Grace, setting his Free Will in
that happy Liberty of the Children of God, conquering in and with it; of that
Divine Virtue which borrows its greatest Luster from human Weakness and
Corruption. All therefore that I shall offer to your Attention will serve for
an Encouragement to the very Weakest, and show even to those who are farthest
from God, the Way and Method how to return to him, by yielding them selves a
Conquest to his holy Grace. If I insist much on those strange Oppositions which
this blessed Saint before his Conversion raised within himself against that
Grace which called him to the true Church, and to an eminent degree of Piety in
it, I hope it will contribute the more to my Auditories Instruction and
Comfort; for as the Saint himself teaches me, Health Confess. l. 8. c. 3.
Creates a greater Joy when restored after a desperate Disease, and Safety when
it succeeds the most pressing Dangers. -- God himself is represented rejoicing
more at the Conversion of one Sinner, than for the perseverance of Ninety Nine
Just: -- And if any part of Holy Writ draws Tears of sensible Comfort from our
Eyes, and softens our Hearts with a feeling Tenderness, it is when we read the
solemn Feast in the House of that merciful Father at the Return of his untoward
Prodigal Child, who had perished, and was now found, had been dead, and was now
revived. S. Augustine till the Age of Thirty Four Years, was out of the true
Church, and Favor of God, plunged into Heresy and Vice. The haughty
Perverseness of his Understanding swelled up with the proud Conceit of his own
Parts, opposed it self to Gods Grace, offering the Light of a true Faith:
Worldly Interest, and the Corruption of his Heart swayed by vicious
Inclinations, withstood the same Grace, offering the true Comforts of Virtue
and Piety; Grace conquered at last, joined with his Freewill, and so possessed
the whole Soul of Augustine, that he continued an even Course of Virtue the rest
of his Life, by being Faithful to the conquering Grace he had yielded himself
unto. These two Victories of Gods Grace, bringing Augustin's Understanding and
Heart to a due Submission and constant Fidelity, whereby he has a just Claim
to my Text; are the two Points of this Discourse, and of Your Royal Majesty's
most gracious Attention. That true Religion, or the Worship which God requires
at our Hand, is sufficiently Jo^^. 1.
revealed to all Mankind, by him who is the Light that enlightens each Man that
comes into this World; that the true Churches Voice, which all are bound to
hearken Matt. 16 and 18.
unto, and obey, may easily be heard, and distinguished; that the House of God,
in which alone those Sacraments are dispensed, which convey to us a plentiful
Redemption, and work together with us our Salvation, is like a City seated on a
Hill, exposed to the View of all; that the Way which God has marked us out to
walk in toward Heaven, is easily found out, and followed, so that Fools shall
not go astray in it, Psa^ 35.
and consequently is discernible by its Infallible Security; are Truths which
Faith teaches us, and even Reason evinces to any who shall acknowledge in God a
Providence and a merciful Goodness. How then befalls it, that so many wander in
Darkness though surrounded by that Light, fail to hear this Churches Voice,
miss to see this City, err in finding this way? But how could this happen to an
Augustine, so that for Twenty Years he should persevere in an Heresy the most
wicked and senseless, that ever infected Mankind? Some you will say are
strangely dull, especially in the Concerns of Piety. True, but as the learned
Scientiam Augustino coelum dedit super omnes homines, etc. Avicen. Fecisse
naturam extremum effectum sine potentiae dum Augustinianum creavit ingenium,
Alb. mag. Confess. l. 4. c. 16.
World has ever owned, he had so soaring and searching an Understanding, that
Heaven never gave so sublime a Wit to any Mortal before, seeming to exhaust
it is Treasury in enriching his Mind, Nature at least emptied hers in perfecting
him. So few cultivate their Wit by Studies! I allow it; but whose was ever
polished with such Industry, improved with such Diligence as S. Augustins? What
did it avail me, says he of himself, that I read and without the help of a
Master understood all the Books that treated of Liberal Sciences, whilst I
remained a dull Slave to my vicious Inclinations? My Back was turned to the
true Light, I read by it other things, but never cast back my Eyes to fix them
on it. I had a quick and sharp Wit; it was your Gift my God, but I sacrificed
no Share of it to you; it was a part of my Misery that I like the prodigal
Child had in my own Hands and proper Disposal, that rich Portion of my
Inheritance, whilst I used not those Abilities in your Service, but withdrew
from you my God into a foreign Land. Possibly being born and bred up in Error,
he met with none that could lay it open to him: On the contrary, he was born of
a most pious Catholic Mother, he had felt in his Youth most pressing
Inclinations to Piety, he had since heard the ablest Divines of Gods Church in
Africa and Italy. Perhaps he was little concerned to find out the Truth, and
little regarded the Proofs of it that were offered him: he assures us that for
Eleven years at least, he Immortalitatem sapientlae concupisc^bam aestu cordis
incredibili, ^ c. conf. l 3. c. 4*
burnt with an incredible Desire of the Knowledge of Eternal Truth, which during
that Time buoyed him up and raised him toward the God he sought. That he
eagerly wished for Wings to quit this World, and soar to that true Wisdom which
dwells only in God, All this perchance was only a vain Curiosity in one, who
felt no Sense of Piety, no Spark of Devotion: My Heart, says he, had sucked in
with my Mothers Ibidem.
Milk, a tender Devotion for the Name of my Redeemer, it had sunk deeply there,
what ever I read of the Name of Jesus was not set in it, how smooth and learned
it ever were, seemed insipid and relished not. It may be that he refused to use
Means proportioned to the finding of the Truth: No, he neglected but one, he
used all the rest. If reading be useful to that End, he left no Book unread; if
consulting private Men, he dealt with the most eminent of all persuasions, and
was deceived by some who had always in their Mouths the Lord, the Spirit, the
Truth: Such were their Words, says he, but their Heart Confess. l. 3. c. 5.
was empty; my Soul did inwardly sigh to thee my God, whilst they deceived me
with an Empty Sound of thy Name. -- Unhappy me, by what large Steps did I sink
into the depth of Hell! But sure he read not the Holy. Text of Scripture: He
did, but to little Purpose, Behold, says he, I saw there something covered and
veiled to the Proud, and not open, not naked to Children: Ecce video ^e^ non
comp^rta^ superbis, neque nudatam pueris, sed incessu humilem successu excelsa^
and velatam mysteriis, etc. ibidem.
Low in appearance, but that soared high, and was wrapped up in Mysteries: The
Light it gave, might have increased and grown with a little one, but I
disdained to be a little One: That is, I scorned to be taught my Book, to hear
any Interpreter of it. Blessed God! such Parts employed! such Means used! so
long a Search so studiously continued! and discovered he not Inveniri posse
viam vitae minim^ putabam. Conf. l. 6 c. 1.
the true Religion? So far from it, that he acknowledges he came to be of no
Religion, and even to doubt whether God had assigned any Way to eternal Life,
which could be found out. Were it possible to discover what blockt up his Way
in the search after Truth? I observe in him three Letts that perfectly
obstructed it. First, He was prepossest with a fixed Persuasion, L. 4. Conf. c.
10, and 13.
That the Catholic Church had erred. He began to suspect, and even to hate the
Heretics, of whose Congregation he was; yet they being many, their Multitude
retarded his Diligence in enquiring farther, Because he despaired that Truth
could be found in your Church, O Lord of Heaven and Earth. Such was the
Aversion from it they had prevented him with. You brought me to Ambrose without
any Knowledge in me of your Design, says he, which was, that by true Knowledge he
might bring me to you; I loved and valued him, but not as a Teacher of Truth;
for I despaired of finding any such in your Church. Secondly, Besides that
general Prejudice he nourisht, he misrepresented to himself the particular
Tenets of the Church, and then hated and reviled the ugly Idol of his own
carving. If ever, says he, my Soul lifted up and moved her self toward the
Catholic Faith, I was soon driven back; for alas! Catholic Faith was not that
which I took it to be. Thirdly, He was willing to be convinced, but not to
believe; to see, but not to submit his Understanding to Faith: He sought a
clear Evidence, and such as should not control his usual Apprehension, or
oppose his Senses, as if they had been fit Judges of the Objects of Faith,
revealed Truths. My sick Soul, says he, could not be cured but by Believing,
Valetudo animae meae quae utique nisi credendo sanari non poterat, ne falsa
crederet sanari recusabat, etc. Conf. l. 6. c. 1.
and for fear of being surprised, and made to believe what might be false, I
refused to admit of a Cure; I was resolved either to see things, or if I could
not, to conceive them as evidently as that Seven and Three make up Ten. It was
on these his Three mistaken Methods that he reflected afterward, when sighing
he said, What am I Quid sum ego mihi sine te nisi dux in praeceps, and quis
homo est quilibet homo cum sit homo! Conf. l. 1. c. 4.
to my self but a Guide leading into a Precipice? What a sad Man, is each Man,
when he is but one Man? That is, when he is left to his own Private Sense,
abandoned to his own Judgment. Was it possible that Gods Grace, had it been
less than Omnipotent, should prevail against these stubborn Ill-dispositions of
his Mind? Long was the Combat, violent the Strife, but Grace conquered at last,
and by this Method gained the Field. First, God by a particular Light convinced
him, That L 7. conf. c. 5.
Religion was not Opinion, but Faith; not a calling of things Divine to the
Test of our weak Judgment, and carnal Senses; but a captivating of our
Understanding, and humbly sacrificing it to the Divine Truth. Next, he observed
how numerable those things were, which he believed, though he had never seen
them; How he had ever adored God, and owned his Providence, though he knew not
what a Kind of Substance he was, nor what Way led unto or from him. I thought
on these Things, says he, and you were present to me, I was carried away by
restless Waves, and you governed and steered my Course, I sighed, and you heard
me. Then he resolves to seek more narrowly. Let Time be assigned, says he, let
some Hours be allotted Ibidem. c. 11.
to the Study of that great Science, How I shall save my Soul. Let all Vain and
Empty Concerns perish, and all my Thoughts and Endeavors be spent in the sole
Pursuit of Truth; this Life at best is but Toylsome and Miserable, Death
certain and at Hand, if it surprises whither do we go? He presently applied
himself seriously to an humble Search after a Guide to Truth; when favored
with a new Light from Heaven, he cries out, Conceive better Hopes my Soul, the
Catholic Faith does not teach what we Believe, and fondly accused her of. Thus
disposed, and weighing with a due Attention the Articles of the Catholic
Belief, he owns his Heart was filled with Joy, and his Face covered with Shame,
to see how profanely he had strove so many Years, not against Catholic Faith,
as he conceived, but against his own Dreams, how Rash he had been, and equally
Impious: That whereas he should with Submission have learnt from the ^o quippe
temerarius and impius fueram, quod ea quae debebam quaerenda discere, accusando
dixeram. l. 6. Conf.
Church, that which she held, he fastened on her what he pleased, and accused
her of it. He reads next Holy Scripture, with the due deference he owed to that
Churches Interpretation, owning there is no Text of Scripture into which a
false Gloss may not Foist an Error; that the Letter ever kills, when severed
from the Spirit Nulla scriptura est quae non apud illos qui came non
intelligunt, possit reprehendi. l. 1. de genesis contra Manich.
which ought to quicken; that the very misapplying a Text, otherwise truly
Interpreted, is the most dangerous Weapon that a tempting Devil could use, to
deceive, even if possible, Truth it self, with an It is written; that
stubbornly to maintain our own Fancy to be the Word of God, because we uphold
it by a forced Text, is to set up the greatest Abomination of Desolation in the
House of God, an Idol upon his Altar; and to adore it by the worst of
Idolatries, Self-worship; proudly challenging as our own, what Christ only
could bequeath, and left to his Church, to each Member as united to the whole,
the Spirit of Truth, who alone must Interpret what he Dictated alone: On which
score Christ left as a Depositum in the same Hands of the Church, the Letter
and the Spirit, the Book and the Sense, the Word and the Truth, to be delivered
to all succeeding Ages by the same Authority, because the separating of the one
from the other, would Neque enim natae sunt haereses nisi dum scripturae bonae
intelliguntur non been, and quod in ^is non been Intelligitur etiam temere and
audacter asseritur. Tract. 18. in Jo.
turn the most wholesome Food of our Souls to present Poison; whence Heresies
have had their birth, from good Scriptures ill understood, and from the bold
and rash asserting of such Errors. So that this only is the holy Method to be
followed, that what we find in Scripture conformable with the Faith we have
received, we feed on it; but when any part thereof appears not uniform with
that Rule, that it create in us no Doubts, but only an humble Quod secundum
sanam sidei regulam intelligere non poterimus, dubitationem a^feramus,
intelligentiam disseramus. Ibid.
persuasion that we understand not yet such a Scripture. He had scarce received
this Light, when behold all his Doubts raised before by the same Lecture,
disappeared, all those seeming Contradictions vanished; whence he was perfectly
convinced, that the Catholic Church was the unerring Guide to be followed by
all the Disciples of Christ. He expresses the difference of this present
Submission, from that former Search into Scripture without this Guide, under
the Comparison of two Travelers, whereof Aliud est de silvestri cacumine
videre pat^iam pacis, and iter ad came non invenire and frustra con^ri per
invia: aliud viam tenere illuc ducentem cura coelestis imperatoris munitam.
Conf. l. 8. c. 1.
of the one climbs up a high Tree indeed, and sees thence the Place he would go
to, but then ranges* blindly in the thick Wood; whilst the other walks securely
in a Way leading right thither, without fear or danger of going astray; a large
Royal Way, made and kept by the Providence of the King of Heaven. Then
observing how all pious humble Catholics, though never so plain and illiterate
Men, enjoyed as a Birthright that Happiness, the Search whereof had been so
dangerous, the Purchase so painful to him; What Lib. 8. cap. 1. Conf.
want, O Lord (said he,) what want did your Little-ones feel of a deep and
quick Wit? How much did this Dullness of theirs injure them? Whilst they were
carried in your Catholica delici^tur Ecclesia and dicat ego do^mio and cor meum
vigilat. Quid est, nisi, ita qui^sco ^^ audiam. Tract. 25. in Jo.
Arms, and rested in the Nest of the Catholic Church, enlarging the Wings of
their Charity, and strengthening them by the Food of a sound Faith; chosen for,
and brought to them without their labor? Happy Men, who enjoy a perfect Rest,
while their whole Duty is to hearken. Behold the final Victory of Grace over
the Pride of Human Wit, captivated to Faith, our Self sufficiency humbled under
the Tutoring Discipline and Direction of the Church. No wonder if this Saint
afterward used no other Method in reconciling misled Heretics to Truth, but
that by which Gods Grace had retrieved him from his Errors, the infallible
Authority of a Guiding Church. He advised Unlearned Men in general, to rely
altogether, and lean on the Authority Epist* 56,
of the Church: He minded the most Learned, who feared to be deceived, where
Truth seemed to them Fo. 7. li^ contra cresco. c. 33.
but obscurely revealed, to consult the Church, which the holy Scriptures point
out without ambiguity; assuring them, that (even in Fundamental Articles, of as
immediate necessity as Baptism is, where Scripture mentions nothing thereof)
the very Truth of Scriptures is followed, whilst that is done which the
Catholic Church declares for, and with reason, since we receive, said he, the
Books of the Old and New Testament in the same number that the Authority of Fo.
10. Sermon. 191. de tempore.
the Catholic Church has Sealed and Delivered up to us; since I would not give
any credit to the Gospel, if the Authority Fo. 6. l. contra Epist. ^und. c. 5.
of the Catholic Church moved me not to it: whatever Doubts there arise, not to
yield to the Church, it is the utmost Ad honor. de util. Cred. c. 17. Fo. 6.
Impiety, the most loose Arrogance: For whether in her most general, necessary
and first Principles, or in remotest Truths leading to solid Devotion; whether
in Contra Faust. l 15. c. 3. in Fo. 6.
her Milk or in her Bread; the Church alone possesses Truth. Those then who
have their Belief yet to choose, who begin a serious Search into Religion,
desiring to De util. Cred. c. 7. and 8.
know to which they are to commit their Souls for Instruction, they must,
without any Doubt, begin with the Catholic Church: If they have been wavering
in their Mind, and desire to put an end to their toil in seeking, let them
follow the Way of Catholic Discipline, which as it is derived from Jesus Christ
to us Christus miraculis conc^liavit auctoritatem auctoritate meruit sidem. De
util. cred. c. 14.
by the Apostles, so must it be transmitted to our Posterity in succeeding
Ages. We must receive our Faith from that Church, as the first converted to
Christianity received it from the Apostles, and they from Christ. Her Authority
being once established by the same Proofs which Domino cooperante and sermonem
confirmante sequent b^s signis. Marc. ult.
the Apostles offered for theirs, our whole Work is to embrace what God teaches
by her Voice, though it be above the level and reach of Human Reason: For before
our Minds be cleared from that Dullness which Sin has left De agone Chron. c.
13.
in it, that especially of Insidelity, we must believe what we cannot yet
understand, the Prophet having most truly said, Without you believe, you shall
not understand; for Faith is delivered in the Church in very few words, in
which Eternal Mysteries are comprehended, which carnal man cannot yet conceive.
The first Heresy arose In Psalm.
amongst Christ's Disciples from the refusal of yielding to his words, which
seemed hard, they unhappily made a Schism from him: If Peter stuck steadfast to
Christ, was it by understanding the high Mysteries of that Speech of Christ?
No; but he piously believed what he understood In Psalm 130.
not: Learn, little ones of Christ, learn from hence due Piety; for those who
will dispute of Mysteries they do not understand, do but heighten their Pride,
whilst that curse falls on them which the Royal Prophet speaks of in the 130
Psalm, If I was not humble of heart, but have swelled up my mind with Pride, as
the Child weaned from the breast is toward his Mother, so be my Soul punished.
The Church of God is that Mother from which they are severed; they should have
been nursed and fed by her, and so might have grown and become capable of
digesting the Word and Mysteries of Faith. Ponder then well the sense of those
two words of your Creed, Catholic Church; observe what a certain death Psalm in
part. Donati.
seizes the Vine-branch, how it withers when lopt off from the Body of the
Vine; come and seek Life from the Root; number the Priests in St. Peter's
Chair; observe how they have succeeded to one another: that is the Rock which
the proud Gates of Hell never conquer. This was his method of reducing those
better-disposed Souls which erred by mistake rather than by malice; but if he
found any obdurate, before he shaked against them the dust of his feet,
according to Christ's Command, before he avoided them as already condemned,
following the Apostles Counsel; he with a true Charity, weeping Ad Tit. 3. 10.
for the certain danger they ran, minded them of it thus: To be fond of ones
proper Opinion, or to be averse L. 2. con. Don. c. 5.
from better, to that degree as to be guilty, by breaking Communion, of the
Sacrilege of Schism or Heresy, is a Presumption beyond all others, but the
Devils; since it is to refuse a Submission to the Spirit of Truth, guiding that
Church it is promised unto, and which God commands all to hearken unto, and to
obey. It Is the Crime of Corah, erecting an Altar against an Altar, which
involves the weak and ignorant Followers as much as the Leaders, when equally
stubborn in standing to their Separation; it seeming even a higher Crime in
unlearned men, who pretend not to extraordinary Parts, and yet presume to be
Judges of, and to condemn the Universal Church, preferring to her Decisions the
opposite Errors of a few L. de Bapt. con Donat. c. 16. L. 2. contra c. 23.
of her revolted Children. I do not despair of the Salvation of any one in
particular, whether he be a great Sinner in the Church, or a Schismatic out of
it. Judgment is reserved to God alone; he only who has in his hands the Iron
Rod, can break the Earthen Vessels: but I equally declare of both, with the
Apostle, That neither those who in the true Church die in sin, nor those who
through a stiff stubbornness die out of her Communion, shall be saved. De symb.
ad Catechum. c 10.
For whoever shall be found out of it, will be an Alien, not reckoned amongst
the Children of God, whom he shall not have for Father, having refused to have
the Church for his Mother. That Catholic Church which only is the Body of
Christ, of which He is the Tract. 32. sup. Joan. Salvator corpo^is sui, L. de
vera and falls. poen. c. 12.
Head, whereof He alone is the Savior; out of that Body no one receives Life
from God's Holy Spirit, nor consequently can pretend to an Eternal one. Out of
this Churches Unity no one can attain to true Penance; no one can obtain
remission of sins, (her Children alone being the sole Dispensers of the
Mysteries of God.) In Her House only the Lamb is eaten; that is, on Her Altars
only is sacrificed the true Victim of our Redeemer, Ser. 18^. de tempore.
(which alone so applies to us the saving Sacrifice of the Cross, that who eats
not of that Flesh has no Life in him.) As then no one escaped the Deluge, who
was not Q. Q. 75. ad ^^a^. Q 52. Contra Petili, ut supra.
in Noah 's Ark, so no one shall be saved, who is not a Member of the Church,
out of which an Heretic may have all things but Salvation: He may have the
Sacraments, he may keep the Gospel, he may have the Faith; and preach it, only
Salvation he cannot have. Though he be a Paul converted by God's Voice,
instructed from Heaven, he must first be sent to those who can administer to
him the Sacraments, and enter him a Member into the Church's Body. Though he be a
pious Cornelius, an Alms-giver, a man of Prayer, a sober Liver; though he have an
Angel to instruct him, Peter must teach him, and admit him into the Kingdom of
God upon Earth, of which he has the Keys, (the Church) before he Ad Bonifacium
cont. 2. Ep. Pelag.
can be saved: otherwise, let him observe all the Commandments, live a chaste
life to the purity of an entire Virginity, be profuse in Almsgiving, most
patient in bearing with all Injuries; let him sell all, and give to the Poor,
reserving nothing for himself: after all those De fide ad Pet. c. 39.
seemingly laudable actions, yet if he be not of the true and Catholic Faith,
when he departs this life he will meet a certain Damnation, although he should
shed his Blood for the Name of Christ. Say not that Cyprian and his Church,
because they condemned no man, and separated none from their Communion, were
not Heretics, and that it may suffice you that you copy this Example: That was
enough when the Church had not yet decided the Dispute, to whose Decision
Cyprian had certainly submitted himself, and with her condemned all her
Opposers, which you do not. Say not that you err in no Fundamentals; that you
conceive it a thing indifferent unto what Party you join your selves, supposing
they be Epistola 45. de Donatistis.
Christians, and therefore remain fixed to that Party in which you were born:
for whatsoever in particular the Opinions of Heretics and Schismatics be, since
they profess otherwise than the Church does, and requires of Sermon. 14. de
verbis Dom.
them to do, they are in a state of Damnation, because they renounce thereby
one fundamental Article of Faith, the In Psalm. 17. In ventre Ecclesiae veritas
manet, quisquis ab hoc separa^us fuerit, necesse est ut falsa loquatur.
Authority and Unity of the Catholic Church, in whose bosom Truth dwells. So
that whosoever is removed from it, it is necessary that he be in Error. Say not,
I am satisfied, my conscience does not reproach me that I am in an Error. I am
charitably persuaded others may also serve God well; but many Mysteries in the
Catholic Church appearing to me very strange, how can I believe what I
understand not? or how shall I, an unlearned person, ever satisfy my self of
the Truth? It Is then better for me to live of that Religion my Father and
Mother were of, and die in that Church which I was Christened in. Such weak
reasons, which yet retain in Heresy the greatest part of those who are
unhappily engaged in it, betray equally the weakness of their Judgment, and
headstrong stubbornness of their Will. The whole Catholic Church of all Ages,
of all Nations, in her General Councils, rests satisfied of the Truth of each
Article of Catholic Belief, so as to Curse and Excommunicate all those who
believed as you do, in opposition to her. Now Sunt ibi quaeda^^ q^ae
suboffendunt animo^ ^^naros and negligentes sui, qu^ maxima turba est;
populariter accusarl possunt, defendi autem populariter, propter myste^^a quae
his continentur, non a multis a ^modum possunt. c. 2. de util. Cred.
there is an ease and satisfaction which proceeds from Ignorance, (such as is
in him who in a dark night walks without fear on the brim of a Precipice he
knows nothing of) another from Knowledge; and can you think, without the
highest Presumption, that Ignorance lay on the whole Church's side, and Science
in your private Gift? Is it charity to think all those General Councils were
most uncharitable, which all said Anathema to the Errors which they condemned,
and you now approve? True Faith involves Mysteries which usually scandalize
ignorant Souls, and careless in seeking Instruction, that is, the greatest part
of the World, because they can be plausibly argued against, but not so easily
made clear, they would not otherwise be Mysteries of Faith. It Is then not only
most to be counseled, to believe what you see not Credere ante ratione, cum
percipiendae rationi non sis idoneus, and ipsa ^i^e excolere animum excipiendi^
seminibus ventatis, non solum saluberrimum judico; sed tale sine quo aegris
anim^^ ^alus redire non potest.
yet the reason of, since you acknowledge your self unlearned, ignorant, not
able to judge in such Debates; and by Faith to manure your Soul, and to fit it
to receive and improve the Seed of Truth: but it is so absolutely necessary,
that by no other method health can be restored to a sick mind. Are you
ignorant? not able by your own Judgment to determine on what side the Truth
lies? Why then it is evident that you are bound to leave all those Congregations
which leave you to your own final Decision, and to repair to that Church which
alone gives you an Infallible Guide. Think well of God's infinite mercy, and
true desire that you should be saved, and never despair to find an Authority
established by God Non est desperandum ab codem ipso Deo auctoritatem aliquam
constitutam* qua v^lut certo gradu innitentes at^ollamur ad Deum. Epist. 56.
Immobili authoritati.
himself, from which, as from a secure step, we may take our rise to God.
Heretics offer Reasons and Arguments for proof of their Belief, and pretend by
them to be preferred to the unmovable Authority of the Church, which is so
firmly established; therein lies the rashness common to all Heretics: But the
most meek Lord of our Faith has been pleased to strengthen his Church with an
Authority far weightier than that of all others; into this Castle of the Faith
all the weaker ought to withdraw Vere illa rectiffima disciplina est in aciem
fidei quam maxim recipi infirmos ut pro illis jam fictissime positis,
firmissima ratione pugnetur.
themselves, whilst for them, thus secure, others fight with invincible
Reasons and Proofs. You are willing to be guided by so weak an Authority as
that of your Father and Mother; and will you refuse to be guided by the pious
Examples of all their Ancestors, and of the whole Church for fourteen hundred
years? As for your Baptism, in it you were christened a Catholic, whoever
baptized you; and by declaring your self a Catholic, you restore your self to
the Religion you were christened in: For the Catholic Church is like unto
Paradise, the Waters of whose Fountain could be drunk out of it in the Rivers
that streamed out; but that Baptism being given and belonging only to the
Catholic Church, as in Paradise only could be enjoyed temporal happiness,
Salutem beatitudinis extra came neminem vel percipere vel tenere. De bapt. cont.
Don. l. 4. c. 2.
so no one purchases or maintains a Right to eternal happiness out of that
Church. Thus did this holy Saint endeavor to draw back to the true Church's
Communion those more stubborn Heretics, creating in them that holy Fear of God,
which is the beginning of Wisdom. Christian Brethren, you who are so happy as
to have been born in, or early called to the Bosom of this holy Catholic
Church, and thereby to enjoy that Blessing with less toil and labor than it
cost S. Augustine; Be ever thankful for so great a Mercy; wonder not when you
see knowing Men, sober Enquirers, who, even after a studious search, have so
thick a Veil yet over their eyes, as not to see those glorious evident Marks
God has distinguished this Church by, nor their Obligation of rendering
themselves Members of it. For twenty years Augustine, a man of far greater
Parts, and a more diligent Searcher, was thus blind. Pity those (...)
who pin their Faith on the Sleeve, bottom it on the Authority of some such
particular men, whilst they refuse to give ear to the whole Catholic Church,
which assures them that they go astray. Pray for both, obtain a Ray of Grace
for them, and they will see as you do, judge as you do, and equally bless God
for it. If any here present enjoy not yet that happiness, may the Example and
Motives of this Saint's Conversion prevail with him. Let him weigh whether he
be not unhappily under the same prejudices this Saint was so long prepossessed
with. It Is in vain to consult many Books or Persons on each point of Belief:
Alas! says the Saint, taught by twenty years De Doctrina Chapter c. 16.
experience, the helps of all sorts of Instructions received from Man avail
little, if God work not in us that very effect which we expect from them. Seek,
then, Knowledge from God by a devout and humble Prayer, but expect not that he
should give you a new Revelation, or lead you to Truth, but by those Guides his
admirable Providence has provided for you. Resolve your Faith finally into
God's Word; but that you may not be deceived, hear it from the Mouth, receive
it by the Authority of that Church you are commanded to hearken unto. Thus did
this holy Doctor, offering to those Heretics, who questioned the Grounds of his
Faith, these evident Marks by which God has charactered his Church, that
Pillar of Truth on which all the Faithful are to lean. If any stubbornly refuse
to observe them, they will allow me however to offer them to the Catholic part
of my Auditory for their comfort. This is then the account he gives of his own
and our Faith: Many things do most justly detain In Epist. Fund. cap. 4, and 5.
me in the Bosom of the Catholic Church; First, the Union in Faith, and consent
of many Nations. It Is the common misery of all Heretics not to see what of all
things Fo. 2. l. 7. contra Parmen. c. 3.
in the world is most patent, and seated in the very eyes of all Nations, to
wit the Church; out of the Unity whereof, whatever they do, can no more cover
their Souls from the anger of God, than a Cobweb could preserve their Bodies
from cold. That Church which everywhere 1. de Symbol^ cap. 5.
opposing different Heresies, can never be conquered by them. They all went out
of Her, like unto so many withered Branches cut off from, and cast out of the
Vine, whilst She remains in her own Vine, adhering to her own Root, enjoying
her Charity, or perfect Tract. 3. in Ep. Joann.
Union. In her alone we hold the Inheritance of Christ (all Nations:) They have
it not whose Communion unites not the whole Circle of the Earth; who is not in
Communion with that Inheritance, is gone out of it: Such may challenge Christ,
but to as little purpose as he who in the Gospel made this address to him; Say,
O Sermon. de temp. 169.
Lord, to my Brother, that he divide the Inheritance with me: Christ refused to
divide it amongst them. Paul was as great an Enemy to Division, when he said, I
beg of you, Brethren, that you say all of you the same thing, and that there be
no Schisms amongst you: He wept for those, who, though on his account, divided
Christ. See then how wicked those men are who will be divided! They Brevic.
contra Donatistas. Acutum aliquid sibi dicere videntur cum Catholicae nomen non
ex totius Orbis communione interpretantur, sed observatione Praeceptorum
omn^um. L. contra Parm. multa Frusta de Uno Frnsto.
think themselves witty, when seeing their Congregation restrained within the
bounds of some Province or Kingdom, they pretend that they be a part of the
Catholic Church, that has all things commanded and necessary for Salvation, as
if to be a Catholic did not import a Communion or Unity in Faith and
Sacraments, in a Church diffused the whole World over. They cut off a part, and
that again falls into many pieces, though no necessity can warrant a rent from
the Unity, though Christ's Garment was seamless, and fell to the Lot of one,
because all that belong to it are gathered into a perfect Unity: No, the
Catholic Church is but one; it cannot be divided, nor Ecclesia Catholica est
una, non potest esse divisa nec scissa in diversas parts. Epist. 47. Dicendum
est quae ve^ ubi sit una Ecclesia quia praeter unam altera non est. L. 1. cont.
Don.
cut into different parts: And, Where is that Church? ought to be our sole
Quaere; for besides that One, there is not another. It is in those good,
faithful, and true Servants of God, wherever diffused, joined not only by a
Spiritual Union, but in the same Communion of Sacraments; whereas all the
Congregations, or rather Divisions, which call themselves Churches of Jesus
Christ, and which are divided from, and opposite to one another, and Enemies to
the Congregation of Unity, which Spiritual Unitate devinctis in cadem
Communione Sacramen^orum de Bapt. contra Don. l. 7. c 51. Si nostra Communio
est Ecclesia Christi, vestra Communio non est Ecclesia Christi, etc. Sermon. 11.
de verbis Dom. cap. 23. Qui ad Religionum, s^iss ^^s trad^cunt, cont. C^es^. l
3.
is the true Church, belong not to Her, though they bear her Name; they might
belong to her if the Holy Ghost were divided against himself. We may then say
to each, If those of Our Communion be the Church of Christ, those of Yours be
not the Church of Christ: For which-ever be the Church of Christ, it is but ONE,
of which it is said, One is my Dove. I will then never hear those who lead to a
Division of Religions or Churches, saying Here is Christ, and There is Christ.
Secondly, I am kept in that Church by her Authority, grounded on Miracles, led
by Hope, (that Hope which moves the Members of that Church to purchase Eternal
Glory, promised as a Reward by our just Judge to meritorious Actions) increased
by Charity. Thirdly, because that Authority of Hers is backed by her
continuation and Antiquity; all other Congregations having had their decay long
since, or their beginning so lately, that their precise Age, the place of their
Birth, the very names of their Fathers, are known; whilst She, founded on the
Prince of the Apostles, with an infallible promise, That Matt. 16.
the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against Her, That Christ will ever dwell
in Her, has continued these seventeen Ages defended from Error by him whose
Sanctity and Mercy could not otherwise have absolutely commanded us to submit
to her Direction, under the pain of belonging as little to him as the very
Heathens. Fourthly, by the Succession of Priests in the Seat of Peter to this
present Bishop. Behold the Title Roman, importing a continued Succession of 244
Teachers legally sent from God, an Union with the Pastor of the one only Flock,
the Vicar of Christ; whose Roma responsa vene^unt causa ^i^ita est atinam error
finiatur.
Authority is so Sacred, that in differences about Religion, when he has past
Sentence, the case is out of question, though the Error continue; so unerring, at
least when that Voice of the Church is owned by her representative Body, that
if an Angel from Fo. 7. in Psalm. cont. part. Don. and To. 2. Ep. 164.
Heaven should require from us to abandon the Church in which that Succession
is found, we ought to return him no other Answer but an Anathema. In fine, the
very name of Catholic detains me in her Communion, etc. A Name She only has
ever owned! Such was the Blessed Saint's Profession of Faith, a Record of Truth
thirteen Ages old, and so plain and convincing, that he doubted not to address
himself thus to the dissenting Sectaries of his time: Can we be unwilling Fo.
6. de Util. Cred. c. 17.
and slow to repair to the Bosom of that Church, which has ever been
maintained in the height of an absolute Authority, even by the general
acknowledgment and consent of all Mankind, by the continual Succession of
Bishops in the Sea Apostolic, against the opposition raised by so great a
number of Heresies, which have barked in vain against her, and which have been
condemned by the unanimous voice of Nations, by the Grace and Judicious Censure
of Councils, by the Glory and Majesty of Miracles; so that not to yield to her
Prerogative, is an infallible Mark of an extreme Impiety, or a prodigious
Arrogance.

Let us return to Augustine. Grace has gained a half Victory, the Battle is
renewed hotter and more stubborn than before; he is convinced, but not
converted; his Understanding yields, but his Heart revolts; that poor Heart was
driven by contrary Winds: known Truth pressed him to profess it, his affection
to some darling Sins, and to a fancied Reputation, held him back. He deferred
1. 7. Conf. c. 11.
(as he owns) from day to day to live to God, whilst without delay he died to
himself. My Savior, (says he 1. 8. Conf. c. 11. and cap. 5.
again) that is, the true way, pleased me, but it was narrow, and I had not
strength enough to break into it. -- I sighed after Liberty, but my Chains fell
not off; those Iron Chains which my own will had made, and shackl'd me in, by
which my Enemy held me fast. -- My sinful Affections, weak in their beginnings,
had been heightened into Passion; Passion yielded unto, was grown a Custom,
Custom unresisted, was become an unconquerable Necessity. -- Two Wills, a
newly-created one, the Offspring of Grace, and my old sensual sinful one,
strove the one against the other, and rent cruelly my martyred Soul. -- I now
suffered with pain what I had wrought in my self with delight, and my sinful
Will uncontrouled had led me further than I would, before, I colored my
backwardness in sacrificing my Vanities and Human concerns to those of
Religion, with this excuse, that I waited but for a fair unquestionable
discovery of the Truth; and now that I had it in my sight, I found my self
chained up, and even afraid that my Chains and Excuses should fall off
together. -- My half-resolutions of rising and following you, my Lord, were
like those of one half asleep: No one would be content to sleep always, all
judge it is better to be awake, and up; yet a drowzy head is loath to shake off a
pleasant fit of sleep Verba ^enta and somnolenta, modo ecce modo, sine
paululum, sed modo and modo non habebat modum, and illud paululum ibat in
longum.
when the hour of rising calls: So it was with me; I was convinced it was fit
and just that I should yield to your Grace; my Judgment pressed me to it: but
soft Pleasures to be renounced, my Reputation to be blasted by my Enemies, my
Sincerity to be questioned by my Friends, enslaved my Will. You clearly laid
open before me that Truth which you invited me to avouch; it was too plain to
be disputed against: yet no answer could I return but those dull and drowzy
words, Shortly, yea presently, leave me but a moment; but that presently was
never present, that shortly lasted long, that moment was eternal. Behold the
sad Picture of a Soul that has not yet lost all pretense to eternal Bliss, yet
so dulled by her sins, so debauched by weak human fears, as to dare to stray
from the way to it, against the loud and clamorous convictions of her own
conscience. A sad case! and at that time that of Augustine. Great God! that
Souls, created to possess an Everlasting Bliss, should be baffled out of all
claim to it, by such poor, childish, weak fears! He was to change, forsooth! to
alter his first Sentiment he had so often declared to the World! He* that
Learned Man, was to lay down his old Errors, to be catechized, to learn (a
little one in Christ) the first Elements of Religion, to take up a new Faith;
what would the World say? how sinistrously would they misrepresent his Motives?
Weakness of men! who dare act against their conscience, lest the World should
think they do. This misery the Saint reflected on afterward, when he cried
out, A curse on thee, swelling Confess. l 1. c. 16.
River of human Respects! who shall bear up against thy Stream? who shall ford
thee? what powerful Grace of God shall drain or dry thee up, and open me a
passage? God directed Augustine to a holy Bishop, Sedulius, who had been a
Spiritual Guide and Father to St. Ambrose; by this Man's means God had designed
to defeat this one great Difficulty at least, which was so dreadful an Obstacle
to Augustin's Conversion. His Exhortations had long been ineffectual, when God
inspired him to relate to Augustine the late Conversion of one Victorinus: You
knew him at Rome, said the holy Bishop, you have often conversed with Confess.
l. 8.
him, and heard him both in the School and at the Bar; you know that for his
eminent Parts and prodigious Rhetoric, he was highly valued, so far beyond all
others, that Rome had raised him a Statue in the most eminent place of the
City, as to the God of Eloquence: He was the Darling of the Nobility, the Glory
of the Senate, the Love of the People, and wanted toward Happiness only (alas!
the all indeed) true Religion. He was now far advanced in Age, when by reading
all those Books that were written by those of the Catholic Church, God's Grace
instructing him interiorly, he came to the knowledge of the Truth. But he was
Head of a contrary Party, or at least the most considered in it. 'Twas hard to
quit that sweet Prae-eminence, and to have a new Interest to make. He would
often tell me, not in public, but in private and familiar discourse, That now
he was converted, and of my Religion: I ever answered him, That he deceived
himself, and that I should never rank him amongst those of it, till I saw him
in their Church, at their Prayers, at their Sacraments. He would reply, That
God knew his heart; and what, said he, do the Walls of a Church make one a
Christian? This was but a fond excuse; alas he feared to offend his Friends; to
cast a blur upon that fair Reputation with them which he had gained to himself.
God pitied him at last; he applied himself to Reading again, and to fervent
Prayer; he inslamed his cold Desires, reinforced his Resolutions; and, fearing
not to be acknowledged by Christ before his holy Angels, in case he blushed to
confess him before Men; He (that great Master of the Literate World!) abandoned
his old Errors, which almost all the Roman Nobility and People were again
infected with; and, though he knew that those tall Cedars of Libanus would fall
heavy on him, that his Friends would forsake him, his Admirers ridicule him,
his best Supporters abandon him, he did not blush to become a little one of
Christ, ashamed of his past Errors, not of the Truth he was to embrace; he
suddenly, unexpectedly, declares to me, that he will go to a Catholic Church.
With what joy did I lead him! Thither come, he refused to be privately admitted
into our Communion; he made a public Profession of his Faith, calling the whole
Multitude for Witnesses of the Mercy which God had showed him. This Example
thus related by the holy Bishop, Oh how powerful was it! I burnt, says
Augustine, interiourly with a violent desire suddenly to copy and follow it; I
addressed my self to God in most fervent Prayers; Do, O Lord, said I, do the
same in my heart, awake and pull it back to you. His Prayer was heard, human
respects are totally laid aside by him, nay he is convinced that nothing but
Error, or Weakness in not daring to disavow and to correct it, ought to be
blushed at. One great point more God's Grace has gained; now we are come to
the last. No wonder if the Enemy, entrenched in his last Fort, makes the most
vigorous, because it is the last, resistance.

From the beginning of his Youth Augustine had found strange Charms (as he
acknowledges himself) in Virtue, especially in that of Temperance and Chastity;
but corrupted Nature found stronger, and more tempting ones, Da mihi
cont^nentiam and ^^stitatem* sed (...) modo. Conf. ^. 8. c. 7.
in Vice. His Prayer was then, Lord, give me Temperance, Continency, Chastity,
but not too soon. In this disposition had he continued till his Thirty-third
year, convinced of his Duty, but unwilling to comply yet with it. Catholic
Religion he liked well of; but with It the Cross of Christ was to be embraced,
Abstinences, Penitential Works, Confession, Restitution, and Self-denial,
Purity of Heart and Body, a removal of all dangerous occasions of sinning. Oh
(says he) the Beauty of thy Law was to me greatly attractive! but I sunk back
with grief under my own weight, the violence of old sensual Customs. Oh of how
many is this the case, when called by God to Qui intelligit Deum, and non
ac^edit ad Fidem ejus, ne vivat Christianus, sed in si^e vult Pidem accipere ut
mor^atur Christianus, qualem sperat Deum cui cum mil^tare ^rubuerit vult ab co
stipendium accipere. Q. Q. ve^. and nov. Q 126.
the true Church; or, if in it already, to Christian Virtues! But a sad one!
For, as Augustine himself observed afterward, Those who being sufficiently
convinced when true Faith is taught, yet refuse to submit to it; resolved not
to live, yet hoping to die in it, can have but one of these two Motives of
their delay; either a greater liberty of sinning, with less restraint, with a
weaker remorse, during Life; or the confusion they apprehend to be put to by
that change. But, alas! what a God do they conceive you to be, O Lord, who
blush to serve you, yet dare expect from you a reward? The force of this
Example had conquered in Augustine the difficulty he met with from human
respects; God uses the same to cure his last and inmost Wound, Sinful Customs.
Potinian, a Noble African, and Friend of his, who followed the Emperor's Court,
renders him a Visit, and finding S. Paul's Epistles opened in his Study,
expressed the joy he had to see him bestow so well his best hours. Their
conversation thus falling on a pious Subject, Potinian takes an occasion to
rehearse the eminent Virtues practiced, and the wonderful Miracles wrought, by
S. Anthony, not long before deceased, and so famous through all the East, even
whilst living, that the Great Theodosius had often begged the Protection of
his Prayers for his Empire and Army, and granted that he owed to them the
Prosperity of the one, and the Victories of the other. Augustine wondered at the
Greatness of those Tam recenti memoria, and prope nostris temporibus
testatissima mirabilia tua in fide recta and Catholica Ecclesia.
Miracles of so fresh a date, of so unquestionable a Truth, wrought in the true
Faith in the Catholic Church, and stood amazed he had never observed, or even
known them before. A great Motive to unite himself with it, in that Communion
for which she had that Hand and Seal of God to show. From this great Guide, and
Father of solitary Eremits and devout Religious, the Discourse passed to his
holy Followers, and the most flourishing Monasteries, and Religious Cloisters,
which Augustine could not but acknowledge to be a peculiar Flock of Christ
endued with singular Piety; their Number and eminent Piety were a second Motive
to embrace the Faith which they, such eminent Conquerors of the World, and
exact Followers of Christ, did profess. Potinian finding him much moved, adds
Fuel to this well-kindled Fire, by a relation of what he had been a witness of
when the Court was at Treves. I went, said he, with three other Courtiers to
view some neighboring Eremits Cells and Gardens; the Company was divided, two
entering a Cell, where dwelt some of those Servants of God, poor in Spirit, to
whom, by that claim, the Kingdom of Heaven belongs, found on the Table S.
Anthony's Life; they opened and read it, and God representing by his interior
Grace, in a far more lively way than the dead Letter could, the Virtues of his
Servant, the one of them, an Agent in Court, inspired with a holy Love for
Virtue, and ashamed of his so different a Life; What drive our hopes at, says
he? What slatters most our wishes? It is, that we may perhaps gain our Princes
Favor; it is but a perhaps; many dangers will way-lay us before we reach it, and
then that height is slippery, and threatens a sore bruise in the fall; whereas
in this very moment I may, if I will, enter into a particular Friendship and
Intimacy with my God. Full of these thoughts, he recollects his discomposed
mind, opens the Book again, and his heart at the same time to the Divine Seed
of God's Grace, which took root presently, and the Fruit soon appeared: God
altered interiourly the whole frame of his Soul, broke all his Chains, severed
him from the World: He sighs, and reads, and sighs again; he balances,
resolves, rises, and now God's Courtier: The strife is at an end, says he,
adien Court and World, none of my hopes are now lodged in thee, it is God only I
will serve; it is resolved, and that at this hour, in this place; and adieu
Friend also, unless you have taken the same resolution. He had; both rich
enough, by that general resolution of sacrificing all to God, begun to build
happily that Noble Tower of Christian Perfection. How surprised were we, when
having but viewed some neighboring Gardens, we found them so altered in so
short a time! so fixed in their new resolutions! If we were not otherwise
altered, having heard their Choice and their Motives, so far we were at least,
as to weep for our weakness and insensibility. We did congratulate Nihilo
mutati a pristinis, fleverunt se tamen.
their happiness, envy their condition, crave their Prayers, and brought home
with us a heavy heart, too too unseparably wedded to this World, whilst those
dwelt in mind in Heaven, in Body in their narrow Cells. Whilst Potinian
related this passage, what a storm was raised in Augustin's breast! who
compared his wavering delays, with the firm resolutions; his deafness to God's
Voice, with the quick obedience of these his Servants. In vain he cast himself
behind his own back, and turned away his eyes, God placed him still in his own
sight, and uncovered the old Sores of his lasting Sins. Not bearing with these
interior reproaches, as soon as Potinian had left him he betakes himself to a
Garden to divert those thoughts: His intimate Friend Alipius followed him;
God's Graces pursue thither their Fugitive, and renew a brisk Attaque against
that struggling heart. There, is exposed unto him, how certain he is now that
it is God who calls and presses him to obey: He had nothing to answer, all his
put-offs and excuses failed him; a stubborn silence had succeeded, a Remanserat
muta trepidatio and quasi mortem reformidabat restringi a fluxu con^uetudinis*
quo tabe^^ebat in mortem. Conf. l. 8. c. 8.
strange fear seized him; he apprehended more than Death to divest himself of
those ill habits that poisoned his Soul to Death. In these violent Convulsions
of his mind, he starts back toward his Friend, and seizing him, What is this,
Alipius? (says he.) What did we hear? Unlearned illiterate people rise and
seize on Heaven, and We with all our eminent Parts and Knowledge, for want of
Courage, behold we wallow in the sink of our sins. Are we ashamed then to
follow such Leaders? or should we not rather blush that we do not, at least
follow, now they have opened the way? His troubled and wandering eyes, his
discomposed and dejected looks, his pale co^tenance, and faltring voice, spoke
the rest of his mind. He was sinking into a kind of wholesome distractedness, (as
he calls it;) He sits down, displeased with himself even to passion, to see
that he could not persuade himself effectually to make his peace with his God,
by a full submission to his preventing Graces; that all the powers of his Soul
violently led him to it, whilst his stubborn Will abandoned him, and withdrew;
that he would, and could not resolve; 'twas but a half-will that strove against
the other wounded half, still pa^ting and withdrawing back. His disordered Soul
suffered strangely in this strife! He plucked the hair off his Head, knocked
furiously his Forehead and Breast; with joined hands he clipped his Knees; then
said, How easily all the parts of my Body obey my Soul! How they move at her
Will, and my Soul cannot obey her own Commands! She would resolve, she asks
with a more violent passion that resosolution Imperat animus ut velit animus
nec alter est, n^c facle tamen voluntas non utique plena imperat, ^deo non est
qued imperat.
from her self, yet cannot obtain it. It Is I my self that would, and I my self
that will not. God's merciful Graces pursue him with quick remorses, by a
saving severity and tender cruelty, press him with shame and with fears,
suggesting to him, That now was the fatal moment of which Eternity depended,
now his Chains were to be broken, whilst they were slackened, or never, in
case he let his Passions streightten Plagella ingeminans timoris and padotis ne
^^^sus* cessarem and non abrumperetur ^d ipsum exiguum and te^^e quod
remanserat and revalesceret iterum and me robustius alligaret.
them again. He strove, and said to himself, Ay, now, be it now done; yet it
was not done. Being now within one step of Peace of Mind, Joy, and Security, by
a final Victory, he suffered in his Soul the most violent pangs; he fell not
back, nor yet dared to advance. In this critical minute his ill Customs, those
old Acquaintances, as he terms them, his past Vanities, sinful Pleasures, and
now-expiring Liberty, faintly pulling him, as by the Sleeve, said, And will thou quit us? From this moment, for ever? And can thou (think thou) live
without us? Ever hereafter under a constraint, ever checking, ever denying thy
self? Grace, for a last supply, offered to his thoughts the Example of so many
Servants of God, even of the weaker Sex, of tender Years, who had sacrificed
and suffered more to purchase Eternal Bliss. These and these could, said he,
and thou can Quid in te stas and non stas? projice te securus in cum, non se
subtrahet ut cadas, projice te in cum, excipiet te, and sanabit ^e.
not. Did God prevent them by his Grace cooperating with them; and art thou
the only One whom God will abandon, returning to him? Why do thou rely on thy
own Strength, or fear thy own Weakness? Cast, cast thy self into his Arms who
calls thee; he will not draw back, and let thee fall. Cast thy self into his
Bosom; he will receive thee there, and cure thee. The Storm grew higher; two
Showers of Tears followed, a sign that it was nigh clearing up. He could not
bear the presence even of Alipius; alas, he could not brook his own! He runs
under a Figtree, (with such Leaves Adam covered his Nakedness!) there prostrate
on the ground, bathed in his Tears, he sobb'd and sighed, then gave vent to his
grief in these broken words: How long, my God, shall I be the Object of your
Anger, the Butt of your Justice? When will the Ray of Mercy shine? How long
shall I say to morrow, to morrow? Why not now? Why not at this instant an end
to my sinful life? Augustine, Jesus sees thee under that Figtree, as well as he
did Nathaniel, before thou see him: His Mercy it is sounds there so deep thy
Wound, only that the Cure may be perfect; that hereafter, fruitful in Pious
Deeds, thou may escape the Curse that fell on the barren Figtree. The happy
moment is come, written in the Book of God's Mercy from all Eternity. A Voice
is heard, Take up and read, Take up and read: He obeys, finding S. Paul's
Epistles by him, he lights on the 13 Romans 13. God guiding his hands and eyes
there he reads, Not in Feastings and Drunkenness, not in Chamberings and
Lechery, not in Strife and Emulation; but put on our Lord Jesus Christ, and
pamper no^ the Flesh, gratifying its Desires. These words he had read often,
but now a Ray of Grace writ the sense of them in his mind, and stamped them in
his heart. In a moment a comfortable Light, breathing Security and Joy, spread
it self into his Soul: His Tears were wiped off, his Doubts resolved, his Fears
and his Anxiety vanished; he rose a SAINT inflamed with the Love of God, begins
his Apostolical Labors by inviting his Friend Alipius to a like zealous
Conversion, who had been all the while a dumb Spectator, and who to show the
Riches and Varieties of God's Graces sitted to all Tempers, without reluctance,
without strife or difficulty, surrendered himself at the reading only of the
Sentence following in S. Paul, Receive, Infi^^um in Fide assamite.
and take him along with you, who is weak in Faith.

I should now open unto you, Christian Brethren, the Riches of God's Mercies
heaped on this Saint; show you his great steps toward an eminent Virtue, and
the fullness of the Reward that attended it, even here, by Numquid hoc esse^
intra in gaudium Domini tui* Con. l. 9.
that serenity of mind, those interior Joys, which he often conceived to be of
the same Nature with the Bliss of Saints in Heaven, and short of them only in
Length. But my Glass is at the lowest ebb, my time expired: I shall trespass no
longer on Your Sacred Majesty's Royal Patience. I will end with a transient
consideration on the Fruit of this whole Discourse, which hangs on these three
Truths. First, That we can do nothing without a continual supply of God's
Grace, and therefore ought with assiduous Prayer to press upon God's Bounty for
it. Secondly, That Divine Grace once granted enables us to do all things, and
that it is never denied when duly asked; whence it follows, that we ought
without the least fear to undertake whatever God moves us unto. Thirdly, That
Grace requires a speedy and diligent cooperation, or is soon withdrawn; and
consequently, that nothing is so dangerous in the great concerns of our Eternal
Salvation, as delays, on whatever account.

No certainly, nothing available to Virtues here, or Happiness hereafter, can
be had without the help of Grace. S. Augustine is a plain Instance for it:
Twenty years continual endeavors, a studious application of so many Eminent
Parts, the Tears of a pious loving Mother, the endeavors of the ablest Divines
of Europe and Africa, could not help him to see an almost selfevident Truth,
what way of Worship God has appointed us to honor him by, and where those
means lie which his Mercy has allowed us, to attain that Bliss we are created
for. This Truth being laid open, his Will passionately moving him to declare
himself of the Catholic Church, he had not yet the strength to raise it to a
Resolution. Oh how truly are all the Crowns of Qui coronat te in mise^i^ordia
and miscrationibus. Psalm.
God's Saints the Works of his Mercy, and his Commiseration on our Weakness!
How truly are all the Merits we can boast of, God's mere Gifts! His own sad
experience did teach S. Augustine how to express this Truth so fully, so
admirably, in his Book of Widows. To will, Coronat munera s^^.
says he, is certainly our own Work, if it be true of any thing, it is
certainly so of our Will, that it is such because we will; and yet what little
influence have we over our own Wills, relating to good! It must be awakened and
stirred, or it lies as in a Lethargy; when awake, it must be healed and
strengthened, or the least difficulty and pain overcomes it; when applied, it
must be encouraged, enlarged, supported, or it is so very narrow, Nost^^m est
velle, s^d vol^nt^^ ipsa and admonetur ut s^rgat, and sanatur ut val^at, and
d^^atatur ut capiat, and impletur, ut ^abea^. De Vi^ui^.
so feeble, that it sinks after the first offers, under the least weight; and
even when we think our selves most resolved, most forward, after even many
endeavors, we find our hearts very empty of all Virtues, if God has not
himself mercifully placed them there. How long do some continue in Error and in
Sin? A constant Object of Gods Hatred and Justice, on the very brim of Hell,
unconcerned, and without any sense of their danger? Ah! Gods Grace has not
awakened yet their dull Conscience, lulled in the sleep of Sin. How many others
behold their own Misery, and sigh often for it, acknowledge themselves equally
criminal and miserable, see themselves sinking deeper and deeper, yet never
offer resolutely to release their Souls from, and avoid, those partly
incumbent, partly threatening miseries. Alas! they have consumed the Substance
and Vigor of their Souls in Sin; those many deep Wounds have impaired their
Strength; God's Grace, which only can, has not yet wrought the cure. How many,
in fine, after their Sins are pardoned, and they set in a right way, stumble at
the first difficulty, and advance no further; or with little sense, ever full
of good Wishes, and empty of Effects? Their narrow and poorly-stock'd Hearts,
can receive but little, know less (...) to improve it, till God by his Grace
enlar^^ and enrich them. Oh then let us ever pr^^* ^ever cease, and may this
Grace be all we ask! ^et us ever seek, but this Grace only; having ever in our
hearts and mouths that frequent Prayer of the Church, O God, be intent on my
help! Lord, hasten to succor me!

But again, for our comfort, that help being obtained, with what security may
we not attempt the greatest things! with what ease may we not perform them! S.
Augustine in that happy moment of his Conversion wondered De quo imoaltoque
secreto evocatum est in momento liberum a^bi^rium m^um? l. 9. c. 1.
from what dark Den, in which it had been so long locked up from him, his
Free Will was restored; such unusual strength he found in himself! It proved a
satisfaction, a comfort to him, to want those Pleasures without which he had
believed he could not live. How unerringly, through the course of his following
^ife, did he practice those Virtues whose Names had been unknown to him! *It Is
with Truth you mind us, Great S. Paul, That it is God works in us both to will
and to do; so little toil and Qui operatur in nobis, and vell^ and perficere.
pain is found in the performance, when God's Grace works in us a steady fixed
Resolution: And can we give place to any Anguishes, Fears, Apprehensions, when
God offers his Grace by calling us to a true Faith, to a pious Life? His
Infinite Mercy is then at hand to create in us a Will, his Omnipotency to join
to it a facility in obeying him. Who has found a Treasure, forms generous
Designs, dares undertake great things, conceives he shall easily remove any
obstacle, because that he knows the force of Gold, which in a moment can supply
all wants. God's Grace is his Treasure; it is the Riches of his Bounty, says S.
Paul; in a moment it gives Divitias bonitatis ejus.
Strength to the Weak, Knowledge to the Dull and Ignorant, Courage to the most
Timorous. It Is true we can do nothing without God, but it is equally true that
Jo. 15. Omnia possum in co qui me comfortat. Phil. 4.
we can do all things in him that enables us all. We can despise the soft
deluding Pleasures of sense, with the Virgins; blot out whatever stains of past
sins, by our Tears, with God's pen^t^nt Servants; practice with ease all
Christian Virtues, with the Con^^ssors; undergo and conquer all sorts of
Sufferings for Justice, with the Martyrs. But then let us ever remember that
Sentence of S. Augustine, God cannot work with us, but when we Deus non esset
co-operator n^si ^^ esses operator. Aug.
work our selves. If Grace be God's hand ever stretched to help us, and work
with us; if a Divine Light, able to disperse the greatest Darkness; if a
Heavenly Science, exposed to no Error, infused in those who admit of it; if it
be an easy conquest of all Vices, and of whatever Opposition to Virtue when
used; if it be that with the help whereof all good Saints came to be such. Oh,
Christian Brother, what a Treasure has laid so long hidden in thy heart! and
how useless yet! That Grace is the whole Fruit of the Cross of Jesus, thy
plentiful effectual Redemption; to neglect it is as deep an Offense as to tread
under foot the precious Blood of our Redeemer. Ah! dig up that Treasure then,
stir it up, use that Talent, or it will be taken away. How long God will permit
it to lie dormant in your hands I know not. He gives Secundum mensuram
do^ationis Christi. ^^h. 4.
it not lavishly, but according to the measure of Christ's Gifts. How soon
yours will be filled I know not. If now you hear your self called, answer; if
moved, follow; if commanded, obey. Some one Grace, I know, is the critical one
to each man's Salvation; such were those Samuel offered to Saul, Nathan to
David; the former past by his, and was set aside for ever, an abandoned
Reprobate; the latter obeyed his, and became according to God's heart. Whether
this day by my voice God has Gratiam inven^amus in auxilio opportuno. Heb. 4.
16.
not presented to some one here the critical Grace, the last loud call, I know
not; but this I know, that whoever obeys not his, whoever resolves it not from
this moment, ventures his Salvation upon a perhaps, than which there cannot be
a more certain Folly, scarce a more crying Sin. Use then all that measure which
God has offered you, and your Fidelity will be blessed by such an increase of
it, as will possess you with a Heavenly Bliss, which God in his Mercy grant us
all without end.

Ad majorem Dei Gloriam.
FINIS.

