Sad and Deplorable NEWS From OXFORD-SHEIR and BARK-SHEIR.

Being a Lamentable and True RELATION Of the Drowning of about sixty Persons,
Men, Women and Children, in the Lock, near Goring in Oxford sheir; as they were
passing by water, from Goring Feast, to Stately in Barksheir.

Readers, this story is both strange and true,
And for your good (presented unto you:)
Be careful of your life, all sins to fly,
Lest you by death be taken suddenly.
When he is sent, on you Arrest to make,
No Fees nor Bail, can purchase your escape.
LONDON, Printed for R. Vaughan, in the Little-old-Baily. 1674.

Sad News from Oxford shier, and Berk-shier, etc.
TIME was when the Curious World had her eyes always turned toward the Banks of
Nile, and the torrid sands of sunburnt Africa, in continual expectation of some
new and uncouth shapes to be still produced by that Monster-teeming Mother.

But now, as if that vast Continent of Prodigies were contracted into the later
small Teutonick engine, It is strange to see how greedy Mortals eye the
laboring Press, and with gaping mouths attend its delivery; as ready to
swallow and devour what ever it brings forth; and what is more preposterous,
the more Elephantine or Garagantuane the brats dimensions seem, whatere it be
above the truth so much the easilier it goes down and is digest^d by that
Monster devouring Monster, the man (...).

To satisfy which insatiable Appetite of our News mongers and their Athenians,
Heaven and the Elements seem peculiarly to have consented. This being an Age,
and this year especially a year of wonders, and if not every where prodigious,
yet in no part not remarkable in some eminent example of Providence or other:
not to speak now of Wars and Battles, or Christians unnaturally weltring in
Christian goar, now in most part of Europe; what prodigious Inundations. Snow
and Cold have molested our Climate, what losses by Sea, what mischiefs by Land
have in several parts afflicted us? but above all, what strange Excess of Fury
and Madness has of late exercised its rage on our peoples minds? what
unparalleld and desperate Roberies, Cruelties and Cheats have happened? what
Diabolical transports of despair, and Self-murder, has of late in all parts,
in more than Prodigious frequency, seized poor Mortals? In a word, have we not
been daily alarmed with an infinite variety of unwonted Accidents, that God
seems resolved to chastise our delight in false and Romantic news, to glut us
with the more serious strangeness of equally sad and wonderful truths? Yes,
surely Providence has given us true subject enough for our discourse, without
either careening the Ocean, or ransacking old wives monum^nt for amusing
figments When we our selves being become so many Prodigies of Sin and
Profaness, when our days are such, that Vice, that formerly shunned the light,
now walks unmasked, and with open face dares plead for the palm, where it was
wont to deprecate punishment. We cannot wonder if Nature and its Author combine
against us, and expose our Enormities by monstrous and irregular accidents in
the Mac^ocosme as a^e the lively H^eroglyphicks of them; nay, we can expect no
less than the Meteors and Elements should be armed to chastize our violences
done to nature, and even the instruments of our Life, Ple^sure, and Recreation
b^b^d and forestalled by unseen and unexpected surprises to revenge our
Hypocrisy. This is certainly, what as in general we deserve, so in reallity we
all might look for, and therefore, however we may see these things as we think
pass by us, and light on others, as perhaps some may be apt to collect from the
deplorable example lately arrived, yet are not so partially to apply them, as
to think those persons were e^e the worse for being the examples of Gods
judgments, or that those things happened to them on^y, merely for their sin,
that we should therefore conceit our selves the more righteous, or spared for
our g^odness; but let u^ rather consid^r that o^r sins were equ^lly, or perhap^
more industriously leve^led at, in such ex^mples than those of the suffering,
and therefore giving you first in charge and caution that Evangelical rule,
that you should never think persons falling under any disasters to be the
greater sinners, but that when all are Sinners, some are made examples to their
own health, and admonishment to the living, which admonishment if we take not,
we shall all likewise perish; upon this Christian stipulation, I say, that what
shall be related to the living, may be to their benefit, made use of without
any uncharitable reflections on the dead; who perhaps may be more Innocent than
the surviving hearers of the sad catastrophe: I shall give you a punctual
account of a most true and unparalleld Disaster which happened at Goring Lock
going to Stately; on Monday the 6th of this instant July 1674* about 7 a clock
at night, where about 50 or 60 persons of Men, Women and Children, with one
Mare crossing the water together in a boat from Oxfordshire to Bark-shire, by
the watermens imprudently rowing too near the shore of the Lock, they were by
the force of the water drawn down the Lock, where their boat being presently
overwhelmed they were all turned into the Pool, except fourteen or fifteen (who
had been all then at the feast at Goring) were all unfortunately drowned, and
to show how vain all humane aid is when Destiny interposes; this happened in
the view of hundreds of people, then met at the same Feast, near this fatal
Lock, who found the exercise of their pastime disturbed and their Jollity
dashed by this mournful Disaster, of which they were helpless, but I hope not
fruitless Spectators.

The persons drowned, and since taken up, are not yet all known who they were,
nor whence they came the Boatman John Waklin and his brother Escaped by
Swimming; William Bushnel of Hagburn, whose the Mare was, was taken up alive,
he having n^er 8 hours time by Providence of the Almighty allowed him longer to
prepare for death then approaching, deceased, his Mare drowned that carried him
and E. Dew, by holding on the Mane to the place where they were taken up. The
same Edward Dew yet alive, relates that he hapened to look to the Bottom of the
Lock Pool with his eyes open saw many that were drowning sprawling at the bottom
like Frogs. Goodman Morecock of Stately, and his wife were Drowned, but their
Son in Law Francis Higgs escaped with the loss of his wife ( the said Thomas
Morecocks daughter,) a Woman with Child, and a Child in her Arms, both then
drown^d. Widow Bell carrying a rich pack of Wares, was drowned, Goodman
Wheeler of Mayseldom was Drowned his wife miraculously I escaped by catching
hold of a man's Leg that g^t on the bottom of the overwhelmed boat, Thomas Smith
of Compton and 3 mo^e of the same Town with Adam Belinger of Chilton, and one
King, a Butcher of Standford, and his wife, were all likewise drowned. And on
Thursday the 9th, was 12 more taken up, whose names are not yet known, and it
is supposed there are yet more at the botton of the Pool not yet discovered.

Readers, London affords or other great citys or towns where much people
inhabit. What may we beleieve, but that the great day is near, and if we
diligently search the Scriptures we shall find these the lat^er times of which
our Savior gave us the signs.

FINIS.

