A HELP TO THE WILLING SOUL, OR The Communicants Counselor. BEING A plain
and familiar Discourse upon sundry maine Truths, both Doctrinall and
Practical, requisite to be known, understood and observed by every Christian,
before his approach to the Lords Table. Composed mostly in reference to the
Rules and Directions concerning Sacramental knowledge; laid down in an
Ordinance of both Houses of PARLIAMENT of the 20 of October, 1645.

By HENRY SEARLE.

For the benefit and edification of the Inhabitants of Aldeburgb in Suffolk.

Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets understanding,

Prove. 3. 13. London, Printed by R. C. for John Bellamy at the three golden
Lions in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

The reasonable Request of the AVTHOR.
Friendly Reader,
KNow assuredly, that had it not been to spare the Purse and Pains of the
poorer sort of that people (amongst whom Gods disposing-hand has for the
present cast me) in procuring written Copies hereof, this Catechisticall
Discourse should not have troubled the buisie Press. But seeing it is now
printed, whoever thou art, be requested these four things.

1 To beware, lest any subtle Factors for Satan, do, by their smooth
ptetences, sly insinuations, or poisonous persuasions, hinder thee in, or take
thee off from bestowing thy time and pains to get understanding in spiritual
things, by the help of this or other such like Books. Answer such cunning
Jugglers thus; True indeed, though I get much knowledge, yet I may perish; But
if I despise knowledge, then I must perish.

2 So often to peruse, discourse, and meditate upon the Truths ensuing, as that
(when justly required) thou may be able to give a good account of the sense
and meaning thereof, and to bear the substance in thy memory, though thou
should not attain to the set-form of words.

3 Seriously upon every occasion to follow whatsoever Practical instructions
thou meetest withal, especially those about self-examination and preparation
before thou come to the Lords Table.

4 And lastly, to seek for a special Blessing from heaven upon thy own and my
endeavors for the welfare of thy soul.

A Help to the willing SOUL, OR, The Communicants Counselor.
Qu. WHat is God?

Answ. God is an uncreated Spirit, Joh. 4. 24. most wise, Romans 16. 27. most
holy, Exodus 15. 11. eternal and infinite, Psalm. 147. 5. Maker of heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, Exodus 20. 11. Esa. 42. 5. Preserver
and governor of all things and creatures whatsoever, Nehem. 9. 6. Acts 17. 26.

Qu. What mean you by calling God a Spirit?

Ans. When I call God a Spirit, I mean, that he has no body at all; and
therefore must not be thought like to any things which may be seen by the eye
of man, Deuteronomy. 4. 15. etc. Romans 1. 22, 23.

Qu. How many Gods be there?

Ans. Though there be three in Person, yet in Divine Essence there is but one
only true God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 John 5. 7. Epbes. 4. 5, 6.

Qu. Which be the three Persons in the Godhead?

Ans. The three Persons in the Godhead, are God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19.

Qu. What is the property of God the Father?

Ans. The property of God the Father is, to be of himself, and to beget the
Son, Joh. 1. 18. Joh. 3. 16.

Qu. What is the property of God the Son?

Ans. The property of God the Son, is, to be begotten of the Father, Joh. 3. 18.

Qu. What is the property of God the Holy Ghost?

An. The property of God the holy Ghost, is, to proceed from the Father, Joh.
15. 26. and the Son, Romans 8. 9. Gal. 4. 6.

Qu. Are any of the three Persons in the Godhead greater then other?

Ans. None of the three Persons in the Godhead are greater or less then
another, but they are all equally God, Phil. 2. 6. 1 John 5. 7.

Qu. WHat was the State of Man by Creation?

Ans. God created man after his own image, Genesis 1. 26. Genesis 5. 1. that is to
say, God created man in a resemblance of that knowledge, Col. 3. 10.
righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. Eccles. 7. 29. which was and
is in himself: and in these the image of God was principally seen.

Qu. If God made us so holy and happy at first, how come we now to be sinful
and miserable?

Ans. We are become sinful and miserable, Ephesians. 2. 1, 3. by reason of Adams
first transgression in eating of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2. 17. Genesis 3. 6.

Qu. But forasmuch as that first transgression was committed in Paradise above
five thousand years before we were born; how come we to be guilty of it?

Ans. Adam was a public person, Eccles. 7. 29. and the common Father of us
all: and because we were in his loins, therefore his sin was ours, and so we
were all sinners in his offense, Romans 5. 12. 19.

Qu. Besides the guilt of Adams first sin, are we not sinners in other respects
also?

Ans. Yes, besides our being guilty of Adams first sin we have both original
and actual sin.

Qu. What is original sin?

Ans. Original sin consists of two parts; namely; First, in a backwardness to
all good; Secondly, in an aptness to all evil, Jer. 4. 22. Genesis 6. 5.

Qu. Why do you call it original sin?

Ans. I call it original sin, because we took our very first beginning in it.
For so soon as ever we began to be conceived in our Mothers womb, Genesis 5. 3.
Psalm. 51. 5. sinful dispositions and inclinations began to cleave unto us.

Qu. What is actual sin?

Ans. Actual sin is a breach of the law of God, 1 John 3. 4. by thinking, Jer.
4. 14. desiring, Man. 5. 28. devising, Prove. 24. 8. purposing, Psalm. 28. 3.
Psalm. 140. 4. speaking, Col. 3. 8, 9. Ephesians. 5. 4. or acting, 1 Samuel 15. 24. 2 Samuel 24. 10. those things which God has forbidden; or by leaving undone those
things which God has commanded, Romans 7. 19.

Qu. What is the fruit of Sin?

Ans. The fruit of all sin, is all woe and misery both here and hereafter.
Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16, etc. Romans 6. 21. Esa. 6. 9, etc. Romans 11. 8. Mat. 27. 3, 4,
5. Exodus 5. 2. Exodus 7. 3. Romans 1. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Romans 6. 23. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
7, 8, 9.

Qu. Is there no way to avoid this misery?

Ans. There is no way to avoid this misery, but only by Jesus Christ, Acts 4.
12.

Qu. Was Jesus Christ God, or Man?

Ans. Jesus Christ was God from all eternity before the world, or any thing was
made, Joh 1. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 8. 58. and he was made man about four thousand years
after the world was made, Gal. 4. 4.

Qu. How was Christ made man?

Ans. Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. born of the Virgin
Mary, Esaias 7. 14. and 11. 1. and so was made a holy man without all sin, Luke
1. 35. John 3. 6.

Qu. But did Christ cease to be God, when he was made Man?

Ans. No, Christ did not cease to be God, when he was made man, but was from
that time forth, is now, Heb. 13. 8. and ever shall be both God and Man, Ioh.
11. 14. Romans 9. 5. in one person, 1 Cor. 8. 6.

Qu. Why was Christ both God and Man?

Ans. Christ was both God and Man, that he might be a fit Mediator betwixt God
and men; and be able both to do and suffer all things that were to be done
and suffered on our behalf, Gal. 4. 4, 5. Heb. 2. 11, 14. and 4. 15, 16.

Qu. Is there any other Mediator between God and men besides Jesus Christ?

Ans. No, there is but one Mediator betwixt God and men, namely, the Man Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. who having died upon the cross Phil. 2. 8. to save his
people from their sins, rose again from the dead, and ascended into heaven,
where he now fits at Gods right hand and makes continual intercession for
them, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. Romans 8. 34.

Qu. What has Christ done for such of us as belong to Gods election?

Ans. First, Christ has fulfilled the Law, Mat. 5. 17, 18. which we ought to
have exactly kept, Romans 10. 5. Secondly, he has merited a crown of
righteousness for us, by fulfilling that Law, Phil. 2. 8, 9. Heb. 2. 9. and
12. 2.

Qu. What benefit have we by Christ's doings?

Ans. We have this benefit by Christ's doings: First, God will impute Christ's
righteousness to us in his fulfilling the Law, Romans 5. 10. Romans 10. 5.
Secondly, he will give us the crown of glory which his Son Christ has merited
by his righteousness, John 17. 22. Col. 3. 4. Heb. 9. 24. John 1. 23.

Qu. What has Christ suffered for us?

Ans. Christ Jesus has suffered for us thus; First, he has born our sins, 1
Pet. 2. 24. Heb. 9. 28. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Secondly, he has suffered the wrath of
God due to us for sin, 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 15. 3.

Qu. What benefit have we by Christ's sufferings for us?

Ans. If we be indeed the people of God, our benefit by Christ's sufferings is
very great. For first, God will not impute those sins to us which Christ has
born, 2 Cor. 5. 19. And secondly, God will not lay that wrath and vengeance
upon us which Christ has suffered and undergone, Romans 5. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
but on the contrary he will give us through Christ all things good for us, both
here and hereafter, Mat. 7. 10. Psalm. 84. 11.

Qu. Seeing Christ has both fulfilled the Law for us, and satisfied Gods
wrath, we may cast away care, because there is nothing left for us to do or
suffer; is there?

Ans. In a way of merit, or so as to rest upon our doings or sufferings for
justification or salvation, we neither can nor may do or suffer any thing,
Esaias 64. 6. Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. Luke 17. 10. But in a way of obedience we are
bound both to do and suffer whatsoever the will of God in his Word requires of
us, as a token of our submissivenesse and thankfulness to God, 1 Cor. 6. 19,
20. Phil. 1. 20.

Qu. How can we do any thing that is good, seeing we have no power naturally
of our selves?

Ans. First, even unbeleevers have so much natural power of themselves, as to
use such outward means both in public and private, as are appointed of God
(through the assistance of his Spirit) to work a power in them to please God;
and therefore they must not be idle, and say they have no power of themselves,
but up and be doing in the use of means, Acts 9. 6. Luke 13. 24. Phil. 2. 12.

Secondly, unfeigned believers, who have some supernatural power derived upon
them from Christ, Joh. 1. 16. must improve, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Rev. 3. 2. that power
also in the practice of duties of holiness toward God, and duties of
righteousness toward men all the days of their life, Luke 1. 74, 75. Acts 24.
16. For though we shall not be saved for our good works, yet we shall never
be saved without good works, Heb. 12. 14. Jam. 2. 14, 26.

Qu. How are Christians made partakers of Christ and his benefits?

Ans. Christians are made partakers of Christ and his benefits, only by faith
apprehending and applying them, Ephesians. 3. 17. Mat. 21. 22.

Qu. What is Faith?

Ans. Faith is a persuasion of the heart, Romans 10. 10. grounded upon the
promises, Psalm. 119. 49, 50. of God rightly understood and applied, a Pet. 3.
16. Mat. 4. 6. comp. with Psalm 91. 11. whereby I believe that Jesus Christ
died for me, Gal. 2. 20. as well as for any other.

Qu. Is this saving. Faith in our own power, or can we believe when we will?

Ans. No, we have not faith of our selves, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. neither is
it in our own power to believe when we will: but faith is the gift of God,
wrought in the heart of Gods elect by the Word, Romans 10. 17. and by the Spirit
of God, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. and therefore we must use the means to get it.

Qu. Cannot we be saved without Faith?

Ans. No, we cannot be saved without faith; for he that believes not on the
Son of God, shall not see life, but shall perish eternally, Joh. 3. 36. Mar.
16. 16. Gal. 3. 11.

Qu. Is there any true faith in that soul that does not unfeignedly repent?

Ans. There is no true faith in that soul that does not often act forth
unfeigned repentance for his sins; because, every one that believes in Christ,
has the spirit of Christ, Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 9. but now true repentance is a
saving grace, issuing from Christ's spirit, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Zech. 12. 10. as well
as faith.

Qu. What is true repentance?

Ans. True repentance is an inward dislike, hatred and sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10.
for all sin, Psalm. 119. 104. and a turning from it to God, Jer. 3. 13. Jam.
4. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Esaias 1. 16, 17. 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Prove. 8.
13. Psalm. ^7. 10. Prove. 13. 5. chiefly upon this ground, because every sin, as
it is sin, is contrary to the holy nature, Genesis 6. 6. Genesis 39. 9. and sacred
will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.

Q. What becomes of the souls of men after death?

Ans. The souls of all that die in the true and unfeigned faith of Christ,
immediately go to live with Christ in blessedness, Luke 23. 43. Phil. 1. 23.
and the souls of the wicked, Luke 16. 23. go immediately into hell torments.

Qu. Whether shall men's bodies rise again at the ^ast day, or no?

Ans. Yes, the bodies both of the godly and ungodly shall rise again at the
last day of ^udgment, and at that time all shall appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, to receive according to what they have done in the body,
whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10. and the righteous shall go into life
eternal, and the wicked into everlasting punishment, Mat. 25. 34, 41.

Of the Sacraments.
Qu. HOw many Sacraments have we under the New Testament?

Ans. Under the New Testament we have only two Sacraments, namely, Baptism
and the Lord's Supper.

Qu. What mean you by the word Sacrament?

Ans. Every Sacrament is an ordinance of God, wherein by external, visible,
and ordinary creatures and acts God does signify and seal, Romans 4. 11. unto us
the real and spiritual conveyance of heavenly graces; and does likewise
receive a mutual seal from us, of our new and better obedience, according to
the mutual Covenant between him and us.

Qu. What is that mutual covenant between God and us?

Ans. The mutual Covenant between God and us, is expressed in these words, I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8.
10.

Qu. What is the meaning of this Covenant?

Ans. In this Covenant God promises that he will be all-sufficient unto us both
in respect of our souls and bodies: but yet so, as that he covenanteth for
himself, that we must fear, serve, and endeavor to obey his whole will. In a
word, if we take him to be our God, we must give up our selves to be his
people.

Qu. How many things are requisite to the making of a Sacrament?

Ans. Three ingredients are necessary to make a Sacrament; namely, 1 Words of
institution from the Lord. 2 An outward sign. 3 An inward grace signified by
that outward sign.

Qu. How often must we take the Sacraments?

Ans. It is enough to be baptized once only, Acts 7. 8. because Baptism is a
pledge of our new birth, Tit. 3. 5. But we must receive the Lord's Supper often,
Acts 2. 42. and 20. 7. because the Lord's Supper is the seal and pledge of our
continuance and growth in Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16.

Qu. What is Baptism?

Ans. Baptism is the first Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein God does
seal and assure to his elect their regeneration or new birth, Ephesians. 5. 26. 1
Pet. 3. 21. Tit. 3. 5. Acts 22. 16. and all the benefits of Christ, which are
entayled upon that new birth.

Qu. What is the word of Institution in the Sacrament of Baptism?

Ans. The word of Institution in the Sacrament of Baptism runs thus, Go ye and
disciple all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19.

Qu. What is the outward sign in Baptism?

Ans. The outward sign in Baptism is water, John 3. 23. Acts 8. 38. wherewith
the party baptized is to be sprinkled, washed, or dipped, in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

Qu. What is the inward grace signified and sealed to us by the water of
Baptism?

Ans. The inward grace signified and sealed to us by the water of Baptism, is
principally the grace of regeneration, yet there be diverse other graces also:
As for instance;

1 By outward Baptism we are made members of the visible Church of Christ, 1
Cor. 12. 12, 13. Acts 2. 41. 2 To them that believe Baptism signifies and
seals their real and firm union to Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 27.
Ephesians. 4. 5. 3 Baptism signifies and seals the spiritual washing of our souls
from the guilt of sin, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto
justification and salvation, Acts 2. 38. Romans 4. 11.

Qu. What sort of persons ought to be admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism?

Ans. Those that profess their faith, repentance, and obedience to the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, Mat. 3 6. Acts 8. 12, 13, 37, 38. and 2. 41. they and their
children, Acts 2. 39. 2 Cor. 7. 14. Acts 16. 15, 33. 1 Cor. 1. 16. Mat. 28. 19.
ought to be admitted to Baptism.

Qu. Can you give me any one good ground why the Infants of professors must be
baptized?

Ans. If the infants of Professors under the new Testament might not be
baptized, we might then conclude that the Law was more glorious, and more full
of grace then the Gospel, and the Infants of the Jews more happy before
Christ's Incarnation, then the children of Christians since Christ's Incarnation
and ascension; but the Scripture teaches the contrary, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11.
therefore the Infants of Christians ought not to be kept from Baptism, seeing
the Jews Infants were not kept from Circumcision.

Qu. Is every elected Infant inwardly regenerated at the very time of its being
washed with Baptismall water?

Ans. Every elected Infant is not so regenerated at the very time of its being
washed with Baptismall water. For these Reasons;

1 Because we do not find that God has so tied and limited himself to any
ordinance, and therefore we must not dare to limit him to such a particular
time in this ordinance, Psalm. 78. 41.

2 Regeneration does not always accompany outward Baptism, because many
elected persons baptized with water in their infancy, live twenty or thirty
years together in open profaneness and impiety before they reform their
ways: and shall we think that these were regenerated or inwardly renewed by
the holy Ghost at their infant baptism? Sure the tree would have been known by
its fruits, and had the seed of God been in them, it would have put forth its
blade and ear before this time, Mat. 12. 33. 1 John 3. 9.

Qu. WHat is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

Ans. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is the sign, seal, and pledge, Romans 4.
11. 1 Cor. 10. 16. of our continuance and growth in that saving faith, and all
other saving graces which God has already wrought in our souls.

Qu. What sort of persons ought to be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper?

Ans. Those that have a competent measure of knowledge in the mysteries of
godliness, and are sound in the faith, and cannot be justly accused of any
vileness or impiety in their walking before God or men; such the Church must
receive into her communion and fellowship here; but all others she ought to
refuse, Tit. 1. 13. 1 Cor. 11. 17, 18, 19. Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16. Rev. 2. 20. Tit.
3. 10, 11. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 2, 5, 7, 12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. ver.

Qu. How shall the Church come to know the state and condition of her members?

Ans. Every particular member ought to watch over his fellow members, Matthew.
18. 15, 16, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 25, etc. but especially the Church Officers are
bound by virtue of their Office also to be very careful over the Flock, and to
look after their knowledge, faith, and manners, as the Scriptures do
abundantly witness, Acts 20. 17, 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Mat. 7. 6. Phil.
2. 19. Col. 4. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2, 5, 6. Tit. 1. 7. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2.

Qu. But may every one that the Church does admit of, come boldly to the Lords
Table, without any danger?

Ans. Every one that the Church admits and allows of in the judgment of
charity, may come without any danger of Church Censures; but if they be
inwardly void of true grace, be close hypocrites, or unprepared persons, then
they will be in danger of Gods sore displeasure (in case they so presume to
come) notwithstanding their admittance by the Church.

Qu. But is it not the Churches fault, if such unsound professors, close
hypocrites, and other persons come to the Lords Table?

Ans. No, it is not the Churches fault though such faulty ones do come;
because the Church in admitting them, did not know them to be such, by reason
their inward unsoundnesse, or gross unfitness, did not appear either in
their outward profession, communication, or conversation. For the Church can no
way judge of the nature of the tree, but only by the sensible fruits, Mat. 7.
1. Mat. 12. 33. 1 Cor. 2. 11. and Scripture-instances make it clear, that
Church Censures were never inflicted in doubtful, suspicious, or hidden cases,
but always administered upon manifest and known grounds, Mat. 18. 16. 1 Cor. 5.
1. compared with the 5 verse.

Qu. Well: Let Us now proceed to enquire further about the nature, ends and use
of this Sacrament; and first tell me, How do Baptism and the Lord's Supper
differ one from another?

Ans. They differ in many particulars; but their main difference is in respect
of the end and use which they serve unto.

Qu. How do they differ in respect of their general end and use?

Ans. They differ in respect of their general end and use, thus: Baptism was
appointed by the Lord to be a sign and seal of our spiritual birth,
spiritual life, and spiritual being: but the Lord's Supper was appointed to be
a sign and seal of our continuing, growing, and increasing in that spiritual
life, and all other spiritual graces.

Qu. Did Christ when he administered this Sacrament at the Table, give the Bread
and the Cup into each particular persons hand severally?

Ans. No, Christ did not give either the Bread or cup into each particular man's
hand severally, but he spoke to them all jointly, and gave them commission and
charge to take the elements themselves, Mat. 26. 26, 27. (...).

Qu. What is the Word of institution in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

Ans. The Word of Institution in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper runs thus:
Take, eat, this is my body which is broken and given for you; do this in
remembrance of me: Drink ye all of this, for this cup is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins; this do ye, as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, Mat. 26. 26, 27, 28. Luke 22. 19. 1
Cor. 11. 24, 25.

Qu. What is the outward sign in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

Ans. The outward sign in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is Bread broken,
and Wine poured forth; as also the actions of blessing, breaking, giving,
receiving, eating, and drinking, Mat. 26. 26, 27.

Qu. What is the inward grace which is signified by the outward sign in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

Ans. The inward grace signified by the outward sign in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, is the body and blood of Jesus Christ, Mat. 26. 26, 28. 1 Cor.
11. 24, 25. and all the benefits of his death, which are promised in the
Covenant of Grace, Romans 8. 32. to such as are already believers; as namely,
increase of faith, and all saving-graces, Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14. Joh. 15. 2.
increase of the assurance of Gods favor and love, Joh. 14. 21, 23. and so
consequently a more firm assurance of all good things both for body and soul,
here and hereafter, Psalm. 84. 11.

Qu. For what special end, or to what purpose did Christ ordain the Sacrament
of his Supper?

Ans. Christ ordained this Sacrament of his Supper for diverse special ends;
but the principal end was, for the quickening of the hearts of his people in
remembrance of him and his death until his coming again, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor.
11. 26.

Q. What is there in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, to put us in
remembrance of Christ and his death?

Ans. In this Sacrament there is Bread broken, which puts us in mind of the
breaking of Christ's body: and there is Wine parted from the Bread, showing the
shedding forth of his most precious blood, when he died for us upon the
cross, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.

Qu. But what comfort can we take by a bare calling to mind the death of
Christ, seeing a wicked person may barely call to mind Christ and his death,
when he sees the bread and wine, as well as we?

Ans. The godly soul at the sight of the bread and wine upon the Lords Table
does not barely call to mind Christ or his death, but does also by faith lay
hold upon Christ crucified as the blessed cause and means of inward comfort and
eternal life, Luke 22. 19, 20.

Q. Why do you desire to receive the Lord's Supper?

Ans. I desire to receive it, to the end I may be put in mind of my Savior,
and of his death in such wise, as that thereby my poor doubting soul may be
strengthened and settled in a more firm persuasion and belief that he died for
me, as well as for any others, Gal. 2. 20.

Q. Will the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords supper make you a good
Christian, though you be an unbeleeving and an ungodly person when you come to
it?

Ans. No, the receiving of the Sacrament will not make me a believer: For if I
bring no faith and other graces with me, I shall carry none away; and if I come
an ungodly person thither, I shall go away again as bad, if not worse then I
came, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.

Qu. But how then must worthy Communicants be qualified? must they needs have
the truth of saving grace wrought in their souls, before they can be meet
partakers of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

Ans. Yes, we must have the truth of saving grace in us before we can be
meet partakers of the Lord's Supper; because the Lord's Supper is the sign,
seal, and pledge whereby God assures us that we shall continue and grow in
grace, 1 Cor. 10. 16. Joh. 6. 54, 55, 56, 57. But now continuance and growth in
grace do presuppose the being, and the life of grace to be in us before; for
dead things grow not at all.

Qu. But (they say) some have been converted at the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. It seems then that this Sacrament is a converting ordinance; and
if so, profane persons and all sorts ought to come even as such: What say you
to this?

Ans. Though instance could be given of some few in an age that were converted
at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, yet that would not prove that we
therefore ought to look upon it as a converting ordinance of God to be used
directly for that end, and so to admit and receive scandalous persons unto it:
Because the rarity of such instances would sufficiently show, that it is but
merely accidental to the Sacrament to be a means to convert people from Sin
and Satan to God and Christ; and we must not gather ordinary and standing
Practical rules from accidental providence and rare events.

Besides, the very nature of the outward elements do plainly discover the
nature of this Sacrament to be nourishing, and not begetting.

And lastly, if any were ever converted by this Sacrament, their conversion
surely was, either by beholding the outward elements which are a visible word;
or by hearing the words of institution read or opened, and prayer joined
therewith, (both which we call the consecration of the Elements) and not by
actual receiving the outward signs: which will only prove, that unworthy
persons ought to be suffered to see and hear, but not prove that they ought
actually to receive and partake of the Sacramental elements.

Qu. But at least, do you not think that the bypast sins of a true believer
are pardoned in, and by his meet partaking of the Lord's Supper?

Ans. No, for if he be a true believer, his sins past, (especially if confessed
to God, and seriously repented of) are pardoned, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. with God,
before he comes to eat and drink at the Lords Table.

Qu. If his sins committed be pardoned before he comes to the Lords Table,
then what good can a believer get by receiving that Sacrament?

Ans. Though the sins past be pardoned to a Christian before he comes to the
Lords Table, yet being a believer and a worthy receiver, he is by the Sacrament
strengthened in a more firm belief of the pardon of his sins; and also, he is
strengthened in a greater confidence, that God will increase all saving graces
in him, Jud. 6. 36, 37. etc.

Qu. How can the eating of a morsel of bread, and the drinking of a little
wine at the Lords Table strengthen the faith, and make you more confident that
God will increase all saving graces in you?

Ans. In this respect the eating of the bread and drinking of the wine at the
Lords Table do strengthen and increase my faith and confidence; Because I know
that Christ did set apart bread and wine as tokens and pledges to assure me,
that as surely as a weak body is made stronger, grows greater, and is preserved
alive, by receiving meat and drink; so surely shall my soul be made stronger in
faith, grow more and more in all saving graces, and be nourished up unto
eternal life through my eating and drinking the flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ by faith, Joh. 6. 54. etc.

Qu. But do worthy Communicants eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ in
the Sacrament?

Ans. Yes; worthy Communicants do eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ
at the Lords supper, Joh. 6. 53, 56.

Q. How can we eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, seeing Christ is in
heaven, and we are on earth?

Ans. Though Christ be in heaven, and we on earth, yet by faith we can reach
him, and by faith we do spiritually eat his flesh, and drink his blood, Joh.
6. 35, 47, 48.

Qu. But what is it to eat and drink Christ's flesh and blood spiritually by
faith?

Ans. To eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ spiritually by faith, is
to believe unfeignedly, that as Jesus Christ does spiritually unite himself to
the outward signs of bread and wine; so this spiritual presence of Christ in
the outward signs, does bring along with it the merits and benefits of Christ's
active and passive obedience, for the comforting, strengthening, and nourishing
of my soul.

Qu. Is not Jesus Christ bodily present in the Sacrament?

Ans. No, Christ is not bodily present in the Sacrament, for the Scriptures
affirm, that the heaven must receive him until the times of restitution of all
things, Act. 3. 21.

Qu. But are not the bread and wine changed into the very flesh and blood of
Christ after the Minister has consecrated them; that is, after he has read the
words of Institution, given thanks and prayed?

Ans. The bread and wine (after the words of consecration) do receive a
Sacramental change in their use and effects, because the worthy receiver by
faith takes them as sacred and holy pledges and seals of Christ's body and
blood, which before consecration were but common and ordinary creatures. But in
regard of their substance and materiality, they remain still the same as they
were before, without any change at all.

Qu. But does not Christ himself say of the Bread, This is my body; and of the
Wine, This is my blood; and does not Christ speak true in so saying?

Ans. Christ's words in calling the bread and wine his Body and Blood, are most
certainly true in his own sacramental and spiritual sense, Joh. 6. 63. but
not in a literal and carnal sense. For if Christ had given his disciples his
very flesh and blood to be eaten by their bodily mouths as they sat at the
Table, then he could not the next day have suffered upon the cross, which yet
he did, Mat. 26. 26, 34. comp. with Mat. 27. 1. 46, 50. Again, if Christ's body
were materially present upon the Communion Table after the words of
Consecration, then he should be in a hundred places at once; for the Sacrament
may be, and is many times administered in a hundred several Congregations at
one very time; and so also we should make Christ to have a hundred bodies! we
still conclude therefore, that Christ is not bodily, but only Sacramentally
and spiritually present in the Sacrament.

Qu. But to return to our former matters: Do all those that partake outwardly
of this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, receive the forenamed spiritual
benefits thereby?

Ans. No, all those that partake of the outward signs, do not receive the
spiritual benefits; for many come to this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper not
for the better, but for the worse, 1 Cor. 11. 17. 34.

Qu. In what respect do many come to the Lords Table for the worse?

Ans. Many come to the Lords Table for the worse; because, by unworthy
receiving thereat, they become guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and eat
and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.

Qu. How may unworthy partakers at the Lords table, be said to be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ?

Ans. Unworthy partakers at the Lords Table are guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, because they are guilty of casting a slight and contempt upon the body
and blood of Christ, which in that ordinance are represented unto them, 1 Cor.
11. 20, 21, 22, 29.

Qu. How are unworthy partakers said to eat and drink their own damnation or
judgment?

Ans. Unworthy partakers at the Lords Table are said to eat and drink their own
damnation or judgment, because by that sin of unworthy receiving, they do as
certainly draw damnation or judgment upon themselves if they should not
unfeignedly repent of the same, as they do eat and drink of the bread and
wine which they there receive, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

Qu. Can one that is regenerated or born of God be an unworthy receiver at the
Lords Table?

Ans. One that is regenerated cannot properly be called an unworthy receiver,
because his person is accepted with God through Christ: but yet such an one may
eat and drink unworthily, and so pull Gods displeasure upon himself for a
time; as those careless, unprepared, and forgetful Corinthians did, of whom
God struck some with sickness, and others with death, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30.

Qu. SEeing there is so great Mr Chancy's Doctrine of the Sacraments, well
suiting here with my scope and purpose, gave me ease in the matters following:
whose steps I have trod in; yet so, as that I have interwoven sundry variations
and additions where I conceived them needful.
danger in unworthy receiving, what ought we to do for prevention thereof?

Ans. There be three sorts of duties to be performed by us, if we would be
accepted with God for worthy Communicants, and prevent the danger of unworthy
receiving.

Qu. Which be th^se three sorts of duties?

Ans. The three sorts of duties belonging to a communicant are these; namely,
some to be done before, some at, and some after our receiving the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper.

Qu. What are the duties to be done by us (through Gods assistance) before our
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

Ans. The duties that we are to perform before we come to the Lords Table, are
two: namely; First, through examination of our selves, 1 Cor. 11. 26. and
secondly, a right behavior and holy carriage after our self-examination.

Q What do you mean by examination of a man's self?

A. Self-examination is the calling of a man's self privately to account and
question in the sight of God, that he may know whether he be duly fitted to
partake of that ordinance, or not.

Qu. Is it not enough for a Communicant to examine himself once for all?

Ans. No, for every Christian should very frequently be examining of himself,
Psalm. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 13. 5. touching the state and condition of his soul, but
especially before he comes to the Lords Table; and look how often soever he
intends to come to that Sacrament, so often he is bound strictly to examine
and sift out his own spiritual state, before he presume to present himself
there as a guest, 1 Cor. 11. 28.

Qu. Wherein consists the through examination of our selves before receiving?

Ans. The through examination of our selves before receiving consists in two
things. First, in general to examine our selves whether we be real and
sound Christians, or hypocrites. Secondly, in a more special trying of our
selves, what sins we stand guilty of; and whether those graces which are
requisite to the right receiving of the Lords supper be truly wrought in us, or
not?

Qu. How may we discern whether we be sound Christians or hypocrites?

Ans. We may discern whether we be sound Christians or hypocrites by these
four notes, viz.

1 If one that is a true Christian be enticed and drawn away from God, he
grieveth for it, Genesis 39. 9. Romans 7. 22, 23, 24. 1 Timothy 1. 15. and gives not
ready consent unto the temptation, Romans 7. 19. Gal. 5. 17.

2 If through frailty he be overborn to give consent to the temptation, yet
it is not full consent, but he does it against his will and purpose; for his
purpose is, not to sin, Romans 7. 15, 19.

3 If he do put his sinful inclinations into execution and practice, yet he
continues not long in them, does not, nor will not walk after them, but
recovereth himself, because he is incorporated into Christ, and has the seed
of true grace in him, 1 John 3. 9. Luke 22. 61, 62.

4 When he does any good thing, his main aim and level is at Gods glory, 1 Cor.
10. 31. Phil. 1. 20. not at his own profit, honor, or credit, Mark 8. 34, 35,
36. Gal. 1. 10. But the contrary to these four, are the marks and notes of
unsound and hypocritical persons.

Qu. Now for the more special trying of our selves, how should we examine our
selves about our sins?

Ans. We must examine our selves about our sins thus; namely, go and
seriously look into Gods Law, and so call to remembrance how we have offended
our God, 1 John 3. 4. Romans 7. 7, 9. Psalm. 51. 4. given occasion to the enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 2. scandalized our brethren,
that is to say, grieved the stronger, Psalm. 119. 136. and occasioned the weaker
(1 Cor. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13.) christian to sin by our example. And lastly, how we
have wronged our own souls, by suffering sin easily to prevail, and the life,
activity, and power of grace to fail and decay in us, Rev. 2. 4, 5.

Q. Now in the next place, how shall I know which be those Graces, that are
especially requisite and necessary to the right receiving of the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper?

Ans. The Graces that are especially necessary to the right-receiving of the
Lord's Supper, are these eight; namely, 1 Sound knowledge, 1 Cor. 11. 29. 2
Saving faith, Romans 4. 11. Mar. 16. 16. 3 True repentance for all our sins, 1
Cor. 11. 31. 4 Unfeigned obedience, Prove. 9. 5, 6. 5 Entire love to God and
man, Mat. 5. 25. 1 Cor. 12. 13. 6 Earnest hunger and thirst after Christ, 1 John 7. 37. Luke 22. 15. 7 The sincerity and uprightness of our hearts, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. 8 Thankfulness to Christ, Mat. 26. 30.

Qu. But how shall I know whether these graces are truly wrought in me by the
word and spirit of God, or not?

Ans. If you would know whether these graces are truly wrought in your soul, or
not, then you must examine your self about each particular grace severally; as
first, about knowledge, then about faith, and so of all the rest in order.

Qu. How may a man examine himself about his knowledge so, as to be convinced
that his knowledge is sound knowledge?

Ans. A man may be convinced that his knowledge is sound, by considering the
measure of it, and the properties of it.

Qu. What measure of knowledge is required of a Communicant?

Ans. Every Communicant must in some competent measure know all the principles
(Heb. 5. 12. Heb. 6. 1, 2.) of the doctrine of Christ necessary to salvation.
As for example; what is the natural condition of every man and woman; what is
the means of our recovery out of that natural condition; what is the spiritual
meaning of the Ten commandments; what is the most true meaning of all the
Articles of the Christian Faith; what is the nature, use, and end of each
Sacrament: and the like.

Qu. What are the properties of sound knowledge?

Ans. Sound knowledge has these and such like properties: 1 It makes a man
humble, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Prove. 26. 16. and ready to render a reason of the hope
that is in him with all meekness, 1 Pet. 3. 15. 2 It makes a Christian willing
to receive every truth discovered unto him from the Word of God, 1 Timothy 6. 5.
and careful to put in practice whatsoever he knows already, 1 John 2. 3, 4, 5.
3 It makes us painful and industrious for the increasing of that knowledge
which we have attained, Prove. 2. 3, 4. Hos. 6. 3. And thus we must examine our
selves about our knowledge, saying to our own souls, What O my soul, has God
as yet wrought these things in thee, or not?

Qu. How may a man examine himself about his faith so, as to know he has true
faith in Christ?

Ans. A man may know he has saving Faith by these characters of it: 1 Saving
faith is always wrought and preserved by the Word of God preached, Romans 10. 14,
17. 1 Cor. 1. 21. and is that whereby we come to be weary and heavy laden
with sins, Mat. 11. 28. to be utterly rid of all confidence in our own
righteousness, Romans 10. 3, 4. and also restless in hungring after Christ,
till we find comfort in the promises touching the pardon of our sins, Mat. 5.
6. 2 Saving faith makes the Christian to look at sin as the greatest evil, and
the grace of Christ as the greatest good in the world, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27.
etc. it purifieth the heart, will, thoughts, affections, and conscience from
all love and allowance of sin, Act. 15. 9. Romans 7. 15. and so works inward
sanctification, Act. 26. 18. It wrestles against temptations of unbelief, Mar.
9. 24. Luke 22. 31, 32. and works by love to God and our brethren, Gal. 5. 6.
And by these evidences we must examine our selves whether we have true faith or
not, saying to each of our own souls, What (O soul) art thou thus and thus
qualified, or not?

Qu. How may a man examine himself about his Repentance so, as to know that he
does truly repent?

Ans. True Repentance may be known, 1 By our willingness and gladness to have
any sin discovered, Psalm. 141. 5. and our hearty love of those that discover
and reprove it in us, 2 Samuel 12. 13. 2 By an inward godly sorrow for all known
sins, as they are a breach of Gods Commandments, and are displeasing unto God,
2 Cor. 7. 10. and by a forsaking of all known sins, Ezekiel. 18. 5, 6. etc. Psalm.
119. 3. out of a perfect hatred of them, and care to avoid all occasions of
them, 2 Cor. 7. 11. 3 By an universal turning to God, Deuteronomy. 3. 10. and constant
cleaving to him in all his revealed will: and by practice of al known duties of
obedience, which obedience, the death of Christ set forth in the Lord's Supper,
notably provokes a Christian unto. And thus we must try our repentance before
we come to the Lords Table; O my soul, do thou repent thus?

Qu. How may a man examine himself about his Obedience so, as to know that his
obedience is unfeigned obedience?

Ans. Unfeigned obedience may be known thus: 1 It is grounded only on the Word
of God, Ephesians. 2. 10. and not on the traditions or inventions of men, Mar. 7. 6,
7. and it has respect unto all Gods commandments without partiality or
exception, Psalm. 119. 6. 2 Unfeigned obedience aims at the right end, namely,
at the praise and glory of God, Phil. 1. 11. and not at any private advantage
cross thereunto; and it is always accompanied with zeal, Gal. 4. 18.
humility, Mich. 6. 8. and constancy, Psalm. 106. 3. And thus we must try our
obedience before we come to the Lords supper: Is it thus with thee, O my soul?

Qu. How may a Christian examine himself about his love so, as to know whether
his love to God be entire, or not?

Ans. We may be sure that our love to God is entire, if no Commandment of God
be grievous unto us, 1 John 5. 3. if our love weanes our hearts from the love
of the world, 1 John 2. 15. 1 John 4. 20, 21. 1 John 5. 1. 1 John 4. 12. and
lastly, if it make us love the children of God.

Qu. How may a Christian examine himself about his love so, as to know that he
has entire love to the children of God in special?

Ans. Entire love to the children of God, makes us love godly men for
godliness sake, 2 John 1, 2, verses; that is, it will make us love all the
Saints, Ephesians. 1. 15. whether rich or poor, strangers or kindred, and that
constantly, Prove. 17. 17. Also such entire love will communicate it self in
doing good to their souls and bodies, 1 John 3. 17, 18.

Q. How may a Christian examine himself about his love so, as to know that he
has true love and charity toward his neighbor, that is, to all men in general?

Ans. True love toward our neighbor, or all men in general, may be known thus.
1 It will make us willing to forgive wrongs to others, Col. 3. 13. and to seek
peace, Romans 12. 18. and make satisfaction if we have wronged them, Romans 13. 10.
2 True love will cause us to love the souls of all people, and not to suffer
sin to lie upon them, Lev. 19. 17. 3 True love to our neighbor will make us to
overcome evil with good, Romans 12. 17, 20, 21. by heaping offices of love upon
them that wrong us. And thus we must examine our selves about our love before
we come to the Sacrament, and see whether these qualifications of Gods Spirit
be wrought in our hearts, or not.

Qu. How may a man examine himself about his hunger and thirst after Christ so,
as to know that he has an earnest hunger and thirst after him?

Ans. We may know if we have true hunger and thirst after Christ, thus: 1 True
hunger and thirst after Christ will make us seek him with all our heart, in the
diligent and constant use of all the means, Prove. 13. 4. so as that nothing will
satisfy us without Christ, Psalm. 73. 25. 2 Earnest hunger and thirst after
Christ, longs after him for his own sake, so as to part with any thing for him,
Matthew. 13. 44. and to be content to have him upon any conditions, Phil. 1. 21.
Phil. 3. 8. 3 Earnest hunger and thirst after Christ, makes the soul ready to
entertain with great thankfulness whatsoever means or messenger shall bring
Christ home unto it, Romans 10. 15. And lastly, true hunger and thirst after
Christ, causes the Christian to seek after Christ for holiness, Isa. 51. 1. as
well as for happiness: Now is it thus with my soul, or not?

Qu. How may a man examine himself about the sincerity of his heart so, as to
know that he is sincere and upright in his heart?

Ans. A Christian may know that he is sincere and upright in heart, thus; 1
Sincerity and uprightness of heart will show it self in a carefulness to reform
our delightful and bosom-sins, Psalm. 18. 23. in an endeavor to find them out,
and a gladness when they are discovered, Psalm. 119. 59. and 141. 5. 2 Sincerity
will put us upon self-denial, and make us part with any outward comfort to
keep a good conscience, Heb. 11. 24, 27. 3 Sincerity and uprightness will cause
us to make conscience of the fruitful performance of holy duties, Romans 12. 11.
especially in secret, Mat. 6. 6. And lastly, it will stir up an earnest
desire of growth unto perfection, Phil. 3. 12, 14. Now is it thus with me, or
not?

Qu. How may a man examine himself about his thankfulness to Christ so, as that
he may know he is truly thankful?

Ans. A man may know he is truly thankful to Christ, when he esteems Christ's
(Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19.) love and benefits, Phil. 3. 8. above all others, and so
desires to please Christ (2 Cor. 5. 14, 15) in all things. And thus we ought
to examine our selves about all these particular Graces of Christ in us; by
asking our consciences whether it be thus and thus with our souls.

Q WHen a man has thus examined himself, what must he endevor to do after
such self-examination, for the finishing of his preparation to the Sacrament?

Ans. 1. If a man after examination of himself shall plainly find any of these
Graces to be wanting in him, he must for the present abstain from the
Sacrament, Exodus 12. 48. Number. 9. 6, 7, etc. 2 If he doubt whether they be
wrought in him or not, he is likewise to forbear coming to the Sacrament, Mat.
5, 23, 24. Romans 14. 23. unless his conscience by some means may be resolved and
settled that he has them. 3 If he shall truly find, that God has wrought them
in him, though yet in much weakness, then he is to come to this sacrament to be
thereby further strengthened, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19.

Q What if a Christian (having for the former reasons abstained from the Lords
Table) do a long time after continue in a sad and sorrowful condition,
mourning for the want of those forenamed Graces in himself; must he still
forbear to come to the Sacrament?

Ans. No man truly and inwardly mourns for the want of those Graces, but he
that in some measure has the truth of them wrought in himself by Gods Word and
Spirit: and therefore spiritual mourners may comfortably, and should readily
approach to Christ in this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 31. as well as in other of his
holy ordinances, Ps. 34. 18. Isa. 61. 2, 3. and 66. 2. Mat. 11. 28.

Qu. Are there yet any more things required of a communicant, after his
examination of himself?

Ans. Yes, after a Christian has thoroughly examined himself, there be yet more
duties to be practiced: For 1 He is carefully with bitterness of spirit to
remember and bewayl to God the manifest rebellions of his unregenerate estate,
Psalm. 29. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 13. and the wants and weaknesses of his present state,
Romans 7. throughout. 2 He is to renew his faith in Christ, Heb. 11. 28. and his
repentance for all known sins, especially committed since his former receiving.
3 He is to renew and stir up his desires and thirstings after Christ in the
Sacrament, and his love to God and man. 4 He is to renew his resolution and
purposes of better obedience to God (in the duties both of the first and second
Table of the Law) for the time to come, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. through the help of
Christ. And lastly, he is to renew his thankfulness to God. All these a
Christian must endeavor to do, because it is not the bare having of grace, but
the present exercise thereof that makes us worthy receivers in Gods account, 1
Cor. 1. 4, 5, 7. compared with 1 Cor. 11. 18, 21, 29.

Qu. How must a communicant renew his faith in Christ before he comes to the
Sacrament?

Ans. A Communicant must labor to renew his says in Christ, thus; 1 He must go
to God in the name of Christ to sue out a new pardon of his sins, 2 Chronicles. 30.
6. especially of such sins as most trouble the peace of his conscience, and
press the promises that concern the sacrament, 1 Cor. 11. 24 and the death of
Christ, 1 John 1. 7. 2 He must strive by Prayer and meditation against carnal
reason, Joh. 6. 52, 58. the greatest enemy of faith; and also he must bewayl
his unbelief, Mar. 9. 24. and ponder and weigh well the nature of the
Sacrament; as namely, That the Sacrament is as Gods oath to secure his promises
unto us, Heb. 6. 16, 17. and a pledge and seal of the righteousness of faith,
Romans 4. 11. 3. And lastly, he must consider that God commands us to receive and
enjoy the merits of Christ's death offered to us in this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.
24. and therefore he must raise up his faith to take hold of Christ.

Qu. How must a Communicant renew his repentance before he comes to the Lords
Table?

Ans. In renewing his repentance a communicant must take this course. 1
Strictly to call to mind his particular sins as near as possibly he can,
especially sins most lately committed, 1 Cor. 11. 31. (either by not-doing the
good he ought and might have done, or by doing the evil he ought not to have
done) and by the serious consideration of such sins with all the circumstances
and aggravations thereof, he is to renew a more bitter sorrow for them, Lam. 3.
40. 2 He must renew his free and humble confession of each particular sin, 1 Samuel 7. 6. as near as he can, judge himself for them, and lift up fervent
prayers for the pardon of them, Psalm. 5. 1, 2. and for strength and power
against them; and this will show that he stands not well-affected toward his
sins. 3 In case that he has wronged any one, he must make restitution and
satisfaction to the uttermost of his power, Luke 19. 8. and must resolve fully
by Gods grace to leave all sins, and avoid the occasions thereof, giving up
himself to newness of life, and to the frequent, constant and conscionable use
of all good means, with the improvement of all holy opportunities conducing to
that newness of life, Psalm. 1. 1, 2.

Qu. How must a communicant renew his spiritual desires and thirst after Christ
before each Sacrament?

Ans. He that would renew his desire and thirst after Christ, must follow this
course. 1 He must acquaint himself thoroughly with his own spiritual wants and
emptiness, Prove. 27. 7. and take heed of a presumptuous imagination of more
grace then yet he has attained unto, Rev. 3. 16, 17. 2 He must take a through
view of the wonderful excellency and fullness that is in Christ, Job. 4. 10.
Col. 1. 19. and the promises, ^ Pet. 1. 4. as also a view of the worth of Gods
favor and loving kindness which is better then life it self, Psalm. 63. 3. 3 He
must have a through view of his own utter insufficiency to bring his heart to
any true hunger and thirst after these things, Phil. 2. 13.

Qu. But how shall a Christian be sensible of his own spiritual wants, and the
decay of the power and activity of grace in his soul?

Ans. A Christian may come to be sensible of his own spiritual wants and
decays of grace, by the consideration of his daily slips and sins of thought
word and deed, either against Gods precepts or prohibitions. As for instance,
my distrust lets me see my weakness of faith; and my omission of, and
sloathfulness in holy duties, lets me see my want of love and zeal toward God
and Christ: And so of the rest. Hereupon now, a Christian must apply the seal
of the Covenant for an assurance to himself, that as all, so especially these
and these particular wants shall be supplied from Christ's fullness, Job. 1. 16.
Psalm. 1. 3. Jam. 4. 6.

Qu. How must a Communicant renew his love before he comes to the Lords Table?

Ans. A Communicant must renew his love before he comes to the Lords Table,
thus: 1 He must strive to get his heart inflamed with love to God, 2 Cor. 5.
14. and Man, 1 John 4. 11. by a due considetion and deep sense of Gods free and
great love to him in Jesus Christ; and by considering also that eating and
drinking together at the Lords Table, is a testification of that sweet love
which is and must be among Christians one toward another, 1 Cor. 12, 13. 2 If
any man have wronged him, he must forgive injuries freely, Ephesians. 4. 26. and if
he has given any just occasion of offense to others, he must seek
reconciliation with them, Mat. 5. 24, 25. Romans 12. 18.

Q. How must a Communicant renew his resolution of better obedience before he
comes to the Lords Table?

A. A Communicant is to renew his resolution of better obedience, thus; namely,
in an humble acknowledgment of his own weakness, Psalm. 119. 106. he must
resolve (through Gods grace) without all further delay, Psalm. 119. 60. to walk
in new obedience: and to this end he must earnestly crave strength from God,
and entreat that he would enable him thereunto, Psalm. 119. 117.

Qu. How must a Communicant renew his thankfulness to God and Christ, before he
comes to the Lords Table?

Ans. A Communicant before he comes to the Lords table, must renew his
thankfulness to God, thus: 1 He must seriously consider that though he has
broken Covenant with God oftentimes, and in special since the last Sacrament,
yet the Lord now graciously offers to confirm the Covenant of Free Grace to him
anew in this next Sacrament. 2 He must also take notice, that if there be but
the least spark of saving grace in him, the Lord will not quench, Isa. 42. 3.
but nourish it; and for that end invites him to come to the holy feast of his
Sons flesh and blood. 3 He must also remember, that if he has thoroughly
endeavored, 2 Cor. 8. 12. to examine and prepare himself for that ordinance, he
shall find acceptance with God through Christ, and the Lord will look upon him
as a worthy guest at his Table, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Now all these three indulgences
from God, call for present thankfulness from the believing soul.

Qu. Besides self-examination and the renewed exercise of the forenamed graces:
and also besides Prayer, so often mentioned before; had we not need yet more
especially to seek God by earnest Prayer before we come to the Lords Table?

Ans. Yes, as a Christian must pray earnestly to God for many particulars
hinted before; so in special he must also pray that God would please further
to fit him by his Spirit, Phil. 4. 6. Psalm. 19. 14. for a meet partaking of
this sacrament, and also accept of him (through Jesus Christ) as a worthy
receiver, though in himself most unworthy. And the reason of al is, because God
will be sought unto, even to do those very things which he has already
promised to do for his people, Ezekiel. 36. 37.

Thus far of the Duties before Receiving.

Qu WHat are the duties required of a Christian At and In the time of receiving
the Lord's Supper?

Ans. The duties required at and in the time of our receiving are these: 1
Every communicant is to give diligent attention to that which is publicly
done, not only when he himself is to receive, but during the whole action, 1
Cor. 14. 16. to behold and look upon both the elements themselves, Exodus 24 8.
and all the Sacramental actions, 1 Cor. 11. 23. etc. in the administration of
the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 14. 40. 2 He must use such reverent behavior as may be
free from super stition, yet fit to stir up and express inward faith and
thankfulness, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

Q. What must be the meditation and disposition of our hearts in tune of
receiving the Sacrament?

Ans. Our meditation and disposition of heart at, and in the time of our
receiving, must be this: 1 When we see the Bread and Wine consecrated and set
apart for this holy use, then we must call to mind and consider the eternal
love of God the Father in sanctifying and setting apart his Son Jesus Christ in
his secret counsel, to be the Redeemer and Surety of his people, Joh. 10. 36.
and the tender mercy of Christ in undertaking this hard service for us, Heb. 7.
26. Heb. 10. 9. 2 When we see the Bread broken, and the wine powered out, we are
to mourn over him whom we have pierced by our sins, Zech. 12. 12. and remember
the infinite justice and wrath of God against sin, that could never be
satisfied but by this means, Romans 3. 25. 3 When we see the Bread and wine given
unto us al by the Minister; we are to meditate upon the gift and application of
Christ crucified to our own souls in particular, and to every believing
receiver else, Gal. 2. 20. 4 When we take the Bread and Wine, we must stir up
our selves by faith to lay hold upon and apply to our selves all the merits of
Christ's death, 1 Cor. 11. 24. and so joyfully to feed thereupon, by believing,
that as sure as bread and wine will nourish the body up in a natural life, so
sure will the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, fed upon by faith, nourish our
souls unto eternal life, and will also satisfy our souls, Matthew. 11. 29. and
strengthen them against all temptations here in this world, 1 Cor. 10. 16. Joh.
6. 35. 5 When we behold the rest of the Congregation communicating with us, we
are then to stir up our hearts to loving and kind affections toward them and
all the people of God, 1 Cor. 10. 17.

Qu. WHat is that holy carriage that is required after receiving the Sacrament?

Ans. 1. Immediately after receiving, a Christian, in token of thankfulness for
his receiving such inward pledges of love from God, must offer up the sacrifice
of praise, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. to the Lord, and cheerfully give alms, 1 Cor. 16. 2.
Heb. 13. 16. for the relief of the poor members of Christ. 2 At other times
after receiving, he must often try himself whether he has been made to drink
into one spirit with Christ and his members or not, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and what
growth he has gotten by the Sacrament in assurance of Gods favor, in strength
against corruptions, in power to walk with God in obedience to him, and in all
other graces of the Spirit, and fruits of Christ's death. 3 If the Christian
after receiving cannot find these fruits in himself, he must humble himself for
his own sins, as the cause thereof, 1 Cor. 11. 31. and though he finds not
that comfort and benefit he looks for, yet if he be truly humbled for the want
of it, he may be comforted in this as a fruit of a worthy receiving, 2 Chronicles.
30. 18, 19. 4 If he shall find upon this after-examination, the forenamed
benefits truly wrought in his heart, then he is most thankfully to give God the
glory, and to desire the continuance and increase of the same grace with all
holy endevors to that end, 1 Chronicles. 29. 13, 14, 18, verses: and as he has
received Jesus Christ, so he is to walk in him, Col. 2. 6, 7. 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21,
22. and not to return to his former evil practices, but to keep the Covenant
that he has renewed with the Lord at the Sacrament, and to increase in love
and fellowship with Gods children, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. 5 And lastly, a
Christian, upon the sense of the comfort and benefit received at the Sacrament,
is to resort the oftener and with the more earnest desire unto it, 2 Chronicles. 30.
21, and 23 verses.

FINIS.

