THE Second Part OF MERRY DROLLERY, OR, A COLLECTION Of Jovial Poems, Merry
Songs, Witty Drolleries.


Intermixed with Pleasant CATCHES.

Collected by W.N. C.B. R.S. J.G. Lovers of Wit.

LONDON, Printed by J.W. for P.H. and are to be sold at the New Exchange,
Westminster Hall, Fleetstreet, and Paul's Churchyard.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WE do here present thee with the Second part of Merry Drollery, not doubting
but it will find good Reception with the more Ingenious; the deficiency of this
shall be supplied in a third, when time shall serve: In the mean time

Farewell.
The Second Part of Merry Drollery.
The indifferent Lover.
NO man Love's fiery Passions can approve,
As either yielding pleasure or promotion:
I like a mild and lukewarm zeal in love,
Although I do not like it in devotion,
For it has no coherence with my Creed,
To think that Lovers mean as they pretend:
If all that said they died, had died indeed,
Sure long e e this the World had had an end.
Some one perhaps of long Consumption dried,
And after falling into love might dye,
But I dare swear he never yet had died
Had he been half so sound at heart as I.
Another, rather than incur the slander
Of true Apostate, will false Martyr prove;
I Will neither Orpheus be, nor yet Leander,
I Will neither hang nor drown my self for love.
Yet I have been a Lover by report,
And I have died for Love as others do,
Praised be Great Jove I died in such a sort,
As I revived within an hour or two.
Thus have I lived, thus have I loved till now,
And never had reason to repent me yet,
And whosoever otherwise shall do,
His courage is as little as his wit.
Loves Torment.
When blind God Cupid, all in an angry mood,
And Cythera, the fairest Queen of Love,
Did leave Sylvanus pleasant shadowed woods,
And mounted up into the Heavens above,
Even then when Sol,
Even then when Sol
In water set his bed,
Did seek to hide,
Did seek to hide
His golden shining head.
Like Philomel, all in a doleful wise,
I pass the silent-coloured night in woe;
No rest nor sleep can seize upon my eyes,
Oh cruel beauty that did torment me so!
No one can tell,
No one can tell
How I in sorrows dwelt,
Save only she,
Save only she
That has like Passions felt.
The night is past all, and Aurora red
Begins to show her ruby-coloured face,
Leaving old Tytan and his aged head,
The cloudy darkness from the skies to chase;
Ah my poor heart,
Ah my poor heart
In flames of fire does fry;
I live in love,
I love and live,
I live, and yet I dye.
Each pretty little bird injoys his Mate,
And gently billing sits upon a Tree,
And on the verdant shadowed woods do prate,
Chirping their Notes with pleasant harmony;
I wish my Love,
I wish my Love
My pretty bird may be
To ease my grief,
To ease my grief,
And cure my malady.
The Rebel Red-coat.
COme Drawer, come fill us about more wine,
Let us merrily tipple, the day is our own,
We'll have our delights, let the country go pine,
Let the King and the Kingdom groan:
For the day is our own, and so shall continue,
Whilst Monarchy we baffle quite,
We'll spend all the Kingdoms Revenue,
And sacrifice all to delight:
It Is power that brings us all to be kings,
And we'll be all crowned by our might.
A fig for Divinity, Lecture, and Law,
And all that to Royalty do pretend,
We will by our Swords keep the Kingdoms in aw,
And our power shall never have end:
The Church and the State we'll turn into liquor,
And spend a whole town in a day,
We'll melt all their Bodkins the quicker
Into Sack, and so drink them away,
We'll spend the demeans o'th Bishops and Deans,
And over the Presbyter sway.
The nimble St. Patrick is sunk in a bog,
And his Countrymen sadly cry, Oh hone, Oh hone,
St. Andrew and's Kirk-men are lost in a fog,
And we are the Saints alone:
Thus on our superiors and equals we trample,
Whilst Jockey the stirrup shall hold,
The Citie's our Mule for example,
While we thus in plenty are rolled,
Each delicate Dish shall but answer our wish,
And our drink shall be cordial Gold.
Love lies a bleeding: In Imitation of Law lies a bleeding.
LAy by your pleading,
Love lies a bleeding,
Burn all your Poetry, and throw away your reading.
Piety is painted,
And Truth is tainted,
Love is a reprobate, and Schism now is sainted,
The Throne Love does sit on,
We daily do spit on,
It was not thus, I wis, when Betty ruled in Britain.
But friendship has faultred,
Loves Altars are altered,
And he that is the cause, I would his neck were haltred.
When Love did nourish
England did flourish
Till holy hate came in and made us all so currish.
Now every Widgeon
Talks of Religion,
And does as little good as Mahomet and his Pidgeon.
Each Coxcombe is suiting
His words for confuting,
But heaven is sooner gained by suffering than by disputing.
True friendship we smother,
And strike at our Brother,
Apostles never went to God by killing one another.
Let Love but warm ye
Nothing can harm ye,
When Love is General, there is Angels in the Army.
Love keeps his quarters,
And fears no tortures,
The bravest fights are written in the Book of Martyrs.
Could we be so civil
As to do good for evil
It were the only happy way to o'rcome the devil.
The Flowers Love has watered,
Sedition has scattred,
We talk with tongues of holiness, but act with hearts of hatred.
He that does know me,
And love will show me,
Has found the nearest noble way to overcome me,
He that has bound me,
And then does wound me,
Wins not my heart, does not conquer, but confound me.
In such a condition
Love is the physician,
True Love and Reason makes the purest politician.
But strife and confusion,
Deceit and delusion,
Though it seem to thrive at first will make a sad conclusion.
Love is a fuel,
A precious Jewel,
It Is Love must stanch the blood when Fury fights the duel.
Love is a loadstone,
Hate is a bloodstone,
Heaven is the North Point, and Love is the Loadstone.
Though fury and scorn
Loves Temples have torn,
He Will keep his Covenant, and will not be forsworn.
His Laws do not border
On strife and disorder,
He scorns to get his wealth by perjury and murder.
What falsehood drew in,
Grace never grew in,
Love will not raise himself upon another ruin.
He can present ye
With peace and plenty,
Love never advances one by throwing down of twenty.
Where Love is in season,
There Truth is and Reason,
The soul of Love is never underlaid with Treason.
He never does quarrel
For princely apparel,
Nor ever fixed a chair of state upon a barrel.
Love from the dull pit
Of Follies full pit
Never took an Anvil out, and put it in a pulpit.
Love is no sinker,
Truth is no slinker,
In mending breaches Love did never play the tinker.
Where Vengeance and Lust is,
No truth nor trust is,
As will appear at last in Gods High Court of Justice.
Pity and remorse is
The strength of Loves Forces,
Paul never converted men by stables filled with horses.
Mercy is fading,
Truth is degrading,
Love is the only cause of Plenty, Peace, and Trading.
Love is a fire
Made of desire,
Whose chief ambition is to heaven to aspire.
It stops the gradation
Of fury and passion,
It governs all good Families, and best can guide a Nation.
The Low Land, the High Land,
And my Land, and thy Land,
Crew all in common straight when Love had left this Island.
Where peace is panting,
And rage is ranting,
It Is an undoubted sign the King of Love is wanting.
Father and Mother,
Sister and Brother,
If Love be lacking, quickly mischief one another.
Where wrath is, the rod is
That ruins our bodies;
With hate the devil is, but where Love is God is.
Then let us not doubt it,
But straight go about it,
To bring in Love again, we cannot live without it.
Then let the Graces
Crown our embraces,
And let us settle all things in their proper places.
Lest persecution
Cause dissolution
Let all purloyned wealth be made a restitution.
For though now it tickles,
'Twill turn all to prickles,
Then let us live in peace, and turn our Swords to sickles;
When Noah's Dove was sent out,
Then Gods Pardon went out,
They that would have it so, I hope, will say Amen to it.
A Catch.
BRing forth your Cunny skins, fair maids, to me,
And hold them fair that I may see
Gray, Black, and Blew; for your smaller skins
I Will give you Glasses, Laces, Pins;
And for your whole Cunny
I Will give you ready money.
Come, gentle Jone, do thou begin
With thy black, black, black Cunny skin,
And Mary then, and Kate will follow
With their silver'd-hair'd skins, and their yellow;
Your white Cunny-skin I will not lay by,
Though it be fat, it is fair to the Eye.
Your gray it is warm, but for my money
Give me the bonny, bonny black Coney;
Come away, fair maids, your skins will decay,
Come and take money, Maids, put your ware away;
I have fine Bracelets, Rings,
And I have silver Pins;
Coney skins, Coney skins,
Maids, have you any Coney skins.
A Catch of the Beggars.
FRom hunger and cold who lives more free,
Or who lives a merrier life than we;
Our bellies are full, and our backs are warm,
And against all Pride our Rags are a Charm;
Enough is a feast, and for to morrow
Let rich men care, we feel no sorrow.
The City, and Town, and every Village
Afford us an Alms, or a Pillage;
And if the weather be cold and raw,
Then in a barn we tumble in straw;
If fair and warm, in yea-Cock and nay-Cock
The Fields afford us a hedge or a hey-Cock.
The Time-server.
ROom for a Gamester that plays at all he sees,
Whose fickle fancy fits such times as these,
One that says Amen to every factious prayer,
From Hugh Peter's Pulpit to St. Peter's Chair,
One that does defy the Crosier and the Crown,
But yet can bouze with Blades that carrouze
Whilst Pottle-pots tumble down, dery down;
One that can comply with Surplice and with Cloak,
Yet for his end can Independ,
Whilst Presbyterian broke Britains yoke.
This is the way to trample without trembling,
It Is the Sycophant's only secure,
Covenants and Oaths are badges of dissembling,
It Is the politic pulls down the pure:
To profess and betray, to plunder and pray,
Is the only ready way to be great,
Flattery does the feat:
Never go, never stir, will venture further
Than the greatest Dons in the Town,
From a Copper to a Crown.
I am in a temp rate humor now to think well,
Now I Am in another for to drink well,
Then fill is up a Beer-boul boys, that we
May drink it merrily,
No knavish Spy shall understand,
For if it should be known,
It Is ten to one we shall be trappan'd.
I Will drink to thee a brace of quarts,
Whose Anagram is called True Hearts,
If all were well as I would have it,
And Britain cured of its tumor,
I should very well like my Fate,
And drink my Sack at a cheaper rate,
Without any noise or tumor,
Oh then I should six my humor.
But since it is no such matter, change your hue,
I may cog and flatter, so may you:
Religion is a widgeon, and Reason is Treason,
And he that has a Loyal heart may bid the world adieu.
We must be like the Scottish man,
Who with intent to beat down Schism,
Brought in the Presbyterian,
With Cannon, and with Catechism:
If Beuk will not do it, then Jockey shoot,
For the Kirk of Scotland does command,
And what has been, since they came in,
I think we have cause to understand.
A Song.
GAther your Rose-buds while you may,
Old time is still a flying.
For that Flower that smells to day,
To morrow will be dying.
That Age is best, which if she force
While youth and blood are warmer,
But being she grows worse and worse,
And still succeeds the former.
The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
The higher he is a getting,
The sooner will his race be Run,
And nearer to his setting.
Then be not coy, but use your time,
And while you may, go marry,
For if you lose but once your prime
You may for every tarry.
The Gelding of the Devil.
A Story strange I will you tell
Of the gelding of the Devil of hell,
And of the Baker of Mansfield Town,
That sold his bread both white and brown;
To Nottingham Market he was bound,
And riding under the Willows clear
The Baker sung with a merry cheer.
The Bakers horse was lusty and sound,
And worth in judgment full five pound;
His skin was smooth, and his flesh was fat,
His Master was well pleased with that,
Which made him sing so merry, merrily
As he was passing on the way.
But as he rode over the hill
There met him two devils of hell:
O Baker, Baker, then cried he,
How comes thy horse so fat to be?
These be the words the Baker did say,
Because his stones are cut away.
Then, quoth the devil, if it be so,
Thou shall geld me before thou do go:
First tie thy horse to yonder tree,
And with thy knife come and geld me;
The Baker he had a knife for the nonce,
Wherewith to cut out the devils stones.
The Baker, as it came to pass,
In have alighted from his horse,
And the devil on his back he lay,
While the Baker cut his stones away,
Which put the devil to great pain,
And made him to cry out amain.
O, quoth the devil, beshrew thy heart,
Thou do not feel how I do smart,
And for the deed that thou have done
I will revenged be again,
And underneath this green-wood tree
Next Market day I will geld thee.
The Baker then but a little said,
But at his heart he was sore afraid;
He durst no longer then to stay,
But he rode hence another way:
And coming to his Wife, did tell
How he had gelt the devil of hell.
Moreover to his Wife he told
A tale that made her heart full cold,
How that the devil to him did say,
That he would geld him next Market day:
O, quoth the good wife, without doubt
I had rather both thy eyes were out.
For then all the people far and near,
That know thee, will but mock and jeer,
And good-wives they will scold and brawl,
Then hold content, and b e thou wise,
And I Will some pretty trick devise.
I Will make the devil change his note,
Give me thy Hat, thy Band, and Coat,
Thy Hose and Doublet eke also,
And I like to a man will go;
I Will warrant thee next Marker day
To fright the devil clean away.
When the Bakers Wife she was so dressed,
With all her bread upon her beast,
To Nottingham Market, that brave Town,
And riding merrily over the hill,
O there she spied the two devils of holl.
A little devil, and another,
As they were playing both together;
Oh ho, quoth the devil, right fain,
Here comes the Baker riding amain:
Now be thou well, or be thou woe,
I will geld thee before thou do go.
The Bakers wife to the devil did say,
Sir, I was gelded yesterday:
O, quoth the devil, I mean to see;
And pulling her coats above her knee,
And so looking upward from the ground,
O there he spied a terrible wound.
O, quoth the devil, now I see
That he was not cunning that gelded thee,
For when that he had cut out the stones,
He should have closed up the wounds,
But if thou will stay but a little space
I Will fetch some salve to cure the place.
He had not ran but a little way,
But up her belly crept a Flea:
The little devil seeing that,
He up with his paw and gave her a pat,
Which made the good wife for to start,
And with that she let go a rowsing fart.
O, quoth the devil, thy life is not long
Thy breath it smells so horrible strong,
Therefore go thy way, and make thy will,
Thy wounds are past all humane skill;
Be gone, be gone, make no delay,
For here thou shall no longer stay.
The good wife with this news was glad,
But she left the devil almost mad;
And when she to her husband came,
With a joyful heart she told the same,
How she had couzened the devil of hell,
Which pleased her Husband wondrous well.
The Vagabond.
I Am a Rogue, and a stout one,
A most courageous drinker:
I do excel, its known full well,
The Ratter, Tom, or Tinker:
Then do I cry, Good your Worship
Bestow some small Denier a,
And bravely then at the bouzing Ken
I Will bouze it all in beer a.
My dainty Dames and Doxes,
When that they see lacking,
Without delay, poor wretches, they
Will end the Duds a packing:
Then do I cry, etc.
Ten miles unto a Market
I go to meet a Miser,
And in the throng I Will nip a bung,
And the party never the wiser:
Then do I cry, etc.
If the Gentry be coming,
Then straight it is my fashion,
My leg I Will tie close to my thigh
To move them to compassion:
Then do I cry, etc.
When I hear a Coach come rumbling,
To my Crutches straight I hye me,
For being lame, it is a shame
Such Gallants should deny me;
Then do I cry, etc.
My Peg in a string does lead me
When I go into the Town, Sir,
For to the blind all men are kind,
And will their alms bestow, Sir;
Then do I cry, etc.
In The winter time stark naked
I go into some City,
And every man, that spare them can,
Will give me clothes for pity;
Then do I cry, etc.
My doublet sleeves hang empty,
And for to beg the bolder
For meat and drink my arm I Will shrink
Up close unto my shoulder,
Then do I cry, etc.
If any gives me lodging
A courteous knave they find me,
For in my bed, alive, or dead,
I leave some Lice behind me;
Then do I cry, etc.
If from out the Low Countries
I hear a Captains name, Sir,
Then straight I Will swear I have been there,
And so in fight came lame, Sir;
Then do I cry, etc.
In Paul's Churchyard by a Pillar
Sometimes you see me stand, Sir,
With a writ that shows what cares, what woes
I have past by Sea and Land, Sir;
Then do I cry, etc.
Come buy, come buy a horn-book
Who buys my Pins and Needles:
Such things do I in the City cry
Often times to escape the Beadles;
Then do I cry, etc.
Then blame me not for begging,
And boasting all alone, Sir,
My self I will be praising still,
For Neighbors I have none, Sir;
Then do I cry, etc.
The Jovial Loyallist.
STay, shut the Gate,
The Other quart, 'faith it is not so late
As your thinking,
The stars which you see in the Hemisphere be,
Are but studs in our cheeks by good drinking;
The Suns gone to tipple all night in the Sea, boys
To morrow he will blush that he is paler than we boys,
Drink wine, give him water, it is Sack makes us the boys.
Fill up the Glass,
To the next merry Lad let it pass,
Come away with it:
Let Us set foot to foot, and but give our minds to it,
It Is heretical Six that does slay wit:
Then hang up good faces, let us drink till our noses
Gives freedom to speak what our fancy disposes,
Beneath whose protection, now under the rose is.
Drink off your Bowl,
'Twill enrich both your head and your soul
With Canary;
For a carbuncl'd face saves a tedious race,
And the Indies about us we carry:
No Helicon like to the juice of good wine is,
For Phoebus had never had wit that divine is,
Had his face not been bow-dy'd as thine is, and mine is.
This must go round,
Off with your hats till the pavement be crowned
With your Bevers,
A Red-coated face frights a Sergeant and his Mace,
Whilst the Constable trembles to shivers,
In state march our faces like some of the quorum,
While the whores do fall down, and the vulgar adore 'um,
And our noses like Link-boys run shining before 'um.
The Answer.
HOld, quaff no more,
But restore,
If you can, what you have lost by your drinking,
Three Kingdoms and Crowns,
With their Cities and Towns,
While the King and his Progeny is sinking;
The studs in your cheeks have obscured his Star, boys,
Your drink and miscarriages in the late war, boys,
Has brought his Prerogative thus to the Bar, boys.
Throw down the Glass,
He Is an Ass
That extracts all his worth from Canary:
That valor will shrink,
Which is only good in drink,
'Twas the Cup made the Camp to miscarry.
Ye thought in the world there was no power could tame ye,
Ye tipled and whor'd till the Foe overcame ye,
Cuds-nigs and ne'r-stir Sir, has vanquished Goddam-me.
Fly from the coast,
Or you are lost,
And the water will run where the drink went,
From hence you must slink,
If you swear and have no chink,
It Is the Curse of a Royal Delinquent.
Ye love to see Beer-bowls turned over the thumb well,
Yelove three fair Gamesters, four Dice, and a Drum well,
But you would as lieve see the devil as Oliver Cromwell.
Drink not the round,
You Will be drowned
In the source of your Sack and your Sonnets,
Try once more your Fate
For the Kirk against the State,
And go barter your Bevers for Bonnets:
I see how you are charmed by your female inchanters,
And therefore pack hence to Virginia for planters,
For an Act, and two Red-coats will rout all the Ranters.
The force of Opportunity.
YOU gods that rule upon the Plains,
Where nothing but delight remains;
You Nymphs that haunt the Fairy Bowers,
Exceeding Flora with her flowers;
The fairest woman that earth can have
Sometimes forbidden fruit will crave,
For any woman, whatsoever she be,
Will yield to Opportunity.
Your Courtly Ladies that attends,
May sometimes dally with their friends;
And she that marries with a Knight
May let his Lodging for a night;
And she that is only Worshipful
Perhaps another friend may gull:
For any woman, etc.
The Chambermaid that is newly married
Perhaps another man has carried;
Your City Wives will not be alone,
Although their husbands be from home;
The fairest maid in all the town
For green will change a russet Gown;
For any woman, etc.
And she that loves a Zealous brother,
May change her Pulpit for another;
Physicians study for their skill,
Whiles wives their Urinals do fill;
The Lawyers wife may take her pride
Whilst he their Causes does decide;
For every woman, etc.
The Country maid, that milks the Cow,
And takes great pains to work and do,
In The fields may meet her friend or brother,
And save her foul to get another;
And she that to the Markets gone
May horn her man ere she come home;
For any woman, etc.
You Goddesses and Nymphs so bright,
The greater Star, the lesser light;
To Lords, as well as mean estates,
Belongs husbands horned baits,
Then give your Ladies leave to prove
Then things the which your selves do love;
For any woman, what ere she be,
Will yield to Opportunity.
Lusty Tobacco.
YOU that in love do mean to sport,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
First take a Wench of a meaner sort,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
But let her have a comely grace,
Like one that came from Venus race,
Then take occasion, time, and place
To give her some Tobacco.
You -- gamesters must be bound,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
Their bullets must be plump and round,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
Your stopper must be stiff and strong,
Your Pipe it must be large and long,
Or else she will say you do her wrong,
She Will scorn your weak Tobacco.
And if that you do please her well,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
All others then she will expel,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
She will be ready at your call
To take Tobacco, Pipe and all,
So willing she will be to fall
To take your strong Tobacco.
And when you have her favor won,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
You must hold out as you begun,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
Or else she will quickly change her mind,
And seek some other Friend to find,
That better may content her mind
In giving her Tobacco.
And if you do not do her right,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
She Will take a course to burn your Pipe,
Tobacco, Tobacco.
And if you ask what she does mean,
She Will say she doth't to make it clean,
Then take you heed of such a Queen
For spoiling your Tobacco.
As I my self dare boldly speak,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
Which makes my very heart to break,
Tobacco, Tobacco,
For she that I take for my friend,
Has my Tobacco quite consumed,
She has spoiled my Pipe, and there is an end
Of all my good Tobacco.
Good Advice against Treason.
BUT since it was lately enacted high Treason
For a man to speak truth against the head of a State,
Let every wise man make use of his reason,
To think what he will, but take heed what he prate,
For the Proverb does learn us,
He that stays from the battle sleeps in a whole skin,
And our words are our own, if we keep them within,
What fools are we then that to prattle do begin,
Of things that do not concern us.
It Is no matter to me who ever gets the battle,
The Tubs or the Crosses, it is all one to me,
It neither increases my goods nor my cattle,
A beggar's a beggar, and so he shall be,
Unless he turn Traitor,
Let Misers take courses to board up their treasure,
Whose bounds have no limits, whose minds have no measure,
Let me be but quiet, and take a little pleasure,
A little contents my own nature.
But what if the Kingdom returns to one of the Prime ones?
My mind is a Kingdom, and so it shall be,
I Will make it appear, if I had but the time once,
He Is as happy in one, as they are in three,
If he might but enjoy it:
He that is mounted aloft, is a mark for the Fate,
And an envy to every pragmatical pate,
Whilst he that is low is safe in his estate,
And the great ones do scorn to annoy him.
I count him no wit that is gifted in railing,
And flurting at those that above him do sit,
Whilst they do out-wit him with whipping and goaling,
His purse and his person must pay for his wit:
But it is better to be drinking,
If Sack were reformed to twelve pence a quart,
I Would study for money to Merchandise for it,
With a friend that is willing in mirth we would sport,
Not a word; but we'd pay it with thinking.
My Petition shall be that Canary be cheaper,
Without either Custom, or cursed Excize,
That the Wits may have freedom to drink deeper and deeper,
And not be undone whilst our Noses we baptize,
But we'll liquor them, and drench them;
If this were but granted, who would not desire
To dub himself one of Apollo's acquire?
And then we will drink whilst our Noses are on fire,
And the quart-pots shall be Buckets to quench them.
The feastingof the Devil by Ben Johnson:
COok-Laurel, would needs have the devil his guest,
And bad him once into the Peake to dinner;
Where never the Fiend had such a Feast
Provided him yet at the charge of a sinner.
His stomach was queasie (for coming there coacht)
The jogging had caused some crudities rise,
To help it he called for a Puritan poacht,
That used to turn up the Eggs of his Eyes.
And so recovered unto his wish,
He sat him down, and he fell to eat;
Promooter in plum-broath was the first dish;
His own privy Kitchen had no such meat.
Yet though with this he much were taken,
Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher;
As soon as he spide the bawd, and bacon,
By this you may note the devil's a wencher.
Six pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
Sempsters, Tire-women, fit for his pallet,
With feather-men, and perfumers put,
Some twelve in a Charger to make a grand sallet.
A rich fat Usurer stewed in his Marrow,
And by him a Lawyers head and Green-sawce;
Both which his belly took in like a barrow,
As if till then he had never seen sauce.
Then carbinadoed, and cookt with pains,
Was brought up a cloven Sergeants Face;
The sauce was made of the Yeomans brains,
That had been beaten out with his own Mace.
Two roasted Sheriffs came whole to the board,
(The Feast had nothing been without 'um,)
Both living and dead they were Fox'd and Fur'd;
Their chains like Sawsages hung about 'um.
The very next dish was the Mayor of a town,
With a pudding of maintenance thrust in his belly;
Like a Goose in the Feathers dressed in his Gown,
And his couple of Hinch-boys boyld to a jelly.
A London Cuckold hot from the spit,
And when the Carver up had broke him,
The devil chopped up his head at a bit,
But the horns were very near like to have choakt him.
The chine of a Lecher too there was roasted,
With a plump Harlots haunch and Garlic;
A Panders pettitoes that had boasted
Himself for a Captain, yet never was warlike.
A large fat Pasty of a Midwife hot,
And for a cold baked meat into the story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought,
And coffined in crust, till now she was hoary.
To these, an over-grown-Justice of peace
With a Clark like a gizard thrust under each arm,
And warrants for sippets, laid in his own grease,
Set over a chafing dish to be kept warm.
The Jowle of a Jailer, served for Fish,
A Constable sous'd with Vinegar by,
Two Aldermen-Lobsters asleep in a dish,
A Deputy tart, a Chuch-warden pie.
All which devoured, he then for a close,
Did for a full draught of Darby call,
He heaved the huge Vessel up to his Nose,
And left not till he had drunk up all.
Then from the Table he gave a start,
Where banquet and wine were nothing scace;
All which he started away with a Fart,
From whence it was called the devils arse.
And there he made such a breach with the wind,
The hole too standing open the while,
That the sent of the Vapor before and behind,
Has foully perfumed most part of the Isle.
And this was Tobacco, the Learned suppose,
Which since in Country, Court, and Town,
In the devils Glister-pipe smoakes at the Nose
Of Polcat and Madam, of Gallant, and Clown.
From which wicked weed, with swines-flesh and Ling,
Or any thing else that is Feast for the Fiend,
Our Captains and we cry God save the King,
And send him good meat, and Mirth without end.
On the Goldsmiths-Committee.
COme Drawer, some wine,
Or we'll pull down the Sign,
For we are all jovial Compounders:
We'll make the house ring,
With healths to our KING,
And confusion light on his Confounders.
Since Goldsmiths Committee
Affords us no pity,
Our sorrows in wine we will steep 'um,
They force us to take
Two Oaths, but we'll make
A third, that we never mean to keep 'um.
And next, who ever sees,
We drink on our knees,
To the King, may he thirst that repines.
A fig for those traitors
That look to our waters,
They have nothing to do with our wines.
And next here is a Cup
To the Queen, fill it up,
Were it poison, we would make an end on it:
May Charles and She meet,
And tread under feet
Both Presbyter and Independent.
To the Prince, and all others,
His Sisters and Brothers,
As low in condition as high born,
We'll drink this, and pray,
That shortly they may
See all them that wrongs them at Tyburn.
And next here is three bowls
To all gallant souls,
That for the King did, and will venture,
May they flourish when those
That are his, and their foes
Are hanged and ram'd down to the Center.
And next let a Glass
To our undoers pass,
Attended with two or three curses:
May plagues sent from hell
Stuff their bodies as well,
As the Cavaliers Coin does their purses.
May the Cannibals of Pym
Eat them up limb by limb,
Or a hot Fever scorch 'um to embers,
Pox keep 'um in bed
Until they are dead,
And repent for the loss of their Members.
And may they be found
In all to abound,
Both with heaven and the countries anger,
May they never want Fractions,
Doubts, Fears, and Distractions,
Till the Gallow-tree choaks them from danger.
Insatiate Desire.
O That I could by any Chymick Art
To sperme, convert my spirit and my heart,
That at one thrust I might my soul translate,
And in her womb my self degenerate,
There steeped in lust nine months I would remain,
Then boldly -- my passage back again.
The Virtue of Wine.
LEt Soldiers fight for praise, and pay,
And Money bid the Misers wish;
Poor Scholars study all the day,
And gluttons glory in their dish;
It Is Wine, it is Wine revives sad souls,
Therefore give me the chearing bowls.
Let Minions marshal every hair,
And in a Lovers lock delight,
And artificial colors wear,
We have the native red and white;
It Is wine, pure wine, etc.
Take Phesant, Puet, and Culvered Salmon,
And how to please your Pallats think:
Give us a salt Westphalia gammon,
Not meat to eat, but meat to drink;
It Is wine, pure wine, etc.
Some has the Ptysick, some the Rheum,
Some has the Palsy, some the Gout;
Some swells fat, and some consume,
But they are sound that drink all out;
It Is wine, pure wine, etc.
Some men want Wit, and some want Wealth;
Some want a Wife, and some a Punke;
Some men want Food, and some want Health,
But he wants nothing that is drunk;
It Is wine, pure wine, etc.
It makes the backward spirits brave,
Them lively, that before were dull;
Those grow good Fellows that are grave,
And kindness springs from Cups brim-full;
It Is wine, it is wine revives sad souls,
Therefore give me the charming bowls.
The Horn exalted.
LIsten Lordings to my Story,
I will sing of Cuckolds glory,
And there at let none be vexed,
None does know whose turn is next;
And seeing it is in most men's scorn,
It Is Charity to advance the Horn.
Diana was a Virgin pure,
Amongst the res5 chaste and demure;
Yet you know well, I am sure,
What Acteon did endure,
If men have Horns for as she,
I pray thee rell me what are we?
Let thy friend enjoy his rest,
What though he wear Acteons creast?
Malice nor Venom at him spit,
He wears but what the gods think fit;
Confess he is by times Recorder
Knight of great Diana's Order.
Luna was no venial sinner,
Yet she has a man within her,
And to cut off Cuckolds scorns,
She decks her head with Silver horns;
And if the moon in heavens thus dressed,
The men on earth like it are blessed.
A Droll of a Louse.
DIscoveries of late have been made by adventures,
And many a pate has been set on the tenters
To tell many a thing more than true is,
How Whales have been served to Saylors in Brewis:
But here a poor Louse by this present defies
The Catalogue of Old Mandevils lies,
And take my report for a certain.
My father and mother, when first they joined paunches,
Begat me between an Old Pedlers haunches;
When bred to a Creeper, I know now how poxie
By chance got a suck of the blood of his Doxit,
Where finding the sweetness of my new Pastor,
I left the loins of my pockified Master,
And thus I grew into a fortune.
A Lord in this Land, that loved a bum well,
By chance came to wap with his Mort in the stumell,
I clung me close to him and left my Rampallion,
And scorned to converse with a Tatterdemallion,
But thought, by Sir Giles, to procure a portion
For my heirs to inherit clean linen and Satin,
But the Parliament crossed my intention.
This Gallant, God bless him, delighted in Tennis,
His sweat made me fat till he traveled to Venice,
Wherewith a Madona in single duella
He left me behind him within the Bordella,
Where lecherous passages I did discover
Between Bonaroboe and Diego, her Lover,
Beyond wonder to hear the report on it.
The trick with the Dildo was used out of measure,
Behind and before they had it at pleasure;
All Arretines tricks were practiced by labor,
Yet Cunicks they hate like Bethlehem Gabor,
Esteeming the English man for a Stallion,
And leaving the Goat unto the Italian,
All this I report for a certain.
One thing in the stews I commend, I pray hear it,
If a clap you do get you need never fear it,
For she, that is troubled come Gallen Comorboe,
Shall never touch upon your Lute nor Theorboe;
Yet many a brave Lord, that never wrought Treason,
Have there lost their heads, I know not the reason,
All this I report for a certain.
Thus living in wonder, escaping the Tallent
Of Citizen, Clown, Whore, Lawyer, and Gallant,
At last came a Soldier, I bravely did firk him,
Unto the skirts of his robustious Buff Jerkin,
There lived I a while without any harm, I
Was burnt before Bergen in Spinola's Army,
All this I report of a certain.
The Brewers praise.
There Is many a blinking verse was made
In honor of the Blacksmiths trade,
But more of the Brewers may be said,
Which no body can deny.
I need not else but this repeat,
The Blacksmith cannot be complear,
Unless the Brewer do give him a hear,
Which no body, etc.
When Smug unto his Forge does come,
Unless the Brewer do liquor him home,
Could never strike my pot and thy pot Tom,
Which no body, etc.
Of all the Professions in the Town,
This Brewers trade did gain enown,
His liquor once reached up to the Crown,
Which no body, etc.
Much blood from him did spring,
Of all the trades this was the King,
The Brewer had got the world in a sing,
Which no body,
Though Honor be a Princes daughter,
The Brewer will woe her in blood and slaughter,
And win her, or else it shall cost him hot water,
Which no body, etc.
He feared no powder, not martial stops,
But whipped Armies as round as tops,
And cut off his foes as thick as hops,
Which no body, etc.
He dived for Riches down to the bottom,
And cried, my Masters, when he had got 'um,
Let every tub stand upon his own bottom,
Which no body, etc.
In war like Arts he scorned to stoop,
For when his party began to droop,
He Would bring them all up as round as a hoop,
Which no body, etc.
The Jewish Scots who fear to eat
The flesh of Swine, our Brewers beat,
'Twas the sight of their hogssheads made them to retreat
Which no body, etc.
Poor Jockey and his Basket-hilt
Was beaten, and much blood was spilt,
When their bodies, like barrels, did run a tilt,
Which no body, etc.
Though Jemmy did give the first assault,
The Brewer he made them at length to hault,
And gave them what the Cat left in the malt,
Which no body etc.
They did not only bang the Kirk,
But in Ireland too they did as much work,
'Twas the Brewer made them surrender Cork,
Which no body, etc.
This was a stout Brewer, of whom we may brag,
But since he was hurried away with a hag,
We have brewed in a bottle, and baked in a bag,
Which no body, etc.
They said that Antichrist came to settle
Religion within a Cooler and a Kettle,
His Nofe and his Copper were both of a mettle,
Which no body, etc.
He had a strong, and a very stout heart,
And looked to be made an Emperor for it,
But the Devil did set a spoke in his Cart,
Which no body, etc.
The Christian Kings began to quake,
And said, with that Brewer no quarrels we'll make,
We'll let him alone, as he brews let him bake,
Which no body, etc.
But yet by the way you must needs understand.
He kept all his Passions so under command,
Pride never could get the upper-hand,
Which no body, etc.
And now may all stout soldiers say,
Farewell the glory of the Dray,
For the Brewer himself is turned to Clay,
Which no body, etc.
Thus fell a brave Brewer the bold son of slaughter,
Who need not to fear much what should fo low after,
That dealt all his lifetime in fire and water,
Which no body, etc.
And if his Successor had had but his might,
We all had not been in that pitiful plight,
But alas, he was found many grains too light,
Which no body, etc.
Though Wine be a Juice sweet, pleasant, and pure,
This trade does such pleasure and profit procure,
That every Vintner in Town is turned Brewer,
Which no body, etc.
But now let us leave singing, and drink off our Bub,
Lets call for a Reckoning, and every man club,
For I think I have told you a Tale of a Tub,
Which no body can deny.
A Let any.
FRom Essex Anabaptist Laws,
And from Norfolk Plough-tail Laws,
From Abigails pure tender Zeal,
Whiter than a Brownists veal,
From a Sergeants Temple pickle,
And the Brethrens Conventicle,
From roguish meetings, or Cutpurse hall,
And New England, worst of all,
Libera nos Domine.
From the cry of Ludgate debtors,
And the noise of Prisoners Fetters,
From groans of them that have the Pox,
And coyl of Beggars in the Stocks,
From roar of the Bridge, and Bedlam-prate,
And with Wives met at Billingsgate,
From scritch-owles, and dogs night-howling,
From Sailers cry at their main bowling,
Libera nos domine.
From Frank Wilsons trick of mopping,
And her ulcered hole with popping,
From Knights of the post, and from decoys,
From Whores, Bawds, and roaring Boys,
From a Bulker in the dark,
And Hannah with St. Tantlins Clark,
From Biskets Bawds have rubbed their gums,
And from purging-Comfit plums,
Libera nos Domine.
From Sue Prats Son, the fait and witty,
The Lord of Portsmouth, sweet and pretty,
From her that creeps up Holbourn hill,
And Moll that cries, God-dam-me still,
From backwards-ringing of the Bells,
From both the Counters and Bridewells,
From blind Robbin and his Bess,
And from a Purse that is penniless,
Libera nos Domine.
From gold-finders, and night-weddings,
From Women's eyes false liquid sheddings,
From Rocks, Sands, and Cannon-shot,
And from a stinking Chamber Pot,
From a hundred years old sinner,
And Duke Humphreys hungry dinner,
From stinking breath of an old Aunt
From Parritors and Pursevants
Libera nos Domine.
From a Dutchmans snick and sneeing,
From a nasty Irish being
From a Welchmans lofty bragging,
And a Monsieur loves not drabbing,
From begging Scotchmen and their pride,
From striving against both wind and tide,
From too much strong Wine and Beer,
Enforcing us to domineer,
Libera nos Domine.
The Blacksmith.
OF all the Trades that ever I see.
There Is none to the Blacksmith compared may be
With so many several tools works he,
Which no body can deny.
The first that ever Thunderbolts made
was a Cyclops of the Blacksmiths Trade,
As in a Learned Author is said,
Which no body, etc.
When thundringlike we strike about,
The fire like Lightning flashes out,
Which suddenly with water we d'out,
Which no body, etc.
The fairest Goddess in the Skies,
To marry with Vulcan did advise,
And he was a Blacksmith grave and wise,
Which no body, etc.
Vulcan he to do her right,
Did build her a Town by day and by night,
And gave it a name which was Hammer smiths hight
Which no body, etc.
Vulcan further did acquaint her,
That a pretty Estate he would appoint her,
And leave her Seacoal-lane for a Joynter,
Which no body, etc.
And that no enemy might wrong her,
He built her a Fort, you would wish no stronger,
Which was in the lane of Ironmonger,
Which no body, etc.
Smithfield he did cleanse from dirt,
And sure there was great Reason for it,
For there he meant she should keep her Court,
Which no body, etc.
But after in a good time and tide,
It was by the Blacksmith rectified
To the honor of Edmund Ironside,
Which no body, etc.
Vulcan after made a train,
Wherein the God of war was taken,
Which ever since has been called Paul's chain,
Which no body, etc.
The common Proverb as it is read,
That a man must hit the nail on the head,
Without the Blacksmith cannot be said,
Which no body, etc.
Another must not be forgot,
And falls unto the Blacksmiths lot,
That a man strike while the Iron is hot,
Which no body, etc.
Another comes in most proper and fit,
The Blacksmiths justice is seen in it,
When you give a man roast and beat him with the spit
Which no body, etc.
Another comes in our Blacksmiths way,
When things are safe, as old wives say,
We have them under lock and key,
Which no body, etc.
Another that is in the Blacksmiths books,
And only to him for remedy looks,
Is when a man's quite off the hooks,
Which no body, etc.
Another Proverb to him does belong,
And therefore let us do the Blacksmith no wrong,
When a man's held to it buckle and thong,
Which no body, etc.
Another Proverb does make me laugh,
Wherein the Blacksmith may challenge half,
When a Reason's as plain as a Pike staff,
Which no body, etc.
Though your Lawyers travel both near and far,
And by long pleading a good cause may mar,
Yet your Blacksmith takes more pains at the Bar,
Which no body, etc.
Though your Scrivener seek to crush and to kill,
By his counterfeit deed, and thereby does ill,
Yet your Blacksmith may forge what he will,
Which no body, etc.
Though your bankrupt Citizens lurk in their holes,
And laugh at their Creditors, and their Catchpoles,
Yet your Blacksmith can fetch them over the coals,
Which no body, etc.
Though Jockie in the stable be never so neat
To look to his Nag, and prescribe him his meat,
Yet your Blacksmith knows better how to give a heat
Which no body, etc.
If any Tailor have the Itch,
The Blacksmiths water, as black as pitch,
Will make his hands go thorough stich,
Which no body, etc.
There Is never a slut, i^ filth o'r smutch her,
But owes to the Blacksmith for her leacher,
For without a pair of tongues there is no man will touch her,
Which no body, etc.
Your roaring boy, who every one Quails,
Fights, domineers, swaggers, and rayls,
Could never yet make the Smith eat his Nails,
Which no body, etc.
If a Scholar be in doubt,
And cannot well bring his matter about,
The Blacksmith he can hammer it out,
Which no body, etc.
Now if to know him you would desire,
You must not scorn, but rank him higher,
For what he gets, is out of the fire,
Which no body, etc.
Now here is a good health to Blacksmiths all,
And let it go round, as round as a ball;
We'll drink it all off though it cost us a fall,
Which no body can deny.
The Gypsies, a Catch.
COme my dainty Doxies,
My Dove, my Darle, my Dear,
We have neither meat nor drink,
Yet never want good cheer;
We take no care for Candle Rents,
We lie, we swear, we snort in Tents,
Come rouse betimes
All you that love your dinners,
Our store now taken
With Pigs, Hens, and Bacon,
And that is good meat for sinners.
At Fairs and Wakes we cuzzen
Poor Country Folk by the dozen;
Some come to disburses,
And some to pick purses;
We for want of use
We steal both hose and shoes,
Gilded Spurs with jingling Rowels,
Shirts or Smocks, Sheets or Towels;
Come live with us all you that love your ease,
He that is a Gypsy may be drunk when he please,
We laugh, we quaff, we roar, we snufflle
We drink, we Drab, we cheat, we shuffle.
In imitation of Come my Daphne, a Dialogue betwixt Pluto and Oliver.
Pluto COme Imp Royal, come away,
Into black night we will turn bright day.

Oliver. It Is Pluto calls, what would my Sire?

Pluto. Come follow to the Stigian fire,
Where Ireton does wait to welcome thee in state.

Oliver. Were I in bed with Lamberts wife,
I Would quit those joys for such a life.

Pluto. My Princely Nol make have,
For thee we keep a fast.

Oliver. In these dismal shades will I
Unto thee unfold my Villainy.

Pluto. In my bosom I Will thee lay,
For thy sake we'll all keep holyday.

Chorus. We'll rage and roar, and fry in flames,
And Charles himself shall see
How damn'dly we agree,
Yet scorn to change our Chains
For his Eternal diety.

John and Jone.
IF you will give ear,
And hearken a while what I shall tell,
I think I must come near,
Or else you cannot hear me well:
It was a maid, as I heard say,
That in her Masters Chamber lay,
For maidens must it not refuse,
In Yeomens houses they it use
In a truckle-bed to lie,
Or in a bed that stands thereby,
Her Master and her Dame
Would have the maid to do the same.
This Maid she could not sleep
When as she heard the bedstead crack,
When Captain Standish stout
Made his Dame cry out, you hurt my back,
Fie, she said, you do me wrong,
You lie so sore my breast upon,
But you are such another man,
You Would have me do more than I can;
Fie Master, then quoth honest Joane,
I pray you let my Dame alone;
Fie, quoth she, what a coyl you keep,
I cannot take no rest nor sleep.
This was enough to make
A maiden sick and full of pain,
For she did fling and kick,
And swore she would tear her smock in twain;
But now to let you understand,
They kept a man whose name was John,
To whom this Maiden went anon,
And unto him she made her moan:
Tell me John, tell me the same,
What does my Master to my Dame?
Tell me John, and do not lie,
What ailes my Dame to squeak and cry?
Quoth John, your Master he
Does give your Dame a steel at night,
And though she find such fault,
It is her only hearts delight:
And you Jone, for your part,
You would have one with all your heart;
Yes indeed, quoth honest Jone,
Therefore to thee I make my moan;
But John, if I may be so bold,
Where is there any to be sold?
At London, then quoth honest John,
Next Market day I Will bring thee one.
What is the price, quoth Jone,
If I should chance to stand in need?
Why twenty shillings, then quoth John,
For twenty shillings you may speed;
The Maid she went unto her Chest,
And fetched him twenty shillings just:
Here John, quoth she, here is the Coin,
And prithee have me in thy mind,
And, honest John, do me no wrong,
But buy me one that is stiff and strong,
And, honest John, out of my store
I Will give thee two odd shillings more.
To Market then went John
When he had the money in his purse,
He domineered and swore,
And was as stout as any horse:
Some he spent in Wine and Beer,
And some in Cakes and other good cheer,
And some he carried home again
To serve his turn another time;
O John, quoth she, you are welcome home:
God-a-mercy, quoth he, gentle Jone;
But prithee John, now let me feel,
Have thou brought me home a steel?
Yes that I have, quoth John,
And then he took her by the hand,
He led her straight into a room
Where she could see nor Sun nor Moon;
The door to him he straight did clap,
He put the steel into her lap,
And then the Maid began to feel,
Cods foot, quoth she, it is a goodly steel:
But tell me, John, and do not lie,
What make these two things hang here by?
O Jone, to let thee understand,
They Are the two odd shillings thou putst in my hand.
The Power of Wine.
HOw poor is his Spirit, how lost is his Name,
Deceives Opinion, and cuttels his Fame,
When as his design turns near to their hate,
'Twixt shall I, and shall I suspects their own wait,
Has traffickt for honor, but lost the whole freight;
He that is stout in the front, but not so in the rear,
Does forfeit his Fame, and is cowed down by fear.
A small part of honor to him does belong,
Consults not his glory, but faints in the throng,
That fears to embrace what his Country does vote,
And yields up her liberty to a Red-coat;
Sure Midsummer is near, and some men do dote,
I like the bold Romans, whose same ever rings,
That kept in subjection such pitiful things.
He that will be Bugbear'd is turned again Child,
A Reed than a Scepter is fitter to weild:
Examine that story, no story you will find
Than saving that story that Cat will to kind;
The world is deluded, the Commonwealth blind,
Your false stamps of honor proves but copper mettle
And Fame sounds as loud from a thinkers old kettle.
He that past has the Pike, and found Canon-free,
Which shows that no curse from his Parents could be,
Had a soul so devout made killing a trade,
And now to retreat at the scent of a blade,
Does show of what mould our Knight Errant is made,
He that flags in his flight when his ambition soars high
Does stab his own merit, and gives fame the lie.
Then Cicero-like you gown-men drench cares,
O'rwhelm'd with your own and your Countries affairs,
And Pulpit-men to be as ayry as he;
Do you but preach Sack up, we'll never disagree
That Commonwealth's best that is the most free,
Then fret not, nor care not, when the Sack's in out crown,
We can fancy a King up, or fancy him down.
The mad Zealot.
AM I mad, O noble Festus,
When Zeal and godly knowledge
Have put me in hope
To deal with the Pope,
As well as the best in the College?
Boldly I preach, hate a Cross, hate a Surplice,
Mirers, Copes, and Rochers:
Come hear me pray mine times a day,
And fill your heads with Crochets.
In the house of pure Emanuel
I had my Education,
Where my friends surmise
I dazell'd mine eyes
With the light of Revelation,
Boldly I preach, etc.
They bound me like a Beldam,
They lasht may four poor quarters;
Whilst this I endure,
Faith makes me sure
To be one of Foxes Martyrs,
Boldly I preach, etc.
These injuries I suffer
Through Antichrsts persuasions;
Take off this Chain,
Neither Rome nor Spain
Can resist my strong invasions.
Boldly I preach, etc.
Of the beasts ten horns (God bless us)
I have knocked off three already:
If they let me alone,
I Will leave him none:
But they say I am too heady.
Boldly I preach, etc.
When I sacked the seven-hill'd City,
I met the great red Dragon.
I kept him aloof,
With the armor of proof,
Though here I have never a rag on:
Boldly I preach, etc.
With a fiery Sword and Target
There fought I with this Monster:
But the sons of pride
My zeal deride,
And all my deeds misconster.
Boldly I preach, etc.
I unhors'd the Whore of Babel
With a Lance of Inspirations:
I made her stink,
And spill her drink
In the cup of Abominations,
Boldly I preach, etc.
I have seen two in a Vision,
With a flying Book between them:
I have been in despair
Five times a year,
And cured by reading Greenham,
Boldly I preach, etc.
I observed in Perkins Tables
The black Lines of Damnation,
Those crooked veins
So stuck in my brains,
That I feared my Reprobation,
Boldly I preach, etc.
In the holy tongue of Canaan
I placed my chiefest pleasure,
Till I pricked my foot,
With an Hebrew root,
That I bled beyond all measure.
Boldly I preach, etc.
I appeared before the Archbishop,
And all the High Commission:
I gave him no Grace,
But told him to his face
That he favored Superstititon,
Boldly I preach, hare a Cross, hate a Surplice,
Miters, Copes, and Rechets:
Come hear me pray nine times a day,
And fill your heads with Crotchets.
Drunk with Love.
I Dote, I dote, but am a Sot to show it,
I was a very fool to let her know it,
For now she does so cunning grow,
And proves a friend worse than a foe,
She will not bold me fast, nor let me go:
She tells me I cannot forsake her,
Then straight I endeavor to leave her,
But to make me stay throws a kiss in my way,
O then I could tarry for every.
Thus I retire, salute, and sit down by her,
There do I fry in frost, and freeze in fire;
Now nectar from her lips I sup,
And though I cannot drink all up,
Yet I am fox'd with kissing of the Cup:
For her lips are two brimmers of Clarret,
Where first I began to miscarry,
Her breasts of delight are two bottles of White,
And her eyes are two cups of Canary.
Drunk, as I live, dead drunk beyond reprieve,
For all my secrets dribble through a sive;
About my neck her arms she lays,
Now all is Gospel that she says,
Which I lay hold on with my fudled faith;
I find a fond Lover's a Drunkard,
And dangerous is when he flies out,
With hips, and with lips, with black eyes and white thighs
Blind Cupid sure tipled his eyes out.
She bids me rise, tells me I must be wise,
Like her, for she is not in love she cries;
This makes me fret, and fling, and throw,
Shall I be fettered to my foe?
I begin to run, but cannot go;
I prithee, sweet, use me more kindly,
You were better to hold me fast,
If you once disengage your Bird from his cage,
Believe it he will leave you at last.
Like Sot I sit, that filled the Town with wit,
But now confess I have most need of it;
I have been fox'd with Duck and Deer
Above a quarter of a year,
Beyond the cure of sleeping, or small beer;
I think I can number the Months too,
July, August, September, October,
Thus goes my account, a mischief light on it,
But sure I shall go when I Am sober.
My legs are lamed, my courage is quite tamed,
My heart and all my body is enflamed,
As by experience I can prove,
And swear by all the Powers above,
It Is better to be drunk with wine than love:
For it is Sack makes us merry and witty,
Our foreheads with jewels adorning,
Although we do grope, yet there is some hope
That a man may be sober next morning.
Thus, with command, she throws me from her hand,
And bids me go, yet knows I cannot stand;
I measure all the ground by trips,
Was ever Sot so drunk with sips,
Or can a man be overseen with lips?
I pray Madam fickle be faithful,
And leave off your damnable douging,
Then do not deceive me, either love me or leave me,
Or let me go home to my lodging.
I have too much, and yet my folly is such,
I cannot hold, but must have the other touch;
Here Is a health to the King: how now?
I Am drunk, and speak treason I vow,
Lovers and Fools say any thing you know;
I fear I have tired your patience,
But I Am sure it is I have the wrong on it,
My wits are bereft, and all I have left
Is scarce enough to make a Song on it;
My Mistress and I shall never comply,
And there is the short and the long on it.
A Present to a Lady.
LAdies I do here present you
With a token Love has sent you;
It Is a thing to sport and play with,
Such another pretty thing
For to pass the time away with;
Prettier sport was never seen;
Name I will not, nor define it,
Sure I am you may devine it:
By those modest looks I guess it,
And those eyes so full of fire,
That I ned no more express it,
But leave your fancies to admire.
Yet as much of it be spoken
In the praise of this love-token:
It Is a wash that far surpasses
For the cleansing of your blood,
All the Saints may bless your faces,
Yet not do you so much good.
Were you never so melancholy,
It will make you blithe and jolly;
Go no more, no more admiring,
When you feel your spleen's amiss,
For all he drinks of Steel and Iron
Never did such cures as this.
It was born in the Isle of Man,
Venus nurss'd it with her hand,
She puffed it up with milk and pap,
And lulled it in her wanton lap,
So ever since this Monster can
In no place else with pleasure stand.
Collossus like, between two Rocks,
I have seen him stand and shake his locks,
And when I have heard the names
Of the sweet Saterian Dames,
O he is a Champion for a Queen,
It Is pity but he should be seen.
Nature, that made him, was so wise
As to give him neither tongue nor eyes,
Supposing he was born to be
The Instrument of Jealousy,
Yet he can, as Poets seign,
Cure a Ladies lovesick brain.
He was the first that did betray
To mortal eyes the milky way;
He is that Proteus cunning Ape
That will beget you any shape;
Give him but leave to act his part,
And he will revive your saddest heart.
Though he want legs, yet he can stand
With the least touch of your soft hand;
And though, like Cupid, he be blind,
There Is never a hole but he can find;
If by all this you do not know it,
Pray Ladies give me leave to show it.
A Combat of Cocks.
GO you tame Gallants, you that have the name,
And would accounted be Cocks of the Game,
That have brave spurs to show for it, and can crow,
And count all dunghill breed that cannot show
Such painted Plumes as yours; that think no vice,
With Cock-like lust to tread your Cockatrice:
Though Peacocks, Wood-cocks, y' are not for me:
I of two feathered Combatants will write,
He that to the life means to express the fight,
Must make his ink of the blood which they did spill,
And from their dying wings borrow his quill.
No sooner were the doubtful people set,
The matches made, and all that would had bet,
But straight the skilful Judges of the Play,
Bring forth their sharp-heel'd Warriors, and they
Were both in linen bags, as if 'twere meet,
Before they died to have their winding sheet.
With that in the pit they are put, and when they were
Both on their feet, the Norfolk Chanticleere
Looks stoutly at his ne'r-before seen foe,
And like a Challenger begins to crow,
And shakes his wings, as if he would display
His warlike Colors, which were black and gray:
Mean time the wary Wishich walks and breaths
His active body, and in fury wreaths
His comely crest, and of then looking down,
He whets his angry beak upon the ground:
With that they meet, not like that coward breed
Of Aesop, that can better fight than feed.
They scorn the dunghill, it is their only prize,
To dig for Pearl within each others eyes:
They fight so long, that it was hard to know
To the skilful, whether they did fight or no,
Had not the blood which died the fatal floor
Born witness of it; yet they fight the more,
As if each wound were but a spur to prick
Their fury forward: lightning's not more quick
Nor red than were their eyes: 'twas hard to know
Whether it was blood or anger made them so:
And sure they had been out, had they not stood
More safe by being fenced in by blood.
Yet still they fight, but now (alas) at length,
Although their courage be full tried, their strength
And blood began to ebb; you that have seen
A water-combat on the Sea, between
Two roaring angry boiling billows, how
They march, and meet, and dash their curled brows,
Swelling like graves, as if they did intend
TO intomb each other, ere the quarrel end:
But when the wind is down, and blustering weather,
They are made friends, and sweetly run together,
May think these Champions such, their combs grow low
And they that leapt even now, now scarce can go:
Their wings which lately at each blow they clapped
(As if they did applaud themselves) now flapt.
And having lost the advantage of the heel,
Drunk with each others blood they only reel.
From either eyes such drops of blood did fall,
As if they wept them for their Funeral.
And yet they would fain fight, they come so near,
As if they meant into each others ear
To whisper death; and when they cannot rise,
They lie and look blows in each others eyes.
But now the Tragic part after the fight,
When Norfolk Cock had got the best of it,
And Wisbich lay a dying, so that none,
Though sober, but might venture seven to one,
contracting (like a dying Taper) all
His force, as meaning with that blow to fall;
He struggles up, and having taken wind,
Ventures a blow; and strikes the other blind.
And now poor Norsolk having lost his eyes,
Fights only guided by the Antipathies:
With his (alas) the Proverb holds not true,
The blows his eyes never see, his heart most rue.
At length by chance, he stumbling on his foe,
Not having any power to strike a blow,
He falls upon him with a wounded head,
And makes his conquered wings his Feather-bed:
Where lying sick, his friends were very chary
Of him, and fetched in haste an Apothecary;
But all in vain, his body did so blister,
That 'twas incapable of any glister,
Wherefore at length, opening his fainting bill,
He called a Scrivener, and thus made his Will.
INprimis, Let it never be forgot,
My body freely I bequeath to the pot,
Decently to be boiled, and for its tomb,
Let it be buried in some hungry womb.
Item, Executors I will have none,
But he that on my side laid seven to one:
And like a Gentleman that he may live,
To him and to his heirs my comb I give;
Together with my brains, that all may know,
That oftentimes his brains did use to crow.
Item, It is my Will to the weaker ones,
Whose wives complain of them, I give my stones;
To him that is dull, I do my spurs impart,
And to the Coward, I bequeath my heart:
To Ladies that are light, it is my will,
My feathers should be given; and for my bitt,
I Would give't a Tailor, but it is so short,
That I Am afraid he will rather curse me for it:
And for the Apothecaries fee, who meant
To give me a Glister, let my Rump be sent.
Lastly, because I feel my life decay,
I yield, and give to Wisbich Cock the day.
Full forty times over.
FULL forty times over I have strived to win,
Full forty times over repulsed have been,
But it is forty to one but I Will tempt her again;
For he is dull Lover
That so will give over,
Since thus runs the sport,
Since thus runs the sport,
Assault her but often, and you carry the Fort,
Since thus runs the sport,
Assault her but often, and you carry the Fort.
There Is a breach ready made, which still open has been,
With thousands of thoughts to betray it within,
If you once but approach you are sure to get in,
Then stand not off coldly,
But venture on boldly,
With weapon in hand,
With weapon in hand,
If you once but approach, she is not able to stand,
With weapon in hand:
If you once but approach, she is not able to stand.
Some Lady-birds when down before them you sit,
Will think to repulse you with Fireballs of wit,
But alas they are but crackers, and seldom do hit;
Then vanquish them after
With alarms of laughter,
Their Forces being broke,
Their Forces being broke,
And the fire quite out, you may vanquish in smoke,
Their Forces being broke:
And the fire quite out, you may vanquish in smoke.
With pride and with state, some outworks they make,
And with Volleys of frowns drive the enemy back:
If you mind her discreetly she is easy to take,
Then to it, never fear her,
But boldly come near her,
By working about,
By working about:
If you once but approach, she can never hold it out,
By working about,
If you once but approach, she can never hold it out.
Some Ladies with blushes and modesty fight,
And with their own fears the rude for do affright,
But they are easily surpised if you come in the night:
Then this you must drive at,
To parley in private,
And then they are o'rthrown,
And then they are o'rthrown,
If you promise them farely, they will soon be your own,
And then they are o'rthrown,
If you promise them fairly, they will soon be your own.
The Answer.
HE is a fond Lover that doateth on scorn,
Who Fortune's neglects has patiently born:
He Is proud of abuses, if ever he return
To prove a fond Lover;
His wit he will discover,
By striving to win
A Fort, where old forces neglected have been.
For when a fort we defend from the foe,
We traitors imprison; they never come below;
And her fort is defended by answering, No,
If this will not do it,
Disdain added to it,
Your weapon will fall;
Although you approach, you will not enter at all.
They are Lady-birds sure, these lovers intend,
Which cannot with with such a fortress defend,
Whilst Hectors their squibs and their crackers do spend;
And vainly come after,
To conquer with laughter:
For she has no wit,
That spends all her fire in the smoke to be hit.
Where a Fort has no strength but such as is made
By pride and by state, such, a foe may invade;
For these are defenses for those of the trade.
You men are so witty,
Works guard not our City,
But forces within,
With which we maintain't, though the outworks you win.
These warriors at last with our weapons will fight;
And if we are -- they will come in the night:
But alas they are denied, our virtues are bright:
For she that loves honor,
No parley ere won her,
To yield up her power,
For a few flattering words, and the sport of an hour.
Loves Tenement.
IF any one do want a house,
Prince, Duke, Earl, Lord, or Squire,
Or Peasant, hardly worth a louse,
I can fit his desire:
I have a Tenement, the which
I know can fit them all,
It Is seated near a stinking ditch,
Men call it Cony-hall.
It stands below Bum-Alley,
A foot of belly-hill;
This Tenement is to be ta'n
By whosoever will:
For term of years, for months, or days
I Will let this pleasant bower,
Nay, rather than a Tenant want,
I Will let it for an hour.
About it grows a pleasant wood
To shade you from the Sun;
Well watered it is, for through the house
A pleasant stream does run;
If hot, you there may cool you,
If cold, you there find hear,
For little it not greatest is,
For least it is not too great.
My house, indeed, I must say is dark,
Be it by night or day,
But if that you be gotten in
You cannot miss the way;
None ever yet within my house
Did ever weep or wail,
You need not fear the tenure of it,
For it is held in tail.
But I must covenant with him
That takes this House of mine,
Either for years, or else for months,
Or for some shorter time,
That once a day he wash it,
And sweep it round about,
And if that he do fail of this,
Ill seek a new Tenant out.
Thus if you like my Tenement,
Your house-room shall be good,
Of such a temper as you shall
Need burn neither Cole or wood:
For be it cold, or be it hot,
To speak I dare be bold,
As long as you keep your nose within doors
You never shall be a cold.
In praise of Sack.
COme faith let us frolic, fill some Sack,
For then we shall not lack
Food for the belly, nor physic for the back,
This Beer breeds the Colic, let us spread
Our Cheeks with Royal Red,
And then we'll sing, hey toss the devil's dead,
To Faction we never more will bow the knee:
Great Britains fate in faith 'twas long of thee.
You may see what Madam England has been at
When we behold her Nose is fallen so flat.
To Wine we'll build a Shrine,
And an Altar divine,
High as the sign, where thy red nose and mine
Like Tapers shall shine:
Then let us drink for the Bets, it is loser that gets,
In spite of their threats, and our Creditors nets,
We'll drink off our debts,
Where he that is dead drunk, shall be
Laid out in state, as well as he
Whose dignity the only objects be
Of new Idolatry.
We'll guard his corpse like a Bride
To the grave-side, so copious and wide,
With as much pride as he that lately dyed,
The Railing set aside.
Fifty red-faces free, shall his Torch-beares be;
Six maudlin Mourners his Coffin shall carry,
There we will tipple free unto the memory
Of our fraternity drowned in Canary:
In the Devil-Tavern we commonly will show him,
We'll bury him from the devil,
Others fair men to him.
We'll be blythe and trimmer,
We'll have Music to --
Jews-harp, tongues, and skimmer,
Thy Cup -- my Cup --
Bar-boy fill the other brimmer,
Fly cup -- strike up -- there boy,
Till our eyes do grow dimmer.
Money shall be spent in Bays,
Every pen shall vent a praise,
And a monument we'll raise
Over his bones.
Where his Epitaph shall be,
That he dyed in Loyalty,
Never gained by Cruelty,
Kingdoms, nor Crowns.
That he never lived by injury,
Nor confounded men for forgery,
Neither put a prop of Perjury
Under his thrones;
That although he drank his Cares away,
And sometimes his Loyal fears away,
Yet he never drank the tears away
Of Orphans Groans.
Thus he shall be both frollick and free,
Who Is kindly killed with Canary,
With red and white, or other delight,
If tippling makes him miscarry,
Provided he a Bachanel be,
And scorns to admit of a parley
With Ale or Beer, or other such geer,
Polluted with Hop or with Barley,
Good Wine does ring, like Priest and King,
But it is Ale that looks like a Layman,
Then for the Vineyard draw your Whynyard,
The Devil go with the Dray-man.
A Maidenbead.
What is that you call a Maidenhead?
A thing often smothered in a bed,
Which some have now, which all have had,
Which freely given it makes one sad.
It Is got for naught with little pain;
It Is kept, but lost, not got again;
It Is that you call a Maidenhead,
By proving quick it is ever dead.
A lump which Lasses bear about
Till putting in does put it out;
A herb it is which proves a weed
When first the husk does bear a Seed.
It Is that a Maidenhead we call,
A thing by standing made to fall;
It is a Maidenhead, say we,
That is kept by holoing close the knee.
Which youths were often used to lurch,
Which Brides do seldom bear to Church;
At fifteen rate, at eighteen strange,
Which either lose when two do change.
That fit's when Maidens begin to reak,
When ere it parts, it makes them squeak,
And being gone, they straight repent:
This by a Maidenhead is meant.
The Night encounter.
When Phoebus had dressed his course to the West
To take up his rest below,
And Cynthia agreed in her glittering weed
Her light in his stead to bestow:
I walking alone, attended by none,
I suddenly heard one cry,
O do not, do not kill me yet,
For I am not prepared to dye.
At length I drew near to see and to hear,
And straight did appear a show,
The Moon was so bright I saw such a sight
It Is fit no Wight should it know:
A man and a maid together were laid,
And ever she said, nay fie,
O do not, etc.
The Youth was so rough he pulled up her stuff, And to blindman-buff he did go,
Though still she did lie, yet still she did cry, And put him but by with a no;
But he was so strong, and she was so young, That she rested a while for to cry,
O do not. etc.
Thus striving in vain, well pleased again,
She vowed to remain his foe,
She kept such a coyl when he gave her the foyl,
The greater the broyl did grow;
For he was prepared, and did not regard
Her words when he heard her cry,
O do not, etc.
He said to the Maid, Sweet be not afraid,
The Physician I will be;
If I light in the hole that pleases me best
I Will give thee thy Physic free;
He went to it again, and hit in the Vein
Where all her whole grief did Iye;
O kill me, kill me once again,
For I am prepared to dye.
At length he gave o'r, and suddenly swore,
He Would kill her no more that night,
He bid her adieu, for certain he knew
She would tempt him to more delight:
But when they did part it went to her heart,
For at length he had taught her to cry,
O kill me, kill me once again,
For now I am prepared to dye.
The Protecting Brewer.
A Brewer may be a Burgess grave,
And carry the matter so fine and so brave,
That he the better may play the knave,
Which no body can deny.
A Brewer may be a Parliament Man,
For there the knavery first began,
And brew most cunning Plots he can,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may put on a Nabal face,
And march to the wars with such a grace,
That he may get a Captains place,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may speak so monstrous well,
That he may raise strange things to tell,
And so to be made a Colonel,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may make his foes to flee,
And raise his fortunes, so that he
Lieutenant General may be,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer he may be all in all,
And raise his powers both great and small,
That he may be a Lord General,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may be like a Fox in a Cub,
And teach a Lecture out of a Tub,
And give the wicked world a rub,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer by's Excize and Rate,
Will promise his Army he knows what,
And set it upon the Colledge-gate,
Which no body, etc.
Methinks I hear one say to me,
Pray why may nor a Brewer be,
Lord-Chancellour of the University,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may be as bold as a Hector,
When he has drunk off his cup of Nectar,
And a Brewer may be a Lord Protector,
Which no body, etc.
Now here remains the strangest thing,
How this Brewer about his liquor does bring,
To be an Emperor, or a King,
Which no body, etc.
A Brewer may do what he will
Rob the Church and State, to sell
His soul unto the devil of hell,
Which no body can deny.
Crommwel's Coronation.
OLivir Oliver, take up thy Crown,
For now thou have made three Kingdoms thine own;
Call thee a Conclave of thy own creation,
To ride us to ruin, who dare thee oppose:
Whilst we thy good people are at thy devotion,
To fall down and worship thy terrible Nose.
To thee and thy Mermydons, Oliver, we,
Do tender our homage as fits thy degree,
We'll pay thee Exsize and Taxes, God bless us,
With fear and contrition, as penitents should,
Whilst you, great sirs, vouchsafe to oppreass us,
Not daring so much as in private to scold.
We bow down, as cowed down, to thee and thy sword.
For now thou have made thy self Englands sole Lord,
By Mandate of Scripture, and heavenly warrant,
The Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant too;
To Charles and his kingdoms thou art Heir apparent,
And born to rule over the Turk and the Jew.
Then Oliver, Oliver, get up and ride,
Whilst Lords, Knights, and Gentry do run by thy sid
The Maulflers and Brewers account it their glory,
Great god of the Grain-tub's compared to thee:
All Rebels of old are lost in their story,
Till thou ploo'st along to the Paddington-tree.
The Drunkard.
WHen I do travel in the night
The Brewers dog my brains do byte,
My heart grows heavy, and my heels grow light,
And I like my humor well, well,
And I like my humor well.
When with upsie freeze I line my head,
My Hostis Sellar is my bed,
The Worlds our own, and the devil is dead,
And I like, etc.
Then I Will be talking of matters of Court,
About the taking of some Fort,
And I Will swear a lie is true report,
And I like, etc.
Then I Will be talking of matters of State,
Of News from the Pallatinate,
What Princes are confederate,
And I like, etc.
If my hostess bids me pay my score,
And stand if I can, and call her whore,
I reell and tumble out of her door,
And I like, etc.
That I came from the War, I roar and swear
I made a fellow die for fear,
How many I killed that I never came neat,
And I like, etc.
If I chauce to meet with a Tailors Stall,
And the stones with my nose with fighting fall,
We kiss and are friends, and so there is all,
And I like, etc.
With an Indian Chimney in my hand,
Having a Boy at my command,
Like a brave Commander up I stand,
And I like, etc.
Then I justle with every post I meet,
I kick the dunghils about the street,
I trample the kennels about my feet,
And I like, etc.
The Constable I curse and ban,
That bids me stand if I be a man,
I tell him he bids me do more than I can,
And I like, etc.
Then home I go, and my Wife does skold,
She bawls the more I bid her hold,
It is my patience makes her bold,
And I like, etc.
Then I grope to bed, but miss the way,
Forget me where my Clothes I lay,
I call for drink by break of day,
And I like my humor.
Sng of Sir Eglamore.
SIr Eglamore, that valiant Knight, fa, la, la, la, la,
He put on his Sword, and he went to fight, fa, la,
And as he rid o'r hill and dale,
All armed, and in his Coat of Maile,
Fa, la, la, la, fa, la, la, lall a la.
There starts a huge Dragon out of his Den, fa, la,
Which had killed I know not how many men, fa, la,
But when he see Sir Eglamore,
If you had but heard how the Dragon did roar,
Fa, la, la, etc.
This Dragon he had a plaguey hard hide, fa, la, la,
Which could the strongest steel abide, fa, la, la,
He could not enter him with cuts,
Which vexed the Knight to his heart blood and guts,
Fa, la, la, etc.
All the trees in the wood did shake, Fa, la, la, Horses did tremble, and man
did quake, Fa, la, la,
The birds betook them to their peeping,
'Tould have made a man's heart to fall a weeping,
Fa, la, la.
But now it was no time to fear, fa, la, la.
For it was time to fight Dog, fight Bear, fa, la, la,
But as the Dragon yawning did fall,
He thrust his Sword down hilts and all,
Fa, la, la.
For as the Knight in Choler did burn, fa, la, la,
He ought the Dragon a shrewd good turn, fa, la, la,
In at his mouth his sword he sent,
The hilt appeared at his fundament.
Fa, la, la.
Then the Dragon, like a Coward, began to flee, fa
Into his Den that was hard by, fa, la, la,
There he laid him down and roared,
The Knight was sorry for his sword,
Fa, la, la.
The Sword it was a right good blade, fa, la, la,
As ever Turk or Spaniard made, fa, la, la,
I, for my part, do forsake it,
He that will fetch it, let him take it,
Fa, la, la.
When all was done, to the Alehouse he went, fa, la,
And presently his two pence he spent, fa, la, la,
He was so hot with tugging with the Dragon,
That nothing would squench him but a whole flagon,
Fa, la, la.
Well, now let us pray for the King and Queen, fa, la,
And eke in London there may be seen, fa, la, la.
As many Knights, and as many more,
And all as good as Sir Eglamore,
Fa, la, la, la, fa, la, la, la, lala la.
The Rump.
IF none be offended with the Sent,
Though I foul my mouth, I Will be content,
To sing of the Rump of a Parliament,
Which no body can deny.
I have sometimes fed on a Rump in Souse,
And a man may imagine the Rump of a Louse;
But till now was never heard of the Rump of a house,
Which no body, etc.
There Is a rump of beef, and the rump of a goose,
And a rump whose neck was hanged in a noose;
But ours is a Rump can play fast and loose,
Which no body, etc.
A Rump had Jane Shore, and a Rump Messaleen,
And a Rump had Antonies resolute Queen;
But such a Rump as ours is, never was seen,
Which no body, etc.
Two short years together we English have scarce
Been rid of thy rampant Nose (Old Mars,)
But now thou have got a prodigious Arse,
Which no body, etc.
When the parts of the body did all fall out,
Some votes it is like did pass for the Snout;
But that the Rump should be King was never a doubt
Which no body, etc.
A Cat has a Rump, and a Cat has nine lives.
Yet when her heads off, her Rump never strives
But our Rump from the grave has made two Retrives,
Which no body, etc.
That the Rump may all their enemies quail,
They Will borrow the Devils Coat of Mayl,
And all to defend their Estate in Tail,
Which no body, etc.
But though their scale now seem to be the upper,
There Is no need of the charge of a thanksgiving supper,
For if they be the Rump, the Armies their Crupper,
Which no body, etc.
There is a saying belongs to the Rump,
Which is good although it be worn to the stump
That one the Buttock, I Will give thee a thump,
Which no body etc.
There Is a Proverb in which the Rump claims a part,
Which has in it more of Sense than of Art,
That for all you can do I care not a fart,
Which no body, etc.
There;s another Proverb gives the Rumpt for his Crest,
But Aldermen Atkins made it a Jest,
That of all kind of Lucks, shitten luck is the best,
Which no body, etc.
There Is another Proverb that never will fail,
That the good the Rump will do when they prevail,
Is to give give us a flap with a Fox-tail,
Which no body, etc.
There is a saying, which is made by no fools,
I never can hear on it but my heart it cools,
That the Rump will spend all we have in close-stools,
Which no body, etc.
There Is an observation wise and deep,
Which, without an Onion, will make me to weep,
That Flies will blow Maggots in the Rump of a sheep,
Which no body, etc.
And some, that can see the wood from the trees,
Say, this sanctified Rump in time we may leese:
For the Cooks do challenge the rumps for their Fees
Which no body, etc.
When the Rump do sit, we'll make it our moan,
That a Reason be 'nacted, if their be not one,
Why a Fart has a tongue, and a Fiest has none,
Which no body, etc.
And whilst within the walls they lurk,
To satisfy us, will be a good work,
Who has most Religion, the Rump or the Turk,
Which no body, etc.
A Rump's a Fag-end, like the baulk of a furrow,
And is to the whole like the jail to the borough,
It Is the bran that is left when the meal is run thorough,
Which no body, etc.
Consider the world, the heaven is the head on it,
The earth is the middle, and we men are fed on it,
But hell is the rump, and no more can be said on it,
Which no body can deny.
The Red-coats Triumph.
COme Drawer, and fill us about some wine,
Let Us merrily tipple, the day is our own;
We'll have our delights, let the Country go pine,
Let the King and the Kingdom groan:
The Crown is our own, and so shall continue,
We'll baffle Monarchy quite,
Well drink of the Kingdoms Revenue,
And sacrifice all to Delight;
It Is power that brings us all to be Kings,
And we'll all be crowned by our might.
A fig for Divine ^^^ctures, and Law,
And all that true Loyalty do pretend;
We will by the Sword keep the Kingdoms in awe,
And our Powers shall never end;
The Church and the Scate we'll turn into liquor,
And spend a whole town in a day:
We'll melt all the Bodkins the quicker
Into Sack, and drink them away;
We'll keep the demeans of the Bishops and Deans,
And over the Presbyter sway.
Now nimble Saint Patrick is sunk in a bog,
And his Countrymen sadly cry, O hone, O hone;
Saint Andrew and his Kirkmen are lost in a fog,
And now we are the Saints alone;
Thus on our Equals and Superiors we trample,
And Jockie our stirrup shall hold,
The Citie's our Mule for example,
Whilst we will in plenty be roul'd;
Each delicate dish shall but echo our wish,
And our drink shall be cordial Gold.
A New years Gift.
FAir Lady, for your New Years Gift
I send you here a dish of fruit:
The first shall be a Popering Pear,
It Is all the fruit one tree does bear;
Roll it not, the juice, I doubt,
It Is so ripe, will all run out;
You must not pare it any whit,
But take it all in at one bit;
If in your mouth a while it lie,
It will melt deliciously.
The next in order does befall,
Two handful of great rouncefal;
King Pryapus, that Garden God,
Made Venus eat it in the God;
And since that seed all women sow,
Because it will so quickly grow;
If pretty Bun the stalk devour,
'Twil up again in half an hour;
When once the Bun it does espy,
'Twill mop most prettily.
The next in order, you shall have
A large Potato, and a brave:
It must be roasted in the fire
That Cupid kindled with desire,
The roasting it will mickle cost,
'Twill bast it self when it is roast;
It needs no sugar, nor no spice,
'Twill please a Stomach never so nice;
'Twill make a miad at Midnight cry,
It comes most pleasantly.
The bravest thing in all this Land,
You shall have Mars his holly wand:
A thing that never grew on tree,
'Twill tuch and sting worse than a Be;
Bend him not, perhaps in time
He may grow up unto his prime;
Correct him not too much at first,
For if you do, tears forth will burst;
When Mars came down to fetch his wand,
It cries, I cannot stand.
The Bulls Feather.
IT chanced not long ago, as I was walking,
An echo did bring me where two were a talking:
'Twas a man said to his wife, die had I rather,
Than to be cornuted, and wear the Bulls feather,
Then presently she replied, Sweet, art thou jealous?
Thou can not play Vulcan before I play Venus:
Thy fancies are foolish, such follies togather:
There Is many an honest man has worn the Bulls Feather.
Though it be invisible, let no man it scorn,
Though it be a new feather made of an old horn,
He that disdains it in heart or mind either
May be the more subject to wear the Bulls Feather,
He that lives discontent, or in despair,
And fears false measure, because his wife's fair:
His thoughts are inconstant, much like winter-weather,
Though one or two want it, he shall have a Feather.
Bulls Feathers are common as Ergo in Schools,
And only contemned by those that are fools:
Why should a Bulls Feather cause any unrest,
Since neighbors fare always is counted the best?
Those women wh'are fairest, are likely to give it;
And husbands that have them, are apt to believe it.
Some men though their wives should seem for to tedder,
They would play the kind neighbor, and give the Bulls feather.
Why should we repine that our wives are so kind,
Since we that are husbands are off the same mind?
Shall we give them feathers, and think to go free?
Believe it, believe it, that hardly will be.
For he that disdains my Bulls feather to day,
May light of a Lass that will play him foul play,
There Is never a proud gallant that treads on Cows leather,
But he may be cornuted, and wear the Bulls feather.
Though Beer of that brewing I never did drink,
Yet be not displeased if I speak what I think,
Scarce ten in a hundred, believe it, believe it,
But either they will have it, or else they will give it.
Then let me advise all those that do pine,
For fear that false jealousy shorten their time:
That disease will torment them worse than any fever:
Then let all be contented to wear the bulls feather.
Old England turned New.
YOu talk of New England, I truly believe
Old England is grown new, and does us deceive,
I Will ask you a question or two, by your leave,
And is not old England grown new?
Where are your old Soldiers with slashes and skars,
That never used drinking in no time of wars,
Nor shedding of blood in mad drunken jars?
And is not, etc.
New Captains are come that never did fight,
But with Pots in the day, and Punks in the Night,
And all their chief care is to keep their swords bright,
And is not, etc.
Where are your old swords, your bills, and your bows,
Your Bucklers rnd Targets that never feared blows?
They are turned to Steelettoes, with other fair shows,
And is not, etc.
Where are your old Courtiers, that used to ride
With forty blew-coats and footmen beside?
They are turned to six horses a coach with a guide,
And is not, etc.
And what is become of your old fashion Clothes,
Your long-sided breeches, and your trunk hose?
They are turned to new fashions, but what, the Lord knows,
And is not, etc.
Your Gallant and his Tailor some half year together,
To fit a new suit to a new hat and feather,
Of Gold, or of Silver, silk, cloth, stuff, or leather,
And is not, etc.
We have new fashioned beards, and new fashioned locks,
And new fashioned hats for your new pated blocks,
And more new diseases besides the French pox,
And is not, etc.
New houses are built, and the old ones pulled down,
Until the new houses sell all the old ground,
And then the house stands like a horse in the pound,
And is not, etc.
New fashions in houses, new fashions at table,
The old servants discharged, the new are more able,
And every old custom is but an old fable,
And is not, etc.
New trickings new goings, new measures, new paces,
New heads for your men, for your women new faces,
And twenty new tricks to mend their had cases,
And is not, etc.
New tricks in the Law, new tricks in the hold,
New bodies they have, they look for new souls
When the money is paid for building old Paul's,
And is not, etc.
Then talk you no more of New England,
New England is where Old England did stand,
New furnished, new fashioned, new woman'd, new manned,
And is not Old England grown New.
A merry Song.
COme Drawer, turn about the bowl
Till every soul has made a scrowle
As long as his arm:
Again, my boy, be filling still
Till every will has had his fill,
'Twill keep us from harm:
For he that is copious, and does freight with Sack,
Has the world at will, and does nothing lack;
He Is richest then can drink off a Tun,
The bravest men that are under the Sun;
Now the world is so giddy, that it scarce knows
To smell out the truth now it has lost its nose:
That has left behind a pitiful case,
It smells, you will find, in every place.
Then since he is happiest that drinks the most,
Joy, call mine Host, that honest tossed,
He shall have his share;
For interest we'll give him drink,
Now wine is chink, yet let him think
Out dealing is saire;
For I Will maintain his reckoning's good,
Though we had drunk on tick since Noah's flood,
We'll clear it all in Platoes year,
You Will hear we shall be Catoes there:
Then he is an ass will spare for Chalk
To purchase Sack; what ever you talk,
He Is not great, nor rich, nor wise.
An errant Cheat does Wine despise.
A Scottish Covenant we'll take
To burn at stake, if not forsake
The old heresy
Of bowzing to a petticoat,
If healths of note we could not vote
Past any she,
They are but blazes, and soon are gone,
Fine trifles for us to play upon;
When we have naught, or little to do,
We'll have 'um brought, and tickle 'um too:
Mean time let us drink a carrouse to those
Who are neither the French nor the Spaniards foes,
For all our treasure is there in their Mines,
There Is no pleasure here but in their wines.
The Contented.
PRay, why should any man complain,
Or why disturb his breast or brain
At this new alteration?
Since that which has been done's no more
Than what has often been done before,
And that which will be done again,
As long as there are ambitious men,
That strive for domination.
In this mad age there is nothing firm,
All things have period, and their term,
Their rise and declinations;
Those gaudy nothings we admire,
Which get above and shine like fire,
Are empty vapors raised from ground,
Their mock-shine past their quickly down,
Must fall like exhalation.
But still we Commons must be made
A gaull'd, a lame, thin hackney Jade,
And all by turns will ride us;
This side, or that, no matter which,
For both do ride with spur and switch,
Till we are tired, and then at last
We stumble, and our riders cast,
'Cause they would not feed nor guide us.
The insulting Clergy quite mistook,
Thinking that Kingdoms past by book,
Or Crowns were got by prating;
It Is not the black coat, but the red,
Has power to make, or be the head;
Nor is it oaths, nor words, nor tears,
But Muskets and full Bandeleers
Have power of legislating.
The Lawyers must lay by their books,
And study Monck much more than Cooks;
The Sword is the Learned Pleader,
Reports and Judgments will not do 't,
But it is Dragoons and Horse and Foot;
Words are but wind, but Swords come home,
A stout tongued Lawyer is but a moan,
Compared to a stout file-leader.
Such wit and valor root all things,
They pull down, and they set up Kings,
All Law is in their bosoms;
That side is always right that is strong,
And that that is beaten must be wrong:
And he that thinks it is not so,
Unless he is sure to beat 'um too,
He Is but a fool to oppose 'um.
Let them impose taxes and rates,
It Is but on them that have estates,
Not such as thou and I are:
But it concerns those worldlings which
At least are made, or else grow rich,
Such as have studied all their days
The saving and the thriving ways,
To be the Mules of power.
If they will reform the Church or State,
We'll never be troubled much thereat:
Let each man take his opinion,
If we don't like the Church, you know
Taverns are free, and there we'll go;
And if every one will be
As clearly unconcerned as we,
They Will never fight for domination.
The Indifferent.
What an Ass is he
Waits a woman's leisure
For a minutes pleasure,
And perhaps may be
Gulled at last, and lose her,
What an ass is he?
Shall I sigh and die
'Cause a maid denies me,
And that she may try me,
Suffer patiently?
O no! Fate shall tie me
To such cruelty.
Love is all my life,
For it keeps me doing:
Yet my love and wooing
Is not for a Wife:
It is good eschewing
Warring, care, and strife.
What need I to care
For a woman's favor?
If another have her,
Why should I despair,
When for gold and labor
I can have my share.
If I fancy one,
And that one do love me,
Yet deny to prove me,
Farewell, I am gone.
She can never move me,
Farewell, I am gone.
If I chance to see
One that is brown, I love her,
Till I see another
That is browner than she,
For I am a lover
Of my liberty.
Every day I change,
And at once love many,
Yet not tied to any,
For I love to range,
And if one should stay me,
I should think it strange.
What though she be old,
So that she have riches,
Youth and Form bewitches,
But it is store of Gold
Cures lascivious itches,
So that Critics hold.
A West-country Man's Voyage to New England.
MY Masters give audience, and listen to me,
And straight che will tell you where che have be:
Che have been in New England, but now cham come over,
Itch do think they shall catch me go thither no more.
Before che went o'r, Lord how voke did tell
How vishes did grow, and how birds did dwell
All one mong, the other in the wood and the water,
Che thought had been true, but che find no such matter.
When first che did land che mazed me quite,
And 'twas of all days on a Satterday night,
Che wondered to see the strong building were there,
'Twas all like the standing at Bartholmew Fair.
Well, that night che slept till near Prayer time,
Next morning che wondered to hear no bells chime,
And when che had asked the reason, che found
'Twas because there was never a Bell in the Town.
At last being warned to Church to repair,
Where che did think certain che should hear some prayer,
But the Parson there no such matter did teach,
They scorned to pray, they were all able to preach.
The virst thing they did, a Zalm they did sing,
I plucked out my Zalm book, which with me did bring,
Che was troubled to seek him, cause they call him by name,
But they had got a new Song to the tune of the same.
When Sermon was done was a Child to baptize
About sixteen years old, as volk did surmise,
And no Godfather or Godmother, yet 'twas quiet and still,
The Priest durst not cross him for fear of his ill will.
A Sir, quoth I, and to dinner che went,
And gave the Lord thanks for what he hd sent;
Next day was a wedding, the brideman, my friend,
He kindly invites me, so thither I wend.
But this, above all, to me wonder did bring,
To see a Magistrate marry, and had never a ring;
Che thought they would call me the woman to give,
But che thick he stole her, for he asked no man leave.
Now this was new Dorchester as they told me,
A Town very famous in all that Country;
They said 'twas new building, I grant it is true,
Yet me thinks old Dorchester as fine as the new.
Che staid there among them till che was weary at heart;
At length there came shipping, che got leave to depart:
But when all was ended che was coming away,
Che had threescore shillings for swearing to pay.
But when che saw that, an oath more che swore,
Che would stay no more longer to swear on the score,
Che bid farewell to those Fowlers and Fishers,
So God bless old England and all his well wisher.
A medicine for the Quartan Ague.
THe Aphorisms of Galen I count but as straws,
Profound Pispot-peepers be you all mute,
The old quartan fever breaks all Physick-Laws,
To help to cure it I think it is boot:
Perusing of late a wormeaten book,
Brought hither from Cinthia down in Charles's wain;
A curious Medicine out thence I took,
To cure the quartan Fever again.
First choose a Physician that will not exceed
Probatum est, speaking more than he knows,
Who has more skill in his tongue than his head;
Who his Potions on Patients gratis bestows,
Three Midsummer moons in one, let him pray
To Apollo, and the Moon being full in the wane,
And Scola Selerna twice backward to say,
And it will cure the quartan Fever again.
His Patients water then let him cast
In a pure Urinal of old August Ice,
And die thim strictly, no gross meats to eat,
But feed him with fancies, and antic device,
To walk every morning some eight miles or more,
Before Phoebus rises, in the sunshine,
And before he be up to be seen without door,
And 'twill cure, etc.
Then let him take from him nine drops and a half
Of purified blood, but pierce not the skin,
Only open a vain in the heel of the calf,
Some half a year before the fit do begin;
To sweat eleven minutes in an Oven let him lie,
Heat with a North wind, and a shower of rain,
And sleep every night with one half of an eye,
And it will cure, etc.
To keep his body always soluble and loose,
That he shall never fear to be subject to be bound,
Let him drink Woodcocks water in the quill of a Goose,
And always untruss when he goes to ground;
Thus being prepared, let the Doctor proceed
With all other ingredients to conquer his pain,
And profess more Art than ere he did read,
To cure the quartan, etc.
Then let him take the wind of the wing of a Crane,
As he flies over Caucasus hill,
With the precious stone was in Gyges his Ring,
Mix these with three turns of an honest Windmil,
Boil these all together from a pint to a quart
In a Travelers mouth whose tongue cannot feign,
And having new dined give him this next his heart,
And 'twill cure, etc.
Then three handful take of Popes holy shadow,
When Sol is new entered into the dog-daies,
Three skreeches of an Owl, four kaws of a Jackdaw,
With the brains and the heads of three ninepenny nails,
Fry these together within a meal-sive,
With the sweat of the south side of a French bean,
And this to his Patient Morn and Even let him give,
And 'twill cure, etc.
Take three merry thoughts of a Bride the first night
She Is to lie with her Groom, to purge melancholy,
Three gingles of the silver spur of a field Knight,
Four Puritan faces, not counterfeit holy,
Take three youthful capers of an old Ox,
And thorough a joined stool them let him strain,
And then drink the juice throrough the tail of a Fox,
And it will cure, etc.
Moreover, because I strive to be brief,
Take three honest thrums of a weavers shuttle,
Three snips of a Tailors sheers that is no thief,
A cut-purses thumb, with his horn and his whittle,
The mind of a Miller that never took a corn
More than his due in grinding of grain,
Burn these all together with Jeeny red stalks,
And 'twill cure, etc.
And lastly, this counsel my old Author gives,
Take the blood of a Beetle in the air as she flies,
Who, like a Physician, of excrement lives,
And therewith let Empericks annoint his quick eyes;
This being practiced, he shall see soon
All natural mysteries perfect and plain,
And know as much Physic as the man in the Moon
To cure the quartan fever again.
A Catch.
NOw I am married, Sir John I Will not curse,
He joyn's us together for better, for worse;
But if I were single I tell you plain,
I would be advised ere I married again.
Of Levelling.
I Have reason to fly thee, and not to sit down by thee,
For I hate to behold one so sawey and bold,
That derides and contemns his Superiors;
Your Madams and Lords,
With such manerly words,
With gestures that be
Fit for our degree
Are things that we and you
Do claim as our due
From all those that are our inperiours,
For from the beginning there were Princes we know,
It Is your Levellers do hate cause they cannot be so.
All titles of honor were at first in the Donors,
But being granted away by that persons stay,
Where he wore a small soul or a bigger,
There Is a necessity
That there should be a degree,
Though Dick, Tom, and Jack
Will serve you and your pack,
Where it is due we'll afford
A Sir John, or my Lord,
Honest Dick's name is enough for a digger;
He that has a strong purse may all things be, or do,
Be valiant, and wise, and religious too.
We have cause to adore that man that has store
Though a boor or a sot, there is something to be got
Though he be neither honest nor witty,
Make him high, let him rule,
He Will be playing the fool,
And transgress, then we will squeeze
Him for fines and for fees,
And so we shall gain
By the vanities of his brain,
It Is the fools Cap that maintains the City;
If honor be but air, it is in common, and as fit
For the Fool, or the clown, as the Champion or wit.
Then why may not we be of a different degree,
And each man aspire to be greater and higher
Than his wiser or honester brother,
Since Fortune and Nature
Their favors do scatter,
This has Valor, that Wit
To his wealth, nor is it fit
That one should have all,
For then what would befall
He that is born not to one nor the other?
Though honor were a prize from at first, now it is a chattel,
And as mere huntable now as your ware, lands, or cattle.
But in this we agree to live quiet and free,
To drink Sack and submit, and not show your wit
By your prating, but silence and thinking;
Let the Presbyter Jews
Read Diurnals and News,
And lard their discourse
With a Covenant that is worse;
That which pleases me best
Is a Song or a Jest,
And my obedience I Will show it by my drinking;
All the name I desire is an honest good Fellow,
And that man has no worth that will not sometimes be mellow.
In praise of his Mistrisses Beauty.
I Have the fairest non-perel,
The fairest that ever was seen,
And had not Venus been in the way,
She had been Beauties Queen.
Her lovely looks, her comely grace,
I will describe at large;
God Cupid put her in his books,
And of this Jem took charge.
The Grecian Helen was a Moore,
Compared to my deer Saint,
And fair faced Sirens beauty poor,
And yet she does not paint.
Andromeda, whom Perseus loved,
Was foul were she in sight,
Her lineaments so well approved,
In praise of her I Will write.
Her hair not like the golden wyre,
But black as any Crow,
Her brows so beetl'd all admire,
Her forehead wondrous low.
Her squinting, staring, gogling eyes
Poor Children do affright,
Her nose is of the Sarasens size;
O she is a matchless wight.
Her Oven-mouth wide open stands,
And teeth like rotten pease,
Her Swan-like neck my heart commands,
And breasts all bit with Fleas.
Her tawny dugs, like two great hills,
Hang sow-like to her waste,
Her body huge, like two wind-mills,
And yet she is wondrous chaste.
Her shoulders of so large a breadth,
She Would make an excellent Porter,
And yet her belly carries most,
If any man could sort her.
No Shoulder of Mutton like her hand,
For broadness, thick and fat,
With a pocky Mange upon her wrist:
Oh Jove! how love I that?
Her belly Tun-like to behold,
Her bush does all excel,
The thing that, by all men extolled,
Is wider than a well.
Her brawny buttocks, plump and round,
Much like a Horse of War,
With speckled thighs, scab'd and scarce sound;
Her knees like Bakers are.
Her legs are like the Elephants,
The calf and small both one,
Her anckles they together meet,
And still knock bone to bone.
Her pretty feet, not bove fifteens,
So splay'd as never was,
An excellent Usher for a man
That walks the dewy grass,
Thus have you heard my Mistress praised,
And yet no flattery used,
Pray tell me, is she not of worth?
Let her not be abused.
If any to her have a mind,
He does me wondrous wrong,
For as she is beauteous, so she is chaste,
And thus concludes my Song.
Sensual Delight.
ARe you grown so melancholy,
That you think of naught but folly?
Are you sad, are you mad, are you worse,
Do you think want of Chinck is your curse?
Do you love for to have longer life, or a grave?
Then this will cure you.
First, I would have a bag of Gold,
That should ten thousand pieces hold,
And all that in your lap would I pour
For to spend on your friend or your whore,
For to play away a dice, or to shift you from your lice
And this will cure you.
Next I would have a soft bed made,
Wherein a Virgin should be laid
That will play any way you devise,
That will stick like an itch to your thighs,
That will bill like a dove, lie beneath or above,
And this will bill like a dove, lie beneath or above,
And this will cure you.
Next the bowl that Jove devine
Drunk Nectar in, filled up with wine,
And all that, like a Greek, you should quaff
Till your cheeks they look red, and you laugh,
Unto Ceres, and to Venus, unto Bacchus and Selenus,
And this will cure you.
Next seven Eunuchs should appear
Singing in Spheare-like manner here
In the praise of the wages of delight,
Venus can use with man in the night,
When she seems to adorn Vulcans head with a ho^^
And this will cure you.
But if no gold nor women can,
Nor wine, nor Song make merry man,
Let the Batt be your mate and the Owl,
Let the pain in the brain make you howl:
Let the Pox be your friend, and the Plague be your end.
And this will cure you.
New England described.
AMong the purifidian Sect,
I mean the counterfeit Elect:
Zealous bankrupts, Punks devout,
Preachers suspended, rabble rout,
Let them sell all, and out of hand
Prepare to go to New England,
To build new Babel strong and sure,
Now called a Church unspotted pure.
There Milk from Springs, like Rivers, flows,
And Honey upon hawthorn grows;
Hemp, Wool, and Flax there grows on trees
The mould is fat, it cuts like cheese;
All fruits and herbs spring in the fields,
Tobacco it good plenty yields;
And there shall be a Church most pure,
Where you may find salvation sure.
There Is Venison of all sorts great store,
Both Stag, and buck, wild Goat, and Boar,
And all so tame, that you with ease
May take your fill, eat what you please;
There Is Beavers plenty, yea, so many,
That you may buy two skins a penny,
Above all this, a Church most pure,
Where to be saved you may be sure.
There Is flight of Fowl do cloud the sky,
Great Turkies of threescore pound weight,
As big as Estriges, there Geese,
With thanks, are sold for pence a piece;
Of Duck and Mallard, Widgeon, Tease,
Twenty for twopence make a meal;
Yea, and a Church unspotted pure,
Within whose bosom all are sure.
Lo, there in shoals all sorts of fish,
Of the salt seas, and water fresh:
Ling, God, Poor-John, and Haberdine,
Are taken with the Rod and Line;
A painful fisher on the shore
May take at least twenty an hour;
Besides all this a Church most pure,
Where you may live and dye secure.
There twice a year all sorts of Grain
Does down from heaven, like hailstones, rain;
You never shall need to sow nor plough,
There Is plenty of all things enough:
Wine sweet and wholesome drops from trees,
As clear as crystal, without lees;
Yea, and a Church unspotted, pure,
From dregs of Papistry secure.
No Feasts nor festival set days
Are here observed, the Lord be praised,
Though not in Churches rich and strong,
Yet where no Mass was ever Sung,
The Bulls of Bashan never met there
Surplice and Cope durst not appear;
Old Orders all they will abjure,
This Church has all things new and pure.
No discipline shall there be used,
The Law of Nature they have chused
All that the spirit seems to move
Each man may choose and so approve,
There Is Government without command
There Is unity without a band;
A Synagogue unspotted pure,
Where lust and pleasure dwells secure.
Lo in this Church all shall be free
To Enjoy their Christian liberty;
All things made common, void of strife,
Each man may take another wife
And keep a hundred maids, if need,
To multiply, increase, and breed,
Then is not this Foundation sure,
To build a Church unspotted, pure:
The native People, though yet wild,
Are altogether kind and mild,
And apt already, by report,
To live in this religious sort;
Soon to conversion they will be brought
When Warrens Mariery have wrought,
Who being sanctified and pure,
May by the Spirit them alure.
Let Amsterdam send forth her Brats,
Her Fugitives and Runnagates:
Let Bedlam, Newgate, and the Clink
Disgorge themselves into this sink;
Let Bridewell and the stews be kept,
And all sent thither to be swept;
So may our Church be cleans'd and pure,
Keep both it self and state secure.
The insatiate Lover.
COme hither my own sweet duck,
And sit upon my knee,
That thou and I may truck
For thy Commodity,
If thou will be my honey,
Then I will be thine own,
Thou shall not want for money
If thou will make it known;
With hey ho my honey,
My heart shall never rue,
For I have been spending money
And amongst the jovial Crew.
I prithee leave thy scorning,
Which our true love beguiles,
Thy eyes are bright as morning,
The Sun shines in thy smiles,
Thy gesture is so prudent,
Thy language is so free,
That he is the best Student
Which can study thee;
With hey ho, etc.
The Merchant would refuse
His Indies and his Gold
If he thy love might choose,
And have thy love in hold:
Thy beauty yields more pleasure
Than rich men keep in store,
And he that has such measure
Never can be poor;
With hey ho, etc.
The Lawyer would forsake
His wit and pleading strong:
The Ruler and Judge would take
Thy part were it right or wrong;
Should men thy beauty see
Amongst the learned throngs,
Thy very eyes would be
Too hard for all their tongues;
With hey ho, etc.
Thy kisses to thy friend
The Surgeons skill out-strips,
For nothing can transcend
The balsome of thy Lips,
There is such vital power
Contained in thy breath,
That at the latter hour
'Twould raise a man from death;
With hey, ho, etc.
Astronomers would not
Lie gazing in the skies
Had they thy beauty got,
No Stars shine like thine eyes;
For he that may importune
Thy love to an embrace,
Can read no better fortune
Then what is in thy face.
With hey ho, etc.
The Soldier would throw down
His Pistols and Carbine,
And freely would be bound
To wear no arms but thine:
If thou were but engaged
To meet him in the field,
Though never so much enraged
Thou could make him yield,
With hey ho, etc.
The seamen would reject
To sail upon the Sea,
And his good ship neglect
To be aboard of thee:
When thou lie on thy pillows
He surely could not fail
To make thy breast his billows,
And to hoyst up sail;
With hey ho, etc.
The greatest Kings alive
Would wish thou were their own,
And every one would strive
To make thy Lap their Throne,
For thou have all the merit
That love and liking brings;
Besides a noble spirit
Which may conquer Kings;
With hey ho, etc.
Were Rosamond on earth
I surely would abhor her,
Though never so great by birth
I should not change thee for her;
Though Kings and Queens are gallant,
And bear a royal sway,
The poor man has his Talent,
And loves as well as they,
With hey ho, etc.
Then prithee come and kiss me,
and say thou art mine own,
I vow I would not miss thee
Not for a Princes Throne;
Let love and I persuade thee
My gentle suit to hear:
If thou will be my Lady,
Then I will be thy dear;
With hey ho, etc.
I never will deceive thee,
But ever will be true,
Till death I shall not leave thee,
Or change thee for a new;
We'll live as mild as may be,
If thou will but agree,
And get a pretty baby
With a face like thee,
With hey ho, etc.
Let these persuasions move thee
Kindly to comply,
There Is no man that can love thee
With so much zeal as I;
Do thou but yield me pleasure,
And take from me this pain,
I Will give thee all the Treasure
Horse and man can gain;
With hey ho, etc.
I Will fight in forty duels
To obtain thy grace,
I Will give thee precious jewels
Shall adorn thy face;
Ever thou for want of money
Be to destruction hurled,
For to support my honey
I Will plunder all the world;
With hey ho, etc.
That smile does show consenting,
Then prithee let us be gone,
There shall be no repenting
When the deed is done;
My blood and my affection,
My spirits strongly move,
Then let us for this action
Fly to yonder grove,
With hey ho, etc.
Let us lie down by those bushes
That are grown so high,
Where I will hide thy blushes;
Here Is no standers by
This seventh day of July,
Upon this bank we'll lie,
Would all were, that love truly,
As close as thou and I;
With hey ho my honey,
My heart shall never rue,
For I have been spending money
Amongst the jovial Crew.
A Catch.
NOw that the Spring has filled our Veins
With kind and active fire,
And made green Liveries for the Plains.
And every Grove a Quire.
Sing we this Song with mirth and merry glee,
And Bacchus crown the Bowl,
And here is to thee, and thou to me
And every thirsty soul.
Shear sheep that have them, cry we still,
But see that none escape,
To take off his sherry, that makes us so merry
And plump as the lusty Grape.
The Huntsman.
OF all the sports the world does yield,
Give me a pack of hounds in field,
Whose echo sounds shrill through the sky,
Makes Jove admire our harmony,
And wish that he a mortal were,
To see such pleasures we have here.
Some do delight in Masks and plays,
And in Diana's Holy days.
Let Venus act her chiefest skill,
If I dislike I Will please my will;
And choose such as will last,
And not to surfeit when I taste.
Then I will tell you a sent,
Where many a horse was almost spent,
In Chadwel Close a Hare we found,
That led us all a smoking round;
O'r hedge and ditch away she goes,
Admiring her approaching foes.
But when she felt her strength to waste,
She parleys with the hounds in haste.
The Hare. You gentle dogs forbear to kill
A harmless beast that never did ill:
And if your Masters sport do crave,
I Will lead a sent as they would have.
The Hounds. Away, away, thou art alone,
Make haste we say, and get thee gone;
We'll give thee leave for half a mile,
To see if thou can us beguile:
But then expect a thundering cry,
Made by us and our company.
The Hare. Then since you set my life so light,
I Will make Black lovely turn to White;
And Yorkshire Gray, that runs at all,
I Will make him wish him in his stall;
And Sorrel, he that seems to fly,
I Will make him sickly e're I die.
Let Burham Bay do what he can,
And Barton Gray, which now and th^^
Does strive to winter up my way;
I Will neither make him sit nor play.
And constant Robin, though he lie
At his advantage, what care I?
But here Kit Bolton did me wrong,
As I was running all along;
For with one pat he made me so,
That I went reeling too and fro:
Then, if I die your masters tell,
That fool did ring my Passing Bell.
But if your Masters pardon me,
I Will lead them all to Througabby;
Where constant Robin keeps a room
To welcome all the Guests that come,
To laugh, and quaff in Wine, and Beer,
A full Carouze to their Career.
The Hounds. Away, away, since it is our nature
To kill thee, and no other Creature,
Our Masters they do want a bit,
And thou will well become the spit:
They eat the flesh, we pick the bone,
Make have, we say, and get thee gone.
The Hare. Your Masters may abate their cheer,
My meat is dry; and Butter dear;
And if with me they would make a friend,
They had better give a puddings end:
Besides, once dead, then sport they will lack,
And I must hang on the Huntsman's back.
The Hounds. Alas poor Hare we pity thee,
If with our nature 'twould agree,
But all thy doubling shifts we fear
Will not prevent thy death so near.
Then make thy Will for it may be that
My save thee; else, we know not what.
The Hare's Will. Then I do give my body free,
Unto your Masters courtesy;
And if they will spare till sport be scant,
I Will be their game, when they do want:
But when I Am dead each greedy hound
Will trail my entrails on the ground.
The Hounds. Were ever Dogs so basely crossed?
Our Masters call us off so fast,
That we the sent have almost lost;
And they themselves must lose the roast,
Wherefore, kind Hare we pardon you:
The Hare. Thanks gentle Hounds, and so Adieu.
A Catch.
O The wily wily Fox, with his many wily mocks,
We'll Earth him if you will but follow,
And now that we have done't, to couclude our merry hunt,
Let us roundly whoop and hollow:
Prithee drink, prithee drink prithee, prithee drink,
That the Hunters may all follow.
A Song.
SHe lay all naked in her bed,
And I my self lay by;
No Vail nor Curtain there was spread,
No Covering but I:
Her head upon one shoulder seeks
To hang in careless wise,
All full of blushes were her cheeks,
And wishes were her eyes.
Her blood lay flushing in her face,
As on a message came,
To say that in some other place
It meant some other Game;
Her nether Lip moist, plump, and fair,
Millions of kisses crowned,
Which ripe and uncropt dangled there,
And weighed the branches down.
Her breasts, that lay swelled full and high,
Bred pleasant pangs in me,
For all the world I did desie
For that felicity;
Her thighs and belly, soft and plump,
To me were only shown:
To have seen such meat, and not to have eat,
Would have angered any one.
Her knees lay up, but stoutly bent,
And all was hollow under,
As if on easy terms they meant
To fall unforced asunder:
Just so the Cyprian Queen did lie,
Expecting in her bower;
When too long stay, had kept the boy
Beyond his promised hour.
Dull Clown, quoth she, why do delay
Such proffered bliss to take?
Can thou find out no other way
Similitudes to make?
Mad with delight I thundered in,
And threw mine arms about her,
But a pox upon it 'twas but a dream,
And so I lay without her.
The Answer.
SHe lay up to the Navel bare,
As was a willing Lover,
Expecting between hope and fear,
When I would come and cover.
Her hand beneath my waste-band slips,
To grope in busy wise;
Which caused a trembling in her Lips,
And a shivering in her Eyes.
The blood out of her face did go,
As it on service went,
To send what was gone before,
When all its strength was spent.
Her Cheeks and lips as Coral red,
Like Roses were full blown:
Which fading straight, the leaves were spread,
And so the -- comes down.
Her breasts that then both panting were,
Such comfort wrought between us,
That all world I dare to swear,
Would envy to have seen us.
Her belly and its provender,
For me was kept in store;
Such news to hear, and nor to have share,
Would have made a man a Whore.
Her legs were girt about my waste,
My hand under her Crupper,
As one would say, now break your fast,
And come again to supper:
Even as the God of War did knock,
As any other man will,
For haste of work, till twelve a Clock,
Kept Vulcan at his Anvil.
Mad Wag, quoth she, why do thou make
Such haste thy self to rear?
Do thou not know that for thy sake,
The Fair lasts all the year?
Quiet and calm as are loves streams,
I threw my self about her,
But a pox upon true jests and dreams,
I had better have lain without her.
A Catch.
CAll George again boy, call George again,
And for the love of Bacchus call George again.
George is a good boy, and draws us good wine,
Or fills us more Clarret our wits to refine;
George is a brave Lad, and an honest man,
If you will him know, he dwells at the Swan.
A Song.
POx take you Mistress I Will be gone,
I have friends to wait upon;
Think you I Will my self confine,
To your humors (Lady mine:)
No, your louring seems to say:
It Is a rainy drinking day,
To the Tavern I Will away.
There have I a Mistress got,
Cloystered in a Pottle pot:
Brisk and sprightly as thine Eye,
When thy richest glances fly,
Plump AND bounding, lively, fair,
Bucksome soft, and debonair:
And she is called Sack, my DEAR.
Sack's my better Mistress far,
Sack's my only beauty-star;
Whose rich beans, and glorious rays,
Twinkle in each red rose and face:
Should I all her virtues show,
Thou thy self would lovesick prove,
AND she would prove thy Mistress TOO.
She with no dart-scorn will blast me;
But upon thy bed can cast me;
Yet never blush her self too red,
Nor fear of loss of Maidenhead:
And she can (the truth to say)
Spirits into me convey,
MORE than thou can take AWAY.
Getting kisses here is no toil,
Here Is no Handkerchief to spoil;
Yet I better Nectar sip,
Then dwell upon thy lip:
And though mute and still she be,
Quicker wit she brings to me,
THEN ever I could find in THEE.
If I go, never think to see
Any more a fool of me;
I Will no liberty up give,
Nor a Maudlin-like love live.
No, there is naught shall win me to'r,
It Is not all thy smiles can do it,
Nor thy Maiden-heat to BOOT,
Yet if thou wilt but take the pain
TO be good but once again;
If one smile then call me back,
THOU shall be that Lady Sack:
Faith but try, and thou shall see
What a loving Soul I Will be,
WHEN I am drunk with naught but thee.
The Answer.
I Pray thee, Drunkard, get thee gone,
Thy Mistress Sack does smell too strong:
Think you I intend to wed,
A sloven to be-piss my bed?
No, your staining me's to say,
You have been drinking all this day,
Go, be gone, away, away,
Where you have your Mistress Sack,
Which has already spoiled your back,
And methinks should be too hot,
To be cloystered in a pot.
Though you say she is so fair,
So lovely, and sodebonair,
She is but of a yellow hair,
Sack's a whore which burns like fire,
Sack consumes and is a dryer;
And her ways do only tend
To bring men unto their end:
should I all her vices tell,
Her rovings and her swearings fell,
Thou would dam her into Hell.
Sack with no dirt scorns will blast thee,
But upon thy bed still cast thee:
And by that impudence does show,
That no virtue she does know:
For she will, the truth to say,
Thy body in an hour decay,
More than I can in a day,
Though for kisses there is no toil,
Yet your body she does spoil:
Sipping Nectar whilst you sit,
She does quite besot your wit:
Though she is mute, she will make you loud:
Brawl and fight in every crowd,
When your reason she does cloud.
Nor do thou ever look to see
Any more a smile from me,
I Will no liberty, nor sign,
Which I truly may call mine.
No, no slight shall win me to it,
It Is not all thy parts can do it,
Thy Person, nor thy Land to boot.
Yet if thou will take the pain,
To be sober once again,
And but make much of thy back,
I will be instead of Sack.
Faith but try, and thou shall see,
What a loving Soul I Will be,
When thou art drunk with naught but me.
A Catch.
SHe that will eat her breakfast in her bed,
And spend the morn in dressing of her head,
And sit at dinner like a Maiden-Bride,
And nothing do all day, but talk of pride;
Jove of his mercy may do much to save her,
But what a case is he in that shall have her.
St. George for England.
Why should we boast of arthur and his Knights,
Knowing so many men have endured hot fights;
Besides King Arthur, and Sir Lancelot du Lake,
Sir Tristram de Lionel, that fought for Ladies sake,
Read old Histories, and then you shall see,
That St. George, St. George did make the Dragon flee;
St. George for England, St. Dennis for France,
Sing Honey soit qui maly pense.
Mark how Father Abraham, when first he rescued Lot,
Only by his household what conquest there they got;
David elected a Prophet and a King,
He slew great Goliath with a stone and a sling;
These were no Knights of the Table round,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon did confound;
St. George, etc.
Joshua and Gideon did lead their men to fight,
They conquered the Amorites, and put them to flight;
Hercules labor's upon the Plains of Bass,
And Sampson slew a thousand with the jaw bone of an ass,
Besides a goodly Temple there he did spoil,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon he did soil;
St. George, etc.
The wars of the Monarchs they were too long to tell,
And next of all the Romans, for thy did far excel,
When Hannibal and Scipio so many fields did fight,
Orlando Furioso was a worthy Knight;
Remus and Romulus, that first Rome did build,
But St. George, St. George did make the dragon yield,
St. George, etc.
Many have fought with proud Tamberlain,
And Cutlax the Dane, great wars did maintain,
Rowland, and Bryan, and good Sr. Oliveer;
In the forest of Arden there slew both Bull and Bear,
Beside the noble Hollander, Sir Goward with his Bill,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon's blood did spill;
St. George, etc.
Bevis conquered Askupart, and after slew the bore,
And then he crossed beyond the seas
To combat with a Moor,
Sir I singbrass and Egelman they were Knights bold,
And good Sr John Mandevil of travels much have told,
These were all English Knights that Pagans did convert,
But St. George, etc. plucked out the Dragons heart.
St. George, etc.
The noble Alphonso, that was the Spanish King,
The order of the red scarfs, and bedrowl he did bring,
He had a troop of mighty Knights when first he did begin,
That sought adventures far and nigh what conquest they might win,
The ranks of the Pagans full often he put to flight,
But St. George, St. George did with the Dragon fight;
St. George, etc.
The noble Earl of Warwick, that called was Sir Guy,
The Infidels and Pagans much he did desie,
He slew the Giant Brandemoor, and after was the death
Of the most ghastly dun Cow, the devil of Dunsmore heath,
Besides other noble Deeds he did beyond the seas,
But St. George, St George the Dragon did appease;
St. George, etc.
Valentine and Orson of King Pipins blood,
Alfred and Henry they were Knights good;
The four Sons of Amon that fought for Charlemain,
Sir Hugh de Bourdeaux, and Godfrey de Bullaign,
These were all french Knights that lived in that age,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon did assuage;
St, George, etc.
When at the first K. Richard was King of this Land,
He gorged a Lion with his naked hand;
The noble Duke of Austria nothing he did fear,
He killed his Son with a box on the ear,
Besides other noble deeds done in the Holy Land,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon did withstand;
St. George, etc.
When as the third King Edward had conquered all France,
He quartered their Arms his honor to advance,
He ransacked their Cities, threw their Castles down,
And garnished his head with a double double Crown,
He thumped the French, and homeward then he came,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon he did came;
St. George, etc.
St David of Wales did the Welchmen much advance,
St. James for Spain, that never yet broke Lance,
St. Patrick for Ireland, that was St. Georges Boy,
Seven years he kept his horse, and then stole him away,
For which filthy act a slave he does remain,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon he has slain;
St. George for England, St. Denis for France,
Sing Honey soit qui mal y pense.
Arthur of Bradly.
SAw you not Pierce the Piper,
His Cheeks as big as a Myter,
Piping among the Swains,
That Is down in yonder Plains:
Where Tib and Tom does tread it,
And Youths the hornpipe lead it,
With every one his carriage
To go to yonder Marriage,
For the honor of Arthur of Bradly,
O brave Arthur of Bradly, O fine Arthur of Bradly
O brave Arthur of Bradly, Oh.
Arthur has gotten a Lass,
A bonnier never was;
The chiefest youths in the Parish
Come dancing in a Morris,
With Country Gambols flouncing,
Country Wenches trouncing,
Dancing with mickle pride,
Every man his wench by his side,
For the honor of Arthur, etc.
And when that Arthur was married,
And his Wife home had carried;
But when that Arthur was married,
And his Bride home had carried;
The Youngsters they did wait
To help to carry up meat:
Francis carried the Furmety,
Michael carried the Mince-pye,
Bartholomew the Beef and the Mustard,
And Christopher carried the Custard,
Thus every one went in this Ray,
For the honor of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
But when that Dinner was ended,
The Maidens they were befriend;
For out stepped Dick the Draper,
And he bid pipe up scraper;
Better be dancing a little,
Then into the Town to tipple;
He bid him play him a Horn-pipe,
That goes fine of the Bagpipe:
Then forward Piper, and play
For the honor of Arthur of Bradly, Oh fine, etc.
Then Richard he did lead it,
And Margery she did tread it;
Francis followed then,
And after courteous Jane:
And every one after another,
As if they had been sister and brother,
That 'twas a great sight to see
How well they did agree,
And then they all did say,
Hay for Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
When all the Swains did see
This mirth and merry glee,
There was never a man did flinch,
But every man kissed his Wench;
But Giles was greedy of gain,
And he would needs kiss twain;
His Lover, seeing that,
Did rap him on the pate,
That he had not one word to say
For the honor of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
The Piper looked aside,
And there he spide the Bride;
He thought it was a hard chance
That none would lead her a dance:
For never a man durst touch her,
But only Will. the Butcher;
He took her by the hand
And danced whilst he could stand;
The Bride was fine and gay,
For the honor of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
Then out stepped Will. the Weaver,
And he swore he would not leave her;
He hopt it all of a Leg,
For the honor of his Peg,
But Kester in Cambrick Ruff,
He took that in snuff:
For he against that day
Had made himself fine and gay;
His Ruff was whipped over with blew,
He cried a new dance, a new;
Then forward Piper and play,
For the honor of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
Then began the Sun decline,
And every one thought it time
To go unto his home,
And leave the Bridegroom alone.
To It, to it, quoth lusty Ned,
We'll see them both in bed:
For I will jeopard a joint
But I will get his codpiece point:
Then strike up Piper and play,
For the honor of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
And thus the day was spent,
And no man homeward went,
That there was such crouding and thrusting,
That some were in danger of bursting,
To see them go to bed:
For all the skill they had,
He was got to his Bride,
And laid him close by her side,
They got his Points and Garters,
And cut them in pieces like quarters;
And then they bid the Piper play,
For the honor of Arthur of Bradley, Oh fine, etc.
Then Will. and his sweet heart
Did call for Loath to depart,
And then they did foot it and toss it,
Till the Cook had brought up the posset,
The Bride-pye was brought forth,
A thing of mickle worth,
And so all at the bedside
Took leave of Arthur and his Bride,
And so they went all away
From the wedding of Arthur of Bradley, Oh, etc.
A Catch.
THere was three Cooks in Colebrook,
And they fell out with our Cook,
And all was for a pudding he took,
And from the Cook of Colebrook.
There was swash Cook, and slash Cook,
And thy Nose in my Narse Cook,
And all was for a pudding he took,
And from the Cook of Colebrook.
Then they fell all upon our Cook,
And mumbled him so, that he did look
As black as the pudding which that he took,
And from the Cook of Colebrook.
The Blacksmith.
OF all the Sciences beneath the Sun,
Which has been since the World begun,
The Smith by his Art great praise has won,
Which no body can deny.
The fairest Goddess in the skies
To marry with him she did devise,
That was a cunning Smith and wise,
Which no body, etc.
Then Mars come down for Venus sakes,
The Smith he did his armor make,
In love together he did theat take,
Which no body, etc.
The first that ever Music made
Was Tubal of the Blacksmiths Trade,
By hammering strokes as it was said,
Which no body, etc.
He did invent continually
The Iron work for the Country,
A Smith for mirth and husbandry,
Which no body, etc.
What Occupation can you name,
But first Smith must help the same,
With working tools their work to frame?
Which no body, etc.
What horse can post to carry news,
But first the Smith sets on his shoes,
With Spur and Stirrup for men's use?
Which no body, etc.
What Ship upon the Sea can sail,
If Iron work in her do fail,
Though Anchor hold 'twill not prevail?
Which no body, etc.
What can you build with lime or stone
If Iron-work therein be none?
Smiths make for houses many a one,
Which no body, etc.
How can you go to Plough or Cart,
Except the Smith do play his part,
With Coulder and Shaire made well by Art,
Which no body, etc.
The Axeltree Pin, the plowing Chain,
The Bill, the Axe, the Wedges twain,
The Pitchfork, and the Dung-fork plain,
Which no body, etc.
The Burchers Axe, the Shooe-makers Awl,
The cutting knives on every stall,
That lies to cut and carve withal,
Which no body, etc.
The Coopers Adds, the Brewers Slings,
The Carpenters Tools for many things,
The plyers for the Goldsmiths Rings,
Which no body, etc.
Your Tongues, your Spits, Trevits, and Racks,
And many other things that lacks,
And for your houses pretty Knacks,
Which no body, etc.
Weights and Skales to buy and sell,
A thousand things I need not tell,
The Smith has matched all things so well,
Which no body, etc.
I could rehearse a thousand things,
Of iron Bars, Bolts, and Pins,
Latches, Catches, Staples, Rings,
Which no body, etc.
He makes all several kinds of Locks,
For horses, for doors, for Chest, for Box,
For houses, and Churches Clocks,
Which no body, etc.
Your fire-Irons, small and great,
Your pothooks, and forks so fine and near,
Your Jack that turns your spits of meat,
Which no body, etc.
Your Paviours Pickax, great and small,
Your Pattens for women, low and tall;
Your Shovel and Spade to work withal,
Which no body, etc.
Your branding Iron to brand your Kine,
Your Clappers for Bells to ring and chime,
Your Stamps for Gold and Silver fine,
Which no body, etc.
The horses Bits, that finely gingle,
The Barbers Tools, that is so nimble,
The Tailors sheer, his bodkin and thimble,
Which no body, etc.
And for all weapons for the fight
The Smith I am sure makes such a sight,
So long, so strong, so fair, so bright,
Which no body, etc.
Bills, Pikes, Dags, and Guns,
Halberds, Spears, and many things,
Through the hammer of the Smith all come,
Which no body, etc.
To love the Smith all Trades are bound,
Which make him thus to be renowned,
For which his hammers they are crowned,
Which no body, etc.
Of Smiths now living at this hour,
There was a Smith within the Tower
Which might he counted for a flower,
Which no body, etc.
Thus of my Song I make an end,
The Smith is every bodies friend,
He seeks his Country to defend,
Which no body can deny.
A North Country Song.
When Ise came first to London Town,
Ise worcester a Novice, as other men are;
Ise thought the King had lived at the Crown,
And the way tol heaven had been through the star.
Ise set up my horse, and Ise went to Paul's,
Good Lord, quo^h I. what a Kirk been here?
Then Ise did swear by all Kerson souls,
It worcester a mile long, or very near.
It worcester as high as any Hill,
A Hill, quo I, nay as a Mountain,
Then went Ise up with a very good will,
But glad worcester I to come down again.
For as Ise went up my head roe round,
Then be it known to all Kerson people,
A man's is no little way fro the ground,
When he is o'th'top of all Paul's steeple.
Ise lay down my hot, and Ise went to pray,
But worcester not this a pitious case,
Before I had done it worcester stolen away,
Who'd have thought thieves had been in that place?
Now for my Hot Ise made great moan,
A stander by unto me said,
Thou did not observe the Scripture aright,
For thou mun a watched, as well as prayed.
From thence Ise went, and I saw my Lord Mayor,
Good lack what a sight was there to see,
My Lord and his horse were both of a hair,
I could not tell which the Mare should be.
From thence to Westminster I went,
Where many a brave Lawyer I did see,
Some of them had a bad intent,
For there my purse was stolen from me.
To see the Tombs was my desire,
I went with many brave fellows store
I gave them a penny that was their hire,
And he is but a fool that will give any more.
Then through the rooms the fellow me led,
Where all the sights were to be seen,
And snuffling told me through the nose,
What formerly the name of those had been.
Here lies, quoth he, Henry the Third,
Thou lie like a knave, he says never a word;
And here lies Richard the Second interred,
And here stands good King Edwards Sword.
Under this Chair lies Jacobs stone,
The very same stone lies under the Chair,
A very good jest, had Jacob but one,
How go he so many Sons without a pair?
Istaid not there, but down with the tide
I made great haste, and I went my way;
For I was to see the Lions beside,
And the hParis-garden all in a day.
When Ise came there, I was in a rage,
I rayl'd on him that kept the Bears,
Instead of a Stake was suffered a Stage,
And in Hunkes his house a crew of Players.
Then through the Brigg to the Tower Ise went,
With much ado Ise entered in,
And after a penny that I had spent,
One with a loud voice did thus begin.
This Lion's the Kings, and that is the Queens,
And this is the Princes that stands hereby,
With that I went near to look in the Den,
Cods body, quoth he, why come you so nigh?
Ise made great haste unto my Inn,
I supt, and I went to bed betimes,
Ise slept, and I dreamed what I had seen,
And waked again by Cheapside Chimes.
The merry Goodfellow.
Why should we not laugh and be jolly,
Since all the World is mad?
And lulled in a dull melancholy;
He that wallows in store
Is still gaping for more,
And that makes him as poor,
As the wretch that never any thing had.
How mad is that damned money-monger?
That to purchase to him and his heirs,
Grows shriviled with thirst and hunger;
While we that are bonny,
Buy Sack with ready-money,
And never trouble the Scriveners, nor Lawyers.
Those guts that by scraping and toyling,
Do swell their Revenues so fast,
Get nothing by all their turmoiling,
But are marks of each tax,
While they load their own backs
With the heavier packs,
And lie down galled and weary at last.
While we that do traffic in tipple,
Can baffle the Gown and the Sword,
Whose jaws are so hungry and gripple;
We never trouble our heads
With Indentures or Deeds,
And our wills are composed in a word.
Our money shall never indite us,
Nor drag us to Goldsmiths Hall,
No Pirates nor wracks can affright us;
We, that have no Estates,
Fear no plunder nor rates,
We can sleep with open gates,
He that lies on the ground cannot fall.
We laugh at those fools whose endeavors
Do but fit them for Prisons and Fines,
When we that spend all are the savers;
For if thieves do break in,
They go out empty agin,
Nay, the Plunderers lose their designs.
Then let us not think on to morrow,
But tipple and laugh while we may,
To wash from our hearts all sorrow;
Those Cormorants which
Are troubled with an itch,
To be mighty and rich,
Do but toil for the wealth which they borrow.
The Mayor of our Town with his Ruff on,
What a pox is he better than we?
He must vail to the man with the Bvff on;
Though he Custard may eat,
And such lubbardly meat,
Yet our Sack makes us merrier than he.
The Rebels Reign.
NOw we are met in a knot, let us take the other pot,
And chirp o'r a Cup of Nectar;
Let Us think on a charm to keep us from harm,
From the Fiend, and the new Protector.
Hertofore at a brunt a Cross would have don't,
But now they have taken courses,
With their Laws and their theft, there is not a cross left
In the Church, nor the Farmers Purses.
They Are with you to bring for stuffing at a King,
For now you must make no dainty
To have your nose ground on a stone turned round
By Noll, and one and twenty.
But our Rights are kept for us in Oliver's storehouse,
'Twere as good they were set in the Stocks:
They are just in the pickle in the thirtieth Article,
Like Jack in a Juglers box.
We are loath for to look for the Saints in a book,
But would not a man be vexed,
To see them so rough with their blades and their buff,
But not a word on it in the Text.
We have been twelve years together by the ears
To prepare for a spiritual reign:
Men were never so spic'd with the Scepter of Christ
In the hands of a Saint in grain.
'Twas brewed in their Hives by Citizens wives,
Who ventured their husbands far,
With Robin the fool there was never such a tool
To lead in the women's war.
He was ill at Command, but worse at a stand,
So they sought out another more able:
Then Fair, undertakes, but Nol keeps the stakes,
And sends away Fox with a bauble.
Will, Conqueror the second, without his host reckoned,
And so did Brown billet his Mate:
They made a great noise amongst women and boys,
But now they are both out of date.
Cowardly W -- had but a foul Fortune,
And wanted a knife to scrape it,
When his Oriphice ran, there was no mortal man,
But omnibus horis sapit.
Bradshaw, the Knave, sent the King to his grave,
And on the blood Royal did trample,
For which the next Lent he was made President,
And ere long may be made an example.
Dorislaus did steer to Hans mine here,
And Askew to Don at Madril,
Ere a man could have scratcht they were both dispatched,
Yet there they lie Ledger still.
Martin and St. Johyns, and more with a vengeance,
Had each a singer in the pie:
Some for the money, and some for the Conny,
And some for they knew not why.
The Parliament sat as snug as a Cat,
And were playing for mine and yours:
Sweep-stakes was their Game till Oliver came,
And turned it to knave out of doors.
Then a new one was cast, and made up in have,
But alas they could do no more
Than empty our purse, and empty us worse
Than ever we were married before.
But in a good hour they gave up their power
To one that was wiser than they;
By common consent 'twas the first Parliament
That ever was felo de se.
After all this Jeer we are never the near,
There sits one at the helm commanding;
One that does us nick with a trick for our trick,
And the stone in our foot notwithstanding.
He Will not relax one groat of the Tax
Though it come to more than he need,
He may keep it in store till his need be more,
It Is an Article of our new Creed.
So well he has wrought, that now he has brought
The Realm to the manner he meant it;
The fishes, and the fowl, and the devil and all,
And the monthly pay his high rent.
All this we must bear, but 'twold make a man swear
When they call us a reformed Nation:
It can never sink into my head for to think
That this is a Reformation.
It Is the man in the Moon, or the devil as soon,
Our Laws are asleep upon shelves:
Our Charter and Freedom we may bid God speed'um,
It Is well we can beg for our selves.
Since Nol has bereft us, and nothing has left us,
Not a horse or an Ox to plough land,
Let Oliver pass, come fill up my glass,
And here is a good health to Rowland.
A Catch.
HAve you observed the wench in the street,
She Is scarce any hose or shoes to her feet;
And when she cries, she sings,
I have hot Codlings, hot Codlings.
Or have you ever seen or heard
The Mortal with his Lion tauny beard?
He lives as merrily as heart can wish,
And still he cries, Buy a brush, buy a brush.
Since these are merry, why should we take care?
Musicians, like Camelions, must live by the Air;
Then let us be blithe and bonny, and no good meeting balk,
What though we have no money, we shall find Chalk.
A new Medley.
LEt the Trumpet sound, The English.

And the Rocks rebound,
Our English Native's coming;
Let the Nations swarm,
And the Princes storm,
We value not their drumming.
It Is not France, that looks so smug,
Old fashions still renewing,
It is not the Spanish shrug,
Scottish Cap, or Irish rug;
Nor the Dutch-mans double jug
Can help what is ensuing;
Pray, my Masters, look about,
For something is a Brewing.
He that is a Favorite consulting with Fortune,
If he grow not wiser, then he is quite undon;
In a rising creature we daily see certainly,
He is a retreater that fails to go on:
He that in a Builder's trade
Stops e're the roof be made,
By the air may be betrayed
And overthrown:
He that has a race begun,
And lets the Goal be won;
He had better never run,
But let 't alone.
Then plot rightly,
Match sightly,
Show your glittering arms brightly:
Charge hightly,
Fight sprightly;
Fortune gives renown.
A right riser
Will prize her,
She makes all the world wiser;
Still try her,
We'll gain by her
A Coffin or a Crown.
If the Dutchman or the Spaniard
Come but to oppose us,
We will thrust them up at the main-yard,
If they do but nose us:
Hans, Hans, think upon thy sins,
And then submit to Spain thy Master;
For though now you look like friends,
Yet he will never trust you after;
Drink, drink, give the Dutchman drink,
And let the tap and kan run faster;
For faith, at the last I think
A Brewer will become your Master.
Let not poor Teg and Shone
Vender from der houses,
Lest dey be quite undone
In der very Trouzes:
And all der Orphans bestowed under hatches,
And made in London free der to cry matches;
St. Patrick wid his Harp do tuned wid true string
Is not fit to unty St. Hewson's shoos-strings.
Methinks I hear
The welsh draw near,
And from each lock a louse trops;
Ap Shon, ap LLoyd,
Will spend her ploot,
For to defend her mouse-traps:
Mounted on her Kisslebagh
With cott store of Koradagh,
The Pritish war begins.
With a hook her was overcome her,
Pluck her to her, thrust her from her,
By cot her was break her shins.
Let Taffie fret,
And welch-hook whet,
And troop up pettigrees,
We only tout
Tey will stink us out,
Wit Leeks and toasted Sheeze.
But Jockie now and Jinny comes,
Our Brethren must approve on it;
For pret a Cot dey bert der drums
Only to break de Couvenant.
Deybore Saint Andrew's Cross,
Til our army quite did rout them,
But when we put them to de loss
De deal a Cross about them:
The King and Couvenant they crave,
Their cause must needs be furthered;
Although so many Kings they have
Most barbarously, basely murdered.
The French. The Frenchman he will give consent,
Though he trickle in our veins;
That willingly
We may agree,
To a marriage with grapes and grains:
He conquers us with kindness,
And does so far entrench,
That fair, and wise, and young, and rich,
Are finified by the French:
He prettifies us with Feathers and Fans,
With Petticoats, Doublets, and Hose;
And faith they shall
Be welcome all
If they forbear the nose.
For love or for fear,
Let Nations forbear;
If Fortune exhibit a Crown.
A Coward he
Must surely be,
That will not put it on.
A Catch.
Show a Room, show a Room, show a Room,
Here Is a knot of Good Fellows are come
That mean for to be merry
With Claret and with Sherry;
Each man to mirth himself disposes,
And for the Reckoning tell Noses;
Give the Red-Nose some White,
And the Pale-Nose some Claret,
But the Nose that looks Blew,
Give him a Cup of Sack, 'twill mend his hew.
The Contented.
Why should a man care, or be in despair,
Should Fortune prove never so unkind?
Or why should I be sad for that I never had,
Or foolishly trouble my mind?
For I do much hate to pine at my Fate,
There Is none but a fool will do so:
I Will laugh and be fat, for care kills a Cat,
And I care not how ere the world go.
Though I am poor, and others have store,
Why should I repine at their bliss?
For I am content with what God has sent,
And I think I do not amiss:
Let others have wealth, for I have health,
And money to pay what I owe,
I Will laugh, and be merry, and sing hey down, down derry,
For I care not, etc.
Some men do suppose, even by their gay Clothes,
For to be in great request;
Though mine be but bare, I am not o'th'show,
And I think my self honestly dressed;
Though every man cannot say so,
I like that I wear, though it cost not so dear,
For I care not, etc.
Your Epicures eat of the best sort of meat,
And wine of the best he does drink,
And lays him to rest, and thinks himself blessed,
On heaven he never does think;
Though my fare be but course, I am not the worse,
My health is the better I know;
Though plain be my food, my stomach is good,
And I care not, etc.
Your flattering Curs, that fawn upon Furs,
And hang at Noblemens ears,
If once they do fall, away they run all,
And this is their flattering fears:
Dislembling I scorn, for I am freeborn,
My happiness lies not below;
Though my words want Art, I speak from my heart,
I care not, etc.
Some men do strive, and mightily thrive,
And some for Offices wait,
Much money they spend, and to little end,
And repent then when it is too late;
Low shrubs are secure, when Cedars endure
Great storms and tempests below,:
Let others look high, for so will not I,
And I care not how the world go.
How to live happy.
HE that a happy life would lead
In these times of distraction,
Let him listen to me, and I will read
A Lecture without faction;
Let him want three things, whence misery springs,
They all begin with a letter,
Let him bound his desires to what nature require
And with reason his humor fetter.
Let not his wealth prodigious grow,
For that breeds cares and dangers:
Makes him envied above, and hated below,
A constant slave to strangers;
They are happiest of all whose estates are but small,
Though but enough to maintain them,
They may do, they may say, having nothing to pay,
It will not quit cost to arraign them.
Nor would I have him clogged with a wife,
For household cares incumber,
Nor to one place to confine his life,
'Cause he cannot remove his Lumber;
They are happiest far who unmarried are,
And forage, and all in common,
From all storms they can fly, or if they should die,
They ruin no child nor woman.
Let not his brains o'rflow with wit,
That capers o'r discretion,
It Is costly to keep, and hard to get,
And dangerous in the possession;
They are happiest men who can scarce tell ten,
And beat not their brains about reason,
They may speak what will serve themselves to preserve,
And their words are not taken for treason.
But of all fools, there is none to the wit,
For he takes pains to show it,
His pride and his drink bring him into a fit,
Then straight he turns a Poet:
His jests he flings at States, or at Kings,
Or at Plays, or at Bays, or at shadows,
Thinks a Verse serves as well as a circle or Cell,
Till he rimes himself to the Barbadows.
He that within these Lines can live,
May baffle all disasters,
To Fortune and Fate commands he can give,
Who Worldlings call their Masters;
He may sing, he may quaff, he may drink, he may laugh
May be mad, may be sad, may be jolly,
He may sleep without care, and speak without fear,
And laugh at the world and its folly.
The Louse.
IF that you will hear of a Ditty
That Is framed by a six-footed Creature,
She lives both in Town and in City,
She is very loving by nature;
She Will ofter her service to any,
She Will stick close but she will prevail,
She Is entertained by too many
Till death, she no man will fail.
Fenner once in a Play did describe her,
How she had her beginning first,
How she sprung from the loins of great Pharaoh,
And how by a King she was nursed:
How she fell on the Carcass of Herod,
A companion for any brave fighter,
And there is no fault to be found with her,
But that she is a devilish backbiter.
With Soldiers she is often comraded,
And often does them much good,
She Will save them the charge of a Surgeon
In sickness for letting them blood;
Corruption she draws like a horse-leech,
Growing she will prove a great breeder,
At night she will creep in her cottage,
By day she is a damnable feeder.
She Will venture as much in a battle
As any Commander may go,
But then she will play Jack on both sides,
She cares not a fart for her Foe:
She knows that always she is shot-free,
To kill her no sword will prevail,
But if she is taken prisoner,
She Is pressed to death by the nail.
She does not esteem of your rich men,
But always sticks close to the poor;
Nor she cares not for your clean shifters,
Nor for such as brave clothes wear;
She loves all such as are nonsuited,
Or any brave fellow that lacks;
She Is as true a friend to poor Soldiers,
As the shirt that sticks close to their backs.
She cannot abide your clean Laundress,
Nor those that do set her on work,
Her delight is all in foul linen,
Where in narraw seams she may lurk:
From her and her breed God defend me,
For I have had their company store,
Pray take her among you Gentry.
Let her trouble poor soldiers no more.
The Concealment.
I Loved a maid, she loved not me,
But that was a maids infirmity;
She wore her Garter above her knee,
But that was a secret bravery;
I played with her paps, she gave me some raps:
But what did you else beside?
Nay, that were a folly, the Fox is unholy,
And yet he has grace to hide.
Her feet were little, her fingers small,
Her hips did wear no Farthingal;
Her body straight, her belly round,
The whale-bone use there was not found;
I hall'd her, I pulled her, I kissed her, I culled her:
But what did you, etc.
I wrung her hands, she wrung mine again,
God bless such wringing as breeds no pain;
I looked on her face, and I gave her dance,
She dimmed my sight with a colored glance;
I hung on her neck, she gave me a check:
But what did you, etc.
When each man had danced with his maid,
Then down behind a tree we staid:
My knees against her knees I thrust,
She cried, sweet heart, let be, and blushed;
But yet at the last I grasped her fast:
But what did you, etc.
Behind my ear I wear her lock,
And she my favor next her smock;
She loves me more, if more you mark,
Since last we tumbled in the dark;
She was so kind-hearted, she wept when we parted,
But what did you, etc.
But by this kissing and this feeling
These gentle foes were soon brought to yielding;
It cost me more in soap and candle
Than all the Gold that ever I did handle,
Though I denied it, she could well hide it:
But what did you else beside?
Nay, that were a folly, the Fox is unholy,
And yet he has craft to hide.
A Catch.
What Fortune had I, poor Maid as I am,
To be bound in eternal vow,
For ever to lie by the side of a man,
That would, but knows not how?
Oh can there no pity
Be in such a City,
Where Lads enough are to be had.
Unfortunate Girl, that art wed to such woe,
Go seek thee a lively Lad,
And let the poor that has nothing to show
Go seek for another as bad;
Then call for no pity
Thou dwelt in a City,
Where Lads enough were to be had.
Advice to Batchelors.
HE that intends to take a Wife,
I Will tell him what a kind of life
He must be sure to lead;
If she is a young and tender heart,
Not documented in Loves Art,
Much teaching she will need.
For where there is no path, one may
Be tired before he find the way,
Nay, when he is at his treasure,
The gap perhaps will prove so straight,
That he for entrance long may wait,
And make a toil of's pleasure.
Or if one old, and past her doing,
He will the Chambermaid be woing,
To buy her ware the cheaper,
But if he choose one most formose,
Ripe for it, she will prove libidinous,
Argus himself shall not keep her.
For when those things are nearly dressed,
They Will entertain each wanton guest,
Nor for their honor care,
If any give their pride a fall,
They Have learned a trick to bear withal,
So you their charges bear.
Or if you chance to play your game
With a dull, fat, gross, heavy Dame,
Your riches to increase,
Alas! she will but jeat you for it,
Bid you to find out better sport,
Lie with a pot of grease.
If meager -- be thy delight,
She Will conquer in venerial fight,
And waste thee to the bones.
Such kind of girls, like to your Mill,
The more you give, the more crave they will,
Or else they will grind the stones.
If black, it is ods she is devilish proud,
If short, Zantippe like, too loud,
If long, she will lazy be,
Foolish (the Proverb says) if fair,
If wise and comely, danger's there,
Lest she do Cuckold thee.
If she bring store of money, such
Are like to domineer too much,
Prove Mistress, no good wife,
And when they cannot keep you under,
They Will fill the house with scolding thunder,
What worse than such a life?
But if her Dowry only be
Beauty, farewell felicity,
Thy fortunes castaway.
Thou must be sure to satisfy her
In belly, and in back-desire,
To labor night and day.
And rather than her pride give o'r,
She Will turn perhaps an honored whore,
And thou wilt Acteon'd be,
Whilst like Acteon thou may weep,
To think thou sorced art to keep,
Such as devour thee.
If being noble thou do wed
A servile creature, basely bred,
Thy Family it defaces;
If being mean, one nobly born,
She Will swear t'exalt a Courtlike horn,
Thy low descent it graces.
If one tongue be too much for any,
Then he who takes a wife with many,
Knows not what may betide him;
She whom he did for learning honor,
To scold by book will take upon her,
Rhetorically chide him.
If both her Parents living are,
To please them you must take great care,
Or spoil your future fortune,
But if departed they are this life,
You must be patent to your wife,
And father all, be certain.
If bravely dressed, fair faced and witty,
She Will often be gadding to the City,
Nor may you say her nay.
She Will tell you (if you her deny)
Since women have Terms, she knows not why,
But they still keep them may.
If you make choice of Country ware,
Of being Cuckold, there is less fear,
But stupid honesty
May teach her how to sleep all night.
And take a great deal more delight
To milk the Cows than thee.
Concoction makes their blood agree
Too near, where is consanguinity;
Then let no kin be chosen.
He loses one part of his treasure,
Who thus confineth all his pleasure
To the arms of a first Cozen.
He Will never have her at command,
Who takes a wife at second hand.
Then choose no widdowed mother:
The first cut, of that bit you love,
If others had, why may not you prove
But taster to another?
Besides, if she bring children many,
It Is like by thee she will not have any,
But prove a barren Do;
Or if by them, she never had one,
By thee it is likely she will have none,
Whilst thou for weak back go.
For there where other gardeners have been sowing
Their seed, but never could find it growing,
You must expect so too;
And where the Terra incognita
S'o'rplow'd, you must it fallow lay,
And still for weak back go.
Then trust not to a maiden face,
Nor confidence in widows place,
Those weaker vessels may
Spring-leak, or split against a rock,
And when your Fame's wrapped in a smock,
It Is easily cast away.
Yet be she fair, foul, short, or tall,
You for a time may love them all,
Call them your soul, your life,
And one by one them undermine,
As Courtizan, or Concubine,
But never as married wife.
He who considers this, may end the strife,
Confess no trouble like unto a Wife.
A Catch.
IF any so wise is, that Sack he despises,
Let him drink small beer, and be sober,
Whilst we drink Sack and sing, as if it were spring,
He shall droop like the Trees in October.
But be sure if over night this dog do you bite,
You take it henceforth for a warning,
Soon as out of your bed, to settle your head,
Take a hair of his tail in the morning,
And be not so filly to follow old Lilly,
For there is nothing but Sack that can tune us,
Let his Ne-assuescas be put in his cap case,
And sing bi-bi-to vinum Jejnnus.
A Mock Song.
When I a Lady do intend to flatter,
Oh, how I do begin to chatter.
I swear and vow
How much I Would do,
That I might once get at her --
I say to kiss her only is a Feast,
A Cupids Beaver at the least,
Whilst silly she
Believes me,
And thinks I love her best.
With those fair phansies which most comely are,
I often her Ladyship compare,
I say the Rose
And Lilly, when it blows,
Are nothing near so fair.
Yet gazing on her face I Have spent some hours,
Consulted with each cheek, and all its powers,
But there none grow,
Unless below,
In pleasures garden-spring her flowers.
Often have I called her Jewel, often have I
Called true, the false pearls of her eye,
Yet precious stone
She will have none,
Until with me she lie.
With what pure whiteness is her bosom blessed,
Often cry I, yet I do but jest;
For sure I Am still,
She never will,
Until If -- her have a milk white breast.
Then tell her by the rolling of her eyes,
I guess her secret rarities,
Swear he who enjoyes
Those pleasant toys,
Ought much to esteem the prize.
Thus Ladies have I learned in Cupids schools,
My Master Ovid's Grammar Rules:
Thus can I prove
I am in love,
And thus I make ye fools.
FINIS.

