Aut Helmont, Aut Asinus: OR, St. George UNTRUST Being a Full Answer to his
Smart Scourge.

LONDON, Printed for R. Lowndes, at the White Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

Honored Doctor,
I Have lately read a scurrilous pamphlet, in whi^^ the Author does endeavor
to render your Pill truc^^ lent, and himself the only Chemist, and a Pediscque
(...) Helmont. As to the first, that he may make (...) world believe he speaks
truth, he pretends knowledge (...) each particular concrete that are
Ingredients of yo^^ Pill; but in this he forgot the Adage, Ne suitor ult^
crepidam; for I having had the honor to be (...) Southampton-house the 13. of
June, 1664. when yo^ calcined your powder for the composing your Pill before
Kings most excellent Majesty, several Princes, Lords Knights, and Gentlemen, am
able to say he is mistake^ in the foundation of the Composition, and has
plaidth^ fool in earnest, in writing against that he never understood: but this
Adage may be applied in his excuse Hominem experiri multa paupertas jubet. To
te^ you my mind, in all that he has done against you, he has imitated the Dog
in Plutarch, that spends his time i^ barking at the Moon, being enraged more at
her ligh^ that offends his eyes, than at the black spots she wears (...) but
you are above, whilst he is below, making good the Adage, Canes timidi
vehementius latrant. Next, as to his Chemistry, the Skinner in Walbrook
suffic^ently experimented it to the damage of 975 l. and loss of his life
afterward with grief. He can transmute metalls, if you will believe him; and
yet is a pitiful Fellow, or else he would not have been so often in prison for
his cousenage, insomuch that he is as well known in Newgate, as most of the
common Rascals: Qui mendax, idem furax. Lastly, his being the only man
understands and imitates Helmont. Helmont was a very holy man, ^^tness his
prayers, his visions, and his gifts, and parti^^larly in page the 19. where he
says, Concidi in fa^em and dixi, Domine ignosce, si favor in proxi^um extra
limits abripuit, condona, condona ^omine indiscretae charitati meae, nam tues
radi^ale bonum ipsiusmet bonitatis, and so onwards, and ^wards the end of the
chapter he says, Et quem ^ominus Jesus vocaverit ad sapientiam, ille and non
^lius venturus est. And can the world be so blind as ^o think this Sot is so
called, who accouuts it his glory by he Circean Charms of Liquor to be
metamorphosed into a Sponge, which is fit for little else but to suck in and
spue out, that will drink and vomit, and vomit to drink again, and so continue
the sport, making good the Adage, Parthi quo plus biberent, eo plus sitiunt? A
pretty Fellow, and likely to be called by the Lord Jesus, and Raphael to be
bestowed on him. It is confessed he borrows Helmonts glorious names, and imposes
them on his trifles: but a Bristol-stone (...) no more than a Bristolstone,
although a fool says it is a Diamond, and counterfeit pearls are but
counterfeit, though they may make a Fiddlers daughter look like a German
Princess. And this is the condition of our pageant Helmont, Aut Helmont, aut
Asinus. And thus I leave him till he gives the next occasion to be flasht, and
rest,

Nov. 7. 1664. Your Friend, G. S.

To the ingenious and industrious Gent. Lionel Lockier, Physician, An Encomium
upon his Universal Pill.
SIr, when I view you in your panick Pill,
And see the throngs which unto you repair,
Some for their cure, others with thanks; your skill
And blessed successes, whatsoever are
The sentiments of others, will subdue
Vnbiass'd minds to give respect to you.
Should I design to celebrate the fame
Of your admired Medicine, 'twere in vain
TO attempt that work in English, since your Name
Has overspread our Land, and crossed the Main:
And (maugre all detraction) will shine forth
With the bright rays of its inherent worth.
What was it acquired the Epithete of Wise
To Socrates, but that he did reduce
To practice all the Sophies Theories,
And make their Speculations fit for use?
This Adjunct is your due, who have the Art
Spagyrick made good in the practick part.
B. M.

To Mr. George St. concerning his Smart Scourge.
HOw, turned a Beadle? hold a blow sweet George,
A Sword and Lance becomes thee, not a Scourge.
^ar'st thou not look thy foe in the face, but come
^^st like a Cur to snap him by the bum?
(...) rather have thee let Erratas pass
^npunished, than show thy self an Ass.
(...) any fault in others works appears,
^is very fit that you pull in your ears.
that fury thus transports thee? will it avail
(...) bring a Birch to whip the Dragons tail?
^as this the account on which you did decry
^carification and Phlebotomy?
^^Subolet Medico) that like a Leech
^ou'd fetch the skin off, and draw blood from's breech.
L. T.

St. GEORGE VNTRVST.
PAssing the street in a melancholy muse, my thoughts were suddenly disturbed
with the obstreperous clamours of a poor Ballad-singer, who went squeeking
along before me, Will you buy a smart scourge for a silly saucy fool, come four
a penny, four a penny, will you buy any smart scourges? being a little curious to
know what the import of this strange title was, concluding the Author of it to
be some Sexstone or City Dog-whipper, I called after the poor Itinerant
bookseller, who very joyfully came, but yet very sadly complaining that she had
sold never a book that day; I partly out of charity to the poor book Peddler,
partly to satisfy my own curiosity, gave her four farthings for her four smart
scourges, concluding, that though they were good for little else, yet they
might serve for tail-timber; considering the Frontispiece a little better* I
found indeed that I had wronged the Author in imagining him to be a Dog-whiper,
whose rods I perceived were only ^ntended for the backs of Fools; ^ut when I
had a little considered his Pamphlet, I ^ould not choose but pity the poor man's
back and ^houlders, concluding that if he were an Impartial Beadle, sure his
own poor hide must needs be mise^ably tanned and tawed; but my pity extending
not only to the Beadle himself, but likewise to the guilty delinquent whom he
does so unmercifully rib-roast, I would needs know his name and his crime, and
his condition, his name I find G. S. his condition a person of quality, and his
crime writing a Letter to the ingenious Gentleman Dr. Lockier, in vindicating
him from the calumnies of a cankered Momus. But all this is not enough, I must
needs be acquainted with the smart scourger himself to, who subscribeth himself
G. S. the same with his Antagonist; which at first glance made me imagine him
some furious Don Quixot marching out with indignation to fight with his own
shadow; but I was soon undeceived, when I saw the Philosopher by the fire side,
come sneaki^g out of the chimney corner, where he had been warming his benumbed
fingers, till he had extinguished the coals with the droppings of his nose; but
when I heard him muttering out his tandem aliquando nuper quidem, I mistook him
again for an old witch with a beard that was mumbling over some Orizon to
Beelzebub; beseeching him to catch the Dr. dead or alive and post haste away
with him a pick pack to hell; but he perceiving my mistake, presently stroaked
up his whiskers, struck fire in his tinderbox, and showed me his Pipkins, he
was wont to stew Pruins in, which in spite of my reason made me to acknowledge
him the profoun^ Chemist or Philosopher by fire. And now Si^ since by your
frontispiece I am a little acquainte^ with you, I make bold to confer notes
with you in your Pamphlet. And first I cannot but observe your envy at the Dr.
being new vamped with a Coat of Arms, to wit, the three Boars heads: well
Goodman Cobbler, since you have such good skill in vamping, by my consent we
will have you vamped, or at least under lined with a Coat of Arms too, and if
you will be advised by me, instead of the three Bores-heads take the three
Asses-heads, for upon my Soul they will be pretty Hieroglyphics of that
blessed noddle of yours; but it concerns not you, you confess, whether they
were bought, begged, or stolen; well Gaffer Scourger, had thou been as little
concerned in the Skinners 975 l. the man perhaps had never dyed of a cheat, but
of that -- In the beginning of your Epistolary Discourse, you accuse the Dr. of
being a Tailer, and of stitching up of many Diseases all curable by his trifle;
if this had been true, I have heard of greater Metamorphoses than this; did you
never hear of a man that dedicated a book to Titchburn, and afterward because
he called him Fool for his pains, or perhaps would not give him a crown for his
dedication, became an earnest suter to the two Royal Dukes, beseeching them to
hang him out of the way with the rest of his fellow Regicides, showing himself
a knave on the one hand in honoring a Traitor, and a fool on the other hand in
counselling Princes; but now (...) think of it it is a thousand pitties thou were
a Pri^y Counselor, that sweet pate of thine is so full of ^in-cracks, by thy
profound skill in Chemistry, ^hou would have found out some new way to make
Plum-pottage against Christmas, made a new Chemical Oven to bake Cheese-cakes
and Gingerbread in, or have showed by the help of the Philosophers stone, how
batter on Shrovetuesday may be turned into Pancakes; however I do not much
question thy coming to preferment, especially if the hangman stands thy friend
and helps thee at a dead lift, as who knows but he may; as for stitching up
Diseases, methinks the word is somewhat far fetched, and argues thee better
skilled a great deal in the patches of the beggars coat thou talkest on, than
in those Diseases, which the honored Dr. enumerateth; you find a Letter you
say, concluding that tractate like the close of Syrup after a fart; Fo!
methinks your lines scent as if your Ink were made of the Syrup you talk; for
shame George pull out the tail of thy shirt and wipe thy mouth, does it become
a Chemist to cack upwards, and squirt at the wrong end? you seem to question
the quality of the Author of this letter, why, I hope you are no Knight errant,
Sir, that you will fight with none but such as are dubbed? but however you do
well to think so honorably of the common hangman, who perhaps may have a
courtesy in store for you, for one good turn you know deserves another; but
Sir you do ill methinks to accuse others as cheats, when you must needs know
how much Bird-lime has sticked upon your own fingers. As for the brats you
talk of, if the Doctor has Fathered an^ of yours, methinks you do but ill
requite the nurse and if he has Fathered any of his on others, I a^ confident
they are such well-favoured ones, tha^ you your self would be very glad to own
them (...) but at the last after much thrust and shuffling you are pleased to
admit the Author in the Predicament of quality; in my opinion he is too blame
if he do not spit in thy mouth, and say, God a mercy George* but in spite of
the Muses you will profess your sell a Scholar; in good faith Sir I think your
profession is Heterodox, and that your enemies are so far from giving you that
honor, that the best of your friends cannot but pity your ignorance; as for
the false Latin you reproach the Author withal, some concluding your self to
be the corrector of the Press, have shrewdly suspected it to be a slip of your
own pen, and that so like an Ape viewing your self in this Looking-glass, they
think you sat moping and making mouths at your self; but in charity I must make
the fairest construction of it, perhaps you only played at blind-mans-buff in
the dark, ^irking the Author instead of the Printer, who as the corrected copy
will inform you, was the sole cause of all those Errataes, and yet the poor
Author is ready to be untrussed for it, and to have his Toby let blood by an
unmerciful Pedagogue. Well George on Horseback thou may sit holding up thy
Sword, but if thou strikest the Dragon he will gripe thee in his claws. In your
next Paragraph you grow angry at the Authors (...)autology, his torturing the
word adage sets your gizard a grumbling; good heart what an easy (...)hing
it is to espy other men's faults? I will warrant you never took notice how often
you your self do wrack and torter the dissylable Botcher, whereon you lay such
an Emphasis. Could you find no synonimon nor Paraphrasis for botcher that you
are fain to botch it in to your Epistle so frequently? once more let me put
thee in mind of an adage, turpe est Doctori, and take this counsel of a friend,
if thou have ever a silva synonimorum, and make much of it, and Christen thy
own Child first; but what you mean by re-seething of Coleworts in an Epistle, I
confess I know not, unless all things you meet withal by your hungry stomach
be mistaken for a Pottage-pot, and if so, I marvail why you are so angry with
our Author for seething Coleworts in his Epistle, alas good man he does it out
of charity to save you the charges of buying Butter and Cheese; but you quarrel
at him Sir for the shortness of his Epistle; and think he would have made a
longer prayer if he had been upon the Gallows; it may be so, and yet I can
assure you he is no Pharesee, that under pretense of making long prayers, can
devour 975 l. at a morsel; but here is the plague of it, after all this beating
of the bush you are not able to spring the Woodcock. I have heard Sir that
those who would come at a Woodcock must reel to and fro from one side to
the other, as if like Nown Adjectives they could not stand by themselves, at which
exercise I am told Sir you are very expert, there seldom being a day but you
are practicing your skill (as I am credibly informed) at it from morning to
night; and that yo(...) with all your staggering should not stumble on th(...)
Woodcock, I confess it is strange. In the beginning of your next Paragraph you
run grinning lik(...) a mad dog, scarce resolved within your self whethe(...)
to bark or bite; your scolding Epithites do s(...) crowd and thrust,
contending for priority whic(...) should go first through the portal of your
mouth that I thought they would have wedged on(...) another so fast in the
door, that you would have been forced to salute your Antagonist with an open
mouth and drivelling silence; but O Heavenly wide mouth, no sooner did it
gap(...) but I saw them marching out three of a breast, pitiful, creeping,
dirty, and all to encounter you(...) splinter boned adversary; but fair and
soft Sir, methinks three to one is ods at football; but now (...) think of it
he is served well enough, teach him to give the Dr. the Epitheton of
honorable, is thy(...) the crime indeed? Fie George, why should you be so
angry? had he given stolen goods to his friends and stole it from you, had he
snatched the Feather out of your Cap, and set it in the Doctors, I should not
have blamed you, but when it is well known it has none of your ear-mark, and
never was given you by any but such as jear you or flatter you, I confess I
wonder you should take it in such induggion, unless your envious soul conceives
all addition to others to be substraction from your self.

As for your suspicion of the* Authors having the ^ox, I perceive you still
believe him a Man of Quality; and some have had suspicions of your self, as one
that was in earnest acquainted with. One of your Wives told me, I might better
have similiz'd you to an Ape than an Ass, he being certainly informed you are
defective in the tail-piece, but a profound Chemist stood up both for you and
me, and told us that he could prove by Chemistry the Analogy good for all that,
saying, a Venereal fire being kindled, though it fixed his Testicles, Of French
faggots.
yet it volatized the sinuous parts, and then by Sublimation carried them to
his Head, from whence sprung his Ears, which have served this learned Ass as
Fescues for his Horn-book ever since. Yet for my part, for all this I dare
absolve and acquit you from the least spice of a Gentleman's disease: but when
the Doctor sells his Pills at half price, perhaps I my self (Sir) may give
you a box of them to cure your swimming Noddle of the Megrums.

And now you have followed our Author as far as the Oyster-wenches (or rather
like an Oyster-wench) of Billings-gate: For in truth, George, thy scolding
skill argues thee no Fresh-man in that University: but though he be an
uncivil, lying, railing Fellow, yet forsooth he shall be accounted none of your
Fellow. Stand off Gentlemen, who comes here? Surely it is some Rosicrusian
Moustrap-maker, or chemical Sub-groom of Queen Nature's close-stool: and since
it is your own worshipful self, Sir, I am glad you have publicly discarded this
uncivil, lying, railing Fellow, for verily the world would have thought him
on^^ your Disciples else, and arch Wags you kn^ would have been apt to say,
Like master, like man^^

Next, Sir, I observe with what authority y^ sub-poena in the poor aliquid tale
to answer and (...) to the praedicament of quale, and how like some J^^stices
of the peace you reconcile in sound those the are only at variance in sense;
but 'twas well for^ seen; had it not been for tale and quale your pan^^phlet
would have had neither reason nor rhyme in (...) You think our Author (you say)
may serve t^ make an Epilogue to the Doctors act, an^ in truth Sir, if there be
ever a Sir John Lack-(...) in the Play, I should judge you a very fit person t^
act him, but that I doubt you are too clownishl^ simple to act a
Gentleman-fool. Next comes a vote of non-addresses; our Author must observe
his distance, come cap in hand, and have a care how he addresseth himself in
jest to your most reverend and worshipful beard: Good heart, how simply pride
becomes a fool! Pray what are you that a man must not speak to you till he has
set his mouth in the Looking-glass? I have known some of your fellow prisoners
at Newgate, that for a single Twopence would have quietly taken a dozen kicks
in the breech; and, I believe, when you hung out your white bag at the grates,
you would have been thankful for a single Penny, though some unhappy Wag should
have given it you in jest: and now forsooth you are so skittish and tender,
that if a man crack a Lent upon you, you are presently wincing.

In your fury you challenge our Author to di^^lge his name, but he will not
sure unless he be ^ad; so you may serve him as you did your old ^end Tichborn,
petition to have him hanged out (...) the way for proclaming you at once both a
^nave and a Fool. But, Sir, it is a common custom ^^ou know with the flagellifer
to put on a vizard ^hen he is to chastise an insolent Villain: but oh (...)
Fates! my bonus genius now forewarns me of (...) calamity of these papers when
once they pre^^me to kiss your hand; it tells me that the sight ^f them will
produce such a fear throughout your ^hole corpusculum, insomuch that losing
your re^^ntive faculties, your Excrements will instantly ^escend into your
Breeches, and then O wretched I (...) these papers must be miserably torn to
cleanse (...) orifice of your drivelling Rump, and spent in ^indling fumes to
recover your senses.

Next you tell the Author of Demonstrations, which you say is an accusation
which you would ^ave answered. Alas! had thou as much wit as (...) Goose,
thou might have found sufficient satis^action; but I perceive somebody a
little wiser ^han thy self, has hammered this into thy Noddle. Well George, I
have discovered the plot: this famous Universal Pill having gotten such
wonderful credit by its conquest over the maladies of thou^ands of persons,
insomuch that for its worth it is ^econd to none, but rather, like Alexander,
it wants diseases to conquer, than virtue to overcome; Now hunger and want
having sharpened the wits of thy Associates, they advised thee to encounter the
Doctor, that if it were possible by affirming (...) falsehood they might know
the truth, and not b^ forced for the gaining of their bread to counterfe^^ his
Pills; thou perceiving that the Rosy brother^ hood by force were like to keep
Lent before Christmas, and finding thy self involved in their fate, chusest
rather to die by the Doctors nobl^ hand, than like a Lubber-lander to perish
for wan^ of belly-timber. But, alas thou pitiful Worm^ he only steps over
thee, scorning to tread o^ thee, lest he should foul his shoes in a quagmire*
Yet I care not if for their sakes, because I have some acquaintance with them,
if I discover to you wha^ a learned Chemist imagined concerning the Pills* not
that I conceive it will enter your pericranium, but for the sake of those that
are a little wiser than thy self, which is this, dra. lb 1. sang. mund. lb 1.
1. Brochi. 4. afreca 2. mi. fiat S. A. which when I said it would not penetrate
my brains, and desired him to be plainer, he told me he should use no other
words but what Helmont used after he had spoke in the commendations of the
Medicine of Aroph, described by Paracelsus page 704. Susurrantes hic audio, qui
non nisi praemasticata deglutive solent, inauspicatam verborum tenebritatem
incusantes, Carbonarii isti, aiunt, sua nobis pharmaca exponant cominus, and
demonstrationes nobis praebeant oculares. Verum ista addiscendae Pythagoricae
philosophiae nova norma est. Carbones emant, and vitra, discantque prius quae
nobis dedere, vigilatae ex ordine noctes atque nummorum dispendia. Dii vendunt
sudoribus, non lectionibus solis, arts. Idcirco nec ausum quidem, Dianam vest
spoliatam propalare, exemplum Acteonis absterret* Qui potest capere capiat.

Next, as to the slanders you talk of, I need not ^ell the world they are in
matters of truth, the Skin^ers emptied bags, Sir, have mouths wide enough ^o
proclaim your frauds without the aid of any Stygian Curs; and though you are so
confident of the good opinion of your Neighbors, take my counsel, and do not
let them know you, for upon my word if they should, you would find more mouths
than ever Cerberus had, barking at (and it may be biting) you too. How a man
should have been in danger of hanging for being the Doctors Voucher to sell a
horse, I know not, but these hard words, Sir, are a Juglers dialect; perhaps
you are afraid to explain your self, lest you should be made to sing another
palinodium in Newgate; yet I have heard it is fatal to be some men's Vouchers,
witness your Surety who was hanged for a Co^er, or rather your Disciple it may
be, to whom you had taught the use of the new-fashioned Philosophers stone. But
oh the plague of an empty belly! how you sit jouring and grumbling at the
Doctors good victuals, and cursing at the Crowns that have blessed his purse,
and so exactly imitating the ^ungry dog, that while his master is at dinner,
sits barking and snarling underneath the table. As for the Hangers-on which
you say the Doctor has shaken off since he changed his Linen, you know Sir,
they have been always retainers to the We mind Impostors only that assume that
name.
Rosicrusian family, and it was not long since you were so stocked with them at
Newgat^ that you might have got more money by curin^ the Yellow Jaundise with
them, than ever you di^ by your Stills and Pipkins, till necessity force^ you
to pawn your Shirt, and so mortgage the fiel^ and the flock together.

Next you seem angry at the Doctors refusal t^ answer all Letters: Fie!
George, do not wrin^ your brows so; you put your self to the hazard o^
disblocking your Perriwig: what though a man has not a scribbling vein like
you, must he be pre^sently buffeted for it? would you have him writ^ against
the College of Physicians? shoot paper^ bullets as you do at all that are your
Superiors (...) In truth Sir, I am put in mind of you as often as ^ see an Ape
sit mumping on a Stall, and making ill-favored mouths at the passengers, he
does so prettily resemble you, that I cannot choose but think on your sweet
Physiognomie. But I know your policy; you would be wounding others with the
blow of Detraction, that you may from the bleeding veins of their Reputation,
suck blood to put color into the pale cheeks of your own. But though you would
needs be playing the Achitophel, I dare say there needs neither prayer nor
miracle to turn your wisdom into folly.

In your next lines I find a good strain of nonsense; you wonder a Dog should
not be able to cast up a Botchers bill: I believe you might find as bad
Arithmeticians among your own long-ear'd brethren. It Is a sad world indeed that
Dogs cannot cast account; but I will let it pass, it is only a ^^seething of
old Coleworts in an Epistle. Next to ^is follows a good intervall of wit, yet
clasped (...) like a Parenthesis with nonsense and imperti^ence: You come
marching out like Orlando Fu^oso in the head of a whole army of Maladies to
^ncounter the Doctors invincible Pill, and now ^ave amongst you blind Harpers,
stand off at your ^eril, the bum-cannon is charging, he is giving ^ire to the
touchhole, hab-nab here is among you (...) whole Ferkin of foul stuff, here is
Deaths Muster^^aster general, let us make proclamation; O Yes: If there be any
man or woman that have a mind to hang themselves, let them repair to George St.
in Bartholo^ew-lane, and they shall have a Pill will poison them under the
price of a Hal^e ^make haste away therefore all ye that are weary of your
lives. Give this Charon but a Groat, and with one dram of his Powder he will
waft you over Styx. If there be any great heir would be rid of his aged Sire,
bring him hither to George, and he will quickly give him a Pasport to Heaven.
If any man be troubled with a scolding wife, bring her to Bartholomew-lane, he
will soon make her as dumb as a dore-nail. And which is more than all this, if
there be any Skinner in Walbrook, that has gotten a surfeit in his purse, here
they may have a purge will give 975 stools at a bout.

Next for the whet-stone you praise the Doctor, I believe you may be as likely
to help him to it as another: but as for the golden handle and chain, Sir, I
doubt he must be ^ain to inquire at another shop. And now you have conquered
the Giant, and broke his sword over his head. Before you can make the world
believe thee a discoverer of (...) you must off with thy Doublet, Breeches and
(...) (if thou have any) and stand three days together (...) the Pillorie in
Cornhill, with this Motto writter (...) Text letters on thy breast, DVM ALIOS
(...) CVSO, IPSE REVS: and then thou may (...) leave to subscribe thy self,
Tom Thum in the chimney-corner, Alluding (...) this Phil^^^^pher by (...)
in spite of the black puddings or Tinkers budget.

And now to fill up the sheet, follows a sup^^^mental Corollary as you are
pleased to call it; (...) sum teneatis amici? did you ever see such a ho^^podg
of ridiculous stuff blanched with the title a Corrolary before? have a care
George, you (...) who was hanged lately for stamping the Kings (...) press upon
leaden six pences. Thus you (...) Courteous Reader, thou may wonder; stay,
(...) here is some Puppit-play to be seen, or Dancing (...) the Ropes, and now
Orator George is about (...) make some speech to the Spectators, what is (...)
going to cut off Olofernes his Head, or Hero (...) bringing in John Baptist's
in a Platter? no co^^^teous Spectators it is little Jack Horner in the chimney
corner, (...)
fighting with the Dr. at long Sword and Custard; next the Monomachy makes me
blush; Sir I (...) heard that the Vermillion of a blush seldom (...) peareth
but on your parboyl'd Nose; yet p^^modesty, you need not be ashamed if the
(...) were such an Illiterate as you represent him* I (...) to Fool would be no
ods at football* (...) ^^ich kindles your indignation and fury, is his
ob^^ding upon the world, a letter under the name (...) person of quality. Good
heart how this ^^^son of quality sticks in your stomach, (...) you are
resolved to be eaven with him in false (...) or Barbarism at least, witness
your vox est, ^^^terea nihill, nihil dixi? Imo calumniae effrontes, etc. The
English whereof in short is this, He is a (...) and nothing else, did I say
nothing? yea he (...) Impudent and most bold calumnies and great (...); for he
that reads your foregoing words (...) barketh securely because invisibly)
will find (...) make (est) a Verb Personal, and so must be ^^^strued as
aforesaid; and now George by your (...) rule you are bound in conscience to
untruss, (...) elevate your Toby and take it patiently; but (...), will you
never do so no more? ha? speak; (...) because it is the first time, and I see you
begin (...) make a pityful lenton face upon it, good boy, (...) I will forgive
thee this once. Your next is but (...) petition of your former folly, only you
threat^^ (...) poor Author to bring him to a recantation, (...) before that be
effected, I doubt you your self (...) be forced to do penance in this white
sheet. (...) Dr. you confess is gotten into the acquaintance (...) persons of
real honor and worth, but yet deser^^ly fallen (it is not the first lie thou have
told) (...) the just contempt of many of them (or at least (...) would have
it so) alas good man how thou (...) grumbling and mumbling to see him shine
(...) Orb so far above thy reach, whilst thou sit (...) (as the Author told
thee) like a dog upon (...), barking at the Moon? and now having wiped off the
dirt from your person, you refer us to your book of Examinations; why do thou
think there is any will be so simple as to read it, unless it be (as he did his
Granmar) sitting on a close-stool, still tearing out the leaves as they read
them to make Napkins for their bums? no George, not all those demonstrations
thou promisest the world will make your book salable at two pence a volume, so
long as men can buy at a cheaper rate the tale of Tom Thumb, or Robin Hood and
little John, for there was never man that did read any thing of thy writing (if
he was any thing read) but could perceive all thou did besides lying and
railing was either begged, borrowed, or stolen; you talk of being alarmed with an
answer of ten sheets of paper, in truth I believe it was in your dream then;
what need a man take such a large scope to confute thee, when the whole
substance of thy wit may be trussed up in a nut-shell, and the only naming thy
arguments would be sufficient to confute them; and yet so confident thou art on
the strength of thy demonstrations that thou dare take up the Doctor upon it
from 5 s. to 500 l. Well, you that are his Creditors pray hard he may not be
loser, lest he should be forced to compound with you for three farthings in the
pound. But suppose the Reduction were as thou say (which thing I need not
grant) it does in no way weaken its energy, Did never read in Helmont, p.
117. Corpora cuncta primitive atque materialiter ex aqua sola fiant, acquisito
per fermentum semine quodque exa^latis seminibus corpora tandem in pristmum
aquae hospitium retrocedant. And thus you see by the Author you pretend to all
bodies are reducible into one and the same matter, and I know many hundred of
Medicines may be made of stibiun by the hand of an ingenious artist, and
afterward a regulus may be produced; yet no man can be so simple as to think
by pyrotechny and a ferment there should be no difference in their dotal
qualities; as for that you say concerning the distemper of the Mother, I had a
letter that came from a reverend and learned Divine, who after the enumerating
of many Cures he had performed by Dr. Lockiers Pill, he declared in particular
the admirable effects of that Pill as to that distemper, which if I could have
had leave from the Dr. I would have published it, but he said he would reserve
it to be published in his book of experimental cures, which book will silence
malice it self.

But I repute it (say you) beneath me to enlarge upon Exc. Now here sits
purring Puss in her Majesty, disdaining to look down on this silly Pill, whose
bones he has all this while been a picking: alas he had quite forgot he was an
Eagle, and this made him Oul-like to quarry upon a Mouse, but now he remembers
he was generously born, he resolves he will not take it as he has done; good
people you must know he was born a great way off, some do conceive him Heir
apparent to reverend John Cobbler, a splay-mouth holder forth in New England; as
for his education, if you will be so simple as to believe him, he was baptized
in the Font of the Muses, which Phainomenon is only solvable by the Proverb, ex
quovis ligno non fit Mercurius; but a^ for his Chemical studies he is the
non-such of the age; after one and twenty years pains and industry he has
found out the mystery of stilling Poppy and Rose Water, nay some say a new way
too, (...) melt Butter by the Sunbeams, nay some say more* a new engine too to
tossed Cheese and Black-puddings, with many other rare Inventions that lie within
the circumference of his teeming Pericranium; for his great encouragement he
has taken his degrees too in the University of Vtopia, where Nicholas Nemo in
a full convocation dubbed M. D. (i. e.) Medicinae Doctor. But Courteous Reader
do not think he writes this with any delight to hear or relate it; no, as God
is his Judge he is a pretty modest elf, do not ye see how he blushes, as if he
had changed faces with Friar Bacons Brazen-head? Next you grumble at the
Doctors Picture, if thou will be advised by me, set thine in the Front of thy
Examinations and Censures, twill be sure a pretty resemblance of the Tartarian
Monster (only his is an Horses, thine an Asses head) that perhaps may inhaunce
the price of thy Pamphlets two pence a piece more than ever they were yet sold
for; as for the new Medicine you say the Doctor is preparing, it makes me
think you talk in your sleep, you tell storys of answers in ten sheets of
paper, of new Medicines, that will out-cure the old, two bars length and a half,
which I dare say are the mere Chymeraes of your own brain, and thus like the
Cuckoo you lay Eggs of your own, and bring them to be hatched in other Birds
nests; and now thou talkest of Heads, and say thou could make thy Reader
metry; alas thou have so much of the Fools head, that when thou sportest thou
playest the fool in earnest, and so deservest pity, rather than laughter; at
last you are confident of vexing the Drs. patience, it is very pretty, (I see a
Fools bolt is soon shot) I never saw yet a wise man impatient at the braying of
an Ass, and now Sir having lashed a Fool upon your worships back, I take my
leave of you for the present, till you spew out some new Pamphlet.

Philo-Chemicus.

SInce the writing of this discourse, I met with an ancient acquaintance of the
Doctors, and now his very near neighbor, of whom I desired an impartial
account of the Doctors life, past, and present; who answered, that his
acquaintance with him, had not been above 28. or 29. years, and that then he
was a Merchant in Hose, and other commodities, maintaining the best part of a
1000. people in employment, and beyond Sea four Factors, and that he married
the widow of Mr. Springal, by whom he had the best part of two thousand pound.
I then inquired whether he was taught Chemistry by Moulton in Hog-lane, he said
no, but the Dr. was acquainted with him in Germany, and gave him three Secrets
for the receipt of one; for the Dr. had spent in Chemistry many pounds before
he was acquainted with him; yet the Dr. he said had taught some of the greatest
persons in the world both for Nobilite and Learning, who counted it no
dishonor to learn of so Industrious and Ingenious a Spagyrick* I then inquired
whether he had not lately been reduced to poverty, he said no, for he had lived
in that Parish the best part of twenty years, and that ever since he had given
thirty two shillings a month where he saw need; having within this three or
four years sold thirty pounds a year, not regarding worldly treasure; but the
more he has slighted it, the more God has blessed him, and given him a
sufficiency to purchase an earthly inheritance, but he said he was strangely
opposite to all earthly purchases, minding much more to do the errant for which
he was sent, having an eye at the recompense of reward, which is to have a
dwelling in that City whose builder and maker is God. The reason of this
discourse being added here, is to let the world know that George is not only
given over to believe lies, but also to write them.


