ENGLISH WORTHIES, IN CHURCH AND STATE.

Anglorum Speculum, OR THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND, In Church and State.
Alphabetically digested into the several SHIRES and COUNTIES therein contained;
WHEREIN Are Illustrated the Lives and Characters of the most Eminent Persons
since the Conquest to this present Age. ALSO An account of the Commodities and
Trade of each Respective County, and the most flourishing Cities and Towns
therein.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Passinger at the three Bibles on London Bridge,
William Thackary at the Angel in Duck-lane, and John Wright at the Crown on
Ludgate Hill. 1684.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present you with an abstract of the Lives and Memoir's of the most
famous and Illustrious Personages of this Realm, since the Conquest to this
present time; for order sake I have digested it Alphabetically into the several
Shires and Counties contained in this Kingdom; which I hope will find a kind
acceptance, there being nothing of the same method now Extant.

Dr. Fuller in his large History in Folio, did go a great way in this matter,
but here is included the Lives of many more eminent Heroes and generous
Patrons, (which I hope their memory may survive in succeeding Ages) this being
done with that brevity, which may be more beneficial to the Reader.

Here you have the Original or rise of most of the Eminent Families in this
Kingdom.

Also, an Epitome of the most material matters in Church and State, containing
the Lives of the most Eminent Fathers in the English Church, and the most
Flourishing Statesmen in the latter times; Also the most famous Authors, as
well Divine as Historical; together with the Lives of the most Memorable
Persons in the Law, Mathematics, Geographers, Astronomers, Poets, etc. which
have made this Kingdom known throughout the World.

I need not enlarge, or give any further Incomium upon this subject, but referr
you to the Table first, and then to the Book it self, which I hope will find
that kind acceptance, that may engage me in some further procedure that may
please my Countrymen, which I shall always endeavor to do in plainness and
brevity to the Readers satisfaction, and in the mean time, am

Yours to command G. S.

An Abstract OF THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. The Design of the Work.
THE Rooms of the House being described by others, it is my intention to
describe the Furniture, viz. the Commodities, with the Persons of Quality, etc.
of the several Shires of England. But it may be asked Cui bono? To what good
end? I Answer. 1. To gain some Glory to God. 2. To preserve the Memories of the
Dead. 3. To present Examples to the Living. 4. To entertain the Reader with
Delight. 5. To procure some honest profit to my self.

The matter is either Real, viz. The Commodities and Observables of every
County, or Personal, the Characters of those worthy Men, who were Natives
thereof.

CHAP. II. The Real Topics insisted on, in the Respective Counties.
1. THE Native Commodities; Of which, if any be general to all England, it is
entered in that County where there was the first, or else the most and best of
that kind. 2 The Manufactures, Admirable for Rarity and Variety; Of which, such
as are not properly Natural, but Mixed, are promiscuously placed. 3 Medicinal
Waters, Wonderful for Color, Taste, Odor, Sound, Heat, Weight, Motion and
Effects. The last is proper for my Pen. 4. The Wonders, or Rarities, which are
Transient or Permanent. The Wonders of England are as considerable for kind as
those of other Countries. 5. The Buildings; of which the Churches are most
admirable. 6. Local Proverbs, and there are Six essentials of a Proverb, that
it be Short, Plain, Common, Figurative, Ancient and True. I have only insisted
upon the most considerable Local Proverbs, that suggest to us some Historical
Hint, and have declined all such as are Narrow, Frivolous, Scurrillou^ and
Scandalous. 7. Medicinal herbs, which if rare and very useful are placed next
the Medicinal Waters, in the respective Counties.

CHAP. III. Of the first Quaternion of Persons.
Viz. 1. Princes since the Conquest. 2. Saints, who generally may be divided
into those of Fiction, Faction, Superstition, or Real existence. 3. Martyrs. 4.
Confessors.


FOr the First, I take notice of the Legitimate Issue; as to Saints, I am sorry
that the Lives of some of them, are so darkened with Needless, if not False
Illustrations, to their Dishonor, and the Detriment of Church History, which
has arisen from the Ignorance or Disingenuity of the Writers of their Lives, or
for want of true matter, or for hope of gain, or lastly for this, that they saw
it pleased the People. Whence it is true, what Melchior Canus says, Lib. 11. c.
6.
I speak it to my grief that the Lives of the Philosophers are more gravely
Written by Laertius, than Saints are by Christians. Our Catalogue contains only
English Saints, wherefore Anselm is left out as being a Frenchman, since whom
the Pope has been very sparing to confer the Honor of Saintship; because, the
multitude of Saints, abates Veneration, and would overcharge the Calender, that
already labors with the Sacred burden; besides the charge of Canonization is
great, and his Holiness unwilling to bestow it gratis; and lastly, Protestants
shrewdly suspect that some unworthy Persons have been served with the Dignity
by that Servant of the Servants of God, therefore none are Canonized while
their Memories are on the Must, immediately after their Deaths, before the same
be fined in the Cask, with some competent time. As to the third, viz. Martyrs,
who have lost their Lives for the Testimony of a fundamental Truth; those our
Land has produced, are either Britains, who suffered under Dioclesian, or
Saxons Massacred by the Danes, or lastly English Martyred by the Papists, since
the year 1400. I shall treat of the last, the two former being done already.
For the last, viz. Confessors, they are such who have lost all but Life, for
the truth, and escaped Martyrdom very narrowly; who were as Wax, ready for the
Signature of Death; But, Threatened folks Live long, yea threatened Elijah by
Gods Miraculous Providence, never died.

CHAP. IV. Of Popes, Cardinals and Prelates, before the Reformation.
THere have been four Popes Englishmen, and but six Germans, tho Germany be
five times bigger then England, which boasts of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
formerly accounted Pope of England. As for Cardinals, they were anciently no
more then Curats, made by Bishops, as well as by the Pope. For, there were
founded, anciently, in the Church of St. Paul's, two Cardinals chosen by Dean
and Chapter, out of the twelve petty Cannons, whose Office was to look to those
of the Quire, to give the Eucharist, to the Minister of that Church and his
Servants, to hear Confessions, appoint Penance, and to commit the Dead to
convenient Sepulture, and two of them lie buried in the Church of St. Faiths.

This Custom of Cardinal-making was in many other Countries, but afterward,
was appropriated to Rome, where they are divided into Bishops, who are
Assessors with the Popes Priests, who are Assistants, and Deacons, Qui serviunt
Servo Servorum Dei, who are Attendants on his Holiness. The Bishops are seven,
viz. Bishop of 1 Hostia, 2 Sabine, 3 Porto, 4 Alba, 5 Preneste, in which three
last places, these Englishmen respectively have been Bishops, viz. R.
Kilwardby, Nic. Breakspeare, Bernar. Anglicus, and Sim. Langham. 6 Rufine, 7
Tusculane. Cardinal Priests are accounted twenty eight, amongst whom Steph.
Langhton was Card. of St. Chrysogon, An. 1212. Tho. Woolsey of St. Cecily,
1515. John Morton, of St. Anastasia, 1493. Will. Alan of St. Martin in the
Mount, 1587. Ancherus, 1261, and Chr. Bambridge, 1511, of St. Praxis Boso, of
St. Crosses Jerusalem, 1156. Rob. Curson, 1211, and Rob. Summercote, 1234, of
St. Steph. in Mount Celius. Th. Bourchier, of St. Cyriacus in the Baths. Rob.
Pullen, of St. Eusebius, 1144. Boso, of St. Puntiana, 1160. John Fisher, of St.
Vitalis, 1535. Of Cardinal Deacons, there are sixteen, whereof Boso was the
only Englishman, and Card. of St. Cosmus and Damian. Their habit is Scarlet.

Pope Paul II. made it Penal, for any beneath their Order, in Rome, to wear a
Red hat. The Cardinal-Bishops took place of the Emperor before his Coronation,
and of other Kings. The Popes were to be chosen by, and out of that Order. The
Cardinal-Deacons were oftentimes elected to the Popedom before the
Cardinal-Priests. There is at this day, a Brother of the late Duke of Norfolk
enjoys the Title and Dignity of Cardinal. It Is alleged by some that Englishmen
being of a different Religion from his Holiness, and in a manner, exiles
abroad, and not furnished with sufficient Estates, are therefore seldom
honored with that Dignity, which has been fatal to several Englishmen; for
Card. Mackelsfield was buried four Months before his Cap was brought him; Card.
Sertor died in Italy in the juncture of time, inter pileum Datum and Susceptum.
Card. Fisher, when his Cap was come to Calis, had his head strucK off at
Tower Hill. Card. Somercot was Poisoned, in the Conclave, to prevent his
Election to the Popedom. Card. Evosham was sent the same way, on the same
occasion. Card. Bambridge was Poisoned at Rome, by one of his Servants, being
an Italian.

As for Prelates, the Catalogue shall begin about the time of King H. 3. And
continue to the 1. El.

CHAP. V. Since the Reformation.
SUch Prelates are the same with the last mentioned in Title, but not in
Tenure; in Dignity, tho not in Doctrine, holding their Places of the King, and
professing the Protestant Religion, these Hundred and thirty years. Amongst
these many are allowed, even by Malice it self, for their Living, Preaching and
Writing, to have been the Champions of Truth, and Unity, verifying the
Observation of Foreigners, That the Clergy of Britain is the Glory of the
World. These Prelates we digest in five Companies, under their respective
Archbishops. 1 Archbishop Cranmer's. 2 Archbishop Parker's. 3 Archbishop
Whitgift's. 4. Archbishop Abbot's 5. Archbishop Juxton's, whose Chairs were
shaken, in the late Troubles. I know the Man, to whom Mr. Charles Herle,
(President of the Assembly,) said, somewhat insultingly, I tell you news, last
Night I buried a Bishop (dashing more at his Profession then Person) in
Westminster Abbey, to whom the other replied, Sure you buried him in hope of
Resurrection.

CHAP. VI. Of Statesmen.
UNder this head I intend to Write of those who have been, by their Princes
Favor preferred to the Offices and Dignities of Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer
of England, Lord Admiral of England, Secretary of State, to whom some Lord
Deputies of Ireland are added. The word Chancellor is derived by some, a
Cancellendo, from Cancelling things amiss, and mitigating the rigor of the
Common Law by the Rules of Equity. The Chancellor is the highest Officer of
the Land, and his Jurisdiction is either ordinary in the exercise of which he
is to proceed, according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm; or Extraordinay,
and as to this he proceeds Secundum Aequum and Bonum, in the Court of
Conscience, where three things are to be judged, Covin, Accident, and Breach of
Confidence, Cook, Jurisd. of Courts. He also keeps the Great Seal. As for the
Antiquity of the Office, King Ethelred appointed the Abbot of Elye, Quatenus
Ecclesiam de Elye, extunc et semper, in Regis Curia Cancellarii ageret
Dignitatem, which albeit it was void in Law to grant the Chancellourship in
Succession, yet it proves that then, there was a Court of Chancery. The Lord
Keeper is in effect the same with the Lord Chancellor: save that some will
have the Lord Chancellors Place, ad terminum Vitae, and the Lord Keepers, ad
placitum Regis. Sure it is, that because Nicholas Heath, late Archbishop of
York, and Chancellor of England, was still alive, tho outed of his Office, Sir
Nich. Bacon was made Lord Keeper, and in his time, the Power of the Keeper was
made equal with the Authority of the Chancellor, by Act of Parliament. The
Catalogue begins with Sir Tho. Moor, before whom Clergymen were Chancellours,
and these are entered, under the Title of Eminent Prelates. As for the Lord
Treasurer, His Office was ever beheld as a Place of great Charge and Profit.
One well skilled in the Perquisits thereof, said, The value of the place was
worth some thousands of Pounds, to him, who (after Death) would go instantly to
Heaven, twice as much to him who would go to Purgatory, and a Nemo scit, to him
who would adventure to go to a worse place. The Catalogue begins at Will. Lord
Paulet Marquess of Winchester, because, before him, Clergymen generally
enjoyed the Dignity. As to Secretaries of State, there are two of them,
Principal Secretary, and the Secretary of State, the first for Foreign, the
other for Domestic business, as some would have it; their Salaries were in the
late Kings time, some two hundred Pounds a Piece, and five hundred Pounds
apiece, for Intelligence and secret Service; the Catalogue begins with Th.
Cromwell, in the reign of H. 8. Lord Admiral follows, the Original of which word
is Amir, in Arabic, a Prince and (...), in the Greek, belonging to the Sea;
the Occasion of the composition of the two Languages seems to be the extent of
the Sultans Dominions in the time of the Holy War from Sinus Arabicus, to the
North Eastern part of the Midland-Sea, where a Barbarous kind of Greek was
spoken, and we do not mend the matter in pronouncing Admiral for Amiral. There
was a Triumvirate of Admirals, for the North, South, and West; The Jurisdiction
of the first reached from the Mouth of the Thames, to the outmost Orcades, and
had Yarmouth for his prime residence. The second, from the Thames Mouth, to the
Lands end, his station at Portsmouth. The third, from the Lands end, to the
Hebrides, his station Milford Haven. Rich. Fitz Allen, Earl of Arundel was made
the first Admiral of all England, John Vere Earl of Oxford was 1. H. 7 Admiral
of England, and kept it during his Life, afterward, according to the pleasure
of the Prince, Men took their turns in that Office; because of this uncertainty
there are some Admirals inserted under the Title of Statesmen, and
Vice-Admirals, under the Topic of Seamen. As for Lord-Deputies of Ireland, they
were constituted, upon the Conquest of that place, by H. 2. and have there
continued the same Power under that and the other titles of Lord Liuetenants,
and Lord Chief Justices, with this difference, that a Lord Lieutenant might
have made a Deputy; and as to the last, there was sometimes one, and at other
times two Lord Chief Justices of all Ireland. The Word Lieutenant denotes the
largeness of his Power, which represents the Kings. Ireland was divided in
former times into many petty Kingdoms, yet, before H. 8. the Kings of England
were content with the Title of Lords of Ireland. King Henry assumed that of
King, for Quod efficit tale, est magis tale, and the Commission whereby King H.
2. made Will. Fitz Adelm his Lieutenant of Ireland, has this Direction, To the
Archbishops, Bishops, Kings, etc.

CHAP. VII. Of Judges and Writers on the Common Law.
CApital Judges are 1. The Chief Justice, of the Kings Bench. 2 Of the
Common Pleas. 3. The Chief Baron of the Exchequer. The first is called the Lord
Chief Justice of England, to whom the Chief Justice of the Com. Pleas is
inferior in Place, tho in Profit he be above him, so that some have, out of
design, quitted that, to accept this; Amongst whom was Sr. Ed. Montague, in the
reign of H. 8, who, in defense of his Choice, said, I am now an old Man, and
love the Kitchen above the Hall. The Chief Baron is employed in the Exchequer,
about the Kings Revenue. The Catalogue begins about the time of E. 1. As for
Writers of the Common Law, I have placed them with the Judges.

CHAP. VIII. Of Soldiers and Seamen.
I Begin with the first at E. 3. As for Seamen, it is agreed there are the best
of that Profession in England. The four first Circum-Navigators of the World
were, 1. Magellanus a Spaniard. 2. Sir Francis Drake, an English Man. 3. Sir
Th. Candish an Engl. 4. Oliver Noort, an Hollander. This last had an
Englishman, one Capt. Mellis Pilot. The Catalogue begins in the time of E. 3.

CHAP. IX. Of Writers on the Canon and Civil Law, Physic, Chemistry and
Chyrurgery.
IN the days of Queen Eliz. some able Civilian was wont to be joined in
Commission with the Ambassador, then they were deservedly dignified, tho in the
late times disgraced by those who aimed at no less then Universal Confusion. I
have given a List of some eminent Civilians and Canonists; as also of
Physicians, and of the most noted Chemists and Chyrurgions that occurr.

CHAP. X. Writers.
OF whom Gildas leads the Army, and they are either such as wrote before or
since the Reformation, the former being either Historians, Philologists, or
Divines. The two last are hinted at by Dr. Collins, as comprised under the
words of the Romans 16.11.
Apostle, Salute Philologus and Olympas. As for History, both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, it has been Written by many, tho farced by the Monks before the
Reformation, with Fictions. To these we have added Poets, which Profession was
not a little honored by King James, who waved his Crown, in the two and twenty
shilling Pieces, and wore the Laurel in his new twenty shilling pieces. Tho
Poets being always poor, Bays were rather the Emblem of Wit then Wealth, since
King James no sooner began to wear them, but he presently fell two shillings in
the Pound in public Valuation. Some are of Opinion that there is always one
Laureal Poet in England. And there is at this time Mr. Dreyden.
one of a profound knowledge and most solid Judgment, whose Memory, in spite of
the teeth of Time, will always last to all succeeding ages.

Music is nothing else but Wild Sounds civilized into Time and Tune; so
extensive that it stoopeth to Beasts and mounteth as high as Angels, for Horses
will do more for a Whistle then for a whip. And We know no more what Angels do
above,
Save only that they Sing and that they Love,


Music was taught, with other Learning by the Bards, and long after 'twas no
small honor to the profession, that King Hen. 8. could sing his part and used
to compose services for his own Chapel, which you may imagine were in b acre,
since he was naturally well versed in that Key. Since the Reformation were some
Romish Writers, who were banished, with whom I knock off.

CHAP. XI. Of Public Benefactors.
BUilders of Churches lead the Van. The Proverb is, Pater Noster built
Churches, and Our Father plucks them down; to confute this, some have
endeavored to pluck down both Churches and Our Father. And as this is
Sacrilegious and Irreligious, so it is no less unjust to Violate the Monuments
of those who were the Founders and Benefactors, which was very much practiced
in the late times, when the bones of Henry Keble, Ld. Major of London 1511, who
rebuilded Aldermary Church, were, sixty years after, inhumanely cast out of the
Vault wherein they were Buried. Free Schools and Colleges come in the next
place, from which I pass to Bridges which keep our Island a Continent to it
self. There is a Memorable passage in History of Q. Maud, for being to pass the
River Ley about Stratford, she was almost drowned in the riding over it, but
this proved the bad cause of a good effect, for hereupon she built the
beautiful Bridge there for the benefit of Travelers. I will, in the next place
visit Almshouses, which ought not to be abolished, tho some corruptions should
continue in their foundations. Let the Charitably minded do what, when, where,
how, to whom and how much God and their own Goodness shall direct them.
Schoolmen reduce corporal Charity to seven Heads, Visito, Poto, Cibo, Redimo,
Tego, Colligo, Condo. That is, Visit men in Misery, give Drink to the thirsty,
Meat to the hungry, Rescue the Captive, cover the Naked, dress the Wounded,
bury the Dead. Which works are placed like the seven Planets, whilst to Redeem
Captives, stands like the Sun in the midst of all the rest. I could wish, that
there were in London a Corporation of able and honest Merchants empowered to
receive and employ the charity of well affected People for a General
Jail-delivery of all English Captives in Tunis, Tripoli, Algier, Sally, etc.
For why should the Romanists be more charitable then we? When their Religion
was publicly current in England, the Order of the Holy Trinity was instituted
for The Redemption of Captives. I have distinguished the Benefactors since,
from them, before the Reformation.

Of the Stating of the Word Reformation.
We may take notice of three distinct Dates and different degrees of our
English Reformation. 1 The Civil part thereof, when the Popes Supremacy was
Banished in the Reign of K. Hen. VIII. 2. When the Church Service was reformed,
as far as that age would admit, An 1. Ed. 6. 3. When the same (after the Marian
interruption) was resumed and more refined, in the Reign of Q. El. The first of
these I may call the Morning Star. The Second, the Dawning of the Day. The
third, the rising of the Sun. As to the Prelates and Writers, in Q. Mary's days,
their inclinations are discovered in their Writings and by their Actions.

CHAP. XII. Memorable Persons.
THE former Heads were like Private Houses, but this Topic is like a public
Inn, admitting all Comers and Goers, having any extraordinary (not vicious)
Remark upon them. Such therefore, who are over, under, or beside the Standard
of Common Persons, for strength, stature, fruitfulness, vivacity, etc. are
lodged under this Head; under which I also repose such Mechanics, who have
reached a clear note above others in their Vocation, and Eminent improvers of
Arts, being Founders of that Accession, which they add thereunto.

CHAP. XIII. Of Lord Mayors of London.
AFter the Death of the King, the Lord Majors Office and Authority continues a
whole year, whereas most other Offices determine with the Kings Death. Younger
Sons are raised to this Dignity by their own Virtue, which affords an
Illustrious Example, and gives the greatest Encouragement to all well-disposed
Youth. Some Shires are destitute of this Honorable Office, tho it is probable
they may come to arrive at the Privilege of Majorality; for Sir Richard
Chiverton, Skinner, descended of a right Ancient and Worshipful Family, having
been lately the first in Cornwall, has opened the door there, for others to
follow after him. Some, in London, have refused the Office, and Fined, and
thereby have Charitably increased the Stock of the City.

CHAP. XIV. Why a Catalogue of the English Gentry in the Reign of H. 6. is
inserted in this Book.
IN the days of H. 6, under pretense of routing out Felons, Outlaws, etc.
Opposition was made to the House of York; which was the Occasion that a List of
Gentry was made. As to the Method of the Catalogue, among the Commissioners,
the Bishop of the Diocese is first put, after whom follow Earls, Barons,
Knights of the Shire. Note here, that in the time of H. 6, de such a place, was
left off, and the addition of Knight or Squire was assumed, tho not generally
in all places.

CHAP. XV. Of Sheriffs.
SHeriff is a Reeve or Overseer of a Shire, in Latin Vicecomes, or Deputy of an
Earl or Count, who anciently presiding over a County, gave names both to the
Place, and deputed Jurisdiction. In the year 888. K. Alfred first divided
England into Shires. The Clerk of the Peace for each County in Mich. Term,
presents to the Lord Chief Justice, six or more names of able Persons for the
Office of Sheriff, of whom three are presented to the King, who pricks one to
stand Sheriff, for the County. His Power is to suppress Riots, secure
Prisoners, distrain for Debts, execute Writs, return Knights and Burgesses for
Parliament, empannel Juries, attend the Judge, see the Execution of
Malefactors, etc. By 4. H. 4, 5. Sheriffs are to abide within their Counties.
It Is observed by some, that anciently the Office of Sheriff was Honos sine
onere, in middle times Honos cum onere, and in our days Onus sine Honor, a
burden without honor.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Coats of Arms of Sheriffs.
ARms seem to have been Jure Divino, to the Jews, and their use is great both
in War and Peace; without them an Army neither has Method, nor strikes terror,
and in peace Arms distinguish one Man from another. Arms assumed according to
one's fancy are but personal, but Arms assigned by Princes are Hereditary. The
plainer the Coat is, the more Ancient and Honorable; two Colors are necessary
and most highly honorable, tho both may be blazoned with one word, as Varrey,
(formerly born by the Beauchamps of Hatch in Wiltshire, and still quartered by
the Duke of Somerset) three are very honorable, four Commendable* five
Excuseable, more disgraceful. One said of a Coat, that it was so well
Victualled that it might endure a Siege, such was the Plenty and Variety of
Fowl, Flesh and Fish therein. Or and Azure are the richest, Argent and Sable
the fairest Coats. The Lion and Eagle are the most Honorable, the Cross the
most Religious bearing; a Bend the best Ordinary, being a Belt athwart, as a
Fess is the same about the middle. Herbs Vert (being natural) are better then
Or. There are Reasons rendered for some bearings. Thus whereas the Earls of
Oxford anciently gave their Coat plain, quarterly Gules and Or, they took
afterward in the first a Mallet or Star Argent, because the Chief of the House
had a Falling-Star, (as is said) alighting on his Shield as he was fighting in
the Holy Land. Now for the Arms of Sheriffs, we have added them, ever since the
first of King Richard 2. I will conclude this Discourse with a Memorable Record.

Claus. 5 H. 5. Membr. 15 in the Tower. The King to the Sheriff Health* etc.
because there are diverse Men, as we are informed, which before these times in
the Voyages made by us have assumed to themselves Arms and Coat-Armours, where
neither they, nor their Ancestors in times past used such Arms, etc. and
Propound with themselves to use and exercise the same in this present Voyage,
which God willing we intend to make. And although the Omnipotent disposes his
favors in things Natural, as he pleases, equally to the Rich and Poor; yet We
willing, that every one of our Liege Subjects should be Esteemed and Treated in
due manner, according to the Exigency of his State and Condition: We Command
thee, that in every place within thy Bailiwick, where by our Writ we have
lately shown, you cause to be Proclaimed, that no Man, of what State, Degree or
Condition soever he be, shall take upon him such Arms or Coats of Arms, save he
alone, who does possess, or ought to possess the same, by the right of his
Ancestors, or by Donation and grant of some, who had sufficient power to assign
him the same; and that he that uses such Arms or Coats of Arms, shall, on the
day of his Muster, manifestly show to such Persons assigned, or to be assigned
by us, for that purpose, by virtue of whose gift he enjoys the same, those
only excepted who carried Arms with us at the Battle of Agincourt; under the
penalties not to be admitted to go with us, in our aforesaid Voyages, under his
Command, by whom he is for the present retained, and of the loss of his wages,
as also of the rasing out and breaking off the said Arms called Coat-Armours,
at the time of his Muster aforesaid, if they shall be shown upon him or found
about him. And this you shall in no case omit. Witness the King, at the City of
New Sarum, June the Second.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Alterations and Variations of Surnames.
SUrnames of Families, have been altered, and new Names assumed, chiefly for
Concealment in time of Civil Wars, or Advancement, when any were adopted into
an Estate; besides, the same Surname is found diversely written, because Time
teaches new Orthography, and Writers have not been very Critical in spelling
them. Lastly, ancient Families have been removed into several Counties, where
several Writings follow the several Pronunciations. So the Names of Villiers
and Roper are variously Written, as Villars, Rooper, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Modern Battles.
SUch have been since the beginning of the Civil Wars in England. I have
endeavored to present these Battles, according to plain Historical truth,
without any partial Reflections, and in describing of them, I use the Word
Parliament according to the abusive acceptance.

CHAP. XIX. Of the number of Counties in England, and why the Worthies are
digested County-wise.
OF English Shires or Counties, there are nine and thirty, at this day, which
by the thirteen in Wales, are made up fifty two; among which Barkshire, from
the Conquest, till the year 1607 had no Count or Earl thereof, tho in the times
of the Saxons, it had an Officiary Count.

The Worthies in this Work are digested County-wise, because, First, the Method
being new, may be acceptable for its Novelty. Secondly, it is as informative to
our Judgments to order them by Counties as Centuries. Here you may behold how
each County is innated with a particular Genius, inclining the Natives thereof
to be dextrous, some in one profession* some in another; and how the same
County was not always equally fruitful in the production of worthy Persons,
but, as trees are observed to have their bearing and barren years, so Shires
have their rise and fall, in affording Famous Persons.

CHAP. XX. Of the Clergy.
IT was fashionable for the Clergy, (especially Regular) to have their
Surnames, from the places of their Nativity; As Richard Bishop of London,
quitted Angervill, tho his Father Sir Richard Angervill was a Knight of Worth
and Worship, to be called of Bury, where he was born, and William Bishop of
Winchester waved Pattin, to wear Waynfleet, tho he was eldest Son to Richard
Pattin, an Esquire of great Ancientry.

Sometimes the place of one's birth is rendered uncertain, when several places
have the same name. One instance of many, William of Wickham was the famous
Founder of New College in Oxford: But how can his Cradle be certainly fixed in
any place, when it is equally rock't betwixt twenty Villages of the same
Denomination? In inquiries of this Nature and Difficulty, it is best to have
recourse to the Circumstances in the History of such a controverted Person.
Where two or more places claim the birth of the same Person, my usual expedient
is to insert the Character at large, of the controverted Person in that County,
which produces the best Evidence for him, yet so, that I also enter his name
with a reference in the other respective places, which with probability pretend
unto him. But many multiply differences in the places of Men's birth by mistake.
The Papists can tell you a Tale how the Men of two Towns in Germany fell out
and fought together, whilst one of them was for Martin, the other for Luther,
being but the several Names of the same Person. If one Author affirms Bishop
Jewel born at Buden, another at Berinerber, let none make strife betwixt these
two Writers, the former naming the House and Village, the later the Parish
wherein he was born.

As for the Sons of Ministers, tho some uncharitably think them generally
unfortunate, by the sequel of this Treatise it will plainly appear that they
have by Gods Blessing, proved as eminent as any who have raised themselves by
their own endeavors. For Statesmen, George Carew, Privy Councellor of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and as able a Man, as the Age he lived in, produced, was
Earl of Totnes, the same place whereof his Father was Archdeacon. Sir Edwin
Sandys, Son to Arch-Bshiop Sandys, was a Man of such Merit, that England could
not afford an Office which he could not manage. For Lawyers, Sir Th.
Richardson, lately, and the never sufficiently to be commended Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, now Lord Chief Justice, with many others. For Seamen, Sir Francis
Drake, that great Scourge and Terror to the Spanish Pride. But the Sons of
Ministers have never been more Successful, then when bred in the Professions
of their Fathers. Thus of the Prelatical Clergy we have Francis Godwin a
Bishop, the Son of a Bishop, and Dr. John King, Son to the Reverend Bishop of
London. And of others, we have three Generations of the Wards, in Suffolk. As
many of the Shutes, in Yorkshire, no less painful then Pious and able in
their Professions. Let me add, that there were at one time three Fellows of
Kings College, Sons of eminent Divines, and afterward Doctors of Divinity,
viz. Sam. Collins, Th. Goad, and Will. Sclater. And I believe there were not
severally in their Generations, Men more Signal, in their different Eminencies.

CHAP. XXI. General Rules for the Author, and Readers ease.
I Have ranked all Persons under their respective Titles, according to their
Seniority of the Ages they lived in. I have endeavored to Time Eminent Persons
by one of these Notations, First, that of their Morning or Nativity, the
second, that of their Noon or Flourishing, the last, that of their Night or
Death.

By AMP. (i. e. Ampliandum.) prefixed to the Names of some Persons, I
understood a further Enquiry to be made about the places of their Birth. AMP.
also is used in the Arms of Sheriffs, where there are different Coats of very
Ancient Families, and largely diffused, as Nevil, Ferrers, Basset, etc.

S. N. (i. e. Second Nativity) is likewise to denote the place of Advancement
of some Eminent Persons, where the place of their Birth is not known.

REM. (i. e. Remove) for the like Reason, when I place any Person of Worth in a
County, where he was not Born, but was a Sojourner only. Where the same Persons
may be ranked under diverse Topics, I bring them under that, which is the most
Eminent.

CHAP. XXII. Of Precedence.
I Place 1. Princes, Good manners obliging all other Persons to follow them, as
Religion obliges me to follow Gods Example, by a Loyal Recognition of that
Original Precedence, which he has granted to his Vicegerents. 2. Saints, 3. 4.
Martyrs and Confessors. 5. Eminent Prelates, 6. Statesmen. 7. Capital Judges. In
the next four, I have not used so strict a Method, reckoning Soldiers, Seamen,
Civilians, Physicians, sometimes one first, sometimes another. It Is a Politic
and Peaceable Custom of the Skinners and Merchant-Taylors of London, to take
place alternately, to prevent suits and quarrels, betwixt their Companies,
about precedence. 12 learned Writers. 13 Benefactors to the Public. Lastly
Memorable Persons.

CHAP. XXIII. Of borrowed Authorities in this Work.
I Tell you my Tale and Tale-Master, First to vindicate the Writer, secondly
the better to inform the Reader. The Authors I use may be reduced to three
Heads. 1. Printed Books. 2. Records in public Offices. 3. Manuscripts, in the
possession of private Gentlemen. 4. Instructions received from the nearest
Relations to those persons whose Lives we have presented. The printed Books are
cited in the Margin. As for Records, Mr. William Riley Master of those in the
Tower had great care in securing, dexterity in finding, diligence in perusing
them, and courtesy in Communicating such Copies of them as my occasions
required. For the Records of the Exchequer, I was assisted by Mr. High-more of
the Pipe-Office, Mr. John Wit, and Mr. Francis Boyton, and the learned Knight
Sir Winkfield Bodenham. Besides, I repaired to the Originals in the Exchequer,
for better information. I have added Church Registers, tho no Records in Law,
yet of great force in History; but the Civil Wars have occasioned great loss of
these. Lastly the Instructions of the nearest Relations. I have met with many
who could not, never with any who would not further me with Information. It Is
observable, that Men an hundred years since and upwards, have their Nativities
fixed with more assurance then those born some eighty years since.

To conclude, my Pains, Brains and Books are no more mine then theirs to
command who Courteously have conduced to my instruction.

CHAP. XXIV. Of a Twofold English Gentry, viz. by Nation and Profession.
I Begin with the Ancient Britains who Inhabited the South, and were succeeded
by the Saxons in the West. As for the more Ancient Romans, their Descendants
are not by any Character discernable from the British. The Offspring of the
Saxons are the main bulk and body, not of the Gentry but of the English Nation.
These, tho pitifully dispersed by the Conqueror, yet by God's Goodness, King
Henry I. his favor, their own patience and diligence, put together the Planks
of their Ship-wrackt Estates and afterward recovered a Competent condition.
The Danes were rather Inroders here then Inhabitants, of whose Extraction there
are therefore few in our Age, among whom the Denizes (often Sheriffs in Devon
and Glocestershire) appear the principal. As for Fitz-Harding, the younger Son
of the King of Denmark, and direct Ancestor of the truly Honorable George Lord
Berkley, he came long since, when he accompanied the Conqueror. They seem to
err who are of Opinion, that those Names which end in son, as Johnson, Thomson,
etc. are of Danish Origination, since the Danes had no such Names in use among
them as John or Thomas, etc. The Normans, after the Conquest became the only
visible Gentry of this Nation, and still continue more then a moiety thereof.
There are some Surnames of the good Families in England now extant, which tho
French, are not to be recovered in the Lists of such as came over with the
Conqueror, and therefore we suppose them to have remained of those Gentlemen
which from Hanault attended Queen Isabel, Wife to King Edward II. Of this sort
was Deureux, Mollineux, Darcy, Coniers, Longchamp, Henage, Savage, Danvers,
etc. Of the British or Welsh, after their Expulsion hence by the Saxons, some
signal persons have returned again, and by the Kings Grant, Matches, Purchases,
etc. have fixed themselves in fair Possessions in England, especially since the
beginning of the Reign of their Countryman King Henry 7 th. rewarding the
Valor of many Contributing to his Victory at the Battle of Bosworth. Of the
Welsh now re-estated in England and often Sheriffs therein, some retain their
old Surnames, as the Griffins in Northamptonshire, the Griffiths and Vaughans
in Yorkshire; some have assumed New ones, as the Caradocks, now known by the
Name of Newtons in Somersetshire.

Many Scotch, long before the Union of the Two Kingdoms under King James,
seated themselves in this Land, resorting hither for Succor from their Civil
Wars. Distress at Sea has driven others in, as the Stewards, High-Sheriffs in
Cambridgeshire. As other Accidents have occasioned the coming in of the
Scrimpshires, an hundred years since High Sheriffs in Staffordshire, more
lately the Napers in Bedfordshire, and before both the Scots-Hall in Kent.

As for the Irish of any Eminency, their Religion and Inclination have drawn
them to other Countries rather then England.

Of the Italian Nation, very few have founded Families in England, yet have we
a Sprinkling of Italian Protestants, Castilian, a Valiant Gentleman of
Barkshire, the Bassanoes, Excellent Painters and Musicians in Essex, which came
into England under King Henry 8; and since, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
Sir Horatio Palavicine (Receiver of the Popes Revenues) Landed in
Cambridgeshire. And the Caesar's, (al. Dalmarii) still flourishing in
Hartfordshire in Worshipful Estates.

The High dutch of the Hans Towns, anciently much conversed in our Land, known
by the Name of Easterlings, invited hither by the large Privileges our Kings
conferred upon them, so that the Steel-Yard was the Gold-yard unto them; But
these Merchants moved round in their own Sphere, matching among themselves,
without mingling with our Nation. Only we may presume that the Easterlings,
commonly called the Stradlings, formerly Sheriffs in Wiltshire, and still
famous in Glamorganshire, with the Nestphalings, lately Sheriffs of
Oxfordshire, were originally of German Extraction.

The Low Contrymen frighted by Duke of Alva's long-Nose and longer Sword,
flocked hither, under King Edward the VI. fixing themselves in London, Norwich,
Canterbury and Sandwich. But these confined themselves to their own
Church Discipline, and advanced not forward by Eminent Matches into our Nation.
Yet I behold the worthy Family of de la Fountain in Leicestershire, as of
Belgian original, and have read how the Ancestors of Sir Simond D'us in
Suffolk, came hither under King Henry VIII. from the Dunasti or D'us in
Gelderland.

As for the Spaniards, tho their King Philip matched with our Queen Mary, yet
few of any Eminence now extant (if I well remember) derive their Pedigrees from
them; by reason of their short Reign and the ensuing Change of Religions.
Probable it is we might have had more Natives of that Kingdom to have settled
and flourished in our Nation, had he obtained a Marriage with Queen Elizabeth,
as he desired.

Of the Portuguese, few have fixed their Habitations here, yet is the want of
the Number of these abundantly supplied with the Transcendent Quality and most
Noble Virtues of our gracious Queen, who as Cynthia, dispenses her Royal
Influence to the lesser Stars, and Strikes with Love and Veneration the Hearts
of all. The May's (who have been Sheriffs in Sussex,) are of the Portugal Race.

Come we now to the second Division of our Gentry, according to the Professions
whereby they have been advanced. And, Note, such Professions found most of them
Gentlemen, being the ( younger) Sons of Wealthy Fathers, able to give them
liberal Education. Their Blood lighted them, and their Profession set them up
in a higher Candlestick, making a Conspicuous Accession of Wealth and Dignity.
Thus all behold Isis increased in Name and Water, after it is Conjunction with
Them at Dorcester, whilst few take notice of the first Fountain thereof many
Miles more Westward in Gloucestershire. The Study of the Common Law has
advanced very Ancient Families in England. It seems they purchased good Titles,
made sure Settlements, and entailed Thrift with their Lands, on their
Posterity. Sir Edward Coke has prevented my Pains, and given in a List of such
Principal Families. It Is admirable, that there is not a great and Numerous
House in England, wherein there is not one, Anciently or at this day Living,
thriving and flourishing, by the Study of the Law. Especially if to them be
added those who have raised themselves in Courts of Judicature.

The City has produced more then the Law in Number, and some as broad in
Wealth, but not so high in Honor nor long lasting in time, who like
Landfloods, soon come, and soon gone, have been dried up before this
Generation. Yet many of these have continued in a certain Channel, and carried
a constant Stream.

The Church before the Reformation, advanced many Families. For tho Bishops
might not marry, they preferred their Brothers Sons to great Estates, as the
Kemps in Kent, Peckhams in Sussex, Wickhams in Hampshire, Meltons in Yorkshire.

Since the Reformation, some have raised their Families to a Knightly and
Worshipful Estate, as Hutton, Bilson, Dove, Neil, etc. For Sheriffs, Sandys in
Worcester and Cambridgeshire, Westphaling in Herefordshire, Elmar in Suffolk,
Rud in Carmarthenshire.

Of the inferior Clergy, Robert Johnson attained such an Estate, that his
Grandson was Pricked Sheriff of a County, but declined the place as being a
Deacon.

The Civil Law has preferred few. The most Eminent in that Faculty before the
Reformation being Persons in Orders abstained from Marriage; since the
Reformation, there are Worshipful Families raised thereby. The professors of
Civil Law were equally Contemned with Gods Ministers, during the Civil Wars,
the Promoters whereof having a constant Pique at all Civility and Order. But by
the Return of our British Sun, those Clouds of Barbarity are dispelled, and
Regularity of Motion and good Order is introduced into the vast Sphere of his
Dominion, and the joyful Seasons of Peace and Plenty are by his kindly
Influences restored.

Physic has promoted more, and that since the Reign of King Henry 8. Before
whose time, there was one a Doctor of Physic, Father to Reginald, first and
last Lord Bray. This Faculty has much flourished the three last fifty years,
Sir William Buts, Doctor Wendy, and Doctor Hatcher have raised Worshipful
Families thereby.

Some have raised themselves by Sea-service and Letters of Mart. Amongst those,
most remarkable the Baronets Family of Drakes in Devonshire, sometimes Sheriffs
there.

Some have raised themselves by their Attendance at Court, here younger
Brothers have found their Birthright.

Many have advanced themselves by their Valor in Foreign Wars, especially in
France, as the Knolls, a Noble Family, and the Caveleys often Sheriffs in
Cheshire.

Clothing as it affords Coats to most People, so it has given Arms and
Gentility to many Families in this Land. As on the Springs of High-Sheriffs in
Suffolk.

The Country with her two full Breasts of Grasing and Tillage, has raised
many Families.

Some have had two Strings to their Bow. As the Chichlies in Cambridgeshire,
are Descendants from a Lord Major; allied also Collaterally to an Archbishop
of Canterbury.

We may observe how happy a Liberal Vocation has proved to Younger Brethren;
with which agree the Schoolboys Exposition of these Verses.

Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus Honores,
Cum Genus and Species cogitur ire pedes.
The Study of Physic gives Wealth,
The Study of Law gives Honor.
When High-birth and Beauty, having no other
Calling is compelled to go on Foot.
Barkshire.
BARKSHIRE has Wiltshire on the west, Hampshire on the South, Surrey on the
East, Oxford and Buckinghamshire on the North. It Is in Form of a Lute, the
Belly toward the West, the Neck extending to the East. In length about forty
Miles, viz. from Coleshul to Windfor, and about twenty Miles in the broadest
part. Very plentiful of Grass, Grain, Fish, Fowl, Wool and Wood, etc.

The Natural Commodities are first, Oaks; of Trees, Barkshire has abundance
in all kinds. The Oaks in Windsor-Forrest, (as all other English Oak) are the
best, 1. for firmness, for, when entered with Bullet, it remains firm round
about it, whilst all the Oak does cowardly split about the passage. 2. For
convenience of Portage, our four principal Forests lying either on the Sea or
Navigable Rivers, viz. New-Forrest on the Sea, Shire-wood on the Trent, Dean on
the Severn, Windsor-Forrest on the Thames.

Secondly, Bark. Whence the Name of this County, It is essential for making of
good Leather; for, he that stays for Leather-shooes made without Bark, may long
time go Barefoot.

Thirdly, Trouts. A dainty Fish, being found in the swiftest Streams and on the
hardest Gravel. Of this kind there are Great and Good in the River of Kennet
nigh Hungerford. They are best in May and decline with the Buck. After their
full growth, they decay in goodness, tho their Head still thrive. Note, a
Hog-back and little Head is a sign any Fish is in season.

As for Manufactures, the chief is Clothing: For the Antiquity of it. 1. Cloth,
is of the same date with the Civility of our Land; indeed the Britains went
naked, which Custom a Beggar continuing, gave a reason thereof, by saying, All
my Body is Face. 2. Fine (narrow) Cloth, begun about, 1. E. III. 3. Broad-cloth
(wherein the Wealth of England is folded up) began in the Reign of Henry 8.
Jack of Newbury, ('it is said) was the first that introduced it. Minerva was held
the Foundress of Weaving, so great is the ingenuity thereof.

For Buildings, Windsor-Castle, a Royal Seat ever since the Conquest, brought
to modern Beauty, chiefly at the cost of E. 3. It is a Castle for Strength, and
a Palace for State, and has a College, Chapel, and Almshouse. In this
Palace is most remarkable, the Hall for Greatness, Winchester-Tower for height,
and the Terrace on the North-side for Pleasure. Nor boasts it so much that it
consists of two Great Courts, as that it contained two Great Kings, John of
France, and David of Scotland Prisoners therein together, as also that it was
the Seat of the Honorable Order of the Garter.

Many pleasant Seats are in this County, on the Kennet and Thames, which seem
dutifully to attend at distance on Windsor-Castle, as Alder-maston,
Ingle-field, etc.

For Proverbs. One is peculiar to this County, viz. The Vicar of Bray, will be
Vicar of Bray still* Bray is a Village here, named from the Bibroges, ancient
British Inhabitants. The Vivacious Vicar living under Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen
Mary and Queen Elizabeth was a Papist then Protestant, then Papist then
Protestant again. He found the Martyrs fire (near Windsor) too hot for his
Temper, and being Taxed for a Turn-coat, Not so, said he, for I always kept my
Principle, to live and dye the Vicar of Bray. General Proverb.

I. When our Lady falls into our Lords lap:
Then let England beware of a sad Mishap;
Al. Let the Clergyman look to his Cap.
This Prophecy about 130 years old implies that the Blessed Virgin offended
with the English, for abolishing her Adoration, watches an Oppertunity of
Revenge on this Nation: And when her day (25 th. of March) chances to fall on
the day of Christ's Resurrection, some signal Judgment is intended to our State
and Chuch-men especially. Such co-incidence has happened just fifteen times
since the Conquest. An. 1095. when King Rufus made a fruitless Invasion of
Wales. 1106. King Henry 1. subdueth Normandy, and D. Robert his Brother. 1117.
the same King Henry forbideth the Popes Legate to enter England. 1190. and King
Richard 1. Conquereth Cyprus, in his way to Palestine 1201. in King John's
days, The French invade Normandy 1212. King John resigneth his Kingdom to the
Pope. 1285. Nothing remarkable but Peace and Plenty. 1296. in the Reign of
Edward 1. War begun with Scotland which ended in Victory. 1380. The Scots do
much harm to us at Peryth Fair. 1459. Lancastrians worsted by the Yorkists, in
fight. 1543. King Henry 8. entered Scotland, and burnt Edinburgh. Hitherto this
Proverb has had but intermitting Truth at the most, seeing no Constancy in
Casualties. But the sting (will some say) is in the tail thereof, And I behold
this Proverb born An. 1554. For then Queen Mary sets up Popery and Martyreth
Protestants. 1627. 3. Car. 1. The unprosperous Voyage to the Isle of Rees.
1638. 14. Car. 1. The first Cloud of Trouble in Scotland. 1649. The first
complete Year of the English Commonwealth (or Tyranny rather) which since,
blessed be God, is returned to a Monarchy. The next Concurrence will be in the
Year 1722. But it matters not tho our Lady falls in our Lords lap, whilst our
Lord sits at his Fathers right hand, if to him we make our Addresses by serious
Repentance. II. When Hemp is spun, England is done. I look upon both this and
the former to be coined by a Roman Mint-Master, and even of the same Age. It is
faced with a Literal, but would be faced with a Mystical sense. When Hemp is
spun, when that Commodity is spent, and none left for Sails, Cordage, etc.
England (whose strength consists in Ships) would be reduced to a doleful
Condition. But know, under HEMP are couched the Initial Letters of Henry 8.
Edward 6. Mary, Philip, and Elizabeth, as if with the Life of the last, the
Happiness of England should expire, which Time has confuted. Yet to keep this
Proverb in Countenance, it may pretend to some Truth, because then England with
the Addition of Scotland, lost its Name in Great Britain by Royal Proclamation.

III. When the Black Fleet of Norway is come and gone,
England build Houses of Lime and Stone,
For after Wars you shall have none.
Some make it fulfilled in 88, when the Spanish Fleet was beaten, Lord Bac.
Ess. p. 215.
the Surname of whose King was Norway. It Is true the English afterward built
handsome Houses of Lime and Stone. But the remainder, After, Wars you shall
have none, was proved false by the Civil Wars. IV. England is the Ringing
Island. So called by reason of the most tuneable Bells which it affords.

V. When the Sand feeds the Clay,
England cries Well-a-day.
But when the Clay feed the Sand,
It is merry with England.
That is when the Season is very wet, the Sandy Ground amounting to about a
fifth part only of the English Soil, is rendered fruitful, yet cannot make any
Compensation to the damage received in the Claiy ground, being about four fifth
parts of the whole; and on the other side, by reason of this Disproportion a
drought never causes a dearth in England. VI. England were but a fling ( i. e.
a slight thing) Save for the crooked Stick, and the gray Goose-wing: That is,
the use of Archery. On which they deservedly put a great Value, because they
were therein so much skilled. VII. England is the Paradise of Women, Hell of
Horses, Purgatory of Servants: Law and Custom allows the Women desirable
Advantages, allowing the third of their Husbands Estates with the fairest
respect and kindest usage: As to Horses, besides overviolent Riding, Racing and
Hunting, they are Tormented in Carts and Wagons. For Servants, whether
Apprentices or Covenant Servants we conceive the Proverb to be Erroneous; since
Apprentices are well used for their Money, and other Servants for their
Fidelity. VII. A Famine in England begins first at the Horse-Manger: That is,
if Peaseor Oats, Horse-Grain be dear, it will not be long ere Wheat and Rye be
so too. VIII. The King of England is the King of Devils: That is, the Mobile
has as great an Ambition to be Worshipped by Christ's Vice-gerant, as ever the
Devil had to have our Savior fall down before him: But this is only a
Conjecture, and such a one as probably has need of a Fuller to reduce to a
genuin Color; but I am told, he is resolved not to meddle with it. The German
Emperor is termed, King of Kings (or free Princes) the King of Spain, King of
Men; because they willingly yield their Sovereign rational Obedience. The King
of France, King of Asses: And here it is very likely the Devil has made the Ass,
two Appellations grating on, not gratifying a well disciplined Ear. As to the
first, S. Gregory gave the English better Language, when he said Angli ve^ut
Angeli, English men were as Angels. IX. The English are the French men's Apes:
This is charged upon the English with some Truth. Since they imitate the French
in two particulars, 1. In their Language ( Which if Jack could speak, he would
be a Gentleman) 2. In their Habits, accounting all fineness in Conformity to
the French Fashion. They learn their Fashions from them, to whom by their
Conquests, they taught Obedience. X. The English Glutton: This Vice has been
charged on the English, which we are more willing to excuse than confess, more
willingly to confess than amend; true it is England is, as it were a large
Cook-shop, and it is no reason any should starve therein, which justifies
Moderation, but does not excuse Excess. XI. Long-beards, Heartless, painted
Hoods, Witless, Gay-coats, Graceless, make England Thriftless. This tho false
acquaints us with the English Habit in former Times. The English were wont to
nourish their Hair, conceiving it more amiable to their Friends, and terrible
to their Foes. Their Hoods, were Colored or stained: And Gallantry began to
creep in with their Gay-coats. This Proverb was made by the Scots, when they
obtained a Victory over the English in the Reign of Edward 2. XII. He that
England would win,
Must with Ireland first begin.
It Is observed that Subjects at a great distance from their Prince, are most
apt to swerve from their Allegience, being not so nearly influenced by the
Beams of Majesty, as others, who besides the Sense of their Duty that inwardly
persuades them to Obedience, have Royal Terror without, encamping as it were
round about them to restrain them from Violence.

XIII. In England a Bushel of March-dust is worth a Kings Ransom. A dry March
being Beneficial to Clay-ground, of which England does most consist.

XIV. England a good Land and a bad People. A French Proverb, it is well they
being such Admirers of their own, will allow any goodness to another Country.

XV. The High Dutch Pilgrims when they beg, they sing, the French whine and
cry; the Spaniards curse, swear and blaspheme; the Irish and English steal.
This is Spanish. The Italians are not mentioned, because they seldom go out of
their Country. There was occasion to make Felony highly Penal, in England; to
restrain the Pezantry somewhat addicted thereunto; but may Honesty in
themselves, and Charity in others hinder the Progress and prevent the
Consequences of that Sneaking Trade.

Princes. John Eldest Son of King E. 1. and Queen Eleanor born at Windsor, dyed
in his Infancy, 1273. an. ult. H. 3. and was buried August 8. in Westminster,
under a Marble Tomb, inlaid with his Picture, in an Arch over it.

Eleanor Eldest Daughter to King Ed. 1. and Queen Eleanor. born at Windsor, An.
Dom. 1266. Afterward was Married by Proxy (a Naked Sword interposed between
her and his Body) to Alphons King of Arragon, who dyed An. 1292, before the
Consummation of Marriage. This Princess was afterward Married to Hen. 3. Earl
of Berry in France, from whom the Dukes of Anjou and Kings of Sicil are
descended. She died in 27 th. year of her Fathers Reign, Anno Dom. 1298.

Margaret third Daughter of E. 1. and Queen Eleanor, born at Windsor, An. 3. E.
1. 1275. At fifteen she was Married at Westminster, July 9. 1290. to John II.
Duke of Brabant, by whom she had John Issue III. Duke of Brabant, from whom the
Dukes of Burgundy are descended.

Mary, sixth Daughter of King Ed. and Queen El. born at Windsor, April. 12.
1279. at 10 years of Age was made a Nun at Amesbury in Wiltshire, merely to
gratify Queen Eleanor her Grandmother. The other Children of this King,
probably born in this Castle, viz. Henry, Alphonse, Blanch, dyed in their
Infancy, who Cleansed at Font did draw untainted Breath,
Not yet made bad by Life, made good by Death.
The two former were buried with their Brother John, at Westminster, in the
same Tomb, but where Blanch was interred is unknown.

Edward III, Son to E. 2. and Queen Isab. born at Windsor Oct. 13. 1312. a
Pious and Fortunate Prince, was Passive in the deposing of his Father,
Practiced on in his Minority by his Mother and Mortimer. His French Victories
speak both of his Wisdom and Valor. And tho the Conquests by H. 5. were
thicker, his were broader (in France and Scotland) tho both in length alike, as
lost by their immediate Successors. He was the first English King which Coined
Gold. He first stamped the Rorse-Nobles, having on one side, Jesus autem
transiens per medium illorum ibat, Cambd. Rem. tit. Moneyar*
and on the Reverse, his own Image, with a Sword and Shield siting in a Ship
Waving on the Sea. Hereupon was made the English Rhym, in the Reign of H. 6.
For four things our Noble shows to me,
King, Ship and Swerd and Power of the Sea.
He had a Numerous and Happy Issue by Phillippa his Queen, after whose Death,
being almost 70 years old, he cast his Affection on Alice Pierce his Paramour
to his Dishonor, it being true what Epictetus returned to Adrian, the
Emperor, asking of him what Love was. In Puero, Pudor; in Virgin, Rubor; in
faemina, Furor; in juvene, Ardor; in Seen, Risus. In a Boy, bashfulness; in a
Maid, blushing; in a Woman, fury; in a Young Man, fire; in an old Man, folly.
However this King had few Equals, none Superiors for Wisdom, Clemency and
Courage. He died An. Dom. 1378.

William, Sixth Son to E. 1. and Queen Phil. born at Windsor. He had a Brother,
born at Hatfield, of the same Name, who died in his Infancy, as this William
also did. As for King Edwards Female Children, Isabel, Joan, Blanch, Mary* and
Margaret, it is believed they were born in France.

Henry VI, Son to H. 5. born at Windsor, was fitter for a Coul than Crown, of
so easy a Nature that he might well have Exchanged a pound of Patience for an
ounce of Valor. He Married Margaret Daughter of Reinier King of Jerusalem,
Sicily and Arragon; Puissant only in Titles. Through Homebred Dissentions he
not only lost the Foreign Acquisitions of the Father in France, but also his
own Inheritance in England, to the House of York. Her Death or Murder rather
happened 1471. This Henry was twice Crowned, twice Deposed, and twice Buried
(first at Chestry, then at Windsor) and once half Sainted. Our Hen. VII.
cheapned the price of his Canonization, but would not come up to the Sum
demanded. However this Henry was a Saint with the People, repairing to his
Monument from the farthest part of the Land. He was the last Prince whom I find
expressly born at Windsor. It seems that afterward our English Queens grew out
of Conceit with that place, as unfortunate for Royal Nativities.

Saints.
Eng. Mart.
Margaret Alice
Rich, born at Abbington, in this County, and were successively Prioress of
Catesby in Northamptonshire. They were Sisters to St. Edmund. The former dying
An. 1257. the latter. 1270. Both were Honored for Saints, and many Miracles
were reported done at their Shrine. Math. par. Ma^jor. An. Dom. 1217.


St. Edmund Son to Edw. Rich and Mabel his Wife, born at Abbington and bred in
Oxford. Edmunds-Hall, in that University which probably, was not built by, but
Named in Memory of him. He was Canon of Salisbury and afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury, but after 10 years, deserted this Function, being offended at the
Ambition and Extortion of the Popes Legate in England; he therefore, going into
France sighed out the Remainder of his Life at Pontiniack, (some say, at
Soissons) where he dyed An. 1240. Pope Innocent IV Canonized him 6 years after
his Death, that (as some affirm) he might not be tormented with his Ghost.
Lewis King of France, a year after, translated his Corpse, and three years after
that, bestowed a most Sumptuous Shrine of Gold, Silver and Crystal upon it.
And the 16 of Nov. is the Festival appointed for his Memorial.

Martyrs.
At Newbury, in this County, Fox. Act. and Mon. p. 817.
there were 6 or 7 score Persons, (being betrayed by a Lewd Person whom they
admitted into their Society) Abjured, and besides there were three or four
burnt, whose Names, tho not known are no doubt written in the Book of Life. The
day of the Gospel dawned as soon in this County as in any place of England. The
Honor of the Seniority, in this kind belongs to Newbury; the Motive used by
Doctor Will. Twit to quicken the pace of his Parishoners there, that Town (as
he said) being the first Fruits of the Gospel in England.

At Windsor, of a Company of Godly Persons there, four were Arraigned and
Condemned by Commissioners, whereof three were put to Death, viz. Anth. Parsons
Priest, being fast'ned to the Stake, he laid a good deal of Straw on his Head,
saying, This is God's Hat, Fox. Act. and mon. p. 1211.
I am now Armed like a Soldier of Christ. Rob. Testwood, a Singer in
Windsor-Quire. There happened a Contest betwixt him and another of that Society,
Singing an Anthem together to the Virgin Mary. Rob. Philips, on the one side of
the Quire. O Redemtrix and Salvatrix. Rob. Testwood, on the other side, Non
Redemtrix nec Salvatrix. Whoever had the better then, God be thanked the Nons
have got now the better of the Os in England. He was also accused for diswading
the People from Pilgrimages, and for striking off the Nose of the Image of our
Lady. Hen. Palmer Churchwarden of Windsor who had Articled against their
Superstitious Vicar for Heretical Doctrine. When an account was given of the
patient Death of these three to King Hen. VIII* he was pleased to say, Alas
poor Innocents! This was Pity, but could be no Protection, yet, by this
Occasion others were preserved. This storm blown over, Barkshire enjoyed peace
for twelve years, viz. from An. Dom. 1544. till 1556, when Doctor Jeffrey the
Cruel Chancellor of Sarisbury renewed the Troubles of Nembury, and caused the
Death of Julins Palmer. See his Character, (being born in Coventry,) in
Warwickshire. John Gwin. Th. Askin. All three Burnt July 16. 1556. in the
Sandpits near Newbury, enduring the Fire with such incredible Constancy, Fox.
Act. and Mon. p. 1934.
that it confounded their Foes and confirmed their Friends in the Truth.

Confessors.
John Marbeck, a skilful Organist in Windsor-Quire, who not perfectly
understanding the Latin Tongue, did out of the Latin with the help of the
English Bible make an English Concordance, commended highly by Bishop Gardener,
yea by King Hen. VIII. saying, He was better employed than those Priests who
accused him. Marbick was a very Zealous Protestant, of so sweet a Nature, all
good Men did love, and few bad Men did hate him. Yet he was Condemned An. 1544.
on the Stat. of the six Articles to be Burnt at Windsor, but was pardoned, some
say for the Love Gardener bore to him, some, that his Accusers, out of Remorse
of Conscience procured his Pardon, others that they intended to reserve him for
a discovery of others. 'Twas a pardonable mistake of Mr. Fox in affirming this
Marbeck was burnt, which he afterward amended. Some Cavil, and tell us, That,
Many who were burnt in Fox's time, in the Reign of Queen Mary, drank Sack in
the days of Queen Elizabeth; but Humanum est errare, Protestants disclaim
infallibility, and will reclaim their Errors when known.

Robert Bennet Lawyer, in Windsor, a zealous Professor of the true Religion,
when Mr. Testwood was Condemned, was sick of the Plague in the Prison of the
Bishop of London, and by that means preserved, receiving a Pardon after his
recovery.

Cardinals.
This County affords one who might have been a Cardinal, but would not, viz.
William Laud, who at the proffer said, That the Church of Rome must be first
mended before he would accept any such Dignity.

Prelates.
Will. Reading, a learned Benedictine, employed by King Henry II. in many
Embassies, Math. West. Flor. Hist.
and by him promoted to the Archbishopric of Bourdeaux, where he died in the
Reign of King Richard I.

John de Bradfield, or De Lato Campo, born (likely) at Bradfield in Berks. AMP.
He was Chanter and Bishop of Rochester. He had another Sur-name, viz. De Hoe,
but the same Character, viz. A man of honest Conversation, good Learning, and
Moderation in all things.

Richard Beauchamp, Brother to William Beauchamp, Bar. of St. Amaud of Widehay
in this County, was bred Doctor in the Laws, and became Bishop first of
Hereford, then of Salisbury. He was Chancellor of the Garter; which Office
descended to his Successors, Windsor-Castle the Seat of that Order, being in
the Diocese of Salisbury. He built a beautiful Chapel, (on the South Side of
St. Marries Chapel) in his own Cathedral, where he lies buried. His death
happened, An. Domini, 1482.

Since the Reformation.
Tho. Godwin, born at Oakingham in this County, Godwin Catalogue of Bishops of
Bath, etc.
was of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, maintained there for a time by the Bounty
of Doctor Layton Dean of York, till at last he was chosen Fellow of the
College. Afterward he was Schoolmaster of Barkley in Gloucestershire, then
he studied Physic, which proved Beneficial to him, when forbidden to teach
School in the Reign of Queen Mary. Bonner threatening him with Fire and Faggot,
caused him often to obscure himself. He was an Eloquent Preacher, Tall and
Comely in person, which much indeared him to Queen Elizabeth. For eighteen
years together he was one of the Select Chaplains, which Preached in Lent
before her Majesty. He was first Dean of Chirst-Church in Oxford, then Dean of
Canterbury, and at last Bishop of Bath and Wells. Being Aged and Diseased, he
was necessitated for a Nurse to marry a second Wife, which was represented to
the Queen, to his disgrace, as if he had married a Girl of Twenty. But the Earl
of Bedford intervening, Madam (said he to her Majesty) I know not how much the
Woman is above Twenty, but I know a Son of hers is but little under Forty. He
died at Oakingham, of a Quartane Fever, Nov. 19. 1590. And lies buried under
a Monument in the South Side of the Chancel.

Th. Ram born at Windsor, was admitted in Kings College in Cambridge, An.
Dom. 1588. whence he was Chaplain first to Robert Earl of Essex; then to
Charles Lord Mountjoy, both Lord Lieutenants in Ireland, afterward he was made
Bishop of Fernos, and Laghlin in that Kingdom, both peaceably enjoyed, An. 1628.

Will. Lawd born at Reading in this County, of honest Parents, bred in S.
John's College in Oxford, whereof he became President: Successively Bishop of
S. David's, Bath and Wells, London, and at last Archbishop of Canterbury. One
of low Stature, but high parts; piercing Eyes, cheerful Countenance, wherein
Gravity and Pleasantness were well compounded, admirable in his Naturals,
unblameable in his Morals, being very strict in his Conversation. Impartial
posterity will allow his Name to be reposed among the Heroes of England, seeing
such as behold his expense on S. Paul's, as but a Cipher, will assign his other
Benefactions, a very valuable Signification, viz. His erecting and endowing an
Almshouse in Reading, his increasing of Oxford Library with Books, and S.
John's College with beautiful Buildings. He was beheaded, Jan. 10. 1644.

Statesmen.
Sir John Mason Knight born at Abbington, (where he was Benefactor to a
beautiful Almshouse) bred in All Souls in Oxford. King Henry VIII. coming
hither was so highly pleased with an Oration Mr. Mason made unto him, that he
instantly gave Order for his Education beyond the Seas, as confident he would
prove an able Minister of State. Sir Jo. Hayward E. ^.
He was Privy-Councellour to Henry 8. and Edward 6. One makes him Secretary of
State: Another, but Master of the Requests: He continued Councellor to Queen
Mary, Stow, E. 6. p. 612*
and Queen Elizabeth, to whom he was Treasurer of the Household, and Chancellor
of the University of Oxford. He having no Child adopted his Nephew. Cambd. Eliz.
He was a Man of Gravity, and great Learning. He died, 1566, and lies buried
in the Quire of S. Paul's, a part of whose Epitaph, (in English) is thus; He
saw five Princes which the Scepter bore,
Of them was Privy-Councellor to four.


Sir Th. Smith Knight born in Abbington, bred in the University of Oxf. God and
himself raised him to the Eminency he attained unto, unbefriended with any
Extraction. Emulating Sir Th. Smith Senior Secretary of State, he had equalled
him in Preferment, if not prevented by Death. This Sir Thomas was Master of the
Requests, and Secretary to King James. He died, Nov. 28. 1609. and was buried
in the Church of Fulham in Middlesex, under a Monument erected by his Lady,
Frances Daughter to William Lord Chandes, and since the Countess of Exeter.

Soldiers.
Henry Vmpton, Knight, born at Wadley in this County, was Son to Sir Edward
Vmpton, by Anne (the Relick of Jo. Dudley Earl of Warwick, and) eldest Daughter
of Edward Seymor D. of Somerset. He was employed by Queen Elizabeth Ambassador
into France, where in the Month of May, An. 1592. being sensible of some injury
offered by the D. of Guise to the Honor of the Queen of England he sent him
this Challenge. Forasmuch as lately in the Lodging of my Lord Du Main, and in
Public elsewhere, impudently, indiscreetly, and over boldly, you spoke boldly
of my Sovereign, whose sacred Person, here in this County, I represent. To
maintain both by Word and Weapon her Honor, (which never was called in
Question by people of Honesty and Virtue) I say, you have wickedly lied, by
speaking so basely of my Sovereign, and you shall do nothing else but lie,
whenever you shall dare to tax her Honor. Moreover that her Sacred Person
(being one of the most Complete and Virtuous Princess that lives in this World)
ought not to be evil spoken of, by the Tongue of such a perfidious Traitor to
her Law and Country, as you are: And hereupon I defy you and Challenge your
Person to mine, with such manner of Arms as you shall like or choose, be it
either on Horseback or on Foot. Nor would I have you to think any inequality
of Person between us, I being issued of as great a Race and Noble House
(everyway) as your self. So assigning me an indifferent place, I will there
maintain my Words, and the Lie which I gave you, and which you should not
endure, if you have any Courage at all in you. If you consent not to meet me
hereupon, I will hold you, and cause you to be generally held for the arrantest
Coward, and most slanderous Slave that lives in all France. I expect your
Answer. I find not what Answer was returned: This Sir Henry dying in the French
Kings Camp before Lofear, and his Corpse brought over, was buried in Farrington
Church, July 8. 1596. He had allowed him a Barrons Heirs, because dying
Ambassador Leigier.

Writers.
Hugh of Reading, quitted his Expectances of a fair Estate, S. N.
and embraced a Monastical life, till at last he became Abbot of Reading: He is
highly commended by the Learned, and writ a Book of Questions fetched from the
Scripture.

Roger of Windsor, Chanter of the Convent of S. Albans, was the Kings
Historian: He flourished, An. Dom. 1235.

Robert Rich Son to Edward, and Mabel his Wife, Brother of S. Edmund
Archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Abbington in this County. He wrote a
Book of the Life, Death and Miracles of his Brother; and died about the year of
our Lord, 1250.

Richard of Wallingford, a Black-Smith's Son was bred at Merton-Colledge in
Oxford a Monk, at last Abbot of S. Albans, where being a good Mathematician
especially, as to the Mechanic part thereof, he made a Clock with much Pain,
more Cost, and most Art: Bale, Scrip. Brit. cent. 5. Numb. 19.
Being a Calender as well as Clock, showing the Fixed Stars and Planets, the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, etc. but my Author did not inform me, if the
Canonical hours were marked on the Clock: He died An. Dom. 1326.

Since the Reformation.
Henry Bullock, probably born in this County, AMP.
where his Name appears in a Worshipful Estate. He was bred a Fellow and Doctor
of Divinity in Queens-Colledge in Cambridge, a general Scholar, familiar with
Erasmus, calling him Bovillum in his Epistles to him. At Cardinal Wolsey's
instance, he wrote against Luther, tho otherwise his Affections were biased to
the Protestant Party. When he died is unknown.

Will. Twis born at Spene, an ancient Roman City, bred at New-Colledge in
Oxford, and there became a General Scholar. Good at plain Preaching, better at
Disputing, and best in Living. He became Preacher in Spinhamlands. Toward his
Death he was slighted by Sectaries, it being usual for New-lights to neglect
those who have born the heat of the Day. His Latin Works speak him able in
Controversy. He was Moderate Prolocutor in the Assembly of Divines. And dying
in Holborn, he was buried at Westminster, An. Dom. 164-

Will. Lyford born at Peysmer and bred at Magdalen-Coll. in Oxf. Proceeded
there Batchelour of Divinity 1631. He was also Fellow of that Foundation. He
was troubled in Conscience for having Resigned his place for Money to his
Successor, but before his Death he made Restitution. He had a comely
Countenance and modest Mind, a Courteous Carriage and meek Spirit. He was
afterward Preacher at Shirburn in Dorsetshire, and tho both Pious and Painful,
he had his share of Obloquie from such factious Persons as could not abide the
wholesome Words of sound Doctrine. He dyed about 1652 tho his Memory lives in
his Learned Works.

Romish Exile Writers.
Th. Hyde born at Newbury, bred Master of Art in New-Coll. in Oxf. was made
Canon of Winchester and chief Master of the School there. He with Jo. Martial,
about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz. went beyond the Seas. This Hyde
is Charactered by one of his own profession, to be A Man of upright Life, of
great Gravity and Severity He wrote a Book of Consolation to his Fellow Exile,
and dyed An. Dom. 1597.

Benefactors to the Public.
Alfrede, the fourth Son to King Athelwolf, born at Wantage. An excellent
Scholar, tho he was past 12 years of Age before he knew one Letter. He was a
Curious Poet, an Excellent Musician, a valiant and successful Soldier,
fighting seven Battles against the Danes in one year, at last Conquered them
and reduced them to the Profession of Christianity. He gave the first
Institution or (according to others) the best Instauration to the University of
Oxford. A Prince who cannot be Painted to the Life without his Loss, no Words
reaching his Worth. He divided 1. every natural day (as to himself) into 3
parts, viz. 8 hours for his Devotion, and 8 for Business, and the remainder for
Sleep and Refection. 2. His Revenues into 3 parts, one for War, a second for
his Court, and the third for Pious uses. 3. His Land into 32 Shires. 4. His
Subjects into Hundreds and Tithings, consisting of 10 Persons mutually Pledges
for their Good Behavior. He left Learning where he found Ignorance, Justice
where he found Oppression, and Peace where he found Destraction. And having
Reigned 34 years, he dyed and was buried at Winchester An. 901. He loved
Religion more then Superstition, favored Learned Men more then Lazy Manks,
which may be the cause he was not solemnly Sainted with other Saxon Kings, who
did not so much deserve.

Since the Reformation.
Pet. Chapman born at Cokeham, bred an Iron-monger in Land. at his Death
bequeathed five pounds a year to two Scholars in Oxford; as much to two in
Camb. and five Pounds a year to the poor of the Town of his Nativity, besides
sixty Pounds to the Prisons of Land. etc. The time of his Death is unknown.

Jo. Kendrick born at Reading, bred a Draper in Land. His State may be compared
to the Mustard Seed, from a small, Math. 13.32.
increasing to a prodigious bigness. If Benefactors were digested as David's
Worthies, 2 Samuel 23.19
Mr. Kendrick would be (if not the last of the first) the first of the second
three. His Charity began at his Kindred, proceeded to his Friends and Servants
(to whom he left large Legacies) concluded with the Poor, on whom he bestowed
above 20000 Pounds, Reading and Newbury sharing the deepest therein; as appears
by his Printed Will. He dyed 30 Sept. 1624. and is buried in St. Christophers,
Land. to the Curate of which Parish he gave 20 Pounds a year for ever.

Rich. Wightwick Batchellor of Divinity, was Rector of East-Isley in this
County. His Benefice not very great may appear a Bishopric by his Bounty to
Pembroke-Coll. in Oxf. to which he gave 100 Pounds a year for 3 Fellows and 4
Scholars. When he dyed is unknown. S. N.


Memorable Persons.
Tho. Cole commonly called the Rich Clothier of Reading. He is reported a Man
of vast Wealth, maintaining 140 Menial Servants, besides 300 poor People, whom
he set on Work, insomuch that his Wains with Cloth filled the Highway from
Reading to Land. to the stopping of King H. I. in his Progress, which King
gratified Cole with a Standard-yard, the length of his Royal-Arm; but the Truth
is, was the Arm of E. I. which was the Adequation of a Yard. This whole story
is uncertain, yet Cole may be accounted Eminent in this kind.

Jo. Winscombe commonly called Jack of Newbury was indeed the most considerable
Clothier England ever beheld. He kept 100 Looms in his House, each of them
managed by a Man and a Boy. In the Expedition to Flodden-field, against Ja.
King of Scotland, he marched with 100 of his own Men well Mounted, to show that
the Painful in Peace, could be Valiant in War. He Feasted King Hen. 8 and his
first Queen Kath. at his own House, yet extant at Newbury, the Church of which
he built from the Pulpit to the Tower Inclusively. He dyed about 1520, some of
his Name and Kindred of great Wealth in this County.

As to the Gentry in this County, Will. Fachel or Vachel was right Ancient,
having an Estate in and about Reading. And the Family of the Pusays is so
Ancient, that they were Lords of Pusay (a Village near Faringdon) long before
the Conquest in the time of King Canutus, holding their Lands by the Tenure of
Cornage, viz. by Winding of a Horn, (when the Enemies made their Approach)
which that King gave their Family, and which their Posterity still Extant at
this day do produce. But generally the List of Sheriffs is the most
Comprehensive Catalogue of the English Gentry.

Noted Sheriffs.
Will. Briewere of mean Extraction, yet he was such a Minion to King Rich. I.
that he created him Baron of Odcomb in Somersetshire. One Fulk-paynel gave this
William the Town of Bridgwater, that he might procure for him the King's favor
which he had lost. Seeing he left no Son, partition was made of his Inheritance
amongst his Daughters, married into the Honorable Families of Breos, Wake,
Mohun, La-fert and Percy.

Phillip Son of Rob. and Alan de Marton, joint Sheriffs in this County.

Rog. Bishop of Covent. and Lich. Sher. in this County. He was Surnamed de
Molend, Longespee, and was Nephew to King Hen. III.

Phil. de la Beach. The Seat of this Family was at Aldworth, Male issue was
extinct in the next Kings Reign, whose Heir General was married to the Ancient
Family of Whitlock.

Th. Chaucer sole Son to Geffery Chaucer the Famous Poet, Dunning-Castle in
this County, and at Ewelme in Oxf. He married Maud Daughter and Coheir of Sir.
Jo. Burwash, by whom he had Alice married to Will. de la Pole D. of Suffolk. He
lies buried under a fair Tomb in Ewelme Church with this Inscription. Hic
jacet Th. Chaucer, Armiger, quondam Dominus istius villae, and patronus istius
Ecclesiae, qui ob. 13. Nov. An. Dom. 1434. and Matilda uxor ejus, quae ob. 28.
Apr. 1436.

Th. Wickham, Kinsman and next heir to Will. Wickham that famous Bishop of
Winchester, Thomas 600 pound Lands a year. As for his Arms, viz. Arg. 2
Cheverons, S. between 3 Roses G. The most ingenious Sir Isaac Wake conceives
those Cheverons (or Couples in Architecture) given him in Relation to the two
Colleges he built in Oxford and Winchester.

Jo. Gowfere, or Golofre, This Addition grew afterward more fashionable, for
after that Jack Straw (one of the Grandfounders of the Levellers) was defeated,
the English Gentry, to appear above the Mobile, did in all public Instruments
insert their Native or acquired Qualifications.

Sir. Jo. Howard, Knight, Son to Sir Rob. Howard, Edw. IV. and Duke of Norfolk
by King Rich. III. as Kinsman and one of the Heirs of Anne Duchess of York and
Norfolk, whose Mother was one of the Daughters of Th. Mowbray Duke of Norfolk.
Soon after he lost his Life in Bosworth-field, in the Quarrel of him who had
given him his Honor. From him descended the Noble and Numerous Family of the
Howards, of whom four Earls, viz. Arundel, Notingham, Suffolk and Barkshire,
and two Barons, viz. Mowbray and Estrick sat in the last Parliament of King Chapter
I. Verstegan the great Antiquary will have their Name to be Holdward, that is,
Keeper of a Castle (or Trust) and they have well answered unto their Name. Did
not Th. Howard Earl of Surrey well Hold his ward by Land, when in the Reign of
King H. 8. he Conquered the Scots in Floddon-field, and took James IV, their
King, Prisoner? And did not Charles Howard (afterward Earl of Nottingham) hold
his ward by Sea in 88. when the Armado was defeated?

Humph. Foster. Ar. Afterward Knighted, lies Buried in St. Martins in the
Fields, Land. with this Inscription.

Of your Charity pray for the Soul of Sir Humphrey Foster Knight, whose body
lies buried here in Earth, under this Marble Stone, who deceased 18 Sept. 1500.

On whose Soul Jesu have mercy, Amen.

Robert Harecourt, Knight, right Ancient is this Family in France, Staunton
Harecourt in Oxfordshire: In the Reign of King Jo. Richard Harecourt of
Staunton, marrying Orabella, Daughter of Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester, had
the Manor of Bosworth in Leichestershire, for his Wives Portion. Robert
Harecourt was made Knight of the Garter by E. 4. From him Lineally descended
the Valiant Sir Simon Harecourt, lately slain in the Wars against the Rebels in
Ireland, whose Son a hopeful Gentleman enjoys the Manor of Staunton to this
day.

Jo. Basket, an Esquire of Remark and Martial Activity in his younger days, and
after, removed to Devnish in Dorsetshire, to whom he going into France,
committed the Care of that Country.

Will. Essex, Ar. a worthy Man, of great Command in this County, Lambourn
therein; for he married Elizabeth, Daughter and sole Heir of Tho. Rogers of
Benham, whose Grandfather Jo. Rogers had married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir
of Jo. Shotesbroke of Bercole in this County (whose Ancestors had been Sheriffs
in Bark-shire, An. 4.5. and 6. E. 3.) by whom he received a large Inheritance.
This Will. (afterward Sir Will.) was Son to Th. Essex, Esquire, Remembrancer
and Vice-Treasurer to E. 4. who died Nov. 1. 1500, and lies buried in the
Church of Kensington, Middlesex: He derived himself from Henry de Essex, Bar.
of Rawley, and Standard Bearer of England, and his Posterity have lately
assumed his Coat, viz. Arg. an Orle G. There was lately a Baron of this Family,
with Revenues of a Baron.

Humph. Foster, Knight, a Lover of Protestants in the most dangerous times, and
spoke to the Quest, in the behalf of Mr. Marbeck, that good Confessor. Yea, he
Confessed to Henry 8. that never any thing went so much against his Conscience,
as his attending (by Command) the Execution of three poor Men Martyred at
Windsor.

Francis Inglefield Knight, afterward Privy-Councellour to Queen Mary, Spain.
He was a most industrious Agent to solicit the Cause of the Queen of Scots: He
was a great Promoter of, and Benefactor to the English College at Valladolid
in Spain, where he lies interred. A Family of his Alliance is still
Worshipful, extant in this County.

Jo. Williams, Knight, was before the Expiration of the year of his Sherivalty
made by Queen Mary, Williams of Tame in Oxford: In which Town he built a small
Hospital, and a very fair School. He with Sir Henry Bennyfield were
Joynt-keepers of the Lady Elizabeth, whilst under Restraint, being as Civil as
the other was cruel to her. Bishop Ridley when Martyred, requested this Lord to
stand his Friend to the Queen, that those Leases might be confirmed, which he
had made to poor Tenants; which he promised and performed accordingly.

Henry Norrice, Son-in-Law to the Lord Williams aforesaid, Elizabeth created
Bar. of Norrice in Ricot, in Oxford. He was Son to Sir Henry Norrice, who
suffered in the Cause of Queen Anne Bullen, Grandchild to Sir Edward Norrice;
who married Friswide Sister and coheir to the last Lord Lovell. He was Father
to the Martial Blood of the Norrices, Elizabeth his Grandchild, sole Daughter
and Heir unto Francis Norrice Earl of Bark-shire, and Baroness Norrice, was
married to Edward Wray Esquire, whose only Daughter Elizabeth Wray, Baroness
Norrice lately deceased, was married unto Montague Bartue Earl of Lindsey,
whose Son a Minor is Lord Norrice, at this day.

Edward Vmpton Knight, this ancient Name was extinct in the days of our
Fathers, for want of issue Male, and a great part of their Lands devolved by an
Heir general to G. Puffen of Wadley Esquire, whose Care is commendable in
preserving the Monuments of the Vmptons in Farrington Church, and restoring
such as were defaced in the Civil War.

Besilius Fetiplace: The Seat of the Family was at Lee, thence called Besiles
Lee in this County, until Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Will. Bes. last of the
Name was married to Richard Fetiplace, whose Great-grand-Child was named
Besile, to continue the Remembrance of their Ancestors.

Richard Lovelace Knight, a brisk Gentleman in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
making use of Letters of Mart, Spains Fleet charged with Silver. King Charles
created him Lord Lovelace of Hurley.

Sir Jo. Darell, Baronet: Of which Order, Note the Qualifications, one Life
only, holding in Dower or Jointure. As to the Second, 1. Each of them was to
advance toward the planting of the Province of Vlster in Ireland, with Money
enough to maintain 30 Foot for three years, after the Rate of eight pence a day
for each Man. 2. The first years Wages was to be paid down on the passing of
their Patent, the Remainder as they contracted with the Kings Commissioners,
Authorized to treat of, and conclude the same. For the last, viz. their
Dignity. 1. They were to take place, with their Wives and Children
respectively, immediately after the Sons of Barons, and before all
Knights-Batchelors of the Bath and Banneret; save such Solemn ones as
afterward should be created in the Field, by the King there Present, under the
Standard Royal displayed. 2. The Addition of Sir was to be prefixed before
their Names. 3. The Honor was to be Hereditary, and Knighthood not to be
denied to their eldest Sons, of full Age, if desiring it. 4. There was added to
their Arms a Bloody hand in a Canton, or Escutcheon at their Pleasure. The King
did undertake, that they should never exceed 200, and none were to be
substituted upon a Vacancy. And that no other new Order should be superinduced.

Battles.
Newbury, I. 1643. Sept. 20. Earl of Essex having raised the Siege of
Gloucester, and returning toward London was followed by the Kings Army; both
sides might be traced by a Tract of bloody Footsteps, especially at Auborn in
Wilts, where they had a smart Encounter. At Newbury the Earl made a stand: Here
happened a fierce Fight on the East side of the Town. The Parliament was
conceived to lose the most, the King the most considerable Persons, amongst
whom the Earl of Carnarvon and Sunderland, the Viscount Faulkland, Colonel
Morgan: Victory and Loss was equally shared on both sides, which were so filled
with their Supper, that the next day they had no Stomach for Breakfast, but
keeping their Stations were rather contented to Face then Fight one another.

Newbury, II. Essex recruited from London, gave the King Battle. The Fight was
as long and fierce as the former, but the Victory more clear on the Parliaments
side. The Royalists at Night hung lighted Matches on the Hedges (so to simulate
their abode thereabouts) whilst they drew off, securing their Cannon in
Dunnington-Castle (the Governor whereof, Sir Jo. Bois, did the King Knights
Service) and returned in as good Order as their Condition was capable of. Many
here lost their lives, as if Newbury were so named by a sad Prolepsis,
fore-signifying, that that Town should afford a New-burying-place to many slain
in two Bloody Battles.

Bedfordshire.
BEdfordshire has Northamptonshire on the North, Huntington and Cambridgeshire
on the East, Hartfordshire on the South Bucking. on the West. Of an Oval Form,
from North to South, about 22 Miles in length, and 15 in breadth. The Soil
consists of a deep Clay, and some Sand (between Woburn and Potton) affording
Fair and Pleasant, as the other part both of fruitful and profitable Places for
Habitation.

Natural Commodities are,
Grain as Wheat and Barley. Where Note that much of that which Originally grows
here is carried to Hartfordshire, and from thence to London, where it carries
credit for Hartfordshire Wheat, etc. Fullers-Earth, at Woburn, (whence it is
called Woburn's- earth) of great use in Drapery, wherefore the Transportation
thereof is prohibited by Stat. Larks, the most and best about Dunstable. As for
Manufactures the Inhabitants take a Writ of ease.

Buildings.
A Fair Chapel and Monument at Maldon, erected by Th. E. of Elgin, to the
Memory of his Lady Diana Cecil. Taddington, Amphtil and Woburn carry away the
credit amongst the Houses of Nobility in this County.

Wonders.
At Harold (or Hareles-wood) the River of Ouse An. 1399. parted asunder, and
became passible on foot for three Miles. A sad Omen of the Wars bebetween the
two Houses of York and Lancashire. Also there is a Rivolet near Asp^lly that is
of a Petrefying Nature, converting Wood to Stone.

Proverbs.
I. As plain as Dunstable Road; this Road being broad and beaten. II. As
Crooked as Crawley Brook; being Meandrous. III. The Baylif of Bedford is
coming. The River of Ouse running by is called Baylif of Bedford, which
swelling in the Winter, and coming down on a sudden, arresteth the Isle of Ely
with an Inundation.

Princes.
Marg. Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Darby, Great-great Grandchild to E.
3. and Mother to H. 7. and Allied to many Foreign Princes. She may be Ranked
also under the Topic of Benefactors. There is an Expression of her Humility and
Charity. That if the Christian Princes would agree to March with an Army for
the Recovery of Palestine, she would be their Laundress. She founded the two
fair Colleges of Christ and St. John's in Camb. besides a Professor of
Divinities Place. This Lady too High for a mean Man to Commend, is long since
gone to the Great God to reward.

Saints.
Ainulph of Royal British Blood, a Holy Hermit. Ainulphs-bury (a Town in the
Confines of this and Huntingtonshire) was erected in his Memory, part whereof
(corruptly called Ainsbury) is now extant under the Name St. Neots.

Martyrs.
Th. Chase an Ancient and Faithful Minister, Hanged at the Bishops Prison in
Woburn. His Executioners, to palliate their Murder, and asperse his Memory,
gave it out that he destroyed himself. A loud Lie, seeing he was so laden with
Chains that he could not lift up his own Body. His Death happened in the Reign
of King Hen. 7. An. Dom. 1506.

Prelates.
Silvester Everton, (al. Eversden or Everseen.) From Everton a Village in this
County. Memorable for his preferment, and very able to discharge the Laypart
thereof, receiving the great Seal An. 29. H. 3. Was well versed in the Customs
of Chancery. The same year he was chosen Bishop of Carlisle, and consecrated the
year following. He, with other Bishops made an Address to H. 3. boldly
requiring that all Foreigners and Insufficient Persons might be put out of
their Bishoprics, to whom the King replied. And thou Sylvester of Carlisle, who
so long Licking the Chancery, was the little Clark of my Clergymen, it is
sufficiently known unto all, how I advanced thee to be a Bishop, before many
Reverend Persons and able Divines. I find no Bishop born here since the
Reformation.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir Jo. Cokeyn Knight, Chief Bar. of the Exchequer, in the Reign of H. 4.
founded a Worshipful Family at, and imparted his Surname to Cokeyn-Hatley in
this County, tho he was born in Derbyshire. q. v.

Edw. Wingate, Esquire, born here, where his Family flourished at Hartington.
He was bred at Greys-Inn, in the Study of the Common Law, whereof he wrote,
besides others, a Book ^ntitled, The Reason of the Common Law, and is lately
deceased.

Writers.
Jo. Dunstable, My Pen now fears Surfeiting; (for he was John of all Arts,) and
therefore I refer you to his 2 Epitaphs on his Tomb in St. Stephen's Walbrook
Land. He dyed An. 1455.

Since the Reformation.
Geo. Joy born in this County. A great Friend to Mr. Tindal, and therefore
hated by Woolsey, Fisher and Sir Th. Moor. The particulars of his Suffering, if
known, would justly advance him into the reputation of a Confessor. He
Translated part of the Bible, and wrote several Books. He dyed and was buried
in his Native Country An. ult. E. 6. 1553.

Fr. Dillingham, bred a Fellow in Christs-Coll. Camb. An Excellent Divine and
Subtle Disputant; was chosen to be one of the Translators of the Bible, and
being richly Beneficed at Wilden in this County, dyed a single Man, leaving a
fair Estate to his Brother Mr. Th. Dill. chosen a Member of the Assembly, tho
he appeared not, but remained Pastor of Dean the place of his Nativity.

Will. Sclater born at Layton-Buzard was Son to Anth. Sclater Minister thereof
for 50 years together, who lied near 100 years of Age. Will. was bred in Eaton,
then in Kings Coll. of Camb. where he became after some years Doctor of
Divinity. Being afterward Preacher in the West he incurred great Vex^tion and
Danger, but came off by God's goodness. He was reconciled to the Ceremonies of
the Church (after he had Studied the Point with all Imaginable Exactness,) and
drew others over by his Example. He was Subject to the Stone, which he called
Flagellum Studiosorum. Jo. Lord Pawlet preferred him to Limpsam living in Some.
from thence, for his Health, he returned to Pitmister, (where he had formerly
been Minister,) and there dyed An. Dom. 1627. and 50 th. of his Age, leaving
behind him his Comment on the Romans and These. a Treatise of Tithes or the
Ministers Portion, etc.

Benefactors.
Sir Will. Son to Will. Harper, was born in Bedford, but bred a Merchant-Taylor
in London, where he was chosen Lord Mayor. He erected and endowed a Free School
in Bedford, where he lies buried.

Hen. Gray, Son to H. Gray, was born at Wrest. Rich. Gray 3 d. Earl of Kent of
that Family wasted most of his Estate, and gave the King and others what
remained thereof, not regarding Sir H. Gray his Brother (by a 2 d. Venture) of
Wrest, in this County, who therefore declined the Honor. Thus the Earldom of
Kent lay asleep in the Family of the Greys almost 50 years, viz. from 15. H. 8
till 13 of Queen Eliz. when she advanced Reginald Gray, Grandfather to Sir H.
Gray aforesaid (who had Recruited himself with Revenues) to be Earl of Kent,
An. 1571. Reginald dying Childless within the year, Hen. his Brother (the
Subject of our present description) succeeded to this Honor. A Person truly
Noble, expending the Income of his own Estate and his Ladies Jointure ( Mary
the Relict of Edw. E. of Darby) in Hospitality. He was a Cordial Protestant, on
the same Token that being present at the Execution of Queen of Scots, when she
requested the Nobility there, to stand by and see her Death, he (fearing
something of Superstition) hardly assented thereunto.

On the other side he was as far removed from Faction, deserving the Character
given him by Mr. Cambd. Brit. Kent.
A Person highly Honored with all the Ornaments of true Nobility. He left no
Issue, except some will behold him, in some sort Parent of Sidney-Coll. in
Camb. as one of the Executors to the Foundress thereof, who both proved and
improved her Will, besides her Personal Benefaction thereunto. And being the
Surviving Executor, he did Perpetuate the Fellowships (formerly) Temporary,
according to his Trust. He dyed An. 1613.

Fr. Cleark, Knight, born at Eaton-soton, in the Lordship called the
Paersonage. A Noble Benefactor to Sidney-Coll. augmenting all the Scholarships
of the Foundation, and erecting a fair Range of Buildings. So skilful he was
that he computed to a Brick what was necessary for the finishing thereof. He
founded four new Fellowships. The Gift was felt before the Giver (a mere
Stranger) was seen. He dyed An. Dom. 163.

Memorable Persons.
A Woman lived, dyed and is buried at Dunstable, (where is her Epitaph) who had
19 Children at 5 Births, viz. 3.3.3.5 and 5.

Noted Sheriffs.
The Family of the Blundells, whereof Sir Edw. Blundel behaved himself right
Valiantly in the Expedition to the Isle of Ree.

Rich. Basset and Albericus de Veer. The last of whom was made, Maud the Emp.
E. of Oxford. And the first was his Undersheriff in this County.

Hen. de Essex. Bar. de Raleigh in Ess. and Hereditary Standard Bearer of
England. He in the Battle at Coleshul in Flintsh. between the English and the
Welsh casting away his Courage and Banner together, occasioned a great
overthrow of the English, and was therefore challenged in Combat by Rob. de
Momford Knight, and by him overcome in Duel. His Inheritance was forfeited to
the King, and he himself made a Honorable Retreat into a Convent, and under a
Coul betwixt Shame and Sanctity blushed out the Remainder of his Life.

Dav. Archdeacon, whose Ancestors probably having been Ecclesiastics left him
that Surname.

Rob. Braybrook and Hen. Fill. Hen. Br. and Rob. Pater.
A loving Reciprocation of Sheriff and under- Sheriff, betwixt Father and Son.
Undersheriff to his Father, that was his Duty. Undersheriff to his Son, that
was his Courtesy. Indeed I can Name one Undersheriff to his own Father, being
a Gent. of right Worthy Extraction and Estate, which Son afterward became,
Lord Chapter Justice and Treasurer of England.

Edward Eldest Son to the King. A great Honor to this Shire and Buck. where he
was Sheriff for five years together. Barthol. de Fowen being Undersheriff.

Th. Hoo. A famous Man, whom King Hen. 6 made Knight of the Garter and Lord Hoo
and Hastings. Anne to Sir Jeffrey Bullen. 2. Eleanor to Sir Rich. Carew. 3.
Jane to Rob. Cople Esquire. 4. Eliz. to Sir Jo. Devenish. From the first of
these was Queen Eliz. descended. Some of the issue Male were lately extant in
Hartfordshire.

Jo. Wenlock, was returned Knight of the Town of his Principal Residence, to
the Parl. 12. H. 6. and afterward created Bar. of Wenlock and Knight of the
Garter, fought Valiantly and lost his Life in the Battle of Teuxbury. He dyed
without Issue, and his Estate came to E. 4. From his Cousin and Heir-general
the Lauleys in Shropshire are descended.

Sir Jo. St. John, Knight, Father, Son and Grandson were of the same Name and
Dignity. The Father, H. 7. was Son to Sir Oliver St. John by Marg. Daughter and
Sole Heir to Sir Jo. Beauchamp. She was afterward Married to Jo. D. of
Somerset, to whom she bare Margaret Mother to King Hen. 7.

Will. Gascoine was a younger Brother of Ganthorp-house in Yorkshire, and was
settled at Cardington in this County, by marrying the Inheretrix thereof. He was
afterward twice Sheriff, under H. 8. Knighted and Comptroller of the House of
Cardinal Woolsey. A rough-Man, preferring rather to profit than please his
Master. The Prelates Wisdom knowing Thrift to be the Fuel of Magnificence
often advised with this his Servant. His Name and Estate are Extinct in this
County.

Jo. Mordant, Ar. of Ancient Extraction, Hen. Vere of Addington in
Northamptonshire. By Aged Persons he was remembered by the Name of John of the
Woods (I was born under the shadow and felt the warmth of them) So great a
Master was he of Timber in that County, besides large Possessions in Essex and
elsewhere. King Hen. 8. owning him deservedly for a Wise Man created him Bar.
Mordant of Turvey.

Will. Windsor, Knight, descended from Walt. Fitz Otho, Castle keeper of
Windsor in the time of Will. the Conqueror, and was by King H. 8. created Bar.
Windsor of Bradenham in Buckinghamshire. Ancestor to the present Lord Windsor,
descended from him by an Heir general, so that Hickman is his Surname.

Fr. Russel, Knight, Son to Jo. Lord Russel afterward Earl of Bedford. Eliz.
was wont to say of him, That he made all the Beggars. He founded a small School
at Wobourn, and dying in great Age and Honor, was buried at Cheneys, 1585.

Oliver St. John, Ar. By Queen Eliz. made Lord St. John of Bletso in this
County, and left two Sons who succeeded him to this Honor. First John whose
only Daughter Anne was married to Will. Lord Esfingham, and was Mother to Eliz.
now Count. Dowager of Peterborough, his Second Son Oliver, blessed with a
Numerous Issue and Ancestor to the present Earl of Bullingbrook.

Will. Dormer, Knight, was Son to Rob. by Jane Newdigate his Wife. Mary Sidney
his Wife, a Daughter married to the Count of Feria, when he came over hither
with King Phil. This Count, under pretense to visit his Sick Lady remaining
here, did very earnestly move a Match betwixt King Philip his Master and Queen
Eliz. which took no effect. He then also mediated for Jane Dormer his
Grandmother and other Fugitives, that they might live beyond the Seas, and
receive their Revenues out of England, which the Queen refusing, the Count
moved Pope Pius IV to Excommunicate her tho his Wife opposed it,

Buckinghamshire.
BVckinghamshire is 44 Miles in length, from North to South, in breadth 15
Miles. Fruitful, especially in the Vale of Alesbury, the County is named from
the chief Town, both from Buccen a Saxon word signifying Beeches, here
abounding. The best and biggest Sheep are in the Vale aforesaid, and at Wicombe
there is kept abundance of Tame Pheasants. As for Manufactures, this County
lives more by its Lands then Hands.

Proverbs.
I. Buckinghamshire Bread and Beef. The first Fine, the latter Fat. II. Here if
you beat a Bush, it is odds youl'd start a Thief. In former times Trees and
Bushes abounding yielded the Rogues Shelter.

Saints.
St. Edburg Daughter to Redwald, King of the E. Angles, embraced a Monastical
life at Alesbury, where her Body being buried was afterward removed to
Edburgton (now Edburton) in Suff. her Native County.

St. Rumald, Rumbald or Grumbald. The Name's enough, in allusion to these
Variations of his Name, let me tell ye, it is said, that as soon as Born he cried
out three times I am a Christian.

Martyrs.
Jo. Scrivener, Martyred at Amersham, An. Dom. 1521. His own Children were
forced to set the first Fire upon him. For which was pretended the Law Deuteronomy.
13.6. Thine Hand shall be first upon him.

Prelates.
Rich. Wendover, Rector of Bromley in Kent, where the Bishop of Rochester has
a Palace, which See being Vacant, he was chosen Bishop thereof; but Edmund
Archbishop of Cant. refused to give him Consecration, because he was
Unlearned. Wendover appealed to the Pope, and procured Consecration by his
Authority, and supplied by Public goodness what he wanted in Literature,
wherefore, after his Death, he was by express Mandat of H. 3. Buried in the
Church of Westminster as another Jehoiadah.

Jo. Buckingham bred at Oxford. A great Disputant and good Scholar, as his
Works do declare, Preferred Bishop of Lincoln, but after removed by the Pope to
Litchfield, a place of less credit. Buckingham being for the best or none,
resigned An. 1397. and dyed a private Monk at Cant. where he lies buried in
Christ-Church. He indented with the Prior and Convent at Canterbury to build
him a Chantry-Chappel near his Sepulcher, which I find not performed.

Jo. Young born at Newton-longvile, and bred at New-Coll. in Oxf. where, in the
Register, there are 10 Youngs reckoned Fellows of that Foundation, of which one
said, that seeing the College was always New, well may many Fellows be Young
therein. This John became Warden thereof, and afterward was made Bishop of the
fair City Callipolis in Greece, by virtue of which Titular Dignity he had a
Vote in General Councils. He was made Master of the Rolls An. 1. H. 8. and dyed
or resigned his Place eight Years after. He lies buried in New-Coll-Chappel.

Jo. Holyman born in Codington, bred in New-Coll. Oxf. Afterward Benedictine
in Reading was by 1. Queen Mary made Bishop of Bristol upon the Deprivation of
Paul Bush. He lived peaceably and dyed seasonably before the end of Queen
Mary's Reign. 1558.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Harley born in the Parish of Newport-Paganel, bred Fellow, then
Schoolmaster in Magd. Coll. Oxf. in the days of H. 8. A hearty (because
concealed) Protestant. For in the first week of the Reign of Edw. 6. he
Publicly Preached Anti-papal Doctrine, whereupon the Vice Chancellor hurried
him up to Land. for an Heretic, there to Answer for his contempt. But the case
was altered, and Harley preferred to be Tutor to the Sons of John E. of
Warwick, and thence he was made Bishop of Hereford. He dyed about the 50 th.
year of his Age, before the then future troubles, An. Dom. 1554. Of whom a
Scholar of his Flos Domui Harlaeus, Socius Ludique Magister,
Celsus deinde Throno, celsior inde Polo.


Rob. Aldrich born at Burnham, and bred in Kings Coll. in Camb. and Proctor
there, An. 1525. Erasmus styles him Blandae eloquentiae juvenem. He was
afterward Schoolmaster, then Fellow and Provoster of Eaton, and at last Bishop
of Carlisle, An. 1537. by King H. 8. He was never a through paced* Papist, (much
less a Persecuter of Protestants) tho a complyer with some superstitions. He
dyed at Horn-Castle in Lincolnshire An. 1555.

Will. Alley born at Wickham, bred first at Eaton then in Kings Coll. where he
was admitted An. Dom. 1528 Being first Bachelor of Arts he became Lecturer in
St. Paul's, whose Lectures are extant in Print. He was consecrated Bishop of
Exeter July 14. 1560. and dying 1576 lies buried under a fair Marble in his
own Cathedral.

Rich. Cox. born at Whaddon, and bred for some years in Kings Coll. in Camb.
when Card. Woolsey had erected Christ-Church in Oxf. he removed hither the most
hopeful Plants of Cambridge, and this Rich. Cox. amongst the rest. He became
afterward Schoolmaster of Eaton, where he had Haddon for his Scholar. Hence
he was sent to be instructor to Prince Edw. At last, he was preferred Bishop of
Ely 1559. continuing 21 years he dyed An. Dom. 1580.

Th. Bickley born at Stow, bred first Chorister, then Scholar, then Fellow in
Magd. Coll. Oxf. He brake the consecrated Host with his hands, and stamped it
under his feet in the Colledge-Chappel. Afterward he fled over into France,
and there lived all the Reign of Queen Mary. Returning into England, he became
Chaplain to Archbishop Parker, who preferred him Warden of Merton-Coll.
wherein he continued 20 years. When he was above 80 years of Age he was made
Bishop of Colchester and lived 11 years in that See. He dyed 1596. He led a
single life and left an 100 Pounds to Merton-Coll. and other Moneys to Pious
uses.

Jo. King born at Warnhall, Rob. King the last Abbot of Osney and first Bishop
of Oxford being his great Uncle, was Dean of Christ-Church, then Bishop of
London being full fraught with all Episcopal Qualities. He dyed An. Dom. 1618.
being buried in the Quire of St. Paul's, with this Epitaph, RESVRGAM. His Faith
standing over him for an Hearse, as is expressed in an Elegy made upon him.

Rich Montague born at Dorney, bred at Eaton, thence successively, he was
chosen Fell. of Kings Coll. in Camb. of Eaton, Parson of Standford Rivers in
Essex, Canon of Windsor, Parson of Petworth, elected Bishop of Chichester, and
at last of Norwich. He spent much on Reparations. He was exact in Latin and
Greek, and in Vindication of Tithes wrestled with the great Antiquary of
England. Of Books, he wrote a Treatise called Appello Caesarem, which (without
his intent) occasioned much trouble in this Land; and began an Ecclesiastical
History, and set forth an Apparatus, which (if finished) might be put in the
Balance with Baronius his Church Annals; they would have swayed with them for
Learning and weighed them down for Truth.

Hen. King. D. D. Son to the forementioned Jo. King Bishop of Land. and his
Wife (of the ancient Family of the Conquests) born where his Father was, And as
was the Father, so was the Son Pious and prosperous, till the Calamities of the
time involved him. In order to the cure of the seeming Consumption of
Episcopacy ( An. 41.) Men of unblamable Life and Eminent Learning were Elected
Bishops, amongst whom King Chapter advanced this our Doctor, Bishop of Chichester,
yet was not the Mouth of Malice stopped, which having a Damnable Appetite was
ready to swallow them down at a Morsel. Since, God has rewarded his Patience,
giving him to live to see the Restitution of his Order. In his Youth he
delighted in Music and Poetry, when elder he applied himself to Oratory and
Philosophy, and in his reduced Age fixed on Divinity, and his Printed Sermons
on the Lords Prayer, etc. will report him a Man that brought forth his Fruit in
due Season.

Writers on the Law.
Sir Geo. Crook, Knight, Son to Sir Jo. and Eliz. Vmpton his Wife, was born at
Chilton An. 2. Eliz. bred first in Oxford, then a double Reader in the Inner
Temple, and the Kings Sergeant, Justice of the Com. Pleas 22. Jac. then Chief
Justice of England. 4. Car. His Ability is sufficiently attested by his
Reports. His judgment was against Ship Money. The Countryman said That
Ship Money may be gotten by Hook but not by Crook. His Piety is evidenced by
his Charity, building a Chapel at Beachley in Buck. and a Hospital in the same
Parish with a liberal Revenue. When old, he sued out a Writ of Ease, and
afterward dyed at Waterstock in Oxfordshire. 82. Aet. An. Dom. 1641.

Edw. Bultstrode, Esquire; bred in the Study of the Municipal Laws, in the
Inner Temple and Justice in North Wales has written a Book of Reports of
Judgments given in the Kings Bench, in the Reigns of King Ja. and King Chapter and
is lately deceased.

Soldiers.
Sir Will. Windsor, Knight, Ancestor to the right honorable Th. Windsor
Hickman Lord Windsor and fixed at Bradenham. He was deputed by E. 3. (in his 47
year) Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, when in Broyls; the Irish Tyrannizing, and
the English degenerating into their Manners. He contracted with the King for
11213 pounds, 6 shillings 8 d. a year, to defray the whole charge of that
Kingdom, and undertook the Custody of the Land in a defensive War, and used
discretion with his Lance, in abating the Irish Fever. Yet the Scabs of their
Boggs and Hair of their Woods, that gave the Natives Shelter afforded him no
access. He resigned his Office 1. R. 2.

Arth. Gray Bar. of Wilton, (whose Father had his Habitation at Waddon near
Buck.) had but a small Estate left him by his Father Will. Lord Gray, who had
spent the best part of his Patrimony, to redeem himself being Prisoner in
France. Our Arth. intending to advance his Fortune by his Valor, followed the
War under his Father and was present at the Siege of Lies, 1560, where being
shot in the Shoulder, he was inspirited with an Antipathy against the Scots.
Being Lord Liuetenant of Ireland An. 1580. before he had received the Sword or
any Emblems of Command, he unfortunately fought the Rebels at Glandilough to
the great loss of English Blood. Yet recovering his Credit he finally
suppressed the Rebellion of Desmond. Returning into England, the Queen relied
chiefly on his Counsel for ordering our Landforces against the Spaniards in
88. (a year Critical for Church-differences, which this Lord would have been
glad to have seen decided in favor of the Anti-prelatical party.) He was the
only Man defended Secret. Davison censured in the Starr-Chamb. about the
business of the Queen of Scots; in which defense he showed both great Courage
and Eloquence. And was always ingenuous, accounting Candor an Essential of
true Nobility. An. Dom. 1593.

Writers.
Roger de Wendover, Benedictine of St. Albans, and the Kings Historian. It
having been a Custom that a Monk of St. Albans should be called to that
Service. The Chronicles being finished, were locked up in the days of the King
and his Son. This Rog. began his Chron. at the Conquest, continuing it till the
Year 1235. and 19 H. 3. tho it is now Fathered upon Math. Paris who made some
Addition to the same.

Jo. Amersham, Monk in St. Alb. so intimate with Jo. Wheathamsted Abbot
thereof, that they two were as One; justifying against Priscian, the saying,
Duo Amici Vixit in eodem Conventu. Amersham caressed his Friend, whilst living,
and Shielded Wheathamsted, Shield of Wheath. a Treatise.
when dead against the Darts of his inveterate Enemies the Monks. He flourished
An. Dom. 1450*

Math Stokes, born in the Town, and bred in the School of Eaton, until he was
admitted into Kings Coll. in Camb. An. Dom. 1531. He afterward was Fellow
there, and at last Esquire. Bedle and Register of the University. He collected a
Catalogue of the Chancellours, Vice-ch. and Proctors, with great Industry and
Fidelity. A Zealous Papist, tho he lived many years in the Reign of Queen Eliz.

Since the Reformation.
Walt. Haddon born of a Knightly Family in this County, bred at Eaton,
afterward Fell. of K. Coll. where he proceeded Doctor of Law, and was the
Kings Professor in that Faculty, chosen Vice Chancellor of Camb. 1550. then
President of Magd. Coll. in Oxf. which place he waved in the days of Queen Ma.
and sheltered himself in obscurity. Queen Eliz. made him one of her Masters of
Requests, and employed him in several Embassies beyond the Seas. Her Majesty
being demanded whether she preferred him or Buchanan for Learning, returned,
Buchananum omnibus antepono, Haddonum nemini postpono. Indeed he was a most
Eloquent Man and a pure Ciceronian in his Style, as appears by his Writings. He
lies buried in Christ-Church Land.

Lawrence Humphred bred in Magd. Coll. in Oxf. a General Scholar, able
Linguist, deep Divine, pious to God, humble in himself, Charitable to others.
In the Reign of Queen Ma. he fled into Germ. where he was Fellow-Commoner with
Mr. Jewel (whose Life he wrote) in all his Sufferings. Here he Translated
Origin de Recta Fide and Philo de Nobilitate out of Greek. Returning into
England, in the Reign of Queen Eliz. he was made President of Magd. Coll. in
Oxf. and Dean of Winchester. Tho he scrupled some Ceremonies, yet he was much
molested in his College with a Party of Fierce Non-Conformists. He dyed Anno
Dom. 1589.

Roger Goad born at Houton, admitted Scholar in Kings Coll. in Camb. 1555.
Afterward was Schoolmaster in Surrey, but being made rather to Govern Men
then Boys, he was thence Elected into the Provost-ship of Kings Coll. wherein
he remained 40 years. He was thrice Vice Chancellor of Camb. a Grave, Sage and
Learned Man. By his Testament he gave the Rectory of Milton to the College,
and dying on St. Marks day An. 1610. he lies buried in a Vestry on the
North-side of the Chapel.

Jo. Gregory born Nov. 10. 1607. at Amersham of Mean and Honest Parents, and
bred in Christ-Church in Oxf. where he Studied 16 hours a day for many years
together. A general Scholar and Exquisite Linguist, his Modesty setting the
greater Luster o^ his Learning. His Notes on Doctor Redleys Book of Civil-Law
gave the first Testimony of the Pregnancy of his Parts. He was first Chapl. of
Christ-Church, then Prebendary of Chichester and Sarum. He dyed 1646. and was
buried at Christ-Church in Oxf. His Posthume Works are set out by Jo. Gurgam.
dedicated to Edw. Bishop Esquire, who relieved Gregory in his greatest Distress.

Sam. Collins Son to Baldwin (Preacher, Prodigiously Bountiful to the Poor,
whom Queen Eliz. called constantly Father Collins.) born and bred at Eaton.
Hence successively chosen Fellow, Provost and Regius Professor of K. Coll. in
Camb. Of admirable Wit and Memory, and a most fluent Latinist. Of his Lectures
(which he constantly read twice a Week for 40 years together) there were not
two, which did not Critically differ. He used all his Friends to decline his
Election to the Bishopric of Bristol, as being in profit inferior to the
place he enjoyed. In these troublesome times he lost his Church but kept his
Choir, wherein he dyed about 1651.

Will. Oughtred, branched from a right Ancient Family in the North, born and
bred in Eaton, becam^ Fell. of K. Coll. and at last Beneficed by Th. Earl
Arundel at Albury in Surrey. Prince of Mathematicians in our Age and Nation.
This Aged Simeon had a strong Persuasion that he should behold Christ's anointed
restored to his Throne, which he did to his incredible Joy, and then had his
Dimittis out of this mortal life, June 10. 1660.

Romish Exile Writers.
Th. Dorman born at Amersham, Nephew to Th. Dorman, a Confessor in the Reign of
H. 8. and Cordial Protestant, tho through weakness he did abjure the Realm.
This Th. junior was bred at Barkhamsted-School (founded by Doctor Incent) in
Hartfordshire under Mr. Reeve a Prot. Schoolmaster, but this Dorman turned
tail, 2.
and becoming a great Romanist fled beyond the Seas, where he wrote Against
Alex. Nowel the English Calvanist. He flourished An. 1560.

Memorable Persons.
Jo. Matthew, Mercer, Son to Th. Matthew, was born at Sherington, Lord Mayor of
London An. Dom. 1490. the first Bachelor that ever was chosen into that
Office, a singular Example for above 120 years, when Sir Jo. Leman (also
Bachelor) enjoyed the same Dignity, 1616.

Dame Hester Temple, Daughter to Miles Sands Esquire. was born at Latmos, and
Married to Sir Th. Temple of Stow, Baronet. She had four Sons and nine
Daughters, who Married and Multiplied exceedingly, insomuch that she saw 700
Extracted from her Body. Which Offspring if contracted into one place had been
enough to have peopled a City of Competent Proportion.

Noted Sheriffs.
Jo. Croke Ar. afterward Knighted, Jo. Croke, one of the six Clerks in Chanc.
The Name was assumed by their Ancestors for that of Le Blount, which they
concealed in the Civil Wars between York and Lanc. As for this Sir John Sher.
of Buck. he was fortunate in an Issue, happy in the knowledge of our
Municipal-Law. Of whom Sir Jo. Croke his eldest Son, Speaker of the House of
Commons in the Parl. 43. Eliz. received this Elogium from her Majesty. That he
had proceeded therein with such Wisdom and Discretion that none before him had
deserved better.

Rob. Dormer Ar. Jun. 10. 1615. made Baronet by King Ja. and 30 of the same
Month, Baron Dormer of Wing in this County. His Grandchild Robert was An. 4.
King Chapter I. created Viscount Ascot and Earl of Carnarvan, and lost his Life
fighting for him who gave him his Honor, in the first Battle of Newbury. Being
a little before his Death desired to make a Suit to the King, he replied I will
not dye with a Suit in my Mouth to any King, save to the King of Heaven. By
Anne Daughter to Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, he had Charles now
Earl of Canarvan.

Edw. Bulstrod Ar. Whose Arms are Ancient, viz. S. a Buckhead, Ar. attired O.
shot the Nose with an Arrow of the 3. headed and featherd of the 2. a Cross
patee fitchee betwixt the attire O.

Hen. Longvile Ar. Had to his 4 th. Son Sir Mich. Longvile who Married Susan
sole Daughter to H. Earl of Kent. Now when the Issue in a direct line of that
Earldom failed in our memory, Mr. Seldom proved that the Barony of Ruthyn
parcel of the Earldom, ought to descend to the Son of the said Sir Michael, and
thereupon he sat as Baron Ruthyn in the late long Parl. His sole Daughter and
Heir was Married to Sir Henry Yelverton of Earton in the County of Northampton
Baronet, a worthy Gent. of fair Estate.

Benedict Winchcombe, whose Arms I represent in gratitude to the Memory of his
Ancestor so well deserving of Newbury, viz. Az. on a Chev. engrail'd between 3
Birds O. as many Cinqfoiles of the 1. on a chief of the 2. a fl. de luce
between 2. Spears-heads of the 1.

Edward Coke, Knight, the English Trebonianus, Common Law. The Court-party to
prevent his Election as a Member of Parliament got him pricked Sheriff, whose
Oath he scrupled to take, because (amongst other things) the Sheriff is bound
thereby to prosecute the Lollards, wherein the best Christians may be included,
but no excuse could serve, so that his Friends must behold him who had been
Lord Chief Justice attend on the Judges of the Assizes.

Francis Cheney, Knight. A noble Ancient Name. There was a Family of the
Cheneys flourishing in Kent, giving for their Arms Az. 6. Lions Ramp. Arg. a
Canton Ermin. Of this House was Hen. Cheney High Sheriff of this County and
Bedf. An. 7. Eliz. and not long after, created by her Baron of Tuddington in
Bedf. tho in his Youth wild and venturous, witness his playing at Dice with
Hen. 2. King of France, from whom he won a Diamond of great worth at a cast,
and being demanded what shift he would have made to repair himself, in case he
had lost the cast; I have (said the young Cheney in an Hyperbolical Brave)
Sheeps-tails enough in Kent, with their Wool, to buy a better Diamond then
this. His reduced Age afforded the befitting fruits of Gravity and Wisdom. And
this Lord deceased without Issue. As for Sir Fr. Cheney, Sher. he was Father to
Charles Cheney, Esquire, who by his Exquisite Traveling has Naturalized
Foreign Perfection to himself, and is Exemplarily happy in a Virtuous Lady,
Jane, Daughter to the truly Noble Will. Marquess of New Castle, and by her of
hopeful Posterity.

Cambridgeshire.
CAmbridgeshire has Lincolnshire on the North, and Suffolk on the East, Essex
and Hartfordshire on the South, Huntington and Bedfordshire on the West, in
length 35, in breadth not full 20 Miles. Plentiful in Provision, the South part
of Bread and Beer, and the North of Cattle. The Grain here is so good that it
outselleth others in 6 pence in the Bushel. The late draining of the North part
of the County was not very grateful to the poor, knowing that it is Felony to
take another Man's Bullock from his Pasture, but a Trespass of an inferior
Nature to take a Pike out of his Fish Pond. An. 1659. the Country suffered a
great loss by an Inundation, upon the dissolution of a great Snow, yet their
Industry prevented a Relapse into their former Condition. The Northern-part is
called the Isle of Ely or Eely from the abundance and goodness of Eeles there,
with which the Courts of the Kings of England were Anciently supplied. Of other
Natural Commodities, there are a great many Hares, and lately there was a
Hare-park nigh New Market preserved for the Kings Game. There is also plenty of
Saffron which was at first planted in Essex. Willows abound in the Isle of Ely,
affording Fuel for their Fire; of which Tree it is a byword in this County,
that the profit of Willows will buy the Owner a Horse before that by other
Trees he can pay for his Saddle. Manufactures here are Paper and Baskets. Of
Buildings Cambridge is the chief credit of this County, as the University is of
Cambridge, which may be said a Town in an University, as Oxford is an
University in a Town, in Camb. the Colleges being more separated from the Town
have the better Convenience of Walks and Gardens. Ely-Minster in this Town a
great Beauty, has a Lanthorn which is a Masterpiece of Architecture, wherein
the labor of 20 years and 52094 Pounds 18 Shillings 10 Pence ^/2 2/4 was
expended. When the Bells ring the Wood-work thereof opens (the perfection of
structure) and exactly chocketh into the Joints again. Rare also is the Art in
the Chapel of St. Mary's, the Pattern of that in Kings Coll. in Camb. And in
Bishop Wests Chapel the Master-Masons of King Ja. upon narrow inspection,
found finer work therein than in King Hen. 7 his Chapel at Westminster.

Wonders.
The Devils-ditch an Artificial Wonder, conceited by the Country People to be
made by the Devil, tho it be the Work of some of the Kings of the East Angles,
probably made to divide and defend their Dominions from the Kingdom of Mercia,
or possibly to employ the People, and to divert them from insurrections.

Proverbs.
I Cambridge requires all to be equal. The same degree levelling all Scholars,
so that the Seniority of years ought not to make any difference. II.
Cambridgeshire Camels. Probably the Fen-men stalking on Stilts may be so called
from their apparent big Stature. III. A Boisten Horse and a Cambridge Master of
Art, are a couple of Creatures that will give way to no body. It shows store of
Spirit when a Man will not be put out of his way, for every Swelling emptiness
that meets him therein. IV. A Henry-Sophister. So they are called who after 4
years standing, stay themselves from Commencing Bachelors of Art, to render
themselves (in some Colleges) more capable of Preferment. For after the
Suppression of Monasteries by King Hen. 8. Learning was at a loss, and the
University stood at a gaze what would become of her. Hereupon many Students
stayed themselves some 2, 3, some 4 years, as who would see, how their Degrees
(before they took them) should be rewarded and maintained.

Martyrs.
Will. Flower, born at Snow-hill, bred first a Monk^ Ely, became afterward a
Secular Priest and Protestant, and after many Removals, fixed at last (...)
Lambeth. He then contracted the Guilt of an abo^minable Act, by wounding a
Popish Priest dangerously with a Wood-knife, so that his Blood spirted i^to the
Chalice. Of this having solemnly repente^ he was put to Death for the Testimony
of the Truth His right hand, before he went to the Stake, was cut off, by order
of the Judges for his Barbarous fact Yet tho his right hand suffered as a
Malefactor, then wanted not those who maintained that Martyr be longs to the
rest of his Body.

Prelates.
Steph. de Fulborn was made Bishop of Waterford, and Lord Treasurer of Ireland;
and after, Archbishop of Tuam, and (twice) Lord Chief Justice of that Kingdom.
He dyed 1288. and was buried in Trinity-Church in Dublin.

Nich. of Ely, obtruded by the bold Barons as Chancellor on H. 3. but by him
displaced, yet appearing a Man of Merit was by him advanced into the Office of
Lord Treasurer, and made Bishop of Worcester, then of Winchester. Here he sat
12 years, and that Cathedral may challenge his Interment, having his Heart
enclosed in a Wall, tho his Body be buried at B^averly in Surry, 1280.

Will. of Bottlesham (Contract Botsam) of the Town so called, the Nursery of
refined, Wits affording a Triumvirate of Learned Men born there, viz. this
Will. Jo. and Nich. Bottlesham. Will. was by the Pope made Bishop of Bethlehem
in Syria, then 1385 of Landaff, thence removed to Rochester. A famous Preacher,
Confessor to R. 2. and a learned Writer. Once a Fellow of Pemb^hall, he dyed
1399. Jo. bred in Peter-house in Camb. to which (and to the whole University)
he was Benefactor, Chaplain to Th. Arundel Archbishop of Cant. by whose means
he had been preferred to the Sea of Rochester, if John's Death had not prevented
the same 1401. Nicholas, a Carmelite bred in Camb. afterward removed to Paris,
where in Sorbon he commenced Dr. of Divinity. Returning to Camb. he became
Prior of the Carmelties (since Queen College) whereby he wrote many Books.
Buried in his own Covent 1435. These three were Contemporaries.

Th. of New Market, (or Th. Merks) of this County, bred in Camb. An Excellent
Humanist and Divine (having left some learned Books to Posterity) advanced to
be Bishop of Carlisle. Famous for his Loyalty to R. 2. was at last confined to a
Titular Grecian Bishopric by H. 4. He dyed about 1405.

Th. Thirlby Doctor of Laws, born in the Town and bred in the University of
Camb. Very able in his Faculty and more than once employed in Embassies by H.
8. (who preferred him Bishop of Winchester, the Land of which See he wasted)
with this success, that his Name and Alliance is Extinct. From Winchester he
was removed to Norwich, from thence to Ely. His Vice was rather Prodigality
than Cruelty, for he wept at Archbishop Cranmer's Degradation. After the Death
of Queen Ma. he was as Violent in his Opinions, but not so Violent in his
Expressions; always devoted to Queen Ma. but never invective against Queen
Eliz. He lived in free Custody, dyed and is buried at Lambeth, 1570.

Since the Reformation.
Godfrey Goldsborough born in Camb. bred in Trinity-Coll. and afterward Fellow
thereof. At last was Consecrated Bishop of Gloucester 1598. One of the second
set of Prot. Bishops, after those in the Marian Days, and before those who come
within our memory. He gave 100 Marks to Trinity-Coll. and dyed An. 1604.

Rob. Townson, D. D. born in Camb. and bred a Fellow in Queens Coll. being
admitted at 12 years of Age. Of so happy a memory that when D. D. he could say
by Heart the second Book of the Aeneads, which he learnt at School, without
missing a Verse. He was an excellent Preacher. He attended King Ja. his
Chaplain into Scotland, and after his return, was preferred Dean of
Westminster, then Bishop of Salisbury. He was Hospital and Generous. He dyed
and was buried An. Dom. 1622.

Th. (Son to Will.) Westfield, D. D. born An. Dom. 1573. in Ely, bred at Jes.
Coll. in Camb. where he was Fellow. He was Assistant to Bishop Felton, whilst
Minister of St. Mary-le-Bow in Cheapside, after Rector of Horsney and great St.
Barth. Land. where in his Preaching he went through the 4 Evangelists. He was
afterward made Archdeacon of St. Albans, and at last Bishop of Bristol. The
Parl. had a good Opinion of him, as appears by this Order, 13. May 1643. From
the Committee of Lords and Com. for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates. Upon
information in the behalf of the B. of Bristol, That his Tenants refuse to pay
him his Rents, it is ordered by this Committee, that all profits of his
Bishopric be restored, and a safe Conduct be granted him, to pass with his
Family to Bristol, being himself of great Age and a Person of great Learning
and Merit. Jo. Wild.

By his Will he desired to be buried in the Cathedral-Church, near the Tomb of
Paul Bush the first Bishop. And as for my Worldly Goods (the words of his Will)
which (as the times now are) I know not well where they be, nor what they are,
I give, etc. to my Wife Eliz. He dyed June. 28. 1644. and lies buried
according to his own desire. An Anagram made on him by his Daughter was.

Thomas Westfield. I dwell the most safe.

Statesmen.
Jo. Tiptoft, Son and Heir of Jo. Lord Tiptoft, and Joyce his Wife, Daughter
and Coheir of Edw. Charlton Lord Powis, by his Wife Eleanor, Sister and Coheir
of Edmund Holland Earl of Kent) was born at Everton in this County. He was bred
at Baliol-Coll. in Oxf. where he attained to great Learning, and by H. 6. was
afterward created first Viscount, then Earl of Worcester, and Lord High
Constable of England, and by E. 4. Knight of the Garter. The Skies began to
Lowre and Threaten Civil Wars and the House of York fell sick of a Relapse.
Mean time this Earl could not be discourteous to Hen. 6. who had so much
advanced him, nor disloyal to Edw. 4. in whom the Right of the Crown lay. For
an Expedient he quitted his own, and visited the Holy Land. At Rome (in his
passage,) by an Elegant Latin Speech he drew the Admiration of all the
Auditors, and Tears from the Eyes of the Pope Pius II. He returned from
Christs-Sepulchre, to his own in England, in an unhappy time, if sooner or
later, he had found Edward on that Throne to which now H. 6 was restored, and
whose Restitution was only remarkable for the Death of this Worthy Lord.
Treason was charged on him for secretly siding with King Edw. On this account
he lost his life. The Ax then did at one blow cut off more Learning in England
then was left in the Heads of all the Surviving Nobility. His Death happened on
St. Lukes day, 1470. Edw. Lord, Tiptoft his Son was restored (by Edw. 4.) Earl
of Worcester, but dying without Issue, his Inheritance fell to his three Aunts,
Sisters to the Learned Lord aforesaid, viz. 1. Philip married to Th. Lord Ross
of Hamlake. 2. Joan, Wife of Sir Edm. Inglesthrop of Borough-green in this
County. 3. Joyce married to Sir Edw. Sutton, Son and Heir of John Lord Dudley,
from whom came Edw. Sutton Lord Dudley and Knight of the Garter.

Jo. Cheek, Knight, Tutor to Ed. 6. and Secretary of State, born in Camb. Of
him see our Church History.

Soldiers.
When the rest of the East Angles cowardly fled away in the Field from the
Danish Army, the Men of the County of Camb. did manfully resist; whence it was,
Bromp. Chron. p. 887.
that whilst the English did rule, the praise of the People of Cambridgeshire
did most eminently flourish. At the coming of the Normans, they made so stout a
Resistance, that the Conqueror who did fly into England, was glad to creep into
Ely. Cambridgeshiremen commonly passed for a Proverb, tho now like old Coin,
almost grown out of request. Indeed the Common People have Robust bodies able
to carry 8 Bushels of Barley on their Backs, whereas 4 are found a sufficient
Load for Men of other Counties, and I doubt not but if there were occasion
their Arms and Hands would appear to be as good as their Backs and Shoulders.

Writers.
Math. Paris, probably born in this, AMP.
and bred-in the next County, where the Name is right Ancient, long before they
were settled at Hildersham, which accrued to them by their Marriage with the
Daughter and Heir of the Buslers. He was a Monk at St. Albans, skilled in
Poetry, Oratory and Divinity, as also in Painting, Graving, etc. But his Genius
chiefly disposed him to the Writing of Histories, wherein he wrote a large
Chronicle from the Conquest unto the year of our Lord 1250. where he concludes
with this Distich: Siste tui metas studii, M^^^^aee, quietas,
Nec ventura petas, quae postera proferat aetas.
Matthew here cease thy Pen in peace, and study on no more,
Nor do thou aim at things to come, which next Age has in store.
Yet resuming the Work he continued it to 1259. A catching disease with Authors
(my self being concerned) to obey the importunity of others, contrary to their
own inclination. His History is impartially and judiciously (save whereby he
indulgeth too much Monkish Miracles) and no Writer so plainly discovers the
Pride, Avarice and Rapine of the Court of Rome, so that he seldom kisseth the
Popes toe without Biting it. The Papists insinuate a suspicion that such
Reflections are forged, but all the Candor imaginable has been used in the
Editions of that Author, first by Math. Parker and then (and especially) by
Doctor Will. Wats. This Matthew left off living and writing, An. 1259. Tho he
had sharp Nails, he had clean Hands, strict in his own and striking at the
loose Conversation of others, and for his Eminent Austerity was not only
employed by Pope Innocent 4. to visit the Monks in the Diocese of Norwich, but
also was sent unto Norway to reform the Discipline in Holni a fair Covent.

Helias Rubeus (in Engl. Rous or Red,) bred D. D. in Camb. A great Courtier and
Gracious with the King, Wrote a Book contra Nobilitatem inanem. It Is thought he
flourished about the year 1266.

Jo. Eversden, was bred a Monk in Bury-Abby, whereof he was Cellerer or
Caterer, but his mounting above this mean Employ, he buried himself in P^^try,
Law and History, whereof he wrote a fair Volume from the beginning of the
World. Being a Monk he was not fond of Friars. And observes, that when the
Franciscans first entered Bury, An. 1336. there happened a hideous Hericano,
levelling Trees, Towers, etc. Yet went they out with a Calm, at the time of the
Dissolution. This John flourished under King E. 3. and dyed about the year 1338.

Rich. Wetherset commonly called of Cambridge, where he was Chancellor. A
great Scholar and deep Divine, it being said, That he conformed his Divinity to
Scripture, and not to the Rules of Philosophy. He flourished under E. 3. An.
1350.

Will. Caxton of Caxton, a diligent and learned Man, bred beyond the Seas, and
lived 30 years in the Court of Marg. Duchess of Burgundy, Sister to King E. 4.
whence I conclude an Anti-Lancastrian. He continued Polychronicon unto the end
of that King, with good judgment and fidelity. He Collected and Printed all
Chaucer's Works, and on many Accounts deserved well of Posterity, and dyed
about 1488.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Huloet, born at Wishich and brought up in good learning. He dedicated to
Th. Goowrich a Book called The English and Latin A. B. C. a Book which
(probably) related to the Elemental Grounds of Religion. He flourished An. Dom.
1552.

Jo Richardson, born of Honest Parents at Linton, bred first Fell. of Emanuel,
then Master of St. Peter's, and at last of Trinity-Coll. in Camb. where he was
Regius Professor. No dull Man as some supposed. For at an Extraordinary Act of
Divinity at Camb. before King Ja. strongly alleged in opposition to Doctor
Davenant then Answerer, vigorously pressed the practice of St. Ambrose
Excommunicating of Theodosius the Emperor, insomuch that the King, in some
Passion returned, profecto fuit hoc ab Ambrosio insolentissime factum. To whom
Doctor Richardson rejoyned, Responsum vere Regium and Alexandro dignum, hoc non
est Argumenta dissolvere sed dissecare. And so sitting down he desisted from
dispute. He was employed one of the Translators of the Bible, being a most
excellent Linguist. He dyed An. 1621.

Andr. Willet, D. D. born at Ely, bred Fellow of Christs-Coll. in Camb.
succeeded his Father in the Parsonage of Barley in Hartfordshire, and became
Prebendary of Ely, Bountiful above his Nobility, notwithstanding his numerous
Issue. Admirable his Industry in his Synopsis, Comments, etc. His Death
hast'ned by a fall (by which his Neck was broken) happened 1621.

Sir Th. Ridley, Knight, Doctor of the Laws, born at Ely, bred at Eaton, was
Fellow of Kings-Coll. in Camb. A general Scholar. He was afterward Chancellor
of Winchester and Vicar General to the Archbishop of Cant. His Book called the
view of Ecclesiastical Laws has embalmed his Memory to Posterity. He dyed Jan.
22. 1629.

Arth. Hildersham, born at Strechworth, descended by his Mothers-side from the
Blood Royal, being great-great-Grand-child to Geo. Duke Clarence, Brother to E.
4. Yet being bred in Christs-Coll. he entered into the Ministry. He dyed An.
Dom. 163. Vid. Eccl. Hist.

R. Parker born in Ely, (Son to Mr. Parker Archdeacon there, who refused the
Bishopric) was bred in and became Fellow of Caius-Coll. an excellent Herald,
Historian and Antiquary, Author of the Manuscript called Scletos
Cantabrigiensis, which is fleshed with much Matter, and has furnished me with
the Nativities of several Bishops who were Masters of Colleges. Which Book I
heartily wish Printed for the good of Posterity, I disclaim Pol. Virgils who
burnt rare English Manuscripts of History, after he had served his own turn
with them.

Mich. Dalton, Esquire, bred in the Study of the Municipal-Law in Lincoln's Inn.
His Gravity graced the Benches of Justice in this County, where his Judgment
deservedly passed for an Oracle in the Law, having enriched the World with two
excellent Treatises called the Office of Sheriffs, and the Justices of Peace.
Here note that King Ja. first made such Justices in Scotland. He dyed before
the Civil Wars in England.

Th. Goad, D. D. Son to Rog. Goad (for above 40 years Provost in Kings-Coll.)
bred a Fellow under his Father, then Chaplain to Archbishop Abbot; Rector of
Hadley in Suff. Prebendary of Cant. A great and General Scholar, exact Critic,
Historian, Poet, Schoolman and Divine. Of a commanding presence, an
uncontrollable spirit, impatient of opposition; loving to steer the Discourse
(being a good Pilot to that purpose) of all the Company he came in. He dyed
about 1635.

Andr. Marvail born at Mildred, and bred Master of Arts in Trinity Coll. in
Camb. was afterward Minister of Hull, Facetious in discourse, Grave in his
Carriage, an excellent Preacher, using all due Study beforehand; he was wont
to say, he would cross the Proverb which called Saturday the working-day and
Monday the holy day of Preachers. He was drowned in Humber 1640. His Excellent
Comment on St. Peter is desired.

Benefactors to the Public.
Hugo de Balsham, Founder of Peter-house in Camb. (the first built College in
England) and finished it 1284. and bestowed much Land upon it. He sat 28 years
in the Bishopric of Ely, and dyed the 6 of June, 1286.

Sir Will. Horn, Salter, Son to Th. born at Snail-well, Knighted by King Hen.
7. 1487. was Lord Mayor of London. He gave bountifully to the Preachers of St.
Pauls-cross, and bestowed 500 Marks to the mending of the Highways between
Camb. and London.

Sir Will. (Son to Jo.) Purcase, born at Gamlingay, bred Mercer in London, and
Lord Mayor thereof 1497. caused Morefieds under the Walls to be made plain
ground, to the great pleasure, since to the great profit of the City.

Sir Th. (Son of Jo.) Knesworth, a Fishmonger in London (whereof he was Lord
Mayor) 1505. appointed the Water-Conduit at Bishop-gate to be built. Note
Cambridgeshire, in the compass of 18. years, affords 3 Lord Mayors and
Benefactors which no other Shire ever produced.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Creane, born at Wisbeech, bred an Apothecary in Camb. very diligent in his
Youth. He lived and dyed in Doctor Butler's Family, to whom he left the main
Body of his Estate. Having a large heart he annually very Nobly treated all the
Oxford-men at the Commencement. At his Death he gave 3000 Pounds to Charitable
uses, bestowing the house he lived in, after his Wifes death on the public
Professor of Physic. To Wisbeech he gave 100 pound to build a Town Hall,
besides what he gave to Cambridge, Lin, Ipswich. He left 100 pound to be lent
Gratis to an honest man, the better to enable him to buy good Fish and Fowl to
the University. He bequeathed to Doctor Wren B. of Ely and Doctor Brownrigg B.
of Exeter, 100 pounds a piece by his Will, and as much by the Codicil annexed
thereunto. Besides his concealed Charities, his hands were always open to all
the destressed Royalists. He dyed in May, 1650.

Memorable Persons.
Will. Collet born at Over, bred a Clerk in London, was made Keeper of the
Records in the Tower, of unparalelled Dexterity in that Office; he abominated
their Course, who by a Water would refresh a Record to make it useful for the
present and useless ever after, nor would he practice with a Pen on any old
Writing, under pretense of mending it. He may be called Caterer to Seldom and
other Antiquaries. He dyed 1644.

Edward Norgate (Son to Rob. D. D. of Bennet-Coll. and bred by Nich. Felton B.
of Ely, his Father in Law) was a Limner, the best of our Age, employed into
Italy to purchase Pictures for E. of Arundel. Returning by Marseilles, and his
money failing him, he used to walk a long time with a swift pace on the
Exchange there every Morning and Evening. A civil Monsieur observing him told
him, That if Will. would convert his Reciprocal into a Progressive Motion
directed to his own Country, he would provide him a light Habit and competent
Money for a Footman. To which Proposal consenting he footed it through France,
(being more than 500 English Miles) and returned safely into England. Where he
was generally employed to make the Initial Letters in the Patents of Peers,
etc. He was an Excellent Herald by the Title of and which was the Crown of all
a very Honest Man. Exemplary his Patience in Sickness, tho a Complication of
Diseases seized on him. He dyed at the Herald Office. 1649.

Noted Sheriffs.
Th. Eliot, Mil. born some say in Suff. had his Habitation in this County,
being well skilled in Greek and Latin, he was the Author (among other
excellent Books) of Defensorium Bonarum Mulierum, or the defense of good Women,
an excellent Latin and English Dictionary, the Stock on which B. Cooper
grafted his Dictionary. He dyed 1546. and was buried at Carlton in this County.

Th. Cromwell, Ar. made Baron of Okeham, was Chancellor of the University.

Edward North, Mil. skilled in the Law, and an able Manager of Public Affairs,
was employed in the Court of Augmentation. Made by Queen Ma. Baron of Catlidge
in this County. A considerable Benefactor to Peter-house in Camb. where under
his Picture there is this Distich: Nobilis hic vere fuerat si Nobilis ullus,
Qui sibi principium Nobilitatis erat.
He was Father to Roger Lord North, and Great-Grand-Father to Dudley Lord North
now surviving.

Jo. Huddleston, Mil. To whom Queen Mary came privately (when Jane Gray was
proclaimed Queen) to Saltston, and rid thence behind his Servant (the better to
disguise her self) to Framlingham-Castle. She afterward made him her
Privy-Councellor and among other Great Boones, bestowed the bigger part of
Cambridge-Castle (then much ruined) upon him, with the Stones whereof he built
a fair House in this County. I behold his Family as Branched from the
Huddlestons in Cumb.

Jo. Cuts Mil. A most Bountiful Housekeeper, Eliz. (whilst there was Peace
with Spain) consigned the Spanish Ambassador in the Sickness at London. This
Spaniard being first Scandalized at the Knights short Surname, was afterward
very well satisfied with his large Entertainment. Where note that the Spanish
Gentlemen have generally long names tho short Commons.

Hen, Cromwell Mil. Son to Rich. Cromwell Esquire Sher. 32 H. 8. to whom his
Valor and Activity so endeared him as he bestowed on him so much Abbey-land in
this County, as at this day is worth 20000 Pounds a year. He was not allied
(tho acquainted) with Th. Lord Cromwell the Mauler of Monasteries; Cromwell the
pretended protected Grandchild to this Sheriff having on a certain occasion
owned, that, that Lord was not related to his Family in the least degree.

Jervase Clifton Knight (By King Ja. created Baron of Leighton) had a fair
Estate at Barrington in Some. whence he removed to Huntingtonshire on his match
with the Sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Hen. Darcy of Leighton-bromswold. Kath.
sole Daughter to Jervase was married to Esme Steward D. of Lennox, to whom she
bare the truly Illustrious James D. of Richmond.

Sim. Steward Knight, lived, after he was knighted, a Fellow-Commoner in
Trinity-hall. The sixth in lineal descent from John Steward who married Talmach
a Maid of Honor to Queen Joan and Swore allegience to H. 4.

Cheshire.
CHeshire lies in form of an Axe, having Lanc. on the North, Darby and Staff.
on the East, Shropshire on the South, Denbigh, Flintshire and the Irish Sea on
the West, the longest part 44, and the broadest 25 Miles. The County was
reputed a Palatinate before the Conquest, and it is much to Lanc. in that
honor, being related to Che. as the copy to the original being Palatinated but
by E. 3 Granting that the D. of Lanc. should have Regal Jurisdiction So fully
and freely as the Earl of Chester. And whereas Records are written in the Common
Law. Contra Coronam and Dignitatem Regis, ^n this County they run thus, Contra
Dignitatem gladii Cestriae. It abounds with all Necessaries for Mars life.
All the Rivers here either rise or through some Pool. And of Lakes of this
Cheshire abounds, and therefore has great plenty of Carps, Tenches, Trouts,
Eels.

The Gentry are Remarable for their Numerousness Antiquity (many of their
Ancestors being fixed here before the Conquest) their Loyalty and Hospitality.
One said pleasantly that it appears they are good Housekeepers by the
Wheaton-sheaves so frequently given in their Coats of Arms; The Original
whereof was in Conformity to Hugh Kivelios the fifth Earl, who gave Az. 6.
Garbs (or Sheaves) O. Natural Commodities are Salt, Cheese (whence, some say,
is the Word Cheshire 9. Chees-shire.) Whereof the best of England is made here,
yet are not their Cows Housed in the Winter. Milstones, great and good in
Mowcop-hill. For Buildings, Beestones-Castle situated on a steep Hill, carried
away the credit, Erected by Raynulf the third Earl of Chester, a beautiful
structure; levelled to the ground since the late Wars, of which Leland
Prophesies a Restoration. As for Wonders, it is said there is a Pool adjoining
to Brereton, wherein great Logs of Timber are seen to swim for certain days
together before the Death of any Heir of that House, but I have heard this
contradicted by the Right Honorable Lord Brereton, now living, who told me
that lately some Persons concerned in the Event, upon observation of the
Critical time, could not behold the prodigy, and that the time of the motion of
those Logs is as uncertain, as the Original cause of looseness is.

Proverbs.
I. Cheshire chief of Men; which Challenge the Men of Cornwall or Kent are
ready to Answer. But, rather than any difference shall arise Wisemen will
allow of many Chiefs. Indeed the Cestrians have in all their Undertakings
demeaned themselves Valiantly. King Rich. II, in dangerous times, sent for 2000
of them, to attend him, and in time a suspicious Parl. the Number was doubled.
Pity it was their Valor was once wasted against themselves in the Terrible
Battle beteen H. 4. and H. Piercy, Surnamed Hotspur. Of which Drayton, There
Dutton Dutton kills, Polyal.
a Done does kill a Done. One side fought for Mortimer, who should be King by
Right, the other for H. 4. who was Actually so. The Loyalty of the first side
is not so much impeached by the Voice of Fame, as it is disproved by Voice of
the Law which Supposes Treason may be committed against one that is only a King
de facto; which Limitation was more Applicable to R. 3. than it was to H. 4.

II. Better Wed over the Mixon than over the Moor. Over the Mixon, that is at
home, Mixon being the Compost, in the Yards of good Husbands. The meaning is,
the Gentry in Cheshire find it more profitable to Match within their County,
than to bring a Bride out of other Shires, being more easily acquainted and put
to less Charge at home.

Cardinals.
Will. Makilsfield, probably born in this County, tho reputed a Conventrian,
because then Cheshire was in the Diocese of Coventry and Liech. See his
Character in Warwickshire.

Prelates.
Will. Booth first bred in Greys-Inn in London in the Study of Com. Law, till,
upon proffer of a Chancellours place in St. Paul's, he took orders. Afterward
consecrated Bishop of Liechfield, and six years after Translated to York, and
after twelve years dyed and was buried in St. Mary's Chapel in Southwell 1464.

Lawr. Booth half Brother to Will. was bred and became Master of Pemb. Hall in
Camb. and was Chancellor of that University. He made the Composition between
the University and the K. Coll. and was an Eminent Benefactor to his own,
bestowing thereon all the Tenements (since Alienated) betwixt it and St.
Botolphs Church, amongst which was St. Thomas Hostle. He Exonerated the
College of a Pension of five Pounds, which he redeemed, and conferred thereon
the manor and Patronage of Overton Waterfield in Hunt. He was preferred
Chancellor to Marg. Queen to H. 6. and An. 13 E. 4. made Lord High Chancellor
(it seems his Public Spirit was neither for York nor Lanc. but England) having
first been Bishop of Durham, afterward Archbishop of York, and built in the
first the Gate of Aukland-Colledge, and bought for the latter the Manor
Baterfed nigh London. He kept the Master-ship of Pemb. Hall till the day of his
Death that place being Ambitious of his Patronage.

Jo. Booth Brother to Lawr. aforesaid, Bachelor of Laws, was consecrated
Bishop of Exeter, An. 6. E. 4. 1466. He built the Bishops Chair, or Seat in his
Cathedral, which has not its equal in England, but the softest Cushion
belonging to it was taken away, when Bishop Vescy Alienated the Lands thereof.
When the Bishop had finished this Chair, he could not quietly sit down therein,
such were the troubles arising from the Wars between York and Lanc. Therefore
retiring to his Private Habitation at Horsley in Hampshire, he dyed 1478. and
was buried in St. Clem. Danes in London. These three Brothers had an eldest
Brother Sir Roger Booth Knight of Barton in Lanc. Father of Margaret Wife of
Ralph Nevil third Earl of Westmerland.

Th. Savage, born at Maklefield. His Father (a Knight) bred a Doctor of Law in
Camb. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Rochester and at last Archbishop of
York. A greater Courtier than Clerk, dextrous in managing secular Affairs, a
mighty Huntsman. He was the first who was privately installed by his Vicar. He
maintained a Numerous Family, and built much at Scroby and Cawood. He dyed
1508. his Body being buried at York, his heart at Maklefield, in a Chapel of
his own Erection.

Since the Reformation.
Will. Chaderton D. D. of worthy Extraction, in this County, bred a Fellow and
Mr. of Queens Coll. in Camb. and chosen first the Lady Margarets, then the
Kings professor in Divinity, to whom Doctor Whitaker succeeded. Made Bishop of
Chester An. 1579. then of Lincoln. 1594. He dyed 1608. His Virtuous
Granddaughter married to Mr. Jocelin Esquire, writ The Mothers Legacy to her
unborn Infant, and dyed in Travel.

Will. James D. D. born in this County, and bred in Christs-Church in Oxf. was
President of the University College, and Dean and Bishop of Durham. He had
been Chaplain to Rob. Dudley Earl of Leicester, and Ministered Comfort to him
near the hour of Death. He was a Principal means of recovering Durham-house to
his See, which House was granted by E. 6. to the Lady (afterward Queen) Eliz.
for Term of Life, and lay neglected till Bishop James regained it and repaired
the Chapel to his great cost. He once entertained Queen Eliz. very much to her
Satisfaction. Otherwise it was with a following Bishop of that See, being
reproved by King Ja. for some neglect of his Officers, he Survived that reproof
not a full Twelvemonth.

Jo. Richardson, born in this County of a most Worshipful and Ancient Family,
bred in the University of Dublin, where he was Graduated Doctor in Divinity,
and afterward was made Bishop of Ardagh in Ireland, in the late Rebellion he
came over into England. A Grave Man and good Divine, verifying the Rule, Bonus
Texturius bonus Theologus, for he carried a Concordance in his Memory. The
Larger Annotations, especially on Ezekiel an Elaborate Work Challenge him, in a
great measure for the Author. Our Bishop, who had been relieved had his bounty
to bestow on others, and by his Will bequeathed a considerable Legacy to the
College of Dublin. He dyed An. 1658. Aet. 74.

Statesmen.
Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, extracted from an Ancient Family in this County, so
Eminent a Lawyer, that Queen Eliz. made him her Solicitor, then Master of the
Rolls, then Keeper of the Great Seal An. 38 of of her Reign. A man of great
Wisdom and Gravity, quick Wit, solid Judgment, ready Utterance, and great
integrity. An. 1. Jac. he was made Lord Chancellor (the same in effect with
Lord Keeper) and of Lord Elismer, he was created Viscount Brackley 1616. Great
was the Contention for many years together betwixt this Lord of Equity and Sir
Edw. Coke the Oracle of Justice at Westminster Hall. His civil Death (by
Resignation) happened a few days before his Natural Death, after which his Body
was buried in Duddleston in this County. He left a fair Estate to his Son, who
was afterward Created Earl of Bridgewater. When he observed King James to be
profuse to the Scots he advised him to preserve his Crown Lands, seeing he or
h^s Successors might meet with Parliaments which would not supply his
occasions, but on such Conditions as would not be very acceptable. It was an
ordinary Speech with him Frost and Fraud end in Foul. He dyed 1616.

Capital Judges.
AMP.
Sir Humph Starkey, probably born in this County, so skilled in the Law, that he
was preferred Bar. of the Exchequer about (...) H^e. 7. Whereas that Age was
justly complaining of the Extortions of the Kings Officers (as Empson and
Dudley, etc.) nothing of that nature is laid to his charge. He dyed An. ult. H.
7. was buried in Leonard Shore-ditch. Where his Epitaph begins, Orate.

Sir Hen. Bradshaw Knight, so noted a Lawyer that An. 6. E. 6. he was Chapter Bar.
of the Exchequer demeaning himself therein to his great Commendation. I have
cause to conceive that this Judge was outed of his place 1. Ma. finding no more
mention of him.

Sir Randel Crew, so great a Lawyer that 22 Jac. was made Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench. and therein served two Kings, (tho scarce two years in his
Office) with great Integrity. He declared his Judgment against the project of
the LOAN, and thereupon he was by Writ discharged from his place, after which
he lived long at Westminster. much praised for his Hospitality. The Gown being put
off, he had a warm Suit remaining, I mean a fair Estate, particularly Crew-Hall
in Cheshire. He it was that brought the Model of excellent Building into these
Remoter parts. He had a Virtuous Lady, very Essential to the Integrity of a
Married Judge, lest what Westminster Hall does conclude Westminster-Bed-chamber
do revoke. He had a Brother Sir Th. Crew a Learned Sergeant in the same
Profession, whose Son Geo. Crew, instrumental in the Kings Restoration is
designed for some Title of Honor.

Sir Humph. Davenport, bred in the Temple, a Studied Lawyer and upright Person,
Qualities which commended him to be chosen Baron of the Exchequer. Q.


Soldiers.
Sir Hugh Calvely, born at Calvely, of whom it is said that he could feed as
much as two, and fight as much as ten men, his quick and strong Appetite could
digest anything but an injury, so that killing a Man is reported the Cause of
his quitting this Country and going for France, where he became such an
excellent Soldier, that he converted the most difficult Atchievments into
easy performances by his Martial Valor. He was one of 30 English in France,
who, in a Duel, encountered as many Britains. He revenged the Blood of the
English, who whilst his Hands were tied behind him, were slain before his Face.
An. ult. E. 3. 'Twas he that, after an unfortunate Voyage of the English
Nobility An. 1. R. 2. took Barkbulloign and 25 other French Ships, besides the
Castle of Mark, lately lost and by him recovered; And in the next year, he
spoiled Estaples, with the plunder of which he enriched the Calicians for many
years after. He Married the Queen of Arragon, whose Arms are quartered on his
Tomb. His Death may be Collected about 1388. After which time no mention of
him, and it was impossible for such a Spirit to be, and not to be Active.

Sir Rob. Knowles, Knight, born of mean Parents in this County; yet did not the
Weight of his low Extraction depress the Wings of his Martial mind, who by his
Valor wrought his own Advancement. He was another of the 30 English spoken of
immediately before. Afterward he was a Commander in the French War, under King
E. 3. where behaving himself like a true Son of Mars, he drove his Enemies
before him, like Sheep, overturning like another deluge, Cities, Towns, etc. so
that many years after, the Sharp points and Gableends of overthrown houses were
commonly called KNOWLES MITRES. His last Service was the suppressing of Wat
Tiler and his Rebels. The Citizens of Land. in expression of their Gratitude,
Enfranchised him a Member thereof. His Charity was as great as his Valor, and
he rendered himself no less loved by the English than feared by the French. He
gave bountifully to the Building of Rochester-Bridge, founding a Chapel and a
Chantry at the East end thereof, with a College at Pontfract in Yorkshire,
where Constance his Lady was born, endowing with it 180 pounds a year. He dyed
at his Manor of Scone-Thorp in Norf. in Peace and Honor, being about 90 years
of Age, and is buried in White Friars in London.

Jo. Smith, Captain born in this County, spent the most part of his life in
Foreign parts. First in Hungary, under the Emperor, fighting against the Turks,
three of which he himself killed in single Duels, and therefore was Authorized
by Sigismund King of Hung. to bear three Turks heads as an Augmentation of his
Arms. Here he gave intelligence to a besieged City, in the Night, by
Significant Fireworks formed in the Air, in Legible Characters. Thence he went
into America about the end of the Reign of Queen Eliz. such his Perils and
Preservations, they seem to most Men above belief. They are mentioned in a
Treatise done by himself. He was very Instrumental in settling the Plantation of
Virginia, whereof he was Governor, as also Admiral of New England. When old,
he lived in London where being High-minded and Poor, he was exposed to the
contempt of disingenuous persons. Yet he efforted his Spirits with a
Commemoration of the Days of Old. He was buried in Sepulcher-Church-Quire. A
Line of his Rauting Epitaph follows.

Here lies one Conquered that has Conquered Kings.

Physicians.
If this County bred no Writers in that Faculty, the Wonder is the less, if it
be true what I read, that if any here be Sick They make him a Posset and tie a
Kerchief about his head, and if that will not mend him, then God be merciful to
him. This may be true of the Common People, the Gentry having the help (no
doubt) of the learned in that Profession.

Writers.
Th. Ecleston, bred a Franciscan in Oxf. wrote a Book of the Succession of his
Order in England, etc. and another de Impugnatione Ordinis sui per Dominicanos,
these two sort of Friars Whipping one another with their Cords to the mutual
wounding of their Reputations. He dyed An. 1340.

Since the Reformation.
Ralph Radcliffe who converted a Demolished House of the Carmelites into a
Grammer-School, wrote a Treatise of the Burning of Sodom, another of the
Afflictions of Job, and a third de Triplici Memoria, Of the Threefold Memory,
denoting probably such a difference, as there is between Wax, Water and Iron,
in receiving an impression. He flourished under E. 6. 1552. and it is likely he
dyed before the Reign of Queen Mary.

Jo. Speed, born at Farington, first a Tailor did no more than cut his Coat
according to his Cloth, when, being obedient to the Impulses of a Vigorous
mind, and assisted by Sir Fulk Grevil, a great Favourer of Learning, he
designed the Maps and Composed the History of England and made the usual
Geneaologies, formerly prefixed to all English Bibles, having a patent granted
to him by King Ja. in reward of his great Labors. Thus he Exchanged a Manual
for a Manly Trade and made no greater have than good Speed. He dyed in London
An. 1629, and was buried in St. Giles without Criple-Gate.

Jo. Dodd, born at Shotliedge, bred in Jesus-Coll. A witty, Learned and Godly
Divine. Minister successively of Hanwell in Oxf. Fenny Compton in Warw. Canons
Ashby and Fausly in Northam. tho for a time silenced in each of them; yet even
then he did instruct by his holy Demeanor and Pious Discourse. A good Chemist
to extract Gold out of other Men's Lead, and how loose soever the Premises of
other Men's discourse, Piety was always his unforced conclusion thereupon. When
others meditated mischief in the Civil-Wars, he confined himself to the
Meditations of Sanctity and Innocence. V. Clarks Lives.

Benefactors.
Sir Rich. Sutton, born at Presbury, of a Plentiful Estate and bountiful Hand.
It happened that Will. Smith Bishop of Lincoln began Brason-Nose-Coll. but dyed
before the finishing of one Nostril thereof. Sutton being his Executor
Completed the Foundation, with his own Liberal Additions thereunto. He dyed
about the middle of the Reign of H. 8.

Since the Reformation.
Rob. Brassy, born at Bunbury (i. e. Boniface-bury) bred D. D. in Kings Coll.
in Camb. whereof he was Provost. Being Learned and Stout he Publicly protested
against the Visitors of the University in the Reign of Queen Ma. as to his own
College, thereby taking off the Edge of these Persecuting Commissioners. When
many Doctors of Camb. were resolved to sell their Right in St^rbridge-fair, for
a Trifle to the Townsmen, he dashed their designs, which Manly Opposition
prevented the Vice-Chancellours holding the Stirrup to the Mayor. He dyed An.
Dom. 1558. and lies buried on the South Side of the Chapple.

Geo. Palin, born at Wrenbury, was bred a Merchant in London, free of the
Company of Girdlers. We may call his Benefactions the Golden-gridle of Charity,
for with our Savior he went about doing good. To Wrenbury he gave 200 pounds
to purchase Lands for the relief of the poor. For building an Almshouse in and
about London 900 pounds. To St. John's Coll. in Camb. 300 l. To the Hospital of
St. Th. in Southwark, 50 l. To the Preachers at Pauls-Cross, 200 l. Toward a
Chime in Bow-Church. 100 l. To six Prisons in and about London 60 l. To Brason
nose-Coll. in Oxf. two Scholarships, to each yearly 4 l. To the Coll. of St.
Jo. Bap. in Oxf. 2 Scholarships of the same value. To Christ-Church-Hospital,
300 l. To the Church and Poor of Wrenbury, to buy them Gowns, 70 l. etc. He
dyed about the beginning of the Reign of King Ja.

Jo. Brereton, Knight, a Branch of that well spred-tree in this County, one of
the first Scholars of the Foundation of Sidney-Coll. then having studied the
Law, went into Ireland and was at last made the Kings Sergeant therein. Having
got a good Estate, he gave well nigh 3000 l. to Sidney-Coll. after 40 years
absence. A pure Gift because 'twas loaded with no Detrimental Conditions in the
acceptance. He dyed about the year 1633.

Jo. Barnston D. D. born of an Ancient Family, a Fellow of Brason-nose Coll. in
Oxf. and Chapl. to Chanc. Egerton Being Judge of the Consistory, when a
Churchwarden was Sued for a Chalice stolen out of (his House not the proper
place of) Custody, Well (said the Doctor) I am sorry the Cup of Union should be
the cause of difference among you, I doubt not but either the Thief will out of
Remorse restore it, or some other as good will be sent unto you, and according
by his secret Charity the Doctor provided another. He founded an Hebrew Lecture
in Brasen-nose-Coll. and dyed An. 1642.

Memorable Persons.
Will. Smith, an Ancient Surname in this County, was made Pursuivant of Arms by
the Name of Raugaragon. He wrote a Geographical and Historical Description of
this County set forth by Mr. Crew.

Will. Web. M. A. was Clerk of the Mayors Court in Chester, and Undersheriff
in this County 13. Jac. He compiled a Descripton of Cheshire and Chestern.

Randel Crew Esquire, second Son to Sir Clisby who was Son to Judge Crew, drew
an exact Map of Cheshire with his Pen, which the Gravers skill could but little
improve. He went beyond the Seas, where he was Assassinated by some Frenchmen
and honorably buried with general Lamentation of the English at Paris, 1656.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 56. Hugh de Hatton, Hatton in this County, by the Grant of Will. the Conq.
From him is Lineally descended the Learned and Religious Sir Christ. Hatton,
Knight of the Bath, (who set forth Pious Meditations on the Psalms) created by
King Chapter I. Bar. of Hatton in Kerby, in Northamp. The Original of the
Conquerors Grant is in this Lords Possession, and was preserved in the
Civil-Wars, tho his Library was then Plundered.

3. Sr. Hugh Cholmly (or Cholmondesly) bought his Knighthood in the Field at
Leigh in Scotland. Flint-sh.) and for many years one of the two Dep.
Lieutenants thereof. He was President of the Marches of Wales, under the Right
honorable Sir Hen. Sidney Knight. He was esteemed (for 50 years) a Father of
his Country and dying An. 157- was buried in the Church of Malpass, under a
Tomb of Alabaster, leaving a Son Heir to his Virtues and Estate.

Jo. Savage direct Anchestor to Sir Th. Savage Knight and Bar. created by King
Chapter I. Baron Savage of Rock Savage in this County. This Lord. (a great
Statesman) married Eliz. Eldest Daughter and Coheir of Th. Lord Darcy of Chich.
Viscount Colchester, and E. of Rivers, Honors entailed on his Posterity, and
now enjoyed by the Right Honorable Th. Savage E. of Rivers.

Battles.
Rowton-heath 1645. Sep. 24. His Majesty being informed that Col. Jones had
seized the Suburbs and strong Church of St. John's in Chester, Marched Northward
for the relief thereof. Poins a Parliament-General pursued his Majesty. At
Rowton-heath within three Miles of Chester, the Kings Army made a halt, whilst
his Majesty with some Prime Persons marched into the City. Next day a fierce
Fight happened on the Heath, betwixt the Kings and Poins's Forces, the latter
going off with the greater loss. 'Twas conceived that had the Royalists pursued
the Single Enemy, before they were recruited, they had finally worsted him,
which Fatal Omission ( oppertunities omitting of no after-games) proved their
overthrow. For next day Col. Jones drew out his Men into the Field, so that the
Royalists being charged on the Heath, in Front and Rear, and having no Foot,
were defeated before a considerable party of Horse (designed for their Relief)
were sent from Chester, who came too soon to engage themselves, as they came
too late to Succor their Friends. Here fell the youngest of the three Noble
Brethren, who lost their Lives in the King's Service, Bernard Steward Earl of
Liechfield.

Chester.
CHester is a fair City on the North-side of the River Dee, so Ancient, that
the first Founder thereof is forgotten, much beholden to the Earls of Chester
for Increase and Ornaments. The Walls thereof were lately in good repair,
especially betwixt the New-Tower and the Watergate. For An. 1569. a Personal
Fight hap'ning betwixt the two Sheriffs thereof, Rich. Massey, and Pet.
Lycherband, they were fined to mend that part of the Wall. The Eastgate was
committed formerly to the Custody of the Earl of Oxford; Bride-gate to the Earl
of Shrewsbury; Watergate to the Earl of Darby; and North-gate to the Mayor of
the City; which is built in form of a Quadrant, having four Streets that meet
in the middle thereof, affording a Pleasant Prospect. Here, under the Rows (or
Galleries, a kind of Building peculiar to this City) the Passengers may walk
dry, in wet Weather, without coming into the Streets. As for Buildings, St.
Werburges Church is a fair Structure, (whereof the Tower begun 1508. is
unfinished) built long before the Conquest, and being ruined was repaired by
Hugh Lupus first Earl. It was afterward made by King Hen. 8. one of his five
Royal Bishoprics, Oxf. Glouc. Brist. and Peterbur. being the other 4. whose
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction were not confirmed by the Pope, nor Baronies by the
Parliament. These owed their being solely to the Kings Prerogative. And
therefore when some Anti-Prelatists, in the late long Parl. 1641. endeavored
to overthrow their Baronies for want of Confirmation in Parl. upon better
Consideration they desisted from that design as unfesible.

Proverbs.
I. When the Daughter is stolen, shut Pepper-gate. The Mayor of Chester had his
Daughter stolen through that Gate, whereupon he caused that shut, with all other
Gates in the City.

Martyrs.
Geo. Marsh, condemned by Bishop Coats, burnt without this City, near to
Spittle Boughton. See his Charact. in Lanc.

Prelates.
Geo. Dounham, D. D. Son to Jo. Dounham, Bishop of Chester, was born in this
City, and bred in Christs-Coll. in Camb. made Fellow thereof 1585. and chosen
Logic Professor of the University. Was as well skilled in Rhetoric as Logic,
tho it is seldom seen that the Clunch-fist of this Art (good to knock a Man down
at a blow) can so open it self as to Smooth and Stroke one with the Palm
thereof. That the Doctor could do both, his Oration prefixed to his Treatise of
Logic, does sufficiently Witness. He Preached the Sermon Apr. 17. 1608. at the
Consecration of Ja. Montague Bishop of Bath and Wells, irrefragably proving
therein Episcopacy jure divino. After which he was made Bishop of Derry of
Ireland, to which Londonderry had been added a little before. He endeavored
by his Gentleness to Civilize the Wild Irish, and proved very successful
therein.

Seamen.
Dav. Middleton one of those who effectually contributed his Assistance to the
making of Through-lights in the World, I mean New- discoveries in the East and
West Indies, v. his Printed Relation. His dangers were great and many among
Canibals and Portugals, Crocodiles and Hollanders, yet at last he did settle
the English Trade at Bantam, about 1610.

Sir Hen. Middleton, Knight, younger brother (as I take it) to the former
under-went great Pains and Perils, in advancing the English Trade. Remarkable
his Voyage into the Red Sea, which had like to have proved the Dead-Sea unto
him. Here he was tolled to Land at Moha, by the Treacherous Aga, and had eight
of his Men Barbarously Slain, himself and seven more Chained up by the Necks.
The pretense was, because that Port was the Door of the Holy-City, and it is
Capital for any Christian to come so near thereunto. Then was he sent above 160
Miles to the Basha, at Zenan in Arab. Jan. 1611. in which City, tho but 15 degrees.
N. Lat. from the Equator, there was Ice, at that time, of a Fingers thickness,
in one Night, as the said Sir Hen. did relate. At last the Basha giving him
leave, he sailed Eastward and repaired himself by a gainful Composition with
the Indians, for the losses he had sustained by the Turks. His Ship called the
Trades increase, well answered the Name thereof until it pleased God to visit
his Men with a strange disease, whereof 100 English deceased, the grief whereat
was conceived the cause of this Worthy Knights Death, May 24. 1613. whose Name
will ever survive, whilst Middletons-Bay (from him so called) appears in the
Dutch Cards.

Writers.
Roger of Chester, a Benedictine Monk in St. Werburges, wrote a British Chron.
from the beginning of the World, which (after an addition of 25 years) he
Entitled Polycratica Temporum; the Style pure Latin. He dyed about 1339. and
was buried in Chester.

Randal (or Ranulph) Higden (commonly called Ran* of Chester) bred a
Benedictine in St. Werb, not only vamp'd the History of Rog. aforesaid, but
composed One of his own, Commendable for his Method and Modesty therein. He
continued 46 years a Monk and dyed 1363 and was buried in Chester.

Hen. Bradshaw, a Benedictine in this City, and diligent Historian, wrote a
Chronicle, and the Life of St. Werburge in Verse. A pious Man for the Age he
lived in. He flourished about 151^.

Since the Reformation.
Edward Brierwood, bred in Brason-nose-Coll. in Oxf. Being Candidate of a
Fellowship and loosing it, he afterward applied himself so seriously, to his
Studies, that he became a most accomplished Scholar in Logic (Witness his
Treatise thereof) Mathematics, being afterward Lecturer thereof in
Gresham-Coll. and Langu^ges of which he wrote his Enquiries. He maintained
against Mr. Byfield, That we are not bound to a Jewish exactness, in the
observatiobservation of the Sabbath. He dyed about 1633.

Jo. Downham, younger Son of Will. Bishop of Chester, bred in Camb. B. D.
became a profitable Preacher in London, and was the first who commendably
discharged the Eminent Lecture behind the Exchange, plentifully endowed by Mr.
Jones of Monmouth. He is Memorable to Posterity for his worthy work of the
Christian Warfare. He dyed about 1644.

Benefactors.
Will. Aldersea, a Pious Man, was Mayor of the City, 1560. and completed the
Lame List of Mayors out of the Records. He dyed Oct. 12. An. 1577. and lies
buried in the Chancel of St. Oswals.

Sir Th. Offley, bred a Merch. Tailor in London whereof he became Lord Mayor
An. 1556. in his Mayoralty began the Custom of the Night-Bell-man. He was the
Zaccheus of London for his high Charity, bequeathing the half of his Estate
(being 5000 pound) to the Poor, tho he had Children of his own; yea he
appointed that 200 pound (left to his Son Hen.) should be taken out of the
other half, and employed to Charitable uses. He dyed 1560 and was buried in the
Church of St. Andr. Undershaft. Mr. Hugh Offley Leather-Seller, Sheriff of
London An. 1588. (buried in the same Church) gave 600 pound to the City to put
forth young Men. Mr. Rob. brother to Hugh, gave 600 pound for 24 young Men in
Chester, whereof 12 were Apprentices. On the first of these I suppose these
Rhythms were made. Offley three Dishes had of daily Roast,
An Egg, an Apple, and the third a Toast.
Feasting himself moderately, that he might feed others by his Bounty.

Jo. Terer, Gent. Erected a seemly Water-work, built Steple-wise at the
Bridge-gate, which serves to convey the River-water through Pipes, to the
Citizens Houses in Chester. His Son endeavored, and I believe effected the
like, for the Convenience of the middle part of that City.

Cornwall.
COrnwall has its Name from the Form and Inhabitants thereof. Cornu signifying
a Horn, and Wale, Strangers, for such were the Inhabitants of this County
reputed by their Neighbors. It has Devonshire on the West, divided from it by
the River Tamer, encompassed with the Sea on all other sides, affording plenty
of Harbors, where Foreigners touch, in their passage to or from Spain,
Ireland, the Levant, the E. or W. Indies. The Language has some Affinity with
the Welsh, and is Copious to express the Conceits of a good Wit, tho (as it is
said) affording but two Natural Oaths or three at the most. The Natural
Commodities are Diamonds, which well cut, and set off with a good Foyl may at
the first sight deceive no unskilful Lapidary. Ambergreese, not engrossed here,
but casually found by small parcels, of which the best, greatest and last
quantity that ever this Age did behold, was found on the Coasts of this County
An. 3. Cor. I. in the Manor of Anthony, belonging to Sir Rich. Carew. The Name
is as much as Grey-Amber. A rare Cordial for refreshing the Spirits and
Sovereign for Strengthening the Head, besides the Fragrant Scent, especially
when Compounded with other Ingredients. Apothecaries hold it at five Pounds an
ounce. Garlic, good Sauce to some, and good Physic to many. The best grows at
Stratton in this County. Pilchards are taken in great plenty in these parts,
driven to the Shore by the Tun and Hake. A small Fish, tho it is said there
have been seen many Pilchards an Ell long; their Numbers are incredible,
employing very many People to dress and dry them, and then (by the Name of
Fumadoes) with Oyland Lemon, etc. they are Meet for the Mightiest Don in Spain.
It is suspected they daily decay, their Shoals usually shifting Coasts and
Verging more Westward to Ireland. Other Fish here be which turn to good
account, save the Star Fish esteemed contagious. Blew-Slate, which is thin,
clear, light and lasting, is commonly found under the Walling-Slate, when the
depth has brought the Workmen to the Water. Great store of them are
Transported into France and the Low Countries. TIN. Whereof the most and best
in Christendom is produced in this County. Yea, it was the only Tin in
Europe, until a Fugitive Miner, running hence, discovered Tin in Voi^eland,
in the Confines of Bohemia. Vast their expenses in making their Addits or
Accesses to the Mine with Dressing, Breaking, Stamping, Drying, Crazing,
Washing, and Melting. As for Buildings, Mount-Eedgecombe was Built by Sir Rich.
Edgecombe, Knight, who in the Reign of Queen Ma. (about 1555) gave
Entertainment at one time forsome good space to the English, Spanish and Dutch
Admirals, and many other Nobles, at Mount Edgecombe, a Square-structure, having
a stately Hall, affording a delicate sound as one enters it, a Parlour and
Dineing-room, giving a large Prospect both of Sea and Land. The high Situation
gives Health, as the Neighbour-River Wealth; two Blockhouses great safety, and
the Town of Pilmouth good company unto it. The ground about stored with Wood,
Timber, Fruit, Deer and Conies, sufficient Pasture, Meadow and Arable Land,
Marl, Stone, Lime, etc. It Is said the D. of Medina Sidonia, Admiral of the Sp.
Fleet, An. 88. beholding this House at a distance, was resolved to have it for
his own Possession in the Partage of this Kingdom. For Waters, I know none
Medicinal, tho Dr. Hall, Bishop of Norw. affirms St. Maderus Well to have
Miraculously cured a Criple washing therein.

As for Wonders, the first is big with a Fiction, viz. the Hurlers which are
Stones, whom Tradition reports to have been men judicially hardened for
Hurling on the Lord's Day. We may believe them to have been set for Bounds, or a
Monument, in memory of some Victory. The next Main Amber, that is, in Cornish,
a Stone set up (as some think) by Ambrose that Valiant Britain. It was a
Masterpiece of the Mathematics and Critical Proportions, being a great Stone
of so exact position on the top of a Rock, that any weakness, by touching it,
might move, and yet no force remove it. Yet I am informed that some Soldiers
of late have utterly destroyed it. In Turkey, there was a Tomb erected near the
Highway, on some Person of Quality, on the Chapter of which was written in
the Turkish Language, the Brains are in the Head, which in process of time, a
cunning Fellow unriddleing broke the Globe or Chapter, and found it full of
Gold. But the pretense for demolishing Main Amber was Reformation, and that
ever this should be advanced by Devastation and Deformity is indeed a Wonder.

Proverbs.
I. By Tree, Poland Pen, you shall know the Cornishmen. These Constituting their
Ancient Surnames, as Tre-lawney, Pol-wheel, Pen-tire, etc. II. To give one a
Cornish-hugg. The Cornish are Masters of Wrestling, so that if the Olympian
Games were in fashion, they would come away with the Victory. Their Hugg is a
cunning Close with their Fellow Combatant. Figuratively applied to deceitful
dealing. III. Hengsten-down well ywrought, is worth London-Town dear ybought:
Denoting the vast Treasure of Tinn, that formerly was, or the Diamonds that now
are found in this Down. IV. Tru-ru Triveth-eu Omdina gives Try-ru, that is,
Truru consists of three Streets, and it shall in time be said, Here Truru
stood. V. He does Sail into Cornwall without a Bark. Italian. The Periphrasis
of a Cuckold, and it is a bare allusion to the Name, and not any reflection on
the County of Cornwall. VI. He is to be summoned before the Mayor of Halgaver.
An imaginary Officer, before whom Slovens are Arraigned, Tried, Condemned and
Executed more to their Scorn then Hurt. VII. When Dudman and Ramehead meet. Two
Forelands 20 Miles asunder, the Periphr. of an impossibility. Yet have these
two Points met (tho not in Position) in Possession of Sir Pierce Edgecombe.

Saints.
St. Kiby, Son to Solom. D. of Cornwall, Traveled into France to see and
converse with St. Hilary of Poictiers, and was by him made Bishop (as Leland
affirms of the Isle of Anglesey) after which he co^verted the Northern parts of
Wales, and confirmed the rest in Christianity. Of whom, in that Isle there is a
threefold Memorial, 1. Point-Hilary, 2. Caer-Guiby. 3. Holy-Head.

Vrsula, Daughter to Dinoth D. of Cornw. is said to have carried over out of
Britain 11000 Maids of prime Quality, besides 60000 of meaner Rank, to be
married to so many in Little-Britain in France; but they were partly Drowned,
and partly slain by the Huns of Colen (where there is a Church dedicated to
their Memories) An. 383.

St. Meliorus Son to D. Melianus, beheaded by Rinald his Pagan Brother in Law,
An. 411. at whose Tomb Miracles were reported to have been done.

Prelates.
Will. de Greenvil, born of a Worshipful Family, became Can. of York, Dean of
Chichester, Chancellor of England (under King E. 1.) and Archbishop of York;
but not confirmed till he had paid 9500 Marks, Then was he confirmed by the
very hands of Pope Clem. V. By this payment being reduced to Poverty, and
relieved once by the Clergy of his Province, he craved another help of their
Hand under the new Name of a Subsidy. He was a great favourer of the Templars.
At the Council of Vienna, he took place next the Archbishop of Triers. He dyed
at Cawood. 1315. and was buried in the Chapel of St. Nicholas, leaving the
Reputation of an able Statesman and no ill Scholar.

Mich. Tregury, bred in Oxf. where he was so eminent, that he was commended to
H. 5. fit to be a Foreign Professor. And accordingly was made (the first)
Professor in the College of that Kings Erection in Cane in Normandy, 1418.
Hence H. 6. preferred him B. of Dublin in Ireland.

Jo. Arundel, of Ancient Parentage, of Lanhearn, bred in Oxf. was by H. 7.
preferred Bishop of Coventry and Lich. An. 1496, thence Translated to his
native Diocese of Exeter. He dyed at Land. An. 1503 and lies buried in St.
Clem. Danes.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
There is a Tradition, that a Giant with a Blackbill in his Hand stands at
Polston-bridge, ready to knock down all the Lawyers that should offer to plant
themselves in Cornwall. The truth is, there have been but few here Eminent in
that Faculty. Yet have we,

Will. Noy born in this County, bred in Lincoln's Inn, a most sedulous Student,
constantly conversant with Ancient Records, verifying his Anagram. W. Noy. I
Moyl in Law. He was for many years the stoutest Champion for the Subjects
Liberty, until King Chapter entertained him to be his Attorney. 'Twas an ingenuous
Expression he used, when the Goldsmiths of Land. at the Pixe or Weighing Gold
in the Star-Chamb. pretended the Scales exact to the two hundredth part of a
Grain, I should be loath (said he) that all my Actions should be weighed in
those Scales.

Soldiers.
King Arthur, Son to Other Pendragon, was born at Tintagel in this County, and
proved afterward Monarch of the Britains. He may be termed the British
Hercules. Q
1. For his Illegetimate Birth. 2. His painful life; one painful for his 12
Labors, the other for his 12. Victories against the Saxons. 3. His Violent
death, as Lamentable tho more Honorable, being Murdered by Mordred. As for his
Round-Table there is very little of Probability in it. The Cornish men having
always esteemed Men of Valor, ever made up that Martial Kings Vanguard; but
afterward in the time of Canutus, they were appointed to make up the Rear of
our Armies. But it is to be pityed that these People, misguided by their
Leaders, have so often abused their Valor in Rebellions, and particularly in
the Reign of H. 7. at Black Heath, where they did the greatest Execution with
their Arrows, reported to be the length of a Taylors-yard. However they have
since plentifully repaired their Credit, by their Exemplary Valor and Loyalty
in the late Civil-Wars.

Soldiers.
Jo. Arundel of Trerice, Esquire, 14. H. 8. took Prisoner Duncan Camble a Scot
(accounted their Admiral by his Countrymen, a Pirat by the English, and a
Valiant man by all) in a Sea Fight. This Valiant Enterprise, represented with
Advantage, by the D. of Norfolk, to the King, was by him highly praised and
rewarded.

Civilians.
Jo. Tregonnel, born in this County, and bred in Oxf. where he proceeded Dr. of
the Laws. He was employed to be Proctor for King H. 8. in the Cause of his
Divorce from Queen Kath. Dowager, and being Dextrous and Diligent in that
Service, he was rewarded by Knighthood and a Pension of 40 Pound a year. And
afterward resigning that, and paying down 1000 pounds, he got a Grant of the
Demesne and Site of Middleton a Mitred Abbey in Dors. possessed at this day by
his Posterity. He dyed about the year 1540, and is buried under a fair Monument
in Middleton-Church.

Physicians.
Atwell, Parson of St. Tue, well seen in the Theorie, and happy in the Practice
of Physic. He mostly for all Diseases Prescribed Milk, and often Milk and
Apples. He bestowed his pains gratis on the Poor, and taking moderately from
the Rich, left one half of what he received, in the Houses he visited. As for
the profits of his Benefice, he poured it out with both hands, in Pious Uses.
He lived about the year 1602.

Writers.
Hucarius the Levite lived at St. Germans in this County, a Pious and Learned
Man, Eminent in his Function of Divine Service, and wrote 110 Homilies, besides
other Books. He flourished 1040.

Jo. Cornwall Studied at Rome, and was Familiar with Pope Alex. 3. He wrote
against Pet. Lumbard that Master of Sentences, a Book called De homine
Assumpto. He also wrote a Book of Philosophy and Heresies. He flourished under
King Hen. 2. An. 1170.

Sim. Thurway, first bred in the English Universities, then in Paris, admired
for his Logic, firm Memory and Fluent Expression; yet most Profanely he
advanced Aristotle above Moses and himself above both. He lost at one instant
both Reason, and Speech, (a judgment adequate to his Crime) 1201.

Mich. Blannpayn was bred in Oxf. and Paris. A good Rhyming Poet as any of that
Age. In defense of Cornwall, against Hen. of Normandy, he has this Verse.
Piscibus and Stanno nusquam tam fertilis Ora. But his Vein lying more in Satyr,
he gives this Character of his foresaid Antagonist. Est tibi Gamba Capri, crus
Passeris and latus Apri,
Os Leporis, catuli Nasus, dens and gena Muli;
Frons Vetulae, tauri Caput, and color undique Mauri,
His Argumentis quibus est Argutia Mentis,
Quod non a Monstro differs, satis hic tibi monstro.
He flourished An. 1350.

Godfrey of Cornwall, bred a Doctor in Paris and Oxf. and afterward a
Carmelite of no mean esteem. He wrote a Book against the Constituting of two
Provincials of that Order in England. This Solemn Doctor flourished An. 1310.

Jo. Trevisa, born at Caradock, bred in Oxf. was Vicar of Berkley in Glouc. and
Chaplain to Thomas Lord Berkley, at whose instance he Translated the Bible into
English, without leave of his Holiness or Authority from a Public Council;
whose Translation is as much better than Wicklifs as worse than Tyndals. He
dyed about the year 1400.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Sk^ish, Secretary to Card. Woolsey, wrote a Chronicle out of many several
Authors. He flourished An. 1530.

Bartholomew Traheron, well descended and bred in Oxf. and beyond Seas. After
which he became Library Keeper to E. 6. and Dean of Chichester. In the 1. of
Queen Mary he passed unto Germany, and there lived by his Pen, 1556.

Rich. Carew, Esquire, Son to Th. Carew and Eliz. Edgecombe, was born at
Anthony, of right Worshipful Parentage, and honored his Extraction with his
Learning. He was bred a Gentleman-Commoner of Oxf. where being but 14 years old
and yet three years standing, he disputed Extempore before the Earls of
Leicester and Warw. with the matchless Sir Ph. Sidney. He is celebrated by
Cambden for his judicious Description of Cornwall, set forth 1602. He dyed
about the middle of the Reign of King James. He or his Son is said to have
introduced the use of Gambadoes in the West, which serve both for Boots and
Stirrups.

Chapter Herle, descended of a Worshipful Family, and bred in Exeter-Coll. was at
last Richly Beneficed in Lanc. A good Scholar and esteemed by his Party a deep
Divine, and (after the Death of D. Twis) President of the Assembly. He dyed
about 1655.

Memorable Persons.
Jo. Bray, Tenant to Mr. Rich. Carew, carried upon his Back, An. 1608. at one
time, by the space well near of a Butt-length, six Bushels of Wheaten-meal, and
upon them all the Miller, a Lubber of 24 years of Age.

Jo. Roman, the Cornish Milo, so used to Burdens in his Childhood, that when a
Man, he would bear the whole Carcass of an Ox, and yet never tugged thereat.

Veal, Q.
an old Man of Bodmin was in the Mechanical Arts what Georgias of Leontium
vaunted of the Liberal Sciences, ignorant in none.

Edw. Bone of Ladock, Servant to Mr. Courtney, tho Deaf and Dumb from his
Cradle, could learn and express to his Master any News that was stirring in the
Country. Remarkable his attention at Sermon, looking the Minister steadfastly in
the Face whilst it lasted, to which his Zeal, his honest life was answerable.

Noted Sheriffs.
Roger de Prideaux, an Ancient Name and Eminently flourishing in this Age.

Jo. Arundel, Knight, was forewarned Car. Surw. of Cornw.
That he should be slain on the Sands. This made him shun his House at Efford,
as too near the Sea, and remove himself to Trerice; But fata viam invenient,
for being this year Sheriff, and the Earl of Oxf. Surprising Mount Michael (for
the House of Lanc.) he was concerned by his Office to endeavor the reducing
thereof, and lost his Life in a skirmish on the Sands thereabouts.

Thom. Gr^nvil, whose Coat of Arms differs somewhat from that of the Greenvils.
The Merits of this Ancient Family are so many and great that engrossed they
would make one County proud, which divided would make two happy. I will
therefore part what I have to say thereof, betwixt Cornwall and Devonshire.

Note Rich. D. of Cornwall was High Sheriff of this County, for term of his
Life, a strange Precedent, seeing for the last two years he was King of England
and Sher. of Cornwall. We account therefore the following Persons unto H. 7. to
be his Deputies.

Ja. Tirrel, Knight, born in Ess. Active in the Murder of the Sons of E. 4.
keeping the Keys of the Tower, and standing himself at the Foot of the Stairs,
whilst Mr. Forest and J. Dighton stifled them in their Beds. King Rich.
accounting Cornwall the Backdoor of Rebellion, made this Knight the Porter
thereof. He was executed for Treason in the beg. of H. 7.

12. Jo. Basset, in whose time was the Commotion at Bodmin, Flamock a Lawyer
and Mich. Joseph a Blacksmith, and it was not the Work of Posse Comitatus, but
of Posse Regni to encounter them. Yet marching to Kent, they were at last
suppressed at Blackheath.

4. Rich. Chamond, Esquire, a Justice of Peace almost 60 years, Western
circuit, was Uncle and Great-Uncle to at least 300, and saw his Youngest-Child
above 40 years of Age.

19. Will. Mohun, descended from the Ancient Lords of Dunster and Earls of Some.
was Grandfather to Jo. Lord Mohun of Oakehampton, (descended by a Coheir from
the Courtneys Earls of Dev.) and Great-Grand-Father to the Right Honorable
Warwick Lord Muhun.

2. Fr. Godolphin, Carew with his Survey of Corn. His Abilities were intailed
on Sidney Godolphin, Slain in at -- Dev. valiantly Fighting for his Master.

10. Will. Wrey direct Ancestor to Sir Chichester Wrey, who tho scarce a Youth
in Age, was more than a Man in Valor, in his Loyal Service. He Married Ann
Daughter of Bourchier Earl of Bath.

12. Richard Roberts was afterward Q.
created Baron, and was Father unto the Right Honorable the Lord Robertes Earl
of Radnor and Baron of T^uro, President of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and lately Deputy of Ireland, a Person of great Learning, singular
Ability and Integrity.

The Battles.
The Battle of Liskerd (or Bradock-down) where on the Kings side, Sir Ralph
Hopton commanded in Chief, was fought to the great loss of the
Parliament-Party, their whole Army being Routed. The Kings Forces had the
Execution of them which they performed very sparingly. They took 1250.
Prisoners, most of their Colors and all their Cannon, Ammunition, and most of
their Arms.

Stratton-Fight succeeds Tuesd. 16 May 1643. The Kings Forces were in want of
Ammunition, and were to hew out their Way up a Steep Hill, and were exposed to
all disadvantages, their Horse and Dragoons about 500 and Foot about 2400. The
Parl. side had plenty of all Provision, and were advantagiously Brocadoed, on
the Top of the Hill. Their Horse indeed not many (having lately sent 1200 to
surprise the Sheriffs and Commissioners at Bodmin.) but their Foot 5400. Yet
notwithstanding the great inequality, the Kings Forces by several Avenues
forcing their Passage, after a doubtful Fight (wherein Sir Jo. Berkeley
relieving Sir Bevil Greenfield's Party, took Maj. G. Chudleigh Prisoner) gained
the Top of the Hill, which the routed Enemy confusedly forsook. The Assailants
loosing but few Men and no considerable Officer, killed of the Enemy about 300,
taking 1700 Prisoners, all their Cannon and Ammunition. Sir Ralph Hopton, for
this good Service, was afterward, at Oxf. created Baron of Stratton, by
Letters Patent. But he dying Issuless in Flanders, the Honor has been
conferred by King Chapter II. on Sir Jo. Berkeley, younger Son of Sir Maurice
Berkeley of Bruiton in Some. He had been one of the four Tetrachs or
joynt-Managers in Chief of Martial Matters in Cornwall, and was highly
Instrumental in reducing of Exeter.

Afterward An. 1644. Essex with all his Forces, followed the King into this
County, till he penned himself in a narrow place (or rather large Pound) so that
being surrounded on all sides with the Sea and the Kings Soldiers, he (with
some Private Commanders) Shipped himself for Plymouth, thence for Land. whither
also their Horse forced their passage under the Conduct of Sir Will. Belfore.
The Foot left behind submitted to the King.

Cumberland.
CVmberland has Scotland on the North, Northum. and Westminster. on the East, Lanc.
on the South, and the Irish Sea on the West, in Form, not unlike a Half Moon,
which from its Tips may be about 40 Miles, and not above 26 Miles in breadth. A
hard but pleasant Soil producing these Natural Commodities, Pearls, found by
the River Irt, where Mussels, Oysters, etc. gaping for the Dew are in a manner
impregnated therewith; so that some think, that as Dew is a Liquid Pearl; so a
Pearl is Dew Consolidated in these Fishes. Black-lead, dug up about Keswick,
the only place, (as I am informed) where it is found in Europe. Copper, the
Mines were renewed about the beginning of Queen Eliz. in whose time Lapis
Calaminaris, the other ingredient of Brass was found in England. Hence it is
that She left more Brass, than She found Iron-Ordnance in England. In this
County the Copper Mines, after a long neglect, were refound by Th. Shurland and
Dan. Hotchstabter of Auspurg in Germ. but they are since discontinued, and
probably the burying of so much Steel in the Bowels of Men, during the late
Civil-Wars, has hindered the digging of Copper out of the Entrails of the
Earth. As for the Buildings in this County, they are rather for Strength than
State, by Reason of the Vicinity of the Scots. The Cathedral of Carlisle may
pass for the Emblem of the Militant Church, being Black but Comely; still
bearing the Signs of its former Burning. And of Rose-Castle the B. Seat, the
Prickles, in the Ruins thereof, only remain. The Houses of the Nobility and
Gentry are built Castle-wise, and in the time of the Romans, this County being
a Limitary, abounded* with Fortifications. Of strict Wonders this County
affords none; yet the Moss-Troopers are worth the noting, as strange in their
way of living. They were Borderers, who before the Reign of King Ja. lived by
Hostile incursions upon their Neighbors. A Nest of Hornets, strike one, and
stir all of them about your Ears. Yet if they promised a safe Conduct to a
Traveller, they would perform it with the Fidelity of a Turkish Janizary. When
it was in their Power, they would out of their common Stock purchase the Pardon
of any of their Accomplices who was Condemned. At their greatest height, they had
two great Enemies, the Laws of the Land, and the Lord Will. Howard of Naworth.
They were at last suppressed by the Wisdom, Valor and Diligence of the Right
Honorable Chapter Lord Howard E. of Carlisle, who looked upon them as Traitors and
Outlaws, which were supposed by the Ancient Law to bear Wolves-Heads, which
any one might have cut off. And Merito sine Lege pereunt, Bract. l. 3. Tract. 2.
qui secundum Legem vivere recusarunt.

Proverbs.
I. If Skiddaw has a Cap,
Scruffell wots full well of that.
These being two Neighboring Hills, if the former be Cap'd with Clouds, 'twill
not be long (...) Rain falls on the other. Spoken of Sympathy in ^^^fering by
Reason of Vicinity. II. Tum tua res agit^^* etc. When thy Neighbors House does
Burn,
Take heed the next be not thy Turn.
Whereof Cumberland had sad Experience, in the Civil-Wars, paying dear for
their Neighborhood with Scotland. III. Ingleborrow, Pendle and Penigent are
the highest Hills between Scotland and Trent. Yet is Plynillimon-hill in Wales
the Monarch of all Mountains South of Scotland.

Saints.
St. Herebert Priest and Confessor, lived a Hermit near Keswick, and by the
Prayers of St. Cuthbert obtained a joint Death with that Saint. An. Dom. 688.

St. Alkike, a Hermit near Carlisle, whose Soul St. Goderic said he saw
ascending into Heaven in a spherical Form.

Martyrs.
In the Days of Queen Ma. the People here, being partly nuzelled in Ignorance,
and partly favored by the B. of Carlisle (who Crowned Queen Elizabeth) I find
only

Eliz. (Married to Jo.) Foster who Traveled to, and Married in Land. when
being Examined and moved to Desert her Answers, I will not (said she) by Gods
Grace. She was Burnt in Smithfield, Jan. 27. 1556.

Prelates.
Rog. Whelpdale, bred in Oxf. and Prove. of Queens Coll. there. Was a good
Divine, Mathematician, and Logician, as appears by his three Respective
Treatises 1. De Deo invocando, 2. De Quanto and Continuo. 3. Summulae
Logicales. By King Hen. 5. he was preferred B. of Carlisle. 1414. and dyed at
Land. 1422. being buried in St. Paul's.

Rog. Layburn, descended of a Noble Family, near Carlisle, expiring when Eliz.
sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Fr. Leyburn was Married to Sir Th. Dacre last
Baron of Gilsland and Graystock, This Roger was bred Fell. in Pemb. Hall, and
D. D. and at last B. of Cartile, 1503. After which he accepted of the
Master-Ship of Pemb. Hall, which is called Episcopale Collegium. He dyed An.
1509.

Since the Reformation.
Edmund Grindall. born at St. Bees, bred Schol. Fell. and Mr. of Pemb. Hall. in
Camb. and Procter of the University. In the Reign of Queen Ma. he fled beyond
the Seas, and when in Frankford, he endeavored to Compose the differences
there. Returning home he was successively B. of Land. A. B. of York and Cant.
by Queen Elizabeth; yet by the mischievous Practices of his Enemies he lost
that Queens Favor. 1. Because he would not let the Lord of Leicester have
Lambeth-house. 2. because he would not permit Julio the Earls Italian Physician
Marry another Man's Wife. It was objected against him that he was a fierce
Defender of Factious Prophesying. Being Blind, and therefore willing to Resign
his place to Dr. Whitgift (who refused it) the Queen was pleased to say, that,
As She made him, so he should die an Archbishop. He left what he had to Pious
Uses in both Universities, and the Foundation of a fair Free School in St. Bees.

Hen Robinson, D. D. born in Carlisle, Fellow, then Prove. of Queens Coll. in
Oxf. was at last B. of Carlisle 1598. being esteemed by Queen Eliz. a Man of
great Learning, Integrity and Sufficiency for that See, which (as she told
himself when he did Fealty to her) She was resolved to furnish with a Worthy
Man for his sake who first set the Crown on her Head. He dyed An. 16-

Rich. Senhouse D. D. born of Worshipful Parentage at Netherhall, a Valiant Man
in his Youth, bred a Fellow of St. Johns-Coll. in Camb. became an excellent
Preacher. He was Chaplain to King Chapter I. whilst Prince, and Preached his Sermon
at his Coronation. He was preferred Bishop of Carlisle, and dyed An. 1626.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir Rich. Hutton, born at Perith of a Worshipful Family, and bred in Jes.
Coll. in Camb. diverted from Divinity by the importunity (chiefly of Geo. E. of
Cumb.) became Barrister in Greys-Inn, and 'twas observed he seldom or never
took Fee of a Clergyman. Afterward being Recorder of York, he was Knighted
and made Judge of the Com. Pleas, and continued, tho his opinion was against
Ship Money, the King using to call him the Honest-Judge. He dyed about the
beginning of the Civil-Wars, and was buried at Dunstans in the West, An. Dom.
1638.

Sir Jo. Banks, born at Keswick, and bred in Greys-Inn, was Knighted by King
Chapter I. and made his Attorney and then Chief J. of the Com. Pleas, and dyed in
the heat of the Civil-War. He ordered by his Will that his Body should be
buried under a Plain-Monument, with the Motto, Non nobis Domine, etc. He gave
thirty Pounds a Year with other Emoluments in Pious uses, and chiefly to set up
a Manufacture of Course Cottons in Keswick.

Civilians.
Geo. Porter born at Weery-hall, of gentile Extraction, was Fellow of Queens
Coll. in Camb. Dr. and Prof. of Civil-Law therein for above thirty years, so
that according to a Constitution of Theodosius. He might have been made one of
the Principal Counts of the Empire. He was called the Patron of Infirmities,
because of his Charity in excusing Men's failings. He wanted not for Valor, for
being assaulted by three Rogues, he drove them away with his Stern looks and
long Sword. He dyed An. 16.

Writers.
Jo. Canon, (probably was born at Canonsby in this County, of whom Bale, He
turned a Minotaure, I should say Minorite, etc. yet he was, famous in the
University of Paris for his Learning. He flourished under King E. 2. 1320.

Will. Egremont, fixed himself at Stamford, became an Augustinian Eremite, and
proceeded D. D. Beyond the Seas he was made Episcopus Pissinensis, and with
that (poor) Bishopric held the Suffragans-Ship under Hen. Beaufort B. of
Lincoln. He left behind him many Learned Books. He flourished under King R. 2.
An. 1390.

Jo. Skeleton, See his Character in Norf.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Crakenthorpe, D. D. descended of an Ancient Family, bred Fell. in Queens
Coll. in Oxf. An. 1. Jac. went over Chaplain to the Lord Evers, sent
Ambassador to the King of Denmark. Here he attained to a great easiness in the
Latin Tongue, and kept Correspondency with Persons of Eminent Learning. He was
an excellent Logician (witness his Work in that kind) and became Chaplain in
Ord. to King Ja. and Rector in Black-Notley in Ess. His Posthume Works, viz.
Vigilius dormitans, in defense of Justinian the Emp. and the Answer to the
Manifesto of the Archbishop of Spalato find an Universal and Grateful
Reception.

Salkeld, a Branch of a Worshipful Family, bred beyond the Seas either Jesuit
or secular Priest. Coming over into England to angle for Proselites, his Line
broke and he was cast in Prison. Whence, being brought to King Ja. by his
Arguments (with a Benefice bestowed on him in Some.) he became a Protestant. He
was not a little proud, that that King was pleased to Style him the Learned
Salkeld. See his true Character in the Book he wrote of Angels. He dyed 1638.

Gerard Langbain D. D. born at Kirk-Banton, bred first Fellow, then Provost of
Queens Coll. in Oxf. A Skilful Antiquary and ingenious in his Writings. In his
Works concerning the Dissent of the Gallican Churches from the Council of
Trent, he makes it appear that the History of that Council is not so complete
as is generally believed. He dyed young An. 1657.

Benefactors.
Rob. Eaglesfield, Pious and Learned in that Age, Chapl. and Confessor to
Philippa Queen to King E. 3. founded Queens Coll. in Oxf. for a Provost and 12
Fellows, appointing that those of Cumberland and Westminster. should be proper for
Preferment in his Foundation, Alleging that those Counties were Desert Places,
and the Minds of the Inhabitants uncultivated. But prevented by Death, he only
left to this College the Manor of Renwick in this County with the
impropriation of Burgh under Stanmore. He ordered that in the Hall they should
speak either Latin or French. He bequeathed his College to the Honorary
Patronage of the Queens of England. He dyed about the year 1370.

Memorable Persons.
Maud, Daughter of Th. Lord Lucy, and Heir of Anth. Lord Lucy, and Bar. of
Cokermouth, the Widow of Gilb. Humphrevile Earl of Angus was the second Wife of
Hen. Piercy E. of Northum. Who, when she saw that she should die without Issue,
gave to E. Hen. her Husband the Castle and Honor of Cokerworth, etc. upon
Condition that his Issue should bear the Arms of the Lucies, (viz. G. 3. Lucies
(or Pikes Hauriant Arg.) quartered with their own Arms of the Percies, and
incorporated into one Coat in effect; and for it levied a fine in the Court of
R. 2. This promise the Piercies have bona fide performed. She dyed about 1382.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 21. Rob. de Vaus. al. de Vaux or de Vallibus, a right Ancient Family,
Beu-Castle Church is thought to have been of their erection. This Rob. was
Father to Jo. de Vallibus, on whose Loyalty and Valor K. Hen. 3. relied. The
Lord Vaux of Harrowd of Northamton-sh. does hence fetch his Extraction.

An. 8. Walt Epis. Carliel no great Clerk. England, he avowed his Accounts
even, when justly charged with 100 pound debt to the Exchequer; upon which he
resigned his Bishopric and became a Friar at Oxf. where he dyed 1248.

An. 2. Andr. de Harcla, E. 2. especially at the Battle of Boroughbridge, where
he killed Humph. Bohun Earl of Heref. and took Th. Plantagenet Earl of Lanc.
etc. Prisoners. In reward whereof he was created Earl of Carlisle, and had the
Isle of Man bestowed upon him. But he turned Apostate from his Allegiance, and
lest the Nobility should by secret Sympathy suffer in his disgraceful Death,
the Earl was first parted from the Man, and his Honor severed from his Person,
by a solemn Degradation, having his Knightly Spurs hewed off, which done, he
was hanged, drawn and quartered.

16. Rich. Duke of Glouc. had a Labell for the difference of his Arms, Eldest
but the only Child of his Father, as it appears by his project, not long
after, to Bastardize both his Brethern. And now did he begin to take this
County in his way, to the Crown, by securing it in the time of his Shirivalty,
in order to his higher Advancement.

21. Th. Wharton by H. 8. Created first Lord Wharton of Wharton in Westmerl.
gave the Scots such a Blow at Solemn Moss that K. Ja. 5. soon after dyed for
Sorrow thereof. Scots then preferred rather to be taken Prisoners, than to
fight under their distasted Genera, Ol. Saint-clere, a Man of Low-birth and
Highpride.

Derbyshire.
DErbyshire has Yorkshire on the North, Notinghamsh. on the East, Leic. on the
South, and Staff. and Cheshire on the West. The River South Darwent falling
into Trent, runs through the middle thereof. It is in length 38 Miles, and
29 Miles in the broadest part thereof. The South and East thereof are very
Fruitful, whilst the North part (called the Peak) is Poor above and Rich
beneath the Ground. Yet is the fair Pasture near Haddon, (belonging to the Earl
of Rutland) so Rich* that one proferred to surround it with Shillings to
purchase it, which because to be set Side-ways (not Edgeways) was refused. Of
Natural Commodities, there is in this County the best Lead in England. The
Miners as a particular Commonwealth are Governed with Laws peculiar to
themselves, often confirmed by Act of Parl. Of which Laws one is this, 16 E. 1.
c. 2. That whosoever Steals Oar twice shall be fined, and the third time
struck through hit Hand with a Knife unto the haft into the Stow, and shall
there stand until Death, or loose himself by cutting off his Hand. As for
Buildings, there is Chatsworth, erected by the Magnificent Lady Eliz. Cavendish
Countess of Shrewsbury: A Stately Structure upon the Bank of Darwent; The
Garden on the backside, with an Artificial Rock compleateth the place with all
Pleasure. Of Wonders, the Chief is Maim or Mam Tor, that is the Mother-Hill,
from which incredible heaps of Sandy Earth fall, yet it is not visibly
diminished; And Buxtom Well dedicated to St. Anne, sending forth both cold and
warm Water, by which Queen Mary Queen of Scots received much refreshing, De
Mir. pecci.
of which Mr. Hobbs, Huc Matter fieri cupiens accedit inanis,
Plenaque discedit puto nec veniente Marito.
Where Wives may breed tho desperately Barren,
Sans Husbands help, as Conies in a Warren.


Saints.
St. Alkmund, Son to Alred King of Northum. slain in Battle, occasioned by the
Viceroy of Worcester, in pursuing of his Title to some Lands, was
notwithstanding reputed a Martyr. However it was believed Miracles were done at
St. Alkmunds Church, where his Body was interred, whither the Northern People
made Pilgrimages, till discomposed by the Reformation.

Martyrs.
Joan Wast, a blind Woman in Derby, and an Innocent tho no Fool, was burnt for
the Testimony of the truth, by the Command of B. Bains.

Cardinals.
Rog. Curson, of Worshipful Extraction, bred in Oxf. was afterward Doctor in
Paris, and lastly a Cardinal in Rome, by the Title of St. Steph. in Mount
Celius, He Accompanied Pelagius when the City Damiata in Egypt was taken under
Jo. Brenn King of Jerusalem. He wrote many Books, and came over into England as
the Popes Legate, in the Reign of H. 3.

Phil. de Repingdon (or Repton) became D. D. in Oxf. A great Assertor of the
Doctrine of Jo. Wickliff. but he recanted An. 1483. and became a Persecuter,
wherefore he was termed (by those he molested) Rampington. He was made Abbot of
Leicester An. 1400. Chancellor of Oxf. 1405. Bishop of Lincoln 1408. and was
created by Pope Greg. 12. Card. of St. Nerius, etc. tho he had solemnly sworn
he would make no more Cardinals till the Schism in Rome were ended. He
resigned his Bishopric An. 1420.

Prelates.
Will. Gray, Son to the Lord Gray of Codnor, was as Honorable. He first
studied in Baliol-Coll. in Oxf. then at Ferrara in Italy, where he was an
Auditor of Guarinus of Verona. He was made by King H. 6. Procurator in the
Court of Rome, and was freely Elected to the Bishopric of Ely. An. 9. E. 4.
1469. he was Lord Treasurer, the last Clergyman that ever was preferred to
that Office, until Bishop Juxton in our days, enjoyed it. He dyed 1478 and
lies buried in the Church of Ely.

Since the Reformation.
Geo. Cook. D. D. Brother to Sir Jo. Cook Secr. of State; was born at Trusley
and bred in Pemb. Hall in Camb. and then Minister of Bigrave in Hertf. Hence
successively made Bishop of Bristol and Hereford, a Grave, Meek man and much
beloved. He was in the same Condemnation with the rest of his Brethren, for
subscribing the Protest in Parl. in defense of their Privileges; so that to
prevent his want, he was relieved by his Rich Relations. He dyed about the year
1650.

Statesmen.
Sir Jo. Cook, younger Brother to Sir Francis, was born at Trusley of Ancient
and Worshipful Parentage. He was bred Fell. of Trin. Coll. in Camb. and there
became an Eminent Rhetoric Lecture. And having Traveled beyond the Seas, he
returned Rich in foreign Language, Observations and Experience. Being related
to Sir Fulk Grevil Lord Brook, he was made Secretary of the Navy, then Master
of the Requests, and at last Secr. of State. He was a good Protestant, and dyed
1644.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Jo. Stathom, born in the Reign of King H. 6. wrote an Abridgement of the Laws,
much esteemed for its Antiquity, tho (as I heard) not much followed, at this
day; in which Book I found a passage, viz. that the Miller of Matlock took Toll
twice, because he heard the Rector of the Parish Read -- Toll, Toll, that is,
Crucify him, etc. A Felonius Fruit of Latin Service.

Sir Anth. Fitz, Herbert, Son of Ralph H. Esquire, was born at Norbury. He was
first the King Serj. at Law, and then 14. H. 8. One of the Justices of the Com.
Pleas. He wrote that Treasure of the Common Law, de Natura Brevium and a choice
Abridgement of the Laws, etc, And it is Pity that there is not due and speedy
care taken for the setting forth a new and more Correct Edition of the latter.
He lies interred in Norbury-Church.

Seamen.
Sir Hugh Willoughby, Extracted from a Right worthy and Ancient Stock at
Riseley in this County, was An. ult. E. 6. Employed for the North-East Passage,
and made Captain Genesis of a Fleet for Discovery of unknown Countries. Their
Commission bore date from the year of the World 55^5. because they might have
occasion to present it to Pagan Princes, They departed from Debtford May 10.
1553. and steering N. N.E. by a Tempest Aug. 2, they lost the Bonaventure, the
two other Ships, viz. the Bona Esperanza, Admiral, and the Good Confidence
(which were all that were left) being Shattered. Sir Hugh, holding on his
Course, descried a Land 160 Leagues from Synam (an Isle belonging to the King
of Denmark) in lat. 72. degrees. Which therefore was then called Willoughby-land;
But in Jan. 1554. He with most of his Company was Frozen to Death in the River
or Haven called Arzina in Lapland. And the Bonaventure returning safe performed
afterward Great Service in opening the Trade to Moscovy. And now for your
Diversion. Note that in Lapland it is Death to Marry a Maid without her Parents
or Friends Consent, wherefore, the Rights of all being saved. The Maid must run
with her Sweetheart (not for Trial of Skill, but of her Will) and having the
Advantage of a considerable part of the Race, has it merely in her own choice,
to signify her dislike of his Person by out-running him, or her consent to
Matrimony by a Voluntary Hault (under pretense of tying her Garter) before she
comes to the end of the Race. All Parties being hereby concluded, it is Penal
for the Man to renew the motion of Marriage, after a Repulse in the manner
aforesaid.

Physicians.
Th. Linacer, born in Derby, bred in Oxf. and beyond the Seas, was the first
Restorer of Learning in our Nation; a Man of an honest Conversation. His
Translation of Galen is not inferior to the Original, in Purity of Style. King
Hen. 7. and 8. were both his Patrons; He founded two Public Lectures in Oxf.
and one in Camb. for Physic. It Is said that a little before his Death he
turned Priest, and began to Study the Scripture, with which formerly he was
unacquainted, insomuch that, reading the 5, 6 and 7 Chapters of St. Math. he
vowed that either this was not the Gospel or we were not Christians. He dyed
An. Dom. 1524. and lies buried at St. Paul's under a stately Monument built by
Dr. John Caius another Phoenix of the same Profession, springing from Linacer's
Ashes, and coming into general Credit after his Death.

Writers.
Th. Asburn, D. D. was one of the Synod which Condemned Wickliff for Heresy.
Yet he assuaged the fury of the enraged People, when they threatened to burn the
Convent about the Augustinian Friars Ears, because Pateshul one of their Order,
in a Sermon Preached by him, had some passages in Wickliff's Favor.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
Eliz. Hardwick, (whose third Husband was Geo. Earl of Shrewsbury) a Lady of
undaunted Spirit founded a stately Almshouse for 12 poor People in Derby. The
Queen of Scots having been committed to her Husband the aforesaid Earl, Queen
Eliz. asking the Countess (at Court) how that Queen did, Madam (said she) she
cannot do ill while she is with my Husband, and I begin to grow Jealous, they
are so great together. Upon which the Queen gave Order that the Queen of Scots
should be removed into the Custody of others; and it is probable the Earl
thought himself well rid of her, whose Custody was both Chargeable and
Dangerous to him.

There is a Free School in Derby built by that Corporation, endowed with 60
pounds a year, in which I believe Mr. Fletcher, (thrice Bailiff of that Town)
was very Instrumental. It Is a noted Privilege of that Town, that none of the
Townsmen pay Toll at Land. tho in some cases the Londoners pay Toll at Derby.

Stow relates that diverse well disposed Citizens of Land. desirous (as yet) not
to be named, Surv. Land.
being born in or near to Ashburn in the Peak in the County of Derby, combining
their loving Benevolence together, have Builded there a Free-School-house, with
convenient Lodgings for a Master, and Liberal Maintenance allowed thereto.

Noted Sheriffs.
Jo. Vernon, Geo. Vernon, who in the beginning of Queen Eliz. for his vast
Revenues and Retinue, was called King of the Peak, and left two Daughters
Coheirs, Eliz. married to Sir Jo. Manners, Ancestor to the present Earl of
Rutland, and Marg. to Th. Stanley, a younger Son of the House of Darby. Yet the
Alliance of this John (in this and the Neighboring Counties) will remember
their Motto Ver non semper floret.

Devonshire.
DEvonshire has the Narrow-Sea on the South, the Severn on the North, Cornwall
on the West, Dorset and Some. on the East. The second County in England for
greatness, and bears a Square of fifty Miles. And generally answers in
Fruitfulness, to the Spur of Industry. The Natives are generally Dexterous in
any Employment; and Queen Eliz. was wont to say of their Gentry. They were all
born Courtiers with a becoming Confidence. The Natural Commodities are Silver,
formerly found, in great plenty in the Parish of Comb-Martin in the Reign of E.
1. but the Mines lay long neglected; and were re-entred upon (in the Reign of
Queen Eliz.) by an Artist who presented a Silver Cup made thereof to the Earl
of Bath. The next is Tinn in great plenty. I wish there were an Artifice to
Sever the Gold and Silver from the Tinn without wasting: Till this be done, I
desire some Invention might prepare Sea-coals for the melting thereof, for the
saving of Wood, and of the Tinn it self. Herrings were formerly taken in great
plenty at Limmouth. The Manufactures are Bone-lace, made at Honyton and weekly
returned to Land. As for Buildings, there is Bediford-Bridge a stately
Structure, far from the Road, consisting of 24 Pears, is said to have been
finished by Sir Theobald Greenvil the Goldneyes and Oketenets. As for Houses of
the Gentry, Wenbury-house is almost Corrival with Greenwich it self for the
pleasant Prospect thereof. For Wonders, there is in the Parish of North-
Taunton, a Pit, but in the Winter a Pool, maintained commonly by the fall of
Rainwater, which yet before the Death of a Prince or other Accident of great
importance as an Insurrection, etc. has been observed to overflow its Banks,
even in a dry Season. The next is the Hanging-stone, upon which a Thief
resting, with a Sheep tied about his Neck, was Strangled, the Sheep struggling
and getting over the Stone on the further side. The Gubbings, are a kind of
Scythians within England, Exempt from Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Civil
Order, who have all things in common, and multiply without Marriage, living by
Stealth, and securing themselves by their swiftness.

Proverbs.
I. To Devonshire Ground, that is, to improve Ground by paring off the Top-Turf
and burning it. II. A Plymouth Cloak, i. e. a Staff. For Gentlemen Landing
there, if unprovided, have leisure to repair to the next Wood to cut a Staff,
when they are unable to recruit themselves with Cloths. III. He may remove
Mort-Stone, which is a Huge Rock in Mortbay, which the people merrily say none
can remove, save such who are Masters of their Wives. IV. First hang and draw,
then hear the Cause by Lidford Law. There was a Court of Stanneries formerly
kept at Lidford which I believe to be traduced by the Proverb.

Saints.
Wenefride Boniface, born at Kirton, was employed by Pope Greg. 2. to convert
the Germans, of whom he Baptized 100000. He was killed at Borne in Friesland
An. 755. Whose Nephew.

Willibald descended of high Parentage, was also profitable in the German
Conversion. He was made Bishop of Eystet in Germany, and dyed in Peace An. 781.

Martyrs.
Agnes Pressed, lived at Northcot in Cornwall, and was indicted before W.
Stanford Judge of the Assise An. 2. and 3. P. and M. Her own Husband and
Children being her greatest Persecuters, from whom she fled because they would
force her to go to Mass. But being presented to the Bishop of Exeter, she was
by him Condemned for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, after which she
refused Money from well affected People, saying; She was to go to that City
where Money had no Mastery. She was burnt without the Walls of Exeter in
So^henhay, Nov. 1558. Aet. 54.

Confessors.
Jo. Molle, born in or near South-Molton, bred in France, where he became
perfect in the Language, spent his Youth in Military Employments, and in his
reduced Age was made an Examiner in the Court of Th. Lord Burgley and President
of the North. Afterward being Governor to the Lord Ross, he went to Rome with
him, where that Lord was Courted and Mr. Molle imprisoned in the Inquisition,
the Priests in vain hacking at the Root of his Constancy. He continued 30 years
in Prison, and dyed 1638. Aet. 81.

Cardinals.
Will. Courtney, born (probably) at Okehampton, Son to Hugh Courtney Earl of
Devonshire, was successively Bishop of Heref. Winch. and Cant. and at last made
Cardinal by the Pope. A great Opposer of John of Gaunt, Wickliffs Patron.

Prelates.
Rob. Chichester, descended from a Noble Family still flourishing at Rawleigh,
was first Dean of Sarisbury, then Bishop of Exeter. He bestowed much Money in
Building and Adorning his Cathedral. He dyed and was buried 1150 on the South
side of the High Altar.

Gilb. Foliot, born at Tamerton-Foliot, Abbot of Glouc. then Bishop of Heref
and Land. He was observed when a Common-Brother to inveigh against the Prior;
when Prior, against the Abbot; when Abbot, against the Pride and Laziness of
Bishops; but when he himself was Bishop all was well; However the less he then
had in Satyrs, the more he had in Elegies afterward bemoaning the badness of
the Age he lived in. He is said to this Challenge of Satan, O Gilberte Foliot,
dum revolvis tot and tot, Deus tuus est Ashtarot, to have returned this Answer,
Mentiris Demon, qui est Deus Sabbath, est ille meus. He was a Loyal Man and a
great Enemy to Becket's pride. He dyed 1187. Whose Cousin was,

Rob. Foliot, Archdeacon of Oxf. was first Tutor to Becket. And afterward
promoted to the Sea of Hereford. He wrote amongst others, a Book of the
Sacrament of the Old Law. There was also one Hugh Foliot, Archdeacon of
Shrewsbury and Bishop of Hereford.

Will. Brewer, born in this County or in Some. made Bishop of Exeter 1224. was
sent to conduct Isabel Sister to King Hen. 3. to be Married to Fred. the Emp.
whom he afterward attended to the Holy Land. In his See, he founded a Dean.
and 24 Prebendaries allowing the latter four Pounds a year. He dyed An. 1244.

Will. de Ralegh, Canon of St. Paul's, then successively Bishop of Norwich and
Winch. tho King Hen. 3. opposed his Election to the last; but the Pope
presented by Raleigh with 600 Marks, did the Work. This great Expense made him
run in Debt. When the Priest brought the Eucharist to him, lying on his
Deathbed he would rise out of his Bed to meet him, saying, I have need to come
to thee, and comes thou to me? Matthew. 3.
He dyed An. 2249.

Rich. Courtney, allied to the Earl of Devonshire. A Man of great Learning, and
skilled in the knowledge of both Laws. Was at the instance of King H. 5.
preferred Bishop of Norwich An. 1413. being highly favored by the Prince and
beloved of the People. He dyed of a Flux at the Siege of Harflew in Normandy in
the second year of his Consecration, and was buried in Westminster.

Ja. Carry, was at Rome made Bishop of Lichfield, and afterward (at Florence)
of Exeter, being then as good a See as Lichfield. He dyed at Florence 1419
having enjoyed neither.

Jo. Stanbury, born in the Farm of Church-hill in the Parish of Bratton, bred a
Carmelite in Oxf. was a Man of great Learning. King Hen. 6. made him the first
Provost of Eaton, being much ruled by him in ordering that his new Foundation.
Being kept from the Bishopric of Norwich by Will. de la Pool D. of Suffolk, he
was made Bishop of Bangor An. 1453. and afterward Bishop Hereford. He very
Loyally adhered to King H. 6. in all his Adversity, and was taken Prisoner in
the Battle of Northampton, being the Kings Confessor, and Consequently tied to
Personal Attendance. He dyed An. 1474. and was buried at Ludlow.

Pet. Courtney, Son to Sir Ph. Courtney, was born at Powderham. He was first
Archdeacon, then Bishop of Exeter, where he finished the North-Tower, and gave
Peter Bell thereunto. He was Translated to Winchester An. 1486.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Jewel, born at Buden a Farm possessed above 200 years by his Ancestors.
Was admitted into Merton-Coll. at 15 years of Age, and having touched at all
Humane Arts, he Landed at Divinity. He was after his return into England from
Germany preferred Bishop of Salisbury. Of him may be said Nomen Omen, Jewel was
his Name, and Precious his Virtues. V. Eccl. Hist.

Jo. Prideaux, born at Hartford, and bred Scholar and Fell. of Exeter-Coll. in
Oxf. Canon of Christ-Church, and above 30 years Professor in that University.
An excellent Linguist, and of a becoming Festivity, of so admirable a Memory,
that he retained what ever he Read. The Welsh have a Proverb, He that has a
good Memory gives f^w Alms, remembering what and to whom he had given before,
but this Doctor Crossed this Proverb with his constant Charity to all in want.
His Learning was admired by Foreigners. He would forgive the greatest Injury
upon the least show of the Parties Sorrow. Episcopacy in England being
grievously wounded by Malevolent Persons, King Chapter I. conceived that the best
Wine and Oil that could be poured into those Wounds, was to select Persons of
known Learning and unblameable lives, to supply the vacant Bishoprics, amongst
whom Dr. Prideaux was made Bishop of Worcester. But alas, all in vain, such the
Fury of the times, He dyed 1650. Of whom, amongst others these Verses were
made, Desine^ mirari caecos* errasse tot Ignes,
In Promptu causa est, Lux Prideauxus obit.
He was Honorably interred at Bredon in Worc.

Statesmen.
Sir. Arth. Chichester, Knight, descended of an Ancient Family dwelling at
Rawley, spent his Youth first in the University, then in the French and Irish
Wars, where by his Valor he was effectually assistant first to Plough that
Barbarous Nation by Conquest, and then to Sow it with Seeds of Civility, when
by King Ja. made Lord Deputy of Ireland; where in his first year he Established
two new Circuits for Justices of Assize, viz. in Connaught and Munster. He
reduced the Mountains on the South of Dublin into the County, of Wicklow. So
observant his Eye over the Actions of suspected Persons, that Tyrone was heard
to complain that he could not drinks a full Carouse of Sack, but the State was
within few Hours Advertised thereof. Being made a Lord and called home, he was
sent Ambassador to the Emperor. When he was besieged in the City of Manichine
(which he Seasonably Victualled) by Count Tilley; he sent him word that it was
against the Law of Nations to besiege an Ambassador; Tilley returned, That he
took no notice of that; the Lord Chichester replied to the Messenger, Had my
Master sent me with as many hundred men, as he has sent me on fruitless
Messages, your General should have known that I had been a Soldier as well as
an Ambassador. He dyed An. 162-

Capital Judges.
Sir Will. Herle, Knight, Q.
was made An. 1. of King E. 3. Chief Justice of the King's Bench, in Hill. Term,
and Chief Justice of the Com. Pleas Jan. 29. before the end of the said Term.
He dyed about 9 of E. 3. He was owner of Illfracombe in this County, the Manor
whereof was held by his Issue till the Reign of King Hen. 7. A Family of his
Name, and I believe of his Lineage has a Worshipful Existence in Cornwall.

Sir John Carry, Knight, born at Cockington, was made Chief Bar. of the
Exchequer An. 10. R. 2. For his Loyalty to his Master, he lost his Office,
Goods and Lands An. 1. H. 4. Yet afterward, King H. 5. restored all his Estate
to his Son Sir Rob. Carry, upon his vanquishing a certain vain Glorious Champion
of Arragon. This Judge dyed An. 1404.

Sir Will. Hankford, born at Amerie, was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
An. 1. H. 5. which place he adorned with great Learning and Integrity.
Afterward being discontented, he charged the Keeper of his Deer-Park to shoot
any Man he should find there, and stood not being spoken unto. The next night,
being dark, he presents himself, and refusing to stand, the Keeper accordlingly
Shot him dead. This happened An. 1422.

Sir Jo. Fortescue born of a right Ancient Family (whose Motto is, Forte Scutum
salus Ducum) was Lord Chief Justice and Chancellor of England, whose Learned
Commentaries on the Law make him Famous to all Posterity.

Another Sir Jo. Fortescue was Privy Councellor, Overseer of Queen Eliz. her
Liberal Studies, and Chancellor of the Exchequer and Duchy of Lanc. Sir Hen.
Fortescue was a Valiant Commander under H. 5. in the French Wars, by whom he
was made Governor of Meux in Berry. Sir Adrian Fortescue, Porter of Calice,
came over with Hen, 7. by whom he was Created Knight Banneret. Sir Hen,
Fortescue was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, highly esteemed for his many
Virtues, especially for his Sincerity in so tempting a place.

Sir Lewis Pollard of Kings Nimet Serj. of Law and one of the Judges of the
Kings Bench in the time of H. 8. was a Man of singular Knowledge and worth. He
had by his Lady Eliz. 11. Sons, whereof four were Knighted, viz. Sir John of
Ford, Sir Richard and Sir George. All the rest especially John Archdeacon of
Sarum, were well Advanced, and 11. Daughters Married to the most Potent
Families in this County, so that by this Match, almost all the Ancient Gentry
in this County are allied. This Memorable Knight dyed An. 1540.

Sir Jo. Doderidge, bred in Oxf. a General Scholar, was second Justice of the
Kings Bench. His Soul consisted of two Essentials, Ability and Integrity,
holding the Scale of Justice with a steady Hand. He is Famous for the
Expression, That as Old and infirm as he was, he would go to Tyburn on Foot, to
see such a Man hanged, that should proffer Money for a place of Judicature; it
being necessary that those who buy such Offices by whole Sale, should sell
Justice by Retail, to make themselves Savers. He was commonly called The
Sleeping Judge, because he would sit on the Bench with his Eyes shut; a Posture
of attention. He dyed, leaving no issue, 1628. and was interred in our Lady's
Chapel in Exeter.

This County, for Lawyers is next to Norfolk. Three Sergeants were made at one
time, Serj. Glanvil Sen. Dew and Harris, of whom it was said, One gained, One
spent, and One gave as much as the other Two. The Town Tavistock furnishes the
Bar at this time, with a Constellation of Pleaders, wherein the biggest Stars
are Serj. Glanvil, and Sergeant Maynard.

Soldiers.
Sir Rich. Greenvil, Knight, lived and was Richly Landed at Bediford. He was
one of the 12 Peers who Accompanied Rob. Fitz-Haimon in his Famous Expedition
against the Welsh, and received in his Partage, (when the Conquered Country was
divided) good Land at Neath in Glamorganshire. But he bestowed all his Military
Acquests in Founding and Endowing a Monastery dedicated to the Virgin Mary, at
Neath, for Cistertians. He afterward lived at Bediford under the Reign of W.
Rufus. 1100. and may seem to have Entailed Valor on his Name and still
Flourishing Posterity.

Ja. Lord Audley had his principal Mansion at Barstable. Famous for his Valor
at the Battle of Poictiers in Fr. where the Black Prince rewarded him with a
yearly Pension of 500 Marks, which he gave to his four Esquires, having (as he
said) received this Honor by their means. For which he begged the Prince's
Pardon, because he gave it away without his License, and withal represented to
him the Merit of his Esquires, and his Resolutions to spend his own Estate in
the Prince's Service. The Prince Extolling his Bounty as well as Valor raised
his former Pension into 1000 Marks. This Noble Lord dyed about the beginning of
King Rich. 2.

Th. Stuckley was a younger Brother of an Ancient and Worshipful Family near
Illfracombe. One of good parts but great Ambition. Having spent his Patrimony,
and undertaking the Plantation of Florida, he blushed not to tell Queen Eliz.
That he preferred rather to be Sovereign of a Molehill, then the highest
Subject to the greatest King in Christendom, and that he was assured he should
be a Prince before his Death. I hope (said the Queen) I shall hear from you
when you are Stated in your Principality; I will Write unto you (quoth
Stuckley.) In what Language? (said the Queen) He returned, In the Style of
Princes, To our dear Sister. His fair Project of Florida being blasted for lack
of Money, he went into Ireland, where missing the Preferment he expected, he
went over with a Treacherous Intent into Italy. There he wrought himself with
incredible Dexterity into the very Bosom of Pope Pius 5. Vaunting that with
3000 Soldiers he could beat all the English out of Ireland. The Pope loading
him with the Titles of Bar. of Ross, Visc. Murrough, Earl of Wexford, Marq. of
Lemster, furnished him with 800 Soldiers paid by the King of Spain for the
Irish Expedition; but Stuckley chose rather to Accompany Sebastian King of
Portugal with two Moorish Kings into Africa, where, behaving himself valiantly
with his 800 Men in the Battle of Alcaser, he was slain An. 1578. In vain he
had given good Counsel to these Furious Kings to refresh their faint Soldiers
before the Fight; for rushing on after their first Landing, they buried
themselves together in the same Ruin.

A fatal Fight, wherein one Day was slain,
Three Kings that were, and One that would be fain.
Geo. Monk highly descended, Commenced Captain in the Martial University in the
Low Countries, no^ per Sal^um but from a private Soldier. Being Governor of
Scotland, no Power or Policy of O. C. could fright him thence; from which as a
Castle he took the Prospect of our English Affairs. He perceived that since the
Martyrdom of King Charles, several sorts of Government (like the Sons of Jesse
before Samuel) passed before the English People, but neither God nor our Nation
had chosen them. He resolved therefore to send for the Heroic David out of a
Foreign Field; as well assured that the English Loyalty would never be at
rest, till fixed in the Center thereof. He secured Scotland in faithful Hands,
to have all his Foes before his Face, and enters England with a strong Army
(in Reputation) consisting of excellent Foot but Lean tired Horse; completed
by the Wise Conduct of their General. The Loyal English did rather Gaze on,
then pray for him, as ignorant of his intentions; the private Man, as the
Apostle observes, not knowing how to say Amen to what is spoken in an unknown
Language. Now began the English to be sensible that they were deluded with the
Pretenses of Religion and Liberty into Atheism and Vassalage, and therefore
Remonstrating their Grievances they refused farther payment of Taxes. Lambert
comes forth of Land. abounding more with outward Advantages then General Monk
wanted; Dragon-like he breathed out naught but Fire and Fury, chiefly against
the Church and Clergy. But he met with a St. George, who struck him neither
with Sword nor Spear; but gave his Army a mortal wound without wounding it; his
Soldiers dwindled away, and Lambert was too Weak to stop them. The Hinderpart
of the Parl. plied the General with many Addresses. He returned an Answer
neither granting nor denying their desires; giving them hope too little to
trust, yet too much to distrust him. He was an absolute Riddle and no Ploughing
with his Heifer to Expound him. Indeed had he appeared what he was, he had
never been what he is, a Deliverer of his Country. But such must be as Dark as
Midnight, who mean to Atchieve Actions as bright as Noonday. After he had
pulled down the Gates of Land. he sided effectually with the City which was
then able to make us a happy or unhappy Nation. Immediately followed that Turn
of our Times which all the World does behold with Wonder. And may the same
Divine Power, which restored* our Gracious King, restore the Understandings of
those who Split their Allegiance and set Religion and Loyalty by the Ears, and
are well versed in most Distinctions but that between themselves and their
Ignorance.

Our Noble General was made D. of Albemarl and Master of his Majesty's Horse,
etc. And carried the Scepter with the Dove thereupon, (the Emblem of Peace) at
the Kings Coronation.

Seamen.
Will. Wilford, born nigh Plymouth, was a valiant and successful Seaman. After
the French in the Reign of H. 4. had by a sudden invasion burnt several
Hundreds of Houses in Plymouth, on that side of the Town called since Britain
side. He took 40 Ships on the Coast of the Britains and burnt as many at
Penarch, repaying the Monsieurs in their own Coin. He dyed about the beginning
of the Reign of Hen. 8.

Sir Humph. Gilbert, born at Green-way, the Seat of his Family for a long time
An. 1569. Valiantly and Fortunatly served in Ireland, and afterward led nine
Companies to the Assistance of the Hollanders. An. 1583 he set forth with five
Ships, to make Discoveries in the North of America, where he took Livery and
Seisin in due manner and form, for the Crown of England. In his Return to
England he met a great Sea-Lyon which passed the Ship making a horrible
roaring. (Such a one (we read) was taken at Sea, An. 1282. and presented to
Pope Martin the fourth) instantly a terrible Tempest arising, Sir Humphrey said
Cheerfully to his Companions, We are as near Heaven here at Sea as at Land. And
a little after his Ship with all therein Sunk, tho the other that was in their
Company recovered home. This happened An. 158.

-- Cock. was in 88. a Cock of the Game being the only Man of Note amongst the
English, who fighting a Volunteer in his own Ship, lost his Life to save his
Queen and Country.

Sir Fr. Drake. Of him see the Holy-State, only take these Verses on his Corpse.

Tho Rome's Religion should in time return,
Drake none thy Body will ungrave again;
There is no fear Posterity should burn,
Those Bones which free from fire in Sea remain.
Sir Walt. Raleigh, born at Budeley of an Ancient Family, but decayed in
Estate, and he the youngest Brother thereof, was bred in Oriel-Coll. in Oxf.
and thence coming to Court found some hopes of the Queens favor; this made him
Write in a Glass-Window, obvious to the Queens Eye. Fain would I Climb, yet
fear I to fall; under which her Majesty perceiving it, did Write, if thy Heart
fails thee Climb not at all. But his Introduction into Court is said to have
Born an elder date, from the time he spread his Plush-Cloak for her Majesty to
step upon over a Wet-Place. Yet the Wise Queen in rewarding him made him to
purchase by Pain and Peril as well as Complement, what Places were bestowed
upon him. He seemed to be born to that only which he went about, so Dexterous
he was in all his Undertakings, in Court, in Camp, by Sea, by Land, by Sword,
by Pen; witness in the last, his History of the World. Of his Detractors he was
wont to say, If any Man accuses me to my Face, I will answer him with my
Mouth, but my Tail is good enough to answer to such who traduce me behind my
Back.

Civilians.
Jo. Cowel, born at Yarnesborow, after various Preferments was Vicar Genesis to
Archbishop Bancroft; Skilled in the Common as well as Civil-Law; he was a
great Champion of the later, to the displeasure of a Great Oracle of the
former, so that in Derision he was by him called Dr. Cow-heel. Yet that well
dressed is so good Meat, that a Cook may lick his Fingers after it. He wrote
Instit. juris Angl. and an Intepreter of the hard words of the Com. Law. His
Book was Condemned, upon Complaint in Parl. because he asserted a double
Prerogative in the King, whereof one was unlimited. He dyed An. 1611.

Arth. Duck, born at Heavy-tree, was Chancellor of Wells and Land. and Mr. of
the Requests. His discourse as to the Matter had a Masculine strength. He dyed
about 1648. and left a great Estate to two Daughters.

Writers.
Rog. the Cistertian lived at Ford-Abbey, and wrote many fond Falsiries of St.
Vrsula; but he lived mostly in the Low-Countires. He flourished An. 1180. under
H. 2.

Jo. de Ford, Abbot of Ford, after Traveling returned stored with good manners
and stocked with good Learning. He was Confessor to King John, and wrote many
Pious Works. He dyed about 1215.

Rich. Fishaker, a Dominican Friar, was for his Learning and Preaching as
highly esteemed as any of that Age. He dyed 1248. and was buried at Oxf.

Jo. Cut-clif, born at the Manor of Gammage, being a very sincere Man, opposed
himself against the Manners of the Clergy, and wrote against the Pope himself.

Rich. Chichester, descended of an Ancient Family at Raleigh, being a Monk in
Westminster, spent his time in Reading Scripture and good History. He wrote a
Chron. from Hegist the Sax. to 1348. He dyed about 1355.

Nich. Vpton, of an Ancient Family, Canon of Salisbury, writ a Treatise of
Heraldry, which he presented to Humph. D. of Glouc. He flourished under H. 6.
1440.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Hooker, born at Heavy-tree, and bred in Oxf. was Mr. of the Temple, when
Travers was Lecturer. Here the Pulpit spoke pure Canterbury in the Mornning and
Geneva in the Afternoon, until Travers was silenced. His Book of Ecclesiastical
Polity is prized by all Generally, save such who out of Ignorance cannot, or
Envy will not understand it. But some quarrel with the Title, and allege that
the Discipline jure divino ought not to bow to Humane inventions. He dyed at
his Benefice in Kent, 1599. leaving the Memory of an Humble, Holy and Learned
Divine. Sir Will. Cooper erected his Monument.

Nath. Carpenter, Chaplain to Archbishop Usher wrote of Logic, Mathematics
and Divinity and dyed about 1636. His Funeral Sermon was made upon that Text,
Behold a true Israelite, etc.

Benefactors:
Pet. Blundel of Tiverton, Clothier; erected a fair free School in that Town,
and allowed it a Competent Maintenance and Lodgings for a Master and Usher. He
bestowed two Scholarships and two Fellowships on Sidney-Coll. in Camb.
providing Tiverton Scholars should be elected therein. It Is thought he dyed
about 1596.

Memorable Persons.
Hen. de la Pomeray, Lord of Pomeray, when Rich. I. was imprisoned by Leopold
D. of Austria, expelled the Monks out of Michaels-Mount in Cornwall, that there
he might be a Petty Prince by himself. But after he heard that King was
enlarged, he laid Violent Hands on himself; as Howeden affirms. But others say,
that having killed the Kings Sergeant who had arrested him and despairing of
pardon, caused himself to be let Blood to Death.

Jo. de Beigny, Knight, Lord of Edge-Lifford longed earnestly for his youngest
Son, employed in the Wars against the Saracens in Spain, and used to say, Oh
that I might but once Embrace my Son, I would be content to dye presently. And
afterward, his Son returning unexpectedly, he expired with an Ecstasy of Joy.
He flourished under King E. 3.

-- Child, of Ancient Extraction at Plimstock, hunting at Dart-More, lost his
Company and Way in a bitter Snow, and having killed his Horse, he crept into
his hot Bowels for warmth, and wrote this with his Blood.

He that finds and brings me to my Tomb,
The Land of Pemstock shall be his Doom.
The Monks of Tavistock finding him Frozen to Death, and being too Nimble for
the Men of Plimstock, buried him and the Abbot accordingly, got that Rich
Manor into his Possession. The Bridge built in the place where the Monks
passed over the River, is called Guils-Bridge to this day.

Nich. and Andr. Tremane, were Twins alike in all Lineaments, and felt like
pain tho at a distance, and without any intelligence given, they equally
desired to Walk, Travel, Sit, Sleep, Eat and Drink together. In this they
differed, that at New Haven in France, the one was a Captain of a Troop, the
other but a private Soldier. There they were both slain together 1564.

Noted Sheriffs.
2. Rich. Comes, that is Earl, viz. of Devonshire, who Married Avis Daughter
and Heir of Reginald E. of Cornwall the base Son of Hen. 1

27. Will. Brewer, whose Mother unable to maintain him, cast him into the
Brakes in New-Forrest where Hen. 2. found him. He was made by Rich. 1. Baron of
Odcomb, and his Inheritance was by his Daughters and Heirs derived to Breos,
Wake, la Fort and Percy.

Will. Yoo, His Worshipful Family, (in this County) give for their Arms Ar. a
Cheveron, between 3 Turky-Cocks in their pride proper.

Jo. Damerel; Throwely in Dartmore his Chief Manor came to his Family by Match
with the Eldest Daughter and Coheir of Moeles (who Married Avis sole Heir to
Sir Will. le Prouze in the Reign of E. 2. North-coat and Wibery, amongst whom a
great Inheritance was divided, and by a Writ of Partition ( An. 14. E. 3.)
Throwely fell to the share of Damerel.

Rich. Edgecombe, Knight, being Zealous in the Cause of the Earl of Richmond
(afterward King H. 7. Rich. sent to apprehend him; for upon their approach, he
tumbled his Cap with a Stone in it, into the Water, which, by the noise it
made, and the Swimming of the Cap induced them to believe he had drowned
himself. He built a Chapel in the place where he had lurked. King Hen. 7.
rewarded his Loyalty by bestowing the Castle of Totnes upon him.

Pet. Carew, Knight, had much ado to save his Life, Tho. Wyate. Afterward he
did signal Service in the Irish Wars. He dyed 1575.

Rob. Dennis, Knight, erected An. 1592. a fair Almshouse in the Suburbs of
Exeter, for 12 poor Aged Men allowing to each an Herber, and 12 pence weekly.
The Family (descended from the Danes) is now extinct, the Heir General being
Married into the House of the Rolls.

Amias Bampfield, of Ancient and Worthy Extraction, one of whose Ancestors
Married to a Daughter and Coheir of the Lord Semaur, whereby a fair Inheritance
at South-Molton in this County accrued to this Family, i^ which Church this
Amias with his Father lies. P^ttimore near Exeter, has been their prime
Habitation ever since the time of King E. 1.

Exeter.
Exeter is of a Circular Form, Situated on the Top of a Hill, and since Nature
is the Scavenger thereof, is a very cleanly City. As for Manufactures,
Clothing is plied in this City with great Industry and Judgment, the return of
Serges alone in this City amounting weekly (tho Trading be now Sick) to 3000
Pounds. This City was highly Commendable for its Loyalty when besieged by
Perkin Werbeck in the Reign of H. 7. and by the Western Rebels in the Reign of
E. 6. and in our time by the Parl. Forces in the Reign of King Chapter I. Their
Valor was invincible in the two first, and their Loyalty unstained in the
last; rewarded by their Enemies with the best made and best kept Articles. Of
Buildings, the Cathedral is a most Beautiful Structure. Here also is that
Castle which (when R. 3. asked its Name) was called Rugement to the great
astonishment of that Usurper, who had heard he should never prosper after he
had met Rugemont or rather Richmond (in K. 7.) In this City 13 Churches were
exposed to sale by the Public Crier, and bought by well affected Persons who
preserved them from Destruction. For Wonders, take this one, when Exeter was
besieged by the Parl. Forces, so that only the South side toward the Sea was
open unto it, an incredible Number of Larks were found in that open quarter,
which were sold for two pence the dozen, and tho it may be alleged that they
were ^ighted thither by the shooting, or that (being Winter) they shelrted
themselves in the Southern parts, or lastly that they were invited thither by
some sort of Seeds that had been there lately sown, yet the Cause of Causes was
Divine Providence providing a feast for many poor People.

Princes.
Henrietta youngest Child of King Charles and Queen Mary, was born at
Bedford-house in this City, An. 1644. June 16. After her long and sad Night of
Affliction, the Day dawned with her in her Brothers happy return. Since she is
Married to the D. of Orleans. I had the Honor to be once Chaplain to that
Princess.

Prelates.
Bartholm. Iscanus, the Oracle of Learning and Religion in his time, was Bishop
of Exeter and opposed Beckets insolence. He dyed An. 1185. Having been intimate
with

Baldvinus Devonius of poor Parentage, a Man of great Learning and Merit made
Bishop of Worcester, then Archbishop of Canterbury. An Eloquent Man and Pious
Preacher. He attended King Rich. 1. into Palestine, and dyed there 1190.

Walt. Bronscombe, of mean descent, by his own Industry raised himself to be
Bishop of Exeter, where he built and endowed a Hospital. He also founded a fair
College at Perin in Cornwall. He instituted an Annual Festival to the Angel
Gabriel, and left Land to defray the cost of the Solemnity, tho I believe it
was only observed in his own Diocese. Yet he is said to have compassed the
Manor of Bishops-Clift to his Church by indirect means.

Writers.
Joseph Iscanus was a Golden Poet in a leaden Age. This our English Maro had
for his Mecenas, Baldwin Archbishop of Cant. The Dutchmen Printed a poem of
this Joseph, under the Name of Cornelius Nepos, who lived in the Days of Tully.

Will. of Exeter D. D. in Oxf. and afterward Canon of the Cathedral in Exeter
being backed with Pope John 23 he was able to undertake Will. of Ockam (a much
more Learned Man than himself) who cried up Poverty in opposition to the Papal
Pomp. He flourished An. 1330. under the Reign of E. 3.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Martyn, bred in the Court and in the Inns of Court was accounted one of
the greatest Wits of that Age, King Ja. being much delighted with his
Facetiousness, a quality which (with his other Abilities) commended him to be
chosen Recorder of Land. He is Eminent for the Speech he made in Parl. An. 10.
Jac. when account was taken of 40 Gentlemen in the House of Commons, which were
not 20 and some of them not 16 years of Age. Formely (said the Recorder Martyn)
it was the Custom of Old Men to make Laws for young ones; but now Nature is
invaded and inverted, seeing young Men Enact Laws to govern their Fathers. He
dyed 1616. Whose Kinsman

Will. Martyn, bred a Student in the Laws, wrote a Treatise Of the Kings of
England since the Conquest. By a Passage in which reflecting on the Royal
Family or the Scotch Nation, he irrecoverably lost King Ja. his Favor. He dyed
1616.

Will. Tucker, D. D. Dean of Lichfield, wrote a Book de Charismate, Of the
Kings of England their Gracious healing of the Evil; dedicating the same to
Queen Eliz. in which he vindicated such Cures from Imposture and the Usurpation
of the French; etc. His Congee d'elire was signed to Elect him Bishop of
Gloucester, but it was revoked by King James; so that the Doctor may be said to
have worn half a Mitre.

Jo. Berkham, set forth Doctor Crackenthorp his Posthume Works, and was helpful
to Jo. Speed in Composing his English History, yea he wrote the whole Life and
Reign of King John, which of all in that Book is the most profoundly Penned. Mr.
Guillim in his Heraldry was much beholden to this Doctor's Emendations. He was
a greater Lover of Coyns than Money. That excellent Collection in Oxf. Library
was his Gift to the Archbishop, before the Archbishop gave it to the
University. He dyed 1641.

Benefactors.
Joan Tuckvile, Widow, procured the Possession and Consecration of a Parcil of
Ground for the interment of such as were Executed at Heavy-tree, allowing Land
to buy a Shroud for every one of them. She dyed about the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Eliz.

Dorsetshire.
DOrsetshire, has Devonshire on the West, Some. and Wiltshire on the North,
Hampshire on the East, and the Narrow-Sea on the South, in length 40 and in the
broadest part 26 Miles. It abounds with all the necessaries for Man's Life,
and has plenty of Sheep, Timber, Freestone, nor wants it Veins of Marble in
the Isles of Purbeck. There is also Salt made in this County, and it can cloth
it self with its own Wool, of which Broad-Cloth is here made. And to all this,
an excellent Air and the Convenience of Navigation. The Natural Commodities are
Tenches abounding in the River Stowre; Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, carried to Land. from
Poole and the Isle of Wight, and at Land. it is worth 30 Shillings the Tun.
H^mp betwixt Bemister and Byrd-port. Wild-Madder, at Hod-Hill, etc. For
Buildings Lulworth-Castle and Sherburn-Lodge are most Eminent. Indeed the Rhyme
holds true Generally of English Structures.

The North for Greatness, the East for Health,
The South for Neatness, the West for Wealth.
Proverbs.
I. As much a Kin as Lenson-hill to Pilsen-pen. Spoken of those who are
Neigbours and no Relations. The first of these two Hills is wholly, the other
partly in the Parish of Broad-Windsor, (whereof once I was Minister;) yet
Seamen make a Relation betwixt them calling the one the Cow, and the other the
Calf, as being Eminent Sea-marks. II. Stabbed with a Byrdport Dagger. That is
Hanged; the best Hemp growing about Byrdport. III. Dorsetshire Dorsers, i. e.
Panniers.

Saints.
Edward Son to Edgar King of England, was in his Infancy whipped by Elfrida his
Mother-in-law with Wax-Candles, so that afterward he could never endure the
sight of any such Candles. When he was King, Elfrida managed for the most part
all the Affairs of State, and afterward caused this Edward to be Stabbed at
Corfe-Castle, whither he had come to visit her. An. 978. Intending by that
Murder to make way for her Son Ethelred to the Kingdom. He was buried at
Shaftsbury, which formerly was called St. Edwards.

Cardinals.
Jo. Morton, born at St. Andrews Milborne, of a Worshipful Family still Extent,
was made Bishop of Ely, 1578. He proposed the Marriage of Eliz. Eldest Daughter
to E. 4. of the House of York to Hen. Earl of Richmond (H. 7.) of the House of
Lanc. which Alliance this Earl did account his surest Title to the Crown. The
Bishop was made by that King, Chancellor of England and afterward Archbishop
of Cant. He was a great Instrument in advancing a Voluntary Contribution to the
King through the Lands, persuading Prodigals to part with their Money, because
they did spend it most; and the Covetous, because they might spare it best.
This Bishop with vast cost cut a new Channel in the Fennes. He enjoined his
Executors to maintain 20 poor Scholars in Oxf. and 10 in Camb. 20 years after
his Death, which happened 1500.

Prelates.
Jo. Stafford, Son to Humph. 6 th. Earl of Staff. was born at Hook, made
Bishop of Wells, and was 18 years Chancellor of England, and at last
Archbishop of Cant. He dyed at Maidstone, 1452.

Rob. Morton, Brother to Card. Morton, was made by his Means Bishop of
Worcester 1486. He dyed 1497. and lies buried in St. Paul's in Land.

Ja. Turbevil, of a Worshipful Family in this County, was made Bishop of Exeter
1556. at which time it was said he was a Baron, but a Bare one, so miserably
had that Cathedral been Polled. Yet he obtained (amongst other Lands) the
Restitution of the fair Manor of Crediton (or Kiron) from Queen Mary, which
was again alienated in the Reign of Queen Eliz. This Bishop staved off
Persecution from those of his Jurisdiction. He was deprived in the beginning of
Queen Eliz.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Winniffe, born at Sherborne D. D. and Chapl. to Prince Henry, for a
passage in his Sermon about Gondomer, was committed close Prisoner to the
Tower, and during his imprisonment a Great Lord begged his Church-preferment;
No (said King Ja.) I mean not thus to part with the Man. At which the Lord said
he intended only to try the Kings Resolution; and that he knew the Doctor to be
a Man of great Merit. He was chosen Bishop of Lincoln, 1642. He dyed An. 1654.
and was buried at Lamburn in Ess. the Conclusion of his Epitaph being Anima
haec recepta in Coelos non Laudationem quaerit sed Imitationem. In the same
place had his Father been buried.

Soldiers.
Th. Basket, Esquire, of Divelish, much confided in, for his Wisdom and Valor
by King Hen. 8. He was commonly called Little Mr. Basket the Great Soldier. He
dyed about 1530.

Jo. Russel, born at Kingston-Russel, bred beyond the Sea, was a Man of great
Accomplishment, and was recommended by Phil. King of Castile (Father to Chapter 5.
Emp.) to Hen. 7. as a Person of Great Abilities; he could see more with his one
Eye than many others could do with two. King Hen. 8. made him Comptroller of
the Household and Privy Councellor, and An. 1538. erected him Lord Russel, and
made Keeper of the Privy Seal. A good share of the Golden Shower of Abbey-Lands
fell into his Lap. King E. 6. (who made him Earl of Bedford) sent him down to
suppress the Western Commotion and relieve Exter, which he performed with great
Wisdom, Valor and Success. He dyed 1554, and was buried at Cheineys in Buck.

Sir Rich. Bingham, born at Bingham's Melcom, descended from Will. de Bingham,
who held Lands in this County in the days of H. 3. was at the Siege of St.
Quintin in Fr. the sacking of Lies in Scotland, served in Candy under the
Venetians against the Turks, then returned into the Netherlands. His Judgment
was much relied upon in 88, about ordering the Land-Army in Tilbery-Camp. He
was a Man of great Valor and Success in all his Undertakings. Being afterward
president of Connaugh in Ireland, he drove away O- Rork that dangerous Rebel.
But his Actions there, being represented to Queen Eliz. as cruel, he was outed
of his Offices, and kept in Restraint, till Tyrone troubled Munster; then he
was sent Marshal of Ireland, and General of Leinster, and had in all
Probability suppressed that Rebel, if he had not been prevented by Death at
Dublin. His Monument is at Westminster Abbey.

Seamen.
Rich. Clerk of Weymouth, Master of the Delight, An. 1583. went with Sir Humph.
Gilbert for the discovery of Noremberg, but his Ship was cast away 70 Leagues
from Land. The Company got into the Ship-boat having but one Oar, and continued
there four days without eating any thing save the Weeds they found in the Sea.
After five Days Rowing, a Spanish Ship meeting them brought them to Biscay. The
Visitors of the Inquisition were diverted by the Masters favor; after which
Rich. and his Company came by France into England.

Geo. Summers, Knight, born in or near Lyme, first discovered the Bermuda's
named the Summer Islands. He was a Lamb on Land, and a Lion at Sea. He dyed
about 1610.

Note, that amongst 12 of Th. Cavendishes Men who were killed by the Spaniards
at Cape Quinterno; four of them belonged to this County, viz. Will. Kingman in
the Admiral, Will. Biet of Weymouth in the Vice-Ad. Hen. Blacknals of Weym. and
Will. Pit of Sherburn in the Hugh-Gallant. The Survivours being 15 in Number
revenged their Death upon 25 Spaniards, and in spite of above a 100 remaining
Spaniniards, watered at the aforesaid Cope.

Civilians.
Sir To. Ryves Dr. of the Laws, was born at Little Langton; a General Scholar
and pure Latinist, Witness his Book of Sea-Battles. Afterward he was made the
Kings Advocate, and indeed he had been formerly Advocate to the King of Heaven
in his Book entitled the Vicars Plea, a Treatise of much Law, Learning, Reason
and Equity. We have good proof of his Valor in the late Wars. He dyed about
1652.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
Rob. Rogers born at Poole, was Leather-Seller in Land. dying a Bachelor
bequeathed 333 l. for building of Almshouses in Pool, 150 l. for Prisoners
(neither Athists nor Papists) 20 Nobles a Man. 100 l. for poor Preachers, to
each Man 10 pound. 100 l. to decayed Artificers, charged with Wife and
Children. 400 l. to the Merchant Adventurers, for the relief of old and support
of young Freemen. 500 l. to Christs-Hospital 600 l. to Erect Almshouses in
and about Land. 200 l. for a weekly Dole of Bread to the Poor. 400 l. to the
Leather-Sellers in trust for maintaining of two Scholars in each University,
etc. He dyed An. 1601. and lies buried in Christ-Church in Land.

Memorable Persons.
Th. de la Lynd Gent. killed a White Heart in Blackmore-Forrest, which King Hen.
3. had reserved for his own Chase. Hereupon he and the whole County (for not
opposing him) was fined, and the fine is paid into the Exchequer at this day,
by the Name of White-Hart-Silver.

Arth. Gregory, of Lyme, could force the Seal of a Letter with admirable Art.
Secr. Walsingham made great use of him about the Pacquets sent to Queen Mary of
Scotland, for his Service therein had he a Pension paid him. He dyed at Lyme
about the beginning of the Reign of King Ja.

Will. Englebert, born at Sherborne was an incomparable Ingineer much used in
88, and had 100 Marks Pension paid him yearly, which he proffered to wave for a
License to serve Foreign Princes, but was denied. He dyed at Westminster about
1634.

Noted Sheriffs.
8. Jo. Newburgh. Newburgs derive their Pedigree from a younger Son of H. the
first Earl of Warwick, of the Norman-line, and it is said they held Winfret with
the whole Hundred (by the Gift of Hen. 1.) by the Service of Chamberlain in
Chief, of the King, and under the Reign of Edw. 1. by Grand-Searjeanty, viz. by
holding the Laver for the King to wash in, upon his Coronation day.

4. Egidius Strangways. Thomas was the first Advancer of this Family in this
County, Milbery.

Th. More, Knight, dwelt at Melplash, having in a Frolic let loose many
Malefactors, was glad to procure a Pardon by the Mediation of Will. Pawlet,
Lord Treasurer, afterward Marq. of Winch. to whose Son, (Sir Thomas) he gave
his Daughter in Marriage.

Durham.
DVrham, (a Bishopric) has Northumb. on the North, Yorkshire on the South,
the Germ. Sea on the East, and Cumberl. and Westminster. on the West, in form
Triangular. After the Bishop had been deprived of his Vote in the House of
Lords, the People, for some years had no Representatives in Parliament.

Princes.
Cicely Nevil, youngest Daughter and Child to Ralph Earl of Westmerland (who
had 21) was married to Rich. D. of York, and beheld her Eldest Son Edward King
of England and enriched with a Numerous Postery. Yet were her Afflictions
great; for she saw her Husband killed in Battle, her second Son Geo. D. of
Clarence cruelly Murdered. Edward her Eldest Son cut off by his intemperance in
his Prime: His two Sons Butcherd by their Uncle Richard who was killed at the
Battle of Bosworth. Under all she carried a Steady Soul, and lived to see Eliz.
her Grandchild Married to Hen. 7. She lived 35 years a Widow and dyed An. 10
of that King, and was buried with her Husband in the Quire Fortheringhay-Church
in Northam. Which Quire being demolished in the days of King Hen. 8. their
Bodies lay in the Churchyard, without any Monument, until Queen Eliz. coming
thither in Progress gave order that they should be interred in the Church and
two Tombs to be Erected over them. The Duchess Cicely had a Pardon from Rome,
hanging about her Neck, plainly Legible. She was a bountiful Benefactress to
the Queens Coll. in Camb.

Saints.
-- Venerable Bede, born at, and a Monk in Girway, now Yarrow, the most General
Scholar of that Age, expounded almost all the Bible, Translated the Psalms and
New Testament into English, and lived a Comment upon those Words, Shining as a
Light in the World, etc. Phil. 2.15. Credible Authors report he never went out
of his Coll. tho both Cambridge and Rome pretend to his Habitation. He dyed An.
734. and his Corpse was removed to Durham.

Confessors.
Jo. Wickliffe, published Opinions distasteful to the Church of Rome, and wrote
200 Volumns, besides his Translation of the Bible into English. Having suffered
much Persecution from the Popish Clergy, after a long Exile he returned in
safety, and dyed at his Living at Lutterworth in Leicestershier An. 1387. His
Bones were taken up and burnt 42 years after his Death.

Prelates.
-- I shall begin with four Nevils of Honorable Extraction. 1. Ralph Nevil,
born at Raby, Lord Chanc. under King Hen. 3. and Bishop of Chichester. 1223.
built a fair House for himself and his Successors in Chancery Lane in Land.
which House is since called from the Earl of Lincoln (once possessor
therereof,) Lincoln's Inn. He was chosen afterward Archbishop of Cant. but the
Pope stopped his Consecration, as being apt to dissuade King Hen. from paying
the Pension granted to his Holiness by King John. Then being elected Bishop of
Winch. he was obstructed by the King. He built St. Michaels Chapple without the
Eastgate of Chichester. and dyed at Land. 1244. 2. Alex Nevil 3 d. Son of
Ralph Lord Nevil, born at Raby was Archbishop of York, where he beautified
Cawood Castle. Being Loyal to R. 2. he was forced for Protection to flee to
Pope Urban, who Translated him to St. Andrews in Scotland. But this Nevil chose
rather to be Minister at Lovaine, where he dyed. 3. Rob. Nevil, sixth Son of
Ralph first Earl of Westmerland, by Joan his Wife, Daughter of Jo. of Gaunt,
was Bishop of Sarisbury An. 6. Hen. 6. 1427. He founded a Convent at Sunning in
Barkshire. From Sarisbury he was Translated to Durham, where he built the
Exchequer at the Castle-gate, and added, (in allusion to his 2 Bishoprics) 2
Annulets to his Arms. He dyed An. 1457. 4. Geo. Nevil, fourth Son to Rich. Earl
of Salisbury was born at Middleham, and consecrated Bishop of Exeter, when he
was not as yet 20 years of Age, and five years after was made Lord Chancellor
of England, and aftewards Archbishop of York, making a prodigious Feast at his
Installing; yet at last falling into the displeasure of E. 4. he was slenderly
dieted, not to say Famished, in the Castle of Calis; for after his enlargement
he dyed Heart-broken at Blyth, and was buried in the Cathedral of York. 476.
There was another Nevil Brother to Alexander, who was chosen Bishop of Ely, but
dyed before Consecration.

Since the Reformation.
Rob. Horn, bred in St. John's-(...) E. 6. made Dean of Durham. (...) he became
head of the Episcopal (...) in Germ. Returning into England (...) of Winch.
1560. A worthy Man, (...) Papists and Sectaries, who sported (...) and twitted
his Person as Dwarf^^, (...) Case, when they were not able to find (...) Jewel.
Whatever his Mould might (...) of good Metal, as being of a Spright^u^ (...)
Wit. He dyed 1589.

Jo. Cosen, was born in Norwich, one (...) are sufficiently made known in his
(...) Great his Constancy in Religion, the he was ^^^^der'd by some silly
people as declining (...) Religion. As for his urging of some (...) made his
Purgation effectually, clearing himself from the least Imputation of any Fault;
yea whilst in France, he was the Atlas of the Prot. Religion, supporting the
same with his Piety and Learning, and daily adding Proselytes (not of the
meanest Rank) thereunto. Since the Kings Restoration he was preferred Bishop
of Durham. When some Propositions of the Pope in favor of Protestants were
made mention of, by one in his presence; he said, We thank him not at all for
which God has always allowed us in his Word; for he would grant it so long as
it stood with his Policy, and take it away so soon as it stood with his Power.

Civilians.
Rob. Cosen, Dr. of Law, was born at Hartly Poole. His Father a Person of
Quality, a valiant Captain in Muss^lborough field, was drowned in the River
Tweed. Richard, at 12 years of Age was admitted into T^^n. Coll. in Camb. He
became a General Scholar, Geometrician, Musician, Physician, Divine, but
chiefly Civil and Canon Lawyer. He was Chancellor of Worcester, then Dean of
the Arches. He defended the High Commission and Oath ex Officio, against a Book
called the Abstract, which one observed was abstracted from all Wit, Learning
and Charity. Some laid to his Charge that he gave many Blank Licenses for
Marriage, whereas there was but one which a Fugitive Servant stole from the
Register. He had (according to his Wish) a sweet and quiet departure, and his
la^^ Words (to his Friends) were, Remember your Mortality and eternal Life. He
gave 40 l. to the building of a Chamber in Trin. Coll. and 15 l. a year for the
maintenance of two Scholarships therein. On him these Verses were made by the
University of Camb.

Magna deos inter lis est exorta, creatas,
Horum qui lites Dirimit, ille deest.
Cosinum petiere Dii Componere tantus,
Lites, quod vere jure peritus erat.
Writers.
Jo. of Darlington, Confessor to Hen. 3. and Archbishop of Dublin; and
Collector of the Pope's Peterpence through Ireland, wrote many Books and dyed
in Land. 1284.

Will. Siveyar (in lat. Severus) born at Shinkley, was Son to a Sive-maker, was
Bishop of Carlisle 1496. and Translated to Durham. He dyed An. 1505. Note Sir
Empson was also the Son of a Sive-maker and his Contemporary.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Jackson, bred in Oxf. where falling into the River he was taken up for
dead by some Fishermen, who were rewarded with a Revenue during his life. He
was chosen President of Corp. Christi-Coll. where he dyed 1640. He was a Pious
Man, profound Writer and painful Preacher.

Sam. Ward, born at Bishops-Middleham, Mr. of Sidney-Coll. in Camb. was
imprisoned in the late times, before which he was counted a Puritan, and Popish
whilst those days lasted; yet was he a true Protestant at all times. He dyed
An. 1643.

Memorable Persons.
Anth. Lord Gray, (Earl of Kent) Son of Geo. Gray Esquire, was born at
Branspath. He studied Divinity and became Rector of Burbach in Leicestershire.
And upon the Death of Hen. Earl of Kent, his Kinsman, the Inheritance and
Honor descended upon him. Yet after that he abated nothing in the constancy of
his Preaching, but improved that accession of Greatness to make his Goodness
the more Illustrious. When Summoned as a Peer to Parl. he excused himself by
reason the indisposition of his Age. By Magdal. Puresoy his Wife he had Hen.
the 9 th. Earl of Kent. He dyed An. 164-

In this County the Bishop is Sheriff Paramount, whose Deputy never accounts in
the Exchequer, but makes up his Audit to the Bishop.

Essex.
ESsex has Kent on the South, Suffolk on the North, Cambr. Hartf. and
Middlesex on the West. A fair County 35 Miles Square, affording all things
necessary for Man's Subsistence, save that the Eastern part thereof is not very
healthful in the Air thereof. The parts adjoining to the Sea are called the
Hundreds of Essex, and Vulgar Wits, will tell you, that the Stock of poor
people in these parts is Five Hundred Cows, which is no more than five. The
Natural Commodities are Saffron about Walden. Oysters, the best in England,
bred near Colchester. King Ja. was wont to say he was a Valiant Man that first
adventured on the Eating of them. Hops, which are said to grow best where Vines
will not grow, and are wholesome, if unmixed, etc. according to Stat. 1. Jac.
c. 18. Puits, in the Puit-Island near Harwick; a kind of Birds which are
delicate Food when fatted. As for Manufactures, Bays, Says and Serges are made
in Colchester, Coxal, etc. And there is Gunpowder made in Mills erected on the
River Ley, between Waltham and Land. Of Buildings, 1. Audley-End built by Th.
Howard Earl of Suff is the best Subjects House in this Island. 2. New-hall,
built by the Ratcliffs Earls of Suff. bought by Geo. Villiers D. of Buck.
surpasses for the pleasant approach thereunto and the adjoining Parks. 3.
Copt-Hall, (or Coppice-Hall) seated on a Hill in the midst of a Park, was built
by the Abbot of Waltham and enlarged by Sir Th. Heneage. In which there is the
most Proportionable Gallery in England. An. 1639. a Hericano forced the Stones
of the great East-Window, like Pellets, quite through this Gallery in length 56
Yards. Dr. Jackson about the same time observed the like Wind as Ominous and
Presaging our Civil Dissentions. To proceed to more Wonders, the huge Bones
which were dug out at the Ness near Harwich, were generally thought to be
Bones of Men; tho it be more probable they were Bones of Elephants brought over
by the Emperor Claudius. The Story of the Anatomy of Bones in the Abbey of
Waltham-Cross, which being touched, in one part fell all into Powder, is
confirmed by Public Fame, with several instances of the like Nature.

Proverbs.
I. Essex miles, that is very long Miles, Comparatively to those of Middlesex
II. Essex Calves, the fattest, fairest and finest in Engl. III. The Weavers
Beef of Colchester, That is Sprats the Weavers Food, such Beef-eaters and such
Beef being numerous in, and about that City. IV. Jeering-Coxhall, it was true
by way of Catachresis in Queen Mary's days, for then the Inhabitants of that
Town were very serious, some in suffering and others in shifting Martyrdom. V.
He may fetch a flitch of Bacon from Dunmoe. It was a Custom formerly, that
whoever did swear before the Prior of the Convent at Dunmoe, That they never
made any Nuptial Transgression, might demand a Gammon of Bacon.

Princes.
Hen. Fitz. Roy, (Natural) Son to H. 8. and the Lady Talbois, was born at
Black-more Manor, An. 1519. He was created Earl of Nottingham and D. of
Richmond. Bastard in him was not Boes art, i. e. an abject Nature, but
Besteaerd the best disposition; since he purchased a Reputation by his Martial
Activity and Learning. He Married Mary Daughter to Th. D. of N^rf. and dyed An.
1536. and was buried in Framlingham in Suff.

Saints.
St. Helen was born at, (and Daughter to Coel King of) Colchester. She was
Mother of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, and is famous to all
Posterity for finding out Christs-Cross on Mount Calvary. Hence the Arms of
Colchester, a Cross enragled between four Crowns. By the Pagans she was
Nicknamed Stabularia, she having found the Stable of Christs-Nativity. Whose
Son

St. Constantine was born at Colchester. V. Eccl. Hist.

St. Ethelburgh, Sister to Erkenwald, Bishop of Land. was Abbess of the Nunery
of Barking, where she led an Austere Life, and dyed 676. Whose Sister, Hildetha
succeeded her and dyed 700. Theorithoid a Holy Nun of the same place, dyed 678.
Edilburge (Wife to Ina King of the West Saxons) a Nun at Barking, was reputed a
Saint after here Death, An. 740. Wolfhild a Barking Nun dyed An. 989. This
Nunery was valued at 1000 l. yearly rent at the Dissolution.

St. Ofith, Daughter to the King of the E. Angles, was abbess of a Monastery of
her own founding at Chich. She was beheaded by the Danes, about 870. after
which she was able to carry her own head no further than 3. furlongs; and if
St. Deni's carried his head further, you may imagine his was the lighter Head
of the tw^.

St. Neots, first an Eremite (in Cornw.) then a profitable Preacher of the
Gospel; a Zaccheus for Stature and Piety. He moved King Alfred to found (or
restore) the University of Oxf. for which his Memory is sacred to all
Posterity. He dyed An. 883. and was buried at Eynsbury since St. Neots in Hunt.

Martyrs.
Jo. Lawrence, being very feeble had a Chair at the Stake, the little Children
crying God strengthen you.

Th. Hawks Gent. having promised to give his Friends a Token of the comfort of
his Conscience; whilst burning, raised himself up and clapped his Hands over
his Head to the Admiration of all the beholders.

Rose Allin a Virgin endured the Burning of her Wrists with incredible
Patience, as afterward the burning of her Body with a Christian Constancy.
These are the most Noted of 44 Martyrs in this Shire.

Confessors.
Rich. George, Labourer of West-Barfold. Of three several Wives he had, two of
them were Burnt, and himself the third imprisoned for Religion. His Burning was
prevented by Queen Mary's Death.

Cardinals.
Th. Bourcher, Brother to Hen. first Earl of Ess. was successively Bishop of
Worc. Ely, Archbishop of Cant. (for 51 years) by the Title of St. Cyriacus in
the Baths, He married H. 7. to the Daughter of E. 4. and applied himself
Politickly to the Power of that Prince. Yet it is said Praestitit hic praesul
nil tanto sanguine dignum. What was 100 pounds and a Chest given by him to
Camb.? He saw the Civil Wars between York and Lanc. begun, continued and
concluded. Many Noble Prelates were his Contemporaries, and after his decease,
Cardinal Pole, a Man of Noble Extraction.

Prelates.
Rich. de Barking, became Abbot of Westminster, and Councellor to Hen. 3. Chapter
Baron of the Exchequer, and Lord Treasurer of England. He dyed An. 1246. and
was buried in Westminster. Church.

Jo. de Chesill, was Bishop of Land. and twice Chancellor, and afterward Lord
Treasurer of England.

Jo. Waltham, Mr. of the Rolls, Keeper of the Pr. Seal and Bishop of Salisbury,
was Excommunicated by Courtney Archbishop of Cant. for refusing to be visited
by him after the Popes death. Yet he dyed Lord Treasurer and was by R. 2. his
Order buried amongst the Kings in Westminster. 1395.

Roger Walden, a poor Man's Son, was Dean of York, and at last Treasurer of
England, during the Exile of Th. Arundel Archbishop of Cant. he called Synods,
etc. in that See, till the Archbishops Restoration; then being poor he was
made by Arundels means Bishop of Land. and dyed 1404.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Howland, born at Newport-Ponds, consecrated Bishop of Peterborough, dyed
June 1600.

Jo. Jegon, born at Coxhall Mr. of Bennet-Coll. and thrice Vice Chancellor of
the University of Camb. He was both Grave and Facetius. The Mulcts of the
Undergraduats were by him one time expended in new whiting the Hall of the
Coll. Whereupon a Scholar hung up these Verses on the Skreen Dr. Jegon,
Bennet-Colledge Master,
Brake the Scholars-head and gave the Walls a Plaster.
To which the Doctor Annexed, Knew I but the Wagg that writ these Verses in a
Bravery.
I would commend him for his Wit, but whip him for his Knavery.
He was made Bishop of Norwich (by King Ja.) as being mighty Zealous for the
Church of England. He dyed An. 1618.

Sam. Haresnet, born at Colchester, was Bishop of Chich. then of Norw. and at
last Archbishop of York and Privy Councellor to King Chapter II. He founded and
endowed a fair Grammer-School at Chigwell. He bequeathed his Library to
Colchester, provided they were kept in a decent Room, for the use of the Clergy
of that Town. He dyed An. 1631.

Augustine Linsel, D. D. born at Bumsted, was exact in Greek, Hebrew, and all
Antiquity. (...) was Bishop of Peterborough, and thence removed to Hereford,
where he dyed 163-

Statesmen.
Sir Th. Audley, Keeper of the Great Seal 1532. was An 24. H. 8. made Knight of
the Garter, Lord Chancellor of England and Baron Audley of Audley End, in this
County. He got a Grant of the Priory of the Trinity, (now Dukes Place) in
Ealdgate Ward Land. the first that was dissolved; He had one only Daughter, who
was Married to Th. last D. of Norfolk. He dyed 1544. and was buried in the
Church of Saffron Walden. He founded and endowed Magd. Coll. in Camb. for the
maintenance of able Poets.

Sir Rich. Morison, Knight, skilled in Languages and in the Laws, A. M. P.
was frequently employed Ambassador by H. 8. and E. 6. unto Chapter 5. Emp. etc.
He began a Beautiful House a Cashobery, but before he had finished it, and
after he had fled beyond the Seas, he dyed in Strasburgh An. 1556.

Sir Anth. Cook, Knight, Great-Grand-child to Sir Th. Lord Mayor of Land. was
born at Giddy-Hall. He was one of the Governors to Ed. 6. whilst Prince. His
Daughters were Learned in Greek and Latin, and Poetry; of whom Mildred was
Married to Will. Cecil Lord Treasurer, and Ann to Nich. Bacon Lord Chanc. of
England; and Katherine, to Hen. Killigrew. This Kath. being unwilling, her
Husband Sir Hen. should be sent Ambassador to France, wrote to her Sister
Mildred these Verses. Si mihi quem cupio cures Mildreda remitti,
Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola ^oror,
Sin male cunctando retines, vel tran^ Mare mittes,
Tu Mala, tu pejor, tu mihi nulla soror.
It si Connubiam, tibi pax sit and omnia loeta,
Sin mare Cecili, nuntio bella, Vale.
This Sir Anth. dyed An. 1576. leaving a fair Estate to his Son.

Sir Th. Smith, Knight, born at Saffron-Walden, was by order of King Hen. 8.
brought up beyond the Seas. He was afterward Secr. of State to Queen Eliz. and
a great Benefactor to both Universities. He dyed An. 1577.

Th. Howard, S. N*
second Son to Th. last D. of Norf. by Marg. Heir to Th. Lord Audle, was by
Queen Eliz. made Baron of Audley, and Knight of the Garter, and King Ja. who
beheld his Father a State Martyr for the Queen of Scots (An. 1. Regni,)
advanced him Lord Chamberlain and Earl of Suff. any ( An. 12) Lord Treasurer of
England. When made Chancellor of the University of Camb. he answered the
Orators Speech, by telling him, Tho he knew no Latin, he knew the Sense, (to
make him welcome) and that he would serve the University faithfully, etc. Upon
which the Vice-Chanc. Hasnet requested him to entertain King Ja. at Camb. which
accordingly he did, in a very Magnificent Manner, at the expense of above 5000
l. Hence, after his Death, Th. his second Son, Earl of Barkshire succeeded him
in the Place. He dyed at Audley-End, An. 1626. being Grandfather to the Right
Honorable Ja. Earl of Suff.

Rich. Westory, probably Son to Sir Jerome, A. M. P.
Sher. in this County, An. 21. Eliz. impaired his Estate to improve himself
with Public Accomplishments, and was no looser when made Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and An. 4. Car. I. Lord Treasurer of England. He was created Earl of
Portland An. 18. Car. I. and dyed An. 163-

Capital Judges.
Sir Jo. Bramstone, born at Maldon and bred in the Middle Temple, was by King
Chapter I. made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. One accomplished with all
Qualities requisite for a Person of his place. Having Married Serj. Bruertons
Widow he paid near 3000 l. to Sidney-Coll. which that Sergeant bequeathed by
his Will imperfect in it self and invalid in the Rigor of the Law. His opinion
was for Ship Money, which cost him much trouble. He dyed about 1646.

Soldiers.
Rob. Fitz. Walter, born at Woodham-Walters, highly beloved by Rich. 1. and
King Jo. until the latter banished him, because he would not Prostitute his
Daughter to his Pleasure. The French entertained him joyfully, till upon a
Truce betwixt France and England, an English Man Challenged any of the French,
and was answered and unhorsed by this Fitz-Walter. Hereupon King Jo. sent for
him, and restored his Lands to him, with License to repair his Castles, and
particularly Bainards-Castle in Land. He was Vulgarly Styled, The Marshal of
Gods Army and Holy-Church. He dyed An. Dom. 1234. and lies buried in the
Priory of Little-Dunmow.

Sir Jo. Haukewood, Son to Gilbert a Tanner, was born at Sible Heningham, and
bound an apprentice to a Tailor in Land. Afterward he served King E. 3. in the
French Wars, and was Knighted for his Valor. Then he served the City and
(then) Free State, of Florence, which rewarded his Gallant Service with a Rich
Statue, and Sumptuous Monument wherein his Ashes remain honored at this day.
He had a Son born in Italy, Naturalized An. 7. H. 4. He dyed very Aged. An.
1394. 18. R. 2.

Th. Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-Walter and Earl of Suss. was twice Deputy of Ireland.
A most Valiant Man, by whose Diligence and Prudence the threatening Clouds of
Rebellion were dispersed in his time. Afterward, at the Court of England, he
opposed Rob. Earl of Leicester. He dyed An. Dom. -- and was buried in the
Church of St. Olives Hartfleet, in London.

Sir Fr. Vere, rigid in Nature, and undaunted in dangers, served on the Scene
of all Christendom where War was acted. One Masterpiece of his Valor was at
the Battle of New-port, where he was attended by the Ragged Regiment. Another
was when for three years he defended Ostend against a strong Army. He dyed in
the beginning of the Reign of King Ja. His younger Brother Sir Horace had as
much Courage, and more Meekness; so Pious that he first made his Peace with
God, before he went out to War with Man. He always tuned his Temper to a
Tenor-pitch. He was the first Baron of King Chapter I. his Creation. Some years
after coming to Court he fell suddenly sick and speechless, so that he dyed
before Night, An. Dom. 163- Both lived in War much honored; dyed in Peace much
Lamented.

Hen. Vere was Son of Edw. Earl of Oxf. (whose Habitation was at
Heningham-Castle,) a Stout and Resolute Man, and the last Lord Chamb. of
England of this Family: Who said to a certain Lord who Commended his White
Feather, It is a fair one, and if you mark it, there is nere a Saint in it.
Indeed his Family was ever Loyal to the Crown, deserving their Motto VERO NIL
VERIUS. This Hen. being a Colonel at the Siege of Breda did overheat his Blood,
and a few days after, dyed 16 --

Physicians.
Will. Gilbert, born in Colchester, was Physician to Queen Eliz. He was a great
Chemist and Loyal Subject. He dyed 1603. and lies buried in Trin. Church in
Colch. His Memory will never fall to the Ground, being supported to Eternity by
his incomparable Book de Magnete.

Writers.
Gervase of Tilbury, is reported Nephew to King Hen. 2. He was a Favorite to
his Kinsman Otho the 4 th. Emp. who made him Marshal of the Archbishopric of
Arles. He wrote a Chron. of England, and added illustrations to Geffrey
Monmouth. He flourished An. 1210. under King Jo.

Ralph of Cogshall Abbot wrote Chronicles and Additions to Radulphus Niger. He
resigned, and dyed about 1230.

Rog. of Waltham, (within 12 Miles of Land.) was Canon of St. Paul's, wrote many
worthy Books flourishing under H. 3. An. 1250.

Jo. Godard, a Cister. Monk, and great Mathematician, wrote some Treatises
which proved his skill and improved the Age he lived in. He flourished An. 1250.

Aubrey de Very, descended from the Earls of Oxf. Born at Great Bentley, wrote
a Learned Book of the Eucharist, and was an Augustinian of St. Osiths. He
flourished An. 1250.

Th. Maldon, D. D. one of great Reputation for Learning, was Prior of the
Monastery at Maldon; He dyed 1404.

Th. Waldensis Son of Jo. Netter was a most professed Enemy to the Wicklifites,
and Champion of the Pope. Under King Hen. 4. he was sent Ambassador for
advancing an Union in the Church 1410. He was Confessor and Privy Councellor to
H. 5. whom he Taxed of too much Lenity to the Wicklifites, and was the occasion
of Burning those poor Christians (under H. 6.) against them he wrote much. He
dyed in his journey to Rome. An. 1430 and was buried at Roan, leaving behind an
Opinion of a Zealous Sanctity.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Tusser, born at Riven-hall, was successively a Musician, Schoolmaster,
Serving-man and a Speculative Husbandman; but a Practical Loyterer in
Agriculture. He dyed about 1580.

Fr. Quarles, Esquire, born at Stewards, was Secr. to Bishop Usher and a very
good Poet, who seems to have Drank of Jordan in stead of Helicon, and slept on
Mount Olivet for his Parnassus; using no less Devotion then Invention. He dyed
about 1643.

Joseph Mede, born near Bishop Stratford, wrote de Sanctitate relativa; he was
a Learned man, good Preacher and Charitable to the Poor. From that place of
Scripture, Judge. 3.30, And the Land had ^est 80 Years, he observed, that that
was the longest Term of Peace that ever the Church of God did enjoy. And seeing
the same Lease of Halcyon-days was expired in England since 1. Eliz. he
grievously suspected some strange Concussion in Church and State; which came to
pass accordingly. He was a Millenary, and was as much dishonored by some
Furious Followers, as ever Aristotle was by Ignorant Pretenders to his
Philosophy. He dyed An. 1638, leaving near 3000 l. to Christs-Coll in Camb.
where he was bred.

Benefactors.
Rich. Badew, chosen Chanc. of Camb. An. 1326. erected Vniversity-Hall in
Milne-Street, which afterward was burnt, and Mr. Badews interest therein was
resigned to Eliz. Countess of Clare.

Since the Reformation.
Walt. Mildmey, Knight, born at Chelmsford, under H. 8. and E. 6. had an Office
in the Court of Augmentations, and having absconded in Queen Mary's days, was
afterward in Queen Eliz. Reign made Chanc. of the Exchequer. He founded
Emmanuel Coll. in Oxf. He was Obnoxious to the Queens displeasure upon a
Suggestion that he was over Popular, yet upon his Death (1589) the Queen
professed her grief for the loss of a Grave Councellor.

Dorothy Petre, Daughter to Sir Will. Secr. of State, and Sister to Jo. Lord
Petre. Her Husband Nich. Wadham founded, she finished, both richly endowed
Wadham-Coll. in Oxf.

Th. Eden, D. L. born in Sudbery, bestowed 1000 l. on Trin. Hall in Camb. He
dyed An. 164.

Memorable Persons.
Matilda Fitz-Walter (Surnamed by some, The Fair, by others, The Chaste,)
Daughter to Sir Rob. of Woodham, is said to have been the occasion of the (...)
War in the Reign of King John, who assaul^^^ (...) Chastity, and Banished her
Father, the mo^^ (...) to obtain her Consent, yet still found her the Tal Maid
(her Anagram) both in Stature and Stoutness of her Virtuous Resolution. That
King being so Baffled procured one to Poison her in a Poached Egg, 1213. and
was buried in Little Dunmow-Church. Note, that he who procured her Poisoning in
her Meat, was Poisoned in his own Drink afterward.

Sim. Lynch, Gent. born at Groves, was 64 years Minister at North-weal, and 61
Husband to his Wife Eliz. He dyed 1656.

Rob. Darcy, in the Reign of H. 6. of an Ancient Family, left by his Will 40
Marks to be disposed for 2000 Masses for his Soul, etc. and a Butt of Malmsy to
the Earl of Essex and Lord Dinham, and a Pipe of Red-wine to Sir Th. Montgomery
and Sir Th. Tirrel, for their pains in Supervising his Will.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 7. Will. de Longo Campo, Bishop of Ely, was Lord Chancellor of England,
tho a Norman by Birth, and utterly ignorant of the English Tongue. It seems
Chancery Suits in those days were Penned and Pleaded in French.

1. Hugo de Nevil and Johan. de Nevil. Hugh attended King Rich. 1. and slew a
Lion in the Holy Land, a great Benefactor to Waltham-Abbey, where he was
buried. John his Son Inherited his Fathers Virtues. Their Issue Male is long
since Extinct.

Walt. de Baud an Ancient Name which has flourished 12 Generations, Bauds held
Land in this County, of St. Paul's, by paying a Fee Buck and Do in their
Seasons. They were paid alive at the High-Altar with great Ceremony, the Keeper
and Horners in Land. then blowing their Deaths.

29. Phil. Son to Sir Phil. Bottiller who lies buried in Walton-Church in
Hartf. Butlers are branched from Sir Ralph Butler Bar. of Wem in Shrop. soon
after the Norman Conquests, and still flourish at Wood-hall in Hartf.

2. Hen. Marny, Ar. was ('it is supposed) Servant, Marg. Countess of Richmond. He
was Knighted, made Chanc. of the Duchy, and Created Lord Marny by H. 8. His
Daughter and Heir was Married to Th. Howard Visc. Bindon.

6. Will. Fitz Williams Ar. (afterward Knight) bequeathed 100 l. to poor Maids
Marriages, l. to mending of the Highways betwixt Chigwell and Copers-hall.

25. Brian Tuke, Knight, was Treasurer of the Chamber to H. 8. He lies buried
in St. Marg. in Lothbury Land. Lealand says he was a very Eloquent Man and Bale
affirms he wrote Observations on Chaucer, etc.

3. Sir Jo. Gates, Geffrey Marshal of Calis, and Capt. of the Isle of Wight.
(who dyed An. 1477.) is charged with Sacrilege, and engaging in the Title of
Queen Jane, for which he was beheaded An. 1. Ma. 1553.

1. Ralph Rowlet, Knight, Anth. Cook. His Family is extinct, his Daughter
Marrying into the Honorable Family of the Maynards.

12. Ja. Altham, Esquire (whose Arms were Pally of 6. Erm. and Az. on a Chief
G. a Lion Ramp. O.) was Ancestor to -- now living at Mark-hall, made Knight of
the Bath at the Coronation of King Chapter II. whose Accomplished Civility adds
much to the Honor of his Family.

Hen. Maynard, Knight, Father to Will. who was bred in St. Jo. Coll. in Camb.
(where he founded a Logic Professor) and Created Bar. of Wicklow in Irel. and
Easton in this County, Will. Lord Maynard has been so Noble an Encourager of
my Studies, that my Hand deserves to wither, when my Heart passes him by
without a Prayer for his good success.

15. Paul Banning, Knight and Bar. afterward Visc. Banning of Sudbury, left a
large Estate now discendible to the Wives of the Marq. of Dorchester, Visc.
Grandison, the Lord Dacres of the South, and Hen. Murry, Esquire of the
Bedchamber to King Chapter I.

Jo. Lucas, Esquire, equalling his Extraction with his Virtues, Oxf. made Baron
by King Chapter I.

The Battles.
Tho now in this County, yet the Siege of Colchester must not be forgotten.
Know then that the Remnant of the Royalists routed in Kent, with much
difficulty recovered this County, and not being able to march farther, or bid
Battle to their Numerous Enemies sheltered themselves in Colchester, which in
few days they fortifyed above imigination, tho the Stone outside of the Wall
remained ruinous. Nor was it General Fairfax they feared so much as General
Famine, having too much of the best Sauce, and too little of the worst meat;
insomuch that they were forced to make Mutton of those Creatures which kill
Sheep, and Beef of Cattle which never wore Horns; till they were forced to
submit to the worst of Conditions. Here those two worthy Knights, Sir Chapter Lucas
and Sir Geo. Lisle (the one eminently a whole Troop of Horse, the other a
Company of Foot) were cruelly Sentenced and shot to Death, whose Bodies have
since had a Civil Resurrection, restored to all possible outward honor by
Public Funeral Solemnities.

Note, that An. 1581. in the Hundred of Dengy, and An. 1648. in the Hund. of
Rochford, an Army of Mice shaved off the Grass at the bare Roots, which
withered to dung, was infectious to Cattle. The March following numberless
Flocks of Owls from all parts flew thither and destroyed them.

Gloucestershire.
GLoucestershire has Worc. and Warw. on the North, and Wilt. on the East, Some.
on the South, Heref. with the River Wye on the West, and is in length 48 miles
and in the broadest part 28. The Severn runs through it. It Is said this
County was much more fruitful in former times than it is now. Tho it affords
not the best Tillage, yet for Pasturage there is Land near Slimbridge, where in
the Spring time, let it be bit to the Roots (as is reported) a Wand laid along
therein overnight will be covered with new grown Grass by the next Morning.
Which being represented to King Ja. in other Terms, viz. that the Wand could
not be seen next morning, he replied, I know a place in Scotland where if a
Horse be left over Night, he cannot be seen in the Morning. But the difference
is Palpable, between long Grass and long Fingers, or betwixt the Grass stealing
out of the Earth without, and a Man's stealing of a Horse with a Felonious
intent. The Natural Commodities in this County are, Tobacco which grew formerly
about Winchcomb, but is since prohibited by Act of Parliament, Oak, the best in
England is in Dean-Forrest in this County. In the Reign of Queen Eliz. the
Spaniard sent an Ambassador over purposely to get Oak destroyed (privately) in
Engl. The next is Steel which was made in abundance by Sir Basil Brook, who
had a Patent prohibiting the importation of Foreign Steel, but it was
afterward revoked. The Manufactures are Clothing as good as any in England;
the best Wool growing on Cots-wood-Hills in this County. Mustard, the best in
Engl. at Tewksbury. Then Wine formerly growing here, witness the places called
the Vineyards; and in this Shire there were Rent-wines paid in great
Proportions. Sider a Liquor more proper for the English Climat. Of Buildings.
The Abbey (since Cathedral) Church of Gloucester, is a Beautiful Fabric
consisting of a continued Window-work; where, if you speak against a Wall
softly, another shall hear your Voice better a good way off then near hand,
occasioned probably by some hollow, behind the Wall. The City is bound by Act
of Parl. to maintain and repair this Church. As for Civil Structures, our late
Wars laid a Finger on Barkeley; their Arms on Sudeley Castle, but their Loins
on Cambden-house (one of the newest and neatest in Engl. built by Baptist
Hicks, Visc. Cambden) pressed down to the Foundation. As for Wonders, there are
frequently found at Aldersey Oysters, Cockles, etc. of Stone which are Lusus
Naturae, and cannot in reason be supposed to have been real Fish. The Higre,
that is, the confluence of fresh and Salt Water in the Severn, which is
attended with terrible Flashings and Noise, so that that River may seem to be
troubled with a Fit of the Mother. The last is a kind of devouring Bird coming
in the Harvest-time, (tho seldom) into this County, which can cut an Apple at
one Snap with its long Bill, which Rapacious Creature drinks up Hogsheads of
Sider at the first hand.

Proverbs.
I. As sure as God's in Gloucestershire. This probably was superstitiously
inferred from the Multitude of Abbeys formerly Extant in this County. II. You
are a Man of Duresley. This is taken for one who breaks his word, I hope the
Inhabitants of Duresley will resolve to confute this Proverb by their Practice,
whatsoever was the first occasion thereof. III. It is long in coming as
Cotswold Barley. It is applied to such things as are slow but sure; The Corn on
the Wowlds being exposed to the Winds is backward at first, but afterward
overtakes the forwardest in this County. IV. He looks as if he had lived on
Tewksbury Mustard. It is spoken of such who have a severe or sad Countenance.

V. The Tracies have always wind in their Faces. Founded on a false Tradition,
since Sir Will. Tracy was most active against four Knights, who killed Th.
Becket; it is imposed on Tracies for Miraculous Penance, that whither they go
by Land or Water, the Wind is ever on their Faces.

Saints.
Kenelme Son of Kenwolfe, King of Mercia, at 7 years of Age succeeded his
Father, but was shortly after killed by Quenrid his Sister, and that Murder was
wonderfully discovered (if the Legend be true) by a Dove that carried in
Parchment notice thereof to Rome. As for Quenrid, when her Eyes fell out they
Bloodied her Primer, whilst her Brothers Corpse was Solemnly buried at
Winchcomb, and had in holy Veneration.

Martyrs.
Jo. Baynham Esquire, a Lawyer and a true Lover of the Gospel, was by Sir Th.
Moors Order whipped at a Tree in Chelsey, then cruelly Rackt in the Tower in his
sight, after which he abjured. But Recanting his Recantation, he was after much
cruel usage Burnt in Smithfield.

Prelates.
Tideman de Winchcomb, was made by R. 2. Abbot of Benle, Bishop of Landaff,
then of Worcester. He was also the Kings Physician; having a Plurality of Cures
both in Number and Kind.

Jo. Chedworth, Bishop of Lincoln was joined in Commission by King Hen. 6. with
the Bishop of Winch. to Regulate the Statutes of Eaton and Kings Colleges in
Camb. He dyed An. 1471.

Jo. Carpenter, born at Westbury was Bishop of Worcester. He could not procure
to himself the Title of Bishop of Worcester and Westbury. He dyed 1475.

Th. Ruthal, born in Chichester was made by King Hen. 7. Bishop of Durham, and
by H. 8. Privy Counselor. He was grossly mistaken when in stead of a Breviate
of the State of England, which he had drawn up, he presented H. 8. with his own
Estate amounting to an invidious Sum, viz. of 100000 l. his Enemy Card. Woolsey
glad at the mistake, told the King, he knew now where a Mass of Money was, in
case he needed it. This broke Ruthal's Heart, who had paid the third part of
the cost of making the Bridge of New Castle over Tyne, and intended many more
Benefactions, had not Death (1523) on this occasion surprised him.

Since the Reformation.
Edw. Fox. born in Duresley, was Almoner to King Hen. 8. He first brought Dr.
Cranmer to the knowledge of the King. He was afterward Bishop of Hereford, and
was the Principal Pillar of the Reformation, as to the Managery of the Politic
part thereof. Of the many Books he wrote, that De differentia utriusque
Potestatis was his Masterpiece. He was employed on several Embassies into
France and Germany and dyed An. 1538.

Statesmen.
Sir Ralph Butler, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Sudeley in this County, was
Lord Treasurer of Engl. He built Sudley-Castle the strongest and best
Habitation of a Subject in Engl. Being Summoned by E. 4. and suspecting
imprisonment, he said, It is thou Sudeley and not I that am a Traitor. And so
resigned the same into the Kings hands to procure his Liberty.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Anth. Fitz Herbert, Justice of the Com. Pleas, V. Derb.

Edw. Trotman, born at Came. wrote an Abridgement of Sir Edw. Coke's Reports,
his Endeavors being well esteemed by the Learned in that Profession. He was
buried in the Temple-Church 1643.

Soldiers.
Sir Will. Tracy, of Todington, a Gent. of high Birth, State and Stomach, much
in favor with King Hen. 2. was the forwardest of the four Knights who killed
Thomas Becket. He had large Possessions in Dev. His intended Pilgrimages to
Jerus. for Penance were ever crossed with advers Winds. He dyed An. 1180.

Seamen.
Will. Winter, Knight and Vice-Adm. of Engl. assaulted the Fort of French in
the Island of Inchkeith in Edinburgh Frith An. 1559. He (with Sir Th. Smith)
demanded the Restitution of Calis, 1567. He conducted a great Treasurer of the
Genoa Merchants safely into the Netherlands, in despite of the French opposing
him, 1568. He (with Rob. Beale) was sent into Zealand to demand the Restitution
of some English Ships, 1576. He did signal Service, when the Sp. Fleet was
fallen toward the Coast of Zealand, 1588. Lidney-house, the Seat of the
Family, had produced many more Mariners happy in Sea-Voyages.

Writers.
Osbern Claudian of Glouc. where he was a Benedictine Monk, a Learned and
Facetious Man, wrote a Comment on the Pentateuch, and on the Incarnation,
Nativity, etc. of Christ, besides his Pan-Ormia and others.

Rob. of Glou. where he was a Monk, was a Rhymer but good Historian,
flourishing under Hen. 2. and King Jo. 1200.

Alan (Abbot) of Teuxbury, was intimate with Th. Becket, after whose decease,
he, with three other of Becket's Evangelists, wrote the History of his
Mock-passion and Miracles. He flourished under King Jo. An. 1200.

Alex. of Hales as he followed Pet. Lombard so he did lead Th. Aquinas and
other Schoolmen. He was the first that wrote a Comment on the Sentences, called
the Sum of Divinity, at the Instance of Pope Innoc. 4. For his Services he had
the Title of Doctor Irrefragabilis. He dyed An. Dom. 1245. and was buried in
Paris.

Th. de la More, well descended, was famous in Peace and War, and brought
honor out of Scotland on his Swords point being Knighted by E. 4 for his
Valiant and Fortunate Service therein. He wrote the Manner of Deposition of E.
2. to whom he bore a most Loyal Affection, and did the best Service he could on
that Fatal occasion. He flourished An. 1326.

Th. of Hales a Minorite, promoted the Fabulous point of Purgatory, with other
Popish Positions under E. 3. 1340.

Th. Neale, born at Yate, and bred in Oxf. (where he was Prof. of Hebrew)
dedicated his Translation of some Rabbis to Card. Pole. He was a Man of
fearful Nature, yet constant to the Romans Persuasion, being Chaplain to Bishop
Bonner. Papists admire him for his rare Judgment, and Protestants for his
strange Invention in first ^eigning Math. Parkers Consecration at the Nags-head
in Cheapside. He lived in Oxf. 1576.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Tracy, Esquire born at Todington was Son to Sir Will. the Confessor, to
whose Zeal he succeeded, and wrote in the defense thereof several Treatises in
English, amongst which was Preparations to the Cross. He wrote Prophetically
before the Reign of Queen Mary. Note, that An. 1626. there was (amongst others)
a Treatise called A Preparation to the Cross found in the Belly of a Cod, which
was sold at Camb. Of which these Verses were written. If Fishes thus do bring
us Books, then we
May hope to equal Bodleys Library.
Yet after that, some found the Cross in Camb.

Sir Th. Overbury, Knight, born at Borton on the Hill, and bred in Oxf. has
given a Proof of his Accomplishments, in Poetry and Prose. He was the first
Writer of Characters in Engl. so far as I have observed. He lost the favor of
the Earl of Some. by dissuading him from keeping Company with a Lady, Wife of
another Person of Honor. He was committed to the Tower for refusing to be
employed Ambassador to Russia. His strict Restraint encouraged his Enemies to
Practice his Death, which was by Poison effected, 1615. For which the Earl was
banished the Court, and others were executed.

Jo. Sprint, bred in Oxf. and Minister of Thornbury, became a Conformist of a
great Dissenter, and wrote his Cassander Anglicanus (a Persuasive to
Conformity) dedicated to Arch-Deac. Burton, whose Arguments had prevailed much
with him in the Laudable Change of his opinion. He dyed about 30 years ago.

Jo. Workman, born about Lasbury and bred in Oxf. and Preacher at Glouc. made a
Counter-change to the former, renouncing all Conformity by reason of some
Super-Canonical Ceremonies that were pressed by some. He was outed of his
School for saying, That the Papists painted the Blessed Virgin more like a
Curtesan than a modest Maid; and afterward turned Physician. He dyed 1636.

Rich. Capel, born in Glouc. and bred in Oxf. wrote a Pious Book of
Temptations, asserting all Temptations to be injected solely by our own
Corruption. Upon his refusing his assent to the Book of Sports on the
Lord's Day, he resigned his Benefice. He dyed An. Dom. 165-

Benefactors to the Public.
Kath. Clyvedon, (or Dame K. Berkley) founded the fair School of
Wootton-under-edge, which remains after the extinguishment of the vast
Donations of the Berkleys to Monasteries.

Sir Will. Hampton, born at Minchen-Hampton, was a Fish-monger and afterward
Lord Mayor of Land. 1472. He was the first that set up Stocks in every Ward,
for the punishment of Vagabonds, etc.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Bell, twice Mayor of Glouc. was one of the first that brought the Trade of
Capping into the City, and was Knighted by H. 8. He bought from the Crown,
Blackfryers by the South-gate, where he built his House, and hard by it an
Almshouse, endowing it with Competent Revenues. His Daughter and Heir brought
a fair Estate into the Families of the Dennis. He dyed in the beg. of the Reign
of Queen Eliz.

Edw. Palmer, Esquire, (Uncle to Sir Th. Overbury) born at Limington, in this
County, where his Ancestry have continued ever since the Conquest, was a
curious and diligent Antiquary. He spent vast Sums of Money in pursuance of a
design to erect an Academy in Palmers-Island in Virginia; but before it was
finished, he was Transplanted to another World, 1625.

Hugh Pirry, born in Wootton-under-edge, Merchant and Sher. in Land. 1632.
derived Water to the Town of Wootton at his own cost; and bequeathed 1000 l.
for the building of an Almshouse there. Of 4 Daughters, the Eldest was Married
to the Lord Fitz-Williams of Northam. He dyed An. 163 --

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 9. Walt. de Stuchesly, Number and Names of all Villages, etc. (with the
present Possessors) of the County. The Return whereof began thus, Nulla est
Civitas in Comitat. Glouc. etc. There is no City in the County of Gloucester;
Gloucester having been since made an Episcopal See (and City) by H. 8. The like
Returns were made through England.

5. Th. Berkeley de Cobberley used E. 2. very civilly, Berkeley Castle, one of
the Seats of that Right Ancient Family, who are descended from Rob.
Fitz-Harding derived from the Kings of Denmark. The Crosses in their Arms,
denote their Services in the Holy-war, as the Mitre signifies their
Benefactions. Of this Family was descended Will. Lord Berkeley, by King Hen. 4.
made Visc. Berkeley and (by R. 2.) Earl of Not. and (in the Right of his Wife
Daughter of Th. Mowbray) D. of Norf. Hen. 7. made him Marq. Berkeley and
Marshal of Engl. He dyed without Issue. At this Day there flourishes many
Noble Stems sprung thereof, tho Geo. Lord Berkeley, Bar. Berkeley, Lord
Mowbray, Segrave, Bruce be the Top Branch. One who has been so signally
Bountiful in promoting these (and all other) my weak endeavors, that I deserve
to be Dumb if ever I forget to return him Public thanks for the same.

43. Jo. Points, whose Ancestors are mentioned in Dooms-day-book, and were
Seated at Acton in the days of E. 2. when Sir Nich. Points Married the Daughter
and Heir of Acton.

Will Kingston, Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower and Captain of the Guard to
King Hen. 8. being persuaded by Card. Woolsey to beware of Kingston he declined
the Town Kingston in his way, but he dyed within a few days after he had been
brought out of the North by

4. Anth. Kingston, the terrible Provost Marshal of the Kings Army in the
Execution of the Western Rebels, who also dyed (as some say) for fear of Death
in his way to Land. having been apprehended for a Conspiracy against Queen Mary
and the Government.

Hantshire.
HAntshire has Berkshire on the North, Surrey and Suss. on the East, the Sea
on the South, Dorcet and Wiltshire on the West, in length 54, and in breadth 30
Miles. It affords the best Wood for Fuel, the clearest Rivolets and a fair and
fruitful Soil, tho Stony in some places. The South-West of the County is called
the New Forest, made by Will. the Conqueror, where are Red Deer, for the
maintaining of which Towns were laid wast. This County affords the best Honey
in England on the Champain and the worst on the Heath. The Hoggs here make the
best Bacon, being our English Westphalian. As for Cloth there is much made in
this County. Of Buildings, the Cathedral of Winchester yields to none in
England for Venerable Magnificence. The Tombs made by Bishop Fox, for the Dust
of the Saxon Kings and Bishops of that See, were Barbarously thrown down in the
beginning of the Civil Wars. As for Civil Structures, Basing built by the Marq.
of Winch. was the greatest of any Subjects House in England. The Motto Love
Loyalty written in the Windows, was much practiced in it, when for Resistance
on that account, it was lately levelled to the Ground. There is a wonderful Oak
said to be in this County, that puts forth green Leaves yearly on, or about
Christmas Day. It grows nigh Lidhurst in the New-Forrest.

Proverbs.
I. Manners make a Man, quoth Will. Wickham. II. Canterbury is the higher Rack,
but Winchester is the better Manger. W. Edington Bishop of Winch. (the Author)
gave this for a reason of his refusal of the Sea of Cant. III. The Isle of
Wight has no Monks, Lawyers nor Foxes, viz. in Proportion to places of the
like extent.

Princes.
Hen. Eldest Son of King Jo. born at Winchester An. 1208. was a Pious but Poor
King. He was at first postponed to King Lewis of Fr. and afterward embroyled
with the Barons Wars and imprisoned; yet at last he attained a comfortable old
Age by the means of his Son Prince Edward. He would be governed by those he
knew to be wiser than himself, the main cause of his Peaceable Death and
Pompous Burial in the Abbey of Westminster of his own Foundation An. Dom. 1273.

Eleanor Daughter to E. 1. was born at Winch. An. 1306. and dyed in her
Infancy, and lies buried in St. Pet. Westminster.

Arth. Eldest Son to King Hen. 7. and Queen Eliz. was born at Winch: An. 1486.
being Partus Octomestris yet vigorous; He is more known to Pesterity by the
Widow he left the Lady Kath. Dowager, than by any of his own Personal
Performances. He dyed An. 1502. and lies buried in the Cathedral of Worc.

Saints.
Edburgh Daughter to King E. the Elder, at three years of Age took (you may
believe it if you will) the N. Testament, leaving Jewels, presented jointly by
her Father: a great Argument of Radical Piety! afterward she would steal the
Nuns Socks, and restore them washed and anointed. She dyed 920. some of her
Bones lying at Winchester (or Wilton) were Translated to Pilshore in Worc.

Martyrs.
Jo. Philpot, well descended, was Arch-Deac. of Lincoln and a Zealous Promoter
of the Prot. Religion. For some Words he used in the Convocation, he was
Martyred An. 1555.

Kath. Gowches and her two Daughters Guillemine Gilbert and Perotine Massey,
for absenting from the Church and denying the Real presence, were burnt for
Heretics, An. 1556. Add to these the Infant that by the force of the Fire
burst of of his Mothers Belly, Perotine aforesaid, whose Husband was a Minister
of Gods Word. The Babe being taken out of the Fire, was thrown in again by the
command of Eliez Gosselin Bailiff of the Isle of Guersney, where this happened.

Prelates.
Will. Wickham, (the Long) Son to Sir Jo. Perrot; Long his Name and Long
lasting his Memory, while the World endures for his 2 Foundations at Oxf. and
Winchester in the first founding St. Mary's Coll. He dyed An. 5. Hen. 4.

Jo. Russel born at Winchester, was Chanc. of Oxf. for Term of his Life. By E.
4. he was made Bishop of Lincoln, and by R. 3. Lord Chanc. of England, but
opposing the Lord Hastings Death he was imprisoned. He dyed An. 1490. leaving
behind him the Reputation of a Pious, Prudent and Learned Man.

Will. Warham, born at Ockley of Worshipful Parentage, was employed by H. 7. to
Marg. Duchess of Burgundy, and by him advanced Bishop of Land. then
Archbishop of Cant. but was Eclipsed by Woolsey, who had more Honor and more
Envy. Being Prime Advocate for Queen Kath. (in the matter of her Divorce) he
carried it so prudently, that he neither betrayed the cause of his Client, nor
incurred the Kings displeasure. He fell into a Praemunire with the rest of the
Clergy, and is said to have spent 3000 l. in repair of his Places. He dyed. An.
1533.

Rob. Sherborn, was employed Ambassador by H. 7. and by him made Bishop of St.
Dav. then Chich. which Church he adorned. When 90 years of Age he resigned, and
dyed An. 1536.

Jo. White, was Bishop of Lincoln, then of Winch. upon which Bishopric he
entered upon condition to pay Card. Pole a yearly Pension of 1000 l. He wrote
an Elegy on the Eucharist to prove the Corporal presence, and Preached the
Funeral Sermon of Queen Mary, wherein reflecting on Queen Eliz. he incurred her
just displeasure. Whereupon he was imprisoned till his Death, An. 1560.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Bilson, born in Winch. was Bishop of Worc. then of Winch. As Reverend and
Learned a Prelate as England ever afforded, Witness his Works, Of the Perpetual
Government of Christ's Church, and of Christ's descent into Hell. The new
Translation of the Bible was by King Ja. command, ultimately committed to his
and Dr. Smith's (Bishop of Glouc.) perusal. He dyed 1618.

Hen. Cotton, born at Warblington, was Pr. Counselor to E. 6. and God-son to
Queen Eliz. who preferred him Bishop of Salisbury, and pleasantly said, that
formerly she had blessed many of her God-sons, but now her God-son should bless
her. Another Cotton, about the same time, being Consecrated Bishop of Exeter,
the Queen added that she hoped she had well Cottoned the West. By Patience his
Wife he had 19 Children, and dyed 1615.

Arth. Lakes, born in Southampton, was Dean of Worc. and Bishop of Bath and
Wells. He answered St. Paul's Character of a Bishop, only he had no Wife. When
Mr. of St. Crosses, he increased the Diet, etc. of the poor Brethren. When
Bishop, he kept 50 Servants in Charity. He was, in fine, a Pattern of Piety. He
dyed An. 1602.

Statesmen.
Richard Rich, Knight, well descended, was Solicitor to H. 8. Upon his
deposition chiefly, Sir Th. More was beheaded. Under Cromwell, he was a lesser
Hammer to knock down Abbeys, some of which stuck (justly) to his Fingers. By E.
6. he was made Lord Chanc. of Engl. Being an opposer of D. Dudley he resigned
his Office by Prevention, having got a fair Estate at Lees-Abbey in Ess.
whereof he was Baron. He dyed in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz.
being direct Ancestor to the Right Honorable Chapter Rich now Earl of Warwick:

Will. Pawlet was Bar. of Basing and Marq. of Winch. in this County, S. N.
descended from the Powlets in Some. It Is said that coming to Court upon trust,
he prosper'd more than any Subject since the Conquest; living in the Harvest of
Estates, viz. the time of the Dissolution of the Abbeys. He was Servant to H.
7. and for 30 years Treasurer to H. 8. E. 6. Queen Ma. and Queen Eliz. The
latter in some sort owed their Crown to his Counsel, his Policy being the
Principal Defeater of D. Dudley's design to Disinherit them. Having seen 103 of
his Descendants, he dyed An. Dom. 1572. Aet. 97.

Sir Th. Lakes, born in Southampton, was Secr. of Estate to King Ja. He could
Endite, Write and Discourse at the same time. He was resembled to the Ship
Swift-sure, and was withal one of great Secrecy, and a learned and good Man. He
was one of the three Noble Hands who first led Mr. Geo. Villers into the favor
of King Ja. Yet he incurred the Kings Displeasure for the Offenses of his
Relations, tho the King even then gave him this Public Eulogie in open Court,
That he was a Minister of State fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe.

Soldiers.
Beavois Earl of Southampton, in the time of W. Conqueror, was vanquished (with
his English and Welsh Army) by the Normans, near to Carclis's, from whence he
fled to Carlisle. Note Beavoisses Sword (in Arundel Castle) is less than that of
E. 3. in Westminster-Church.

Seamen.
Sir Jo. Wallop, well descended, provoked with Prior John's Piracy, Landed in
Normandy with 800 Men, Burnt 21 Towns with Diverse Ships. Wherefore his Arms may
appear prophetical, viz. Arg. a Bend-unde (i. e. Wave) S.

Rob. Tomson, Merch. born in Andover, made a Voyage for the Discovery of Nova
Hispania, of which (with the City Mexico) he wrote a Description. He was
imprisoned in Mex. then in Spain for speaking against Saint-worship. And after
his Enlargement he was confined to Donna Maria de la Barrera, a Spanish Lady,
with whom he had in Marriage 2500 l. besides Jewels.

Writers.
Lamfrid of Winch. a Famous Doctor, flourished 980.

Wolston of Winch. a Learned, good and Eloquent Man, tho his Eloquence was
confined to Poetry, flourished An. 1000.

Jo. of Rasingstoak, Arch-Deac. of Leic. went to Athens, where he heard the
Lectures of Constantine a Noble Woman (not 20 years old) of the Mysteries of
Nature. He was the first Restorer of Greek in Engl. He was the Author of many
Works and dyed 1252.

Jo. of Hide, wrote Of the patience of Job, and of his own Convent, besides
Homilies. He flourished An. 1284.

Will. Lilly, born at Odiam, Mr. of St. Paul's School, wrote a Lat. Grammar
revised by Erasmus. He flourished An. 1522.

Will. Alton, a Dominican, in his Sermons avouched the Blessed Virgin tainted
with Original Sin. He flourished An. 1330.

Since the Reformation.
Mich. Reneger, bred in Oxf. wrote a Book in defense of Ministers Marriage.

Th. Sternhold, was Servant to H. 8. and a Legatee in his Will, by which 100
Marks were left to him as Groom of the Robes. He was also one of the
Bedchamber to E. 6. He Translated 37 Psalms into English Meeter, which with
the rest, have been called by some Geneva Giggs; and it is no wonder Libellous
Verses or Songs were made on the Translaters of the Psalms, seeing Drunkards
made them on David the Author thereof. He dyed An. 1549, before the Reign of
Queen Ma.

Dav. Whitehead, bred in Oxf. fled in the days of Queen Ma. into Frankford,
where he was in great esteem. In the Reign of Queen Eliz. he refused the
Archbishopric of Cant. out of a desire of Privacy, and the Master-Ship of
Hospital of the Savoy, which (had he been disaffected to the Government) he
might have accepted without Subscription, but would not, affirming he could
live plentifully on the Preaching of the Gospel. Being a great Divine, he was
chosen 1. Eliz. one of the Disputants against the Popish Bishops. His many
Books extant testify his Learning and Religion. When the Queen told him, She
loved him the better because he was unmarried, In truth Madam, (said he with a
Conscientious Bluntness) I love you the worse because you are unmarried. He
dyed An. Dom. 1571.

Nich. Fuller, Minister of Allington, was an Excellent Linguist, and his Books
found good regard beyond the Seas, where they were reprinted. Drusius charged
him for being his Plagiary, tho Mr. Fuller, had never seen any of his Works. He
was Eminent for his Humility, and dyed 1626.

Th. James, born in the Isle of Wight, D. D. and Keeper of the Library in Oxf.
was a Member of the Convocation held with the Parl. of Oxf. 1 Car. where he
made a Motion that some might be Commissioned to peruse the Manuscript Fathers
in all English Libraries for detecting Popish Editions. He was Sub-Dean of
Wells, and dyed 1628.

Chapter Butler, wrote a Book of Music, an English Grammar and a Treatise of Bees,
whence were made these Lines Aut a Consiliis Apibus, Butlere, fuisti
Aut a Consiliis est Apis ipsa tuis.
He was a Pious Man, painful Preacher, and solid Divine, Witness his Book of
the Marriage of Cosen Germans approved by Dr. Prideaux. He dyed about 1640.

Romish Exile Writers.
Rich. White, born at Basingstoak, proceeded Dr. of the Laws in Padua, were he
was afterward Regius Professor. He wrote, amongst other Books a British and
English History. He was made Priest, and was alive at Doway, 1611.

Jo. Pits, D. D. born near Alton, after much Writing and Traveling was
Confessor to the Duchess of Cleve. One Book of his, de Illustribus Angliae
Scriptoribus survived him, having caused all the rest to be Buried with
himself. And because that single Book Treated of a Subject handled by many, he
with his Base sets off this Treble, viz. Pits the Drone, Leland the Be, and
Bale the Wasp make up Three. He was at first Nephew to Sanders, and at last
Dean of Liverdun^ in Lorrain where he dyed 1616.

Benefactors since the Reformation.
Sir Will. Doddington, Sher. of this County An. 3. Jac. restored to the Church
the Impropriations which be held. The Almighty God Polished him with the sharp
Instruments of Affliction. He dyed about 1638.

Jos. Diggons, a Dutchman, S. N.
lived at Whetham, became Barrester, and by his Will bequeathed to Clare-hall
in Camb. (where he had been bred) his Real Estate to the value of 130 l. per
An. for the founding of Fellowships, etc. He dyed 1658.

Memorable Persons.
One at Stockbridge made a Plough, which drawn by Dogs, and managed by one Man,
could Till in one Day nigh an Acre of Light-ground in this County. But these
were brought up to their Trade; I have heard of a Race of Beagles about
Portsmouth that were Artists in hunting of Moles, tho they had never served an
Apprentiship.

Note, that H. Ep. Winton, Cardinalis Angliae, An. 1445. was Son of Jo. of
Gaunt, and the Popes Legate or General, who led an Army into Bohemia.

Hertford-shire.
HErtford-Shire, is so called from Hertford, the chief City therein, which
gives a Heart, etc. for its Arms it has Essex on the E. Middlesex; on the S.
Buckingham on the W. Bedford and Cambridge on the N. and is almost a Square of
20 Miles. The Garden of England for Delight. The Soil tho fittest for a crop
of Wood, bears good Grain. Of Buildings, 1. Theobalds, once in greatest Credit,
was built by Sir William Cecil, Lord Treasurer of England, and by his Son
exchanged with K. James for 2. Hatfield-house, which was at first the Bishops
of Ely, then the Kings, afterward the Earls of Salisbury, and is inferior to
none in England, being proud of the adjoining Vineyard, the English Tempe. Of
Medicinal Waters, there is one Well near Barnet, that springs from Allomveins.
The Water coagulateth Milk, and the Curd thereof, is an excellent Plaster for
green Wounds.

Proverbs.
1. Hertford-shire- clubs and clouted Shoon. 2. Hertford Hedge-hogs, Whereof
there is plenty in this County, whose nudling on the Earth, may serve as a
Metaphor for Covetousness. 3. Hertford-shire kindness. This is taken for a
mutual return of Favors.

Princes.
William Second Son of K. E. 3. was born at Hatfield, An. 9. E. 3. 1335. and
died within a few days after.

Edmund of Langley, Fifth Son to E. 3. was created Earl of Cambridge, An 36. E.
3. and Duke of York, An. 9. R. 2. He married Isabel, Daughter and Coheir of
Peter K. of Castile, and they lie buried at Langley, together. He had Richard,
Duke of York to his eldest, and died, An. 1402.

Edmund of Haddam Son to Q. Katherine by Owen Theodor, half-brother to H. 6.
and Father to H. 7. was solemnly created Earl of Richmond, at Reading, An. 31.
H. 6. He died 1456. It Is said, the fair Cathedral of St David's, was spared in
the days of H. 8. for the Monument of this Prince, which was in the Quire, as
the Church of Peterborough was saved by the Corpse of Q. Katherine Dowager.
Others say the Earl was buried at Carmarthen.

Saints.
St. Alban, born in Verulam, was Martyred under Dioclesian, An. 303. Note that
there grows good Liquoras, on the ruinous Walls of that City.

Popes.
Nicholas, Son to Rob. Breakspear, born at Abbots-Langley, was Lay-brother in
the Abbey of St. Albans. He was afterward Pope of Rome, by the Name of Adrian
4. having recommended himself to the Chair, by his converting the Norwegians.
He was Choakt with a Fly 1158. Whose Nephew Boso was made Cardinal. 1155.

Prelates.
Richard de Ware, (al. Warren, was made Abbot of Westminster, 1260, and
afterward Treasurer of England, to E. 1. He made that Pavement at Westminster,
which is a Masterpiece of Art. He died 1283.

Ralph Baldock, wrote a History of England, and was made B. of London, by E. 1.
He gave above 200 l to repair the East part of St. Paul's, where, upon clearing
the Foundation, there were a great number of Heads of Oxen found, which
probably had been sacrificed to Diana. He died 1313.

Jo. Barnet, was made B. of Worc. then translated to Bath and Wells, hence to
Ely, and was Lord Treasurer of England. He died 1373.

Th. Rudburn, was Chancellor of the University of Oxf. 1420. A great Scholar
and Mathematician. His mildness procured him the Love of persons of Honor. He
built a Tower over the Gate of Merton Coll. He wrote a Chron. of England, and
was B. of St. Dav. He flourished 1419.

Statesmen.
Sir Edw. Waterhouse, Knight, born at Helmstedbury of an ancient Family, since
the time of H. 3. His Father was Auditor to H. 8. who foretold that this
Edward, (when but a Child,) would be the Crown of all his Fathers Children, and
a Man of great Honor and Wisdom, fit for the Service of Princes. And
accordingly he grew in the Favor of great Persons, and Knowledge of the
Affairs of State. Walt. Devereux E. of Essex lying on his Deathbed, said to
him, Oh my Ned farewell, thou art the faithfullest and friendliest Gentleman
that ever I knew. Sir Jo. Perrot Dep. of Ireland, would do nothing in
State Affairs without him. He was afterward in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth
Knighted, then made Privy-Councellor for Ireland, and Chancellor of the
Exchequer therein; Where he was highly instrumental, in modelling the Shires as
they now are. He boldly signed the Instrument wherein the Earl of Desmond was
proclaimed Traitor, when other Privy-Councellours, dreading the Earls
greatness, durst not do the same. He died at Wood-Church, 1591. leaving no
Issue.

Henry Carry, Visc. of Faulkland, in Scotland, was born at Aldnam. A most
accomplished Gentleman, and complete Courtier. He was made by K. James Dep. of
Ireland. He married the Daughter and Heir, of Sir Lawrence Tanfield, Chief Bar.
of the Exchequer, by whom he had a fair Estate in Oxf. He died, 1620.

Soldiers.
Sir Henry Carry, was made by Q. Elizabeth, Lord Chamb. Baron of Hunsden. He
said to his Servants, when they had drawn their Swords in his Quarrel, against
one Mr. Colt, You Rogues, may not I and my Neighbor change a Blow, but you
must interpose? His custom in Swearing and Obscenity in Speech, tho it may
induce some of the Modern improvers of such Liberal Arts, to Swear: He was a
fine Gentleman, yet it made him seem a worse Christian, than he was, and a
better Knight of the Carpet then he could be. He might have been with the Queen
whatsoever he would himself, but would be no more then what he was, preferring
enough above a Feast in that Nature. He was a Man of great Candor, Loyalty and
Courage; The first Northern Commotion was suppressed by him, after which the
Queen sent him a Congratulatory Letter, in which she highly commended his
Wisdom, Valor and Fidelity. When he lay on his Deathbed, the Queen was
pleased to give him a Visit, and caused a Patent for the Earldom of Wiltshire
be drawn up, and the Robes to be made, and both to be laid upon his Bed. But
this Lord (whose Dissimulation was as his Latin) Madam (said he) seeing you
counted me not worthy of this Honor, whilst I was living, I count my self
unworthy of it, now I am dying. He deceased 1596. and lies buried in
Westminster-Abbey, being the direct Ancestor to the Earls of Dover and Monmouth.

Physicians.
Jo. Giles, born at St. Albans, was Physician to Philip K. of France, then D.
D. and the first English Dominican. Rob. Grosthead B. of Linc. lying on his
Deathbed, sent for him, and expected double comfort from him. He died 1253.

Writers.
Alex. Nequam was born in St. Albans, to the Abbot of which he wrote (for
Admission) Si vis veniam, Sin autem, tu autem. To whom the Abbot returned Si
vis venias, Si Nequam, nequaquam.

One Philip accosts Nequam thus, Et niger and nequam cum sis cognomine Nequam,
Nigrior esse potes, Nequior esse nequis:
To whom Nequam rejoined, Phi nota faetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis,
Phi malus and Lippus, totus malus ergo Philippus.


Yet Nequam was Miraculum ingenii. He was Canon of Exeter, and lies buried at
Worcester.

William of Ware, was Instructor to Jo. Duns Scotus. He flourished under H. 3.
1270.

Jo. Mandevile Knight, born at St. Albans wrote his own (Wonderful) Itinerary
through Afric, etc. He was wont to say of that Age, Virtue is gone, the Church
is despised, the Clergy do err, the Devil reigns, and Simon is his Deputy. He
died 1370.

Nicholas Gorham, a Dominican bred in Merton College, in Oxford, spent his
life in France: He commented almost on all the Scriptures. He died at Paris,
1400.

Jo. Whethamstead, was Abbot of St. Albans, in the adorning of which Church he
spent above 6000 pounds. On the North side of the Church he set up the Statues
of those Heathen Philosophers, who had testified of the Incarnation of Christ.
Having written above 80 Treatises, he died 1440.

Jo. Bourchier, Baron Berners, of an Honorable Family, whose ancient Seat was
Tharfield in this County. For his good Service in mauling Michael Joseph the
Blacksmith, leader of the Cornish Rebels against K. Henry 7. 1496, he was
made Chief Governor of Calis. He translated many and wrote some Books. He was
the second Author (the Lord Tiptoft being the first) since the decay of
Learning. He died 1532. It Is said the Berners Estate, is descended to the
Knyvets in Norf.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Cartwright, of St. Jo. Coll. in Cambridge, (whence he fled in Q. Mary's
time,) was Marg. Professor in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. He was the Champion of
the Presbyterian Party. He died An. 1603.

Arthur Capel, Esquire of Hadham, was by Charles 1. created Baron 1641. After
the surrender of Oxford, he retired to his House from whence he went to
Colchester. His Loyalty to his Master was proof against all Batteries and
Solicitations of his Enemies. He was beheaded 1648. Undaunted on the Scaffold.
Hence one alluding to his Arms ( a Lion Ramp. in a field G. betwixt 3 Crosses)
made these following Lines.

Thus Lyon-like Capel undaunted stood
Beset with Crosses in a field of blood.
He wrote a Book of Meditation, wherein Judicious Piety is discovered.

Edward Symonds, born at Cottered, bred in Cambridge, wrote a Book in
Vindication of K. Charles, and was Instrumental in setting forth his Majesty's
Book called (...). He died 1649.

Benefactors.
Nicholas Dixon, Parson and Clerk of the Pipe-Office, Under-Treasurer and at
last Baron of the Exchequer, contributed to the building of Chesnet-Church. He
died 1448.

Sir Ralph Josceline, born at Sabridgeworth, Draper and twice Mayor in London,
was made Knight of the Bath, by E. 4. He repaired the Walls of the City. He
died 1478.

Jo. Incent, Dr. of Law was born at Berkhamsted founded a fair School there,
confirmed by Act of Parliament, allowing the Master 20, l. the Usher 10 l. per
An. He died in the Reign of E. 6.

Sir Th. White, born at Rixmansworth, was Merchant Tailor in London, where he
was Lord Mayor, An. 1553. He built Gloucester-hall, and endowed St. Jo. Coll.
in Oxford. He bestowed great sums of Money on several Corporations, for poor
Freemen.

Since the Reformation.
Richard Hale, Esquire, born at Cudicot, was Grocer in London. He founded a
fair School, allowing 40 l. a year to the Master at Hartford. He died An. 16^0.
Whose Family does flourish with Worship at Kings-Walden.

Edward Bash, Knight, was born at Aldnam, gave 20 l. per An. for the
maintenance of a Schoolmaster at Stansted, besides his benefaction to Pet.
House in Cambridge. He died 1605.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 16. Henry Cock, Knight, was Cofferer to Q. Elizabeth and K. James,
Scotland to London. His Daughter was married to the Lord Delaware.

44. Edward Denny, Knight, presented K. James at his first coming out of
Scotland, with a gallant Horse, rich Saddle and Furniture. He was created Baron
Denny of Waltham.

Th. Connisby, Ar. being told that his potent Adversary had prevailed to make
him Sheriff, said, I will not keep a Man the more, or a Dog the fewer on that
account.

Hereford-shire.
HEreford-shire, has Worc. and Shrop. on the N. Glouc. on the E. Mounm. on the
S. Brecknock and Radnorsh. on the W. in Form almost a circle of about 35 miles
Diameter. The great Age of the Inhabitants is a sign of the goodness of the
Air, Serj. Hoskin entertained K. James with a Morish Dance of 10 aged people,
all of them making up more then 1000 years. This County exceeds in 4 W's. Wood,
Wheat, Wool and Water. Much Syder is made here, so that the County deserves
the Name of Pomerania. Cambden says, This County is not content to be accounted
the second in England. Salmons are here in season all the Year long, and are
found in the River Wy. As for Wonders, Bone-Well, near Richard's Castle, is
always full of Bones of little Fishes of which it can never be emptied, but
that they return again. An. 1461 three Suns appeared at the Battle fought
betwixt E. 4. and Ja. Butler Earl of Ormond, etc. An. 1575 Marcley-Hill shaked
and roared for 3 days together, and raised it self into an higher Place.

Proverbs.
1. Blessed is the Eye, that is betwixt Severn and Wye. It is intended to
signify either the blessedness of Pleasure or Safety. 2. Lemster bread and
Weably Ale, viz. the best.

Saints.
Ethelbert K. of the E. Angles was murdered at Sutton-Wallis, by Quendred Wife
to Offa K. of Mercia, An. 793. and was buried at Hereford.

Th. Cantilupe, well descended, Chanc. of Oxford and B. of Hereford. He died
about 1282 in Tuscany, whence his Bones were immediately sent into England. He
was Canonized by Pope Jo. 22. Note, his Father possessed Abergavenny Castle. He
was so highly honored by the Bishops of Hereford that (waving their ancient
Arms) they assumed those of Cantilupe) viz. G. 3 Leopards Heads inverted, each
with a Flower de Luce in his Mouth. He was the last English Man who was
canonized.

Martyrs.
Sir Jo. Oldcastle, Sheriff of Hereford. An. 7 H. 4. was Lord Cobham in Right
of his Wife. A valiant Man but a Wicklevite, so that he lost his Life on that
account. v. Eccl. Hist.

Cardinals.
Adam de Easton (or Eaton) first very Poor and mean, was D. D. in Oxford.
Afterward he was made Cardinal at Rome by the Title of St. Cicilie. Pope Urban
who created, did likewise annihilate him, confining him for 25 Years to an
empty and dark Abyss (or Dungeon) for suspicion of some Treachery, as for the
like reason he caused five other Cardinals to be put in a Sack and cast into
the Sea, in that manner sending them as joint Ambassadors to Neptune.
According to the ancient Roman Law De Sicariis, a Cock, etc. ought to have been
put in the Sack with the Cardinals, and it is very strange that The Pope assumes
to himself his Name and Authority.
Peter (understanding the usefulness of that Creature) should have been so
ill-natured as to withhold that Herald of Repentance from his devoted
Servants. By Pope Boniface Successor to Urban, our Cardinal was restored to all
his Dignities, and sent over into England to R. 2. with ample commendation. He
died 1397. and was buried in the Church of St. Cicilie.

Jo. Breton, S. N.
Dr. of the Laws was Famous in that Profession, and lived in the Reign of E. 1.
by whose Authority he wrote a Treatise of the Laws of England, the Tenor
whereof runs in the Kings Name, thus, We will, etc. His Work, after great
variation of the Laws, is still in great and general repute. He was made B. of
Hereford, by H. 3. He died about 1275.

Adam de Orlton, D. L. born in Hereford, where he was Bishop. He Murdered E. 2.
being moved thereunto by this Riddle. Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.

Jo. Grandesson, born at Ashperton, of high Extraction, and B. of Exeter, would
not suffer the Archbishop of Cant. to visit his Diocese. He arched the Roof of
his Cathedral, builded and endowed a rich College of St. Mary Ottery, to which
Benefactions he was enabled by persuading all the Secular Clergy to make him
sole Heir to their estates. He died 1369.

Since the Reformation.
Miles Smith, D. D. born in Hereford, was the Son of a Fletcher, and bred in
Oxford. The last Translation of the Bible was referred to the review of B.
Bilson, and this Doctor, who made the Preface to it. He was preferred B. of
Glouc. by K. James. He was a Man of great meekness. He died 1624.

Soldiers.
Rob. Devereux, Son to Walt. E. of Essex, was born at Nethwood. He was a
Masterpiece of Court and Camp. He entered the Court with the Advantages of
Pity (for his Fathers sake) Kindred (by his Mothers side) Favor (as being Son
in Law to Leicester) Merit, being a Beautiful, Courteous and Noble Person. The
Queen afterward made him the wanton to her fond Affection. When the Earl
privately left the Court, to see some Military Service in France, the Queen
passionately in Love with his Person grievously complained of his absence, and
often said, We shall have this young Fellow knocked on the head, as foolish
Sidney was by his own forwardness, and was restless till his return. He was
then in the Zenith of Reputation, when he returned Victorious from Cadiz, tho
he very quickly awakened the Queens jealousy by his Popularity. His
declination commenced upon his unfortunate Expedition into Ireland, which with
his absence from the Queen, and his ensuing return to Court, without leave,
were without any difficulty by his Enemies laid hold upon as a sure Foundation,
on which they might build the Earls Ruin; and he himself did not a little
contribute thereunto, when he headed a Company of disaffected Persons, who with
their Swords in their Hands, required that Evil Counselors might be removed
from the Queen, under that Pretense affording their zealous, tho too weak
assistance, to the distressed Essex; But the Gunpowder of their zeal did no
other Execution than blow their own Heads up into a vain expectation of the
Conquest of Terra incognita, their Designs into a final disappointment, and the
once beloved Earl into the final displeasure of the Queen, 1600. He was
valiant, liberal to Scholars and Soldiers, nothing distrustful, if not too
confident of Fidelity in others. Revengefulness was not bred, but put into his
Disposition. When one flattered him to his Face for Valor, No, said he, my
Sins ever made me a Coward. In a Word, his failings were neither so foul nor so
many, but that the Character of a right worthy Man belongs to his Memory.

Writers.
Roger of Hereford, bred in Camb. wrote a Book of Judicial Astrology, and was
skilful in Metalls, etc. by which he was acceptible to the Nobility. He
Flourished 1170. under H. 2.

William Lemster, D. D. in Oxford, was a Franciscan. He wrote Collations on the
Master of Sentences, and Questions in Divinity.

Since the Reformation.
Richard Hackluit, of Ancient Extract, bred in Oxford, was Prebend of
Westminster. He set forth a Collection of the English Sea Voyages; a work of
great Honor in England. He died in the beginning of King James, leaving a fair
Estate to his Son a Spend-thrift, who said, he had cheated the covetous Usurer,
who had given him spick and spannew Money for the old Land of his Great
Grandfather.

Jo. Guillim, of Welsh Extraction, Born in this County, was Pursuivant of Arms,
by the name of Portsmouth, then Rou^e^roix. He wrote that Learned Treatise,
called the Display of Heraldry, of which one Writes. But let me tell you, this
will be the harm,
In Arming others you your self disarm.
-- Sic vos non vobis, etc.
He died about the end of King James.

Jo. Davies of Hereford, was the great Master of the Pen in England, for fast,
fair, close, and various Writing, and could Flourish with his Fancy (in
Poetry,) as well as with his Pen. He died in the midst of the Reign of King
James.

Romish Exile Writers.
Humphrey Ely, Bred in Oxford, was Professor of the Canon and Civil Laws at
Pont-muss in Lorain. He Died and was Buried there 1604. with two Epitaphs, viz.
He eased others of Poverty, being himself almost pinched therewith, and Wonder
not that England is clouded with Heresies, -- here her Son lies.

Benefactors.
Jo. Walter, Born in Hereford, Bred in London, was Clerk of Drapers-Hall.
Having vowed he would give the surplusage of his Estate to Pious uses;
Accordingly he built and endowed a fair Almshouse in Southwark, another at
Newington, (both in Surrey) on which and other Pious Uses he expended well nigh
10000 l. whereof 20 l. per an. he gave to Hereford, he died and was Buried at
London. 1656.

Memorable Persons.
Rosamund, Daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, was a Mistress-piece of Beauty,
(and therefore Concubine to H. 2.) and Mother to William Longespee Earl of
Salisbury. King Henry is said to have Built a Labyrinth at Woodstock, to hide
this his Mistress from Jealous Juno, (Queen Eleanor) who (yet) getting access
to her, caused her death. She was Buried at Godstow-Nunnery near Oxford, with
this Epitaph, Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa Mundi non Rosa munda,
Non redolet sed olet, quae redolere solet.


Hugh Bishop of Lincoln caused her Bones to be scattered, which afterward were
gathered by the Nuns, and put into a perfumed Bag, where they continued till
the Reign of H. 8.

An. 8. Rich. de Baskevil, from a Town in Normandy so named. Peter's in Glouc.
Note, This County had Sheriffs long before H. 2.

26. Walter Devereux. Probably the same who Married Anne Daughter and Heir to
William Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Ferrers. He was Father to John Lord Ferrers
of Chartley, who Married Cecily Sister to Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, and
was Father to Walter Devereux Lord Ferrers, Created Viscount Hereford by King
Ed. 6. and was Father to Sir Richard Devereux Knight; Father to Walter Devereux
first Earl of Essex of that Family.

14 Ja. Baskevile. 18 Jo. Mortimer, 19 Richiard de la Bear. a Leash of Valiant
Knight Batchelors) were by H. 7. ( an. 1.) made Knights Bannerets.

11. Richard Cornwall, Knight, attended the Duke of Suffolk into France An. 15.
H. 8. at what time they took the Town of Roy, Richard took possession.

Sir James Crofts was privileged from being Sheriff, Court and Camp. For his
supposed compliance with Wyate, he was convicted of High Treason under Queen
Mary; but was restored by Queen Elizabeth, and made Governor of the Town and
Castle of Barwick. He behaved himself Valiantly at the Siege of Lies, yet in
the Second assault, when the English were worsted, the blame fell on him (as if
he favored the French, and maligned the Lord Gray then General) so that he was
outed of his Government of Barwick, yet he continued Privy-Councellor and
Controller of the Household to the Queen. He was one of the Commissioners in 88
to Treat with the Spaniard in Flanders. His inheritance is lately devolved to
Hen. Crofts D. D. and Dean of Hereford.

40 Thomas Conisby Founded a place in Hereford for poor People.

43 Jacob Scudamore, was Father to Sir. Jo. Created by King Charles Viscount
Slego in Ireland. This Lord was employed Leiger Ambassador in France, and
during the Tyranny of the Protectorian times, kept his secret Loyalty to his
Sovereign, Hospitality to his Family, and Charity to the distressed Clergy.

Huntington-shire.
HVntington-shire, is surrounded with Nothampton, Bedford, and
Cambridge-shires, and is hardly 20 miles in length. The goodness of the Land
may be collected from the plenty of Convents erected therein, the fourth part
of the whole having been Abbey-Land. All England can hardly show, in so short a
distance, so pleasant a Park as Waybridge, so fair a Meadow as Portsholme, and
so fruitful a Town for Tillage as Godmanchester, all three situated within 3
miles. Of Buildings, Kimbolton-Castle was the Jointure of Q. Katherine Dowager,
where she wept out the remainder of her Widowhood. It came afterward, by Gift,
to the Wingfields, from them by Sale to the Montagues; Henry late E. of
Manchester, who spared no cost which might add to the Beauty thereof.
Hincing-Brooke, once a Nunnery, and which I am confident, will ever be a
Religious House, whilst it relates to the truly Noble Edward Montague Earl of
Sandwich, the owner thereof. It shows one of the Magnificent Rooms which is
to be beheld in our Nation. The House and Chapel in Little-Goddin the
inheritance of Mr. Ferrer, where three In the beginning of the long Parliament.
numerous female Families lived (all from one Grandmother) in a strict
discipline of Devotion, rising at midnight to Prayers, and employing their
needles to bind Bibles, etc. whereof one most exactly done was presented to K.
Charles. The Marriage of all the younger of those Virgins confuted the Cavil,
that their Society was an Embrio Nunnery, and that there was a Pope Joan
therein. For Medicinal Waters, there are Hail-Weston, near St. Neots. 2
Fountain-lets, one sweet, conceived good to help the dimness of the Eyes, the
other somewhat Salt, esteemed Sovereign against Scabs and Leprosies.

Proverbs.
1. This is the Way to Beggars Bush. Spoken of Spend-Thrifts. Beggars Bush is a
Tree growing between Huntington and Caxton. It Is said that K. James being in
Progress in these Parts, with Sir Fr. Bacon, the Lord Chancellor, and having
heard that Morning how Sir Francis had prodigiously rewarded a mean Man for a
small Present, Sir Francis (said he) you will quickly come to Beggars Bush, and
I may even go along with you, if both be so bountiful. 2. Ramsey the Rich.
'Twas a rich Abbey once of 7000 l. yearly Revenue, the only 1983 l. at the
Dissolution.

Saints.
St. Elsled, Daughter of Ethelwold, E. of the E. Angles, (Founder of the
Monastery of Ramsey) was Abbess of Ramsey. When her Steward complained to her
that she had exhausted her Coffers with her profuse Charity, she with her
Prayers presently recruited them to their former fullness. (But I doubt the
Reader has not so much Faith as she had Charity.) When her Candle casually went
out as she read the Lesson, there came such a brightness from the fingers of
her right Hand, that it enlightened the whole Quire, which is as true as the
New-lights to which our Modern Sectaries do pretend, having Revelations at
their finger ends. She died An. 992, being buried in Lady-Church at Ramsey,
with high Veneration.

Prelates.
Will. de Whitlesey, is said to have been 3 d. Master of Pet. House in
Cambridge. He freed Oxford from the Jurisd^ction of the B. of Lincoln, allowing
the Scholars leave to choose their own Chancellor. He was successively B. of
Rochester, Worc. Land. and Archbishop of Canterbury. An excellent Scholar, an
Eloquent Preacher, and his last Sermon most remarkable to the Convocation on
this Text, And the Truth shall make you free, Jo. 8.2. Whence ('it is said) he
inferred the exemption of the Clergy from payment of Taxes, save with their own
free consent: But that Sermon de privilegio, non ducebatur ad consequentiam,
the Clergy in the contemporary Parliament paying a yearly Tenth to E. 3. He
died 1375.

Since the Reformation.
Fran. White, born at St. Neots, was successively B. of Carlisle, Norw. and Ely.
He encouraged the Students of Caius Coll. (where he was bred) to ply their
Books, by his own Example, telling them that from a poor Scholar, in that
House, by Gods Blessing on his Industry, he was brought to that Preferment. He
reduced many Romanists to our Church. This our Jonathan with his Armor-bearer,
Dan. Featly, D. D. were in their disputes, jointly Victorious over the Romish
Philistines. He died 163. leaving some Learned Works to Posterity.

Writers.
Hen. Saltry, a Cistertiar, wrote a Book in maintenance of Purgatory. He
flourished, 1140.

Geo. of Huntington, a Bendictine Monk in Ramsey, where he became Prior, was
one of the most Learned Men in that Age, being through-paced in 3 Tongues,
Latin, Greek and Hebrew. When the Jews were banished England, he purchased
many of their Rarities, for the use of his Convent. He flourished under H. 3.
and died in the Reign of E. 1. 1280.

Hugh of St. Neots, was a Carmelite in Hitching in Hartford-shire, and D. D. in
Camb. Of whom Bale (tho none of the best Bail,) affirms, That living in the
Egyptian Darkness, he sought after the light of Truth. He wrote a Comment on
St. Luke, and died, 1340. and was buried at Hitching.

William Ramsey, Abbot of Crowland, wrote the Life of St. Guthlake, St. Neots,
St. Edmund the K. all in Verse, wherein he did trip now and then, as being
through-paced in Poetry, born with a Poetical License in his Belly, and
consequently a Parce precor Lector -- in his Mouth. It Is said he paid 40000
Marks for the engagment of his Convent and all within the compass of 18 Months,
but he was assisted therein by H. 2. who to expiate the Blood of Becket, was
contented to be melted into Coin, and was prodigiously bountiful to some
Churches. Will. died 1180.

Hen. of Huntington, (where he was Archdeacon) wrote an Excellent History of
the Sax. Kings, therein showing more Modesty and less Superstition then most of
his Contemporaries. He flourished under K. Stephen, 1248. and died about 1260.

Rog. of St. Ives, was active against the Lollards and Sir John Old-Castle,
against whom he wrote, flourishing in 1420.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Young, a Monk in Ramsey, at the Dissolution saved many Hebrew Books of the
noble Library of Ramsey. He flourished, 1520.

Jo. White, Brother to Fr. B. of Ely, was bred in Camb. and made aftewards
Vicar of Eccles in Lanc. then Chaplain in Ordinary to K. James, and shortly
after died at London, and was buried in St. Mary's Church Woolnoth, 1615,
leaving Learned Works to Posterity.

Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet, born at Cunnington, descended by the
Bruces from the Blood Royal of Scotland, was bred in Trin. Coll. in Camb. and
became a most Eminent Antiquary, whose Memory is Famous to this and Foreign
Nations for his Collection of his Library at Westminster, containing Original
Manuscripts, wonderful for their Rarity, Variety and Method. And what adds a
Luster to all the rest, is the favorable access thereunto for such as bring
any Competency of Skill with them, and leave Thankfulness behind them. Here I
Register my self amongst the meanest of those who through the favor of Sir Th.
Cotton, (inheriting as well the Courtesy as Estate of Sir Robert) have had
admittance into that worthy Treasury, from which the grandest Antiquaries have
fetched their Materials. Cambden to him, to him does Seldom owe, -- their Glory
-- No Wonder, there was a Design driven on in the Popes Conclave, after the
Death of Sir Robert, to compass this Library to be added to the Vatican. Fine
Sharpers! with their Solemn Hue, and Cry, Have you any Knives to Grind? Whereas
they only intended to blunt their Edge by their Index Expurgatorius. Their
Project having miscarried to the Honor of the Nation, and advantage of the
Protestant Religion. Those Useful Instruments, remaining in safer Custody, will
serve upon occasion, to pair the Nails, (if not to cut the Fingers) of
Sanctified Ambition. From this Library, Secretaries of State, etc. have
recovered lost Originals. This Sir Robert was a Man of public Spirit, it being
his principal endeavor in all Parliaments (wherein he served so often) that
the Prerogative and Privilege might run in their due Channel, and in truth he
did cleave the Pin betwixt the Sovereign and the Subject. He was wont to say
that He had the least share in himself, whilst his Country and Friends had the
greatest Interest in him. He died at his House in Westminster, May, 6. An.
1631. and Aet. 61. Tho one may truly say, his Age was adequate to the
continuance of the Creation, Such was his exact Skill in all Antiquity. By
Eliz. Daughter and Coheir of William Brocas Esquire he had only one Son, Sir
Th. now living, who by Margaret Daughter to the Lord Will. Howard (Grandchild
to Th. D. of Norf.) has one Son, Ja. Cotton Esquire, and 2 Daughters, Lucie,
and Frances. The Posthume Works of this Worthy Knight, are lately set forth, to
the great profit of Posterity.

Steph. Marshall born at God-Manchester, and bred in Eman. Coll. in Camb. was
Minister at Finchfield, in Ess. and after long discontinuance, B. D. in Camb.
To the long Parliament, he was, in their Fasts and Preaching, their Trumpet; in
their Sickness, their Confessor; in their Assembly, their Counselor; in their
Treaties, their Chaplain; and in their Disputations, their Champion. He was of
so supple a Soul, that he brake not a joint, yea sprained not a Sinew, in all
the alteration of Times; and his Friends put all on the account, not of his
unconstancy, but Prudence, who in his own Practice (as they conceive,)
reconciled the various Lections of St. Paul's Precept, Romans 12.11. (...),
Serving the Lord and the times. He is said on his death Bed to have given full
satisfaction to such who formerly suspected his sincerity to the Presbyterian
Discipline, dying An. 1655. He was buried in the Abbey of Westminster.

Exile Romish Writers.
Rich. Broughton, born at Great Steuckley, bred and made Priest at Rhemes in
Fr. was afterward in England made Assistant to the English Archpriest, in
propagation of the Roman Catholic Cause. He wrote an English Ecclesiastical
Hist. from the first planting of the Gospel to the coming in of the Saxons. He
was living in the latter end of K. James.

Benefactors.
Ambrose Nicholas, born at Needenworth, Salter, then Lord Mayor in London 1576.
founded 12 Alm-houses in Mungwel-Street, with competent maintenance.

Sir Wolstan Dixie, born at Catworth, Skinner, then Lord Mayor in London 1585.
gave 600 l. to Eman. Coll. in Camb. to the founding of a Fellowship, erected a
Free School at Bosworth in Leic. and endowed it, where his Family flourish at
this day in worshipful Estate.

Rich. Fishbourn, Gent. born in Hunt. gave 2000 l. for the buying of
Impropriations in the North, and settling a preaching Ministry, where most want
thereof; he bequeathed as much to the Company of Mercers, and the same sum to
Huntington, with 1000 Marks to Christ-Church Hosp. He professed on his
Deathbed, that to his Knowledge, he had got no part of his goods unjustly,
having got it in the Service of Sir Baptist Hicks, after Visc. Cambden.

Memorable Persons.
Sir Oliver Cromwell, Knight, Son to Sir Hen. Knight of Hinching Brook, gave
K. James, and his Court a prodigious entertainment. He was an upright dealer;
Sir Jo. Leamon (Lord Mayor of London, having bought the fair Manor of Warboise
of him, affirmed that it was the cheapest Land that ever he bought, and yet the
dearest that ever Sir Oliver sold. None that bought of him was ever put to a
three pence Charge to make good his Title. He was very Loyal, always beholding
the Usurpation and Tyranny of Nephew and Namesake, with Hatred and Contempt.
He died 1654.

Kent.
KEnt, a Kingdom in the Sax. Heptarchie, has the Thames on the N. the Sea on
the E. and S. Surrey and Sussex on the W. in length 53 Miles, and in breadth
26. A considerable part of the County is called Weald, that is Wood-land
Ground, the Inhabitants whereof are called Wealdish Men. The general goodness
of the Soil may be gathered from the greatness of the Kentish breed of Cattle.
The natural Commodities are Cherries first planted here by K. Hen. 8.
Saintfoine, or Holy Hay, a great Fertilizer of Barren Ground. Trouts at
Forditch. Weld or Would, a Seed sown with Barley, and peeping out of the Earth,
when this is cut; The use of it is to die the best Yellow. Then Madder for
making Reds and Violets, whereof there are Crop-Madder, betwixt 4 and 5 l. the
Hundred, Vmber owe between 3 and 4 l. and Pipe or fat-Madder about 1 l. 10 s.
It was some 2 years since sown by Sir Nich. Crisp. at Deb^ford. The next is
Flax, the best in England. The Manufactures are Cloth in great credit. Thread
at Maidston. As for Buildings, the Cathedral of Rochester has a venerable
aspect of Antiquity. The Kings Palaces here are 3. viz. 1. Greenwich, affording
a most pleasant Prospect. 2. Eltham, not altogether so wholesome, and 3 Otford,
which Archbishop Warham did so enlarge and adorn, that Cranmer his Successor
was in some sort forced to exchange it with H. 8. on no gainful Conditions.
Cobham, the House of the late D. of Richmond and -- the fair Mansion House of
Sir Edward Hales Baronet, when finished will carry away the credit from all the
Buildings in this County. A Wonderful Accident happened Aug. 4. 1585 in the
Hamlet of Mottingham in a Field belonging to Sir Percival Heart. Betimes in the
Morning the Ground began to sink, 3 great Elm Trees were suddenly swallowed
into the Pit, and before 10 of the clock, no part of them could be discerned,
the Concave being suddenly filled with Water. The Hole was above 50 Fathoms
deep. Ten yards distance from that place, there was another piece of ground
sunk in like manner. Of Ships the most, best, and biggest, are built at
Woolwich and Winter near Chattam. The great SOVEREIGN, built at Dulwich, a
Lieger Ship for State is the greatest Ship our Island ever saw. I am informed
that the Mystery of Shipwrights for some discents has been preserved
successively in Families, of whom the Pets about Chattam, are of singular
regard. Queen Eliz. erected a Navy-Royal (continued and increased by her
Successors) of the best Ships ever Europe beheld, whereas before her time our
Kings hired Vessels from Hamburgh, Lubeck, and Genoa. The Model of our great
Ships primitively were our own, and we have improved the Patterns of those
Frigots that were taken from the Dunkerkers, in the days of the D. of Buck.
Lord Admiral, 2 of which still survive in his Majesty's Navy by the Name of
Providence and Expedition. The Navy-Royal exceeds all other Kingdoms, and
States, in Europe for 1. Swiftness, 2. Strength, 3. Beauty, 4. Seamen, 5.
Advantageous Weapons, 6. Provision, 7. Contrivance, lastly, Government. Of
Medicinal Waters, Tunbridge-Wells, are said to be discovered by a Footman to a
Dutch Lord, observing the Water to be in taste like to the Spaw in Germany.

Proverbs.
1. A Kentish Yeoman. That is, a Plain Man of Plentiful Estate. 2. A Knight of
Cales, a Genentleman of Wales, and a Lord of the North-Country; a Yeoman of
Kent with his yearly Rent will buy them out all three. Knights of Cales were
made by Rob. E. of Essex, An. 1596. to the number of 60, some whereof were Men
of mean Fortunes. 3. A Man of Kent. This relates to the Liberty or Courage of
the Kentish Men. As for the first, they know not the Tenure of Villanage; as to
the latter, ever since the time of Canutus, till H. 2. they had the Precedence
of marching in our English Armies, to lead the Van. 4. Neither in Kent nor
Christendom. It Is said, that H. 4. of Fr. Mustering his Soldiers at the Siege
of a City found more Kentish Men therein then Foreigners of all Christendom
besides, which (being but 70 years since) cannot be the Original of this Prove.
more ancient in use. Of England (or English Christendom,) Kent was first
converted to the Faith. This seems to be the true Original of the ^^overb.
According to some, it is the Periphrasis of no where, Kent being the best place
of England, Christendom of the World. 5. Kentish Long-Tailes. There Is a Fable
of the Pagans tying Fish-tails to St. Austins backside, whilst he was
preaching, in revenge whereof, real tails grew to the hinder-parts of the
offenders. Some would found the Prove. on this Miracle, but the Scene of that
Lying Wonder was pretended many Miles off, near Cerne in Dors. But I conceive
it a Note of Disgrace which by Foreigners was first cast upon the English in
general; For when there happened a difference in Palestine, betwixt Rob. Brother
of Lewis K. of Fr. and Will. Longespee E. of Salisbury, hear how the Frenchmen
insulted, O the Cowardliness of these fatal Long-tails! How happy, how clean
would this our Army be, were it but purged from Tails and Long-tails. Math.
Par. p. 790. That the English were hereby nicked appears by the Reply of the
Earl, The Son of my Father shall press thither to day, whither you shall not
dare to approach his Horse-tail. Some will have the English so called, from the
Bag they wore behind their Backs, whist the Monsieurs had their Lacqueys to
carry their Baggage; The Proverb continues still in Kent, (likely,) because it
lies nearest to France. Others will have the Kentish so called, from dragging
Bows of Trees behind them, which afterward they advanced above their Heads,
and so partly Cozened, partly Threatened K. Will. the Conq. to continue their
ancient Customs. 6 Kentish Gavel-kind. A Custom whereby Lands are equally
divided among all the Sons, and in default of such, among the Daughters, that
is, Give all Kind, Kind signifying a Child in the Low Dutch. This practice was
derived to our Saxons from the ancient Germans. An. 18. H. 6. there was not
above 40 Persons in Kent, but all their Land was held by this Tenure; But on
the Petition of diverse Gentlemen, this Custom was altered by Act of Parl. 31.
H. 8. and the Kentish Lands for the most part reduced to an Uniformity with the
rest of England. 7. Dover Court, all Speakers and no Hearers. Expressing a
tumultuous Court once kept at Dover, and implying all irregular Conferences,
etc. 8. The Father to the Bough, The Son to the Plough. That is, tho the Father
be Executed for his Offense, the Son shall nevertheless succeed to his
Inheritance, and hold it by the same Services by which his Father did hold the
same, tho the Goods and Chattels be forfeited. But this holds only in Felony
and Murder, and not in the Case of Treason, nor peradventure in Piracy, which
belongs to the Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty; Neither does it hold
where the Offender will not abide his lawful Trial, For in these Cases the real
Estate of the Offender shall be forfeited. 9. Tenterdens Steeple is the Cause
of the Breach in Goodwyn Sands. It is used in derision, when one assigns for
the Cause of any Acccident, that which is ridiculous and impertinent. This
Proverb was at first a serious assertion of an old Man of Kent, for said he,
those Sands were firm Lands before that Steeple was built, which ever since
were overflown with Sea Water. And some affirm that the Money which was
collected for the Fencing of East Banks against the Eruptions of the Sea, was
commuted by the B. of Roch. to the Building of Tenterden Steeple; By which
diversion of the collection, the Sea afterward brake in upon Goodwyn Sands.
10. A Jack of Dover, that is, Food that is unsavory by reason of frequent
dressing, Crambe bi^cocta; and is appliable to such who use Tautologies.

Princes.
Jo. Eltham, 2 Son to K. Ed. 2. by Isab. his Queen, was born at Eltham, and
afterward created E. of Cornwall. A Spritely Gentleman. He died in the prime
of his Age, in Scotland, An. 10. E. 3. After him all the Younger Sons of Kings
were created Dukes, except exspiring in their Infancy.

Bridget of Eltham, 4 th. Daugh. of K. Ed. 4. and Eliz. his Q. was a Nun at
Dartford, in this County, founded by K. E. 3.

Edmund youngest Son to K. Hen. 7. and Eliz. his Q. was born at Greenwich 1495.
He was created D. of Some. and died in his Infancy An. 15. H. 7. 1500 at Bish.
Hatfield in Hartf. which then was the Nursery for the Kings Children.

Henry VIII. Son of K. H. 7. born at Greenwich, was a Prince in whom great
Virtues and no less Vices, were in a manner equally contemperated. Pol. Virg.
He was a Man of an Uncomptrolable Spirit, carrying a Mandamus in his Mouth,
sufficiently sealed when he put his Hand to his Hilt. He awed all into
Obedience, which was Great in a King and Necessary in a Father of his Country.
In a Play of K. Hen. VIII. there was a Weak whining Boy that personated that
King; One of his Fellow Actors perceiving him to Act rather like a Mouse then a
Man told him, if you speak not HOH with a better Spirit, your Parliament will
not grant you a penny of Money. He died Jan. 28. 1546. v. Lord Herbert's Hist.

Q. Mary, Eldest Daughter to K. Hen. 8. and Q. Kath. of Sp. was born at
Greenwich, Feb. 18. 1518. She derived a Great Spirit from her Father, and her
Devotion from her Mother. She attained to the Crown, by complying with the
Gentry of Norf. and Suff. promising them to continue Religion, as Established
by K. Ed. 6. after the breach of which Promise she never prospered, losing
successively the Hearts of her Subjects, the hopes of a Child, the Company (not
to say Affection) of her Husband, the City of Calais, her Mirth, her Health and
her Life, which ended, Nov. 17. 1558.

Q. Elizabeth, 2 d. Daughter to K. Hen. 8. was born at Greenwich, Sep. 7. 1533.
She was Heir to the Learning, Bounty, Courage and Success of her Father;
Besides Goodness, wherein she was Daughter to her Mother. Her Learning appears
in her 2 Lat. Speeches to the University, and a third little better then Ex
tempore to the Poland Amb. Her Bounty was founded on Merit, and ordered with
Moderation, seeing that is the best Liberality that so enricheth the Receiver
that it does not impoverish the Giver. Her Courage was undaunted, never making
her self so cheap to her Favorites, but that she still valued her own
Authority. A prime Officer (with a White Staff) was commanded by the Q. to
conferr a Place then void on one of her Servants whom she commended unto him;
Pleases your Highness, Madam, (says the Lord) the disposal thereof pertains
to me by virtue of this White Staff conferred upon me. True said the Queen; yet
I never gave you your Office so absolutely, but I still reserved my self of the
Quorum: But of the Quarum, Madam, (returned the Lord) presuming on the favor
of her Highness. Hereat the Q. in some Passion snatching the Staff out of his
Hand; you shall acknowledge me, said she, of the Quorum Quarum Quorum, before
you have it again. The Lord waited Stafless almost a day (which seemed so long
to him as if the Sun stood still) before the same was re-conferred upon him.
Her Success was admirable, keeping the K. of Sp. at Armes-end all her Reign.
She was well skilled in the Queen-craft, and by her Policy and Prosperity she
was much beloved by her People; insomuch that since it has been said, That Q.
Eliz. might Lawfully do that which K. James might not. Her Popularity having
sugared many things, her Subjects thanking her for taking those Taxes which
they refused to pay to her Successor. She died at Richmond, March, 24. 1602.

Mary Daughter to K. James, and Anne of Denm. his Q. was born at Greenwich Apr.
8. K. James was wont pleasantly to say, He would not pray to the Virgin Mary,
but he would pray for the Virgin Mary; viz. his own Daughter. She died in her
Infancy, and was buried at Westminster.

Sophia, Youngest Daughter to K. James and Q. Anne, was born at Greenwich,
June, 22. 1606. and died 3 days after. She was buried nigh Q. Eliz. and is
represented sleeping in her Cradle.

Charles, Eldest Son of K. Charles and Q. Mary, was born at Greenwich. An.
1629. A fright of his Mother is generally reported to have antedated his
Nativity. The Popish Priests belonging to the Queen stood ready, watching to
snatch the ROYAL BABE to their Superstitious Baptism; But the tender Care of
K. Charles did out-vigil their watchfulness, commanding Dr. Web, (his next
Chaplain in attendance) to Christen the Child according to the Church of
England. This done, within few hours he expired, and lies buried at Westminster.

Saints.
St. Elphage, well descended, bred at Glouc. became a Monk at Glastenbury,
whence he removed and built himself a Hut at Bath, which small Cell, in process
of time, proved the beautiful Priory of that Place. Hence he was preferred B.
of Winch. and at last of Canterbury, which City was in his time Decimated by
the Danes, under pretense of Tribute detained. They saved the 10 th part of the
Citizens alive, amounting to 804. Destroying 9 parts, no fewer than 7236.
Elphage, unable to pay the Sum by them demanded, was after 7 Months
Imprisonment, barbarously murdered near Greenwich, about 1013. His Corpse first
buried in St. Paul's, was removed to Cant. by the Command of K. Canutus.

St. Agelnoth the Good, Arch-bish of Cant. is said to have given at Rome 100
Talents of Silver and one Talent of Gold, for the Arm of St. Augustine, B. of
Hippo. He expended much in repairing his Cathedral lately destroyed by the
Danes, assisted therein by the Bounty of K. Canutus. He died 1038.

Martyrs.
Will. White, a Wicklevite, and the first married Priest, since the Popes
solemn prohibition thereof, was constant to his Calling, and was as a Partridge
daily on the Wing, removing from place to place. He was seized, condemned and
burnt at Norwich, 1428. As for Marian Martyrs, those in this Shire suffered
either by the Cruelty of Griffin, Bishop of Rochester* or Thorton Suffragan of
Dover.

Confessors.
Sim. Fish, Esquire. a Lawyer, was forced to fly beyond the Seas for personating
Proud Woolsey in a Tragedy. His Book called the Supplication of Beggars
approved by Hen. 8. was the occasion of his Return to England after 2 years
absence. He escaped the Hands of Men, (viz. Sir Th. More, and more Papists) and
fell into the Hands of God, dying of the Plague. 1531.

Sir Ja. Hales, J. of the Com. Pleas, a Man of signal Integrity, when the rest
of the Judges (frighted with the Frowns of the D. of North.) subscribed the
disinheriting of the Lady Mary and Lady Eliz. he only refused, as against both
Law and Conscience. Yet An. 1. Q. Mary, by urging some Laws of E. 6. he fell
into the Displeasure of B. Gardener, was imprisoned and so threatened by his
Keeper that he endeavored to have killed himself, which being set at liberty
he afterward effected, Drowning himself in a small Water near his House. He
had led a Godly Life, and suffered much for his Conscience.

Cardinals.
Jo. Kemp, born at Wye (where he built a fair College for seculars) and bred
in Oxf. was successively B. of Roch. Chich. and Land. afterward Arch-bish. of
York and Cant. Cardinal first by the Title of St. Balbine, then of St. Rufine
in Rome; He was also twice Lord Chan. of Engl. according to these Verses. Bis
Primas, ter Praesul erat, bis Cardine functus.
Et dixit Legem bis Cancellarius Anglis.
Being of a Knightly Family he left it much improved by his bounty, and some of
his Name and Blood flourish in Kent at this day. He died An. 1453.

Rich. Clifford, born (probably) at Babbing was made B. of Land. 1407. and sent
by K. Hen. 4. as his Ambassador to the Council of Constance, where he preached
a Lat. Sermon before the Emperor and Pope. He acted as a Cardinal among the
rest, in the Election of a Pope. He was a Pious Man, and much esteemed. He died
1421 being buried nigh Sir Christopher Hatton.

Prelates.
Ralph of Maydenstan, (Maidston) a very Learned Man and great Divine, was
preferred, B. of H^reford, in the Reign of H. 3. 1234. He bought of one
Mount-hault a Nobleman, a fair House and the Patronage of St. Ma. Mont-hauly,
in Land. leaving both to his Successors in the Sea of Heref. He turned his
Mitre into a Coule, becoming a Franciscan first in Oxf. then in Glouc. where he
died about 1244.

Henry de Wingham, was made by H. 3. Chancellor both of England and Gascony,
Dean both of Totten-hall and St. Martins, and twice Ambassador into France.
Being chosen B. of Winchester he refused that See, because he would not eject
Ethelmar (Womb-Brother to K. Hen. 3.) he was therefore preferred B. of Land.
1259. He died 1261 and was buried in his own Cathedral.

Hen. of Sandwich, Arch-Deac. of Oxf. was Consecrated B. of Land. 1263. Ho
joined with the Barons against H. 3. for which he was Excommunicated by Othobon
the Pope's Legate, He danced attendance at Rome almost 7 years before he could
procure his Absolution. He died 1273. and was buried in St. Paul's.

Rich. of Graves-End, made B. of London, An. 1282. first founded a Convent of
Carmelits at Malden in Ess. He died at Fulham 1303.

Sim. Mepham, bred in Oxf. was Arch-bish. of Cant. in the Reign of E. 3. He
sued the Monks of Cant. in the Court of Rome, which Suit cost him 700 l. He
made a magnificent Visitation of the Diocese South of Thames till he was
resisted by Grandison B. of Exeter with whom the Pope sided. This broke
Mepham's he^rt, 1333.

Haymo of Hithe. B. of Roch. An. 12. E. 2. (to whom he was Confessor) erected
the great Hall at his Palace in Halling, and erected and endowed the Hosp. of
St. Barth. in Hithe. He resigned his Bishopric before his death, which
happened 1355. Whose Successor

Jo. of Shepey, was Treasurer of England, and died 1360.

Will. Read, built and furnished a Library in Mert. coll. He was by E. 3.
preferred B. of Chich. He erected a Famous Castle at Amberley in Suss. He died
1385.

Th. Kemp, B. of Land. saw the wars between York and Lanc. begun, continued and
ended. He curiously arched and leaded the Divinity Schools in Oxford, and built
the Cross nigh the Church of St. Paul's. He died 1489.

Ja. Goldwell, born at Great Chart, was Dean of Salisbury, Secr. to E. 4 and at
last B. of Norwich. He repaired the Church of Great Chart, and founded a
Chapel on the South side thereof. He died 1498.

Th. Goldwell, was by Q. Ma. prefer^ed B. of St. Dav. and in the Reign of Q.
Eliz. he went to Rome, where he procured Indulgences to such as should go in
Pilgrimage to St Winifrid's Well in his Diocese.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Poynet, was an exact Grecian and expert Mathematician. He presented H. 8.
with a curious Dial, showing with the Hours of the Day, the Change of the Moon,
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, etc. He was made B. of Roch. then of Winch.
but was forced to fly into high Germ. An. 1. Ma. Where before he had finished
his Book begun against Th. Martin in defense of Ministers Marriage, he died
1556.

Rich. Fletcher Dean and B. of Peterborough, and at last B. of Land. made a
Speech to Q. Mary of Scots, before her death. He was a Man of Graceful
Countenance, and therefore favored by Q. Eliz. tho he fell into her
displeasure for entering into a second Marriage, and that with a Lady of none
of the best reputation. He died with Grief 1596.

Brian Duppa, D. D. the Worthy B. of Winch. was born at Lewsham.

Statesmen.
Sir Edward. Poynings, a Brave Soldier, ferreted Perkin Warbeck out of
Ireland, of Parl. in that Kingdom, whereby All the Statutes made in England
before that time, were made of Force in Ireland; and that no Act should be
propounded in any Parl. in Ireland, till first it be transmitted to England,
approved there by the King, and returned thence under the broad Seal. After his
Return into Engl. he was created Baron, and died in the beginning of H. 8.

Sir Anth. St. Ledger, was properly the first Viceroy in Ireland, seeing,
during, his Deputy-ship, H. 8. ( An. 33.) assumed the Title of King of Ireland.
To him all the Irish made their Solemn Submission, yet they obtained from him
some relaxation of the Laws of England. He seized all the Abbey-Lands in
Ireland for the King's use. He made a Law that no Children should be admitted
to Church Livings. He Persuaded O Neil and O Brian to come over to England and
do Homage to the King, and procure the Title of Earls. He died in the Reign of
E. 6.

Sir Hen. Sidney Son to Sir Will. of Penherst, was by Q. Eliz. made Knight of
the Garter, Lord Pres. of Wales and Dep. of Ireland, where he made Annaly a
Shire by the Name of the County of Longford. In a Parl. 11 Eliz. he abolished
the Usurped Captain-ships, etc. He caused an Act to pass, whereby the Lord
Deputy was authorized to accept the surrenders of the Irish Seigniories, with
power of regranting the same, etc. He provided that 5 of the best persons of
every Sept should bring in all the persons of their surname to be justified by
Law. A Law was made that there should be a Free School in every Diocese. He
vested in the Crown more then half of the Province of Vlster, upon the
Attainder of Shane O Nale. He raised Customs upon the principal Commodities,
and reformed the Abuses of the Exchequer in that Kingdom. He also established
the Composition of the Pale in lieu of Purveyance and sesse of Soldiery, and
caused the Statutes in his own time to be printed. He died at Worcester 1586.
Having sought the Weal-Public more then his own private Advantage. Whose Son

Sir Phil. Sidney, born at Pensherst, Sisters Son to Rob. E. of Leicester, bred
in Christ-Church in Oxf. was a Gentleman of great Accomplishments and a sweet
Nature. Being in Election to be K. of Poland, he chose rather to be a Subject
to Q. Eliz. than a Sovereign beyond the Seas. He was so essential to the
English Court, that it seemed maimed without his Company, being a complete
Master of Matter and Language, as his Arcadia does evidence. At last leaving
the Court he followed the Camp, being made Governor of Flushing, under the E.
of Leic. But the Walls of that City could not confine the Activity of his Mind,
which must into the Field, where, (before Zutphen) he was slain with a Shot, in
a small Skirmish, which we may sadly term a Great-Battel, considering our heavy
loss therein. His Corpse being brought over into Engl. was buried in the Quire
of St. Paul's.

Sir Fr. Walsingham, Knight, originally descended from the Walsinghams in Norf.
was bred in K. Coll. in Camb. and gave the K. of Spain's Bible to the Library
thereof; after he had attained to great Experience by many Years travel beyond
the Seas, he was made Secretary of State; Mavelous his Sagacity in examining
suspected persons, either to make them confess the Truth, or confound them by
denying it to their detection; Cunning his Hands, who could unpick the Cabinets
in the Popes Conclave; quick his Ears who could hear at London what was
whispered at Rome. And numerous the Spies and Eyes of this Argus, dispersed
into all places. The Jesuits being out-shot in their own Bow, complained that
he out-equivocated their Equivocation having a mental Reservation deeper than
theirs. They tax him for making Heaven bow too much to Earth, oftentimes
borrowing a point of Conscience with full intent never to pay it again; whom
others excused by Reasons of State and dangers of the Times. He thought that
Intelligence could not be bought too dear, the Cause that so great a Statesman
left so small an Estate, and that so Public a Person was so privately buried
in St. Paul's, An. 1590. His only Daughter Frances was successively matched to
three matchless Men, Sir Philip Sidney, Rob. E. of Essex, and Richard Earl of
Clanricard.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir Jo. Fineux, born (probably) at Swinkfield, (bestowed on him by Th. Criol a
Lord in the Reign of E. 2.) was for 24 years L. Chapter J. of the K. Bench. viz.
from 11 H. 7. to 17. H. 8. He was a great Benefactor to St. Augustines in Cant.
and was of great Prudence, Justice, Piety and Humanity. He died about 1526. and
lies buried in Christ-Church in Cant.

Sir Rog. Manwood, born at Sandwich, was by Q. Eliz. preferred second Justice
of the Com. Pleas, and afterward Chief Bar. of the Exchequer. He was one of
the Commissioners who sat on the Trial of the Q. of Scots. He wrote a Learned
Book of the Forest Laws. He erected and endowed a Free School at Sandwich, and
died An. 35 Eliz. 1593.

Sir Hen. Finch, Knight, of Right Worshipful Extraction (the ancient Surname
being Herbert) was Serj. at Law to K. James, and wrote a Book of the Law which
is much esteemed. He wrote also another learned Book of the Calling of the
Jews, by which he was brought into some trouble, K. James, conceiving that Sir
Hen. advanced the Commonwealth of the Jews to the depressing Christian
Monarchies. He was Father unto Sir Jo. Finch. L. Chapter J. and for a time Lord
Keeper and Baron of Fore-ditch.

Soldiers.
In former times the leading of the Front in Armies absolutely belonged to the
Men of Kent. When the Cornish had that privilege in the time of K. Arthur, it
was only Temporary; and when the Men of Archenfeld in Her^ford-sh. prescribed
to have it, that was only local, as being confined to the Welsh Wars.

Seamen.
Will. Adams, born at Gillingham, served the English Company of Barbary
Merchants 10 years, and was for 14 years Employed by the Dutch in India. Being
Pilot to their Fleet of 5 Sail he conducted them to Japan, (being the first
Englishman who effectually discovered that Island) and in order to the
settlement of Trade, endured many Miseries. He died at Firando in Japan, 1612.

Civilians.
Nich. Wotton, Son to Sir Rob. was born at Bockton-Malherb. He was the first
Dean of 2 Metrapol. Churches, of Cant and York, and of those Cathedrals. Also
Privy Counselor to 4. Successive Sovereigns, K. Hen. 8. E. 6. Q. Ma. Q. Eliz.
was Employed 13 several times in Embassies to Foreign Princes. He refused the
Archbishopric of Cant. He died An. 1566. and was buried in Cant.

Giles Fletcher D. L. and Brother to Rich. B. of Land. was a most Excellent
Poet, Commissioner into Scotl. Germ. and the Low Countries, for Q. Eliz. and her
Ambassador into Russia, Secretary of Land. and Master of the Court of Requests.
His Russian Embassy to settle the English Merchandise was his Masterpiece; to
Theodore Juanowich D. of Muscovia. He came thither in 88. when some Hollanders
envying the free Trade of the English, had done them bad Offices, and when a
false report was generally believed that the Spanish Armado had worsted the
English Fleet. Yet our Doctor demeaned himself with such Cautiousness, that he
procured many privileges for the English Merchants, exemplified in Mr.
Hackluit. Having returned home he gave God hearty Thanks for being rid out of
the power of that Barbarous Prince, and wrote a Book called, The Russian
Commonwealth, the printing whereof was not permitted by Q. Eliz.

Physicians.
Rob. Floyd, of a Knightly Family, was bred in Oxf. and beyond the Seas. A
great Philosopher and Physician. He was of the Order of the Rosa-Crucians. His
Books are Mystical, as his Discourses were. He died An. 1637.

Will. Harvey, born at Folkston, and bred in Caius-Coll. in Camb. where he
proceeded Dr. of Physic, 5 years also he studied at Padua. He was afterward
Physician to Chapter 1. and was not only Dr. Medicinae but Dr. Medicorum. For this
was he who first found out the Circulation of the Blood. Tho he lived a
Bachelor, he may be said to have left three hopeful Sons to Posterity; his
Books 1. De Circulatione Sanguinis, 2. De Generatione, 3. De Ovo. This Dr. had
made a good progress in laying down a Practice of Physic, conformable to his
Thesis, of the Circulation of blood; but was plundered of his Papers in the
Civil War. Yet Posterity will acknowledge the improvements of this opinion as
Superstructures on his Foundations, and thankfully pay the fruit to his Memory.
He has since been a second Linacre and great Benefactor to the College of
Physicians at Land. He died An. Dom. 1657.

Writers.
Jo. of Kent, was sent Legate by Pope Innoc. 4. into Engl. He flourished 1248.
Haimo of Feversham, went to Paris, where he was inter Aristotelicos
Aristotelissimus. He was Provincial, then General of the Franciscan Order in
Engl. when on his Deathbed he received a Visit from the Pope. He died 1260.
Having first corrected the Roman Breviary.

Sim. Stock, lived an Hermit in a hollow Tree, (whence his name) tho B. D. of
Oxf. He left behind him many superstitious Books. Being 80 years of Age, he had
a Revelation that before his Death he should behold a Holy Order of Carmelites
come out of Syria, which fell out accordingly, Simon coming out of his Oak to
meet them, which is as true as that he was fed 7 years with Manna in Mount
Carmel.

Th. Haslewood, an Augustinian Friar in Leeds, a good Scholar and fruitful
Historian. He flourished under E. 2. 1321. in a Manuscript (in Librar. Cotton.)
he mentions how Edw. the Black Prince took. K. Jo. of Fr. Captive, vanquished
Hen. an Usurper in Spain, and restored Peter K. of Spain.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Th. Wiat, (Senior) Knight, was born at Allington-Castle. Being Servant to
H. 8. he fell into his disfavour about the business of Q. Anne Bullen, till by
his Innocence, Industry and Discretion he extricated himself. He was one of
great Learning, admirable Ingenuity, and answered his Anagram Wiat a Wit. He
translated David Psalms into English Meter. Of him Leland Let Florence fair her
Dantes justly boast,
And Royal Rome her Petrarchs numbered feet,
In English, Wiat both of them does Coast,
In whom all graceful Eloquence does meet.
Being sent Ambassador by Hen. 8. to Chapter 5. Emp. before he took shipping, he
died of the Pestilence, An. 1541.

Leonard Diggs, Esquire. one of excellent Learning and deep Judgment, was very
skilful in Architecture and Fortification. He printed his Tectonicon,
Prognostic general, Stratiotick, etc. He flourished 1556, and died I think
about the beginning of Q. Eliz. His Learning seems to run in the Blood of his
Family, Witness Sir Dudley Diggs of Chilham-Castle, made Mr. of the Rolls 1636.
whose Abilities will be in perpetual remembrance. And the Son of this Knight
wrote a Solid Treatise of the difference between King and Parliament.

Th. Charnock, born in the Isle of Thanet, writes of his own Book of the
Philosophers Stone. For satisfying the Minds of the Students in this Art
Then thou art worth as many Books as will lie in a Cart.
An. 1555. all his Work (carried on in pursuit of that Stone) fell on fire, and
he himself, 3 years after, was (by a Gentleman that owed him a grudge) pressed a
Soldier for the relieving of Calice, and this unluckily fell out when he was
within a Month (of his Reckoning) to be delivered, by the acquest of that
immortal Elixir, from Poverty and Contempt, those unsupportable Appurtenances
of Mortality. He saved nothing but the CAPUT MORTUUM, and now his own
projecting Head is dead.

Fr. Thin, was a Herald, by the Title of Lancaster, about the end of Q.
Eliz. afforded great assistance to Holinshed in his Works.

Rob. Glover, born at Ashford, was Pursuivant Procullis, and then Some. Herald.
He attended the E. of Derby, when he carried the Garter into France to K. Hen.
3. He began a Catalogue of the English Nobility with their Arms, etc. He died
1583. and was buried in St Giles Land. Whose Sister's Son

Th. Miles, born at Ashford, set forth his Uncles Catalogue of Honor. He was
Employed from Q. Eliz. to H. 4. K. of France, and discharged his Trust with so
great Fidelity and incredible celerity, that in memory of his Service, he had
given him for the Crest of his Arms a Chappeau with Wings, to denote the
Mercuriousness of this Message. He died An. 16 --

Jo. Philpot, born at Faulkston, was first Pursuivant Extraord. by the Title of
Blanch Lion, then in Ordinary by name of Rouge Dragon, and afterward Somerset
Herald. He made Additions to the second Edition of Mr Cambden's Remains, and
deserved highly well of the City of Land. proving in a Learned Book, that
Gentry does not abate with Apprentiship, but only sleeps, during the time of
their Indentures, and awaketh again when they are expired. He contributed to
the setting forth the aforesaid Catalogue. He died 1645. and was buried in
Bennet Pauls-Wharf.

Th. Playford, was chosen Marg. Professor in Camb. 1597. It Is said,
Self-conceit, (a Chronical Disease in others) was in him, an Acute Distemper
that violently seized his intellectuals. He died 160^ and lies buried in St.
Botolphs in Camb.

Jo. Bois, D. D. (descended from Jo. de Bosco who entered England with Will. the
Conq.) was Dean of Cant. Famous to Posterity for his Postils in defense of our
Liturgy. So pious his Life, that his Adversaries were offended that they could
not be offended therewith. A great Prelate in the Church did bear him no good
Will, for mutual Animosities betwixt them, whilst Gremials in the University,
the reason perchance that he got no higher Preferment. He died about the year
1625.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir Jo. Philpot, (whose Family has long resided at Vpton Court) was bred a
Grocer in Land. whereof he was Mayor, 1378. He set forth a Fleet An. 2. R. 2 at
his own cost to repress the Insolence of one John Mercer a Sco^, who was taken
with all his Ships arid rich Plunder therein. Two years after he conveyed an
English Army into Britain, in Ships of his own hiring, and with his own Money
released more then 1000 Arms there, which the Soldiers had formerly engaged
for their Victuals. The Nobility accused him for acting without a Commission;
Yea Pro tantorum sumptuum praemio v^niam vix obtinuit.

Will. Sevenock, born in Sevenock, gave 7 Acorns for his Arms, which if they
grow as fast in the Field of Herauldry, as in the Common Field, may be presumed
to be Oaks at this day. He was Grocer in, and ( An. 1419) Lord Mayor of Land.
He founded at Sevenoc a fair Free School for poor peoples Children, and an
Almshouse or 20 men and women, which at this day is well maintained.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Andr. Jud. born at Tunbridge and bred Skinner in Land. whereof he was Lord
Mayor An. 1551. He built an Almshouse nigh Sr Helens in Land. and a stately
Free School at Tunbridge, submitting it to the care of the Company of Skinners
who have expended of their own money 4000 l. in maintenance of it, etc.

Will. Lamb, Esquire. a Gent. of the Chapel to K. Hen. 8. was born at Sutton
Valens, where he erected an Almshouse and a well endowed School. An. 1557 he
began, and within 5 months finished the fair Conduit at Holburn Bridge, and
carried the water in Pipes of Lead more than 2000 yards, at his own cost,
amounting to 1500 l. The total sum of his several gifts moderately estimated
exceed 6000 l, He died about 1580. and lies buried in St Faiths Church under St
Paul's.

Frances Sidney, Aunt to the Renowned Sir Philip, was born (probably) at
Penherst. She bestowed on the Abbey-Church of Westminster a Salary of 20 l. per
An. for a Divinity Lecture, and Founded Sidney Sussex Coll. in Camb. She was
Relict of Tho. Ratcliffe E. of Sussex. She died childless An. 1588.

Sir Fr. Nethersole Orator of the University of Camb. was preferred to be
Ambassador to the Princes of the Union, and Secretary to the Lady Eliz. Q. of
Bohemia; it is hard to say whether he was more remarkable for his doings or
sufferings in her behalf. He married Lucy eldest Daughter of Sir Hen. Goodyear
of Polesworth in Warw. by whose encouragement he has founded and endowed a
very fair School at Polesworth aforesaid, and is still living.

Memorable Persons.
Simon Linch Gent. born at Groves, V. Essex.

Mary Waters, born at Lenham had at her decease, lawfully Descended from her,
367 Children, 16 of her own body, 114 Grandchildren, 228 in the 3 d.
Generation, and nine in the fourth. She died 1620.

A Gentlewoman now alive being in extreme Agony of Soul, held a Venice-glass in
her hand, and said, I am as surely Damned, as this glass is broken, which she
immediately threw with violence to the ground, yet was it taken up again sound
and entire. The Gentlewoman took no comfort thereat, but afterward it pleased
God she recovered from her sad condition. This she her self told to Th. Morton
Bishop of Durham, from whose Mouth I have received this Relation. In the days
of Q. Mary she used to visit the Prisons,and comfort and relieve the Confessors
therein. She was present at the Burning of Mr. Bradford. She died 1620.

Nicholas Wood, born at Halingborne, had the Caninus Appetitus and could eat a
whole Hog at a sitting, at another time 30 dozen of Pigeons. He died 1630.

An ingenious Yeoman in this County, used to Plough two Furrows at once, with
two Ploughs curiously joined.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 1. Hubert de Burgo late Lord Lieutenant to K. Jo. and L. Chapter J. of
England. Dover against Lewis the French Kings Son, but also in a Naval conflict
overthrew a new supply of Soldiers sent to him for Assistants. Hubert de
Burozo succeeded the former in his Office. No less a Courageous Judge, having
advised K. Hen. 3. to cancel the Great Charter, alleging that since it had
been granted by that King, during his Minority, it was of no Force in Law --

An. 20. Johan. de Northwood, of a right Ancient Family before the Conquest.
Northwood in the Parish of Milto Church. One of their Heirs was married into
the Family of the Nortons.

16. Rich. Waller, in the time of H. 5. took Charles, Orleans, Prisoner, at the
battle of Agin-Court, and brought him over to England where he held him in
honorable restraint at Grome-Bridge. He was a Benefactor to the repair of
Spelherst Church. The Prince assigned to him and his Heirs an Additional Crest,
viz. the Arms of France hanging by a Label on an Oak, with the Motto, Hic
fructus Virtutis. From this Richard, Sir William Waller is lineally descended.

23. Will. Crowmer, was taken by Jack Cade, the Rebel, and committed by his
Worship to the Fleet in London, because, (as Jack said,) he was guilty of
Extortion in his Office, Jack having caught him would not leave him so, but
being attended with other venturous Lads, brought him to Mile-End, and there
reformed the Gentleman by cutting off his Head, which they set upon a long Pole
on London Bridge.

John Scot, Arm. was Knighted and was much trusted and employed by E. 4. who
made him one of his Privy Council and Knight Marshal of Callis; and sent him
(with others) Ambassador to the Dukes of Burgundy and Britain to bring back
the Earls of Pembrook and Richmond. He lies buried in the Church of Braborne.

An. 3. Rich. Blakenbury, was nearly allied to Sir Rob. Constable of the Tower,
Ed. 5. and his Brother.

An. 5. William Boleyn, Mil. was made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of
R. 3. Th. Butler E. of Ormond, by whom he had (among others) Sir Th. Boleyn E.
of Wiltshire.

10 Jo. Peach (with the Kentish Gentry) made Perkin who landed then in
Sandwich, shrink his Horns back again into the shell of their Ships, and
brought 150 of Perkin's men up to London. He was Knighted for his good service.

An. 5. Jo. Norton, Ed. Poynings to assist Marg. Duchess of Savoy against the
D. of Guelders; where this Sir Jo. was Knighted by Charles, Young Prince of
Castile and afterward Emperor. He lies buried in Milton Church.

7. Th. Cheyney, Arm. Knighted by H. 8. was a Spritely Gentleman, living and
dying in great Honor; a Favorite and Privy-Councellor to four successive
Kings and Queens, viz. H. 8. E. 6. Q Mary and Q. Elizabeth.

11 Jo. Wiltshire Mil. was Comptroller of Calis An. 21. H. 7. He founded a
Chapel in the Parish of Stove.

An. 3. Moile Finch, Mil. married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to Sir Th.
Heneage, Vice-Chamb. to Q. Elizabeth, Lancaster. She in her Widowhood, by the
Special favor of K. James was honored Viscountess Maidston, and afterward by
the great grace of K. Charles 1. created Countess of Winchelsey, both Honors
being Entailed on the Issue Male of her Body; To which her Grandchild, the
right Honorable Heneage (lately gone Ambassador to Constantinople) does
succeed.

Canterbury.
CAnterbury an ancient City, during the Saxon Heptarchie was the chief Seat of
the Kings of Kent. Here Becket had his death, here Edward the Black Prince and
K. Hen. 4. had their Interment. The Metropolitan Dignity first conferred by
Gregory the Great on Land. was for the Honor of Augustine afterward bestowed
on this City. It is pleasantly Situated, being surrounded with a fertile Soil,
well Wooded and commodiously Watered by the River Stoure, (called Durrwhen in
Brit. i. e.) a swift River, tho it needs scouring. Of Buildings, Christ-Church
first dedicated, and (after 300 years Intermission to Th. Becket) restored to
the Honor of our Savior, is a Stately Structure, being the performance of
several successive Archbishops; it is much adorned with Glass Windows, painted
with excellent Colors tho none of the best Figures. Yet it is said a Foreign
Ambassador proffered a vast price to transport the East Window of the Quire
beyond the Seas. As Pictures are the Books, painted Windows were in time of
Popery the Library of Laymen. V. Somners Antiquities.

Proverbs.
1. Canterbury Tales, a Book of Chaucer so called; it is applied to all Feigned
and Pleasant Stories, etc. such as the Miracles of Becket; some helpful, as
when perceiving his old Palace at Otford to want water, he struck his staff
into the dry ground (still called St. Thomas his Well) whence Water runs
plentifully to serve that House. Others spiteful: as when (because a Smith
dwelling in that Town had clogged his Horse) he ordered that no Smith
afterward should thrive in that Parish.

Prelates.
Steph. Langton, born in England, bred in Paris, S. N.
was one of the greatest Scholars of the Christian World in his Age. He was
consecrated Cardinal of St. Chrysogone, and then by the Pope intruded
Archbishop of Canterbury, in defiance of King John. He wrote Comments on all
the Old, and some on the New Testament. He first divided the Bible into
Chapters, which Robert Stephens a Frenchman subdivided into Verses. Others
attribute the Division into Chapters to that able Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman,
who was the Improver but not the Inventor. Langton divided also the Kingdom of
England, reducing King John to sad extremities. He died and was buried at
Canterbury 1228.

Soldiers.
William Prude, Esquire. Lieutenant Colonel in the Low Countries was slain July
12, 1632 at the Siege of Mastricht. His body was brought into England and
buried in the Cathedral of Canterbury, part of his Epitaph being Stand
Soldiers; ere you march by way of Charge,
Take an Example here, that may enlarge
Your Minds to noble Action --
He feared not Death midst all Harms
He bare as much of Piety as Arms.
Now Soldiers on, and fear not to intrude
The Gates of Death by the Example of this Prude.
He married Mary Daughter of Sir Adam Sprackling, Knight, and had Issue by her
four Sons and three Daughters, his surviving Son Searles Prude having erected
his Monument.

Writers.
Osbern of Canterbury, an admirable Musician, and therefore a great Favorite
to Lanfrank the Archbishop. He was the English Genesis 4.22.
jubal as to the curiosity of Music in our Churches; An Art which never any
spoke against who understood it, otherwise Apollo is in a sad case, if Midas
his Ears must be the Judges. He wrote the Life of St. Dunstan in Latin,
flourished under William the Conqueror An. 1070.

Simon Langton, Brother to Stephen Archbishop was, Archdeacon of Canterbury;
who Carne and Sanguine revelante increased both the Revenues and Jurisdiction
of that Place to him and his Successors. A troublesome Man he was, and a great
Adversary to King Joh. and would not be reconciled to that King tho he was
urged both by the Command (under the pain of Excommunication) and Example of
his Holiness. This caused him to trudge to the Court of Rome where he found
little favor; For such who will be the Popes White Boys must watchfully
observe his signals, and charge when he charge, and retreat when he
retreateth. He wrote (besides other) a Book of the Penitence of M. Magdalene,
in relation (it seems) to himself, tho she found more favor in the Court of
Heaven then he at Rome. He died 12 --

Benefactors to the Public.
Jo. Easday, of most honorable Extraction, bred in Cambridge, was Dean of
Canterbury. He was the first Clergyman who carried tidings of the English
Crown to King Ja. He reduced the Court of Trinity College to a spacious and
beautiful Quadrangle, and added a stately new Court at his own expense of above
300 l. He died 161 --

Lancashire.
LAncashire has the Irish Sea on the W. York-sh. on the E. Cheshire on the S.
Cumberland and West. on the N. Being in length 50 and in the broadest part 31
Miles; Of a piercing Air which produces fair Complexions and firm
Constitutions in the Natives. Tolerably Fruitful. There are in this Country 36
Parishes, few, in so great a compass. But as Sir Tho. More, when Lord Chanc.
every Morning in Term-Time, asked Blessing in Westminster. Hall of his Father Sir Jo.
More, then a puisne Judge So in this Shire some Chapels exceeding their Mother
Churches in Fairness of Structure and numerousness of people, owe their filial
Relation, and still continue their dutiful dependence on their Parents. The
Church of Manchester has 9 Chapels, which before the Civil-Wars were reputed
to have had 500 Communicants a piece; a Lincolnshire Church is best built, a
Lancash. Church is largest bounded, and a London Audience consists of most
intelligent people. The people generally devout are (as I am informed)
Northward and by the West Popishly affected, which in other parts (intended by
Antiperistasis) are Zealous Protestants. Hence it is that many Subtle Papists
and Jesuits have been born and bred in this County, which have met with their
Matches in the Natives of the same County. Of Natural Commodities, there are
the most and best Oats. Allom found at Houghton. Oxen the fairest in Engl.
with goodly Heads, the tips of whose Horns are sometimes distanced 5 Foot
asunder. The Manufactures are Fustians Jen. Ausburgh and Millain. The Cottons
of Manchester carry away the credit in Engl. Other small Wares of that Town may
be wrapped up in Manchester. Tickin, tied with the Tape and bound about with the
Points and Laces of the same place. Of Buildings Manchester (a College.) Church
a great Ornament to this County, has a Quire exceeding beaut^ful, and for
Wood-work an Excellent Piece of Artifice. The wonder of this County, is, that
about Wiggin, Men go a Fishing with Spades and Mattocks, and find small Fishes
in deadish water un^er the tursie ground.

Proverbs.
I. Lancashire for Women. II. It is written upon a Wall in Rome, Richester was
as Rich as any Town in Christendom. Probably Richester was anciently an Eminent
Roman Colony; tho now it is not so much as a Mereate Town.

Martyrs.
Jo. Rogers, bred in Camb. an able Linguist and General Scholar, Converted from
the Popish Religion, translated the whole Bible, and dedicated it to H. 8.
Subscribing himself Th. Matthews. He fled beyond the Seas for fear of the 6
Articles, and returning in the Reign of E. 6. became a Preacher in Land. and a
great Stickler against Ceremonies. He was the first Martyr in Q. Mary's days,
he led all the rest, who if they had not been Flesh and Blood they could not
have been burnt: and if they had been no more then Flesh and Blood they would
not have been burnt. He was Martyred Feb. 4. 1555.

Jo Bradford, born at Manchester, Lawyer and good Scholar, Commenced Mr. of
Arts in Camb. by favor; He had been always a hard Student from his Youth. A
most Holy Man, who secretly in his Closet would so weep for his Sins, one would
have thought he would never have smiled again, and then appearing in Public,
he would be so harmlesly pleasant, one would think he had never wept before (V.
Fox Mart.) He suffered 1555.

Geo. Marsh, born at Dean, first Farmer, then (after the death of his wife)
Student in Camb. became Curate to Mr. Lawr. Sanders the Martyr. If he made
doubtful and fearful answers at his Examination, he made amends with his final
Constancy, being Burnt and Scalded to Death (having a Barrel of Pitch placed
over his head, an Accent of Cruelty peculiar to him alone) when he was Martyred
at Winchester Apr. 24. 1555.

Cardinals.
Will. Alan, of Gentile parentage, bred in Oriel-Coll. in Oxford, became Head
of St. Maries-Hall. therein. Then beyond the Sea, he became K. Professor at
Doway, Can. of Cambray, and Rhemes, and at last by Pope Sixtus 5 tus made Card.
Priest of Martins in Rome. He troubled the Church of Engl. lining his Red Hat
with the Black Offices he did against his Native Country. He Collected the
English Exiles into a Body, and united them in a College, first at Doway, then
at Rhemes, so great an Advancer, that we may behold him as a Founder of that
Seminary. He died at Rome an. 1594. and was buried in the English School.

Prelates.
Hugh Oldham, bred in Camb. a Pious Man and no ill Scholar, was B. of Exeter. A
Foe to Monkish Superstition, and a Friend to University Learning, Bountiful to
Braz. Nose, and Corp. Chr. Coll. in Camb. He founded and endowed a School in
Manchester, with a large Revenue. Dying Excommunicate 1520. (for not standing
to the decision of Rome in a contest with the Ab. of Tavestock) he was buried
in the Wall of the Chapel he had built by his own Cathedral.

Ja. Stanley, D. D. Brother of Th. E. of Darby, was by K. Hen. 7. his Kinsman
by Marriage, preferred B. of Ely. 1506. He lived at a distance from his
Cathedral, with his Brother all the Summer, and in the Winter time at Somersham
in Hunt. with one who was not his Sister and wanted nothing to make her his
wife save marriage. He died. 1515.

Hen. Standish, a Franciscan, and D. D. in Camb. and afterward made B. of St.
Asaph, entered the Lists with Erasmus as a Dwarf with a Giant, and petitioned
H. 8. to continue the Religion of his Ancestors; and entering into Matters of
Divinity cited the Colossians in stead of the Corinthians. He died 1535.

Jo. Christopherson, Mr. of Trin. Coll. in Camb. an excellent Scholar, made and
wrote a Greek Tragedy (so curiously that it seemed printed) and presented it to
H. 8. He translated Philo and Eusebius. into Lat. Besides his own Benefactions to
the Masters Lodgings and Library, he was highly instrumental in moving Q. Ma.
to her magnificent Bounty to Trin. Coll. In the visitation of Camb. he was very
active in burning the bones of Bucer, being then Elect B. of Chichester. He no
sooner put on his Episcopal Ring, but presently began to wash his hands in the
blood of poor Martyrs, An. 1. Eliz. he was deprived. He dyed in Restraint 1560.

Since the Reformation.
Ja. Pilkinton, D. D. of ancient Family before the Conquest, (when the chief of
them then sought for, disguised himself a Thresher) has for his Motto, Now
thus, now thus, in allusion to the head of the Flail, or to himself embracing
the safest condition for the present. He was bred in Camb. and fled an. 1. Mar.
into Germ. where he wrote a Comment on Ecclesiastes, and both the Epistles of
St. Peter. After his return he was preferred an. 1. Eliz. B. of Durham. And 9
years after, the Northern Rebels came to Durham, and tore the English Liturgy.
The Bishop had fared no better, if they had found him. When the Rebellion was
suppressed, the Bishop commenced a Suit against Q. Eliz. for the Lands and
Goods of the Rebels attainted in the Bishopric as due to him. But the
Parliament interposing, on special consideration, pro hoc tempore, Adjudged
them to the Queen He died. 1576.

Edwin Sandys, was born at Conisby. v. Eccl. Hist.

Rich. Barnes, born at Bold and bred in Oxf. was Suffr. B. of Not. then B. of
Carlisle 1570, and at last of Durham. A Man of good Nature, but abused by his
Credulity and Affection to his Brother Jo. Chancellor of his Diocese, who
(permitting base and dishonest persons to escape Scot-free for a piece of
Money) was the cause of good Mr. Gilpins's suspension, yet the Bp. restored him
afterward and thus accosted him, Father Gilpin, I acknowledge you are fitter
to be B. of Dur. then my self to be Parson of this Church of yours, I ask
forgiveness for my errors passed; Forgive me Father, I know you have hatched up
some Chickens that now seek to pick out your eyes, but so long as I shall live
Bp. of Dur. be secure no man shall injure you. He died in 88.

Jo. Woolton, born at Wiggin, fled in Q. Mary's days, and after his Return was
made Bishop of. Exeter, 1579. He endited Letters full of Wisdom and Piety not 2
hours before his death An. 1593. His daughter was married to Fr. Godwin Bishop
of Hereford.

Matthew Hutton, Marg. Professor and B. D. 1561 was chosen Bishop of Durham
1589. Translated to York 1594. He died 1605. V. Eccl. Hist. He gave 100 marks
to Trinity College, in Cambridge, and Founded a Hospital at Wareton in this
County. A learned and Pious Prelate. Martin Heton, Canon of Christ Church, was
made Bishop of Ely, by Q. Elizabeth ('it is supected he used Simoniacal
compliance.) He was the best Housekeeper in that See within Man's remembrance.
He died 1609. leaving two Daughters married in those Knightly Families of Fish
and Filmer.

Rich. Bancroft, bred in Camb. was made by Q. Elizabeth B. of Land. by K. James
Archbishop of Cant. A great Statseman and grand Champion of Church Discipline.
He was so habituated to the Poisons of malicious Tongues, that they became Food
unto him. Once a Gentleman presented to him a Libel which he found pasted on
his Door, Who nothing moved thereat, Cast it (said he) to 100 more which lie
here on a heap in my Chamber. Many a Lye-bel or loud Lie was made upon him. He
cancelled his first Will, wherein he left much to the Church, whereof a
Scurrillous Pen, He who never repented of doing Ill
Repented that once he had made a God Will.
Whereas indeed suspecting a popular violence on Cathedrals, and fearing an
Alienation of what was bequeathed unto them, he thought fit to cancel his own,
to prevent others cancelling his Testament. For by his second Will, he gave the
Library at Lambeth to the University of Cambridge in case the Archiepiscopal
See should be extinct. Which Clause secured that Library in the late Wars. He
died An. 1610. and lies buried at Lambeth.

Th. Jones, bred in Cambridge, commenced D. D. in Dublin, and was made B. of
Mead 1584. and one of the Privy Council to Q. Elizabeth in Ireland. He was
translated to be Archbishop of Dublin. 1605. and by K. James made Chanc. of
Ireland. Sir Roger his Son was by K. Charles created Viscount Renelaugh,

Rich. Parr, bred in Oxford, was preferred B. of Man by the E. of Darby, Lord
thereof. He died 16 --

Soldiers.
Sir Will. Molineux, Knight of Sefton, was at the Battle of Navarret in Spain,
made Knight Banneret by Ed. the Black Prince, An. 1367. He died at Cant. 1372.
Whose descendant

Sir Will. Molineux, Junior, flourishing under H. 8. brought the strength of
this County to the Succor of the D. of Norfolk, with whom he performed signal
service in Flodden-field.

Writers.
Hugh of Manchester, first a Dominican, then a Franciscan, having discovered an
Impostor, wrote a Book de Fanaticorum deliriis, dedicating the same to E. 1.
who sent him Ambassador to Philip K. of France to demand Lands which were
detained from him in Aquitain. He died 1294.

Rich. Vlverston, a great Antiquary, bred at Oxford, wrote a Book entitled the
Articles of Faith. He died (probably) about 1434.

Th. Penketh, D. D. in Oxford, so deep a Scotist, and of so great a Memory,
that had all the Books of Scotus been lost, he was reported by Forraigners,
able to restore them every word. He was Professor at Padua, and after his
return, Provincial of the Augustinians in England. He died and was buried in
London, 1487.

Jo. Standish, wrote a Book against the Translation of the Bible into English,
and presented it to the Parliament. He died 1556 near the end of Q. Mary.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Leaver, B. D. in Cambridge, fled in the Marian days and became Pastor of
the English Exiles at Arrow in Switz. He wrote a Book entitled The right path
way to Christ. He died after his return into England, 1558.

Will. Whitaker, born at Holme, died 1596. V. Eccl. Hist.

Alexander Nowell, born at Read. of a Knightly Family, and bred in Oxford,
narrowly escaped being catched by Baner, whilst he himself was catching of
Fish; being conveyed beyond the Seas by one Fr. Biwyer Merch. and leaving
behind him a Bottle of Ale on the Grass, which afterward was found no Bottle
but a gun, such the sound at the opening thereof; which is believed the
Original of Bottle-Ale in Engl. Returning An. 1 Elizabeth he was made Dean of
St Paul's, and for his Meekness, Learning, Prudence and Piety, the then
Parliament enjoined him to make a Catechism for public use. He was Confessor
to Q. Elizabeth. He gave 200 l per An. to maintain 13 Scholars in Brazen-nose
College. He died at 90 years of age, not decayed in sight, 1601.

Joh. Dee, Dr. in Oxford, was an excellent Mathematician and well skilled in
natural Magic, S. N.
and therefore by ignorant people suspected to be a Conjurer, which occasioned
the seizing of his Library, and his leaving of the Land. After his return he
was again haunted at Mortlack with the same scandal, but he gave such
satisfaction of the lawfulness and usefulness of his Studies, that the Queen
(besides many New Years gifts (presented him Warden of Manchester. All his
Books speak him a Learned Man. He died about 1 year of King James.

Roger Fenton, D. D. in Camb. was a Pious Minister in St. Steph. Walbrook
London. He wrote a Treatise against Usury. He had set about studying Dr.
Felton's Funeral Sermon (who lay at the point of Death) Yet it pleased God this
Dr. recovered, and preached Dr. Fenton's according to a former mutual agreement
betwixt them, that the Surviver should Preach the others Funeral Sermon. He
died 1615.

Robert Balton, born at Blackborne, had the 6 Properties of a good Scholar,
viz. good natural parts, a Faithful Memory, Curiosity, (using withal) Study,
Labor and Attention. He could speak the Greek and Lattin as well as English,
and that Stilo imperatorio. He was chosen a Disputant before King James, and
acquitted himself with great applause. He was afterward Rector of Broughton.
He died 1631.

Jo Weaver, bred in Cambridge an Antiquary, composed a Book of Funeral
Monuments in the Diocese of Canterbury, Roch, Land. and Norwich. He died about
1634.

Ja Cudworth, D. D. and an excellent Preacher, finished some of Mr Perkins's
Works.

Lawr. Chaderton, Lawyer, was a Convert from the Romish Religion, which when
his father (a rich Gentleman) heard, he sent him a groat in a poak to go a
begging therewith. He was one of the four Representatives of the Nonconformists
in Hampton Court Conference, and afterward a Translator of the Bible; having
preached one time for two hours space, he concluded That he would no longer
trespass upon their patience, at which the hungry people cried out For Gods
sake go on, which obliged him to an Extempore-continuance. After he had
commenced D. D. he died 1640.

Geo. Walker, born at Hauxhead, having the Smallpox in his childhood, (the
standers by expecting his dissolution) started up out of a Trance with this
ejaculation, Lord take me not away till I have showed forth thy Praises, which
made his parents devote him to the Ministry after his recovery. His Sermon,
printed against the profanation of the Sabbath, etc. procured him much trouble
and 2 years Imprisonment. He died 1651.

Romish Exile Writers.
Edw. Rishton, M. A. in Doway, and priest in Rome 1580. at his return to
England was three years Prisoner. He died of the Plague at St. Manhow, 1585.

Th. Worthington, well descended, was bred at Doway, B. D. and sent into
England, in 88. where he was imprisoned in the Tower of London. He commenced D.
D. at Triers. He wrote Notes on the Old Testament which came out in English at
Rhemes.

-- Anderton, a Learned Popish Priest scurvily disappointed Mr. Bolton, his
Prosylite who was to go over with him to the English Seminary.

Benefactors to the Public.
Will. Smith, born at Farmeworth preferred by H. 8 B. of Lich. and Cov. and
president of the Marches, Founded a Hosp. and School at Lich. and a School at
Farmeworth, allowing 10 l. per An. Salary for the Master. He founded
Brazen-nose College in Oxford, before the finishing of which he died 1513.

Molineux a preacher, about the time of H. 8. descended of the House of Softon
built the Church there, and Houses for Schools about the Church Yard, and made
the great Wall about Mag. College in Oxford.

Edw. Halsall, Esquire, Chamberlain of the Exchequer at Chester, founded a Free
School in Halstall.

Th. West, younger Brother to the Lord de la Ware, and Parson of Manchester
became Heir to that Barony. For a Marriage-License from the Pope he built a
College for Priests in Manchester.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Smith, finding Magd. Coll. in Cambridge, poor and empty, left it rich and
full of Scholars, having served it all his life and bequeathed to it 600 l. at
his Death.

Geo. Clarke, Haberdasher, a devout Man, dying Issueless before the late Civil
Wars, left to the Poor 100 l. per An. in Lands lying in Crompsal.

Humph. Chetham, a Pious and prosperous Man, was High Sheriff of this County
1635. He gave by his Will 7000 l. to buy a Fee-simple Estate of 420 l. per an.
for the Education of 40 poor Children in Manchester at School, from about 6
till 14 years of Age. He gave 1000 l. for Books to a Library and 100 l. to
prepare a place for them. He bequeathed 200 l. to buy Books for the Churches of
Manchester, Bolton, etc. He gave the remainder of his Estate above 2000 l.
Debts, etc. being paid to the increase of the Books in the Library.

Memorable Persons.
Sir Edm. de Trafford and Th. de Ashton Knights descended, of great Wealth and
Reputation were Famous Chemists. They procured a Patent from K. Henry 6. for
trying their (pretended) Skill in turning base Metalls into Gold.

Rich. Rothwell, is said to have dispossessed Jo. Fox near Not. of the Devil,
there passing betwixt them a large Dialogue. He died 1627.

The Battles.
At Preston in Anderness, Aug. 7. 1648. D. Hamilton entered England with an
Army. Most beheld him as one rather cunning than Wise, yet rather Wise than
Valiant. However he had Officers what did Ken the geat of feighting as weel as
any of oor Age. He would accept of no English assistance. Their Van and Rear
were many Miles asunder, and they met the resistance of Maj. Genesis Lambert
before they expected it. He at Preston gave the Scotch Army such a blow as
stunned, it, tho it reeled, on some Miles more Southward into Staffordshire,
where at Vlcester, the Duke was taken prisoner and utterly defeated. As for the
defeat of Ja. E. of Derby, ult. Aug. 1651. it amounted to no Battle by reason
of the Vigilance of Coll. Lilburn and others.

This County may be called the Cockpit of Conscience, by reason of the
constant Combats therein betwixt Religion and Superstition. A certain Impostor
had almost made Eleanor Q. Mother mad, by reporting the Posthume Miracles done
by her Husband H. 3. till Hugh of Manchester (of whom before) settled her
judgment aright.

Leichestershire.
Leichestershire, is almost circular in form, the Town of Leic. being the
Center, and the River Soar the Diameter thereof. Having Linc. and Rut. on the
E. Darby and Not. on the N. Warw. on the W. and Northam. on the S. in length
33 and in breadth 27 miles. The South W. parts abound in Corn, the North. W. in
Wood. The rest of the County having sufficiency of both. The natural
Commodities are Beans, about Barton in the Beans, where they appear like a
Forest in the time of Harvest. Cole dug up at Cole-Orton which warms
Cold-Orton (another Village) together with the whole County. Of Buildings, the
Parish Church of Bottsford is very fair and large, with a high Spire Steeple.
At the suppression of the Abbeys, many ancient Monuments of the Albanies and
Roses were removed hither out of the Priory of Beaver, by the Command of Th. E.
of Rutland. Then the Stone Tower built by William Lord Hastings at Ashby de la
Zouch has something Monarchical, in Height, Strength and Workmanship above the
ordinary Aristocracy of Fabrics. Also the Fair Palace built at Broadgate by
Th. Gray, Marq. of Dorset challenges the pre-eminence above the rest. As for
Wonders, There is a Village in this County called Charleton Curly, and all that
are born therein have an harsh and rattling kind of Speech, and cannot well
pronounce the Letter R. Which in all probability proceeds from a peculiar
Intemperature of the Elements in that place. There was a Fellow of Trin. Coll.
(likely a Native of Charleton) composed a Speech of competent length, without
any R therein, which he could not pronounce, his Speech having no Room for
ERRORS seeing there was an error in his Speech.

Proverbs.
1. Bean-belly Leichestershire; for Plenty. It Is a merry saying, Shake a
Leichestershire Yeoman by the Collar, and you shall hear the Beans rattle in
his Belly, tho at the same time they may have good Silver ringing in their
Pockets. 2. If Bever have a Cap, You Churles of the Vale look to that. That is
when Clouds hang over Bever-Castle it is a sign of much Rain, etc.

Princes.
Jane Gray, eldest Daughter of Hen. D. of Suff. by Fr. Bandon eldest Daughter
to Mary, second Sister to K. Hen. 8. was born at Broadgate, near Leicester. She
lived many pious, but few pleasant days, whose Soul was never out of the
Nonage of Afflictions, till death made her of full years to inherit Happiness.
Whilst a Child, her Father's was to her an House of Correction, nor did she
write Woman sooner than she did subscribe Wife, and in obedience to her
Parents, was unfortunately matched to the Lord Guilford Dudley, (a pious
Gentleman,) but Son to an Ambitious Father. She was Proclaimed, but never
Crowned Queen, living in the Tower longer a Captive than a Queen. Her Family,
by snatching at a Crown which ^as not, lost a Coronet which was their own. She
suffered on Tower Hill 1554/5 Feb. 12.

Kath. Gray, 2 d. Daughter to Henry D. of Suffolk was married to the Lord
Herbert Son to the Earl of Pembroke, who knowing the Case altered with that
Family, brake the Marriage quite off. Thus she became a Heraclita or Lady of
Lamentation. The Roses of whose cheeks looked very wan and pale tho they wanted
not for watering. Afterward Ed. Seymour E. of Hertford married her privately
without the Queens License, and concealed it till her pregnancy discovered it.
The English Proverb, It is good to be near a Kin to land, holds in private
Patrimonies, not Titles to Crowns. Q. Elizabeth beheld her with a jealous eye,
unwilling she should match either Foreign Prince, English Peer, or any person
whatsoever. The E. of Hartford being fined 15000 l. was imprisoned with his
Lady in the Tower, and severely forbidden her company. By bribing the Keeper he
bought (what was his own) his Wives Embraces, and had by her a surviving Son
Edw. Ancestor to the Right Honorable the D. of Some. She died Jan. 26. a
Prisoner in the Tower, 1567, after 9 years Durance therein. Whose Sister

Mary Gray the Youngest, Frighted with the infelicity of her two elder Sisters,
forgot her Honor to remember her Safety, and married one whom She could love,
and none need fear, Martin Kayes of Kent, Esquire. Sergeant Porter and died without
Issue 20 Ap. 1578.

Martyrs.
Hugh Latimer, born at Thurcaston, in his first Sermon, before King Ed. 6.
declared his own Pedigree to this effect. My Father was a Yeoman who had a Farm
of 3 or 4l. a year, kept 100 Sheep and six Servants, and my Mother milked 30
Kine. He did find the King an HARNESS which I remember I buckled on, with
himself and his Horse, when he went to Black Heath field. He kept me to School,
or else I had not been able to Preach before the King's Majesty now. He married
my Sisters with 5l. a piece, so that he brought them up in Godliness and the
fear of God. He kept Hospitality for poor Neighbors and some alms, and all
this did he of the same Farm, where he that now has it pays 16l p. an. and
more, and is not able to do any thing for his Prince, for himself, nor for his
Children, or give a cup of Drink to the Poor. He was bred in Cambridg, and
converted under God, by Mr. Bliney from a violent Papist to a zealous
Protestant. He was afterward made Bishop of Worc. and 4 years after outed, for
refusing to subscribe the 6. Art. He only (of the Bishops of the new Learning
in the time of H. 8.) urged that two Abbeys at the least, in every Diocese, of
considerable Revenues, might be preserved for the maintenance of Learned Men
therein, And swiming a good while against the stream, he was at last carried
away with the Current. He was Martyred at Oxford, 1555.

Prelates.
Gilb. Segrave, born at Segrave, and bred in Oxford succeeded a Kinsman (who on
his Deathbed recommended him) in the Provost's place of St. Sepul^hers in
York; and afterward was Bishop of Londdon He died 1317.

Walt. de Langton, born at West-Langton made by E. 1. Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield and Treas. of English. He lost the Favor of E. 2. for reproving him
when as yet but Prince for his debauchery; and tho he never wholly regained
that Princes good Will, it is said the surplusage of the People's affection to
him did fill up that blank. Prodigious his bounty in building and endowing his
Cathedral. He died 1321, and was buried in the Chapel of St. Ma. of his own
erection.

Rog. de Martival, Son of Sir Aukitell Mar. (whose Arms were Ar. a cinque-foil
S.) was born at Nowsley. He was First Archdeacon of Leic. then Dean of Linc.
and at last Bishop of Salisbury in the Reign of E. 2. 1315. He was the last
heir male of his Race, and Founded a College at Nowsley, for a Warden and
certain Brethren. His Estate descended to Joyce-de- Mart. his Sister married to
Sir Ralph Hastings, lineal Ancestor to the now Earl of Hunt. and the Hazleriggs
are at this day Possessors of the Manor of Newsley. He died 1329.

Rob. Wivil well descended, born at Stanton Wivil, was made Bishop of Salisbury
1329. tho both a Dunce and a Dwarf. He impleaded William Montague E. of
Salisbury in a Writ of Right for the Castle of Salisbury, and it had been tried
by a Combat of their two Champions, had not the King interposed and ordered
that the Bishop should pay 2500 marks for the quiet Possession of the Castle.

Since the Reformation.
Joseph Hall, born at Ashby de la Zouch, and bred in Em. College in Cambridg,
maintained there (with a Flourishing wit) That the World grows Old. He was
Minister at Halsted in Suffolk, where his Little Catechism did much good. He
became D. D. and was at the Synod of Dort, and was preferred first Dean of
Worc. then Bishop of Ex. then of Norwich, then of no place; surviving to see
his Sacred Function buried before his eyes. He may be said to have died with
the pen in his hand He was commonly called our English Seneca. For his pure,
plain and full style. Not ill at Controversies, more happy at Comments, very
good in his Characters, better in his Sermons, best of all in his Meditations.
In his Will he affirms that he does not hold Gods House a mere Repository for
the dead bodies of the greatest Saints. He died 1656.

Statesmen.
Geo. Villiers born at Brooksby, fourth Son to Sir Geo, being debarred (by his
late Nativity) from his Fathers Lands, was maintained in France by his Mother,
till he returned one of the compleatest Courtiers in Christendom. Sir Th. Lake
Ushered him into the Court, whilst the Lady Lucy Countess of Bedford led him by
the one hand, and William E. of Pembrook, by the other, about the same time
that Somerset began to decline. Soon after he was Knighted, created
successively Bar. Visc. Villiers, E. Marq. D. of Buckingham. and Knight of the
Garter, and had the Offices of Master of the Horse and Admiral conferred upon
him. He married his Neeces to Honorable Persons, thereby both gratifying his
Kindred, and fortifying himself with noble alliance. King Charles had as high a
kindness for the Duke as King James. had. Thenceforward he became
Plenipotentiary in the English Court, some of the Scotch Nobility making room
for him by their seasonable departure out of this Life. The Earl of Bristol was
justled out, the Bishop of Linc. cast flat on the floor; the Earls of Pembrook
and Carlisle content to shine beneath him, Holland, behind him. But tho he was
the little God at Court, he was the Great Devil in the Country; being
perfectly hated by the Commonalty, and charged by them with all Miscarriages in
Church and State. John Felton, apprehending himself injured, stabbed the Duke
to the heart at Portsmouth 1620. His person could not be charged with any
blemish, save that some Critics conceived his brows somewhat over pendulous, a
cloud which in the Judgment of others, was by the beams of his eyes
sufficiently dispelled. V. his Monument in the Chapel. H 7

Capital Judges.
Sir Roh. Belknap, Chief J. of the Common Pleas An. 48. E. 3, was displaced An.
11 R. 2. For this King intending to make away certain Lords, viz. his Uncle the
Duke of Glouc. the Earls of Arund. Warw. Darby, Not. demanded of his Judges
whether he might by his Regal power revoke what was acted in Parliament. To
this all the Judges answered affirmatively (Sir William Skipwith only
excepted) and subscribed it. Belknap to that his subscription added these
words, There wants nothing but an hurdle, an horse and an halter, to carry me
where I may suffer the death I deserve, for if I had not done this, I should
have died for it, and because I have done it I deserve death for betraying the
Lords. In the next Parliament all the Judges were arrested, Sir Rob. Tresilian,
Chief J. of the Kings Bench executed, and Belknap with others banished.

Sir Robert Catelin descended of the ancient Family of the Catelins in Northam.
was born at Biby An. 1. Eliz. he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench. He had aprejudice at all those who writ their Names with an alias, which
made a certain person ask him what exceptions his Lordship could take at Jesus
Christ alias Jesus of Nazareth. He died An. 16. Eliz.

His Arms were Party par Cheveron Az. and O. which are quartered by the Right
Honorable the Lord Spencer Earl of Sunderland, this Judges Daughter and sole
Heir being married to his Ancestor. Some 40 years since a Gent. of his Name and
Kindred had a Cause in Kings Bench, to whom the Chief Justice therein said,
Your Kinsman my Predecessor -- was a great Lawyer. My Lord (replied the Gent.)
he was a very Honest man, for he left a small Estate.

Writers.
William Leicester (or De Montibus) D. and Pr. D. in Oxford, Eminent in
Learning, and beloved by the Nobility, was known by the Name of Mr. William, an
Evidence sufficient to avouch his Magisteriality in all Learning. He was Chanc.
of Lincoln Church. He flourished under King Jo.

Rich. Belgrave, wrote a Description of this County, Theolog. Determinations
and Ordinary Questions. He was a Carmelite in Cambridge. He flourished under E.
2. 1220.

Rob. de. Leic. a Fran. in Oxford, was one that brought Preaching into Fashion
in that age. He wrote of the Hebrew and Romans Chronological Computation. He died
at Lichfield 1348.

Th. Ratcliffe, an Augustinian in Leic. a Man of great parts, wrote diverse
Books, and flourished 1360.

Barth. Culie wrote of Generation and Corruption, flourished under E. 3.

William De. Lubbenham, bred in Oxford, Provincial of the Carmelites in
Coventry, wrote upon Aristotle's Posteriors. He died 1361.

Jeffrey De Harby, Provincial of the Augustines in Oxford, and Confessor, Privy
Councellor to E. 3. wrote a Book in Praise of Poverty. He died 1361.

William De Folvill, a Fran. in Cambridge, maintani'd that Children (under 18)
might be admitted into Monastical Orders. He died 1384.

Hen. de. Knighton, Abb. of Leic. wrote his History from William the Conqeuror
to R. 2. in whose time he died.

William Woodford, a Fran. of profound Learning, was depeuted by Th. Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury to confute Wickliffe's Opinions.

Th. Langton a Carmelite in London wrote Of their Ordinary Acts, and Of the
Trial of H. Crump. D. D. etc. He flourished under H. 4. 1400.

Rob. de Harby, a Carmelite in Linc. wrote Sermons of the Festivities of the
Blessed Virgin. He flourished 1450.

Rich. Turpin, born at Knaptoft, was one of the Gentlemen in the English
Garrison in Calais in Fr. in the Reign of H. 4. He wrote a Chronicle of his
time, and died 1541.

Since the Refomation.
Hen. Smith, (called Silver-tongued) was Preacher at St Clement Danes. V. his
Life writ by me.

Jo. Duport, D. D. born at Shepshed, thrice Vice-Chanc. of the University of
Cambridge, was one of the Translators of the Bible. He bestowed the perpetual
Advowson of the Rectory of Harston on Je. College. He was happy in a Son Ja.
Duport, D. D. and Greek Prof. in Trinity College. He died 1617.

William Burton, Esquire. born at Lindley, 1575, wrote an Alphabetical Description
of the Towns and Villages in this County. etc. whose Younger Brother Robert
Burton, B. D. in Christ Church Oxford, wrote the excellent Book (called
Democritus Junior) of the Anatomy of Melancholy. He died Rector of Segrave
1636. and had this Epitaph, Paucis notus, Paucioribus ignotus;
Hic jacet Democritus Junior
Cui vitam pariter and mortem
Dedit Melancholia.


Rich. Vines, M. A. born at Blazon, and bred in Magd. College in Cambridg, was
Schoolmaster of Hinckley, then Minister of St Lawrence Jury in London. Being
the Champion he was called the Luther of his Party, Employed by the Assembly in
their Treaties at Vxbridg, etc. He forsook the Mastership of Pemb. Hall for
refusing the Engagement. Not a week before his Death, Preaching at St.
Gregory's, a rude Fellow cried out unto him, Lift up your Voice, For I cannot
hear you, To whom Mr. Vines returturned, Lift up your ears, for I can speak no
louder. He died 1655. Mr. Jacome Preached his Funeral Sermon.

Jo. Cleaveland, Born at Hinckley (where his Father was Vicar) was Fellow of St
John's in Cambridge, and Advocate General in the Garrison of Newark A General
Artist, Pure Latinist, Exquisite Orator, and Eminent Poet. His lofty Fancy may
seem to stride from the top of one Mountain to the top of another, so making to
it self a constant Champain and Level of continued Elevations. He died 1658.
and was buried at Colledge-hill Church. Mr Parson in his Funeral Sermon forbore
his Praises, seeing such who knew him not would suspect them far above, whilst
such who were acquainted with him, did know them much beneath his true Desert.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir Jo. Poultney, Knight 4 times Lord Mayor of London, built a College to the
Honor of Jesus and Corpus Christi, for a Mr. and 7 Chaplains, in St Lawr.
Church in Candle-wicke street in London An. 20 E. 3. which Church was named of
him St Lawr. Poultney. He built the Church of Allhallows the less, in
Thames Street, and the Monastery of White Friars in Coventry, and a Fair
Chapel on the Northside of St. Paul's in London where he lies buried, having
died 1349. He was a great Benefactor to the Hospital of St Giles's in Holborn,
and gave many great Legacies to the Relief of Prisoners and the Poor.

Since the Reformation.
Robert Smith, born at Mercate Harborough, Merchant Tailor in London,
Comptroller of the Chamber there, and one of the 4 Attorneys in the Mayors
Court, gave 750 l. to purchase Lands for the Maintenance of a Lecturer in the
Town of his Nativity, etc. as appears by the Settlement. He died about 1618.

Memorable Persons.
Edm. Applebie, Knight, served at the Battle of Cressy An. 2. E. 3. where he
took Monsieur Rob. du Mailart a Nobleman of Fr. Prisoner. An. 8. R. 2. he went
into France with Jo. Gaunt D. of Lancaster to treat a Peace betwixt both
Kingdom, and 9. R. 2 he accompanied the said Duke into Castile, who went over
to invest himself in the said Kingdom in Right of his Lady Constance, Daughter
and Coheir of Pet. K. of Castile.

Jo. Herdwick Esquire. born at Lindley, was the Man by whose Conduct Hen. E. of
Richmond (afterward H. 7.) in the Battle of Bosworth, got the Advantage of
Ground, Wind and Sun. He died 1511.

Jo. Poultney, born in Little Shepey, used (in his sleep) to rise, walk, fight,
etc. He was frozen to death with Sir Hugh Willoughby and the Fleet about Nova
Zembla.

Hen. Noel, Esquire. Younger Son to Sr Ande. of Dalby, was for his Excellent
Accomplishments, of the first Rank in Court, and being Gentleman to Queen
Elizabeth did equalize the Barons of great worth in Magnificence and Expenses.
Being challenged by an Italian Gentelman to play at Bal oun he so heat his
blood, that falling into a fever he died thereof, and by her Majesty's
appointment was buried in the Abbey of Westminster. An, 1596.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 16. Th. de Woodford was Coheir (with other 4 Brothers) to his Grandfather.
Hand of all where the Thumb was weakened to strengthen the 4 fingers.

An. 3. Th. Burdet, Mil. whose Grandchild Th. was accused of Treason, E. 4. for
wishing the Horns of his ( White) Buck in the Belly of him who advised K. Ed. 4
to kill him. But the true Cause of his Death seems to have been the bad opinion
the K. had of him, for that he had ever been a faithful Friend to Geo. D. of
Clarence the Kings Brother and Enemy. He took Death patiently and Cheerfully,
affirming he had a Bird in his Breast. (viz. innocence) that sung comfort to him.

An. 2. Humph. Stafford, (afterward Knight, Callais, coming over to England
was slain by Jack Cade. Sir Humph. his Grandchild fixed himself at Blatherwick
in Northam. where his Posterity does flourish to this day.

34. Will. Hastings, Son to Sir Leonard, was made by K. E. 3. Lord Chamb. Baron
Hastings of Ashby de la Zouch. An illustrious Person and Loyal to, and highly
beloved by his Master. Rich. D. of Gloc. perceiving him to obstruct the Way to
his Ambitious designs caused him to be beheaded. 1. E. 5. He was buried in
Windsor Chapel. He was Grandfather to Geo. Hastings first E. of Huntington.

Edw. Hastings Mil. created by Q. Mary (for his Devotion) Baron of
Loughborough, Stoke Pogeis in Buck. He died without Issue, that Title
afterward descending to a younger Branch of the same Honorable Family Hen.
Hastings, 2 d. Son to Hen. E. of Huntington, who by his Virtues does add to the
Dignity of his Extraction.

An. 5. Jo. Fisher, Arm. whose Father Th. a Valiant Coll. in Mussle-borough
Field, Scotch-man prisoner, who gave a Griffin for his Arms, received of the D.
of Some. his General, the Arms of his Captive, to be born within a Border Varrey.

14. Fr. Hastings (probably the same person with Sir Fr. 4th. Son to Fr. second
E. of Huntington, whose Children agreed together in Brotherly Love tho not in
Religion.) wrote a Learned Book in defense of our Religion, and was a great
Benefactor to Eman. Coll.

28. Anth. Faunt, served the P. of Orange, and afterward was chosen Lieutenant
Genesis of all the Forces in this Shire to resist the Spanish Invasion. But his
Election being crossed by Hen. E. of Hunt. (Lord Lieutenant of the County) he
died of Melancholy soon after.

39. Will. Skipwith, Esquire. afterward Knighted was a person of much Valor,
Judgment, Learning and Wisdom, Dexterous at making Epigrams, Poesies, Mottoes,
Devises, but chiefly Impresses.

Lincolnshire.
Lincolnshire in Fashion resembles a Bended Bow, the Sea making the Back, the
Rivers Welland and Humber the two Horns thereof. It is in length 60 and in the
broadest part 40 miles, divided into 3 parts, viz. Holland (or Hay-land) on the
S. E. Kesteven on the S. W. and Lindley on the N. to them both. The Natural
Commodities are Pikes in that River near Lincoln, whence the Prove. Witham Pike
England has n^ne like. For Wild-Fowl this County may be termed the Aviary of
England, for Variety, Deliciousness and Plenty, 3000 Mallards with other Birds
having been caught sometimes in Aug. at one Draught. Here is a Bird called the
Kings-Bird, namely Knut^, sent for hither out of Denmark for the use of Knut or
Kanutus, K of Engl. Then Dotterels, Birds that are ridiculously mimical; as the
Fowler stretches forth his Arms and Legs, going toward the Bird, the Bird
extends his Legs and Wings, going toward the Fowler, till surprised in the
Net. But it is observed, that the Foolisher the Fowl or Fish, the finer the
Flesh thereof. Pippins, very good about Kirton in Holland. Note, when they are
graffed on a Pippin Stock, they are called Renates. There are very good Dogs
in this County as Fleet-Hounds, Greyhounds originally employed in the Hunting
of Grays, that is Brocks and Badgers, Mastiffs for Bull and Bear, the Sport
being much affected therein, especially near Stamford. As for Buildings, no
County affords worse Houses or better Churches; and these are made of Polished
Stone, imported from other Parts, so that what might seem a Parodox, is true
here, The further from Stone, the better the Churches. The Cathedral of
Lincoln, whose Floor is higher than the Roof of many Churches, is a Magnificent
Structure. Three other Bishoprics, viz. Ely, Peterborough and Oxford were
carved out of this Diocese. Of the Houses of the Nobility, Tattershall
(belonging to the Right Honorable the E. of Lincoln) has been advanced by
degrees to the modern Magnificence thereof. Grimsthorp built by Chapter D. of Suff.
to entertain H. 8. in his Progress into these Parts, is now in the Possession
of the Right Honorable E. of Lindsey. For Wonders, At Fishtoft no Mice or Rats
are found, insomuch, that Barns built party per pale, in this and the next
Parish, on one side are annoyed, on the other side (being Fishtoft Moiety) are
secured from this Vermin. Some 140 years since at Harlaxton, there was found
(turned up by one Ploughing the Ground) a Golden Helmet of Antick-fashion,
studded with precious Stones, (probably of some prime Roman Commander. It was
presented to Q. Kath. Wife to H. 8.

Proverbs.
1. Lincolnshire Bag-pipes, which inspire the heavy Heels of Country Clowns,
overgrown with Hair and Rudeness, probably the Ground work of the Poetical
Fiction of Dancing Satyrs. 2. As loud as Tom of Lincoln. This Shire carries THE
BELL from all other places in England. 3. All the Carts that come to Crowland
are shod with Silver. Crowland being a Mossy Ground, so that a Horse can hardly
come to it. 4. It Is height makes Grantham Steeple stand awry. This Steeple
seems crooked to the beholders and Eminency exposes the uprightest Persons to
exception. 5. As mad as the Baiting Bull at Stamford. Will. E. Warren Lord of
this Town, in the time of K. Jo. standing upon the Castle Walls of Stamf. saw
two Bulls fighting for a Cow in the Meadow, till the Butchers Dogs pursued one
of the Bulls (running Mad) clean through the Town. The Earl being mightily
pleased with the sight, gave all those Meadows (called the Castle Meadows)
where first the Bull Duel began, for a Common to the Butchers of the Town
(after the first Grass was eaten) on Condition that they find a Mad Bull, the
day six Weeks before Christmas, for the continuance of that sport every year:
But as for the Sober Bull of Stamford, he was not so freakish as to leave his
Cow, after such a fair riddance of his Horn-mad Corrival. 6. He looks as the
Devil over Lincoln. Lincoln Minster being one of the Stateliest Structures in
Christendom, it is supposed that the Devil (of Malice if you please) overlooked
this Church when first finished with a tetric Countenance, as maligning Men's
costly Devotion. 7. He was born at Little Wittham. A Charitable Periphrasis of
a Fool; tho probably the first Inventor of this Proverb was born near the same
Village. 8 Grantham Gruel, 9 Grits and a Gallon of Water. Appliable to those
who multiply what is superfluous and omit what is necessary in their Discourse
or Actions. 9. They held together as the Men Marham when they lost their
Common. Ironicall, that is, they were divided, etc. Others take it to be an
Expression of ill success.

Note, This County is Famous for these here Natives, Contemporaries in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth Edward Clinton Lord Admiral, William Cecil Lord
Treasurer, Jo Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury and Peregrine Bartu Lord
General in Fr. Sir Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice Th. Wilson D. L. and
Secretary of State.

Princes.
Henry eldest (surviving) Son of Jo. of Gaunt D. of Lancaster was born in the
Castle of Bullinbrook. He was Courageous, Choleric and Ambitious, cunning to
catch, careful to keep, and industrious to improve all advantages. Being
disobliged by R. 2. he complotted with a good part of the Nobility to depose
him, whose Miscarriages, ill success and Debauchery exposed him to their Fury.
After the Murder of King Richard, Henry reigned with much opposition. He
persecuted the Wickliffites (who had been patronized by his Father) thereby to
be ingratiated with the Clergy. When Duke, he wore on his head an Antic hood.
On his deathbed he complained of his Sufferings in Keeping, nothing bewayling
his sin in getting the Crown. Fire and Faggot was kindled in his Reign in
England to burn (Pardon the Prolepsis) poor Protestants, and happy had it been,
had they been quenched at his death, which happened 1413.

Saints.
St. Botolph (probably of English Nativity) lived at and gave Name to Botolphs
Town (corruptly Boston) in this County.

Gilb. de Sempringham, of Noble Extraction, deformed in Body, but of Subtle Wit
and great Courage, obtained License of the Pope to found those Hermophradite
Convents of Monks, and Nuns under one roof, with no impregnable partitions.
It Is said, he saw 13 Convents, 700 Monks, 1100 Nuns of his Order, of which the
Convent Sempringham was the Prince residence. He died 1189.

Hugh born in Lincoln was stolen and crucified, when 9 years of Age, by the Jews
in derision of Christ 1255.

Martyrs.
Anne A^kewe, Daughter of Sr. William Knight, was born at Kelsey in this
County. She went to Heaven in a Chariot of Fire July 16. 1546. V. Eccl. History.

Cardinals.
Rob. Somercot, a discreet and Learned man, AMP.
was made Cardinal of St. Stephens, by Pope Greg. 9. An. 1231. He was a true
Lover of his Countrymen, the Cause that his Choler was twice raised, when the
Pope said in his presence, that there was not a faithful Man in England, tho
wisely he repressed his Passion. After this Pope's death, he was the foremost
of the 3 Elects for the Papacy, But the Italians were too hard for the Honest
Englishman, being made away by Poison in the Holy Conclave, 1241.

Prelates.
William of Ganesborough, a Franciscan in Oxford was sent over by King E. 1.
with Hugh of Manchester to Phil. King of France to demand reparation for some
Damages in Aquitain. He was a mighty Champion of the Popes Infallibility. And
for his good service Pope Boniface 8. preferred him Bishop of Worcester. 'Twas
a wag who said upon a Report of the close Imprisonment of Pope Urbane 8. Now it
is true, Papa non Potest errare, that is, the Pope cannot straggle. This
William died 1308.

William Ayrmin, descended of ancient Family still extant at Osgodby, was
Keeper of the Seal and Vice Chancellor to King E. 2. 1319. and was about that
time taken Prisoner by the Scots who slew 4000 Men of the English Army (being
8000 in all) near the River Swale. Afterward having recovered his Liberty, he
was made Chancellor of England and Bishop of Norwich An. 18. E. 2. He gave 200
l. to buy Lands to maintain Priests to say Mass for his Soul, and died 1337. at
Charing Cross nigh London It Is he bestowed the Manor of Silk Willoughby in
this County, on his Family, which with other fair Lands is possessed by them at
this day.

William Waynflet, (surnamed of the Town of his birth) Son to Richard Pattin an
ancient Esquire. (whose Posterity remain at Barsloe in Darbyshire) Founded Magd.
College in Oxf. V. Eccl. Hist.

William Lynwood, (probably) D. L. in Oxford, was Chanc. to the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Keeper of the Pr. Seal to H. 6. and was Employed on several
Embassies to Sp. and Portug. He wrote a Comment on the English Provincial
Constitutions, for which he was made Bishop of St. Dav. He died 1446.

Will. Ascough, D. L. descended of a worshipful and ancient Family now living
at Kelsey, became Bishop of Sarum, Confessor to H. 6. Jack Cade and his Crew
(many of them being his Tenants) fell foul on this Bishop, being a learned,
Pious and rich Man, three Capital Crimes in a Clergy man. They first plundered
his Carriages of 10000 marks, and then dragged himself from the high Altar to a
hill hard by the Church, and there barbarously murdered him, tearing his bloody
shirt in Pieces and leaving his stripped body stark naked the Place. 1450 Sic
concussa cadit Populari Mitra tumultu
Protegat optamus nunce DIADEMA, deus.


Richard Fox, born at Grantham, for the Public good was very instrumental in
bringing H. 7 to the Crown, who made him Bishop of Winchester. He was bred in
Cambridge and afterward in Oxford where he founded the Fair College of Corp.
Christi, allowing to it 401 l. 18 s. 11 d. per An. He beautified his Cathedral,
and made decent Tombs for the Bodies of the Sax. Kings and Bishops there, which
were since barbarously demolished, when, blind with Age, he felt Woolsey's pulls
beat violently, through the extreme desire he had of his civil or natural
death, and having defeated that Cardinals design to effect the first (by
rendering him obnoxious to the Kings displeasure, and outing him of his See) he
yielded to the latter An. 1528.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Goodrick (of Kirby) D. L. in Cambridg was employed in many Embassies and
at last made Bishop of Ely by King Henry 8. and Lord Chancellor of England by
King E. 6. Having resigned the place of Chancellor to Stephen Gardener, his
Death was very seasonable for his own safety. 1554. An. 1. Ma.

Jo Whitgift, born at Grimsby and bred in Cambridg was Bishop of Worcester,
then Archbishop of Canterbury (See my Eccl. History) I meet with this Anagram.
Joannes Whitegifteus, Non vi egit, favet Jesus. Indeed his politic patience
was Blessed in a high Proportion.

Jo. Still D. D. born at Grantham, was bred in Cambridg, for which he was
chosen, to oppose all Comers for defense of the English Church, when toward
the end of Queen Elizabeth there was an (unsucceeding) motion of a Diet which
should have been in Germany, for composing Matters of Religion. Then An. 1592
being the 2 d time Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, he was made Bishop of Bath and
Wells, where he raised a great Estate from the Lead Mines (in his time) found
in Mendip Hills; and laid the Foundation of three Families, leaving to each of
them a considerable Revenue in a worshipful Condition. He gave 500 l. for the
building of an Alms-houss in the City of Wells, and dying 1607 he lies buried
in his own Cathedral.

Mart. Fotherby, D. D. born at Great Grimsby, of a good Family, and bred in
Cambridg was Preband of Canterbury, then preferred by King Ja. Bishop of
Salisbury. Having begun a Treatise against Atheists, he died 1619*

Statesmen.
Edw. Fines, Lord Clinton, Knight of the Garter, was Lord Adm. of England for
above 30 years, a Wise, Valiant and Fortunate Gentleman. The Masterpiece of his
service was in Mussleborough Field, where the Victory over the Scots was from
the Sea, and an execution on the Land. Queen Elizabeth created him Earl of
Lincoln May 4. 1574. and indeed he had breadth to his height, a sufficient
Estate to support his Dignity. He died 1585. and lies bur^^d at Windsor.

Th. Wilson, D L^bred in Cambridg was Tutor to H. and Chapter Brandons successively
Dukes of Suff. He was made (in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth) Mr. of the Hospital
of St Kath. the Quire which he took down as being (probably) past repairing. He
at last became Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth. He died 15-

Th. Lord Bury (or Borough (Grandson to Th. created Baron by King Henry 8) was
born at Gainsborough. He was sent Ambassador into Scotland 1593. to excuse
Bothwel's lurking in England to advise the speedy suppressing of the Sp.
Faction and to advance an effectual Association of the Protestants in that
Kingdom, for their Kings defense, which was done accordingly. He was made
Deputy of Ireland An. 1597* Where, after the expiration of a Months Truce with
Tyrone,) he besieged the Fort of Black Water (the Key of the County of Tyrone)
and took it by Force, and presently followed a bloody Battle, wherein the
English paid dear for their Victory, losing many worthy Men, and amongst the
two that were Foster brothers (the strongest Irish Relation) to the E^rl of
Kildary who so laid this ^oss to heart, that he died soon after. Tyrone
rebe^eged Blackwater, and the Lord Deputy endeavou^ing to relive it, was struck
with an untimely Death. ^ote, That it brake the Heart of the Valiant Sir ^o.
Norris (who had promised the Deputies Place ^o himself, as due to his Deserts)
when this Lord Burgh was superinduced to that Office.

William Cecil, our English Nestor (for Wisdom and Vivacity) born at Burn, was
Secretary and Trea^urer for above 30 years together. He steered the Court at
his Pleasure, and whilst the Earl of Leice^ter would endure no Equal, and
Sussex no Superior ^herein, he by siding with neither, served himself with
both. You may easily imagine how highly the Wise Queen Elizabeth valued so
great a Minister of ^tate. Coming once to visit him when sick, and being much
heightened with her Head Attire (then ^n Fashion) the Lord's Servant who
conducted ^er throw the door, May your Highness (said he) ^e pleased to stoop;
The Queen returned, For your Master's sake I will stoop, but not for the King
of Spains. All England in that Age was beholding to his Bounty (as well as the
Poor in Standford, for whom ^e erected a fair Bead-house, acknowledging under
God and the Queen, their Prosperity the Fruit of ^is Prudence. This Worthy
Patriot died in 77 ^ear of his Age, Aug. 4. 1598. V. my Holy State.

Capital Judges.
Sir Will. de Skipwith, made Chief Bar. of the Exchequer An. 35. E. 3.
condemned Will. Wickham, B. of Winchester, REM.
at ^he importunity of Jo. Gaunt D. of Lanc. whereupon the Bishops Temporals
were seized, and he denied access within 20 miles of the K. Court.

Sir Will. Skipwith, Junior a Puisne Judge, AMP.
would not comply for the importunity of R. 2. nor the Example of his Fellow
Judges ( An. 10 Regn.) to allow, That the King by his own Power might rescind
an Act of Parliament. May I move that every 4 th. Link of the Collar of S S S
Esses, (from St. Sim. Simplicius an uncorrupted Judge in the primitive times)
may mind the Judges of this Skipwith. His Name has flourished at Ormesby, ever
since his time, in a very worshipful Condition.

Sir Will. Husee, Knight of a worshipful Family in this County, AMP.
was made Lord Chief Justice of the K. Bench An. 21. E. 4. Afterward, upon a
Question of great importance, he, with all the rest of the Judges, unanimously
resolved, That the Knights and Burgesses (formerly of the K. party) attainted
by due Course of Law, should forbear to come into the House, till a Law were
passed for the Reversal of their Attainders, but (as to K. Hen. 7. who had been
also Attainted) That the Crown takes away all defects, and Stops in Blood, and
that by the Assumption thereof, the Fountain was cleared from all Attainders
and Corruptions. He died An. 10. H. 7.

Sir Edm. Anderson Knight, a younger Brother of a Gentile Extract at
Flixborough was made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, An. 24. Eliz. He
censured Secr. Davison (about the business of Q. of Scots) for indiscretion;
telling him, that he had done Justum non just. He checked Sir Edw. Coke, the
Q. Solicitor, and H. Cuff (who was arraigned about the rising of the E. of
Essex) for their Foolish Syllogismes used in Court. He was a great Promoter of
the Established Church Discipline, and severe against Brownists. He died An. 3.
Jac.

Soldiers.
Sir Fred. Tilney, Knight resided at Boston. A Man of mighty Stature and
Strength. He attended K. R. 1. An. 119 to the Siege of Acon in the Holy Land.
16 Knights are descended from in a direct Line successively, till at last their
Heir General being married to the D. of Norfolk put a period to the Luster of
that ancient Family.

Peregrine Berty, L. Willoughby, Son of Rich. and Kath. Duchess of Suff. was
born near Hidleberg in the Palatinate. S. N.
He gave good proofs of his Valor in France and the Low Countries, and was at
last made Governor of Barwick. Not brooking the Obsequiousness of the Court,
he was wont to Say That he was none of the Reptilia, which could creep on the
Ground. The Camp was his proper Element, being a Gallant Soldier. When one
sent him a Challenge, whilst he lay sick of the Gout, he returned this Answer,
that although he was lame of his hands and feet, yet he would meet him with a
piece of Rapier in his teeth. Once he took a Genet managed for the War, which
was intended for a present to the King of Spain and was desired by a Trumpeter
from the General, to restore it, offering this Lord 1000 l down for him, or a
100 l. per An. during his Life, at his own choice. This Lord returned, That if
it had been any COMMANDER, he freely would have sent him back, but being an
HORSE, he loved him as well as the King of Spain himself, and would keep him.
When he was at the Spaw in Lukeland for the Recovery of his health, The Queen
wrote to him a very kind Letter, wherein she enjoins him to an especial care to
increase and continue his Health, and not to affect the satisfaction of his own
private contentation, beyond the attending on that which Nature and Duty
challenge^ from all Persons of his Quality and profession. Inviting him (in
most gracious and obliging Terms) as one of her Best and Noble Subjects, to the
Acceptance of some Employment at Home, tending to his own Honor, her Majesty's
Intrest and Security, and the general Peace of the Kingdom, at that time when a
Second Spanish Invasion was expected. His Parents fled in the Reign of Queen
Mary beyond the Seas. His Ancestors have flourished many years in this County,
where he was Baron of Willoughby in Right of his Mother. He died 1601.

Sir Edw. Harwood, born nigh Burn, was a Valiant Soldier and a Pious Man. His
having killed a Man in a private Quarrel put a period to all his carnal Mirth.
No possible provocations could afterward tempt him to a Duel; He refused all
Challenges with more Honor than others accepted them, it being well known that
he would set his Foot as far in the Face of his Enemy, as any Man alive. He was
one of the 4 standing Colonels in the Low Countries, and was shot at the Siege
of Mastricht 1632.

Seamen.
Job Haertop, born at Bourn went An. 1568 with Sir Jo. Hawkins his General, to
make Discoveries in New Spain. He was chief Gunner in the Ship called Jesus of
Lubeck. 8 of his Men were killed at Cope-verd, and the General wounded with
poisoned Arrows, but was cured by a Negro drawing out the poison with a Clove
of Garlic. He wrote a Treatise of his Voyage, wherein he makes mention of a
Tree that affords a Liquor which is both meat and drink, yields both Needles
and thread and Tiles for Houses; which may therefore be called the Tree of Food,
Raiment and Harbor. Being with some other left on Land after many Miseries, he
came to Mexico, and he continued a Prisoner 23 years, of which time he was 12
years in the Galleys, and 3 years a drudge to Hernando de Soria, who then sent
him to Sea in a Flemish, which was afterward taken by an English ship called
the Galeon-Dudley, that safely landed him at Portsmouth December 2. 1590.

Sir William Mounson, Knight of an ancient Family was made Vice Admiral An.
1602. (Sir Richard Leveson Ad. (by whose Diligence and Valor Trading was
Killed on the Coasts of Portugal, and a Caract of 1600 Tun taken (which had in
her 300 Sp. Gentelmen, and amounted to the Value of 1000000 Crowns of Portugal
Account) tho the Marquis de Sancta Cruce lay hard by with 13 Ships, and all
were secured under the Command of a strong Castle. In the Dispute, the
Syllogismes of Fire and Sword which were used by the English, (tho the
Premises were opposed with the best Spanish Logic) were ^nswered by the
Opponent, with a fair concessio^ (...) the Conclusion. The Goods gotten in the
Cara^^ight be valued, but the Good gained thereby was ^^estimable, for
henceforward the Spanish beheld the English with Admiration, and quitted their
thoughts of Invasion. This Worthy Knight died about the midst of the Reign of
King James.

Writers.
Gilb. of Holland, Preacher went to Clarvaulx in Burgundy where he was St.
Bernard's Scholar. He was a Judicious, Learned and Eloquent man, and one who
studied much the Holy Scriptures. Trithem. He continued St. Bernard's Sermons.
He flourished An. 1200. and was buried in Gistreaux in France.

Rog. of Crowland, a Benedictine, then Ab. of Friskney, wrote the Life of Th.
Becket. He flourished 1214.

Elias de Trekingham, a Monk of Peterb^oough, D. D. in Oxford a learned Man and
a Lover of History, wrote a Chronicle from 626 till 1270.

Hugh Kirksted, a Bernardine Monk (with one Serlo (made a Chronicle of the
Cisternians from their first coming into England* when Walter, d'Espeke first
founded their Abbey at Rivaux York-sh. He flourished 1220.

Will. Lidlington, a Carmelite and Provincial of his Order in England refusing
to subscribe to the decisions of the Synod at Narbone, was excommunicated and
banished from his Native Country. Then he lived at Paris and at last was
preferred Prove. of the Carmelites in Palestine. Yet he died in England and was
buried at Stamford. 1390.

Nich. Stanford, a Bernardine a smart, solid and judicious Writer in that Age
flourished 1310.

Jo. Bloxham, had great Employment under E. 2. in Embassies; an acute Man, tho
the Country Folk in this County, when they intend to Character a Dull Person,
use to say of him That he was born at Bloxham, the Town of his Nativity. He
flourished 1331.

Jo. Hornby, a Carmelite D. D. in Cambridg, vindicated the Seniority of his
Order against the Dominicans and carried away the Conquest. He flourished 1374.

Jo. Boston of Bury, named from Boston and a Monk in Bury, wrote a Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers a Manuscript, whereof Bishop Usher boasted he had the
best Copy. He flourished 1410.

Lawr. Holebeck, a Monk in Ramsey, wrote an Hebrew Dictionary very exact,
according to those days, wherein what ever was not understood was generally
accounted Hebrew. He died 1410.

Bertram Fitzalin, B. D. in Oxford, then Carm. in Linc. where he built and
furnished a fair Library, at his own and his friends cost; adding some Books of
his own writing thereunto. He died 1424.

Since the Reformation.
Edmond Sheffeild, (descended from Rob. Recorder of London, Knighted by H. 7.
for his good service at Black Heath) was born in the Isle of Axholm and by E.
6. created Baron thereof. Being a great Musician he wrote a Book of Sonnets
according to the Ital. fashion. He was slain at a Skirmish in Norwich. 1449. He
was direct Ancestor to the Hopeful E. of Moulgrave.

Pet. Morwing, bred in Oxford fled into Germany in the Reign of Queen Mary and
Preached to the English Exiles. He was a pure Latinist, in discourse, and
writing.

Anthony Gilby, bred in Cambridg, much skilled in the 3 Learned Languages, was
an Exile at Geneva, in the Reign of Queen Mary. Returning into England he
became a Furious opposer of Church Discipline Established in England.

Jo. Fox, born at Boston, and bred in Oxford, fled beyond the Seas in the Reign
of Queen Mary, where he set forth the Book of Martyrs in Latin, and after his
return into England enlarged and twice revised the same in our Language. He was
of prodigious Charity to the Poor. V. my Eccl. Hist.

Th. Sparks, D. D. born at South Sommercot, bred in Oxford, was Minister of
Bleachley in Buck. (an Impropriation restored to the Church by the Lord Gray of
Wilton,) a Solid Divine and a Learned man, as by his Works does appear. Being
Champion for the Non-Conformists in the Conference at Hampton Court, he was
there Convinced of the Lawfulness of Ceremonies, so that some accounted him K.
James's Convert. He afterward set forth a Book of Unity and Uniformity, and
died about 1610.

Dr. Tigh^, born at Deeping and bred in Oxford, was Archdeacon of Middl. and
Minister of Alhollows Barking London. An excellent Textuary and profound
Linguist, therefore employed by King Ja. in translating the Bible. He died
about 1610 leaving to his Son Jo. of Carby, Esquire, 1000 l. per An.

Fines Morison, Brother to Sir Rich. Lord Pres. of Munster, of worshipful
Extraction, was bred in Cambridge. Having traveled to Jerusalem he printed his
Observations in a large Book, which contains no stretched Reports. At last he
was Secr. to Char. Blunt, Dep. of Ireland, saw and wrote the Conflicts with,
and Conquest of Tyrone. He died about 1614.

Benefactors to the Public, since the Reformation.
William Ratcliffe, Esquire. 4 times Alderman of Stamford, dying An. 1539. gave all
his Lands in the Town (now worth 30 l per An.) to the Maintenance of a
Free School therein.

Jane Cecil, Wife to Sir Rich. Esquire. and Coheir to the Worshipful Families of
Ekington and Walcot, saw (being near 100 years of Age) the preferment of her
Son Sir William Lord Treasurer of Engl. She Leaded and paved the Friday
Market-Cross at Stamford, besides 50 l. given to the Poor, etc. Her Will was
made 1588, and dying she was buried in St. Martins in Stamford.

Geo. Trigg, Gent. gave ( An. 1586) 400 l. to be lent out for ever, upon good
security, without Interest to Poor young Tradsemen and Artificers in Stamford,
and bestowed a Tenement upon the Parson and Poor of St Jo. in the same Town.

Rich. Sutton, Esquire. born at Knaith, a Soldier (Paymaster by Place) afterward
Merchant in London, had Company with another Merchant in Common that (in
traveling with him) used to spend double to Mr Sutton, the one calling for
half a pint, the other for a Gill of wine, etc. At last Mr Sutton hearing of
his Death, and that he left but 50000 l Estate, I thought (said he) he would
dye no Rich man, who made such needless Expenses. He bestowed all he had on the
Charter House or Sutton's Hospital, a Masterpiece of Protestant English
Charity, wherein he appears Peerless in all Christendom. He died 1611.

Rob. Johnson, born at Stamford, was Minister of Luffenham in Rutland. He could
by his Argument surprise a Miser into Charity. He effectually moved those of
Vicinage, to contribute to the building and endowing of Schools, Whereof
(finding none) he left as many in Rutland, as there are Market Towns therein.
He was a considerable Benefactor to Em. and Sidney Coll. in Camb. and tho never
digni^^ed higher than Archdeacon of Leic. he left an Estate of 1000 l. per An.
to his Posterity. He died about 1616.

Frances Wray, Daughter to Sir Chichester Wray, Lord Chief Justice, was born at
Glentworth, and married first to Sir Geo. St. Paul, and afterward to Rob. Rich.
E. of Warw. She was a great Benefactress to Magd. Coll. in Camb. She died in
the beginning of K. Charles.

Memorable Persons.
Ja. York a Blacksmith of Linc. set forth a Book of Heraldry, called the Union
of Honor, An. 1640, etc. Lincoln-sh. of singular use, tho he has not hit the
Nail on the Head in every particular therein contained.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 17. Jo. Walch, of Grimesby fought a Combat with Mortileto de Vilenos of
Navar, Navarois, was overcome and afterward hanged for his false accusation.

An. 2. Jo. Rochford, Mil. whose Arms are quartered by the E. of Moulgrave, Fr.
and Italy and his Translation of Josephus his Antiquities, Polychronicon, etc.

An. 2. Rob. Dimock, Mil. at the Coronation of H. 7. came on Horseback into
Westminster. Hall, where the K. dined, Gauntlet on the ground, challenged any who
durst question the Kings Right to the Crown.

An. 9.^0. Husee, created by H. 8. the first and last Baron of Husee in Sheford
engaging with the Rebellious Commons An. 1537. was beheaded.

An. 16. Th. Burge, Mil. descended from the Heir Genesis of the Lord Cobham of
Sterbury in Surry, Burge or Burough by H. 8. His Grandchild Th. Lord Burge
Dep. of Ir. and Knight of the Garter left no Issue Male nor plentiful Estate,
only 4 Daughters, Eliz. married to Sir Geo. Brook. Frances to the ancient
Family of Coppinger in Suff. Anne Wife to Sir Drue Drury and Kath. married to
-- Knivet of Norf. Mother to Sir Jo. Knivet Knight of the Bath.

An. 9. Jervase Scroop, Mil. engaged with his Majesty in Edge-hill-fight where
he received 26 Wounds and was left among the Dead. Adrian obtained leave to
bury his Corpse, which when he found, he perceived some heat therein, and by
Gods Mercy he recovered and lived 10 years after.

Middlesex.
IT is in Effect but the Suburbs at large of London, replenished with the
retiring Houses of the Gentry and Citizens thereof, Palaces of Noblemen and 3
(lately) Royal Mansions. It is about 18 miles in length and 12 in breadth. It
has Hartford on the N. Buck on the W. Ess. on the E. Kent and Surrey on the S.
The Air generally is most healthful, especially about High-Gate. The Natural
Commodities are Wheat, the best in Engl. growing in the Vale lying South of
Harrow-the-hill nigh Hessen. Q. Eliz. received no Composition-Money from the
Villages thereabouts, but took her Wheat in kind; one of those Villages being
called Perivale (or Purevale) from the cleerness of the Corn therein. Tamarisk,
first brought over by B. Grindal out of Switz, and planted in his Garden and
Fulham. The Manufactures are Leather, in the true Tanning of which the Lord
Burleigh was indoctrinated by a Cobbler, exemplifying the same in toasted Bread
(called by him a tanned Toast) which if artificially done, will last (said the
Cobbler) many Mornings Draughts. Of Buildings, HAMPTON COURT, built by Card.
Woolsey who bestowed it on H. 8. by him erected into an Honor, and mightily
increased, and now continues, tho the other Royal Palaces, ( Holdenby,
Oatlands, Richmond, Theobalds) have found their fatal Period. H. 8. enforrested
the Grounds hereabouts. OSTERLY-HOUSE (now Sir Will. Waller's) was built in a
Park, by Sir Th. Gresham, who here magnificently entertained and lodged Q.
Eliz. who found fault with the Court of this House as too great, affirming,
that it would appear more handsome, if divided with a Wall in the middle. Sir
Thomas being very observant, had the Court made double against the next
Morning, of which a Courtier then said, It was no wonder he could so soon
change a Building, who could build a Change. Another (reflecting on some known
differences in this Knights Family) affirmed, That any House is easier divided
than united.

Proverbs.
1. A Middlesex Clown. Clown, i. e. Colonus one that Plougheth the Ground, of
which Middlesex has many of great Estates; and there are some of the Yeomantry
in this County, as completely civil as any in England. 2. He that is a low Ebb
at Newgate, may soon be a float at Tiburn. This is too Satirical. Some will
have Tiburn, so called from Tie and Burn, the poor Lollards having been the
first who were tied up and burnt in that place. 3. When Tottenham- Wood is all
on fire, Then Tottenham- street is naught but mire. That is, when that Wood of
many 100 Acres on the top of a Hill has a Mist like Smoke over it, generally
foul weather follows. 4. Tottenham is turned French. About the beginning of
H. 8. French Mechanics swarmed in England to the great prejudice of English
Artisans, which caused the Insurrection in London on ill-Mayday 1517. The City
and Country Villages were filled with French Fashions and Infections. The
Proverb is applied to such who contemning the Custom of their Country, make
themselves more ridiculous by affecting foreign Humors and Habits.

Princes.
Edward, Sole surviving Son of H. 8. and Jane his Wife, was born at
Hampton Court, An. 1537. He succeeded his Father in the Kingdom and was most
Eminent in his Generation, Whose Virtues were so resplendent, no faults (humane
frailties excepted) appeared in him. He died July 5 th. 1553. and pity it is
that deserved the best, should have no Monument, indeed a brass Altar of
excellent Workmanship under which he was buried (I will not say sacrificed with
an untimely Death by treachery of others) did formerly supply the place of his
Tomb, which since is abolished under the notion of Superstition. Being a Child
he had more of Man in him than any of his Age; And his Goodness was no less
conspicuous. In a Letter he wrote to Mr. Barnaby Fitz-Patrick, Gentleman of his
Bedchamber, he charges him to regard the Scripture or some good Book, and to
give no reverence to the Mass. (at which that Gentleman should chance to be
present in his Attendance on the French K.) To avoid the Company of Women as
far forth as he might: Besides other Advertisments relating to the Public,
which are very judiciously penned. In another Letter to him, he congratulates
his Constancy -- and sends him an Account of the Great Tide which drowned the
Isle of Dogs, Plumsted Marsh, Shippey and Foulness in Ess. as also Towns and
Cities in Zealand, etc.

Martyrs.
At Barnet, Islington and Stratford Bow there were more than 20 persons
Martyred. Mr. Jo. Dendley burnt at Vxbridge began to sing a Psalm at the Stake,
and Dr. Story (there present) caused a prickley Faggot to be hurled in his
Face. Now the singing Nightingale needed, no Thorn, but only the sleeping one
to awake it. We may believe that this Martyrs Prick-song indeed made good
Melody in the Ears of the God of Heaven. Smithfield near London being Bonners
Shambles, and the Bone-fire General of England, no wonder if some sparks
thereof were driven thence into the vicinage.

Prelates.
Richard Northall, a Carmelite and Chaplain to R. 2. was made B. of Ossory and
Chancellor of Ireland, and at last Archbishop of Dublin. He wrote a Set of
Sermons for the whole year he died, 1397.

Since the Reformation.
William Wickham, (junior) born at Enfield, bred in K. Coll. Bishop first of
Lincoln, then of Winchester, died of the Strangury 1596. having not made water
for 14 days together. It Is no ill Custom among the Modern Jews that they Praise
God solemnly for their vents of ejection, as well as Mouths for the admission
of nourishment.

Soldiers.
Falcatius, or Fulke de Brent, was Minion to King Jo. who gave him in marriage
Marg. the Daughter of Warrin Fitzgerald his Chamberlain. He was highly in
favor with King Henry 3. who by the Valor of this General obtained the great
Victory at Lincoln. Being afterward slighted in time of Peace he embroyled the
Nation, committing many Outrages and Felonies, for which he was condemned to
perpetual Banishment. He went to Rome, where he lived obscurely, died miserably
1226.

Sir Ralph Sadlier, born at Hackney, (where he was heir to a fair Inheritance)
being servant to the Lord Cromwell was by him advanced into the service of H.
8. who made him Secretary of State, and employed him in the Scotch Affairs. The
Pen and Sword met eminently in him: For in the Battle of Mussleborough, he
ordered and brought up our scattered Troops, inviting them to fight by his own
Example, and so for his Valor was made a Knight Banneret. Queen Eliz. made him
Chancellor of the Duchy. During his last Embassy into Scotland, his house at
Standon in Hartfordshire was built by his Steward in his absence, far greater
than himself desired, so that he never joyed therein and died soon after 1587.
When this Knight attended the Lord Cromwell (before the Reformation) a Pardon
was granted for the Sins of that Family, for 3 immediate Generations expiring
in R. Sadlier lately dead.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir Th. Frowick, Knight, born at Elinge, was made Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas 18 H. 7. and was accounted the Oracle of Law in his Age, tho one
of the youngest Men that ever enjoyed that Office. He died 1506 and lies
buried in Finchley Church. Elah his eldest Daughter was married to Sir Jo.
Spelman (one of the Justices of the Kings Bench) Grandfather to Sir Henry that
Renowned Knight.

Sir William Stamford, Knight, (born at Hadley) Son to Will. Merchant in
London, was one of the Judges of the Com. Pleas; Famous for his Book of Pleas
of the Crown. He died An. ult. Ma. 1558.

Writers.
Jo. Acton, D.L. in Oxford, became Canon of Lincoln. He wrote a Commentary on
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of Otho, etc. and flourished under E 1. 1290.

Ralph Acton, D. D. in Oxford, Preached the Gospel of the Kingdom of God in the
midst of the darkness of Roman Superstitions. He flourished under E. 2. An.
1320.

Roger Twiford, D.D. an Itinerant Preacher through the Diocese of Norwich, AMP.
was commonly called GOOD LUCK. He flourished 1390.

Rob. Hownslow, a Friar, then Provincial of the Order of the H. Trinity,
instituted for the Redemption of Captives. By this Robert's diligence many were
set free. He wrote many Synodal Sermons and Epistles to excite the Charity of
Persons of Quality and others. He flourished 1430.

Since the Reformation.
William Gouge, born at Stratford Bow, and bred in Cambridge, read 15 Chapters
of the Bible every day, and was afterward Minister of Blackfriars London. He
died 1653 leaving the Examples of Humility, Faith and Patience to Posterity.

Benefactors to the Public.
A Hermit near the Hermitage, on his own cost, caused Gravel to be dug in
the top of Highgate-hill (whence there is now a fair Pond of Water in that
place) and therewith made a Causway from High-gate to Islington.

Since the Reformation.
Alice Daughter of Rob. Wilkes, was a poor Maid in Islington, where her Cap was
casually shot through with an arrow without any hurt to her head. She was
married to J. Owen (her 3d. wealthy Husband) and built at Islington near to the
place of her deliverance an Almshouse by her well endowed. She expended to
charitable uses 2300 l. and lies buried at Islington.

Sir Jul. Caesar Knight, descended from the Dalmarii in Italy, bred in Oxf. was
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and sworn Privy Counselor July, 6 th.
1607. then preferred Master of the Rolls. A person of such prodigious Bounty
that he might seem to be Almoner General of the Nation. A Gentleman having
borrowed his Coach, was so Rendevouzed about with Beggars in London, that it
cost him all the Money in his Purse to satisfy their Importunity. 'Twas not
without a good Omen that his chief House in Hartford was called Benington, the
Bountiful Village. His Arms (G. 3 Roses Ar. on a Chief of the first, so many
Roses of the Second) do Emblem the Fragrancy of the Memory he has left behind
him. He died 1636 and was buried in St. Helens London.

Memorable Persons.
Pet. Fabel, a conceited person is said to have deceived the Devil (at the
Funeral) of K. James) with his merry devises. But as a Bishop in his Sermon
speaking of Brute his coming into this Land, said, it was but a Bruit; in like
manner the best Comment upon this Peter is his own Surname.

-- Trestram, a Gardener at Branford, aged about 76 years, being seized with an
extreme Fever and violent Inflammation of the Lungs, recovered after the loss
of above 60 ounces of Blood in 3 days, let by Dr. Theod. Deodate Physician to
P. Henry, and Lady Eliz.

Ancient Gentry since the time of H. 6.
Will. Wroth, was Ancestor to Sir Hen. still living at Durance. His Grandfather
Sir Th. fled for his Religion into Germany in the Reign of Q. Mary, and has
alone his Name remaining in this County.

Jo. Shordyche, so called from Shorditch in London, whereof he was owner. His
Progeny has a considerable Estate at Icknam, in this County. Note. The Gentry
in Middlesex have a Privilege above any County in England, that they are not
Eligible (except also they be Freemen in London,) to be Sheriffs of this Shire.

The Battles.
Branford-Fight, 1642. Nov. 12 began on the South-West-side of the Town, near
Zion-house; some Execution being done by great Guns, and a Boat on the Thames
with many therein sunk, and Captain Quarles (an active Citizen on the
Parliament side) drowned. Then the Scene being shifted to the North-side of the
Town, near Acton, the Kings Forces fell fiercely on the Regiment of Col. Denzil
Hollis, then present in Parliament, and put them to the worst. Here the Welsh
under -- Salisbury their Leader, made true the Gr. Proverb. (...), he that
flies will fight again. These who showed swift heels at Edgehill, used as
stout Arms (as any) in this Fight; For formerly they were little better than
Naked, whereas since they have recovered Armor to fence their Bodies, and
Resolution to arm their Minds. Next day (being Sunday,) marched out the Militia
of London. It is incredible how many Cart-loads of Victuals were carried out
from London. In the Evening the Kings Forces drew off toward Kingston. The
Number of the Slain on both sides amounted not to 1000, and the Reputation of
the Victory on the Kings side was more than the Effect thereof, for then the
Royalists did Nose and Beard the Populous City of London. Indeed the Accession
of Citizens to the King answered not rational expectation, Many scores of
Prisoners taken by the K. were by him freely dismissed without other Ransom,
than a strict Oath to serve no more against him. Now what Oath-Office is kept
in London I know not, nor what Pope therein had power to dispense with so
sacred an Obligation. But these some Weeks after, appeared on the same side as
fierce as before.

This County is infested with Mildew when Corn is almost ripe for the Sicle,
which a good Rain or strong Wind does remove.

London.
LOndon is the Second City in Christendom for greatness, and the First for good
Government; but of so large a Reputation, that Some Strangers have conceived
London to be the Country and England the City. The River Thames may in some
sense be called the Foundation of this vast and solid Structure; which River
could not be removed by King Ja. (as the Lord Mayor told his Majesty) when he
threatened to remove his Court from the City: and no wonder, seeing Thunder can
make no impression upon it, and by Gods special Providence it can wash off the
blackest marks and saddest effects of the Most dreadful Fire. In reference to
this River London may use the Millers Riddle, If I have Water I will drink
Wine, but if I have no Water I must drink Water. This City is the Field of Art
and Shop General of England, and Cheap Side, the best Garden, etc. the whole
and every Part containing the greatest Variety of Adventitious and no Natural
Commodities. Of Manufactures the greatest is the Engine (for quenching of
Scare-fires) the form whereof was first brought from Norenberg by one Mr. Jones
a Merchant living in Austin Friars, who obtained a Patent of King Ja. that none
should be made without his approbation. William Buroughs City-Founder, living
in Lothbury has so completed this Instrument, that his additions amount to a
new Invention, having made it stronger and easy to be cleansed; so that with
the striking out of a wedge, it will cleanse it self in 4 minutes. As for
Buildings, St. Paul's the Mother Church (having a Babe, viz. Saint Faiths in
her Body) was lately struck with the Palsy or rather Death, as the Way to a
Noble Resurrection; which is now so far accomplished, that it stands already on
its Feet, or rather it is arising with its Feet foremost, the Foundation being
laid anew, and a considerable progress made in the rebuilding thereof. The Money
for defraying the Charges, is raised on Coals. The former Reparation of this
Church was a worthy Monument of the Piety and Charity of Archbishop Laud. May
they who have Plundered the Cloak and Cover of Saint Paul's be compelled to make
him a new one of their own cost, at least to contribute more than ordinary
Proportions thereunto. As for other Churches, Saint Clement's East-Cheap, the
Monument of the Bounty of Baldwin Hamey Dr. in Physic, with other Parochial
Churches which have at least their Fronts beautified, if not their Bodies
rebuilt, may all of them have this Inscription, Heus Viator! Anne bonis
operibus effaetum est hoc seculum, which is written upon the Entry of Saint
Gile's Church in the Fields. As for other Structures, The Bridge was made with
great Cost, and is maintained with daily Charge. Some 20 years ago a Lamentable
fire hap'ning there, could not be quenched, because of the great store of water
which hindered all access thereunto. The Exchange was built by Sir Th. Gresham
Knight An. 1571. In imitation of that at Antwerp, but so that the Copy
exceeds the Original. The Tower was first founded by William the Conqueror,
finished by William Rufus, encompassed with a Ditch by William Longchamp Bishop
of Ely, enlarged by H. 3. fortified by E. 4. beautified by R. 3. repaired by H.
8. In which there is an Armory a Mine and a Wardrobe, for the keeping of Vests
and Robes of State, etc. There is an Unicorns Horn to be shown amongst the
Rarities of the Tower, and tho some are apt to believe that there never was any
such creature as an Unicorn, and others, that it is the same with a Rhinoceros;
Yet (for the first,) the Indian Ox is famous for carrying one horn, and for the
latter, the Unicorn carries his Horn on his Forehead, and not on his Nose, as
the Rhinoceros does. The horn is an Antidote against poison.

Proverbs.
1. A London Jury, hang half and save half. This is such a Libell as
comprehends in a few words, a large volume of Calumny. As if London Juries were
for dispatching their business without any regard to Justice. 2. A Fool will
not part with his Bawble for the Tower of London. 3. London Lick penny. The
Countryman will tell you it is very true, and the Citizen on the other hand does
know, that there is no less Truth in this, London Get penny. 4. London
Cockneys. That is, such who are born within the sound of Bow-Bell, are tender
enough and sufficiently ignorant of Country businesses. One merrily persuaded a
She-Citizen, that seeing Malt did not grow, the good House-wives in the Country
did spin it. I knew as much said the Cockney, for one may see the threads hang
out at the ends thereof. 5. An ill word meets another, and it were at the
Bridge of London. This is Scottish. The meaning seems to be, that on that
Bridge, as being a narrow Passage, Quarrels are apt to arise. 6. Billingsgate
Language. Many rude Persons, especially Scolds, repair to that Place, and
sometimes improve their smart Words into smarter Blows. 7. Kirbies Castle and
Megses Glory, Spinola's Pleasure and Fishers Folly. These were 4 Houses about
the City, whereof the 2 first are forgotten. Spinola a Genoan was infected with
the Italian Plague of Building. As for the last, it was built by Jasp. Fisher,
free of the Goldsmiths, one of the 6 Clerks in Chanc. and J. of Peace, who was
much in Debt; and it is called Devonshire House at this day. 8. He will follow
him like a St. Anthonies Pig. St. Anth. is the Patron of Hogs, and therefore
very well known by them; Besides the Protectors of Hosp. in Bennets-Fink in
this City built to the Honor of St. Anthony, used to garble the Live pigs in
the Markets of the City, and such as they found starved or unwholesome, they
would slit in the ear, tie a Bell about their necks, and let them loose about
the City, through which they followed their feeders, that is, their Leaders.
The Proverb is applied to servile Souls, etc. 9. He was born within the sound
of Bow-Bell. This is the Periphrasis of a Londoner at large, born within the
Suburbs thereof. Jo. Dun, Mercer, (1472) gave 2 Tenements to maintain the
ringing of this Bell nightly at 9 a clock, which sounded to Servants a Retreat
from their Work. William Copland the King's Merchant about 1520. gave a bigger
Bell for the same purpose, and had the Hansel thereof himself, being first rang
as a Knell at his Burial. 10. -- St. Peter's in the Poor, Where no Tavern,
Alehouse or Sign at the Door. I conceive it is called in the Poor, because the
Augustinian Friars professors of Poverty, possessed one moiety thereof; Their
Signless Houses are a Sign of Rich and EEminent inhabitants. 11. To dine with
Duke Humphrey. This at first signified to dine well, viz. With that Hospital D.
of Gloucester, but since his death, it imports to be dinnerless, to walk in St.
Paul's whilst others dine, it having been supposed that D. Humphrey was buried
there, tho he was indeed buried in St. Alb. 12. I will use you as bad as a Jew.
This had its Original at the Old-Jury in London, where the Jews were
intollerably abused by the English, especially on Shrove-Tuesday. 13. Good
Manners to except my Lord Mayor of Land. 14. I have dined as well as my Lord
Mayor of London. That is, as contentedly. 15. A^ old as Paul's Steeple, That is,
only about 1040 years of Age. 16. He is only fit for Ruffians-Hall.
Well-Smithfield (now the Horse-Market) was formerly so called; There the
Hectors did meet for Trial of Skill at Sword and; Buckler; but since that
desperate Traitor Rowland York, first used thrusting with Rapiers, that Sport
is disused; and the Prove. only appliable to quarrelsom people. 17. A Loyal
heart may be landed under Traitors-Bridge. Q. Eliz. was compelled to go under
that Bridge, when she was sent Prisoner to the Tower. 18. To cast Water into
the Thames. 19. He must take him a House in Turn-again Lane. This in old
Records is called Wind-again-Lane, and lies in the Parish of St. Sepulchers,
and in it there is no through-passage. It is applied to those who take sinister
Courses. 20. He may whet his Knife on the Threshold of the Fleet. It is applied
to those who being out of Debt may defy Arrests, and are in no danger of
Imprisonment in the Fleet or elsewhere. 21. All goes down Gutter-lane, (A
small Lane in the City otherwise Guthurum-lane.) Appliable to great Gluttons
and Drunkards. 22. As Lame as St. Giles Cripple-gate. St. Giles, a Noble
Athenian, being Lame, waved all cure for his greater Mortification. It is
spoken of such who for some light hurt, or out of Laziness lagg behind. 23. You
are all for the Hustings. The Hustings is the highest Court in London, so
called from the French word Haulser to lift up. The Proverb is spoken of those
who are lifted up with the Wings of Pride and Ambition above the Level of their
Birth and Estate.

Princes.
Kath. 3d. Daughter to K. Hen. 3d. and Q. Eleanor, was born at London, 1252. on
St. Kath. Day. She dyed in her very infancy: Wak't from the Womb, she on this
World did peep,
Dislik't it, closed her eyes, fell fast asleep.
She lies buried at Westminster.

Joan Eldest Daughter of King Edward 2. and Queen Elizabeth, was born in the
Tower of London about 1316, and was married to Dav. 2. King of Scotland. She
did good offices betwixt the 2 Kingdoms, and was therefore called Joan
Make-Peace. Dying without Issue at London. she was buried in G^ey-Friers. Kath.
Youngest Daughter to King Henry. 7. and Elizabeth his Queen was born in the
Tower of London Feb. 2. 1503. dying few days after. On whose Innocence and
short life this Epitaph might be written: Here l^eth SHE was born and cried,
Lived a few days, fell sick and died.
Much differing from that of an Ancient Man.

Here lies the Man was born and cried,
Lived 60 years, fell sick and died.
Anne Bollen, Daughter of the Lord Th. Bollen, Earl of Wilt-shire, AMP.
was (Probably) born in London and became 2 d Wife to H. 8. after he had made
her Marchioness of Pembroke. She was accomplished in Body, Virtuous in Mind,
and a great Promoter of the Gospel. The Inconstancy of her Husband's Affection,
is conceived by most moderate Men her chiefest Crime and cause of her death
1536.

Kath. Howard, Daughter to the Lord Edm. Howard, Son to Th. D. of Norfolk, was
(probably) born in London, AMP.
and became 5th. Wife to Henry 8. Whom you may imagine thus speaking on his
Deathbed: Three Kates 2 Nans and one dear Jane I Wedded
One Spanish, one Dutch and 4 English Wives,
From 2 I was Divorced, 2 I beheaded
One Died in Childbirth and one me survived.
It Is said the Incontinency of this Kath. cost her her Life. The greatest good
the Land got by this Match, was general leave to marry Cousin-Germans. She was
beheaded 1540.

Saints.
St. Sedd. born in London, was very instrumental in the Conversion of the
Mircians.

St. Wulsine, a Benedictine Monk, was Ab. of Westminster, then translated to be
Bishop of Sherburne in Dorset-shire whence he drove all the secular Priests, as
became a Champion for Monastical life. He is said to have seen Heaven open in
the instant of his departure out of this Life, 985.

Th. Becket a Merchants Son was born in London, in the place where now
Mercers-Chappel is erected. He was slain on Innocents-day in his own Church of
Canterbury, 1170. many Vows were made by superstitious Pilgrims to his Shrine.
The Papists, in favor of Vows of that Nature, tamper to corrupt Holy Writ, as
in the Vulgar Lat. Prove. 20.25. Ruina est homini Devorare Sancta, etc. Which
they read, Ruina est homini Devorare Sanctos, It is a snare to a man who often
makes Vows to Saints, and after Vows retracteth them. See my Ecc. Hist.

Martyrs.
William Sautre, (al. Chatris) Parish Priest of St. Osiths, London, was the
first English Wickliffite who wast put to Death for his Opinion. He was charged
with a relapse into Heresy after Abjuration. He was convicted in a Provincial
Council of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and burnt in Smith-field about Feb.
28. 1400. The close of the Archbishops Sentence of Degradation, when Sautre
was committed over to the Secular Court, ends with this expression,
Beseeching the Court aforesaid, that they will receive favorably the said
William, etc. which was nothing but Cruelty in Masquerade.

Jo Badby, an Artificer in Black Friars, London, was burnt about 1401. Hen.
Prince of Wales (afterward King Henry 5) being present at his execution
promised him a Pardon and a Pension, on his Recantation, all which Badby
refused. He was put in an empty Tun and the fire put there in; at the first
feeling whereof he cried Mercy, Mercy (of God) which Prince Henry mistaking for
a kind of Revocation of his Opinions, proffered him the same Condition, a second
time, which Badby again refused, and was Martyred.

Prelates.
Sim. of Gaunt, born in London was preferred B. of Salisbury by Edward 1. 1298.
He gave the first leave to the Citizens thereof to fortify that place with a
Ditch and Walls, and no less was his care of the Church than of the City,
making good Statutes, whereby it was ordered even unto our Age. He died about
1315.

Jo. Kite, born in London, bred in Oxford, sent Ambassador into Spain, made a
Titulary Archbishop, and at last Bishop of Carlisle. He lies in the Church of
Stepney.

William Knight, bred in Oxford, was Secretary to Henry 8. and first employed
to the Pope to mention the Matter of his Divorce. After his Return he was made
Bishop of Bath and Wells. In Wells he built a stately Cross to secure poor
people from the Weather. He died 1547.

Nic. Heath, one of St. Anthonies Piggs (i.e. Scholar of that School in London)
then bred in Cambridge, was Almoner to Henry 8. and by him preferred Bishop,
first of Roch. then of Worc. deprived by Edward 6. restored by Queen Mary who
advanced him Archbishop of York and Lord Chancellor of England. A moderate Man
yet infected with the Popish Bishops, he refused the Oath of Supremacy in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, for which he was deprived. He led a pious Life on his
own Lands at Cobham in Surry, whither Queen Elizabeth came often to visit him.
He died about 1566.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Young, D. D. was born in Cheapside and bred in Cambridge, was Bishop of
Rochester, and refused the Sea of Norwich, saying -- It was not so easy for an
old man, since the Cushion was taken away from it. Meaning since Dr. Scambler
had scambled away the Revenues thereof. He died An. 1605, and lies buried at
Bromly Church in Kent.

Will. Cotton, D. D. born in London, bred in Cambrigde, was made B. of Exeter
Nov. 12. 1598. during his sitting there, Mr. Snape came out of Gersey, and
plentifully sowed the seeds of Nonconformity in his Diocese, which the
Vigilance of this Prelate seasonably plucked up. Being enfeebled with the
Apoplexy which deprived him of his Speech some days before his death, so that
he could only say, Amen, Amen, he was rendered obnoxious to this malicious
cavil, That he lived like a Bishop and dyed like a Clark, He died 1621. and was
buried in the Quire of Exeter.

Lancelot Andrews, D D. bred in Cambridge, was an unimitable Preacher, of whom
Bishop Felton said, I had almost marred my own natural Trot by endeavoring to
imitate his artificial Amble. See my Eccl. Hist. He died, 1626.

Th. Dove, D. D. was made by Q. Eliz. Dean of Norwich An. 1589, then Bishop of
Peterborough 1101. He died 1630 having raised his Family to a Knightly degree.

Jo. Howson, bred in Oxf. was made B. of Oxford 1619. His Book of Divorce with
his Sermons against Popery, and his Stating of the Popes Supremacy in 4 Sermons
to clear himself from the Imputation of Popery have made him Famous to all
Posterity. Being translated to Durham, he died 1631, and was buried in St.
Paul's London.

Jo. Davenant, D. D. Son to Jo. of Davenant Lands in Essex was Master of Q.
College in Cambridge. He gave his Negative voice at an Election against a Mr.
Jo. Gore.
Kinsman, Cosen (said he) I will satisfy your Father, that you have Worth, but
not Want enough to be one of our Society. Returning from the Synod of Dort, he
was elected B. of Sarum 1621. Praefuit qui Profuit was the Motto written in
most of his Books. He was humble in himself and charitable to others. Being
invited by B. Field, and not pleased with some roisting Company, he embraced
the next opportunity of departure. When B. Field proffered to light him with a
Candle down Stairs, My Lord (said he) let us lighten others by our unblameable
Conversation. He was a Man of great Candor, and Sincerity, who hated Flattery
from his Childhood. He dyed 1641 and was buried in his own Cathedral.

Math. Wren, was bred in Cambridge, where at an Extraord. Philof. Act. before
K. Ja. he noted the Prerogative of the King's Hounds, by virtue whereof they
could lawfully do that for which other Dogs were beaten. He preached a Sermon
on Amoz 5.24. let Judgment run down like Waters, a little before the Draining
of the Fens, suspected detrimentalto the University. He was B. of Norwich and
Ely. He was imprisoned by the Long Parliament almost 15 years and his Cause
never heard. He died 1661.

Statesmen.
Sir Th. More, Son to Sir Jo. one of the Justices of the K. Bench, was bred in
Oxford. He became Barrister and Judge in the Sheriff of London's Court, and
never took a Fee from the Poor or Widow, etc. Being Member of the House of
Commons, he obstructed H. 7. about Money for the Marriage of his Daughter Marg.
a Courtier telling the K. that a Beardless Boy had obstructed his desires. K.
Hen. 8. coming to the Crown, Knighted him and made him Chancellor of the Duchy
of Lancaster, then Lord Chancellor of England. He demeaned himself with great
Integrity. Refusing a compliance about the Queens Divorce, he resigned his
Place. It was against his Mind that any should suffer for their Consciences; He
rather soiled his Fingers than dirted his Hands, in the matter of the Holy Maid
of Kent. He used to say, that his Natural Temper was so tender that he could
not endure a Philip; yet he suffered 16 Months Imprisonment for refusing the
Oath of Supremacy. When the Lieutenant of the Tower told him he was sorry his
Commons were no better, I like (said Sir Th.) your diet very well, and if I
dislike it, I pray turn me out of Doors. He was beheaded 153. He left but 100
l. per An. Estate, having perfectly hated Covetousness, as appears by his
refusing of 4 or 5000 l. offered him by the Clergy. Of his Latin Books, Vtopia
is the most considerable. His Daugh. Marg. for all Learning and Languagues the
Miracle of her Age, was for her secrecy entrusted by her Father with his most
important Affairs. Erasmus has dedicated some Epistles to her. Being well red
in the Fathers, she mended a depraved Place in St. Cyprian (nisi vos
sinceritatis) making it Nervos Sinceritatis. She translated Eusebius out of
Greek, which (because done before) was not Printed. She bought her Fathers Head
and kept it for a Relic till she was Questioned before the Council for the
same.

Th. Wriothesley, Knight of the Garter, was bred in Cambridge. He became an
Eminent Lawyer. He was by Henry 8. created Baron of Tichborne 1543, and a year
after Chancellor of England. From which Place being afterward removed by
Edward 6. he was created Earl of Southampton. He died 1550, and lies buried at
St. Andrews in Holbourn.

William Paget, Knight, Privy Councellor to 4 successive Princes. King Henry 8.
made him Secretary, and employed him Ambassador to Chapter 5. Emperor and the King
of France. King Edward 6. made him Chancellor of the Duchy, Comptroller of his
House and created him Baron of Beaudesert. Queen Mary made him Keeper of the
Privy Seal. Queen Elizabeth dispensed with his attendance at Court, in favor
to his great age and highly respected him. Duke Dudley in the days of King
Edward, ignominiously took from him the Garter of the Order, quarrelling that
by Extraction he was not qualified for the same, no wonder if his Pride
wrongfully snatched a Garter from a Subject, whose Ambition endeavored to
deprive 2 Princes of a Crown. This was restored to him by Queen Mary, as to a
person who by his Prudence, had merited much of the Nation. He died 1563. and
was buried in Lichfield.

Th. Went^orth (of Yorkshire parentage) was bred in Cambridge, became a
Champion Patriot on all occasions, and seemed to have a casting voice in the
House of Commons. He was created Bar. and Visc. Wentworth, Earl of Strafford
and Lord Dep. of Ireland; where he vigorously endeavored the reduction of the
Irish to Obedience to the King and profit to the Exchequer, but some believe
the means he used for that good end were not Legal. Being charged in Parliament
with many Crimes, he pleaded, that they amounted not to Treason. But the
Parliament found an Almighty expedient of giving the Name and stamping the
signature of Accumulative Treason on that Brave Gentleman's past Actions. By a
Clause in the 25 of Edward 3. after an enumeration of many particular Treasons,
it is in general Enacted, that whatsoever the Parliament should (hereafter)
declare to be Treason should be accounted so, by Virtue of that Statute. It
seems the Parliament did only pursue their power given them by that Act. But
there are two things worth the consideration in this Case, first, According to
the aforesaid Statute, Such Crimes as were afterward to be declared
Treasonable, ought to be of like Nature with those Treasons which are specified
in the said Act. Secondly, If the Parliament had made those Misdemeanors
Constructive Treason before that my Lord Strafford had committed them, he could
have had no color for the Plea he made; But seeing where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression; my Lord of Strafford at the time of his
Misdemeanors committed was guilty of no Treason; and if it was possible for
him to become guilty of the same, ex post facto, I leave to the Learned to
determine. The Parliament provided his Condemnation should not pass into
Precedent. Some hours before his suffering he fell fast asleep, alleged by his
Friends as an Evidence of the clearness of his Conscience. He was beheaded
1641. He has an everlasting Monument in the great Character given him, (...),
Med. 2. p. 6. I looked upon my Lord of Strafford as a Gentelman whose Abilities
might make a Prince rather afraid than ashamed in the greatest Affairs of
State, etc. King Charles II. has made his Son a Knight of the Garter.

Lyonel Cranfield, Merchant, Man of a great Sense, was made by King James Lord
Treasurer, Baron of Cranfield and Earl of Middlesex. Having lost the Treasurers
Place by the means of the D. of Buckingham, into whose displeasure he had
fallen, he was wont to say that the way to preserve Life was to get to be Lord
Treasurer of England, for they never dye in their Place, which was true for 4
Successions. He was a Wise and Good Man. He dyed about 1644.

Writers on the Law.
Fleta, who being in the Fleet wrote an Excellent Treatise of the Common Law
before the 14. R. 3. He lived about the end of E. 2. and beginning of E. 3.

Christopher St. German, of an ancient Family, read constantly a Chapter in the
Bible every night to his Family, lived and dyed unmarried without the least
spot on his Reputation, gave Counsel and Help to all his People gratis. He was
excellently skilled in the Civil, Canon and Common Law and Scripture, Witness
his Book of Doctor and Student. In his several Works he plainly appears a
Champion for the Reformation. He lived to be above 80 years Old, dying 1593.
and was buri^d at St Alphage, London.

William Rastal, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, wrote the Life, etc.
of his Uncle More and made a Comment on the Statutes of England. Being a
zealous Papist, he fled (in the Reign of Edward 6.) into Flanders, where he
wrote against Bishop Jewel. He died 1565.

Soldiers.
Sir Th. Roper, (the Surname formerly Furneaux) Son to Th. Servant to Queen
Elizabeth, was Page to Sir Jo. Norrice, and was Captain of a Foot Company at 16
years of Age. Being Privy Counselor and having acquired the Reputation of a
Valiant Soldier by his Services in Connaught, Vlster in Ireland, and Breast in
France, in his Voyage to Portugal, at Bergen in the Netherlands, etc. he was
An. 3. Car. created Baron of Bauntree and Visc. Baltinglasse, in Ireland. When
in Ireland he put himself in Irish Trouzes and was imitated by other
Englishmen, which easy Habit tended (...) the more effectual execution on
their Enemies. He died at Ropers Rest 164. and was buried in St. Jo. Church in
Dublin.

Civilians.
Sir Hen. Martin, Knight, bred in Oxford, a great Civilian and an Eminent
Advocate in the High Court of Commission, and afterward Judge of the
Prerogative Court, and also of the Admiralty, so that as King James said
pleasantly, He was a mighty Monarch in his Jurisdiction over Sea and Land. He
died 1642.

Physicians.
Richardus Anglicus, bred first in Oxford, became afterward in Paris one of
the most Eminent Writers in the Profession of Physic. REM.
He Flourished, 1230.

Jo. Phreas, bred in Oxford, was afterward an Auditor of Guarinus in Ferrara.
He read Physic successively at Ferrara, Florence, Padua and Rome. Pope Paul 2.
made him Bishop of Bath and Wells, but he died (of Poison as is thought) before
his Consecration, 1465.

Andr. Board, bred (I think) in Oxford, was Physician to Henry 8. His Book (the
first written of that Faculty in English) was dedicated to the College of
Physicians in London. He died in the Reign of Queen Mary.

Writers.
Nothelmus of London Bishop of London, then Archbishop of Canterbury, wrote
the Gests of Greg. the Great, etc. which are inserted in Bede's Church History.
He died 736.

William Fitz-Stephen, descended of Norman Nobility, was a Monk in Canterbury.
He wrote (amongst others) a Latin Book of the Description of London. He
flourished, 1190.

Albricius of London, wrote a work of the Original of Heathen Gods. He
flourished 1217.

William Sengham, (poor but Witty) wrote de Fide and Legibus, REM.
affirming the Gospel of Christ to be the only Law for the Salvation of men,
about the time that a Book called The Eternal Gospel (or rather the Infernal
Gospel) was obtruded on the World by the Friars. He flourished 1260.

Laurentius Anglicus, bred in Paris, opposed the Mock-Gospel of the Friars and
wrote against False Preachers, REM.
but afterward being frightened with the Popes Thunderbolts, he cowardly
recanted. He flourished An. 1260.

Nich. Lyra, a Jew by Nation, and born (probably) in the Old Jury, was
converted by some Franciscans. He vigorously confuted the Jews. He wrote
Commentaries on all the Old and New Testament keeping close to the Text,
therefore uncharitable the Censure Lyra delirat, tho sometimes he may be wide
of the mark* He dyed in Paris 1340.

Bankinus of London, an Augustinian Friar, a Violent Opposer of the
Wicklevites, was stopped (some think Killed) by the Violence of an Earthquake,
when ready to dispute against them in a public Council. He flourished, 1382.

Robert Ivory, D. D. in Cambridge, and President Genesis of the Carmelites,
adorned the Library of White Friars with his own and other Books, and dyed 1392.

Juliana Barnes, of an ancient and Illustrious Family, REM.
the Diana of her Age for Hunting, etc. of which (with Hawking and Fishing) she
wrote 3 Treatises. She wrote also a Book of Heraldry. She flourished 1460 under
H. 6.

Robert Fabian, Sheriff of London, 1493. wrote 2 Chronicles. 1. From Brutus to
the death of Henry 2. another, from the 1. of King Richard to the death of King
Henry 7. He was an Excellent Poet. A modern Master-wit, in the contest betwixt
the Poets of our Age, makes Apollo to adjudge the Laurel to an Alderman of
London, because to have most wealth was a sign of most wit. But had the Scene
of this Competition been laid 140 years since, etc. Apollo would have given the
Laurel to this our Alderman. He died 1512, and was buried at the Church of
Alhallows. After his death Cardinal Woolsey, caused them to burn all the Copies
of his Book which he could come by; because therein he had made too clear
Discovery of the Revenues of the Clergy.

Th. Lupset, Greek Prof. at Oxford, was known unto Erasmus. He was diverted
from Divinity by Woolsey. He was in favor with Hen. 8. and died of a
Consumption 1532. in Land. and buried at St. Alphage.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Rastal, Printer, undertook to prove Purgatory by Reason. He was a Good
Mathematician, and made a Comedy of Europe, Asia and Africa. He wrote a Book
against Jo. Frith, (which he afterward recanted) and a Book of the Terms of
the Law, and an Index to J. Fitz-Herbert. He was Father to Rastal the Famous
Lawyer. He died and was buried at London 1536.

Edw. Hall, bred in K. College, became a Judge in the Sheriffs Court. He wrote
an elegant Hist. of the Wars of York and Lanc. He died 1547, and was buried in
St. Sithes Church.

Will. Fulke, D. D. and Marg. Professor in Camb. when Young wrote a Book of
Meteors. Being a solid Divine he confuted the Rhemish Translation of the Bible.
He died 1589.

Edm. Spencer, bred in Camb. A great Poet who imitated Chaucer, It Is said that
he presented Q. Eliz. with a Poem, with which she was so well pleased, that she
commanded the Lord Treasurer Cecil to give him 100 l. and when he alleged that
Sum was too much, then give him, (Quoth the Q.) what is Reason, but being
delayed he presented these Lines to the Queen: I was promised on a time
To have Reason for my Rhyme;
From that time unto this Season,
I received nor Rhyme nor Reason.
Hereupon the Q. gave strict Order for the present payment of 100 l. He was
afterward Secretary to the Lord Gray, Deputy of Ireland. He was an Excellent
Linguist, Antiquary, Philosopher, Mathematician, yet so poor (as being a Poet)
that he was thought Fami non Famae scribere. Returning into England, he was
robbed by the Rebels of that little he had, and dying for Grief in great Want
1598, was honorably buried nigh Chaucer in Westminster. The expense of his
Funeral and Monument was defrayed at the sole charge of Rob. first of that
Name, E. of Essex.

Jo. Stow, bred at learning no higher then a good Grammar-Scholar, became an
useful Historian; and very accurate in the Notation of Time. Besides his Chron.
of England, he has written a large Survey of London. He died 1605, and lies
buried in the Quire of St. Andr. Undershaft. There was another of his Name, a
Monk of Norwich, 1440.

Giles Fletcher, equally loved of the Muses and Graces, wrote a Poem entitled
Christ's Victory. Having commenced D. D. he became Preacher first in St. Mary's,
then in Suff. where being slighted by his clownish Parishioners he fell into
Melancholy and died (in a short time) 162 -- His Brother Phineas of Cambridge
wrote an excellent Poem called The Purple Island, etc.

Jo. Done, a Man of excellent Wit, large Travail and choice Experience, in his
reduced Age became D. D. and Dean of St. Paul's. He died 1631. and lies buried
in St. Paul's. His Life is written by Mr. Isaac Walton.

Romish Exile Writers.
Jo. Heiwood, writes of himself, that he applied Mirth, more then Thrift, many
mad Plays, and did few good Works. His Jests were biting. He printed English
Proverbial Epigrams and his pleasant Monumenta Literaria. After the Death of Q.
Mary, (who highly favored him) he fled for Religion. He died 156. Whose Son
Jasper a Jesuit was executed in the Reign of Q. Eliz.

Maurice Chamnee, bred a Friar in the Charterhouse. He only escaped when 18 of
his Order lost their lives (by him written) for refusing the Oath of Supremacy.
It Is said he warped to the Will of H. 8. to preserve his Convent from
Destruction. He dyed beyond the Seas 1581.

Edm. Campian, bred in Oxf. being Deacon of the Protestant Church, he renounced
that Order and fled beyond the Seas. A Man of great Parts and no less
Ostentation. Coming over into England with Father Parsons to reduce it to the
Church of Rome, he fetched over many ( Neuters before) to his persuasion by his
Ten Reasons in pure Latin and pithily penned. He was quickly caught by the
Setters of Secretary Walsingham, imprisoned, examined on Matters of State, and
saw rather than felt the Rack; but a while after he was engaged in 4 solemn
Disputations (in the Chapel in the Tower) to make good a bold Challenge he had
made against all Protestants, concerning Scripture, the Church, the Sacrament
and Justification; and it is said, whatever Questions he there answered, that he
answered not the general expectation of his own Party. He was executed 1581.

Benefactors to the Public.
Th. Pope, Knight, Architect (under God) of his own Fortune, employed (under
the Lord Cromwell) an Instrument of the second magnitude, got his share at the
dissolution of the Abbeys, and refunded a considerable proportion for what he
received for the Building and endowing of Trin. Coll. in Oxf. He died about the
beginning of the Reign of Q. Eliz. There are in Oxfordshire, many descendants
from him continuing in a worshipful Estate (the Chief of the Family being the
E. of Down in Ireland,) on the same token that K. James came in Progress to the
House of Sir -- Pope, Knight, when his Lady was lately delivered of a Daughter,
who was presented to K. James with this Paper of Verses.

See this little Mistress here,
Did never sit in Peter's Chair;
Or a Tripple Crown did wear,
And yet she is a Pope.
No Benefice she ever sold
Nor did dispense with Sins for Gold,
She hardly is a Sevenight Old
And yet she is a Pope.
No King her Feet did ever kiss
Or had from her worse Look then this,
Nor did she ever hope
To Saint one with a Rope
And yet she is a Pope.
A Female Pope you will say, A Second JOAN
No sure she is Pope Innocent or none.
Th. Curson, Armorour, being much afflicted with a sad Accident (one having
shot another in his Shop, tho during his absence) resolved to give all his
Estate to pious uses, and accordingly disposed of some hundreds of pounds for
the use of the poor in Alhallows Lumbard-Street (where he was born) and other
Parishes. He died, 16 --

Edw. Allin, a Stage Player and Roscius of our Age, built a fair College at
Dulwich in Kent, for the relief of poor people. The Poor of his native Parish
of St. Botolph-Bishopsgate have a privilege to be provided for therein before
others. Thus he who out-acted others in his Life, out-did himself before his
death, which happened An. 16 --

Will. Plat, Son to Sir Hugh, Grandson to Sir Rich. Alderman of London, was
bred in St. Jo. Coll. in Camb. He bequeathed thereunto Lands to maintain
Fellows at 30 l. and Scholars at 10 l. per An. so many as the Estate would
extend to. Between the said Colonel and Jo. Plat, Clerk (Heir to Will.) there
was a Composition made of 4 Scholars at 10 l. and 2 Fellows at 50 l. per An.
William also gave 30 l. yearly to the Poor of Hornsey and High-gate, with a
Lecture founded therein. He died 1637.

Alex. Strange, B. D. of Pet. House in Camb. was Preb. of St. Paul's, and 46
years Vicar of Layston, the Church whereof stood alone in the Fields, For
remedy of which he built at Buttingford (a thorough road Market, mostly in his
Parish) a strong and neat Chapel from the Bounty others gave and he gathered.
And having laid the Foundation, he gave for his Motto Beg hard or Beggared. He
also purchased Land out of his own Purse to pay for the reparation thereof: and
promoted the building of a Free School in the said Place, founded by some
Sisters worshipfully born. Having lived a Peacemaker, he died 1650.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 18. Philip Malpas, gave by his Will 125 l. for relief of poor Prisoners,
London every one 6 sh. 8 d. To poor Maids Marriages 100 Marks; to Highways 100
Marks; 20 Marks the year to a Graduate to preach; 20 l. to the Preachers at the
Spittle on the 3 Easter. Holy Days, etc.

20. Richard Rich, Mercer, founded Almshouses at Hodsden in Hartf.

An. 17. Rich. ^awson bequeathed large Legacies to the Prisoners, l. and his
Executors to build a large House in the Church Yard of St. Mary's Spittle,
wherein the Lord Mayor and his Brethren do use to sit and hear Sermons on
Easter Holy Days.

20. Th. Ilam new builded the great Conduit in the Cheap, at his own Charges,
to the great convenience of the City.

An. 18. Henry Keble, gave to Highways 200 l. to Poor Maids marriages 100
Marks, etc. to 7 Almsmen in London 6 Pence the Week for ever. He was when
living a great Benefactor to the building of Aldermary-Church, and by his Will
gave 1000 l. toward the finishing thereof. He was barbarously after requited,
his body being thrown out of his Grave, etc.

Geo. Monox, reedified the Parish of Walthamstow in Ess. Free School and
Almshouses for 13 poor people, he made also a Cawsey of Timber over the
Marshes from Walthamstow to Lock-bridg.

Note Mr. Camdens Verse in commendation of this City, Vrbs Pietate potens,
numeroso cive superba, had the forepast thereof concerning their Piety expunged
by the Index Expurgatorius printed at Madrid, 1612. the latter Moiety of their
Pride remaining a piece of harmless Romish Spite.

Westminster.
WEstminster the greatest City in England next to London. It was anciently
called Thorney, afterward Westminster, for distinction from Saint Paul's
formerly called Eastminster. As for Buildings, the Abbey Church is a stately
Structure, built by Henry 3 and afterward enlarged and beautified by the
Abbots thereof. Adjoining to it is the Chapel of King Henry 7. which Leland
calls the Miracle of the World. A most Noble Pattern of curious Architecture.
In this Chapel the Founder thereof, with his Queen lies interred under a
Monument of solid Brass most richly gilded and artificially carved, which cost
but 1000 l. pounds in the making, an argument of the great Value of Money at
that time, and an instance of the thrift of Henry. 7. who would make a little
Money go far. Amongst the civil Structures, Westminster Hall is Eminent, erected
by King William Rufus For the Hall to his own Court, built with Cobwebless
Beams conceived to be of Irish Wood. The next is White Hall the Palace of our
English Kings which is all Glorious within.

Proverbs.
1. As sure as Exchequer pay, This being most true in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth began to be crossed about the end of the Reign of King James, the
Revenues of the Crown being then much abated. 2. There is no Redemption from
Hell. There is a place by the Exchequer Court so called, formerly a Prison for
the Kings Debtors, who never were freed thence until they had satisfied and
paid all their debts. 3. As long as Meg of Westminster. In the Tower there is a
great Gun called long Meg which in the days of Henry 8. lay a long time in
Westminster. To this the Proverb seems to relate, and not to a Giant Woman whom
some believe to be buried on the South side of the Cloisters, under a very long
Marble. For it is more probable that many Monks were buried (in an infectious
year which happened) under that Stone.

Princes.
Edward 1. surnamed Longshanks, was a Wise, Valiant and Successful Prince. He
was so fortunate with his Sword in the beginning of his Reign, that he awed all
Enemies with the scabbar^d before the end thereof.

Edward sole Son to H. 6. and Marg. his Queen was born 13. October 1453. After
the defeat of his Fathers Party at Tuksbury he told E. 4. that he came over
into England to recover the Crown which his Ancestors for 3 Descents had no
less righftully then peaceably possessed. Upon which King Edward presently
dashed him on the mouth with his Gauntlet, and his Brother Richard Crook-back
stabbed him to the heart with his Dagger.

Edward V. Eldest Son of Edward 4. and Elizabeth his Queen was born November 4.
1471. He was murdered in the Tower by the procurement of his Uncle Protector.

Elizabeth Eldest Daughter of Edward 4. and Elizabeth his Queen was born 11
February 1466. afterward married to King Henry 7. Whereby the 2 Houses of York
and Lancaster were united. She died in Childbed after her safe delivery of the
Lady Katharine. She lies buried with her Husband Henry 7. in his Chapel.

Cecily Second Daughter to Edward 4. by Elizabeth his Queen, AMP.
led a single life for a long time, then wedded her self to a Lincolnshire
Lord, Jo. Baron (afterward Visc.) Wells. She was little respected of King
Henry 7 her Brother in Law, who knew if he had no issue by his Queen, then the
Right of the Crown rested in her. She died without Issue.

CHARLES II. (Son to King Charles I. of Blessed Memory, and Mary Youngest
Daughter to Henry 4. King of France) was born at St. James's, May 29. 1630. His
birth was accompanied with two notable Accidents in the Heavens. The Star Venus
was visible all the day long, and 2 days after there was an Eclipse of the Sun.

Who seeing a Greater Sun appear
In the English Hemisphear
In Humble duty waved all Quarles,
And resigned the day to Charles.
The Occurrences in the Life of this Pious Prince are full of Miracle and
Amazement. He was 1. Jan. 1650, at Seoon Crowned King of Scotland, being before
invaded by an Army under the Conduct of O. C. Soon after quitting that Kingdom
he marched for England, and 3. Sepember 1651 nigh Worcester was fought, and
lost the day, tho he acted beyond the expectation of his friends, and to the
great applause of his very Enemies. Narrow search was made after his Person,
yea 1000 pounds promised to such who should betray him. Yet God (whose Angels
were his Lifeguard) miraculously preserving him out of the Hands of his
Enemies, he safely passed over into France to the Queen his Mother. During his
continuance beyond the Seas, great were the proffers tendered unto him if
forsaking the Protestant Religion; but as soon might the impotent Waves remove
the most Sturdy Rocks, as they once unfix him; such his Constancy, whom neither
the Frowns of his Afflictions, nor Smiles of Secular Advantages could make to
warp from his first Principles. At last his Piety and Patience were rewarded by
God with a Happy Restitution to his Undoubted Dominions, and He after a long
and tedious Exile, landed at Dover, May 25. 1660. to the great Joy of this
Three Kingdoms. A Prince whose Virtues I should injure, if endeavoring their
contraction within so narrow a Scantling. The great and various Dimensions of
his Profound Wisdom, Solid Judgment and all other Royal Endowments and Heroic
Virtues can never be projected on a Plain nor delineated on Paper. And yet I
cannot pass over that wherein he so resembles the King of Heaven (whose
Vicegerent he is) I mean His Merciful Disposition, doing Good unto those who
spightfully used and persecuted him. And now it is my hearty Prayer, That God
who appeared so wonderful in his Restoration, would continue still Gracious
to us in his Preservation, confounding the PLOTS of his Adversaries, that upon
him and his Posterity the Crown may flourish for ever.

Mary Eldest Daughter of King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at St.
James's, November 4. 1631. She was Married to Count William of Nassaw Eldest
Son to Henry Prince of Orange, May 2. 1641. She endured her heavy Afflictions
caused by the Murder of her Royal Father, and loss of her Husband, with a
courage far surpassing the weakness of her Sex; and a little after had a Son
November 1650. The complexion of the Times being altered in England She came
over to congratulate the Happiness of her Brother's Miraculous Restitution, and
died 31 December following 1660, and was buried in the Chapel of H. 7.

James 3 d Son of King Charles and Queen Mary, was born at St James's, October
13. 1633. He was commonly styled Duke of York, tho not solemnly created until
January 27. 1643. At the rendition of Oxford he was taken Prisoner, and some 2
years after through the assistance of one Coll. Bamfield, made his escape,
landing safe in Holland. Hence he went for France where he gained the Esteem of
the whole Court, and before he arrived at the Age of 21 years, he was made
Lieutenant General of the Forces of the King of France. This Trust he
discharged to the Admiration of all, atchieving so many Noble and Heroic
Exploits which rendered him renowned through the Christian World. Yet such was
the Ingratitude of the French that concluding Peace with O. C. the Usurper they
wholly forgot his former services, and consented to the expulsion of this
Prince and his Royal Brothers out of that Kingdom. Soon was he Courted by Don
Jo. D. of Austria into Flanders, where in the Action at Dunkirk, he far
surpassed his former deeds, often forgetting that he was a Prince, to show
himself a true Soldier, (such his hazarding his person really worth 10000 of
them) to the great Molestation of his true Friends. Since God out of his
infinite Love to the English, has safely returned this Duke to his Native
Country, I pray God he may long live to be the Joy and Delight of the whole
Nation.

Elizabeth, 2 d. Daughter of King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at St.
James's, December 28. 1635. A Lady of a strong Judgment but weak Body, being of
a melancholy temper (as affected, above her Age, with the sad Condition of her
Family) fell sick at Carisbroke-Castle in the Isle of Wight. After many rare
ejaculatory expressions, abundantly demonstrating her unparalelled Piety, to
the eternal honor of her own Memory, and the Astonishment of those who waited
on her, she died December 8. 1650. and was interred in St Th. Chapel in
Newport.

Anne 3 d. Daughter to King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at St. James'
March 17. 1637. She was a very Pregnant Lady above her Age, and died in her
Infancy when not full 4 years old. Being minded by those about her to call upon
God even when the Pangs of Death were upon her, I am not able, says she, to
say my long Prayer (meaning the Lords Prayer) but I will say my short one,
Lighten mine Eyes O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of Death. This done the Little
Lamb gave up the Ghost.

Katharine 4th Daughter to King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at
White Hall, and survived not above half an hour after her Baptizing. Note that
none of this Kings Children but P. Charles, were entered into the Register of
St. Martin's in the Fields, tho I am credibly informed that at the Birth of
every Child born at White Hall or St. James's, there were 5 l. paid for that
purpose.

Charles, Son to the Illustrious James D. of York, by Anne Daughter to the
Right Honorable Edward Hide, E. of Clarendon and Lord Chanc. of England and
Frances his Lady, was born at Worcester-House October 22. 1660. He was declared
Duke of Cambridge, a Title which has been only conferred either on Foreign
Princes or Persons of the Royal Blood. This Princely Infant died May 5. 1661.

Saints.
St. Wulsey, of great Reputation for Virtue and Innocence, was by St. Dunstan
created first Abbot of Westminster. He died 960 and was buried in the same
Monastery, and the 26 of September was kept by the Citizens of London with
great Veneration of his Miracle-working Memory.

Note that Jo. Fecknam Abbot of Westminster. in the days of Q. Mary, was cruel to
none, but Courteou^ and Charitable to all who needed his Help or Liberality,
which is the Cause I meet with no Martyrs in this City.

Prelates Since the Reformation.
Rich. Neile, bred in Cambridge, was Vicar of Chesthunt in Hartf. then Dean of
Westminster. Through many Bishoprics of Coventry and Lichfield, Durham and
Winchester, he was at last preferred Archbishop of York, being also
Privy-Councellor to K. James, and K. Charles. He died 16 -- *

Jo. Warner, D. D. bred in Oxford, was preferred B. of Rochester. He bestowed
an excellent Font upon the Cathedral Church of Cant. Keeping good Hospitality
in the Christmas at Brumley; as he fed many Poor, so he freed himself from
much trouble, being absent when the rest of the Bishops subscribed their
Protestations in Parliaments. He was an able Advocate for Episcopacy, in the
House of Lords, speaking for them as long as he had any voice left him. He has
since seen the happy Restitution of his Order, enjoying again his former
Dignity An. 1661.

Statesmen.
Sir Fr. Bacon, Knight, Youngest Son to Sir Nich. Lord Keeper, was born in
York-House 1560. He was bred in Trin. College in Camb. and there first fell
into a dislike of Aristotle's Philosophy. Having afterward attained to great
perfection in the Study of the Common Law, he got no Preferment therein during
the Reign of Q. Eliz. imputable to the Envy of a Great Person.

He was Favorite to the Earl of Essex, and more true to him then the Earl was
to himself; for finding him choose rather destructive then displeasing
Councils, he forsook not his Person, but his practices, and herein he was not
the worse Friend for being the better Subject. By King James he was made his
Solicitor, then his Attorney (then privileged to sit in the House of Commons)
and at last Lord Chancellor of England. He was a rich Cabinet filled with
Judgment, Wit, Fancy and Memory, and had the golden Key, Elocution, to open it.
He was singular in singulis, in every Science and Art, and being In-at-all came
off with Credit. He was too Bountiful to his Servants, and either too
confident of their Honesty, or too conniving at their Falsehood. It Is said he
had 2 Servants, one in all Causes Patron to the Plaintiff, the other to the
Defendant, but taking bribes of both, with this Condition, to restore the Money
received, if the Cause went against them. Such practices, tho unknown to their
Master, cost him the loss of his Office. During his Solitude, he made many
Excellent Discoveries in Nature. His vast Bounty to such who brought him
Presents from great Persons, occasioned his want afterward. He was the first
and last Lord Verulam, as if it had been reserved for that ancient Roman Colony
(of Verulam) to be buried in its reverend Ruins, and in this Peerless Lords
everlasting Memory, much admired by English, more by outlandish Men. He died
1626, and was buried in St. Michael's Church of St. Albans. His Skull being
afterward found was by one King Doctor of Physic, made the Object of Scorn,
but he who then derided the Dead, is since become the Laughing Stock of the
living.

Writers.
Sulcard of Westminster, a Benedictine Monk, one of great Wit, Meekness and
Candor, was much esteemed by King Edward the Confessor. He Flourished An. 1070
under King William the Conq.

Gilb. of Westminster first Monk then Abbot, published a Dialogue he had with a
Jew in his return from France, and dedicated it to Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury. He died 1117. and was buried in Westminster.

Math. of Westminster, a Monk and an accomplished Scholar. He rectified our
English History, writing one History from the beginning of the World to Christ,
a 2 d from Christ's Nativity to the Norman Conquest, a 3 d from thence to the
beginning of King Edward 2. adding afterward to it his Life and that of E. 3.
He named his Book Flores Historiarum, and died about 1368.

Since the Reformation.
Ben. Johnson, (whose Mother married a Bricklayer for her 2 d Husband) was bred
in Westminster School, then in St. John's College in Cambridge (being also
honorary Member of Christ-Church in Oxford) where he continued but few weeks
for want of further maintenance, being fain to return to the trade of his
Father in Law. He helped at the new Structure of Lincoln's Inn, when having a
Trowel in his Hand, he had a Book in his Pocket. Some Gentlemen afterward
manumised him freely to follow his own ingenuous Inclinations. His Wit was
Elaborate, wrought out by his own Industry. He would sit silent in learned
Company, and suck in (besides Wine) their several Humors into his Observation.
He was Paramount in the Dramatique part of Poetry, and taught the Stage and
exact Conformity to the Laws of Comedians. His Comedies were above the Vulgar,
(which are only tickled with downright obscent^y) and took not so well at the
first stroke as at the rebound, when beheld the second time; yea they will
endure reading, and that with due commendation, so long as either Ingenuity or
Learning are fashionable in our Nation. He died 1638, and was buried in the
Abbey-Church of Westminster.

Masters of Music.
Christopher Tie, Doctor of Music in the Reign of H. 8. and E. 6. to whom he
was one of the Gentlemen of their Chapel and probably the Organist. S. N.
Music which received a grievous Wound in England at the dissolution of
Abbeys, was much beholden to him for her recovery; such his excellent Skill and
Piety, that he kept it up in credit in Court and in all Cathedrals during his
life. He translated the Acts of the Apostles into Verse, and set an excellent
Composition of Music of 4 parts to the several Chapters, dedicated to E. 6.
and printed 1553. Besides many Services and Anthems.

Jo. Douland, was Servant in the Chapel to Q. Eliz. and K. James. He was the
rarest Musician that his Age did behold, having improved his Skill by his
Travels. A cheerful person truly answering his Anagram. Johannes Doulandus,
Annos ludendo hausi. Christian K. of Denmark having obtained him of K. James,
took him along with himself into Denmark. He died about 1615.

Benefactors to the Public.
Ja. Palmer, B. D. bred in Cambridge and maintained there by the Company of
Carpenters in London who were since bountifully repaid, was Preacher of St.
Bridgets in Fleet Street, tho sequestered in those times; what he had formerly
gained in that place, he has since bestowed in buildings and endowing, over
against the New Chapel in Westminster a fair Almshouse for 12 poor People,
besides many and great gifts to Ministers poor Widows. To the Poor in his
Almshouse he preached constantly twice a Week. He died 1659.

Memorable Persons.
Edm. Doubleday, Esquire, a Man of great Stature, S. N.
Valor, Gravity and Activity, attended Sir Th. Knevet, November 4. 1605. when
he searched the Cellar beneath the Parliament House, where they found Guy Faux
with his dark Lanthorn in the dead of the Night providing for the Death of many
next Morning. He was newly come out of the Devils Closet (the inner Room where
the Powder lay) Faux beginning-to bustle, Mr. Doubleday ordered him at his
pleasure, up with his Heels, and there with the Traitor lay the Treason flat
along the Floor by Gods Goodness detected and defeated. Faux vowed that had he
been taken in the inner Room, he had blown up himself and all the Company
therein* Mr. Doubleday died 1618.

Norfolk.
NOrfolk has the German Ocean on the N. E. Suffolk on the S. Cambridg and a
part of Lincolnshire on the W. 50 miles in length and 30 in breadth. The Soil
is various, comprehending all Kinds and Degrees, so that Norfolk collectively
taken has a sufficient result of pleasure and profit. This County has the
most Churches of any in England (viz. 660) and tho the poorest Livings, yet the
richest Clergymen. Nor can there be given a greater demonstration of the
Wealth and Populousness of this County, than that in the late Act for an
Assessment upon England, at the Rate of 60000 l. by the Month, for 3 Months;
Norfolk with the City of Norwich is rated at 3266 l. 13 s. 4 d. the highest
Proportion of any Shire in England. The Natural Commodities are chiefly
Rabbits, and Herrings caught nigh Yarmouth, besides the County shareth
plentifully in all other English Commodities. It Is reported of a Gentleman in
Norfolk that he made above 10000 l ster. of a Piece of ground (not 40 yards
square) which contained a sort of Clay for the making a choice sort of earthen
ware. The Manufactures are Worsteds, (so called from Worsted a Village in this
County) which first found a general repute in England toward the end of King
Henry 6. Worsted Stockins were first made in England An. 1564. by William Rider
Apprentice in London, who made a pair by an Italian Pattern and presented them
to William Earl of Pembrook.

Proverbs.
I. Norfolk Dumplings. The fare they generally feed on. II. Norf. Wiles. Such
the Skill of the Common People in the Common Law, who are said to study Law as
following the Plough tail; and some would persuade us that they will enter an
action for their neighbors horse but looking over their hedge. III. A Yarmouth
Capon, That is a Red Herring. IV. He is arrested by the Baily of Marshland.
That is, an Ague caused by the unwholsomness of the Air in the Marshes.

Prelates
Gilb. Berkeley, descended from the ancient Barons of that Name (as appears
by his Arms) was made Bishop of Bath and Wells An. 1 Eliz. He died 1581. and
was buried in his own Cathedral.

Jo. Aylmer, (brother to Sir Rob.) was born at Aylmer-hall, and bred in
Cambridg. He became Chaplain to H. Gray D. of Suffolk, and had the tuition of
his Daughter the Lady Jane Gray. Flying in the Reign of Queen Mary he was
wonderfully saved from the Searchers of the Ship, by a Merchant who put him in
a great Wine-But which had a Partition in the middle, so that Mr. Aylmer sat in
the hinder part, whilst the Searchers drank Wine which they saw drawn out of
the head or other end thereof. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth he was made
Archdeacon of Linclon and at last Bishop of London. He had a Son called Tob-el
(i. e. God is Good) in memorial of a great deliverance bestowed on his mother,
when being big with child of him, she was thrown out of a coach. This Bishop
was a great Scholar and Divine. He was chosen a Disputant at Westminster
against the Popish Bishops An. 1. Elizabeth. He stoutly opposed the
Non-conformists, and was foully be-libelled by them. He died 1594. He left the
main of his great Estate to Sam. his eldest Son (High Sheriff of Suff. in the
Reign of King Ch.) of his youngest Sons, Dr. Aylmer Rector of Haddam in
Hartford, was a very Learned Man and great Divine.

Jo. Towers bred in Cambridge, became Chaplain to William Earl of Northampton,
who bestowed on him the Benefice of Castle-Ashby in Northampton. He was
preferred Dean, and at last B. of Peterborough. He was a good Actor when he was
young, and a great Sufferer when he was Old, (dying about 1650) rich only in
Children and Patience.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Ralph de Hengham, was made Lord Chief Justice of the K. Bench, An. 2 E. 1* and
fined in 7000 Marks for bribery, and ejected out of his place 18 E. 1. He was
afterward made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, under the confidence
generally conceived of his Amendment. He died An. 19 E. 1. and lies buried in
the Church of St. Paul's.

William Paston, Esquire, born at Paston, was Serj. to H. 6. and was by him
preferred second Judge of the Common Pleas. The King allowed him, besides the
ordinary Salary, 110 Marks, with 2 Gowns yearly out of the Exchequer. He had
been also in Grace with two former Kings, H. 4. and H. 5. This William married
Agnes Daughter and Heir of Sir Edmund Berrey, by which Marriage the Pastons
Quarter at this day, the several Coats of Hetherest, Wachesham, Craven,
Gebredge, Hemgrave and Kerdeston. He died at London 1444, and lies buried in
Norwich* Wolstan de Paston, his Ancestor, came into England 3 years after the
Conquest, from whom all the descendants except this Will. were buried at
Paston. Jo. eldect Son to Will. married Marg. the Daughter of Jo. Mautby, and
William his second Surviving Son married Anne Daughter to Edm. D. of Somerset.

Sir Ed. Coke, Knight, Son of Rob. Esquire, and of Winefred his Wife, was born
at Mileham, and bred in Trinity College in Cambridge, and in Cliffords-Inn
London. Afterward in the Inner Temple. After 6 years he was called to the
Bar, and for 3 years he was Reader in Lyons-Inn. He had 30000 l. with his
incomparable Wife, Bridget, Daughter and Coheir of Jo. Paston, Esquire. By her
he had 10 Children. Then began Preferment to press upon him, being made
Recorder of the City of Norwich, Knight of the Shire for the County of Norfolk,
Speaker in the House of Commons, and successively the Queens Solicitor and
Attorney. King James honored him with Knighthood, and made him Chief Justice
first of the Common Pleas, then of the K. Bench. Thus beginning on a good
Bottom left him by his Father, Marrying a Wife of Extraordinary Wealth, having
at the first great and gainful Practice, afterward many and profitable
Offices, being provident to choose good Penny-worths in purchases, leading a
thrifty life, living to a great Age, during flourishing and peaceable times, no
wonder (...) he advanced a fair Estate. Some falsely Character him a back-friend
to the Church and Clergy, being a Grand Benefactor to the Church of Norwich,
which he vigorously defended (and that gratis) against a Frye of busy
Informers and Devourers of Churches who intended to swallow down the Church
Lands of Norwich under the obscure Title of Concealments. He freely gave the
Benefices in his own Patronage to worthy Men, and used to say, That he would
have Church Livings pass by Livery and Seisin and not Bargain and Sale. Five
sorts of people he used to fore-design to Misery. viz. Chemists, Monopolizers,
Concealers, Promoters and Rhyming Poets. For three things he would give God
solemn thanks, that he never gave his Body to Physic, nor his Heart to
Cruelty, nor his Hand to Corruption. In three things he did much applaud his
own success; in his fair fortune with his Wife, in his happy study of the Laws,
and in his free coming by all his Offices, nec Prece nec Pretio, neither
begging nor bribing for preferment. His parts were admirable, he had a deep
Judgment, faithful Memory, active Fancy; and the Jewel of his Mind was put into
a fair case, a beautiful Body with a comely Countenance. Being always neat he
was wont to say That the out-ward neatness of our Bodies might be a Monitor of
purity to our Souls. He always declined Circumlocutions. He commended
Moderation, saying, if a River swell beyond its Banks it loses its own
Channel. If any adverse party crossed him, he would patiently reply, If another
Punish me, I will not Punish my self. He would never privately retract what he
had publicly adjudged, professing, that he was Judge in a Court and not in a
Chamber. He was wont to say, No Wise Man would do that in Prosperity, whereof
he should Repent in Adversity. He gave for his Motto, Prudens qui Patiens, and
his practice was accordingly, especially after he fell into the disfavour of K.
James. (See the Engl. Chron.) In his private Life he triumphed in his own
Innocence, that he had done nothing illegally, calling to mind the Motto which
he gave in his Rings, when made Searj. Lex est tutissima Cassis, The Law is the
safest Helmet. And now he had leisure to peruse 30 Books written with his own
hand, most pleasing himself with a Manual, which he called his Vade Mecum
containing the Remarkables of his life. His most Learned and Laborious Works on
the Laws, will last (...) be Admired by the Judicious Posterity, whilst Fame
has a Trumpet left her, and any breath to blow therein. His Judgment lately
passed for an Oracle in Law, and if since the Credit thereof has causlesly
been questioned, the wonder is not great. If the Prophet himself living in an
incredulous Age, found cause to complain Is. 51.1.
Who had believed our Report? It needs not seem strange that our licentious
times have afforded some to shake the Authenticallness of the Reports of any
earthly Judge. He constantly had Prayers in his own House, and relieved the
Poor with his constant Alms. The Foundation of the Charter House had been
ruined before it was raised, and crushed by some Courtiers in the hatching
thereof, had not his great care preserved the same. The Free School at The^ford
was supported in its being, by his assistance, and he founded a School at his
own cost at Godwick in this County. Dr. Whitgift (afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury) was his Tutor, who sent unto his Pupil, when the Queens Attorney, a
fair New Testament, with this Message; He had now studied Common Lawenough, let
him hereafter study the Law of God. When he was under a Cloud at Court, and
outed of his Judges Place, the Lands belonging to the Church of Norwich were
again called into Question being begged by a Peer: Sr Edw. desired him to
desist, telling him, that otherwise he would put on his Gown and Cap, and come
into Westminster Hall once again, and plead there in any Court in Justification
of what he had done. He died at Stoke Poges in Buck. on Wedn. 3. September,
being the 83 year of his Age; Whose last Words were, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done.

Sir Th. Richardson, Knight, born at Mulberton, (his Father being Minister
thereof) was the Kings Serj. afterward sworn Chief Justice of the Common Pleas
1626. Speaker of the House of Commons 21 and 22 Jac. He married for his second
Lady Eliz. Beaumont, the Sister (as I take it) of Mary Countess of Buck and the
Relict of -- Ashburnham, Knight She was by King Charles created Baroness of
Craumont in Scotland, and (tho issuless by the Judge) the Honors descended to
his Grandchild.

Soldiers.
Rob. Vinile, when about to fight Tournboll the Champion of the Scoth Army, is
said to have made his Way through a Mastiff, (the Champions attendant) by
cutting him off at the Loins, and then cut Tournboll's head from off his
shoulders.

Sir Oliver Hingham, was born, richly landed and buried in Hingham. A Valiant
Man, whom King Edward 3 left Governor of Aquitain in France. He gave the
French (who had been drawn into Bourdeaux) such entertainment, that they drank
not so much Claret Wine in the City, as they left blood behind them, An. 13.
and 3. He was afterward made Knight of the Garter. His Monument has his
Resemblance in Coat Armor, lively set forth in Metal with 24 Mourners about his
Monument.

Jo. Fastolf, Baron of Sineginle in France, was a Ward to Jo. D. of Bedford,
sufficient to prove him an Englishman. Tho he was truly Valiant, the stage has
made him a Thrasonica Puff and Emblem of Mock-valour. He was made Knight of the
Garter by Henry 6. and died about the second year of his Reign.

Sir Clem. Paston, Knight, Grandson to Sir Jo. a favorite to Edward 4. was
born at Paston. He was at the burning of the Conquest in France, and afterward
by Henry 8. was made Captain of one of his ships of war, and in a sea fight
took a French gally and therein the Admiral of France Prisoner, called the
Baron of Blancard, whom he brought into England and kept at Caster nigh
Yarmouth, till he had paid 7000 Crowns for his Ransom, besides a Cup and 2
Snakes of Gold (of the Spoil of the Gally) bequeathed by Sir Clem to his
Family. He received many wounds, and was left for dead in Musleborough Field in
Scotland. He was the Gentleman to whom Sir Wiat (when worsted at Ludgate) did
willingly submit. He had the Command of some Ships of Queen Elizabeth at
New Haven and was Pensioner to 2 Kings and 2 Queens successively. At Oxnit he
built a goodly house for Hospitality, and a Hospital hard by for 6 poor
serving-men. He died 15 --

Seamen.
No County in England does carry a Top and Top Gallant more high in Maritine
performances than Norfolk. Witness Yarmouth's proportion in the Navy used by
Edward 3. against -- of about 700 Ships and 14500 Men. 43 ships with 1950
belonging to Yarmouth; well nigh double to what London did afford, Yarmouth was
very Populous in that Age, and (tho but one Parish) a lamentable Plague in one
year did sweep thence 7000 men.

Nich. of Lynne, bred in Oxford, accounted a Franciscan Friar, an Excellent
Musician, Mathemation and Astrologer, is reported to have sailed to the
Northern Islands in the World An. 30 E. 31, 330, and to have gone so far as the
Pole Arctick, where he discovered 4 In-draughts of the Ocean from the 4
Quarters of the World. It Is said he wrote a Book of discoveries, called
Inventio Fortunata. Chaucer makes an Honorable mention of him. He died 1360.
and was buried in Lynne.

Pet. Read, Esquire. worthily served his Prince and Country, as also Chapter 5. Emp.
who gave him the Order of Barbary, for his valiant deeds there and at Tunis. He
died 1569.

Writers.
Jo. Baconthorpe, born at Baconthorpe, bred a Carmelite in Blackney. made more
Books for weight and number then his Body could bear. His Soul had but a small
Diocese (of a Body) to visit, and therefore might the better attend the
effectual informing thereof. It Is said that the Heart of the D. of Hamilton was
the largest, and that of the Lord Capel was the least that the Anatomist ever
beheld, whence 'its inferred, That contracted Spirits act with the greatest
vigorousness. This Jo. was termed the Resolute Dr. He equally disliked
Scepticks of none; and unconstant people; (successively) of all Opinions. He
groped after more light than he saw, saw more than he durst speak of, spoke of
more than he was thanked for by those of his superstitious Order. He died 1346.

Jo. Colton, born at Tirington, was Chaplain to W. Bateman Bishop of Norwich,
and first Master of Gonvil-Hall in Cambridge. For his Learning and Piety, he
was by Henry 4 preferred Arch. Bishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. He was
employed to Rome in the Schism between Pope Vrb. 6. and Clem. 7. which
occasioned his writing a Learned Treatise De Causa Schismatis, and another De
Remedio ejusd. It seems he resigned his Archbishopric before his death, which
happened 1404.

Alan of Lynne, in Cambridge, then a Carmelite in Lynne, made Indexes of 33
Writers he perused, among which were Augustine, Anselm and Aquinas. He
Flourished. 1420.

William Wells, born (probably) at Wells in this County, Provincial of the
Augustinian Order in Lynne, D. D. in Cambridge, was an industrious Man and good
Writer. He died and was buried at Lynne, 1421.

Jo. Thorpe, born in Thorpe, was a Carmelite at Norwich and Dr. at Cambridge.
Being a great Logician, he wrote a Book entitled the Labyrinth of Sophismes,
and another called the Rule of Consequences, for which he got the Title of
Doctor Ingeniosus, not Ingenuus; having a pound of Wit for a Dram of good
nature, and being a Violent Persecutor of W. White and other Wicklevites. He
died 1440. and lies buried at Norwich.

Jo. Skeleton, (Minister at Dis in Norf.) styled himself the Kings Orator and
Poet Laureat. AMP.
Erasmus in a Letter to Henry 8. styles him Britannicarum Literarum Lumen and
Decus. Besides a Satirical Wit, (using biting discourse, scornful laughter,
and bitter Jests) which was unhappy to light on three Noli me tangere's, viz.
the Rod of a Schoolmaster, the Couls of Friars, and the Cap of a Cardinal; The
first gave him a lash, the second deprived him of his livelihood, the third
almost outed him out his life. W. Lilly, with whom he fell foul, paid him
sufficiently, when he told him, That whilst he was Ambitious of the Reputation
of a Learned Poet, he was neither Learned nor a Poet. The Friars instigated Nix
Bish. of Norwich to suspend this Skeleton from his Benefice, for keeping a
Concubine. And Cardinal Woolsey, his too Potent Enemy, being charged by him
with too much truth, so persecuted him, that he was forced to take Sanctuary at
Westminster. In his Restraint he died 1529. and was buried in St. Marg. Chap.
with this Epitaph. Jo. Sceltonus, Vates Pierius, hic situs est. On his death
bed he declared he had kept the aforesaid supposed Concubine in notion of a
Wife.

Since the Reformation.
Jo Barret, born at Lynne, bred a Carmelite in Cambridg in an ignorant and
ambitious Age, was stoped by Archbishop Cranmer, for Insufficiency. Afterward
having plied his Book hard he became an admirable Scholar, and having Commenced
Dr. was Preacher in Norwich, always making honorable mention of Dr. Cranmer.
It Is charitably believed, that tho complying in the times of Persecution, he
returned to the truth in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Edm. Gourney, bred B. D. in Cambridge, was Preacher in this Shire. An
excellent Scholar, and innocently humorous. When I was collecting the Witnesses
of the Truth in all Ages, even in the times of Popery, It is needless (says
he) for I know that I am desended from Adam, tho I cannot prove my Pedigree
from him. Yet he was born of as good a Family as any in Norf. He wrote 2
learned Treatises against Transubstantiation, and of the 2 d. Commandment. He
died in the beginning of the Civil Wars.

Benefactors to the Public.
Godfrey Bollen, Knight, Son to Jeffrey, born at Sale, was Lord Mayor of London
An. 1457. By his Will he bequeathed liberally to Prisons and Hospitals, etc.
Besides he gave 1000 l. to poor Householders in London, and 200 l. to those in
Norfolk. He was Great-Grandfather, by the Mothers side to Q. Eliz.

Ja. Hobart, Attorney Genesis and of the Privy Council to, and Knighted by H. 7.
besides his many Benefactions to his Parish Church in London, built a fair
Bridge over the River Wareney betwixt this County and Suffolk, and a firm
Causey there by, etc. There are 3 Houses of his Issue in this County.

Andr. Perne, born at Bilney, Mr. of Pet. House, Protector and Vice Chancellor
of Cambridge, and Dean of Ely, founded a Fellowship and Scholarships in his
College, and increased the Library with many rare Manuscripts. In the days of
Queen Mary he was the Skreen to keep off the Fire of Persecution, from many
poor Protestants; so that by his Means, no Gremial of the University was
Martyred therein. Indeed he altered his Religion 4 times in 12 years (from the
last of H. 8. to 1. Elizabeth) a Pap. a Prot. a Pap. a Prot. and was a bending
tho no smarting Willow, guilty of Compliance not Cruelty. Being very Facetious
he called a Clergyman Fool (who indeed was little better) who returned that he
would complain thereof to the Bishop of Ely. Do (says the Dean) when you
please, and my Lord Bishop will Confirm you. Yet at last, he himself ('it is
said) was Heart-broken with a Jest of the Queens Jester, who (Archbishop
Whitgift and Dr. Pern being present) dissuaded her Majesty from going abroad in
a wet day. Heaven (says he) Madam, dissuades you, it is cold and wet; And Earth
dissuades you, it is moist and dirty; Heaven dissuades you, this heavenly Man
Archbishop Whitgift; and Earth dissuades you, your Fool Clod, such a Lump of
Clay as my self. And if neither will prevail with You, here is one that is
neither Heaven nor Earth, but hangs betwixt both, Dr. Perne, and he also
dissuades you. He died soon after at Lambeth.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Th. Gresham, bred a Mercer and Merchant in London, the Wealthiest Citizen
in England of his Age, Founded 2 stately Fabrics, the Old Exchange, a kind of
College for Merchants, and Gresham College a kind of Exchange for Scholars. As
Vessels of Massy Gold need no burnishing, whilst Vessels that are only gilded
are set off therewith: So let lesser Donations be set off with Rhetorical
Praises, whilst those of this Knight are resplendent without any adventitious
Luster. He died 21 Nov. 1579.

Sir William Paston, Knight (whose Ancestors were bountiful to the Abbeys of
Saint Bennet in Holme and Bromholme in this County) erected a fair School with
30 l. per An. at Northwalsham in this County. He married Frances the daughter
of Sir Th. Clear of Stokesby, and was great-grandfather to Sir William, the
bountiful Promoter of all my weak endeavors.

Henry Howard, Youngest Son of Henry Earl of Surrey, and Brother to Th. last D.
of Norfolk, was born at Shotesham, bred in King's College in Cambridge, then in
Trin. Hall, being afterward Chancellor of the University. A great Scholar,
Witness his Learned Dispensative against the Poison of supposed Prophesies,
dedicated to Sir Fr. Walsingham. He lived privately in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth till King James advanced him in Honor and Wealth, creating him Baron
of Marnehill in Dors. Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, Knight of the Garter. He founded and endowed an Hospital for 12
poor Women and a Governor at Rising in this County: Another for 12 poor Men,
and a Governor at Clun in Shrop. another at Greenwich in Kent, for a Governor
and 20 poor men, of which 8 are to be chosen out of Shotesham. He died 15 June
1614. and was buried in the ancient Chapel of the Castle of Dover.

Memorable Persons.
-- Sharnborn, born at, and Lord of Sharnbourn a Manor in this County; which
Manor William the Conqueror conferred on Warren a Norman Soldier Sharborn
traversed his Title, and (being a Norfolk-man) durst go to Law with the
Conqueror and question the Validity of his Donations. Yea he got the better of
the Suit, and the Kings Grant was adjudged void. This is pressed by many to
prove that King William (tho in name) was in deed no Conqueror, but came in by
Composition to keep the Laws of England. Sharborn was lately aliened (the Heirs
Males being extinct) to a worthy Person Fr. Ash. Esquire who has settled it on
Emanuel College.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 14. Philip Calthrope, a Facetious Gentleman, Jo. Drakes, a Shoemaker had
bought some of the same French Tawney that himself had provided for a Gown,
commanded his Tailor to cut his Gown full of Holes, which purged Drakes of his
Proud Humor, that he would never be of the Gentleman's Fashion again.

An. 29. Edm. Windham (whose Grandmother was Daughter to Jo. Howard D. of
Norf.) struck Mr. Clear, Kings Tennis Court, For this he was arraigned in the
great Hall at Greenwich, and had Judgment to lose his righthand. He desired
that the King of Mercy would be pleased to take his left hand, and spare his
right; for therewith (said he) I may be hereafter able to do his Grace Service.
The King being informed hereof, granted his full Pardon. He made his promise
good (to E 6. by whom he was Knighted) endeavoring to suppress Kets Rebellion
in this County, till at last it proved a Task above his Strength to perform.

Th. Woodhouse, Mil. descended from Honorable Ancestors, viz. Rob. (Treasurer)
was summoned to Parliament, by E. 3* Jo. was Servant and Executor to Hen. 5.
Sir Will. was Vice Ad. of the English Fleet in Masleborough Field. Philip
active at the taking of Cadiz and Knighted there by the Earl of Essex. And ever
since there has been a Military inclination in this Family which has
manifested it self on several occasions.

An. 18. Drugo Drury, Arm. afterward Knighted, Amias Paulet, to keep Ma. Q. of
Scots. Both were nicknamed Puritans by the ill-natured Roman Catholics.

An. 5. Roger Townsend, Baronet, a Religious Gentleman expending his Soul in
Piety and Charity, God, his Service and Servants, restored Impropriations to
the Church to some Hundreds per An. He married Mary, Daughter and Coheir of
Horatio Lord Vere of Tilbury, by whom he had Sir Horace, created Baon at the
Coronation of K. Chapter II.

Norwich.
NOrwich is a Pleasant and Populous City, the first with the Inhabitation of
Trees, the latter with the Plantation of People. The pleasantness of the City
was not a little advanced by the Dutchmen who first garnished it with curious
Flowers. As for Manufactures, Stuffs were first brought hither by the Dutch who
were expelled their Country by the Cruelty of the D. of Alva. Of these Stuffs
there was one formerly called Stand-far-off, which discovered its coursness
when near to the Eye, another called Perpetuano from the lasting thereof.
Satinisco, Bombicino, Italiano, etc. Norwich has beaten Sudbury out of
distance, in the Race of trading. Of the Buildings, the Cathedral is spacious,
tho the Roof in the Cioysters be most commended. Amongst private Houses, the D.
of Norfolk's Palace is the greatest I ever saw in any City out of London. Here
is a covered Bowling-Alley, The Bishops Palace, formerly a fair Structure was
lately unleaded, and new covered with Tyle. Whereon a Wagg, Thus Palaces are
altered, we saw
John Leaden.
Leyden, now Wat Tyler, next Jack Straw.


Physicians.
Jo. Goslin, Master of Caius College in Camb. Proctor of the University and
twice Vice Chancellor thereof, a greet Scholar and Reg. Prof. of Physic, was
strict in pressing the Statutes of the University; and it being then highly
penal for a Scholar to wear Boots in the University, there was a Student
undertook for a Wager to address himself booted to the Vice Chancellor, craving
his advice for a Numness in his Legs, the Vice Chancellor prescribed him a
Receipt and dismissed him very civilly. This Youth a cunning Gibeonite, covering
at the same Instant his Legs with his Boots, and his Boots with his Legs;
escaped the punishment that was due in that case. Dr. Goslin was a Worthy
Benefactor to Kath. Hall, bestowing thereon the fair Bull-Inn of considerable
value. He died 1625.

Jo. Caius, Fellow in Gonvil-Hall in Camb. traveled into Italy and wrote
several Trea. there. After his Return he was Physician to Q. Mary and improved
Gonvil-Hall into a College. He wrote an Excellent Book of the Antiquity of
Cambridge and another De Canibus. His Epitaph is FUI CAIUS.

Since the Reformation.
Rob. Watson was Skilled in the Laws, and Steward of the House to Archbishop
Cranmer. Having frequently disputed with Papists, during his Imprisonment for
Religion, he wrote, after his enlargement, an Elegant Latin Treatise, wherein
he relates the Accidents of his Life.

Benefactors to the Public.
Will. Baitman, bred in Cambridge, Archdeacon, then B. of Norwich in the Reign
of E. 3. enjoined Penance to Rob. Lord Morley for stealing of his Deer, and
made him perform the same in the Cathedral of Norwich, notwithstanding the
Kings threatening Letters to the contrary. He erected Trinity-Hall College, in
Cambridge, for the Study of the Canon and Civil Laws. He removed Gonvil-Hall,
to a more convenient place, building and settling the Revenues thereof according
to the Will of the Founder. King Ed. 3. resolving to follow his Title to the
Crown of France sent this Bishop to the Pope, to acquaint him with his
Intentions; In which Embassy he died at Avignon 1354.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Leg, Master of Gonvil-Hall, in Cambridge, was Doctor of Law and Arches,
one of the Masters in the Chancery, twice Vice Chancellor of the University. He
was well skilled in Antiquity. He wrote a Tragedy of the Destruction of Jerus;
which was filched from him, by a Plagiary, before it was acted. In the acting
of a Tragedy, he had formerly written of R. 3. Jo. Palmer (afterward Dean of
Peterborough) who personated K. Rich. therein had his head so possessed with a
Prince-like Humor, that ever after he did what he then acted, in his pr^digal
Expenses. Dr. Leg bequeathed 600 l. for the building of the East-Part of his
College. He died An. 1607.

Northamptonshire.
Northamptonshire, a long narrow Inland County stretched from the N. E. to S.
W. bordereth on 9 several Counties. viz. on the E. Camb. Hunt. on the W.
Warwickshire, on the N. Linc. Rutl. and Leic. on the S. Bedford, Buckingham*
and Oxford. It is a fruitful and populous County as any in England. Here there
is very little Wast Ground; so that this Shire is an Apple without Core or
Rind. All the Rivers therein, are bred there, which argues the elevation of the
Ground. The Language of the Inhabitants is very proper. There is a Heath in
this County, nigh to Stamford, which has variety of very rare Plants growing
upon it. The Natural Commodities besides Grass, Corn, etc. are Saltpeter, most
whereof is found in Dove-Houses, and most Dove-houses in this great
Corn-County. Then Pigeons, in Hebrew Jonah which comes from a Root which
signifies to spoil and destroy. They are thought to be the Causers of Dearth,
and are indeed devouring Innocents. This Shire needs no Manufactures, yet the
Town of Northampton may be said to stand chiefly on other Men's Legs, where (if
not the best) the most and cheapest Boots and Stockins are bought in England.
Upon Trial of the Cloth Manufacture in this County, their Cloth ran very
course, tho their Wool be fine. Among Buildings, the Cathedral of St. Peter
challenges the precedence of all in England for a Majestic Western Front of
Columel-work. The Cloisters of this Cathedral were lately pulled down to repair
the Body thereof. As for civil Structures Holdenby-House, built by Sir
Christopher Hatton, once a stately Structure, is now demolished. Next
Burleigh-House nigh Stamford, built by W. Lord Cecil, is a House of great State
and Magnificence. Withorpe, built by Th. Cecil E. of Exeter, to retire to, (as
he pleasantly said) out of the Dust, whilst his great House of Burleigh was a
sweeping. Castle-Ashbey, the Noble Mansion of the E. of Northampton, was most
beautiful before a casual Fire deformed part thereof. Besides these, there be
many others, no County in England yielding more Noblemen, no Noblemen in
England having fairer Habitations. The Wonder of this Shire is, that within the
Demesnes of Baughton (the Barony of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Montague)
there is a Spring which is conceived to turn Wood into Stone. As for Medicinal
Waters, Wellinborough-Well was very famous in the days of Queen Mary who lay
many weeks thereat.

Proverbs.
I. The Mayor of Northampton opens Oysters with his Dagger. This Town being 80
miles from the Sa, Seafish may be presumed stale therein. II. He that must eat
a buttered Faggot, let him go to Northampton. Because it is the dearest Town in
England for fuel.

Princes.
Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Richard Woodvill, by the Lady Jaquet his Wife,
(formerly the Relict of Jo. D. of Bedford) was born at Grafton-Honour. She was
Widow to Sir. Jo. Gray, who lost his life for the House of Lancaster; and
petitioned King Edward to take off the sequestration from her Jointure. She
afterward became the Royal consort of that King, tho it was not long before
the Tempest of his lust drove him to another Shore, which had a greater share
in his Affections. This Lady lived to see the Death of her Husband, Murder of
her 2 Sons, and the rest of her Children and tho her Daugh. was afterward
married to H. 7. that King, was not over dutiful to her, nor over-loving to her
Daughter. She died An. 14 -- She finished Queens College in Cambridge (where I
had my first breeding) begun by Queen Marg. Wife to Henry 6 an implacable Enemy
to her Husband, so that the 2 Houses of York and Lancaster had their first
Amity in that Foundation.

Rich. Plantagenet, (Crook-back) Son to Rich. D. of York, was born at
Fothinghay Castle. Valor and Eloquence met in his Person. He compassed the
Crown by Cruelty, and the Killing of his Nephews, the 2 Sons of Edward 4. When
King he made good Laws. He lost the Crown and his life in the Battle of
Bosworth, An. 1435. having performed in the Fight, all the Offices of a Wise
General and Valiant Soldier. He knew it was all one for him to die as to
survive success.

Kath. D. to Sir Th. Par, and last Wife to Henry 8. was probably born in this
County See Westmerland.

Saints.
Werburgh, D. to Wolpher Prince of Merica, was a Nun at Ely, whence returning
to Wedon (formerly her Father's Palace) she turned that place into a Monastery.
She had also Juridiction over the Monastery of Trekinghan in Linc. (where she
was buried) the Gates of which place are fabulously reported to have opened of
themselves, when the Men of Hamburge (which was also within her Jurisdiction)
came for her Corpse, to bury it according to the direction given in her Will.
'Twas presumed that Werburgh (al. Wardburgh) would prove a Tutelary Patroness
of the Town or place which possessed her body. Some have reported, that she
has driven awry all Geese from Weden, that they shall destroy no Grain
thereabout. She died An. 675. her body was afterward translated to Chester,
where H. Lupus built the Monastery of St. Werburghs, converted into a Cathedral
by Henry 8.

Martyrs.
Jo. Curd a Shoemaker, burnt in Northampton An. 1557. whose Blood was not
chargeable on the Bishop, but his bloody Archdeacons account.

Cardinal.
Henry Chichley, born at Higham-Ferrers, is said to have been made Cardinal by
the Title of St. Eusebius.

Prelates.
Rich. and Adam of Northampton were both Bishops in Ireland, the former
Consecrated Bishop of Fernose 1282. died 1304. The later Consecrated 1322. died
1346. having first seen his Cathedral burnt by the Rebels.

W. le Zouch, Son to -- Lord Zouch, was born at Haringwort, from Dean he became
Archbishop of York, to whose care Edward 3. going into France committed the
care of the North. This Archbishop (soon after,) bid Battle to David King of
Scots, at Durham, on St. Luke's Eve, whereon the Scotch King found such a Fast,
that he had little list to feast the day following, being routed and taken
Prisoner. Hence a Poet of that Age, Est Pater invictus, sicco de Stipite
dictus, Zouch in French signifying the dry stump of a stick. However his Family
flourished as a Green-tree, till withered in our memory, when Edward the last
Lord Zouch died without Issue male in the beg. of King Charles. This Prelate
began a beautiful Chapel on the South Side of his Cathedrial. He died and was
buried before the Altar of St. Edmond. 1352.

Rob. Braybrooke was made Bishop of London 1381. and afterward Chancellor of
England. He died 1404. and was buried in the Chapel of St. Mary.

Lionell Woodvill (or Wydevill) born at Grafton, bred in, then Chanc. of
Oxford, was made B. of Salisbury 1482. His Memory is supported rather by the
Buttresses of his great Relations, than the Foundation of his own Deserts. For
he was Son to Jaquet Duchess of Bedford and Rich. Wydevill Earl of Rivers,
Brother to Elizabeth Queen of England and Brother in Law to Edward 4.
Heart-broken with grief with the Tragedies he beheld in his own Family, caused
by the Cruelty of King Richard 3. he died about 1484.

Since the Reformation.
Ja. Montague, Son to Sir Rich. Knight, was born at Boughton, bred in
Christ-college in Cambridge, was after Mr. of Sidney-college, which he freed
from a debt of 20 l. yearly payable to Trin. College. He expended 100 Marks to
bring running water into the Kings-ditch in Cambridge. He was afterward Bishop
of Bath and Wells, then of Winchester being highly in favor with King James
whose Works he translated into Latin. He died 1618, and lies buried in the
Church of Bath.

Fr. Godwin, Son to Th. Bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at Hanningham 1561.
and became D. D. in Christs-Church in Oxford, Sub-Dean of Exeter and afterward
Bishop of Landaffe An. 40 Eliz. 1601. He was a good Man, grave Divine, skillful
Mathematician, pure Latinist and incomparable Historian, to whose painful
Endeavors the whole Church Militant is much beholding. He was translated by
King James to Hereford, and died in the Reign of King Charles, An. 162 --

Jo. Owen, born at Burton Latimers (where his Father was Minister) was bred in
Jesus-College in Cambridg, where he commenced D. D. and was Chaplain to King
Charles whilst he was a Prince. King Charles being troubled with 2 Competitors,
advanced this modest Doctor to the Bishopric of St. Asaph, to end the contest.
He outlived his Vote in Parliament, and survived to see all Contempt cast on
his Order, which he bare with Moderation, and died 164...

Rob. Skinner, D. D. born at Pisford and bred in Oxford, became a Preacher in
London and Dean of -- Hence he was preferred Bishop of Brist. then of Oxford,
and is still and long may he be living.

Statesmen.
Sir Christopher Hatton, born at Holdenby, of an ancient Family, was beloved of
the Queen for his handsome Dancing, better for his Proper Person, and best of
all for his Abilities. The Queen at last preferred him Lord Chancellor of
England. He by his Power and Prudence convinced some sullen Sergeants (who
thought him not thoroughly learned in the Laws) of their Errors and his own
Abilities. His Zeal for the Discipline of the Church of England gave the first
being to a scandalous report, that he was Popishly affected. It brake his heart
that the Queen rigorously demanded the present Payment of some Arrears, and
falling into a mortal Disease, he could not be recovered by the Queens broth's,
which (some affirm) her Majesty brought to him with her own hands. He died
1591. and was buried in the Quire of St. Paul's.

Sir W. Fitz-Williams, born at Milton, married the Sister of Sir Henry Sidney
Lord Dep. of Ireland, where himself was 5 times Dep. and when Walt. Earl of
Essex was sent over Governor of Vlster, he took his Commission from this Sir
W. then Lord Dep. He was Serviceable toward the reduction of that Kingdom, in
raising a Composition in Munster, and in settling the Possessions of the Lords
and Tenants in Monohan. His Vigilance was most conspicuous in 88. when the
routed Armado in its return dared not to land in Ireland, except against their
Wills, when driven by tempest, when they found the Shore worse than the Sea
unto them. Some impute the Irish Rebellion, which afterward brake out, to this
Deputies Severity, in imprisoning suspected Persons for concealed Spanish
Goods, tho, this gave only the Irish a Mantle for their intended Wickedness. He
died An. 15...

Sir Isaac Wake, honorably descended, was bred in Oxford, where he was Orator
of the Univ. He was afterward Secretary to Sir Dudley Charleton, Secretary of
State, and from his, was advanced into the Kings service and employed
Ambassador to Venice, where he neglected his own Commodity to attend his
Majesty's Employment; the reason that he died only rich to his own Conscience.
He was afterward appointed Leiger for France, and designed Secretary of State,
had not Death prevented him at Paris. He was accomplished with all
Qualifications requisite for public Employment. King Charles allowed the
Expenses for his Funeral, and at his Majesty's Command his Corpse was brought
over to England and buried in the Castle of Dover An. 16 --

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Martin de Pateshull, was made Justice of the Common Pleas An. 1. H. 3. AMP.
He was 4th Dean of St. Paul's.

Sir Tho. Billing, dwelt at Ashwell, was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
An. 6. E 4. Whose Lands have since by the Lovils descended to the Shirlies. He
married for his 2d Wife, Mary, Daughter and Heir of Robert Nosenham of
Conington in Hunt. the Relict of W. Cotton, (whose Issue possess her
Inheritance at this day) and she lies entombed in Westminster.

Sir W. Catesbye, (whose Family flourished at Ashby St. Ledger) was advanced by
W. Lord Hastings into the Notice and Favor of Richard 3. tho ill requiting it,
when betraying him who caused his Preferment. He was a man well Learned in the
Laws of the Land, and sure great pity it was that he had not had more Truth or
less Wit. He was eminently all Officers in every Court of Judicature. Witness
the Libell which Collingborn made, and which cost him his Life for the same.
The Rat and the Cat, and Lovel the Dog,
Do Govern all England under the Hog.
He died (probably) before the end of R. 3.

Sir Richard Empson, (another Catesbye,) was eminent for having, odious for
abusing his skill in the Law, active for his Prince, injurious to the People.
He was Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and from a Sieve-maker's Son (at
Towceter in this County where he was born) came to sift the Estates of the
wealthiest Men in England. For Henry 7. vexed that he had refused Columbus his
proffer (whereby the West Indies fortunately discovered, fell to Ferd. King of
Spain) resolved to discover Indies in England, and to this purpose made Empson
Promoter General to press the Penal Statutes all over the Land. Empowered
hereby, this prolling Knight did grind the faces of the Rich and Poor, bringing
the grist thereof to the K. and keeping the Toll thereof to himself, whereby he
advanced a vast Estate, which now with himself is reduced to nothing. He united
the Houses of York and Lanc. in the Kings Coffers, taking notice of no person
for his good service, but making all equally obnoxious to Forfeitures. This
Empson scoffingly demanding of a Judicial Astrologer in Warw. When the Sun
would change? Even then (said the Astrologer) when such a wicked Lawyer as you
go to Heaven. In the beginning of H. 8. he was beheaded, 1510.

Edw. Mountague, born at Brigstock, was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, An. 30. H. 8. His Motto was, Equitas Justitiae Norma. In his time, tho
the Golden Showers of Abby-Lands rained amongst great Men, it was long before
he would open his lap (scrupling the acception of such Gifts) and at last
received but little in proportion to others. An. 37. H. 7. he was made Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, a descent in Honor, but ascent in profit. In
drawing up the Will of E. 6. and settling the Crown on Lady Jane, for a time, he
swam against the Tide and Stream of D. Dudley, till at last he was carried away
with the Stream. Outed of his Office, An. 1. Mary he found that Contentment in
his Hospital-Hall in Northamptonshire which he could not find in Westminster. Hall.
He died An. 1556. and lies buried in the Church of Weekley.

Sir Augustine Nicolls, born at Eckton, was freely made by K. James one of the
Judges of the Com. Pleas. That K. commonly called him the Judge that would give
no money. He was renowned for his Patience to hear both Parties all they could
say, a happy Memory and singular Sagacity to search into the material
circumstances, and exemplary Integrity, even to the rejection of Gratuities
after Judgment given. He forbearing to Travel on the Lords Day, wrote a
Reformation on some of his own Order. He loved Plain and profitable preaching,
being wont to say, I know not what you call Puritanical Sermons, but they come
nearest to my Conscience. He died as he went the Northern Circuit, and lies
buried in Kendall-Church in Westmorland.

Sir Robert Dallington, born at Geddington, bred a Bible-Clerk in
Bennet-Colledg. He was afterward a Schoolmaster in Norf. and (after having
traveled) Secretary to Francis Earl of Rutland. His accurate Aphorisms on
Tacitus, witness his Excellent Wit and Judgment. At last he was Knighted and
preferred Mr. of the Charter House. At the end of a Latin Speech (spoken by a
Schoolboy with which he was welcomed to that Hospital, there was a Distick to
this effect Do not the least part of your trust disdain,
Nor grudge of Boys to take the Care again.
He died An. 162.

Jo. Fletcher, Son of Rich. D. D. had an excellent Wit. He with Fr. Beaumont,
Esquire. like Castor and Pollux (most happy when in conjunction) raised the English
to equal the Athenian and the Roman Theater. Beaumont being the Ballast of
Judgment, Fletcher the Sail of Fantasy, both compounding a Poet to
Admiration. Meeting once in a Tavern, to contrive the rude draught of a
Tragedy, Fletcher undertook to kill the King therein, his words being overheard
by a Listner, he was accused of High Treason, till the mistake soon appearing
that the Plot was only against a Dramatick and Scenical King, all wound off in
Merriment, Fletcher surviving his Partner, wrote good Comedies himself, tho
inferior to the former; and no wonder if a single thread was not so strong as a
twisted one. He died (as I am informed) of the Plague An. 1. Car I. 1625.

Sir Hen. Montague, (Grandson to Sir Edward, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench) was born at Boughton. He raised himself (as was foretold in his
Childhood) above the rest of his Family, by the pregnancy of his parts. He was
bred in Christ's College in Cambridge, then in the Middle Temple. He became
Serjant at Law, was Knighted by King James 1602. and was Recorder of London,
made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench 1616. Lord Treasurer of England
1620. created Baron of Kimbolton and Visc. Mandevile (afterward Earl of
Manchester,) made President of the privy Council, then Lord Privy Seal; at
which time he brought the Court of Requests into such repute that what was
formerly called the Almes-Basket of the Chancery, had in his time, well nigh as
many Suits and Clients as the Chancery it self. His Motto was Movendo non
mutando me. His Meditations on Life and death, written in time of his health,
may be presumed to have left good impressions on him, preparatory for his death
which happened 164...

Writers.
Jo. of Northampton, (in lat. Jo. Avonius) a Carmelite, an Eminent
Mathematician, wrote a Book entitled The Philosophers Ring, a Perpetual
Almanac; a Masterpiece of that Age. He flourished. 1340.

Robert Holcot, born in Holcot, and bred in Oxford, became a Dominican in
Northam. A learned and prudent Man. He wrote many famous Treatises. He died of
the plague 1349 at Northam. before he had finished his Lectures on
Ecclesiastes. Note, The Plague about that time, so raged in England that our
Stow, p. 245.
Chroniclers affirm, scarce a tenth person of all sorts was left alive.

Robert Dodford, born at Dodford, was a Benedictine Monk in Ramsey. He wrote
Postills on the Proverbs, which the envy of time has intercepted from us. He
flourished about 1370.

Pet. Peteshull, an Augustinian, in Oxford disliking his Order, procured a
dispensation to relinquish it, and became Honorary Chaplain to Pope Vrbain 6.
He afterward promoted the Doctrine of Wickliffe, and in his Exposition of the
Prophecy of Hildegardes, so taxed the pride and laziness of all Friars, that
his Book was burnt, and himself fled to escape the same Fate. He flourished.
1390.

Since the Reformation.
Robert Crowley, bred in Oxford, confuted Miles Hogheard, who wrote against the
poor Protestants. He fled to Frankford in the Reign of Queen Mary and in the
Reign of Q. Eliz. was made Vicar of St. Giles without Cripple-gate, London,
where he lies buried, having died 1588.

Eusebius Paget, born at Cranford, and bred in Oxford, was commonly called the
Golden Sophister. He was Minister in London, and wrote an excellent book called
the History of the Bible and Catechism of the 40 short Questions.

Ja. Preston, D. D. born in Heyford, and bred in Cambridge, was so far from
Eminency (before he commenced Master of Arts) that he was but a little above
Contempt. Soon after, his skill in Philosophy rendered him to the general
respect of the University. He was the greatest Pupil-manager in England. The
Duke used him to work the Puritan Party (then most active in Parliament) to his
compliance. And tho this Dr. was most powerful with them, he was at last found
useless to the intended Purpose. He was therefore called by one, the Court
Comet, blazing for a time and fading soon afterward. He was a perfect
Politician, and used ( Lapwing-like) to flutter most on that place which was
furthest from his eggs. He had perfect command of his Passion with the Caspian
Sea never ebbing nor slowing, and would not alter his composed Pace for all the
whipping which Satirical Wits bestowed on him. He never had Wife or Cure of
Souls, and leaving a plentiful, no invidious estate, died 1628.

Th. Randolph, born at Hougton, was bred Fell. in Trinity College in Cambridg.
The Muses may seem not only to have Smiled but to have been tickled at his
Nativity, such the Festivity of his Pomes of all sorts. He died 163 --

Nick. Estwick, B. D. born at Harowden, and bred in Cambridg, was (40 years)
Parson of Warton, then of Botsworth a pious and judicious Divine. His Works
witness his great Worth. He died 1657.

Romish Exile Writers.
Math. Kellison, born at Harowden, was Kings Professor and Rector of the
University in Rhemes. He wrote a Book to King James, another against Sutliff,
with many more, and was living 1611.

Benefactors to the Public.
Hen. Chichley, born at Higham Ferrers, and bred in Oxford, was sent by Henry
4. to the Council of Pisa 1409, and by the Popes own hand was consecrated
Bishop of St. David's at Vienna, and thence was advanced Archbishop of
Canterbury by Henry 5. Which Wise King having a shrewd design against the
Abbeys, was diverted with vast sums of Money paid by the Clergy, to maintain his
Wars in France. He refused a Cardinals Cap (proffered to him in the Reign of
Henry 6.) being loath (as some think) to be junior to Cardinal Beaufort of
Winchester who had often disobliged him. He was cruel against the Wicklevites,
but was a Zealous Asserter of the English Liberties in opposition to the Popes
Usurped Supremacy. Great his Zeal to promote Learning, as appears by 3 Coll^ges
erected and endowed at his expense and procurement. One with an Hospital at
Higham-Ferrers St. Bernards in Oxford, afterward bettered by Sir Th. White
into St. John's College and All Souls in Oxford. Having continued in his See 29
years, He died 1443.

William Laxton, (of Oundle) was bred a Grocer in London, whereof he was Lord
Mayor 1544. He founded and endowed a fair School and Almshouse at Oundle in
this County, well maintained at this day by the Company of Grocers. He died
1556.

Since the Reformation.
Nic. Latham, born at Bridgstock was Minister at Barn-Wells. He founded several
small Schools with Salaries, in Country Villages, and founded a most beautiful
Almshouse at Oundle. He died 1620.

Edward Montague Baron of Baughton, a pious, peacable and hospitable Patriot,
was a Bountiful Benefactor to Sidney-Colledg, and built and endowed an
Almshouse at Weekley in this County. He was Honorable at Court and beloved in
the Country, tho he never affected popularity, being wont to say, Do the common
sort of people 19 Courtesies together, and yet you may lose their love, if you
do but go over the style before them. He died in restraint in the Savoy on the
account of his Loyalty to his Sovereign. 164...

Memorable Persons.
A Sexton of the Cathedral of Peterborough interred 2 Queens ( Kath. Dowager
and Mary of Scotland) more than 50 years interceding betwixt their 2
sepultures. He buried also 2 generations of people that lived in the place.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 16. Rich. Widevil al. Woodvil, married Jaquet Duchess of Bedford, Rich.
Duke of York That the Family was made Noble which was not worth a Noble. Yea
it is very probable that all the ancient Nobility of England are derived from
his Daughters.

23. Hen. Green, (of another Family than those of Green Norton) built Draiton
House in this County. He had one Daughter and Heir, Constance married to Jo.
Stafford, E. of Wilt. to whom she bare Edward who died without Issue, so that
her Inheritance devolved unto the Family of the Veres.

An. 1. Hen. Vere, Arm. a jolly Gentleman both for Court and Camp, Guines in
Picardie, was created by H. 8. Baron of Harouden, Ancestor to Edw. Lord Vau.
now living. He was a great Courtier, and appeared in costly Equipage, wearing
on the Marriage day of P. Arthur, a Gown worth above 1000 l. and the day
following, a Collar of S S worth 800 l. The solemn occasion of this Gallantry
was that which hindered Empson from taking this Gentleman by the Collar and
picking a Hole in his Gown, upon the breach of some rusty penal Sumptuary
Statute.

An. Th. Par. removed from Kendal-Castle in Westmerland into this County Maud
Daughter of Sir Th. Green of Green-Norton. He was Father to Q. Kath. Par, and
to W. Marquess of Northam.

15. W. Fitz-Williams Sen. Mil. first a Merchant-Taylor and Servant to Cardinal
Woolsey, was Alderman in London 1506. Afterward upon his entertainment of his
Mr. Woolsey at Milton in Northamptonshire, the King being displeased therewith,
demanded how he durst harbor so great an Enemy to the State; his Answer was,
That he had done it because he had been his Master, and partly the means of his
greatest Fortunes. The K. was so well pleased with his Answer that saying,
himself had few such Servants, immediately Knighted him and afterward made him
a privy Councellor.

17. W. Par, Uncle to Queen Kath. Par, was by H. 8. created Baron Par of Horton.

21. Jo. Clarke, Mil. A^. 5. H. 8. at the Siege of Terrowane, took Prisoner
Lewis de Orleans D. of Longevile, for which service he got the Arms of that
Duke, viz. a Canton sinister Az. and thereupon a Demi-Ram mounting Ar. armed O.
betwixt 2 Flower de Luces in Chief of the last, over all, a Batune dexterways
Ar.

24. Dav. Cecil, was Grandfather to W. Cecil, Baron of Burleigh, and Lord
Treasurer of England.

25. W. Par, Mil. brother to Q. Kath. Par, was made Lord Par of Kend^l and E.
of Essex in the right of Anne Bourcher his Wife, King Ed. 6. created him Marq.
of Northampton, under Queen Mary he was condemned for siding with Queen Jane,
but pardoned and restored by Q. Eliz. He was skilled in Music and wanted not
for Valor, tho unsuccessful in his employment against Ket. He died 1571
without issue.

An. 1. Th. Tressam Mil. for his activity in bringing Q. Mary to the Crown,
Prior of St. Jo. in Jerusalem.

An. 6. Edm. Brudenell, Arm. afterward Knighted, was a great Antiquary, Th.
Lord Brud. of Stoughton.

15. Th. Tressam, Arm. Knighted 18 Eliz. built the Market-House at Rothwell.
For his Zeal to the Popish Religion he was confined to Wisbich Castle.

20. Th. Cecil, Mil. Son to Sir Will. Bar. of Burleigh, was created E. of
Exeter and married Dorothy Daughter to the Lord Latimer. These jointly bestowed
108 l. per An. on Clare-hall in Cambridge.

34. Anth. Milemay, Esquire. was Knighted by Q. Eliz. and sent Ambassador into
France.

43. Rob. Spencer, Knight, descended from the Spencers Earls of Gloucester and
Winchester, was An. 1. Jac. created Baron Spencer of Wormleiton in Warw.
speaking in Parliament of the Valor of their English Ancestors in defending
the Liberties of the Nation, your Ancestors (said the Earl of Arundel (were
keeping of Sheep when those Liberties were defended. The other returned. -- And
yours were then in plotting of Treason. He was sent by K. James to Frederick
Duke of Wirtenberge, to present him with the Garter.

An. 2. Arth. Throgmorton, Knight, (whose Sister was married to Sir Walt.
Raleigh) an ingenious Gentleman, Dacres, Lord Wotton, Sir Peter Temple of Stow
Barronet, and Sir Ed. Partridge.

3. Jo. Freeman was a most bountiful Benefactor to Clare-Hall in Cambridge
giving 2000 l. to the founding of Fellowships and Scholar-ships therein. He
died without Issue.

12. W. Wilmer, Arm. the first Pensioner in Sidney-Colledge to which he was a
Benefactor.

An. 7. Jo. Hewet, Baronet, tho he had no Land in this County;

Northumberland.
NOrthumberland has Durham on the S. Cumberland on the S. W. the German Ocean
on the E. and Scotland on the N. and W. parted with the River Tweed and Cheviot
Hills. It is somewhat of a Pyramidal Form whose Base extends to above 40. and
Shaft. ascends to 50 miles. The Soil is not very fruitful but is improved
more and more daily. An 4. Jac. many Gentlemen in this County challenged their
hereditary right in the Bounds betwixt the two Kingdoms, which had been
formerly neglected. The Buildings in this County are either Castles or
Castle-like able to resist a tumultuary incursion.

Proverbs.
I. To carry Coals to Newcastle. That is, to busy ones self in a needless
employment. II. From Berwick to Dover 300 miles over. That is from one end of
the Land to the other. III To take Hectors Cloak. That is to deceivce a friend
who confideth in his faithfulness. It Is said that one Hector Armstrong of
Harlaw betrayed his friend Th. Piercy, Earl of Northumberland for money, and
afterward fell into so great poverty and contempt that he durst not go abroad.
IV. We will not lose a Scot^^ That is, We will lose nothing how inconsiderable
soever. The Proverb began during the Enmity betwixt the 2 Kingdoms. V. A
Scottish Mist may wet an Englishman to the skin. That is, small mischiefs in the
beginning, if not seasonably prevented, may prove very dangerous. VI. A
Scotish-man and a Newcastle grindstone travil all the World over. Occasioned by
the curiosity of the one and the goodness of the other. VII. If they come, they
come not, and if they come not they come, That is, if the Borderers came, the
Cattle of the Vicinage came not home from their Pasture, but were by them
intercepted, etc. The 4 following Proverbs are Scottish. VIII. Lang or ye cut
Faulkland-Wood with a penknife. It is spoken of such means which are
insufficient for the effecting of any end or design. IX. He is an Aberdeen 's
man taking his word again. Aberdeen is a Town in the County of Mar in Scotland.
X. He was born in August. This is said to be meant as a Periphrasis of a
liquorish person. A Yule Feast may be quat at Pasche. That is, Christmass-cheer
may be digested, and the Party hungry again at Easter.

Saints.
St. Ebba, Daughter to Edilfrid King of Northum. was Prioress of Coldingham in
Scotland. She with others cut off their Noses, that their Beauty might be no
bait to the lustful Danes. She flourished 630.

Prelates since the Reformation.
Geo. Carleton, born at Norham, bred in Oxford, was one of the 4 Divines sent
by King James to the Synod of Dort. He was Bishop of Landaff, afterward of
Chichester. A man of good affections, solid Judgment and clear Invention. He
wrote (amongst others) 2 Treatises called A Thankful Remembrance of Gods mercy
and a Confutation of Judicial Astrology. When Young, he was grave in his
manners, so when old, he was youthful in his parts even to his death, which
happened An. 1. Chapter

Valentine Carry, born at Barwick, extracted from the Cary's Barons of Hunsdon,
was bred in Cambridg, where he was Vice Chancellor An. 1612. He was preferred
Dean of St Paul's, and at last Bishop of Exeter. A complete Gentleman and
excellent scholar. Tho some Contest happened betwixt him and the City of Exeter,
yet he was bountiful above expectation in relieving the poor thereof, when it
was visited with the Sickness. He died 1626. and lies buried in St Paul's London.

Rich. Holeworth, D. D. born at Newcastle, bred in Cambridg. Rector of St Peter
in the Poor in London, Archdeacon of Huntington at last Mr. of Emanuel
College, incurred the Censures of Factious Innovators in London at the
beginning of the Civil wars. Most candid his disposition, being wont to check
himself when in Passion. He was imprisoned for a Sermon he preached in
Cambridg. After he had procured his Liberty, he waited on his Majesty in the
Isle of Wight. He was Proffered the Bishopric of Bristol, but refused it. Some
shoot by the aim of their own fancies who report him to have said, He would not
wear a Bristol-stone. Tho he was a zealous assertor of Episcopacy, he esteemed
the acceptance of that Bishopprick unsafe and unseasonable. He afterward took
the Deanery of Worcester. The Treatise called the Valley of Vision is in all
probability none of his. Dying about 1650 he was buried in St. Pet. Broadstreet.

Soldiers.
This County breeds most hardy Men. The Borderers have been embroyled in
several Battles against the Scotch, Witness the Battle of Chevy chase, An. 29
Henry 8. about which time Henry Earl of Northumberland died peaceably at
Hackney near London, tho reported to be slain in that battle.

Physicians.
W. Turner, born at Morpeth, bred in Cambridge, was a general Scholar and very
zealous in the Protestant Religion, writing much in the defense thereof, and
much molested for the same by Bishop Gardner and others. After long
imprisonment he escaped and fled beyond the Seas. At Ferrara in Italy he
commenced Dr. in Physic He wrote a great Herbal and a Book of Physic. for the
English Gentry, besides several other Treatises. He died in Germany, as I
conjecture, in the Reign of Queen Mary. Whose Contemporary and fellow Confessor,

Th. Gibson, born at Morpeth, wrote a Book of Herbs, as also a Treatise
entitled The Treasons of the Prelates since the Conquest. He was alive in the
last of Queen Mary.

Writers.
Ralph Frechbourne, bred a Soldier, Scholar, Traveller, became at last a
Friar. He attended Rich. Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Romans, into the
Holy land; whence he brought the Carmelites into England, and built for them a
House at Holme in Northumberland. He wrote Books of pious Exhortations and
Epistles, and after he had been 14 years Provincial of his Order, died and was
buried at Holme, 1274.

Johannes Scotus, born at Dunston, a Franciscan Friar, got the Title of Doctor
Subtilis. He maintained against the Thomists that the Blessed Virgin was
conceived with sin. He died of a sit of an Apoplexy, at Colen.

Benefactors to the Public.
Stephen Brown, Grocer, was born at Newcastle, afterward Knighted and made
Lord Mayor of London 1438. In which year happened a Great Famine, caused much by
unseasonableness of weather, but more by some Huckstring husbandmen) who
properly may be termed Knaves in Grain, Sir Stephen sent some ships to Dantz,
whose seasonable return with Rye, suddenly sunk grain to reasonable rates,
whereby many a languishing life was preserved. He was one of the first
Merchants who in want of Corn showed the Londoners the way to the Barn-dore. I
mean into Spruseland.

Rob. Woodlark, Provost of King's College in Cambridge in the Reign of Edward
4. bought 3 Tenements in Milne street and erected them a small College by the
Name of St. Katharine's Hall.

Memorable Persons.
Machell Vivan, a Scoth-man (born near Abberdeen) beneficed in this County
within 3 miles of Alnwick. An Old Man (of 110 years of Age) was famous for a
new growth of his hair, breeding of three teeth in the space of 2 years, and
reading of small Print without spectacles, whereas 40 years before that time,
he had used them for the biggest Print. He had 5 Children after he was 80 years
of Age. Note, The Countess of Desmond (alive 1589) is said to have recovered
her teeth, after she had cast them 3 several times, and to have lived 140
years.

-- Anderson, Merchant in Newcastle, lost a Ring in the River, which being
afterward found in the Belly of a Fish was again restored to him.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 25. Jo. Coupeland, (An. 20 E 3) took Dav. Bruce King of Scotland prisoner,
Nevils-Cross, for which he was rewarded with Knighthood and 500 l. per An. Note
the Sheriffs of this County never accounted in the Exchequer until 3. E. 6.

An. 19. Fr. Russell, Knight, (Son to Fr. and Father to Edward Earl of Bedford)
married Julian Daughter to Sir Jo. Foster. Scots (on a Truce-day) June 27, 1585.

Nottingham-shire.
NOttingham-shire has Yorkshire on the N. Linc. on the E. Leic. on the S. and
Derby-shire on the W. The pleasantness thereof may be collected from the plenty
of Noblemen, many having their Baronies, and more their Residence therein. This
County affords the first and best Liquorish in England. There were 2 Ayries of
Lannards lately found in Sherwood Forest. These Hawks are the Natives of
Saxony, which coming hither and breeding with Lanerets, proved as excellent in
their Kind, when managed, as any which were brought out of Germany.

Proverbs.
I. Many talk of Robin Hood who never shot in his Bow. That is, many prate of
Matters wherein they have no skill. Robin Hood an excellent Archer and
Arch-robber did chiefly reside in Sherwood Forest in this County. II. To sell
Robin Hoods penny-worths. That is, stolen goods under half their value. III. As
wise as a man of Gotham. The usual Periphrasis of a Fool; yet Gotham (a Village
in this County) breeds as wise people as any which causlessly laugh at their
simplicity. IV. The little Smith of Nottingham, who does the work that no man
can. This seems to be intended (by circumlocution) for no body, and by way of
Sarcasm is applied to such who being conceited of their own skill, pretend to
the atchieving of Impossibilities.

Martyr.
Th. Cranmer, born at Arse-lackton in this County, and bred in Jesus College in
Cambridge, became Archbishop of Canterbury, and at last (after some
intermediate failings) valiantly suffered for the Truth at Oxford, March 22.
An. 1556. After his whole body was reduced into Ashes, his heart was found
entire and untouched, which is justly alleged as an Argument of his cordial
Integrity to the Truth, see Fox and my Eccl. History. Note that none suffered
within this County in the Marian days, which was imputed to the mild-temper of
Nich. Heath, Archbishop of York and Diocesan thereof.

Prelate since the Reformation.
W. Chapel, born at Lexington, and bred in Chr. College in Cambridge, was a
Man of strict Conservation, an Excellent Tutor and a most subtle Disputant. He
was chosen Provost of Trin. College in Dublin, and afterward B. of Cork and
Rosse, frighted with the Rebellion in Ireland he came over into England, where
he rather exchanged then eased his Condition, such the wofulness of our Civil
Wars. He died 1649, and parted his Estate almost equally betwixt his own
Kindred and distressed Ministers.

Capital Judges.
Sir Jo. Markham, descended of an ancient Family, was born at Markham. He was
Knighted by E. 4. and was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the
place of Sir Jo. Fortescue, of these one favored the house of Lancaster, the
other of York, both, the House of Justice betwixt party and party being Men of
signal Integrity. I. Markham, at the Trial of Sir Th. Cook, (late Lord Mayor
of London) for lending Money to Marg. Wife to Henry 6. directed the Jury to
find it only Misprision of Treason, tho Sir Th. had been cast at Court before.
The King highly displeased thereat, vowed that Sir Jo. should never sit on the
Bench any more, and accordingly being outed of his Place, he lived privately
but plentifully, the remainder of his Life, having fair Lands by Marg. his Wife
(Daughter of Sir Sim. Leke of Cotham in this County) besides his own Estate.

Seamen.
Edw. Fenton, Brother to Sir Jeffery, was Servant to Queen Elizabeth and a
Valiant Commander in Ireland, when O Neal and the Earl of Desmond troubled that
Kingdom. He was Ambitious to discover the Northen unknown Passages, and after a
long and dangerous Voyage, he returned to England, and being made Captain of
one of her Majesty's Men of War, he signalized his Valor in his Sea-Service
against the Spaniards in 88. He died An. 1603.

Writers.
W. Mansfield, a Dominican in Mansfield, was a great Philosopher, and defended
Aquinas against H. Gandavensis. He flourished. 1320.

William Nottingham, Provincial of the Augustinian Order, wrote a Concordance
on the Evangelists with other Books. He died 1336.

Rob. Worsop, born at Worsop, was an Augustinian at Tickhill. He wrote amongst
others a Book entitled the Entrance of the Sentences. Bale says he was a
Bishop. He died 1360.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Jeffrey Fenton, Knight (for 20 years Privy Counselor in Ireland to Queen
Elizabeth and King James) translated the History of Guicciardine into English,
dedicating it to Queen Elizabeth. He died at Dublin 1680.

Jo. Plough, a pious Minister, fled to Basil in the Reign of Queen Mary. He
answered a Book against the Marriage of Ministers, written by one Hoggard, a
silly Hosier. He died ih the beginning of Queen Elizabeth.

W. Brightman, born in Not. bred in Cambridge, and beneficed at Haunes in
Bedfordshire a, Char^table Nonconformist, wrote a Commentary on the Revelation.
He died daily and died suddenly An. 16 --.

Memorable Persons.
Rob. Hood, a Gentle Thief, robbed Peter to pay Paul plundring Clergymen, but
relieving the poor and distressed. His principal residence was in Shirewood
Forest in this County, tho his Bay is still remembered in Yorkshire. He
complemented Passengers out of their Purses, tho he never asked the Keeper's
leave for Killing of Deer, and disposing of the Venison amongst the Vicinage.
He played his pranks in the Reign of R. 1. about 1100. So much for Robin Hood.

Th. Magnus, an exposed child, left by his Mother in the Parish of Newark, was
found and educated by a Company of Yorkshire Clothiers, who gave him the name
of Amang-us i. e. Amongst-us. But he growing afterward a famous Scholar and
Statesman took upon him the Name of Dr. Magnus, and was famous thereby both at
home and abroad. He was a great benefactor to the Town of his Nativity, and
founded a fa^r School there. He flourished (as I take it) under Henry. 8.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 15 W. Hollis Knight, (called the Good Sir W. for his Hospitality and other
Virtues) was Son to Sir W. Lord Mayor of London, Jo. Hollis Lord Houghton of
Houghton, created Earl of Clare An. 22 Charles I, and Grandfather to the Right
Honorable Jo. the present Earl of Clare.

Rob. Pierpoint, Arm. was afterward created Baron Pierpoint and Earl of
Kingston upon Hull, An. 4 Car I. His Ancestors, coming over with the
Conqueror, first fixed at Hurst Pierpoint in Sussex, and thence removed into
this County. There was another Rob. who lived in great dignity under E. 3.

Oxfordshire.
Oxfordshire has Bark-shire on the S. Gloucestershire on the W.
Buckingham-shire on the E. Warwickshire and Northamptonshire on the N. A
plentiful County, whereof the Chief City Oxford was lately, for some years
together a Court, a Garrison and an University. The Natural Commodities are
Fallow Deer, the most ancient Park is said to have been at Woodstock in this
County. Wood now in decay is relieved by Coals. For preservation of
Shot-over-woods it was alleged by the University, That Oxford being one of
the eyes of the Land, and Shot-over-woods the Hair of the eye lids, the loss
thereof must needs prejudice the sight, with too much moisture flowing therein.
As for Buildings, the Colleges in Oxford exceed the most in Christendom for
the generality of their Structure, and equal any for the largeness of their
Endowments. A moiety of their Founders were Prelates, who provided them the
Patronages of many good Benefices. Of these Colleges University is the Oldest,
Pemb. the youngest, Christ-Church the greatest, Lincon. the least, Magdalen the
neatest, Wadham the most uniform, New-College the strongest, and Jesus-College
the poorest. New-College for the Southern, Exeter for Western, Queens for
Northern, Brazon-nose for North-Western men, St. John's for Londoners, Jesus
for Welshmen; and at other Colleges almost indifferently for men of all
Countries. Merton Famous for Schoolmen, Corpus-Christi for Linguists,
Christs-Church for Poets, All Souls for Orators, New-College for Civilians,
Brazen-nose for Disputants, Queens College for Metaphysicians, Exeter for a
late Series of Regius Professors, Magdalen for ancient, St. John's for modern
Prelates. Corpus-Christi-College was formerly called the College of Bees, which
industrious creatures were, as it seems, Aborigines from the first building of
the College, and An. 1630 there was an incredible mass of Honey found over the
Study of Ludovicus Vives that Mellifluous Doctor. The Library in some respects
equals any in Europe, and in most kinds exceeds all in England, standing as
Diana amongst the Nymphs. In the infancy of Christianity, the Library of York
bare away the Bell, founded by Archbishop Egbert. Before the Dissolution of
the Abbeys, that at Ramsey was the greatest Rabbin, abounding chiefly with
Jewish Books. Guildhall Library, founded by Richard Whittington, was deprived
of 3 Cart loads of choice Manuscripts in the days of Edward 6. Since the
Reformation that of Benet in Cambridge founded by Math. Parker, exceed any
Collegiate Library in England. And of late the Library of that University,
augmented with the Archi-episcopal Library of Lambeth, is grown the Second in
the Land. Of Private Libraries that of Treas. Burleigh's was the best for the
use of Statesmen, the Lord Lumlie's for an Historian, the Earl of Arundel's for
a Herald, Sir Rob. Cottens for an Antiquary, and Arch-Bishop-Usher 's for a
Divine, with many others as Lord Brudnel's, Lord Hatton's etc. which were,
routed in our Civil wars or transported into foreign parts. Oxford Library was
founded by Humphry D. of Gloucester, confounded in the Reign of Edward 6. and
refounded by Sir Th. Bodley and the bounty of daily benefactors.

As for the Kings Houses in this County. Woodstock is Justly to be preferred,
where the Wood and Water-Nymphs might equally be Pleased in its Situation. Here
Queen Elizabeth was Prisoner in the Reign of Queen Mary. Here she escaped a
dangerous fire. Here hearing a Milkmaid merrily singing in the Park she wished
for an exchange of her Condition with the Maid's. Here Henry 2. built a
Labyrinth which is now vanished. Enston made by Th. Bushel Esquire. sometime
Servant to Fr. Bacon Lord Verulam, is a Place by Nature pleasant and adorned
with Art.

Proverbs.
I. You were born at Hogs-Norton. This is a Village properly call Hoch-Norton,
whose Inhabitants (it seems formerly) were so rustical in their behavior, that
clownish people are said to be born at Hogs-Norton. II. To take a Burford bait.
That is, to be drunk. III. Banbury Zeal, Cheese and Cakes. Some would have Veal
put for Zeal. IIII. He looks as the Devil over Lincoln. The Devil 's picture
did overlook Lincoln-College. It is appliable to envious persons. V.
Lincolnshire Testons are gone to Oxford to study in Brazen-Nose. That is,
Testons (now corruptly called Testers worth 6 d.) were in the Reign of Henry 8.
debased and so mixed with copper and brass that they were not above 3 s. 4 d.
the ounce, looking so red with the allay, that they blushed for shame, as
conscious of their own corruption. VI. Send Verdingales to Broad Gates in
Oxford. Verdingales formerly worn by women, pent-housed theirs Gowns far beyond
their bodies, and were (as some say) a barricado against the assaults of
Wantons, but (as others affirm) a convenient cover of the fruits of wantonness,
the first Inventress thereof being known for a light hous-wife. These grew so
great that their Wearers were to enter ordinary Doors side-ways, as the Scotch
Pedlars do with their Packs on their backs. VII. Chronica sipenses, cum pugnent
Oxonienses,
Post aliquot menses volat ira per Anglinienses.
Mark the Chronicles aright,
When Oxford Scholars fall to fight
Before many months expired
England will with war be fired.
By this are properly intended the Contests betwixt Scholars and Scholars,
which were observed predictional, as if their Animosities were the Index of the
Volume of the Land. There were shrewd Bickerings betwixt the Southern and
Northern Men in the University, not long before the bloody War of the Barons
did begin. The like happened twice under R. 2. before the fatal Fights betwixt
Lancaster and York, tho there were no Broyls in Oxford before the late Civil
Wars.

Princes.
Richard, Son to H. 2. and Queen Eleanor (was the 6 th. King since the
Conquest) born in Oxford, 1157. Whilst a Prince he was undutiful to his Father,
or to qualify the Matter, over-dutiful to his Mother, whose Domestic Quarrels
he always espoused. To expiate his offense, when King, he with Philip King of
France undertook a Voyage to the Holy Land, where through the Treachery of
Templary Cowardice of the Greeks, diversity of the Climate and differences
betwixt Christian Princes, much time was spent, a Mass of Money expended, many
lives lost, some Honor achieved but little Profit produced. Going to
Palestine, he suffered Shipwreck and many Mischiefs on the coasts of Cyprus;
coming for England through Germany, he was tossed with a worse Land-Tempest,
being (in pursuance of an old grudge betwixt them) taken Prisoner by Leopold,
D. of Austria; yet this Caeur de Lion, or Lion-Hearted King (for so was he
commonly called) was no less Lion (tho now in a Grate) then when at Liberty,
abating nothing of his high Spirit in his Behavior. The Duke did not
undervalue his Royal Prisoner, prizing his Person at 10 years purchase,
according to the (then) yearly Revenue of the English) Crown. This Ransom of
100000 pounds being paid, he came home; first reformed himself, and then mended
many abuses in the Land. He was afterward shot with an Arrow in France, 1199.

Edmund, Youngest Son to King Edward 1. by Queen Marg. was born at Woodstock,
Aug. 5. 1301. He was afterward created E. of Kent, and was Tutor to his Nephew
King Edward 3. In whose Reign he was beheaded at Winchester, March 19. for that
he never dissembled his Brotherly affection toward his Brother deposed, and
went about when he was murdered before, (not knowing so much) to enlarge him
out of Prison, persuaded thereunto by such as covertly practiced his
Destruction.

Edward, Eldest Son of King Edward 3. was born at Woodstock and bred under his
Father in Martial Discipline. He was afterward called the Black Prince, from
his Achievements dismal and black, as they appeared to the eyes of his Enemies
whom he constantly overcame. He married Joan Countess of Salisbury and Kent,
whose Garter (which now flourishes again) has lasted longer than all the
Wardrobes of the Kings and Queens of England, since the Conquest, continued in
the Knighthood of that Order. This Prince died before his Father at Cant. An.
46. Aet. An. Dom. 1376. whose Maiden success attended him to the Grave, as
never soiled in any undertakings. He left 2 Sons Edward and Richard afterward
King, both born in France.

Th. of Woodstock, Youngest Son of E. 3. and Queen Philippa, was Earl of Buck.
and Duke of Gloc. created by his Nephew King Rich. who summoned him to
Parliament. He married Isabel Daughter of Humphrey Bohun E. of Essex, in whose
Right he became Constable of England. He observed the King too nearly and
checked him too sharply; whereupon he was conveyed to Calis and there
Strangled. By whose Death King Richard being freed from the causless fear of an
Uncle, became exposed to the cunning Plots of his Cosen German, Henry Duke of
Lancaster, who at last deposed him. This Th. founded a fair College at Playsie
in Essex, where he was afterward buried, his Body having been since translated
to Westminster.

Anne Beauchamp, born at Cavesham, was Daughter to Rich. Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick, and married to Rich. Nevil, Earl of Sarisbury and Warwick, commonly
called the Make-King. In his own and her Husband's right she was possessed of
114. Manners. Isa. her eldest Daughter was married to Geo. Duke of Clarence,
and Anne her younger to Edward Prince of Wales, Son of H. 6. and afterward to
King Richard 3. Her Husband being killed at Barnet fight, all her Land by Act
of Parliament was settled on her 2 Daughters. Being attainted on the account of
her Husband, she was forced to fly to the Sanctuary at Beauly in Hant-shire,
and thence to the North, where she lived privately and in a mean condition.

Saints.
St. Frideswide, was born in Oxford, being Daughter to Didan the Duke thereof.
It Is said that one Algarius a young Noble man was struck blind upon his
attempting her Chastity. She was afterward Abbess of a Monastery erected by
her Father in the same City, which since is become part of Christ's Church,
where her body lies buried. An. 1. Eliz. the Scholars of Oxford took up the
body of the Wife of Pet. Martyr, who formerly had been disgracefully buried in
a dunghill, and interred it in the Tomb with the dust of this Saint, with this
Inscription (as Saunders affirms) Here lies Religion with Superstition: and
there was more than 800 years betwixt their several deaths. St. Frideswide
dying 739 and is remembered in the Romish Calender on 19 Oct.

St. Edwold, Younger brother to St Edmond King of the E. Angles, so cruelly
Martyred by the Danes, and after his death, Edwold being his right Heir,
declined the Crown and retired to Cornhouse-Monastery at Dorchester, where he
was interred and had in great veneration for his reputed Miracles after his
death, which happened 871.

St. Edward the Confessor was born at Islip. He was afterward King of England,
whose Reign was attended with Peace and Prosperity. Famous for the first
founding of Westminster-Abbey, and for many other worthy Achievements. He
lived and dyed Single, never carnally conversing with St. Edith his Queen,
which opened a Door for foreign Competitors, and occasioned the Conquest of
this Nation. He died 1065. and lies buried in Westminster-Abbey.

Cardinals.
Robert Pullen, (or Bullen) came over from Paris in the Reign of Henry 1. when
Learning ran low in Oxford. S. N.
He improved his utmost power with the King and Prelates for the restoring
thereof. He is said to have begun to read the Scriptures at Oxford which were
grown out of fashion in England. Afterward Pope Innocent courteously sent for
him to Rome. Celestine created him Cardinal of St. Eusebius, 1144. Lucius 2.
made him Chancellor of the Church of Rome. He died about 1150.

Th. Joyce, or Jorce, a Dominican and D. D. in Oxford, S. N.
became Provincial of his Order. Afterward Pope Clement 5. created him
Cardinal of St. Sabine. He had 6 Brethren Dominicans, who altogether were by
one uncharitably resembled to the 7. Sons of Seeva which were Exorcists;
however they may be termed a Week of Brethren, whereof this Rubricated Cardinal
was the Dominical Letter. There want not those who conceive great Virtue in the
youngest Son of these seven, and that his touch was able to cure the Popes
Evil. Th. flourished 1310. and he lies buried in his Convent in Oxford.

Prelates.
Herbert Losing, born in Oxford, Son of an Abbot, gave 1900 l. to King William
Rufus for the Bishopric of Thetford, having also purchased his Fathers
preferment. Hence the Verse Filius est Praesul, Pater Abbas, Simon uterque,
both being guilty of Simony. Herbert afterward went to Rome (no such clean
washing as in the water of Tyber) and returned thence as free from fault as
when first born. Thus cleansed from the Leprosy of Simony, he removed his
Bishopric from Thetford to Norwich, laid the first Stone and in effect
finished the fair Cathedral therein, and built 5 beautiful Parish Churches. He
died 1119. See Suff.

Owen Oglethorp, Pres. of Magdalen College. AMP.
Dean of Windsor, and Bishop of Carlisle (in the Reign of Queen Mary) crowned
Queen Elizabeth which the rest of his Order refused to do, and by her deprived
for his ensuing Stubbornness distilled in him by other Popish Bishops, who
abused his good Nature. He died of an Apoplexy 1559.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Underhill, born in Oxford and bred in New College, was Chaplain to Queen
Elizabeth, and by her made Bishop of Oxford after that See had been Vacant 22
years. He died 1592. and lies buried in Christ Church.

Jo. Bancroft, born at Ascot, was Mr. of University College in Oxford and
settled the ancient Lands of that Foudation. Being afterward Bishop of Oxford,
he renewed no Leases, but let them run out for the Benefit of his Successor. He
obtained the Royalty of Shot-over for, and annexed the Vicaridge of Cudsen to
his Bishopric; where he built a fair Palace and a Chapel at the cost of 3500
l. But that Palace was reduced to its first Principles, being burnt in the late
Civil Wars. He died 1640.

Statesmen.
Sir Dudley Carleton, Knight, bred in Oxford, was Secretary to Sir Ralph
Winwood Ambassador in the Low Countries when King James resigned the Cautionary
Towns to the States. Here he added so great experience to his learning, that
afterward King Charles I. employed him for 20 years together Ambassador in
Venice, Savoy and the Low Countries; And created him Baron of Imbercourt in
Surrey, then Visc. Dorchester. He married for his 2 d Wife, the Daughter of Sir
Hen. Glenham, the Relict of Paul Visc. Banning. He succeeded the Lord Conway in
the Office of Secretary of State. He died 163..

Soldiers.
Sir Jo. Norris, a most accomplished General, had 3 Horses is one day killed
under him in a Battle against the Scots, when in France he brought off a small
handful of English from a great armful of Enemies, fighting as he retreated, so
that always his Rear affronted the Enemies. Having afterward a great Command
in Ireland he found it far harder to find out, than fight his Enemies. At last
a great Lord of an opposite Party to Sir Jo. being made Lieuetenant of Ireland,
it is conceived his working Soul broke the cask of his body, as wanting a vent
for his Grief and Anger; for going up into his Chamber, at the first hearing of
the News, he suddenly died 1597. His ancient Father dying soon after. Upon the
News of his death, Queen Elizabeth wrote a Consolatory Letter to the Lady Marg.
his Mother, whom her Majesty used to call Her own Crow; in which* was this
Endearing Expression, If it be true that Society in Sorrow works diminution, We
do assure you by this true Messenger of our Mind, that Nature can have stirred
no more dolorous Affection in you as a Mother for a dear Son, than Gratefulness
of Memory of his Service past has wrought in us his Sovereign an apprehension
of Our miss for so Worthy a Servant. His Father Hen. Lord Norris was descended
from the Viscount Lovels, and his Grandfather died in a manner Martyr for the
Queens Mother Margaret aforesaid; his Mother was Daughter to Jo. Lord Williams
of Tame, Keeper of Queen Elizabeth whilst in Restraint under her Sister, and
civil to Her in those dangerous days. His eldest Brother William was Marshall
of Barwick, and Father to Francis, afterward Earl of Bark-shire. He had 4
Brothers more, viz. Sir Th. President of Munster, who died of a small wound
which being neglected turned to a Gangrene. Sir Hen. who died about the same
time, in the same manner, Maximilian, who was slain in the War of Britain. Then
Sir Edw. who led the Front at the taking of the Groyn, fought so valianly at
the siege of Ostend, and of all the 6 only survived his Parents.

Sir Fra. Knowlls, Treasurer to the Queens Household, and Knight of the Garter,
was descended from Sir Robert that Conquering Commander in France. He was an
Exile in the days of Queen Mary. He married -- Carry Sister to Henry Lord
Hunsdon and Cosen German to Queen Elizabeth, having Mary Bullen for her Mother.
Thus the Husband was allied to the Queen in Conscience (Fellow Sufferers for
the Protestant cause) the Wife in Kindred. Their chief dwelling was Grays in
this County. Their Issue was Sir Hen. whose Daughter and Heir was married to
the Lord Paget. Sir W. Treasurer of the Household to King James, by whom he was
created Baron Knowlls 1603. Visc. Wallingford 1616. and by Charles I. ( An. 1
regn.) Earl of Banbury. Sir R. father to Sir Rob. of Greys now living. Sir Fr.
a Member of the late long Parliament, since dead, aged 99. Sir Th. a Commander
in the Low Countries. Lettice second Wife to R. Dudley Earl of Leicester, and
(by a former Husband) mother to R. Devereux Earl of Essex.

These 2 last mentioned Families being Contemporaries, and High in State and
Stomach, often Justled together, and no wonder if Oxfordshire wanted room for
them, when all England could not hold them together. The Norrices were Sons of
Mars, and never out of military Employment. The Knowlls were Mercurial,
conversing constantly at Court, and were rather Valient men, then any great
Soldiers. The Norrices got more Honor abroad, the Knowlls more Profit at
Home. There was once a challenge passed betwixt them at certain exercises, to
be tried between the 2 Fraternities, the Queen and their Aged Fathers being to
be the Spectators and Judges, till quickly it became a flat quarrel betwixt
them, which lasted for many years, and the Knowlls are suspected to have done
the Norrices bad offices, which at last did tend to their mutual hurt.

Writers.
Jo Hanvile, proceeded M. A. in Oxford, then studied in Paris, AMP.
and traveled over most parts in Christendom. He is commonly called
Archithrenius, or Prince of Lamentation. He wrote a Book wherein he bemoaned
the Vices of his Age. He flourished under King Jo. 1200, and died as some
conceive a Benedictine of St. Albans.

Jo. of Oxford, surnamed by Boethius, a Vado Boum, was owned by him as the next
Historian to Jeffrey Monmouth, in Age and Industry. He was a great
Anti-Becketist, being Dean of old Sarum and Chaplin to H. 2. and was by him
employed among others, to give an account to the Pope of the Kings carriage in
the business of Becket. He was preferred An. 1175 Bishop of Norwich, where he
repaired his Cathedral lately defaced with fire, and built a fair Almshouse.
He built also Trinity Church in Ipswich. He died about 1200.

Rob Bacon, D. D in Oxford became a Dominican Friar, was for his Sermons highly
esteemed by Henry 3. He was Lepidus and Cynicus, and a most professed Enemy to
Pet. Roach Bishop of Winchester. He was a great Divine. I behold him as the
Senior of all the Bacons, which like Tributary Streams disembogued themselves
with all the credit of their actions, into Roger Bacon, who in process of time
has monopolized the Honor of all his sirname-sakes in Oxford. This Rob. died
1248.

Rob. of Oxford an Adorer of Aquinas his contemporary, wrote against the
College of Sorbonne. He flourished under Henry 3. 1270.

Jeffrey Chaucer born (probably) at Woodstock* was a terse and elegant Poet,
the Homer of his Age, and refined the Engish Tongue. A great Mathematician,
Witness his Book de Sphaera. He was living 1402. being Contemporary with Gower.

Since the Reformation.
Th. Lydgate, born at Alkerton and bred in Oxford, was Eminent for his Learning
and Obscure for his Living. An admirable Mathematician, witness his Learned
Treatises De Natura Coeli, and de variis Annorum Formis, etc. He opposed the
opinion of Scaliger, and was by him jeered for a Prophet, having somewhat
traded in the Apocalyptical Divinity; yet it is said Lydgate had the best in the
Contest. He was Rector of Alkerton. His low Condition may be imputed to these
Causes. 1. The Barrenness of his speculative Studies. 2. His own Nature, being
inclined to Solitude. 3. The death of P. Henry, whose Library Keeper he was. 4.
His Disaffection to Church Discipline and Ceremonies, tho such wrong his Memory
who represent him an Anabaptist. His Modesty was as great as his want, which he
would not make known to any. Sir W. Boswell, and B. Williams were great Friends
to him. He died about 1644*

Sir Richard Baker, Knight, was High Sheriff of this County An. 18. Jac. 1621.
his Estate being encumbered, he fled in his old Age for shelter to his studies
and devotions. He wrote an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, and a Chronicle of
our English Kings. He died about the beginning of the Civil Wars.

W. Whateley, born in (afterward Minister of) Banbury, and bred in Cambridge,
was a good Linguist, Philosopher, Mathematician, and Divine. He wrote a Book
entitled the Bride-bush, which is variously construed. He died 1639.

Jo. Balle, born at Casfigton, bred B. D. in Oxford, was Preacher at Whitmore
in Staffordshire. His Treatise of Faith cannot sufficiently be commended. He
was a Humble, Pious and good Natured Christian. When his friend having had a
fall from a Horse, said that he never had the like deliverance, Yea (said Mr.
Balle) and a hundred times when you never fell. He hated all New Lights. Living
comfortably he relieved others charitably, left his children competently and
died piously 1640.

W. Chillingworth, born in Oxford, and bred in Trinity College, was a subtle
Disputant. Going beyond the Seas, he was in some sort reconciled to the Church
of Rome, but returning afterward into England, in testimony of his true
Conversion, he wrote a Book entitled The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation. He was taken Prisoner by the Parliaments Forces at Arundel-Castle
and safely conducted to Chichester, where hard usage hastened his death.

Dan. Featly, D. D. born in or near to Oxford, made the Speech in
Corpus-Christi-College at the Funeral of Dr. Reynalds. He was good in the
Schools and in the Pulpit, and a happy disputant against Papists. In the
conference with F. Fisher who was caught in a Net cast by Dr. White, Dr. Featly
did help strongly to draw that Net to the shore. He was in, but (it seems) not
of the late Assembley, his body being with them but his heart at Oxford. Being
discovered he was imprisoned in the College at Chelsey where he died 1643.

Jo. White, (originally from Hant-shire) born at Staunton-St John and bred in
Oxford, was Minister at Dorchester for about 40 years, in which time he
expounded the whole Scripture once over and half over again. That Town was
enriched by his Wisdom; Knowledge causing Piety, Piety breeding Industry, and
Industry Plenty unto it. A beggar then was not to be seen in the Town. He
absolutely commanded his own Passions and the Purses of the Parishoners, and
was free from Covetousness. He had a Patriarchal influence both in Old and
New England. Yet toward the end of his days Factions grew in his stock, then
disloyal persons would not pay the due respect to the Crown of his old Age. He
was chosen one of the Assembly of Divines. He married the sister of Dr. Burges,
by whom he left 4 Sons, and died quietly at Dorchester 163..

Benefactors to the Public.
Th. Tisdall, of Glimpton Esquire. dying 1610. bequeathed 5000 l. to Geo. Abbot
then Bishop of London and others to purchase Lands for the maintenance of 7
Fellows and 6 Scholars. which Money was expended for the purchase of 250 l. per
An. and a new College was erected therewith by the Name of Pembroke College.
Th. gave many other charitable Legacies, and deserved well of Abbington School,
founding an Usher therein.

Memorable Persons.
Anne Green, a person unmarried having been executed at Oxford 1650. for
killing her Child, recovered perfect health. Charitable people interpret her so
miraculous preservation a Compurgator of her Innocence.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 11. W. Taverner, Arm. in the year of his Sherivalty came to Oxford, Mary's
with a sword by his side, and a gold chain about his neck, where he made a
Sermon to the University.

18 Rob. Doyle Knight, in whose year the Black Assizes were at Oxford, wherein
the Prisoners caused the death of the Judge (Chief Baron Bell) the Sheriff,
some of the Lawyers, many of the Justices, and most of the Jury, besides other
persons of Quality there present. It was generally imputed to the stench of the
Prisoners clothes and bodies.

31 W. Clarke, Arm. Son to W. Sher. 10 Jac. and grandchild to Sir Jo. of
Northam. 21. Henry 8.

36. Rich. Fenys, bred in Oxford was lineally desended from Ja. Lord Say and
Seal Treasurer of England in the days of Henry 6. was created An. 1 Ja. Lord
Say and Seal. He died 1612. W. Fenys his eldest Son was since created Visc. Say
and Seal and is still alive.

An. 3. Rich. Wenmam was by King Charles I. created, Wenman of Chilmaynam in
the County of Dublin, and then Visc. Wenman of Tuant in the County of Galloway,
both in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Rutland-shire.
RVtland-shire the least County in England, is both pleasant and fruitful, and
in Form almost Orbicular. The name is q. Redland from the color of the Soil.
As for Buildings, Burgley on the Hill belonged formerly to the Lords
Harringtons, but since so beautified by the D. of Buckingham, that it was
inferior to few for the House, superior to all for the Stable. It was
demolished in the Civil War. Of Wonders, this is one, that this County had
never an absolute or entire Abbey therein, producing only Okeham and Brook, two
small Appurtenances to Convents in other Counties. The cause whereof seems to
have been, Ed. the Confessor's giving all Rutland to Westminster Church, which
tho rescinded by William the Conqueror, yet other Convents perchance might be
scrupulous to accept what once belonged to another Foundation.

Proverbs.
I. Rutland Raddleman, A poor sort of Trader, that sells red stones or Oker for
the marking of sheep.

Saints.
St. Tibba (a Saxon) was in the times of Superstition reputed the Patroness of
Hawking, and worshipped as a second Diana; she lived a Virgin and Anchoress at
Dormundcaster, and died with the reputation of holiness about 660.

Benefactors to the Public.
W. Brown Esquire. twice Alderman of Stamford, was descended from the ancient
Family of the Browns of Toll-Thorp in this County. He built the beautiful
Steeple, with a great Part of the Church in Stamford, (where he lies buried).
He erected An. 1493. the Old Bead-house in that Town, to which he gave the
Manor of Swayfeld worth 400 l. per An. etc.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Harington, Senior, son to Sir Ja. was born at Exton, the residence of that
ancient Family. He divided his eminent Hospitality betwixt Rutland and
Warwickshire. He was a grand benefactor to Sidney-College, King Ja. created
him Baron of Exton, and his Lady was Governess to Princess Elizabeth whom this
Lord afterward attended when she went over to be married to Frederick Prince
Palatine; after which he died at Worms in Germany 1613. The Lord Jo. his Son
did not survive him a year; both of them signally eminent, the one a Pattern
for all good Fathers, the other for all gracious Sons. Thus the Male issue of
that Honorable Family expired.

Memorable Persons.
-- Jeffrey, born in Okeham, never arrived at a full ell in stature, tho his
Father was a proper man, and was presented to the Duchess of Buckingham, as a
very great Rarity, being then but a foot and a half in height, and a very well
proportioned dwarf about 9 years of Age. The Duchess raised him to a
considerable degree of Eminency, when after many special marks of her Favor,
she caused him to be presented in a cold baked pie to King Charles and Queen
Mary at an Entertainment. Hence living at Court, he grew so high that he looked
not down upon his Father, until by a sound correction (at the Kings command)
his Mind was reduced into somewhat nearer proportion with his Body. He was a
Captain in the Army in the late civil Wars, and afterward went over to wait on
the Queen in France. He shot one Mr. Crofts who had prvoked and accounted him
the object rather of his contempt than Anger: whereupon he was imprisoned. And
so I take my leave of Jeffery the least Man of the least County in England.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 16. Christopher Brown Arm. came with King Henry 7. Richard 3. for which
good Service King Henry 8. by Letters Patents Granted to Francis Brown Son of
this Sheriff, That he should not be impanelled on any Jury nor serve in Office
of Sheriff or Escheator in any County, and also that he should be covered in
the Kings presence. Tolethorpe (the chief place of residence at this day of
Christopher Brown Esquire. who bore the Office of Sheriff in this County 1647) was
by Deed conveyed to Jo. Brown by Th. Burton Knight An. 15. Edward 3. There was
Brown Lord Mayor of London 1479. the Son of Jo. Brown of Oakham.

Shrop-shire.
SHrop-shire has Cheshire on the North. Staffordshire on the East Worcester,
Hereford and Radnor-shire. on the South. Montgomery and Denby-shire on the
West. It is in length 34 and in breadth 26 miles. A large and lovely County,
generally fair and fruitful, plentifully producing all things necessary for
man's sustenance, but chiefly abounding with Iron and Coal at Mendip Bedworth,
etc. As for Manufactures, the County has none her Original, but is supplied
with Welsh-Freeses brought to Oswastre the Staple of that commodity. For
Buildings, Shrop-shire may seem on the West divided from Wales with a Wall of
continued Castles. Mr. Speed who allows 186 Castles in England, accounts 32
in this County, which having been formerly serviceable whilst Shrop-shire was
the Verge of English Dominions, are now neglected, this Shire being almost in
the midst of England since Wales was annexed thereunto. Of the Houses of the
Gentry, many are Fair and handsome, none amount to an extraordinary Eminency.
In this Shire there is a Spring at Pitchford which has an oily matter upon the
Water thereof, which being Bituminous is a great comfort to the Nerves.

Proverbs.
I. He that fetches a Wife from Shrewsbury, must carry her into
Staffordshire, or else must live in Cumberland. That is a Shrew must be beaten
with a Staff, etc. II. The Case is altered quoth Plowden. It Is said that
Plowden a great Lawyer of this County, being of the Romish Persuasion, some
Setters trapanned him (pardon the Prolepsis) to hear Mass, but afterward
Plowden understanding that the Pretender to Officiate was no Priest, but a
Layman (on design to make a Discovery) O! the Case is altered quoth Plowden,
No Priest no Mass.

Princes.
Richard Plantagenet, Second Son to King Ed. 4. and Eliz. his Queen, was born
at Shrewsbury, 1472. He was created Duke of York and affianced to Anne Daughter
and Heir to Jo. Mowbray D. of Norfolk, but before the Nuptials were Solemnized
his cruel Uncle the Duke of Gloucester married him to a Grave in the Tower of
London. The obscurity of his Burial gave the advantage to the report that he
lived in Perkin Warbeck, one of the Idols which put Henry 7. to some Danger and
more Trouble before he could finally suppress him.

Geo. Plantag. Youngest Son to E. 4. and Eliz. his Queen, was born at
Shrewsbury, and lived but a very short time, being like Plautus his Solstitial
Flower Qui repentino ortus repentino occidit.

Saints.
St. Milburgh, Daughter to Meroaldus Prince of Mercia, gave the fair Manor of
Wenlock in this County, (which was assigned to her for his Portion) to the
Poor, and living a Virgin, she built a Monastery in the same place, answering
her Name, which being interpreted is Good to Burgh or Town. She died about 664.
Some 400 years after in the Reign of W. the Conqueror, her Corpse (discovered by
Miracles wrought thereby) is said to have been taken up sound and uncorrupted.

St. Oswald King of Northumberland was slain by Penda the Pagan King of the
Mercians, at a place called after his name, Oswaldstre in this County 635. He
had been always Pious and exceeding charitable to the Poor. His Arm cut off, it
seems, from the rest of his Body remained, said Bid, whole and incorrupted,
kept in a Silver Case in St. Pet. Church at Bamborough, whilst his Corpse was
first buried at Peterborough, and afterward (in the Danish Persecution)
translated to Bergen in Flanders, where it still remains. The 5 th. of August
in our Calender was consecrated to his Memory, save that the Thanksgiving for
Gowrie's Conspiracy made bold to justle him out all the Reign of King James.

Confessors
Th. Gataker, (a Branch of an ancient Family at Gataker-Hall, in this County,
from the time of King Edward the Confessor,) was bred in the Temple, and
afterward present at the Examination of persecuted People in the Reign of
Queen Mary. Their hard usage made him pity their persons, and admirable
Patience to approve their Opinions. His Parents perceiving his inclination,
used all possible means to divert the same by sending him beyond the Seas, and
providing liberally for him; then (these proving ineffectual) by recalling his
Person, and reducing his Allowance, all which would not do. He afterward
studied Divinity and became Pastor of St. Edmunds in Lumbard-street London
where he died An. -- leaving Th. his learned Son (of whom formerly among the
Writers in London) heir to his Pains and Piety.

Prelates.
Rob. of Shrewsbury preferred B. of Bangor, in the Reign of K. Jo. 1197. was
afterward taken Prisoner in his own Cathedral Church, by the King, waging War
against Leoline P. of Wales, and enjoined to pay 300 Hawks for his Ransom,
which was more considerable than a Brace of Greyhounds, the late Ransom of an
English Nobleman (in the Reign of King Chapter I.) About that time the Men of
Norway, possessed the Isle of Anglesea, could best provide him the best and the
most. Besides in Pembrook-shire there were Aryes of Peregrines which bred in
great plenty. This Bishop ordered by his Will that he should be buried in the
middle of the Market place of Shrewsbury. This may be imputed either to his
Humility, or fear of future Sacrilege, during the Wars betwixt the English and
Welsh. He died 1215.

Rob. Burnel, Son to Rob. and Brother to Hugh Lord Burnel, whose prime Seat was
at Acton-Burnel-Castle in this County, was by E. 1. preferred B. of Bath and
Wells, and first Treasurer, then Chancellor of England. He caused the Court of
Chancery to be kept at Bristol for the more convenient management of the Welsh
affairs. Having acquired great Riches, he is supposed to have rebuilt (for his
Heirs) the Castle of Acton Burnel on his own expense, as he built for his
Successors, the beautiful Hall at Wells, the biggest Room of any Bishops Palace
in England, plucked down by Sir Jo. Gabos (afterward executed for Treason) in
the Reign of E. 6. after a good settlement of the English and Welsh affairs,
this Bishop was employed in some business about Scotland; in the Marches
whereof he died, 1292. and was buried in his own Cathedral.

Walter de Wenlock Abbot of Westminster was Treasurer of England to E. 1. He
died at Periford in Gloc. 1307 and was buried in his Church at Westminster,
where Abbas Walterus non fuit Austerus is part of his Epitaph.

Rob. of Shrewsbury was An. 3. E. 3. preferred Bishop of Bath and Wells. Being
consecrated without the Popes privity, he paid a large sum to expiate his
presumption. He bestowed on his Cathedral a Chest Port-cullis-like barred with
iron, able to hold out a siege in the view of such as beheld it, which
notwithstanding was forced open by some Thieves in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. He erected and endowed a spacious Structure for the Vicars-Choral of
his Cathedral, to inhabit together. Having made such a Palace for his Vicars,
he was necessitated in some sort to enlarge the Bishops Seat, which he
beautified and fortified Castle-wise. He disafforrested Mendip, and died 1363
being buried in his Cathedral, where his Statute is done to the life.

Rob. Mascal, born (probably) and a Carmelite in Ludlow, was bred in Oxford and
became for his Piety and Learning, Confessor to King Henry 4. and Counselor
to Henry 5. He was one of the 3 English Prelates which went to (and one of the
2 which returned alive from) the Council of Constance. He died 1416. being
buried in the Church of White-friers London, to which he had been a great
Benefactor.

Rich. Talbot, of honorable Parentage, was brother to Jo. first Earl of
Shrewsbury. He was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin in Irland 1417. and was
Privy Counselor to Henry 5 and 6. twice Chief Justice and once Chancellor of
Ireland. He founded 6 Petty Canons and 6 Choristers in his Church, and wrote a
Book against Ja. Earl of Ormond, wherein he detected his abuses during his
Lieutenancy in Ireland. He died 1449. and lies buried in St Patricks in
Dublin. He had refused the Archbishopric of Armagh tho a higher place.

Geo. Day, Provost of King's College in Cambridge, was preferred Bishop of
Chichester 1543. A pertinacious Papist, who tho he made some kind of
recantation (which is entered in the Diary of E. 6.) yet either the same was
not satisfactory, or else he relapsed into his errors again, for which he was
deprived, but restored again by Queen Mary. He died 1556. Whose Brother

Since the Reformation.
W. Day, a Zealous Protestant (bred in Cambridge) requested of his Brother some
Money to buy books etc. therewith, and was answered with this denial, That he
thought it not fit to spend the Goods of the Church on him who was an Enemy of
the Church. Yet he found a Friend nearer than a Brother. He was Proctor of
Cambridge 1558. and afterward was made by Queen Elizabeth Prove. of Eaton, Dean
of Windsor, and Bishop of Winchester, and having enjoyed that See scarcely a
whole year, he died 1596.

Statesmen.
Sir Th. Bromley, born at Bromley, of a right ancient Family, was Solicitor
Genesis to Queen Elizabeth before he was 40 and afterward Lord Chancellor of
England 1579. before he was 50 years old; of great Learning and Integrity. He
died 1587. Learning in Law may seem to run in the Veins of that name, which
since has had a Baron of the Exchequer of his Alliance.

Sir Clem. Edmunds, born at Shrawardine and bred in Oxford, generally skilled
in all Arts and Sciences, (Witness his Translation of, and Illustrations on
Caesar's Commentaries) was Clerk of the Council to King James, Knighted by him,
and at last preferred Secretary of State, tho he acted not therein, being
prevented by death happening 16.. He lies buried at Preston in Northam. were he
purchased a fair estate which his Grandchild does possess at this day.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Edmond Plowden Arm. born at Plowden, wrote learnedly on the Common Law. He was
a man of eminent Integrity. He was Treasurer for the Honerable Company of the
Middle Temple An. 1572. when their Magnificent Hall was built: He being a good
advancer thereof. He died 1584. and lies buried in the Quire of Temple Church
in London.

Sir Jo. Walter, Son to Edm. Chief Justice of S. Wales, was born at Ludlow. An
eminent Lawyer and Judge. When a Pleader, he suffered not good men to be born
down by slanderers, poor men by more Potent, Learned men by the ignorant. Sir
Jo was passionate, Judge Walter was most Patient and grave; and merry enough for
a Judge as he told Judge Denham. He was outed of his place, when Chief Baron of
the Exchequer about the illegality of the Loan as I take it. He was a great
Benefactor to Jesus College in Oxford and died 1630. in the Parish of Savoy,
bequeathing 20 l. to the poor thereof.

Edward Litleton, born at Mounslow was Eldest Son to Sir Edward one of the
Justices of the Marches, and Chief Justice of N. Wales. He was bred in Christ
Church in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelor of Arts. He was preferred one of
the Justices of N. Wales, Recorder of London and Solicitor to King Charles I.
and afterward Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Privy Counselor, thence
advanced to be Lord Keeper and Baron of Mounslow. He died in Oxford and was
buried in Christs-Church, 1645.

Soldiers
Sir Jo. Talbot born at Blackmore, was Lord Talbot and Strange, from his
paternal Extraction, Lord Furnival and Verdon (by Marriage with Joan Daughter
of Th. de Nevil) and E. of Shrewsbury in England and Weisford in Ireland, by
creation of King Henry 6. This is that Talbot, so famous for his Sword, or
rather whose Sword was so famous for his Arm that used it. A Sword with bad
Latin upon it, viz. Sum Talboti pro vincere inimicos meos, but good steel
within it, which constantly conquered where it came, insomuch that the bare
Fame of his approach frighted the French from the Siege of Bordeaux. Being
victorious for 24 years together; success failed him at last, charging the
Enemy near Castilion, on unequal terms, where he was slain with a Shot July,
17. 1453. The Victories of the English in France were buried with the Body of
this Earl, which lies at White-Church in this County. Whose Son

Sir Jo. Talbot, (Visc. Lisle in right of his Mother) was slain with his
Father, who had advised him by an escape to reserve himself for future fortune,
but he craved to be excused, and would not on any terms be persuaded to
forsake his Father. He surpassed Emilius the Roman General (who being pressed
with Hanibal's Forces, was resolved to die, and not come again under the
Judgment of the People of Rome) in that Sir Jo. was young, unhurt and able to
escape, and in no wise answerable for the days misfortune, Aemilius, old,
grievously wounded and accountable for the overthrow received.

Writers.
Rob. of Shrewsbury, wrote the Life and Miracles of St. Winfride. He flourished
1148.

Dav. of Chirbury, born in Chirbury, a Carmelite, and (according to Leland) a
Famous Divine, was made B. of Drummore in Ireland. His Writings were either few
or obscure. He died and was buried at Ludlow, 1420.

Since the Reformation.
Rob. Langeland, a Protestant in Judgment (tho he lived 150 years before the
general Reformation) was born at Mortimer's Clibery, bred a Priest, and one of
the first followers of Wickliffe, wanting neither Wit nor Learning, Witness his
Book entitled The Vision of Pierce Plough-man, highly commended by Mr. Seldom.
He flourished under Edward 3. An. 1369.

Th. Churchyard, born in Shrewsbury, about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth,
wrote a Book in Verse, of the Worthiness of Wales, taking in Shrop-shire. He
died about 11 Elizabeth 1570. His Epitaph being Come Alecto lend me thy Torch,
To find a Churchyard in a Church Porch:
Poverty and Poetry his Tomb does enclose,
Wherefore good Neighbors be merry in Prose.


Th. Holland, D. D. born in the Marches of Wales, bred in, and Rector of Exeter
College, in Cambridge, was so much addicted to Study, that the Scholar in him
almost devoured all other Relations, and being well acquainted with the
Fathers, succeeded Dr. Lawr. Humphride in the place of Regius Professor. His
solemn Valediction of the Fellows (when occasion) was, I commend you to the
Love of God and to the hatred of Popery and Superstition. His Extemporaries
were often better than his premeditations. He died 1612. and was buried in
Oxford.

Abraham Whelock, born in White-Church Parish, Arabic Professor and Minister
of St. Sepulchers in Cambridge, admirable his knowledge in the Oriental
Tongues; amongst the Western, he was well versed in the Saxon. Witness his
Edition of Bid* He translated the New Testament into Persian, and printed it,
hoping that it might tend to the Conversion of that Country. He died 1654.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir Roger Achley, born at Stanwardine was Mayor of London 1511. Observing that
poor People, who never have more than they need will sometimes need more than
they have, pepared Leaden Hall, (the Common-Garner and stored up much Corn
therein, collecting from the present Plenty, a relief against an ensuing Famine.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Rowland Hill, born at Hodnet, was a Mercer in London, whereof he was Lord
Mayor 1549. He gave maintenance to a fair school at Drayton in th^s County,
which he built and endowed, besides 600 l. to Christs-Church Hospital etc. He
forgave at his death all his Tenants in his manors of Aldersey and Sponely a
years Rent, and enjoined his Heirs to make them new Leases of 21 years for 2
years Rent. He built two Bridges of stone, containing 18 Arches in both,
besides Cawseys etc He died 15 --

Sir Th. Adams Knight, born at Wem, bred a Draper in, became Lord Mayor of
London 164 -- A man who drank of the bitter waters of Meribah, without making a
bad face thereat. He gave the House of his Nativity to be a Free School, with
liberal endowment.

W. Adams. Esquire. born at Newport, bred a Haberdasher in London (where he fined
for Alderman.) founded a School-house in Newport, with a Library and Lodgings
for a Master and Usher, (the one having 60 l. the other 30 l. salary per An.
with a Tarras on the top. 2 Almshouses near to the School with competent
maintenance. On which School the following Verses were made Some
Cottage-Schools are built so low,
The Muses there must grovelling go;
Here whilst Apollo's harp does sound,
The sisters Nine may dance around;
And Architects may take from hence
The Pattern of Magnificence.
Long may this Worthy person live to see his Intentions completed.

Memorable Persons.
Th. Parre, born at Alberbury, lived above 150 years, (verifying his Anagram.
Th. Parre, Most rare hap.) being born in the Reign of E. 4. 1483. he was 2
months before his death brought up by Th. Earl of Arundel (a great Lover of
Antiquities) to Westminster. He slept away most of his time, and is thus
Charactred by an eye witness of him From head to heel his body had all over
A Quick-set thick-set nat^ral hairy cover.
Change of Air and Diet (tho to the better) with the trouble of many Visitants
are conceived to have accelerated his death, which happened Westminster
November 15. 1634. and was buried in the Abbey-Church, all present at his
burial doing homage to this our aged Th. de Temporibus.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 9. Nich de Sandford. This ancient Name is still extant in this County; Fr.
Sandford Esquire. paid 459. a Gentleman excellently skilled in Fortification.

Jo. Cornwall Mil. descended from Rich. Earl of Cornwall and King of the
Almains, Henry 5. in France. He built a Fair House at Amp-hil in Bedford-shire.
He was created by King Henry 6. Baron of Fanhop and Knight of the Garter, and
faithfully adhered to that King, after the Crown forsook him. Continuing till
the Reign of E. 4. he was by him dispossessed of his lands in Bedford of which
he said pleasantly, That not he but his fine House at Amp-hill was guilty of
High Treason.

An. 1. Th. Mitton, in obedience to the Kings Command, Buckingham the (grand
Engineer to promote that Usurper) in that House of Humphrey Banaster, who for
1000 l. betrayed the Duke to the Sheriff.

3. Gilb. Talbot, Mil. Son to Jo. 2 d. Earl of Shrewsbury of that name,
assisted Hen. of Richmond (afterward K. Hen. 7.) with 2000 men well appointed
(most of them Tennants and Retainers to his Nephew Geo. E. of Shrewsbury at the
Battle of Bosworth-Field. For his good Service K. Hen. rewarded him with fair
Lands at Grafton, in Worc. made him Governor of Calis in France and Knight of
the Garter; and from him the present E. of Shrewsbury is descended. I conceive
it was his Son to whom K. Hen. 8. (fearing a surprise) wrote briefly and
peremptorily, that he should instantly fortify the Castle of Calis. To whom
Governor Talbot as briefly replied, That he could neither fortify nor fiftifie
without Money.

An. 45. Roger Owen, Mil. was a Worthy Son to a Worthy Father Sir Th. Chief J.
of the Com. Pleas. Parl. 11 Jac. when a great Man there cast a grievous and
general Aspersion on an English Clergy, (using this Expression) Quo genere
hominum nihil est putidius. This Sir Rog. appeared a Zelot in their defense,
and not only removed the Bastard (calumny) from their doors, but also carried
the Falsehood home to the true Father, and urged it shrewdly against the Person,
who in that place first revived the Aspersion.

An. 14. Roll. Cotton, Mil. was a valiant and active Gent. so strong as if he
had been nothing but Bones:

An. 2. Rich. Newport, Mil being Faithful to the King in his lowest Condition,
High-Arc^l in this County, 1642. His Son Fr. Lord Newport adorneth his Honor
with Learning and other natural Accomplishments.

Note, This County was visited with the Sweating Sickness which first began and
twice raged in the Town of Shrewsbury, the Cure was found to be the keeping the
Patient in the same posture wherein he was seized without Food or Physic, and
such who weathered out the Disease for 24 hours did certainly escape.

SOMMERSET-SHIRE.
SOmmerset-shire has the Severn Sea on the North, Gloucestershire on the North
East, Wilt-shire on the East, Dorset-shire on the South, and Devonshire on the
West; It is named from Sommerton the most ancient Town in the County. It
reaches from East to West 55, and from North to South 42 Miles. It is
generally Fruitful. It Is said there are several single Acres in this Shire,
which may serve a good round Family with Bread for a Year, as affording a
Bushel of Wheat for every Week therein. There is plenty of the best Lead, (for
Shot) dug out of Myndyp-Hills, by the benefit whereof vast sums of Money
were advanced to the Bishops of Bath and Wells, since the latter end of the
Reign of Q. Elizabeth; Bishop Still having had the Harvest, Bishop Montague the
Gleanings, and Bishop Lake the Stubble thereof, and yet considerable was the
profit of Lead to him and his Successors. In Myndip-Hills there is also found
plenty of Lapis Calaminaris, (good for clearing of the sight) which mixed with
Copper, does make Brass, and yet is not worth above six pence in the pound. It
was discovered about the time when Copper-Mines were rediscovered in
Cumberland. The best and biggest Cheese in England, are made at Chedder in this
County. The Rich and Poor of a Parish join their Milk, for the making of
Corporation Cheeses, of which the Proprietors are Tennants in Common. Woad
grows naturally in this County, especially about Glassenbury; The use thereof
was either ancient, (among the Britains, for a black wash to render their Faces
terrible to their Enemies) or modern, as a ground-colour for dying. It greatly
impaireth the ground it grows on. The Gentry and Commonalty of thi^ County
are much affected with Bull-baiting, for which purpose there are very good
Mastiffs, though chiefly useful for necessary defense, as being good Porters.
Note, Prince Henry An. 1602. allowd a pension for the maintenance of a Mastiff
which had worsted a Lion, and gave Order, That he that had fought with the King
of Beasts, should never after encounter any inferior Creatures. When 100
Mastiffs were sent from England to the Pope, a Cardinal hearing the Letter
read, mistook the Latin Molossos for so many Mules; yet since that word does
almost sound Mule-asses, you may imagine the Cardinal had neither good Lati^^
nor English, in not laying his Bull equally on both the kinds of these Beasts
of burden. The Manufactures here are Taunton Serges, which were much sent into
Spain before the Civil War. As for Buildings, the Churches of Bath and Wells
are most eminent, and constitute one See. The Church of Bath was begun by
Oliver King, Bishop of this Diocese in the Reign of Hen. 7. and the West end
most curiously Cut, and Carved with Angels on Jacob's Ladder. After his decease
it stood a long time neglected, whence these Verses were written on the
Church-wall with a Charcoal, O Church I wail thy woeful plight
Whom King, nor Cardinal, Clark or Knight
Have yet restored to ancient right.
Alluding to the aforesaid Bishop King, and his 4 Successors in 35 years, viz.
Card. Woolsey, Card. Adrian, Bishop Clark and Bishop Knight. It felt the
Hammers which knocked down the Abbeys. The Townsmen were not willing to buy the
Church so cheap as 500 Marks (as it was proffered by the Commissioners) fearing
to be thought to cousen the King, so that the purchase might come under the
compass of concealed Lands. Hereupon the Glass, Iron, Bells and Lead, (which
last amounted to 480 Tun) provided for the finishing thereof, were sold and
sent beyond the Sea, and (as some say) lost by shipwreck. In the Reign of Q.
Elizabeth, Collections were made all over the Land, for the repairing thereof,
though they proved inconsiderable: Only Mr. Billet, who was ( I think) Executor
to W. Cecil Lord Burleigh, disbursed good sums to that end. A Stranger wrote on
this Structure, Be blithe fair Kirck, when Hemp is past
Thine Olive, that all winds did blast,
Shall flourish green for Age to last.
The parcel Popish Author (who subscribed himself Cassadore) expected the
finishing of this Church at the return of their Religion, and looked for this
after the Reigns of Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary, K. Philip, and Q. Eliz. This
Church was finished by James Montague, Bishop of this See, who removed the Lead
from the Bowels of the Earth to the Roof of the Church, which is both spacious
and specious, the most lightsome as ever I beheld. The parable of Jotham, (the
name of the first Founder,) Judge. 9.8. is most curiously wrought in this
Church. When Oliver the Usurper was Commander in chief in this Land, some
beheld him as the Olive, (mentioned in the Parable) till he was once blasted
Root and Branches. The Cathedral of Wells is greater, and darker then the
other, so that Bath may seem to draw Devotion with the pleasantness, Wells to
drive it with the solemnity thereof. The West Front of Wells is a Masterpiece
of Art made of well proportioned imagery, Vera and Spirantia Signa.

As for the Civil Habitations in this County, to pass by Dunstar Castle, (which
has a high Ascent, and a goodly Prospect by Sea and Land) Montague built by
Sir Edward Philips, Master of the Rolls, is a most Magnificent Fabric. Hinton
St. George, the House of the Lord Paulet, has every Stone in the Front shaped
Doule-wayes, in form of a Cart-nail, and it is said the owner thereof built it
in a dear year, on purpose to employ the more poor people thereupon.

The Wonder of this County is Wockey-hole in Mendip-Hills, near Wells, a
Subterranean Concavity, having spacious Vaults, stony Walls, creeping
Labyrinths. The water which incessantly dropped down from the Vault of the
Rock, was seen by some to turn to the Rock it self. And the like transmutation
is thought to be the Original of many Rocks.

As for Medicinal Waters, Bath is well known, the Waters whereof have much
Bitumen, sovereign against Obstructions, Niter, which strengthens the
operation of the former, and Purges the Body of gross Humors, and Sulphur
which dries, and is good for uterine effects. Amongst the various Opinions
concerning the heat of these Waters; some do with great probability impute the
same to the fermentation of several Minerals, through which the Waters run The
practice of taking the Waters inwardly (in Broths, etc.) begins to prevail.
The Right Honorable James Earl of Marleborough undertook to cover the
Cross-Bath at his own cost, and would others follow his Resolution, it would
effectually conduce to public benefit, and raise the credit of the place.

Proverbs.
I. Where should I be bore else then in Tanton deane. A Peasant's bragg; that
place is indeed populous, pleasant, and so fruitful with the zun and zoil
alone, that it needs no manuring. II. The Beggars of Bath.

Saints.
St. Dunstan, born in, and Abbot of Glassenbury, was Bishop of London and
Worcester, Archbishop of Canterbury, and at last, for his promoting of Monkery
reputed a Saint: He dyed 988. His skill in Smithery was so great, that the
Goldsmiths in London are Incorporated by the name of the Company of St.
Dunstans. See my Eccl. Hist.

Martyrs.
Jo. Hooper, born in this County, and bred in Oxford, then beyond the Seas, a
great Scholar and Linguist, was in the Reign of Edw. 6. Elected Bishop of
Gloucester, but for a time scrupled the acceptance thereof, as refusing the Oath
of Supremacy, which then enjoined the receivers to a Conformity to the Kings
Commands, in what alterations soever he should afterward make in Religion, and
also concluded with so help me God, and all his Angels and Saints; This was the
occasion of the ensuing reforming of that Oath, whilst the King dispensed with
his present taking thereof. He also scrupled the wearing of some Episcopal
Habiliments, but at last consented thereunto. He held afterward Worcester in
Commendam with Gloucester, and having a double Dignity, gave treble Diligence by
Preaching Gods Word, living piously, and dying patiently, being Martyred, An.
1555. The only Native in this Shire, who suffered for the Testimony of the
Gospel, Bishop Burn, Bishop of Bath and Wells in the Reign of Q. Mary, having
persecuted no Protestants in his Diocese, to death.

Prelates.
Joceline of Wells, whereof he was Bishop. He first changed the Style of Bishop
of Glaston (used by his Predecessors) into that of Bishop of Bath and Wells.
The Monks of Glassenbury purchased their exemption from his Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, by parting with 4 fair Manors to the Sea of Wells. After his
return from Exile (for his obstinacy against King John) he Beautified and
Enriched the Cathedral, Erected some new Prebends, and to the use of the
Chapter appropriated many Churches, and gave 3 Manors of great value to the
Episcopal See. He with Hugo Bishop of London, was the joint Founder of St. Jo.
in Wells and on his own cost, built two fair Chapels, one at Wokey, the other
at Wells. The Church of Wells was rather rebuilt then repaired by him. He was
Bishop 37 Years, and Dyed 1242. His Effigies in Brass which was on his Tomb, is
since defaced.

Fulk of Samford, was Treasurer of St. Paul's, London, and then by Papal-Bull
declared Archbishop of Dublin 1256. He dyed in his Manor of Finglas 1271. and
was Buried in the Church of St. Pat. whose Brother

Jo. of Samford Dean of St. Pat. in Dublin, and for a time Escheator of all
Ireland, was afterward chosen, and by Edw. the 1st. Confirmed Archbishop of
Dublin 1284. For a time he was Chief Justice of Ireland, and thence was sent
(with Anth. Bishop of Durham) Ambassador to the Emperor, whence returning, he
dyed in London 1294. his Body being carried over into Ireland, was buried in
St. Pat.

Thomas Beckington, born at Beckington, bred in New-Colledge, Dr. of the Laws,
and Dean of the Arches, till by King Hen. 6. he was advanced Bishop of Bath and
Wells. He gave for his Rebus (in allusion to his Name) a burning Beacon, to
which he answered in his Nature, being a burning and shining light. He wrote a
Book to prove the K. of England's Title to the Crown of France; He spent 6000
Marks in repairing and adorning of his Palaces; He was a Loyal Subject, kind
Kinsman, and a good Master, bequeathing 5 pound a piece to his Chief, and 5
Marks a piece to his meaner Servants, and 40 Shillings a piece to his Boys. He
was a Benefactor to Wells Church, Winch. New, Merton, but chiefly
Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford, being little less than a second Founder thereof.
His Will was Confirmed under the Broad Seal of England: He dyed 1464.

Richard Fitz-James Dr. of Law, was born at Redlinch, of Ancient and Worshipful
Extraction, and bred at Mert. Coll. in Oxford, where he built most Beautiful
Lodgings, repairing also St. Ma. in Oxford. He was preferred successively
Bishop of Rochester, Chichester, and London: An excellent Scholar, and Author
of some Books not now Extant. He was over busy with Fire and Faggot,
persecuting the poor servants of God in his Diocese. He dyed 1512, and was
buried in his Cathedral, (having contributed to the adorning thereof) in a
Chapel like Tomb of Timber, since burnt down, 1561: He was Brother to
Fitz-James Lord Chief Justice.

Statesmen.
Sir Amias Poulet, (whose Grandfather put Cardinal Woolsey, then but a
Schoolmaster, in the Stocks) was born at Hinton St. George: He was Chancellor
of the Garter, Governor of Jersey and Gersney, and Privy-Councellour to Q.
Elizabeth, who chiefly committed the keeping of Mary Q. of Scots to his
fidelity. He would not yield to Secretary Walsingham, who moved him to suffer
one of his servants to be bribed by the Agents of the Queen of Scots, so to
compass the better Intelligence: He dyed 15. and was Buried in St. Martins in
the Fields, in London: His Motto was Gardez la Foy, keep your Faith, or
Allegiance.

Capital Judges.
Jo. Fitz-James, born at Redclinch, of an Ancient Family; was by Hen. 8. made
Chief Justice of the King's Bench: He sat one of the Assistants, when Sir
Thomas More was Arraigned for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, and was shrewdly
put to it to save his own Conscience, and not incurr the Kings displeasure,
declaring himself (upon demand) in these words, My Lords all, by St. Gillian, I
must needs confess, that if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful, then the
Indictment is not in my Conscience insufficient: He dyed An. 30. Hen. 8. and
his Family does still flourish at Lewson in Dorsetshire. Sir Jo. descended from
his Brother Alured, has strongly encouraged my weak Endeavors.

Jo. Portman Knight, of Worshipful Extraction at Portmans-Orchard, was An. 2.
Mary, made Chief Justice of the King's Bench, in which Office it seems he dyed.
A Baron of his Name and Lineage, flourishes at this day with a plentiful
Estate.

Dav. Brook Knight, born at Glassenbury, Son to Jo. Brook Esquire Sergeant at Law
to Hen. 8. was an. 1. Mary made Chief Bar. of the Exchequer: He Married
Katharine Daughter of Jo. Lord Chandois, but dyed without Issue.

James Dier Knight, born at Roundhill, an. 1. Elizabeth, was made Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, continuing therein 24 years. At the Trial of the
Duke of Norfolk, an. 1572. This Judge declared that Duke could have no Council
assigned him for matter of Fact, and that the Council of Humphry Stafford, in
the Reign of Hen. 7. (which was pleaded by the Duke) had been granted only as
to point of Law: His Reports evidence his great Abilities: He dyed an. 25.
Eliz. (though Married) without Issue. There is a house of a Baronet, descended
from his Elder Brother, at great Stoughton in Hunt.

Sir Jo. Popham, of most ancient descent, was born at Huntworth; when a Youth
he was stout, and well skilled at Sword and Buckler, and wild enough in his
Recreations. Afterward he applied himself to a more profitable Fencing, the
Study of the Common Laws, wherein he became Eminent. He was preferred the
Queens Attorney, and afterward Lord Chief Justice of England: He deposed upon
his Oath in open Court, at the Trial of the Earl of Essex, an. 1600. that he
had been violently detained at the Earls house, by his Military men there
Assembled, which some conceived tantamount to an Imprisonment. Note the rarity
of the Precedent. He cut asunder the Knot of Northern Robbers (and others) with
the Sword of Justice. He represented effectually to King James, the
inconvenience of frequent Pardons. He used exemplary severity against
Male-Factors, (shunning the dangerous Rock of Cruel Mercy) whereby the Lives of
many Thousands were preserved; He dyed 16.

Soldiers.
Jo. Courcy, Baron of Stoke-Courcy, was the first Englishman who invaded and
subdued Vlster in Ireland, therefore Created Earl thereof. He was afterward
surprised by Hugh Lacy, (corrival for his Title) sent over into England, and
imprisoned by King John, in the Tower of London. Sometime after he was
commanded by the King to fight a French man, in decision of a Controversy
about the Title of a French Castle, (the King of France being Present) but the
Monsieur being informed that Courcy was a monstrous Eater, and concluding his
Courage to be proportionable to his Stomach, wisely declined the Combat. The
English Champion was fain to give proof of his strength another way, in the
presence of the two Kings, sundring a Steel Helmet at one blow, into two
pieces, and striking the Sword so deep into the Block (whereon the Helmet lay)
that none but himself could pull it out again, being observed to look sternly
before, and in the giving of the blow, he was demanded why he looked so
exceeding fierce, Had I (said he) missed my blow, I would have killed the
Kings, and all in the place. This was in no wise displeasing to the Kings,
(being highly in good humor) both because they were confident Courcy (now) was
not so ill natured as his words did import, and also because the words appeared
to be some necessary Evaporations of that violent Ferment of his Blood, which
had produced in him a propensity to give an Universal demonstration of his
Strength, by making the deepest Impression on the strongest Metal, (or
otherwise,) leaving no reserve of Spirits to actuate the Organs of his Speech
for any Expression of his Allegiance at that time; yet by that great Action he
seems to have declared himself in a most eminent manner the Kings Man, and to
have antedated the performance of that Homage which the Lord Courcy, Baron of
Ringrom, (the second of Ireland) was of course bound to do. Hence it is that
these Barons claimed a privilege, after their first Obeisance, to be covered
in the Kings Presence. His Devotion was equal to his Valor, being a great
Founder, and endower of Religious houses; yet he turned the Church of the Holy
Trinity in Down into the Church of St. Pat. for which ('it is said) he was
condemned never to return into Ireland, though attempting it 15 several times,
but repelled with soul weather. He dyed in France about 1210.

Math. Gournay, was born at Stoke under Hambden, where his Family has
flourished since the Conquest, and there built both a Castle and a College. He
was the Honor of his house. In the Reign of Edw. 3. he fought at the Siege of
Algier and Benemazin against the Saracens, at Ingen, Poictiers, Sluice and
Cressy, against the French, and at Nazaran under the Black Prince in Spain. His
Armor was beheld by Martial men with much civil veneration, with whom his
faithful Buckler was a Relic of esteem. He dyed in Peace, Aged 96 years,
about the beginning of Rich. 2. and was buried in the Church of Stoke.

Seamen.
Sir Amias Preston, of an Ancient Family at Cricket, an. 88. seized on the
Admiral of the Galiasses, wherein the Governor, with most of his Men, were
burnt or killed. An. 1595 he took the Isle of Puerto Santo, and the Isle of
Cochi, surprised the Fort and Town of Coro, sacked the City of St. Jago, put to
ransom the Town of Cumana, and entered Jamaica, (all in the West Indies) and
returned home safely. He sent a Challenge to Sir Walter Raleigh then Privy
Councellor, which was by him refused, Sir Walter having a Wife and Children,
and a fair Estate, and Sir Amias being a private and single Person, though of
good Quality; Besides Sir Walter condemned those for ill Honors, where the
Hangman gives the Garland. These two Knights were afterward reconciled, and
Sir Amias dyed about the beginning of the Reign of King James

Writers.
Gildas (the Wise) was born in Bath. He was also surnamed the Querulous,
because the little we have of his Writing is only an Historical Complaint,
against the sins (and sufferings) of the Age he lived in, calling the Clergy,
Mountains of Malice, the Britans generally, the Ink (or stain) of the Age. Dr.
Gerard Vossius does by a mistake, attribute the Comedy of Aulularia in Plautus
to this Gildas. He dyed about 570.

Maurice Somerset, born in Sommerset-shire, a Cistertian in Ford Abbey, and
bred in Oxford, was Abbot of Wells, Some Books he Dedicated to Reginald Bishop
of Bath, and flourished 1193.

Alexander of Essebie, the Prince of English Poets in his Age, put our English
Festivals into Verse, and wrote the History of the Bible, with the Lives of
some Saints, in an Heroic Poem. He became Prior of Esseby-Abbey, and
flourished under Hen. 3. 1220.

Adam of Marsh born (probably) at Brent-marsh, was D. D. in Oxford; Robert
Grosthead and he jointly compared the Scripture; being afterward Franciscan
Friar in Worcester, he furnished the Library thereof with excellent
Manuscripts: He flourished 1257. Hugo de Belsham his Corrival, got the
Bishopric of Ely from him.

Since the Reformation.
H. Cuffe, born at St. George Hinton, was Fellow of Merton-Colledge in Oxford,
and Secretary to Robert Earl of Essex, with whom he engaged in his Rising, an.
1600. being Arraigned at Westminster, he was cast, (...) being proved against
him, that whilst Essex was in Consultation with his Accomplices, this Cuffe had,
for promoting that Plot, alleged this Verse out of Lucan, Viribus utendum est
quas fecimus, Arma ferenti
Omnia dat, qui justa negat.
For which he suffered. S. N
He wrote an excellent Book of the difference of the Ages of Man.

Jo. Harrington Knight, had a fair Estate at Kelston near Bath, was Master of
St. John's College, and afterward one of the most ingenious Poets of the
English Nation, witness his Translation of Orlando Furioso out of Italian, etc.
Being at an Ordinary in Bath, (with some Gentlemen of greater Estates than
himself) the Maid that waited at Table, attended him with a particular
observance, and being demanded the reason, I understand, said she, you are a
very witty man, and if I should displease you in any thing, I fear you would
make an Epigram of me. He made an Addition to Bishop Godwins Catalogue of
Bishops. He left a fair Estate to a Learned and Religious Son, and dyed about
the middle of the Reign of K. James. His Father suffered Imprisonment, and lost
One Thousand Pound for carrying a Letter to the Lady (afterward Queen) Eliz.
from whom his Mother was sequestered, as an Heretic, and all by Gardiner's
means.

Samuel Daniel, born near Taunton, was an exquisite Poet, and a Judicious
Historian, witness his Lives of the English Kings, since the Conqueror until
Edw. 3. He was servant in Ordinary to Q. Anne, In his old Age, he rented a Farm
in VVilt-shire, and dyed about the end of K. James.

Humphrey Sidenham, born at Dalverton, of an Ancient and Worshipful Family, was
bred a Fellow in Wadham College; So eminent a Preacher, that he was commonly
called Silver-tongued Sidenham. He wrote learned Sermons, of which that called
the Athenian Babbler was most remarkable. He dyed 1650.

Romish Exile Writers.
Jo. Gibbon, leaving the Land, was by Pope Greg. 13. made Canon, in the Church
of Bonn, he was afterward Rector of the Jesuits-Colledge in Triers. He wrote a
Book, in which he endeavored to prove that the Pope was not Antichrist. He
dyed 1589.

Rob. Person, bred in Oxford, (whence he was expelled for his Viciousness) went
to Rome, whence he returned with Campian, to preserve this Nation, 1589. Some
of his own party (offended with his ill nature) intended to resign him to the
Queens Officers. He was Satirical, and so much of a Politician, as to provide
for his own saftety; who would look on, direct, give ground, abet on other Men's
hands, but never played so as to adventure himself into England. He wrote a
shrewd Book of the Succession to the English Crown, setting it forth under the
Name of Dolman. He had an Authoritative influence on all the English
Catholics. He was 23 years Rector of the College at Rome, where he dyed 1610.

Jo. Fen, born at Montacute, and Batchelour of the Laws in Oxford, fled into
Flanders, thence into Italy, whence returning, he fixed at Lovain: He wrote
many, and Translated more books, and dyed 1613. Note, there lived a rigid
Nonconformist of his Surname about Coventry, who in his latter Will and
Testament railed against the Hierarchy.

Jo. Collington, bred in Oxford, was taken with Campian, and Condemned, but
being Reprieved; after some Travel, he advanced his Religion in England for 30
years together. He was alive 161^.

Benefactors to the Public.
The Lady Mohun, obtained from her Husband, Jo. Lord Mohun of Dunstor, so much
ground for the Commons of the Town of Dunstor, as she could in one day compass
about, going on her naked Feet. She dyed (as is conjectured) in the Reign of
Hen. 5.

Since the Reformation.
Nich. Wadham of Merrifieild, Esquire having great length in his Extraction,
breadth in his Estate, and depth in his Liberality, Married Dorothy, Daughter
to the Secretary, Sister to the first Lord Peter's. His Hospital house was an
Inn at all times, a Court at Christmas. This worthy Pair, being Issuless,
Erected the College of VVadham in Oxford. His Estate (after his Death)
descended to Strangwayes, Windham, White, etc. He was buried in the Church of
Ilminster.

Phil. Biss. of a worthy Family at Spargrave, Commenced D. D. in
Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford, and was Archdeacon of Taunton. He bequeathed his
Library (consisting of so many Folio's as were valued at One Thousand Pound) to
VVadham-Colledge, then newly Founded. One Epitaph made on him begins, Bis fuit
hic natus, etc. in allusion to his Name. He dyed about 1614.

Memorable Persons.
Sir Jo. Champneis, born at Chew, bred Skinner in London, (and Lord Mayor
thereof, 1535.) was the first private Man, who in his house next
Cloth-VVorkers-Hall, built a Turret to oversee his Neighbors in the City,
which delight in his Eye was punished with blindness some years before his
Death.

Tho. Coriat, born at Odcombe, and bred in Oxford. A great Grecian, carried
Folly (which the Charitable call Merriment) in his Face, and had a Head in form
like an inverted Sugar Loaf. He lay always in his Clothes, to save both labor
and charge in shifting. Prince Henry allowed him a Pension, and kept him for
his Servant; Sweetmeats and Coriat made up the last course at all
Entertainments; being the Courtiers Anvil to try their Wits upon, sometimes he
returned the Hammers as hard knocks as he received. His Book called Coriat's
Crudities is not altogether useless. Being hardy he undertook to travel on foot
to the East Indies, and dyed in the midst of his Journey.

Noted Sheriffs.
An. 14. Jo. Paulet Arm. an Accomplished Gentleman, Charles I. Created Baron
Paulet of Hinton St. George in this County, whose Right Honorable Son and Heir
Jo. Lord Paulet, now succeeds in that Barony.

Modern Battles.
The Skirmish at Martials-Elm, 1642. made much noise in Men's Ears, (a Musket
gave a greater report then a Canon since) and is conceived to have first broken
the Peace of the Nation. As for the Encounter at Lang-Port, where the Kings
Forces under the Lord Goring were defeated, July 12, 1645, it was rather a
Flight than a Fight; And hence forward the Sun of the Kings Cause declined,
versing more and more VVestward, till at last it set in Cornwall, and since
(after a long and dark night) rose again by Gods goodness in the East, when our
Gracious Sovereign arrived at Dover.

Note that an. 1607, there happened an Inundation, by the irruption of the
Severn-Sea, which over-flowed this County, almost 20 Miles in length, and four
in breadth, though by Gods special Providence, it drowned no more then 80
Persons.

BRISTOL.
BRistol (or Bright-stow, i. e. Illustrious Dwelling) is divided by the River
Avon, and pleasantly Situated on the Rising of a Hill. The Buildings are fair
and firm, the Streets cleanly kept. The City answers its Name, chiefly for
having bred many Eminent Persons. It is a Liberty of it self, though it
stands both in Sommerset-shire and Gloucestershire. There are Diamonds
(though somewhat dim) produced at St. Vincents Rock near to this City. Of
Manufactures; Gray Soap was anciently made only in this City. As for Buildings,
Ratcliff-Church is the best Parish Church in England It was first Founded by
Cannings, first a Merchant, then a Priest. St. Augustines Church, is better
accommodated with public Buildings about it, for the Sea of the Bishop. Under
St. Vincents Rock, on the West of the City, there is St. Vincents Well, the
waters whereof run through some Mineral of Iron, and are sovereign for sores
and sicknesses, being washed in, or taken inwardly. The Beer brewed thereof is
wholesome against the Spleen, If it should chance that the Crudity of the Waters
trouble the Stomach, there is a remedy in this City, and that is Bristol Milk,
(a Prove.) or Sherry-Sack, which the Courteous Inhabitants present to all
Strangers, when first visiting their City.

Martyrs.
Richard Sharp, Th. Benion, and Th. Hale, were Martyred in this City in the
days of Q. Mary, whose Blood will be visited on account of Dalbye, the
Chancellor of this Diocese, Jo. Holyman, then Bishop of this City, not having
Persecuted any therein.

Prelates.
Ralph of Bristol, born there, and bred (belike) in the Covent of Glassenbury,
became Treasurer of St Pat. in Dublin, then Bishop of Kildare. He wrote the
Life of Lawrance Archbishop of Dublin, and granted certain Indulgences to the
Covent aforesaid. He dyed 1232.

Since the Reformation.
Tobias Matthew, D. D. bred in Oxford, became Bishop of Durham, and at last of
York. He dyed 1628. See my Eccles. Hist.

Seamen.
Hugh Eliot, Merchant of this City, the prime Pilot of our Nation, in his Age,
first (with the Assistance of Mr Thorn his Fellow Citizen) found out
New Foundland; though an. 1527. before Virginia, or any other English
Plantation was conceived. And note that no City in England (London alone
excepted) has in so short a time, bred more brave and bold Seamen. As for
Eliot's discovery, had it been as fortunate in public Encouragement as private
Industry, probably before this time we had enjoyed the kernel of those
Countries, whose shell only we now possess.

VVriters.
Th. Norton, a great Professor of Chemistry in the 7 Chap. of his Ordinal,
wrote the two following Lines of himself, Thomas Norton of Briseto
A perfect Master you may him trow,
The first Line whereof he modestly parted into the initial Syllables of
several other Lines, thereby obliging his Reader to become a perfect Master in
Nominal Chemistry, before he can extract the Golden Name of Norton. He affirms
of himself, that being scarce 28 years of Age, he learned the perfection of
Chemistry in 40 days. The spite is, he complains, that a Merchants Wife of
Bristol, stole from him the Elixir of Life. Some suspect her to have been the
Wife of VV. Cannings (of whom before) contemporary with Norton, who started up
to so great and sudden Wealth. He is said to have undone himself, and those who
trusted him. He dyed 1477.

Jo. Spine, D. D. in Oxford, living under Edw. 4. left some Books to Posterity.
His surname seems to be Latin, which Englished is Thorn, an ancient name in
this City. He was Provincial (and Champion) of the Carmelites through England,
Scotland and Ireland. He labored to make all believe that Christ was a
Carmelite, and Professor of wilful Poverty, by which he tacitly condemned the
pomp of the Prelates. Hereupon the Bishop of London (his Diocesan) cast him
into Prison, from whom he appealed to Paul II, and went to Rome, where he
remained three years in close Prison, then he was enlarged by 7 Cardinals, to
whom the business was referred. Returning into London, he was nominated Bishop
of St. Dav. but never sat in that See. He dyed 1^86.

W. Grocine, an excellent Poet, became public Professor of the Greek Tongue in
Oxford. Erasmus owns him in his Epistles for his Patron and Master. His
Mistress (it seems) having in a frolic pelted him with a Snow-ball, he
declared in a Poetical Rapture, that that cold Meteor, had made so great an
addition to his Flame, that it could not be quenched otherwise then by a
reciprocal Affection, Sola potes nostras extinguere Julia flammas
Non nive, non glacie sed potes igne pari.
He dyed, an. 1520.

Romish Exile Writers.
Jo. Flower, Printer, skilful in Latin and Greek, and a good Poet, Orator and
Divine, wrote an Abridgment of Thomas his Sums, the Translation of Osorius
into English. Having fled for his Religion he set up at Antwerp, where he was
serviceable to the Catholic Cause. He dyed 1579.

Benefactors to the Public.
Robert Thorn, a Merchant-Taylor in London, gave more then 4445 pound to pious
uses, and to his Kindred 5142 pound. He dyed a Bachelor 1532, and was buried
in St. Christophers, London.

Since the Reformation.
Mary Dale (or Ramsey) Daughter of William Dale, became second Wife to Sir
Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, and Lord Mayor of London, 1577. She founded two
Fellowships, and two Scholarships in Peter-House in Cambridge, on which she
would have have settled 500 pounds per Annum, on condition that it should be
called the College of Peter and Mary. Dr. Soams then Master of the House,
refused, affirming, that Peter, who so long lived single, was now too old to
have a Feminine Partner. She dyed 1596, and lies buried in Christs-Church, in
London.

Thomas White, D. D. was bred in Oxford, and a Preacher in the Reign of Q.
Eliz. He had one Cure of Souls, but several dignities. False was the Aspersion
of his being an Usurer. Besides Benefactions to Christs-Church, and a Lecture
in St. Paul's, London, he left 3000 pounds for the building of Sion-Colledge. He
built there also an Almshouse for twenty poor Folk, allowing them yearly 6
pounds a piece, and another at Bristol, which is better endowed. He dyed 1623.

Mr. Jo. Simson, Minister of St. Olaves Hart-street, London, perfected the
aforesaid College of Sion, building the Gate House, with a fair Case for the
Library, and endowing it with 60 pounds per Annum.

Mr. Richard Grigson, expended a great sum of Money in new casting of the Bells
of Christs-Church, in Bristol. He paid 105 pounds for his reputed delinquency
in our Civil Wars.

STAFFORDSHIRE.
Staffordshire has Cheshire on the North-West, Darby-shire on the East, and
North-East Warwickshire, and Worcestershire on the South, and Shrop-shire on
the West. It lies from North to South in form of a Lozenge, in length 40, and
in breadth 26 Miles. A most pleasant and fruitful County, wherein Beau-desert
is the beautiful Barony of the Lord Paget. The best Alabaster in England is
found about Castle-Hay in this County. The great Manufacture here is Nails. As
for Buildings, the neat Church of Lichfield was ruined in the Civil Wars. It Is
said of the Close of Lichfield, that the Plague (which long had raged therein)
did abate, at the first shooting of a Cannon at the siege thereof. Of Civil
Buildings, Tutbury-Castle is a stately Structure, affording a large and brave
Prospect. It was formerly the Seat of the Lord Ferrars Earl of Derby, and was
forfeited to Hen. 3. by Robert de Ferrars Earl of Darby (who had sided with
Simon Mumford against that King) because he did not advance a Fine of 5000
pounds at the time appointed. The English Clergy willing to relieve Jo. the Son
of this Earl Robert, were commanded to the contrary, under the pa^n of the
Popes Curse. Tutbury was annexed to the Duchy of Lancaster, and some small
matter was restored to John. Dudley Castle high and pleasantly seated, and in
the Reign of King Edw. 6. well built, was adorned by John Dudley Duke of
Northumberland, who claiming the Title thereof, had thrust out John Sutton Lord
Dudley (a weak man and entangled with Debts) who therefore got the Name of Lord
Quondam* But after the Execution of that Duke, Queen Mary restored Edward the
Son of the aforesaid poor Lord.

Proverbs.
I. In April Doves Flood is worth a Kings good. Dove is a River parting this
and Derby-shire, much batling the Meadows thereof, II. Wotton under Weaver,
where God came never. Though it is probable that Wotton is a dismal place,
covered with Hills from the light of the Sun, yet this Proverb, set off with
such a dark ground, does the more plainly discover its own profane Complexion.

Saints.
There was a Grand Massacre committed by the Pagans under Dioclesian, on the
Christians in Britain, (and elsewhere) particularly in the place where
Lichfield now stands, whose names and numbers are utterly unknown.

St. Bertelin, a Brittan of Noble Birth, lived an Eremite in the Woods near
Stafford, anciently called Bithiney.

Wolfadus and Ruffinus, loving in their Lives, in their Death they were not
divided. They were Murdered by their Bloody Father the Pagan, King of Mercia.
There is the Chapel of Burnweston built in a Woody place, whither Ruffinus had
fled for a while from his Fathers fury.

Cardinals.
Reginald Pole, born at Stoverton-Castle, 1500, was second Son to Sir Richard,
Knight of the Garter, and nearly related to King Henry 7. His Mother Margaret,
Countess of Salisbury, was Neice to King Edw. 4. and Daughter to George Duke of
Clarence. He was bred in Corpus-Christi College in Oxford, preferred
afterward Dean of Exeter. King Henry 8. allowing him a Pension, sent him
beyond the Seas. He studied at Padua, conversed much with the Patricians of
Venice, and in fine became a perfect Italian and could not be prevailed upon by
the King or his Friends to return to England, whereupon his Pension was
withdrawn. Living afterward in a Venetian Monastery, he attained great Credit
for his Eloquence, Learning and good Life. It was not long before he was made
Deacon Cardinal, by the Title of St. Mary in Cosmedin, by Pope Paul 3. who sent
him Ambassador to the Emperor, and the French King, to incite them to War
against K. Hen. 8. Afterward he retired to Viterbo in Italy, where his House
was the Sanctuary of Lutherans, and he himself became a Racking, but no through
paced Protestant: Insomuch, that being appointed one of the three Presidents of
the Council of Trent, he endeavored to have Justification determined by Faith
alone. During his living at Viterbo, he was taxed for begetting a Bastard,
which Pasquil Published in Verses affixed to his Pillar. That Blade being made
all of Tongue and Teeth, would not stick to tell where the Pope trod his Holy
Sandals awry: Yet he had some Relation to the Beast in the Apocalypse, in that
under the Name of Pasquil, there has been a successive Corporation of
Satyrists. After the death of Paul 3. Pole was at midnight in the Conclave
chosen to succeed him, the refusal whereof under the notion of a deed of
darkness, was by the Italians, looked upon as a piece of dullness in our
Cardinal. Next day expecting a re-Election, he saw Julius 3. his professed
Enemy chosen in his place: Yet afterward he became Alterius Orbis Papa, when
made Archbishop of Canterbury by Queen Mary. He was a Person free from
Passion. His Youthful Books are full of the Flowers of Rhetoric; whilst those
of his old Age are dry and dull. He dyed few hours after Q. Mary, November 17.
1558.

Prelates.
Edmund Stafford, Brother to Ralph, first Earl of Stafford, and Son to Edmund
Baron of Stafford, was by King Rich. 2. preferred Bishop of Exeter, and under
King Henry 4. was Chancellor of England. He added two Fellowships to
Stapletons-Inn in Oxford, (first named by him Exeter-Colledge) and settled Lands
for the maintenance, and made good Statutes for the good order of the same. He
dyed 1419, and was buried in his own Cathedral.

W. Dudley, Son of John Baron Dudley of Dudley-Castle in this County, and bred
in Vniver. College in Oxford, became Dean of Windsor, and afterward Bishop of
Durham. He dyed at London 1483, and was buried in Westminster.

Edmund Audley, Son to the Lord Audley of Heyley in this County, (whose Surname
was Touchet) was bred in Oxford, where he built the Quire of St. Mary's,
adorning it with a Musical Organ. He was preferred Bishop of Rochester, then of
Hereford, and at last of Salisbury. He dyed at Ramsbury 1624, and was buried in
his own Cathedral, in a Chapel of excellent Artifice, of his own Erection*

Lawyers.
Sir Thomas Littleton Knight, was Son to Thomas VVestcote Esquire and Elizabeth
Littleton his Wife. He was bred in the Study of the Laws, in the Inner Temple,
and became Sergeant and Steward of the Court of the Marshal-sea of the Kings
Household, to Henry 6. By Edw. 4. ( an. 6 reg.) he was made one of the Judges of
the Common Pleas, and an. 15. reg. Created Knight. of the Bath. He deserved as well
of our Common, as Justinian of the Civil Law; whose Book of Tenures is counted
Oraculous in that kind, Commented upon by the Learned Sir Edward Coke. He
Married Joan Daughter and Coheir of W. Boerly of Bromsecraft Castle in Salop,
by whom he had three Sons, Founders of three Families still flourishing. 1.
William, fixed at Frankley in this County, where his Posterity is eminently
extant. 2. Richard, whose Issue remain at Pillerton-Hall in Shropshire. 3.
Thomas, whose Lineage continues in Worcestershire, This Reverend Judge dyed an.
21. of King Edw. 4. and lies buried under a fair Monument in the Cathedral of
Worcester.

Edmund Dudley Esquire was Son to John Dudley Esquire second Son to John Sutton first
Baron of Dudley, though he was slandered by some as being the Son of a
Carpenter. He Married the Daughter and Heir of the Visc. Lisle. Being bred in
the Study of the Laws, he was made one of Puisne Judges, and wrote an excellent
book, Entitled the Tree of the Common Wealth. He was employed by K. Henry 7.
to put his Penal Statutes in Execution, which he did with severity, cruelty and
extortion: K. Henry 8. resigned this Dudley, and Sir Richard Empson his Partner
to Justice, so that they were made a Peace Offering to popular anger 1510,
being Executed at Tower Hill.

Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, was an. 1. Mary made Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, holding his place hardly a year.

Soldiers.
Jo. Bromley Esquire branched from the Bromleys in Shropshire, was born at Bromley.
He recovered the English Standard, which was taken by the French at the battle
near Corby in France: In reward of his Valor, King Henry 5. (whose Arms he had
followed in France) made him a Knight Bachelor, Captain of Dampfront, and
great Constable of Bossevile le Ross in France, and granted by Letters Patent
40 pounds in Land a year, to him and his Heirs. Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier,
having on the same account, conferred on him a yearly Pension of 40 pound
during his life. Sir John dyed about the middle of the Reign of Hen. 6.

John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, Son to Edward Dudley Esquire and would
willingly be reputed of this County, a descendant from the Lord Dudley therein.
He was a proper, wise and valiant Man, and generally (till his last project)
prosperous: But he was also notoriously wanton, intolerably ambitious, a
constant dissembler, prodigiously profuse, so that he had sunk his Estate, had
he not met with a seasonable support of Abbey-Land. King Henry 8. first
Knighted him, then Created him Visc. Lisle, Earl of Warwick, and Duke of
Northumberland. Under Queen Mary, he contrived the settling of the Crown on
Queen Jane, his Daughter in Law, for which Treason he was Executed, an. 1.
Mary, much bemoaned by Martial Men, whom he had formerly endeared in his good
service in the French and Scottish Wars. He left two Sons who survived to great
Honor, Ambrose Earl of Warwick Heir to all that was good, and Robert Earl of
Leicester, Heir to all that was great in his Father.

The Bagnols (or Bagenhalts) were formerly a Family of such remark in this
County, that before the Reign of Hen. 8. there scarce passed an ancient
Evidence, which is not attested by one of that Name; And having for a time sunk
into a low condition, was afterward restored to their genuine Luster, when
Ralph and Nicholas, Sons to John Bagnol of Newcastle in this County, were both
Knighted for their good service, the one in Mussleborough Field, the other in
Ireland. Their Sons Samuel and Henry, were for their Martial merit advanced to
the same degree.

Seamen.
William Minors, Son to Richard Gent. of Hallenbury-Hall, was born at
Vttoxater, who afterward coming to London, became so prosperous a Mariner,
that he has safely returned eleven times from the East Indies, and now
peaceably enjoys what he painfully has gotten, living in or near Hartford,
at this present year 1660.

Writers.
John Stafford a Franciscan, born in Stafford, wrote a Latin History of
England, about 1380.

W. de Lichfield, D. D. and Rector of All-hallowes the Great in Thames Street,
London, a Learned and Godly Man, wrote many Books, one Entitled The complaint
of God unto sinful men. There were found in his Study, after his death 3083
Sermons of his own Writing. He dyed an. 1447. and was buried in the Quire of
his own Church.

Robert Whittington, born at Lichfield, was an indifferent, but conceited
Grammarian. He coped with W. Lilly, (and others) in comparison of whom he was
but a crackling Thorn.

Since the Reformation.
Henry Stafford, Baron of Stafford, was Son to Edw. Duke of Buckingham,
beheaded under K. Hen. 8. The Barony descended unforfeited to this Henry,
placed here not as a trans, but a Cis-Reformation-man for translating the Book
of Dr. Fox, Bishop of Hereford, (a favourer of Luther) into English, Of the
difference of the Power Ecclesiastical and Secular. He dyed 1558, some Months
before the beginning of Q. Elizabeth.

Sampson Erderswik, Esquire born at Sandon, of Ancient and Worshipful Extraction,
was a Gentleman, accomplished with all Noble Qualities, Affability, Devotion
and Learning. Being a great Antiquary, he began a description, E^tituled a View
of Staffordshire, an. 1^93. which has directed me in matters of difficulty
relating to (...) County. He repaired, and new glazed the Church of Sandon,
wherein he Erected a Monument for himself, with his Statue in Stone, and lies
now Interred, dying April 11, 1603. Of him Mr. Cambden says, Venerandae
Antiquitatis fuit Cultor Maximus.

Thomas Allen, descended from Allanus de Buckenhole Lord of Buckenhole, in the
Reign of Edw. 2. was bred in Glocester-Hall in Oxford, a most excellent
Mathematician, where he succeeded to the skill and scandal of Friar Bacon, as
accounted a Conjurer. He was much in favor with Robert Earl of Leicester. His
Writings are detained in some private hands. He dyed toward the end of K.
James.

Edward Leigh of Rushwel-Hall, Esquire (alive) wrote Critica Sac^a, with many other
worthy Works, which will make his judicious Industry known to Posterity.

Elias Ashmole, Esquire (alive) born in Litchfield, a great Antiquary, Chemist,
Herald, Mathematician.

John Lightfoot, D. D. (alive) has deserved well of the Churches of England,
for his exact insight in Hebrew and Rabbinical Learning.

Romish Exile Writers.
W. Gifford, an extract of the Family of Chillington, was a man of much motion.
Being bred in Oxford he went over to Lovain, where he became B. D. whence going
to Paris, he was highly prized by H. Duke of Guise, (who made him Archbishop
of Rhemes) and the Cardinal his Brother, who gave him a Pension of 200 Crowns a
year. He became afterward Dean of St. Pet. the Isle in Rome, then Rector of
the University of Rhemes, and at last a Benedictine at Delaware in Lorain. He
founded a Convent for English Monks at St. Mallower in France, and another at
Paris, for those of the same Profession. He was alive 1611.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir Stephen Jennings Lord Mayor of London, built a fair School at
Wolver-Hampton. Another being erected by Mr. Tho. Allen at Vtceter.

Martin Noel, Esquire born in Stafford, bred Scrivener in London, built, and
largely endowed an Hospital in the Town of his Nativity; the first considerable
Fabric of that kind in this County.

Memorable Persons.
Tho. Tarlton. born at Condover in Shropshire: REM
Here he was in the Field, keeping his Fathers Swine, when a Servant of Robert
Earl of Leicester, (passing this way) was so highly pleased with his odd
Answers, that he brought him to Court, where he became the most famous Jester
to Q. Eliz. When the Queen was out of humor, he could undumpish her at his
pleasure. He prepared in some cases for the highest Favorites, an advantageous
access to her Majesty. In a word, he told the Queen more of her Faults, then
most of her Chaplains, and cured her Melancholy better than all her
Physicians. Much of his Merriment lay in his Looks and Actions, according to
his Epitaph, Hic situs est cujus poterat vox, actio, vultus,
Ex Heraclito reddere democritum.
His Jests never were profane, scurrilous nor satirical, as in which, plurimum
Salis nihil veneni. He dyed about the end of Q. Eliz.

James Sands of Horborn, lived 140, and his Wife 120 years. He outlived 5
Leases of 21 years, which were made to him after his Marriage.

Walt. Parsons, first an Apprentice to a Smith, grew so tall, that a hole was
made for him in the Ground to stand therein, to make him adequate with his
Fellow-Workmen. He afterward was Porter to K. James, a proper place, seeing he
might serve both for Tower and Spy, to give notice (upon occasion) of the
approach of the Kings Enemies. He would make nothing to take two of the tallest
Yeomen of the Guard (like the Gizard and Liver) under his Arms at once, and
order them as he pleased. And his Valor was equal to his Strength. He was
proportionable in all parts, and was of a good temper, disdaining to do an
injury to any single person.

Noted Sheriffs.
Hen. 6. An. 1. Ranul. Com. Cestr. and Henry de Aldicheleia. This Henry was the
first Lord Audley in this County, and Founder of that Noble Family, so long
Famous for Martial Atchievments. K. Henry 3. confirmed to him many Lands of his
own Grant, and the donation of others. Of the latter kind were these following
(the most of them) great Manors. Aldithlege, Coulton, Cold Norton, Betleigh,
Shagbourn, Stanweare, Tunstal, Chaderley, Chell. Normancot, Nerle, Brudnap,
Weston, Hauskley, Bagley, Morton and Heleigh, afterward the prime Seat of the
Lord Audley, who also had great Lands in Devon-shire. Their Heir Males sailing
about the Reign of K. Henry 6. Joan one of their Heirs was Married to Sir John
Touchet, whose Son was Baron Audley, Ancestor to the present Lord Audley, Earl
of Castle-Haven in Ireland.

Edw. 3. An. 18. John de Aston. I have not met with a more Noble Family,
measuring on the Level of flat and un-advantaged Antiquity. They have ever born
a good respect to the Church and Learned Men, ever since Roger de Molend Bishop
of Litchfield, in the Reign of Henry 3. gave Haywood in this County, to Roger
de Aston his Servant, Son to Ralph, and Father to Sir John aforenamed, from
whom are descended in a Lineal Succession. Sir Thomas, Sir Roger, Sir Robert,
John Aston Esquire Sir John, Knight Banneret, Sir Edward, Sir Walter, Sir Edward,
Sir Walter, employed by K. James Ambassador into Spain.

Hen. 6. An. 12. Thomas Stanley, his true name was Audley, for after that Adam
youngest Brother to James Lord Audley, had married the Daughter and Heir of
Henry de Stanley, William their Son, assumed the Surname of Stanley. This
Thomas seems to have been the same person whom K. Henry 6. made Lord Stanley,
Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord Chamberlain of the
Household; and who was Father to Thomas, whom K. Henry 7. Created the first Earl
of Derby.

34. John Delves Esquire (afterward Knighted) was the last of his Ancient Family,
who were fixed in this County, in the Reign of Edward 3. Helene his sole
Daughter and Heir, Married to Robert Sheffield Knight, and Recorder of London,
Ancestor to the present Lord of Moulgrave

Edw. 4. an. 1. Walter Wrotesley was lineally descended from Sir Hugh, one of
the first Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter.

Hen 8. an. 28. John Dudley, was afterward by Hen. 8. Created Duke of
Northumberland.

K. Charles I. W. Bowyer, lineally descended from Thomas, who in the Reign of
Richard 2. Married Katharine, Daughter and Heir to Robert Knipersley. The
Bowyers of Sussex (invited thither some 200 years since by an Earl of
Northumberland) are a younger of these in Stafford.

Battles.
At Hopton-Heath, March, 1643. a fierce Fight happened betwixt the Kings and
the Parliaments Forces, on a ground full of Cony-borroughs, affording bad
footing for the Horse. The Royalists may be said to have got the day, and lost
the Sun which made it, I mean the truly Loyal and Valiant Spencer Earl of
Northampton, leaving a grateful Memory, and a Noble and Numerous Issue.

SUFFOLK.
SVffolk has Norfolk on the North, Cambridgeshire on the West, the German
Ocean on the East, and Essex on the South. It stretches from East to West 45
Miles, though the general breadth be but 20, saving that is somewhat toward
the Sea. The Air thereof is esteemed the best in England, a small parcel near
the Seaside only excepted. There is very good Cheese made in this County,
(whereof the finest are very thin) though yielding to the Butter made here,
which excells both in Quantity and Quality. The Manufacture of Clothing in
this County has been much greater, and Clothiers richer heretofore then in
these times; Many stately Monuments having been formerly erected to their
Memories, and not one in those latter Seasons. The County has no Cathedral,
though generally fair Parish Churches. It had formerly a most magnificent
Abbey-Church in Bury, with three lesser Churches waiting thereon in the same
Churchyard; of these, but two are extant at this day, being stately
Structures. It is generally avouched by all Authors, that Mary youngest Sister
to King Henry 8. Relict to Lewis 12. King of France, afterward Married to Chapter
Brandon D. of Suffolk, was buried in the Abbey-Church in Bury, 1533. Yet her
Corpse could not protect that Church, which was in few years after levelled to
the ground. I read not that her Body was removed, nor does any Monument remain
here to her Memory. The Town of Bu^y is sweetly seated, and fairly built,
especially since 1608. about which time it was defaced with a casual Fire. The
School, a great Ornament to the Town, was founded by K. Edw. 6. and is it self
a Corporation now (as well as ever) flourishing under Mr. Stephens, the able
Master thereof. Amongst the Houses of the Gentry, long Melford, late the House
of the Countess of Rivers, was the first Fruits of the plundering in England.
Then Sommerley-Hall nigh Yarmouth, belonging to the Lady Wentworth, is
Beautified with pleasant Walks, set with Firr-Trees, verdant all the year. As
for others, there are many handsome Houses in the Town of Ipswich, which belong
to Merchants.

Proverbs.
I. Suffolk Milk. No County in England affords better. II. Suffolk fair Maids.
III. Suffolk-stiles. This belongs both to Suffolk and Essex, where there are
troublesome Styles to be clambred over. IV. You are in the right way to
Needham; spoken of those who hasten to Poverty. Needham is a Market Town in
this County, stocked (as it happens) with poor people.

Princes.
Edmund Mortimer, Son to Roger Earl of March, AMP.
was born (probably) in Clare. After the death of Richard 2. he was the next
Heir to the Crown; but was willing to yield the same to K. Henry 4. so he might
receive and enjoy his private Patrimony, kept from him by the said Henry, but
he could obtain neither. Being afterward employed by this King in a War
against Owen Glendor, the Welsh Rebel, he was taken Prisoner, and neglected by
the King, (who had only exposed him to danger under pretense of Honor) he made
a shift to ransom himself. Yet did he but exchange a Welsh for an Irish Prison,
kept 20 years in restraint in his own Castle of Trim, in the end of the Reign
of Henry 4. all the Reign of Henry 5. and the beginning of Henry 6. He dyed an.
1454. without issue, leaving Anne his Sister his Heir, and was buried in Clare.

Saints.
St. Edmund, K. of the E. Angles, was cruelly tortured to death at Hoxton in
this County, by the Pagan Danes, an. 870. His Body was placed in a goodly
Shrine, richly adorned with Jewels, at Bury in this County. Of him a Popish
Author; When the Christians, seeking his Corpse, were lost in a Wood, did call
to one another, where art? where art? where art? The Martyred head answered,
here, here, here. Here is a threefold cord artificially twisted, the full
length of which I leave to the learned Author, and will only add, that if those
Christians could not hear a Treble voice, they were as deaf, as the Forger was
impudent, who first hammered out such a base lie. The Glorious Memory of this
Martyr-King, needs not the rotten Varnish of such Falsities. The Town of Bury
bears his Name.

Robert Grosthead, bred in Oxford, was eminent for Religion and Learning. He
became Bishop of Lincoln, 1235. He wrote 300 Treatises, whereof most are extant
in Manuscript in Westminster Library. He was a stout Opposer of Popish
Oppression. Such his Piety, that though loaded with Curses from the Pope, he
generally obtained the reputation of a Saint. He dyed 1254.

Martyrs.
Rowland Tailor was bred in Cambridge, became Dr. of Laws, and Rector of
Hadley in this County. He was a proper and comely person, a great Scholar,
painful Preacher, charitable to the Poor, and cheerful in his Behavior. The
same Devotion had different looks in several Martyrs, frowning in stern Hooper,
weeping in meek Bradford, and smiling constantly in pleasant Tailor. Indeed
some have censured his merry conceits as trespassing on the gravity of his
calling, especially when just before death. But sure such Romanists who admire
the temper of Sir Thomas More, jesting with the Axe of the Executioner will
excuse our Tailor, for making himself merry with the Stake. But though it be
ill jesting with edged Tools (whereof death is the sharpest) yet since our
Savior has blunted it, his Servants may rather be delighted then dismayed
with it. Not long after, Dr. Tailor set Archbishop Cranmer (his Patron) a Copy
of Patience, who indeed wrote after it, but not with so steady a hand, and so
even a Character of Constancy. Tailor was Martyred at Hadley, Feb. 9. 1555.

Rob. Samuel, Minister of Barfold in this County, was tortured in Prison by the
cruelty of Hopton Bishop of Norwich, and Downing his Chancellor, who allowed
him every day but three Mouthfuls of Bread, and three Spoonfuls of Water. Fain
would he have drunk his own Urine, but his Thirst-parched Body afforded none. I
read how he saw a Vision of one all in White, comforting and telling him, that
after that day, he never should be hungry or thirsty, which came to pass
accordingly, being within few hours after Martyred at Ipswich, August 31. 1555.
There was a Report that his Body when burnt, did shine as bright as burnished
Silver. Some may possibly impute his Vision, and this Appearance, the first to
his own, and the latter to the Beholders Imaginations, or both to the forgery
of those who were more remote and unconcerned. If to Imagination; it is a plain
Concession of the matter of Fact in both, and consequently, a granting of all
such things which can be reasonably proved therein. The Argument I shall use to
prove that his Vision was supernatural, shall be drawn from the Absurdity of
the contrary Opinion; For since Samuel was reduced (as aforesaid) to extreme
weakness, his Body being parched, his Humors fixed, and his Spirits exhausted,
it is impossible that his languishing Fantasy should either produce or
receive so bright an Idaea, without the supernatural Assistance of Divine
Power. As for the appearance of his Body when burnt; I will suppose, ( salvo
jure Omnipotentiae,) that some good Christians who beheld his last Suffering,
did by an Heroic act of Faith, antedate the glorious State of a Future
Resurrection: And as Seaware or mud is sometimes found in the Net, or on the
Line, after the Fish is caught, so they, having stretched out the hand of
Faith for apprehending of a Christian verity, might together with the same,
receive an erroneous imagination, upon the (then) present occasion. After all,
if both instances be charged with subsequent Forgery, as to the matter of Fact,
I shall not insist any longer on them, as not being so proveable by others as
they are probable in themselves.

Cardinals.
Tho. Woolsey, Son to an honest Butcher, was born in Ipswich; one of so vast
undertakings, that our whole Book will not afford room enough for his
Character, the writing whereof I commend to some Eminent person of his
Foundation of Christs-Church in Oxford. He was Cardinal of St. Cecily, and dyed
Heart-broken with grief at Leicester, 1530. without any Monument, of which Dr.
Corbet, (one of his College) thus complains, If Thou art thus neglected, what
shall we
Hope after death that are but Shreds of Thee.
He was not guilty of mischievous Pride, and was generally commanded for doing
Justice, when Chancellor of England.

Prelates.
Herb. Losing, was deeply guilty of Simony in his Youth, otherwise when he was
Old, being then wont to say, When Young we went astray, when Old we will amend.
He dyed 1119. and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Norwich.

Richard Angervile, Son to Sir Richard, was born at Bury, and bred in Oxford.
He was Governor to King Edw. 3. whilst Prince, and successively his Cofferer,
Treasurer of his Wardrobe, Dean of Wells, Bishop of Durham, Chancellor, and
lastly Treasurer of England. He bestowed on the Poor every Week 8 Quarters of
Wheat baked in Bread. When he removed from Durham to Newcastle, (12 Miles) he
used to give 8 pounds to the poor, and so proportionably in other places
betwixt his Palaces. He bequeathed his stately Library to the University of
Oxford. He dyed 1345.

Jo. Paschal, well descended, bred a Carthusian, and D. D. in Cambridge, was
Bishop first of Scutary, then of Landaff under Edw. 3. He dyed 1361.

Simon Sudbury, (alias Tibald) was born at Sudbury. He was made Archbishop of
Canterbury. He began two Synods with Latin Sermons, portending ill success to
Wickliffe and his followers, but overawed by God and John Duke of Lancaster,
he could do him no harm. He was killed in the Rebellion of J. Straw and Wat
Tyler, 1381. being buried in St. Gregory's Church in Sudbury,

Tho. Edwardston, born in Edwardston, bred in Oxford, then Augustinian in
Clare, attended Lionel Duke of Clarence in Italy, when he Married the Daughter
of the Duke of Milan. He wrote some Learned Works, and undertook care of some
Archbishopric (probably) during the vacancy thereof. He dyed at Clare 1396.

Tho. Peverel, well descended, a Carmelite, and D. D. in Oxford, was by Rich.
2. made Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, whence he was removed to Landaff in Wales,
then to Worcester in England, being much esteemed for his Learning, as his
Books do declare. He dyed 1417. and lies buried in his own Cathedral.

Stephen Gardener, was born in Bury St. Edmunds, and (by some) reported to be
Base-Son to Lionel Woodvile, Bishop of Salisbury, though this Bishop was by
others, more truly conceived to be younger then he. He was a Man of admirable
natural parts, and Memory especially, and was bred Dr. of Laws, in Trinity-Hall
in Cambridge. After many great Employments, he was made Bishop of Winchester.
Being Secret in all his own Acts of Cruelty; he often chid Bonner, calling him
Ass, though not so much for killing poor people, as for not doing it more
cunningly. He (chiefly) contrived the six Articles, (Gardiner's Creed) which
caused the death of many, and trouble of more Protestants. He had almost cut
off Queen Kath. Par, and prevented Queen Elizabeth, from being Queen, had not
Divine Providence preserved them. He thoroughly complied with Henry 8. opposed
K. Edw. 6. by whom he was imprisoned and deprived, acted all under Q. Mary, by
whom he was restored, and made Lord Chancellor of England. He is reported to
have avowed (at his death) Justification by the Merits of Christ only. He dyed
at Whitehall, of the Gout, Nov. 12. 1555, and was buried in the Quire, leaving
(as is said) 4000 Marks in ready Money behind him. He improved his power with
Queen Mary, to restore some Noble Families formerly depressed, viz. Some
descendant from the Duke of Norfolk, the Arundels of Warder-Castle, and the
Hungerfords.

Since the Reformation.
John Bale, born at Covie, and bred in Jesus-Colledge in Oxford, was a
Carmelite in Norwich. He was converted to be a Protestant, by the means of
Thomas Lord Wentworth. He wrote a Book de Scriptoribus Britannicis. He was
Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, an. 1552. whence on the death of Edw. 6. he fled,
(some of his servants being slain before his eyes) and in his passage over the
Seas, was taken Prisoner, ransomed, and safely arrived in Switzerland. Under Q.
Eliz: he was made only Prebendary of the Church of Canterbury, being (probably)
a p^^son more learned then discreet, fitter to write then govern, as unable to
command his own Passion, and Biliosus Balaeus passes for his true Character.
He dyed at Canterbury, 1563. and was buried in the Cathedral Church therein.

John May, bred in Cambridge, was Consecrated Bishop of Carlisle, September 27.
1577. and dyed in April 1598.

John Overal, D. D. born at Hadley, was Regius Professor in Cambridge, and
Master of Kath. Hall, afterward Dean of St. Paul's. He was by King Jam^^
employed in the New Translation of the Bible, and made Bishop of Norwich, where
he was a discreet presser of Conformity. He dyed 1618.

Leonard Maw, born at Rendlesham (anciently the Residence of the Kings of the
E. Angles, where K. Redwald kept at the same time a Communion Table, and Altars
for Idols) was Master of Peter House, then of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge,
and in 5 years disengaged that Foundation from a great debt. He was Chaplain to
King Charles whilst he was a Prince, and waited on him in Spain, by whom he was
made Bishop of Bath and Wells. A good Scholar, grave Preacher, mild man, and
gentile in his deportment. He dyed 163.

Ralph Brownrig, D. D. born in Ipswich, was the Son of a Merchant. He was
Fellow of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge, where he to the wonder of the hearers,
performed the Joco-serious part of a Philosophy Act, before King James; no man
had more ability, or less inclination to be Satirical. His Wit was Page, and
not Privy Councellor to his Judgment. He had a Loyal Memory, quick Fancy, solid
Judgment, and fluid Utterance, being not only flumen, but fulmen Eloquentiae.
When Commencing B. D. he chose for his Text, Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given,
not only to believe but suffer, somewhat Prop^etical to him, being afterward
affronted and defied by some, who almost Deified him before, in whose Eyes he
seemed the blacker, for wearing white Sleeves, when 1641. made Bishop of
Exeter; Dr. Young Preaching his Consecration Sermon on this Text, The Waters
are risen, etc. complained of the many invasions which Popular Violence had
made on the Rights and Privileges of Church and State. This Bishop himself was
soon sadly sensible of such Inundations, and yet by the procerity of his parts
and pi^ty, he not only safely waded through them himself, but also (when
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge) by his Prudence raised such Banks, that those
overflowings were not so destructive, as otherwise they would have been to the
University. He continued constant to the Church of England, a Champion of the
needful use of the Liturgy, and for the privileges of Ordination to belong to
Bishops alone. Being unmovable in his Principles of Loyalty, he told Oliver
the Usurper, (demanding his Advice in a matter of great difficulty) My Lord,
the best Counsel I can give you is, give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, with which free Answer, O. C.
was rather silenced then satisfied. A little before his death he was Minister
of both Temples. He dyed December 7. 1659. Aet. 67. The deserved Opinion of his
goodness had peaceable possession in the hearts of the Presbyterian-Party, and
at his Burial, the prime persons of all persuasions were present. Dr. Jo.
Gauden wrote the Memorials of his Life, and has since succeeded him in the
Temple and Bishopric of Exeter.

Statesmen.
Sir Nich. Bacon, Knight, born not far from St. Edmund Bury, of a very ancient
Family, and bred in Ben. College in Cambridge, (in which he built a beautiful
Chapel) after he had studied the Common Law, was made Attorney to the Court of
Wards, whence he was preferred Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, an. 1. Eliz.
1558. He Married Anne, second Daughter to Sir Anth. Cook of Giddy-Hall in
Essex, Governor to King Edw. 6. Queen Elizabeth relied upon him as her Oracle
in Law, who, that he might clear the Point of her Succession, derived her Right
from a Statute which allowed the same, though there was a Statute, whereby the
Queen was made illegitimate, in the days of her Father remained unrepealed, the
rather, because Lawyers maintain, that a Crown once worn clears all defects
of the wearer thereof. He was a Man of rare Wit and deep Experience, though of
a corpulent Body, especially in his old Age, so that he would be not only out
of breath, but also almost out of life, with going to Westminster Hall to the
Star Chamber; According to his Motto, Mediocria Firma, he never attained,
because he never affected any great Estate. He was not for invidious
Structures, but delighted in Domo Domino Pari, such as was his house at
Gorhambury in Hartford. And therefore, when Q. Elizabeth coming thither in
Progress, told him, My Lord, your house is too little for you, no Madam (said
he) But it is your Highness has made me too great for my house. He left rather
a good then a great Estate to his Posterity, whose eldest Son Sir Edward was
the first Baronet of England. He dyed Feb. 20. 1578. and lies buried in the
Quire of St. Paul's. In a Word, he was a good man, a grave Statesman, a Father
to his Country, and a Father to Sir Francis Bacon.

Sir W. Drury, descended of a Worshipful Family long flourishing at Haulsted,
answered his name ( Drury in Sax. Pearl) in the pretiousness of his
disposition, clear and hard, innocent and valiant. His Youth he spent in the
French Wars, his middle in Scotland, and his Old Age in Ireland. He was Knight
Marshal of Barwick, at what time the French had possessed themselves of the
Castle of Edinburgh, in the Minority of King James. Queen Elizabeth employed
this Sir Will. with 1500 to besiege the Castle, which service he right worthily
performed, reducing it within few days to the true Owner thereof. He was
appointed Lord President of Munster, 1575. where he executed impartial justice
in spite of the Opposers thereof; entering Kerry with a competent Train, (of
140 Men) with which he forced his Return through 700 Men, belonging to the Earl
of Desmond, who claimed Kerry as a Palatinate peculiarly belonging to himself.
In the last year of his Life, he was made Lord Deputy of Ireland, dying at
Waterford, 1598.

Sir Robert Naunton, was descended from an ancient Family, extant at (or
before) the time of the Conqueror, who rewarded the Chief of that Name for his
Service, with a great Inheritrix given him in Marriage, whose Lands were then
estimated at 700 pounds a year. For a long time they were Patrons of Alderton
in this County. Sir Robert was bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and
Proctor of the University, 1600. He wrote (in his Youth I conjecture) an
excellent piece called Fragmenta Regalia. He was afterward sworn Secretary of
State to King James, Jan. 8. 1617. which place he discharged with great ability
and dexterity; during which, one Wiemark was called to an Account for saying,
the Head of Sir Waltar Raleigh (beheaded that day) would do very well on the
Shoulders of Sir Robert Naunton, and having alleged in his own Justification,
that two heads were better than one, he was for the present dismissed.
Afterward Wiewark, being with other wealthy persons called on for a
Contribution to St. Paul's, first subscribed 100 pounds at the Council Table,
but was glad to double it, after Mr. Secretary had told him, two hundred were
better then one: Sir Robert dyed 163.. leaving one Daughter, who first was
Married to Paul Visc. Banning, and after to the Lord Herbert, eldest Son to
Philip Earl of Pembroke.

Capital Judges.
Jo. de Metingham, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Reign of Edw.
3. When all the rest of the Judges ( an. 18. Edw. 3.) were fined and outed for
Corruption, this Jo. and Elias de Beckingham continued in their places, whose
innocence was of proof against all Accusations. King Edw. 3. ( an. 20. reg.)
directed a Writ to him, about the stinting of the number of the Apprentices,
and Atturneys at Law, to 140, (or thereabouts) according to the discretion of
this Judge, and his Assistants, whereof a certain number were to be provided
out of every County, -- what may better avail for their Court, and the good of
the people of the Land.

Sir Jo. Cavendish Knight, born at Cavendish in this County, (where his Name
continued until the Reign of King Henry 8.) was made Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, an. 46. Edw. 3. He dyed a violent death, an. 5. Rich. 2. on this
occasion. J. Raw, a Priest, contemporary with J. Straw and Wat Tyler, advanced
Robert Westbroom a Clown, to be King of the Commons in this County, having
50000 followers. These for eight days together, in savage sport, caused the
Heads of great persons to be cut off, and set on Poles, to kiss and whisper in
one another ears. Chief Justice Cavendish chanced to be then in the Country,
to whom they bare a double pique, for his Honesty and Learning. Besides, they
had lately heard that Jo. Cavendish his Kinsman, had killed their Idol Wat
Tyler in Smithfield: Whereupon they dragged the Reverend Judge, with Sir Jo. of
Camb. Prior of Bury, into the Market place there, and beheaded them; whose
innocent blood remained not long unrevenged by Spencer, the Warlike Bishop of
Norwich, by whom this Rascal Rabble of Rebels was routed and ruined 1381.

Sir Robert Broke, a great Lawyer, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
in the Reign of Q. Mary, wrote an excellent Abridgement of the Law. His
Posterity still flourish in a Worshipful Equipage at Nacton, nigh Ipswich in
this County.

Soldiers.
Sir Th. Wentworth, of Nettlested, descended from the Wentworths in Yorkshire,
was Created Baron Wentw. by King Henry 8. He was a Valiant Gentleman, a Cordial
Protestant, and his Family a Sanctuary of such Professors. By his means Jo.
Bale was converted from a Carmelite. The Memory of this Lord is much (but
unjustly) blemished, because Calis was lost the last of Q. Mary, under his
Government, the manner thus; The English being secure by reason of their late
Conquest at St. Quintin, and the Duke of Guise having notice thereof, sat down
before the Town on New Years day. Next day he took the Forts of Rise-bank and
Newnam-Bridge, which ('it is suspected) were betrayed. Within three days, the
Castle of Calis, which commanded the City, and was under the command of Sir
Ralph Chamberlain, was taken, the French being first repulsed back by Sir Anth.
Ager, (the only Man of note who was killed in the Fight) entered the City the
next day, being Twelfth day. Then resistance being in vain, the Lord Wentworth
Deputy thereof, was forced to take what terms he could get, that the Townsmen
should depart (though plundered to a groat) with their Lives, and himself, with
49 more should remain Prisoners to be put to ransom. Queen Mary might thank her
self for losing this Key of France, because hanging it at her side with so
slender a string, there being but 500 Soldiers effectually in the Garrison.
The Lord Wentworth was condemned for High Treason, during his absence, but
Queen Mary, soon after dying, he was tried and acquitted by his Peers, in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, though Sir Jo. Harlston Governor of Rise-bank, and
Sir Ralph Chamberlain Governor of Calis-Castle were both condemned, but their
Judgment was remitted. This Lord played in a manner Rubbers, when his Head lay
at Stake, and having lost the fore, recovered the after-game. He dyed very
Aged, 1590.

Seamen.
Th. Cavendish, of Trimley, Esquire intending foreign discoveries, on his own cost
Victualled and Furnished three Ships (the least of Fleets) viz. the Desire,
Admiral, 120 Tuns, the Content, Vice Admiral, 40, and the Hugh-Gallant,
Rere-Admiral, 40 Tuns; all three manned with 123, and setting to Sea from
Plymouth, July 21. 1586. Entering the mouth of the Magellan Straits, 7 Jan.
following, where they suffered great hunger; Mr. Cavendish named a Town there
Port-Famine. The Spaniards intending to fortify the Straits, and engross the
passage, were smitten with such a Mortality, that scarce 5 of 500 did survive.
On Feb. 24. they entered the South Sea, and frequently landed, as they saw
occasion. Many their Conflicts with the Natives, more with the Spaniards,
coming off gainers in most, and savers in all encounters, that at Quinterno
excepted, April 1. 1587. when they lost 12 men of a^^ount, the cause that they
afterward sunk the Rere-Admiral, for want of Men to manage her. Of the many
prizes he took, the St. Anne was the most considerable, being the Spanish
Admiral of the S. Sea, of 700 Tuns, and 190 Men. There were 122000 Pezos (each
worth 8 shillings) of Gold, with other Rich Lading, as Silks and Musk. Mr.
Cavendish landed the Spaniards, and left them plentiful Provisions. Surrounding
the East Indies, and returning for England, the Content (whose Men were
mutinous) stayed behind. Mr. Cavendish safely landing at Plymouth, Sept. 9.
1588. Amongst his Men, three most remarkable, Mr. John Way, their Preacher, Mr.
Th* Fuller of Ipswich, their Pilote, and Mr. Fr. Pretty of Eyke, in this
County, who wrote the History of their Voyage. Thus having circumnavigated the
whole Earth, let his Ship be no longer termed the Desire, but the Performance.
He was the third Man, and second Englishman of such universal undertakings. In
his next Voyage, begun 26 August 1591. he was severed from his Company the
November following, near Port-desire (by him formerly so named,) in the
Megellan-Straits, and never seen or heard of afterward.

Physicians.
W. Butler, born at Ipswich, was Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, where he
became the Aesculapius of our Age. He was the first English^man who quickened
Galenical Physic with a touch of Paracelsus; Being excellent at the instant
discovery of a cadaverous face, at the first sight of sick Prince Henry, he got
himself out of the way; knowing himself to be Prince of Physicians, he would be
observed accordingly: Complements would prevail nothing with him, entreaties
but little, surely threatenings would do much, and a witty jeer would do any
thing. Neatness he neglected into slovenliness, and accounted cuffs to be
manacles. He made his humoursomness to become him, wherein some of his
Profession have rather aped then imitated him, who kept the tenor of the same
surliness to all persons. He was a good Benefactor to Clare-Hall, and dyed
1621, he was buried in the Chancel of St. Mary's in Cambridge, leaving nothing
to his only Brother, because he had turned Papist beyond the Seas.

VVriters.
Humphrey Necton, a Carmelite in Norw. and the first D. D. of his Order in
Cambridge, flourished under Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. and dyed, 1303.

Jo. Horminger, Traveling in Italy, where he heard some Italians villifie
England, as being only fruitful of a barbarous people, wrote in her defense, an
Epitome of the Commodities thereof, and (after his return) Of the Profit and
Pleasure of England, He flourished 1310.

Th. of Ely, born in Monks-Ely, was a Carmelite, the second D. D. of his Order
in Cambridge. He traveled over the Seas, and kept Lectures at Bruges in
Flanders till his death, about 1320.

Rich. Lanham, a Carm. in Ipswich, and D. D. in Oxford, was a great Adversary
to the Wicklevites. His Learning is attested by the Books he left to Posterity.
Some say he was beheaded by the Rebellious Crew of Wat Tyler, others, that he
dyed a natural death at Bristol, 1381.

Jo. Kinyngham, a Carm. in Ipswich, then bred in Oxford, was prefect of his
Order in England and Ireland, Confessor to Jo of Gaunt and his Lady. He was the
first who encountered Wickliffe in the Schools of Oxford, and disputed with
great ingenuity and modesty, whereupon his good Antagonist pra^ed heartily,
that his Judgment might be convinced. He dyed 1399. and was buried at York*

Jo. Lydgate, born at Lydgate, was a Benedictine in St. Edmund Bury; the best
Author of his Age in Poetry and Prose. He wrote of himself as follows, I wear a
habit of Perfection,
Although my Life agrees not with the same, etc.
He dyed about 1444. and was buried in his own Convent.

Jo. Barningham, born at Barningham, was a Carm. in Ipswich, and D. D. in
Oxford, and in Sorbon the Cockpit of Controversies. He had a subtle Wit, and
was a great Master of Defense in Schools, both to guard and hit. He wrote 4
fair Volumes. He dyed 1448.

Jo. of Bury, an Augustinian in Clare, and D. D. in Cambridge, was Prove. of his
Order, through England and Ireland, and a great Opposer of Wicklevites,
flourishing 1460.

Th. Scroope, born at Bradley, but descended from the Lord Scroope in
Yorkshire, was a Benedictine, a Carmelite in Norwich, then an Anchorite 20
years, afterward (by papal dispensation) Bishop of Drummore in Ireland, and at
last an Anchorite again, yet using once a Week to walk on his bare Feet, and
Preach the Decalogue, in the Villages round about. About 1425. being clothed
with Sackcloth, and girt about with an Iron Chain, he cried out in the Streets,
That new Jerusalem was shortly to come down, etc. Rev. 21. and that with great
Joy he saw the same in the Spirit, Th. Waldensis the great Anti-VVicklivite,
offended thereat, protested it was a great scandal to the Church. Scroop lived
very nigh 100 years, being accounted a Holy man. He was buried at Le^^offe,
1491.

Since the Reformation.
Rich. Sibs born nigh Sudbury, was Fellow in St. John's College in Cambridge,
afterward Preacher to the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn, whence he was
chosen Master of St. Kath. Hall in Cambridge which he found in a low condition,
but left replenished with Scholars, beautified, and better endowed. He was most
eminent for Christian humility. Of all points of Divinity, he most pressed that
of Christ's Incarnation or Humility, the true Original whence he copied his own.
He dyed 1631.

W. Alabaster, born at Hadley, was Fellow in Trin. College in Cambridge; a
most rare Poet, witness his Tragedy of Roxana, so admireably Acted in that
College, and so pathetically, that a Gentlewoman present thereat, at the
hearing of the last words thereof, Sequar, Sequar, so hideously pronounced,
fell distracted, and never after recovered her Senses. He was Chaplain to
Robert Earl of Essex in Calis Voyage, where he staggered in his Religion, and
afterward turned Papist; though he returned both to his Religion and Country,
where he was made Preb. of St. Paul's, and Rector of Tharfield in Hartford. He
was an excellent Hebrician. He dyed 163..

Samuel Ward, was born at Haveril, where his Father had been a Famous Minister,
according to his Epitaph, Quo si quis scivit scitius
Aut si quis docuit doctius
At rarus vixit sanctius
Et nullus tonuit fortius.
Grant some of knowledge greater store,
More Learned some in teaching,
Yet few in Life did Lighten more,
None thundered more in Preaching.
Sam. was bred in Sidn. College in Cambridge, and became a great Scholar, and
excellent Preacher. Being Minister in Ipswich, he gained the Affections of the
people, by the tender care he had of them, yet he had his Foes as well as
Friends, who complained of him to the High Com. where he met with some
molestation. He had three Brethren, and it was said, that these four put
together would not make up the abilities of their Father; nor were they
offended with this Hyperbole: One of them (lately dead) followed the Counsel of
the Poet, Ridentem dicere verum, Quis vetat? having in a jesting way delivered
much smart truth of the times. Sam. dyed 163..

Jo. Boise, born at Elmeseth, bred in Cambridge, was of the Quorum in
Translating the Bible, and whilst Chysostome lives, Mr. Boise shall not dye,
such his learned pains on him in the Edition of Sir H. Savil. He dyed about the
beginning of the Civil Wars.

Romish Exile Writers.
Robert Southwell, wrote many Books? and was reputed a dangerous Enemy to the
State, for which he was Imprisoned, and Executed, March 3. 1595.

Benefactors to the Public.
Elizabeth, third Daughter of Gilb. Earl of Clare, and Wife to Jo. Burgh Earl
of Vlster in Ireland, had her greatest Honor from Clare in this County. She
Founded Clare-Hall in Cambridge, an. 1343.

Sir Simon Air, born at Brandon, first an Vpholster, then a Draper in London,
whereof he was Lord Mayor 1445, on his own cost built Leaden Hall, for a common
Garner of Corn to the City. He left 5000 Marks to charitable uses. He dyed
Sept. 18. an. 1459. and is buried in the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth in
Lumbard-Street, London.

Th. Spring, the rich Clothier, was born (I believe) at Laveham. He built the
Carved Chapel of Wainscot, on the North side of the Chancel, as also the
Chapel at the South side of the Church. He dyed 1510, and lies buried in his
own Chapel.

Since the Reformation.
W. Coppinger was born at Bucks-hall, in this County, where his Family
flourishes in good esteem. He was bred a Fishmonger in London, whereof he
became Lord Mayor 1512. He gave the half of his (great) Estate to pious uses. I
am sorry to see this Gentleman's ancient Arms subtracted (in point of honor)
by the addition of a superfluous Bordure.

Sir W. Cordal Knight, S. N.
had a fair Estate in Long-Melford, and was well descended. He became a
Barrister, Speaker of the Parliament, and Privy Counselor, and Master of the
Rolls, to Queen Mary. He founded a fair Almshouse at Melford, and left a large
allowance to the poor, for Diet and Clothes, He continued Master of the Rolls
till the day of his death, 23 Eliz.

Sir Robert Hicham Knight, and Sergeant at Law, born at or near Nacton,
purchased the Manor of Framlingham from the Earl of Suffolk, and entered into
the same, after great and many intervening Obstacles. He left a great part of
his Estate to pious uses, and principally to Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge. He
dyed a little before the beginning of the Civil Wars.

Memorable Persons.
Jo. Cavendish Esquire born at Cavendish, was servant to Richard 2. when Wat Tyler
played Rex in London, whom he, in assistance of Sir W. Walworth Lord Mayor of
London, dispatched by giving two or three mortal wounds. The beginning of the
bustle, was that Wat took it mightily in dudgeon that Sir Jo. Newton did not
make a mannerly approach to him, upon which the said Lord arrested Wat, and
wounded him with his Dagger. Hence the Arms of London were augmented with a
Dagger. King Richards discretion appeared very much in appeasing the tumult,
which happened 1381.

Sir Th. Cook Knight, and Sir W. Capel Knight, born, the first at Lavenham, the
later at Stoke-Neyland, were bred Drapers in London, and were Lord Mayors of
the City. Sir Will. is reported, after a large entertainment for King Henry 7.
to have burnt many Bonds, in which the King stood obliged to him, and at
another time to have drank a dissolved Pearl (which cost him many hundreds) in
an Health to the King. Sir Th. was in danger of his Life, for lending Money in
the Reign of K. Edw. 4 Both dyed in Age, Honor and Riches, these transmitted
to their Posterity: The Cooks flourishing at Giddy-hall, and the Capels at
Hadham in Hartford. Note Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Will. Capel, was Married to
Sir W. Pawlet Marquess of Winchester and Mildred, descended from Sir Th. Cook,
to VV. Cecil Lord Burleigh, both their Husbands being Lord Treasurers of
England. Sir Tho. lies buried in the Church of Augustine Friars in London; Sir
VV. Capel in St. Bartholomews behind the Exchange.

Noted Sheriffs.
Q. Eliz. An. 18. Jo. Higham, Arm. (the ancient Surname of the Lords Montaign
in France) was descended from Sir Clem. a Potent Knight.

20. Robert Jermin, a pious Man, and a great Benefactor to Emanuel College,
and a potent man, was Father to Sir Th. (Privy Councellor and Lord Chamberlain
to King Charles I.) Grandfather to Tho. and Hen. Esquire the younger of these being
Lord Chamberlain to our present Queen Mary, and sharing in her Majesty's
sufferings, was by King Charles II. made Baron and Earl of St. Albans.

23. Nich. Bacon, Mil. was the first Baronet in England.

36. Tho. Crofts, Arm. was Grandfather to -- Crofts, who was created Baron
Crofts, by K. Cha. II.

Sir Simond Dewes was Grandfather to Adrian, descended from the Lords of Kessel
in Gelderland, who came thence in the time of their Civil Wars, in the Reign of
Henry 8. He was bred in Cambridge, and became a great Antiquary. He observed
that the Ordinances of the late long Parliament, did in Bulk and Number exceed
all the Statutes made since the Conquest. He dyed about 1653.

SURREY.
SVrrey has Middlesex on the North, Kent on the East, Sussex on the South,
Hant and Bark-shire on the West. It is (very near) a Square of 22 Miles, the
Skirts whereof are fruitful, and the inward parts barren, though generally the
Air be clear, and the ways clean. Here is the most and best Fullers Earth,
dug up near Rygate. It is worth four pence a Bushel at the Pit, and the
Transportation thereof is prohibited. The County likewise affords good Trouts
and VVall-nuts, and the best Box growing about Darking. In this Shire there is
the best Gardening for Profit; King James about the end of his Reign, gave 2000
pounds to Sir Francis Crane, to build a House at Morelack, for setting up a
Manufacture of Tapestry, and one Francis Klein a German, was the designer
thereof, and united the Italian and Dutch perfections in that Mys^^^y. This
Klein afterward settled in London, where he had a gratuity of 100 pounds per
An. until the beginning of the late Civil Wars. The chief Buildings are
Richmond, built by King Henry 7. and most pleasantly seated on the Thames;
Non-such built by King Henry 8. answers its Name for complete Architecture,
though exceeded by Wimbleton in point of a neat Situation. This was built by
Sir Th. Cecil in 88. Of Medicinal Waters, those at Ebsham, (found out 1618, in
a dry season, the Water being first observed in a Horse or Neats-footing) run
through some Veins of Alume, and are abstersive and sanative, being outwardly
and inwardly taken. The wonder in this County is, that there is a River (termed
Mole) at a place called the Swallow, that sinketh into the Earth, and surgeth
again, some two miles off nigh Letherhead, and it is said, a Goose was put in,
and came out again with Life; if so, there was a wonderful preservation of the
Goose! There is also a Vault nigh Rygate, capable to receive 500 Men, which was
anciently the Receptacle of some great person, a proper place it seems, for the
exercise of Valor, (if the old saying in arenam descendere be capable of a
litteral sense) affording the finest Sand, and having several Rooms therein.

Proverbs.
I. The Vale of Holms-dale, never won, ne never shall. Holms-dale, (partly in
this County, and partly in Kent) when in the hands of the Saxon Kings was
generally victorious; yet William the Conqueror having vanquished Harold,
passed through the middle of it, in his way to London.

Princes.
Henry, eldest Son of King Henry 8. and Queen Katharine Dowager, was born at
Richmond, an. 1509. Jan. 1. and lived but about two Months. K. Hen. 8.
alleged his untimely death, with that of another Son by the same Queen, as a
punishment, for begetting them on the Body of his Brothers Wife. This Prince
was buried in Westminster.

Henry of Oatlands, 4th, and youngest Son of King Charles I. and Queen Mary was
born at Oatlands, 1640. He was commonly called Duke of Gloucester, though not
solemnly Created. In the year 1654, almost as soon as his two Elder Brethren
had removed themselves into Flanders, he found a strong practice in some of the
Queens Court, to seduce him to the Court of Rome, whose temptations he resisted
beyond his years, and thereupon was sent by them into Flanders. He had a great
Appetite to Learning, and a quick Digestion, able to take as much as his Tutors
could teach him. He fluently could speak many, understood more Modern Tongues.
He was able to express himself in matters of importance presently, properly,
solidly, to the Admiration of such who trebled his Age Judicious his Curiosity
to enquire into Navigation, and other Mathematical Mysteries. His Courtesy set
a luster on all, and commanded men's Affections to love him. He dyed at
White Hall, Sept. 13. 1660. and was buried in the Chapel of King Henry 7.

Confessors.
Eleanor Cobham, Daughter to the Lord Cobham of Sterborough Castle in this
County, was afterward Married to Humphrey Plantag. Duke of Gloucester. She was
persecuted for being a VVicklevite, and for other heinous crimes, under Hen. 6.
an. 14.

Prelates.
Nich. of Fernham, (or de Fileceta) was born at Fernham, and bred a Physician
in Oxford. After he had traveled, he became Physician to King Henry 3. by whom
he was made Bishop of Chester, afterward of Durham. Having written many Books,
he dyed 1257.

Walt. de Merton, was thrice Chancellor under K. Hen. 3. and Bishop of
Rochester. He founded Merton-Colledge in Oxford, and dyed 1277.

Th. Cranley, born (probably) at Cranley, was the first Warden of New-Colledge
in Oxford, thence preferred Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, where he was made
Chancellor by King Henry 4. and Chief Justice thereof by King Henry 5. He wrote
a terse Poem to the King, of the Rebellious humor of the Irish. He was a great
Scholar, Divine, and an excellent Preacher; Tho. of Marleborough thus
(blasphemously) bespeaks him, Thou art fairer then the Children of Men, full of
Grace are thy Lips. He dyed at Faringdon, and lies buried in New-Colledge
Chapel.

Nich. West, born at Putney, and bred in Cambridge, was in his youth a Rakel in
grain, for something crossing him in the Kings-Colledge, he in revenge,
secretly set the Masters Lodgings on fire; but naughty Boys sometimes make good
Men. He reformed himself, and in process of time was transformed into a great
Scholar and Statesman, being preferred Bishop of Ely, and employed in many
Foreign Embassies. He rebuilt the Masters Lodgings (part of which he had
burnt) firm and fair from the ground. He lived in great State, and kept a
bountiful house, dying 1533.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Parkhurst, born at Gilford, and bred in Oxford, was Tutor, yea Mecenas to
Jo. Jewel: He was Beneficed at Clear in Gloucestershire. He laid himself out in
the Works of Charity and Hospitality. He used to examine the pockets of such
Oxford Scholars as repaired to him, and always recruited them with
necessaries. Yet after the death of King Edward 6. he had not a house to hide
himself in, flying beyond the Seas (in the Reign of Queen Mary) and being
robbed before his return of that little he had, by some Searchers appointed for
that purpose. Being returned into England, he was by Queen Elizabeth made
Bishop of Norwich, 1560. His Epigrams declare his excellency in Poetry. He dyed
1574.

Tho. Ravis, born at Maulden, of worthy Parentage, was Dean of Christ's Church
in Oxford, of which University he was twice Vice Chancellor. He was made
Bishop of Gloucester, whence he was removed to London, where he dyed 1609. and
lies buried in his Cathedral.

Rob. Abbot, D. D. born at Guilford, principal of Bal. College, and Kings
Professor of Divinity in Oxford, was a man whom every liberal Employment did
beseem. He routed the Reasons of Bishop, the Romish Champion, that he never
could rally them again. His preferment to the Bishopric of Salisbury was late,
and his continuance therein but short, being hardly warm in his See, before
cold in his Coffin. He was one of 5 Bishops whom Salisbury saw in 6 years; yet
whilst-Bishop, he saw his Brother George at the same time Archbishop of
Canterbury. The delay of his Advancement is imputed to his Humility, to his
Foes (who traduced him for a Puritan) and to his Friends, who were loath to
adorn the Church with the spoil of the University, and mar a Professor to make
a Bishop.

George Abbot born at Guilford, (one of that happy Ternion of Brothers, whereof
two eminent Prelates, the third Lord Mayor of London) was bred in Oxford. A
pious Man, and excellent Preacher, as his Lectures on Jonah do declare. He was
mounted from a Lecturer to a Dignitary, and was never incumbent on any Living
with Cure of Souls, nor acquainted with the trouble of taking Tithes; which is
assigned by some as the cause of his severity to Ministers when brought before
him. Being Chaplain to the Earl of Dunbar, then Omni-prevalent with King James,
he was unexpectedly preferred Archbishop of Canterbury. Two things are charged
on his Memory, first, that he respected his Secretary above his Chaplains,
secondly, that he connived at the spreading of Nonconformity. He was much
humbled with a casual homicide of a Keeper of the Lord Zouch's in Bramzel-Park,
though he was soon after solemnly acquitted from any irregularity therein. In
the Reign of King Charles I. he was Sequestered, say some, on the old account of
that Homicide, though others say, for refusing to License a Sermon of Dr.
Sibthorps. Probably his former obnoxiousness for that casualty was renewed on
the occasion of such refusal. He dyed 1633, having Erected a large Hospital
with liberal maintenance at Guilford.

Rich. Corbet, D. D. born at Ewel, became Dean of Christ's Church, then Bishop
of Oxford; an high Wit, and most excellent Poet, and of a courteous Carriage.
He was afterward advanced Bishop of Norwich, where he dyed 1635.

Statesmen.
Tho. Cromwell, born at Putney: Of whom at large in my Church Hist.

William Howard, Son to Thomas Duke of Howard, was by Queen Mary created Baron
of Effingham, and made Lord Admiral of England. He was one of the first
Favorers and Furtherers of the discovery of Russia. He died 154.. Whose Son

Chapter Howard succeeded his Father in the Admiralty, an hearty Gentleman, and
cordial to his Sovereign, of a most proper person, one reason why Q. Elizabeth
reflected so much upon him. The first Evidence he gave of his Prowess was, when
the Emperors Sister the Spouse of Spain, with a Fleet of 130 Sails, passed the
narrow Seas, his Lordship accompanied with 10 Ships only environed their Fleet,
and enforced them to stoop gallant, and strike Sail. In 88. at the first News
of the Spaniards approach, he towed at a Cable with his own hands, to draw out
the Harbor bound Ships into the Sea. He was Commander of the Sea Forces, at
the taking of Cadiz, and for his good Service there, he was made Earl of
Nottingham. Having been a Guest at the Consecration of Matthew Parker at
Lambeth, many years after, he confuted those Lies which the Papists tell of the
Nags Head in Cheapside. He resigned his Admiralty in the Reign of King James to
the Duke of Buckingham, and dyed about the end of that Kings Reign.

Seamen.
Sir Robert Dudley, Son to Robert Earl of Leicester, was born at Shene, became
a most complete Gentleman, and endeavored in the Reign of King James, to prove
his legitimacy (his Mother being Douglas Shefeld) and meeting with much
opposition from the Court, in distaste left the Land, and went over into Italy,
where he became a Favorite to the Duke of Florence, who used his directions in
all his Buildings. Legorn was much beholding to him for its fairness and
firmness, as chief Contriver of both. Upon his refusal to come home into
England, all his Lands there were siezed on by the King. These his losses
doubled the Dukes love to him, as being a much meriting Person, an excellent
Mathematician, Physician and Navigator. In Queen Elizabeth's days he had sailed
with three small Ships to the Isle of Trinidad, in which Voyage he sunk and
took nine Spanish Ships, whereof one an Armada of 600 Tun. Ferd. 2. Emperor of
Germany, conferred on him and his Heirs the Title of a Duke of the Sacred
Empire.

Writers.
Nich. Ockham, a Franciscan in Oxford, where he was the 18th. public Lecturer
of his Convent, flourished 1320.

W. Ockham, born in Ockham, was bred under J. Scotus, whose Principles he
afterward disproved, heading the Nominals against the Reals, followers of
Scotus. This Will. undertook Pope Jo. 23. and gave a Mortal wound to his
Temporal Power over Princes. The Court of Lewis of Bavaria, the Emperor being
then the Sanctuary of this Will; yet he was Excommunicated by the Pope, and
condemned for an Heretic by the Masters of Paris, who burnt his Books, which
were much esteemed by Luther; yet the Pope taking Wit in his Anger, Will. was
afterward restored to his State, and the Reputation of an acute Schoolman, his
Epitaph reflects on his Spirit of Contradiction; Sed jam mortuus est ut apparet
Quod si viveret, id negaret.
But now he is dead as plainly does appear,
Yet would deny it, were he living here.


He flourished under K. Edw. 3. and dying 1330, was buried at Monchen in
Bavaria.

Jo. Holbrook, a profound Philosopher and Mathematician, was much esteemed of
the English Nobility. He is conjectured to have flourished in the 14th. Century.

George Ripley, see Yorkshire.

Since the Reformation.
H. Hammond, D. D. born at Chertsey, was Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford,
till preferred Canon of Christ's Church, and Orator of the University. He may be
called an Angelical Doctor, for his Countenance, Sanctity, Meekness, Charity,
(this demonstrated by his keeping many a poor Royalist from famishing,
bestowing yearly (as was believed) 200 pounds for their relief,) and his
Knowledge, being general in Antiquity, Controversy, etc. His excellent
Controversial Treatises, Comments, and Practical Catechism, do abundantly
declare the accomplishments of his Mind, and the stability of his great Soul.
He dyed of the Stone, at West wood in Worcestershire. By his Will he empowered
Dr. Humphrey Henchman (since Bishop of Sarum) his sole Executor, to expend,
according to his discretion, in relief of poor people, not exceeding 200 pounds.

Romish Exile Writers.
Nich. Sanders, born at Charlewood in this County (where his Family still
continues Worshipful) was bred Batchelour of the Laws in New-Colledge. Going
to Rome, he was there made D. D. and Kings Professor thereof at Lovain. He was
Learned and Malicious, and presumed to write Passages without Truth, because on
a subject beyond Memory. His Libellous Treatise has been sufficiently answered
by that Learned Baronet, Sir Roger Twisden, a great Champion in a good Cause,
in the defense of which, and in the confounding of malicious falsehoods, he was
protected by the Kings ancient Prerogative, justified by the Laws of the Land,
and directed by the plainest Rules of right Reason. It is observable that
Sanders, who surfeited with Falsehoods, was famished for lack of food in
Ireland, 1520.

Benefactors to the Public.
Henry Smith Esquire born at VVandsworth, was Alderman of London; He gave 6000
pounds to buy Lands for a perpetuity, for the relief and setting of the poor to
work, in Croidon, Kingston, Guilford, Darking, Fernham, Rigate, 1000 pounds for
each place. Besides many other liberal Legacies bequeathed to pious uses. He
dyed Jan. 13. 1627. 79 Aet. and lies buried in the Chancel of VVandsworth.

Memorable Persons.
Elizabeth Weston, a Virgin of gentile Extraction, was a great Scholar,
flourishing about 1600, of whom Janus Dousa, Angla vel Angelica es, vel prorsus
es Angelus; immo,
Si Sexus vetat hoc, Angelus est Animus.
Joseph Scaliger praises her no less in Prose. There is an Ancient and
Worshipful Family of her Name flourishing at Sutton in this County. The Birth
and Quality of this Virgin, had she lived in the days of King James, and been
presented to him as another Maid was, would have left no room for that Kings
inquisitiveness, in asking if she could spin, as he did in the case of the
other, who could Speak and Write pure Latin, Greek and Hebrew.

Noted Sheriffs.
Edw. 3. An. 1. Andrew Sackvil; The Family of the Sackvils is as ancient as any
in England, taking their Name from Sackvil, a Town of their Possession in
Normandy. Before this time Sir Robert Sackvil, Knight, younger Son of Herbran,
was fixed in England, and gave the Manor of Wickham in Suffolk, to the Abbey
of St. John de Bap. in Colchester, about the Reign of Will. Rufus. Sir Jo. his
Son, was one of the Assistance to 25 Peers, appointed to see the Liberties of
Magna Charta performed; whose Son Richard was a principal Baron, (of whose
house Hubert de Avesty held some Lands) whose Granchild Sir. Jordan was taken
Prisoner at the Battle of Emesham, in the Reign of Henry 3. for siding with the
Barons against him, whose Son Andrew (the Kings Ward) was imprisoned in Dover,
an. 3. Edw. 1. and afterward, by the Kings command Married Ermyntide, a Lady
of the Household of Queen Eleanor, whereby he regained a great part of his
Inheritance, which had been formerly forfeited; whose Son Andrew (first above
mentioned) was Ancestor to the truly Honorable Rich. now E. of Dorset.

Note Surrey and Sussex generally had distinct Sheriffs until the Reign of Edw.
2. when they were united; then again divided an. 9, Eliz. united an. 13.
divided agin an. 12. K. Charles I.

Rich 2. An. 19. Jo. Ashburnham, was Ancester to Sir Jo. who Married Elizabeth,
Daughter of Sir Tho. Beaumont (afterward Created Viscountess Cramond in
Scotland) and had by her 2 Sons, John of the Bed Chamber to K. Charles I. and
II. and William Cofferer to his Majesty, who will build their Name a story
higher to Posterity. And note this Family is of stupendous Antiquity, the
chief whereof was Sheriffs of Sussex and Surrey 1066; when VV. Duke of Normandy
invaded England, to whom K. Harauld wrote to assemble Posse ^omitatuum to make
resistance against that Duke. And the eminency has equalled the Antiquity
thereof, having been Barons of England, in the Reign of King Henry 3.

Hen. 6. An. 29. Jo. Lewkenor, (afterward Knight) (with 3000 others) were
slain in the Battle of Teuksbury, valiantly fighting under P. Edward, Son to K.
Hen. 6.

Hen. 7. An. 12. Math. Brown, Arm. was Ancestor (though not in the direct Line)
to Sir Anthony Standard Bearer of England, second Husband of Lucy, fourth
Daughter to Jo. Nevel Marquess Montacute, and Grandfather to Sir Anthony,
(whom Q. Mary created Visc. Montacute, and whom Q. Eliz. much esteemed) direct
Ancestor to the right Honorable the present Visc. Montacute, who has a place,
and Vote in Parliament, by an express clause in his Patent, but otherwise no
particular Title of a Baron.

Hen. 8. An. 10. Nich. Carew, Mil. a jolly Gentleman, was made Knight of the
Garter by, and Master of the Horse to Hen. 8. He built the fair house at
Beddington in this County, which by the advantage of the water is a Paradise of
Pleasure. It Is said K. Hen. 8. being then at Bowls, gave this Knight
opprobrious Language, betwixt jest and earnest, to whom the other returned a
stout Answer, that was inconsistent with his Allegiance, which cost him his
Life. The last of this Surname adopted a Throgmorton, on condition to assume
the Name and Arms of Carew. From him is Lineally descended Sir Nich. Carew
Knight, who I confidently hope, will continue and increase the Honor of his
ancient Family.

Edw. 6. An. 1. Tho. Carden, Mil. was 5 years before Endited for Heresy, but
K. Henry preserved him with some others of his Privy Chamber, being in the same
circumstances.

Q. Eliz. An. 20. George Goring; whose names sake Sir George Goring, was by
Charles I. created Baron of Hurst Per-point in Sussex, and afterward Earl of
Norwich. He was the only instance of a Person of Honor, who found Pardon for
his Loyalty to his Sovereign: Afterward going beyond the Seas, he was happily
instrumental in advancing the Peace betwixt Spain and Holland, and since the
Restoration of K. Charles II. he was made Captain of his Majesty's Guard.

Note that about 140 years ago, one Mr. Clark hearing that the Market-house of
Farnham in this County, (begun by him) was not generally approved of, but liked
by some, and disliked by others, who found fault with the Model thereof, and
discouraged the Workmen, caused this Distich to be writ in that House; You who
do like me, give Money to end me,
You who dislike me give Money to mend me.
I wish the Advice may be practiced all overt his County.

SUSSEX.
Sussex has Surrey on the North, Kent on the East, the Sea on the South, and
Hantshire on the West. It extends along the Sea 60 miles in length, though
not exceeding 20 in breadth. A fruitful County, though very dirty for
Travelers. All the Rivers in this County have their Fountains and Falls
therein. It is sufficient Evidence of the plenty of this County, that the Toll
of the Wheat, Corn and Malt, growing or made about, and sold in the City of
Chichester, does amount yearly at a halfpenny a Quarter, to 60 pounds and
upwards. Of Commodities, Iron is plentiful in this County. It is to be hoped
that for the preservation of Woods, a way may be found out to Chark Sea-coal in
such manner as to render it useful for the making of Iron. Then Talk, produced
in great abundance in this County, is an excellent white Wash, and a great
astringent. There is a Bird called Wheat-Ears (so named, because fattest when
Wheat is ripe) which is peculiar to this County; a fine Bird, though in season
only in the heat of Summer. A certain Gentleman concluded a great Lord, a man
of very weak parts, because once he saw him at a Feast, feed on Chickens, when
there were Wheat-Ears on the Table. This County abounds with more Carpes,
then any other in England, and is eminent for an Arundel Mullet, a Chichester
Lobster, a Shelsey Cockle, and an Amerly Trout. The Manufactures are great
Guns, made of the Iron in this County. A Monk in Mentz (some 300 years since)
is generally reputed the first Founder of them, when about the same time a
Soldier found out Printing. Jo. Oaven. was the first Englishman who in England
cast Brass Ordnance, an. 1535, Peter Baud a Frenchman, an. 1. Edw. 6. was the
first who in England cast Iron Ordnance. Tho. Johnson servant to Peter,
improved his Masters Art. He dyed about 1600. There is also plenty of Glass
made in this County, and the Workmen thereof are much increased since 1557 A
certain Lord living near Cambridge, (upon his Petition) got from Queen
Elizabeth, a grant of all the Plate in that University, upon condition to find
Glasses for the Scholars, the performance of which condition at first, and at
all times after, upon the casual or wilful breaking of the Glasses, would have
been the most effectual way of ruining the Lord absolutely and infallibly. The
first making of Venice Glasses in England, began at the Crochet Friars in
London, about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by one Jacob
Venaline an Italian. As for the Buildings in this County, Chichester Cathedral
is a fine Fabric built (after it had been twice burnt) by Bishop Seffride 2.
an. 1193. The Country Folk say, the Master Workman built Sarisbury, and his Man
the Church of Chichester, but this is a mistake, since Seffride lived under
King John, and Bishop Poor who founded Sarisbury, lived much later under Hen.
3. This Church was Beautified by Bishop Sherborn, in the Reign of Henry 7.
Lately a great part thereof has fallen to the ground. Arundel Castle is of
great esteem, the rather because a Local Earldome is cemented to the Walls
thereof. Some will have it named from Arundel, the Horse of Beavois the great
Champion, though this Castle was so called long before that imaginary Horse was
Foaled, (that is long before the Conquest) from the River Arund, running hard
by it. Petworth, the House of the Earls of Northumberland, is most famous for a
stately Stable, which affords standing in State for 60 Horses, with all
necessary accommodations.

Proverbs.
I. He is none of the Hastings; That is, he is slow and dull, the Proverb
bearing only a nominal counter-relation to the Noble and ancient Family of the
Hastings, formerly Earls of Pembroke, and still of Huntington. There is also a
Haven of that name, in this County, which is said to have been built in all
have by William the Conqueror.

Martyrs.
Grievous the persecution in this County, under Jo. Christopherson the Bishop
thereof: Such his havoc in burning poor Protestants in one year, that had he
sat long in that See, and continued after that Rate, there needed no Iron Mills
to rarifie the Woods of this County. The Papists admire him as a great Divine,
which I will not oppose, but only say as the Man said of his surly Mistress,
She has too much Divinity for me,
Oh! that She had some more Humanity.


Cardinals.
Herbert de Bosham was a Manubus unto Tho. Becket, at whose Murder-Martyring,
he was present, and had the discretion to make no resistance. He wrote the
story of his Masters death. Going over into Italy, he was by Pope Alex. 3. made
Archbishop of Beneventum, and in Dec. 1178. created Cardinal.

Prelates.
Jo. Peckham, born of obscure Parents, bred in Oxford, and beyond the Seas,
became Archbishop of Canterbury, by the Popes favor, for which he afterward
paid 4000 Marks. He neither feared the Layty, nor flattered the Clergy; and was
a great punisher of Pluralists. He transmitted the Canons place at Lions (which
he held for life) to his Successors, who held the same in Commendam some
hundred years after. He built and endowed a College at Wingham, yet left a
great Estate to his Kindred, whose descendants are possessed of the same at
this day, in this and the next County. He dyed 1294.

Robert Winchelsey, bred in Merton-Colledge in Oxford where (after having
traveled) he proceeded D. D. and became Chancellor of the University;
successively Can. of Paul's, Archdeacon of Essex, and Archbishop of
Canterbury. He went to Rome, and obtained his Pall of Pope Celestine, refusing
a Cardinals Cap offered unto him. After his return, confiding in the Canon of
the Council of Lions, which forbad the Clergy to pay Taxes to Princes, without
consent of the Pope, he created much molestation to himself, King Edw. 1. using
him first very harshly, till at last he overcame all with his Patience: A
worthy Prelate, excellent Preacher. Being Learned himself, he loved and
preferred Learned Men. Prodigious his Hospitality, being reported, that Sundays
and Fridays he fed no fewer then 4000 Men, when Corn was cheap, and 5000 when
it was dear. After his death, (1313) poor men used to repair to his Tomb, and
present their Petitions to him.

Tho. Bradwardine, descended of an ancient Family at Bra^w. in Hereford,
(whence they removed and settled in this County, for three Generations.) was
born in or near Chichester, and bred in Merton-Colledge in Oxford, where for
his skill in the Mathematics and Divinity, he was called Dr. Profundus. He was
Confessor to Edw. 3. To his Prayers the Conquest of France was (by some)
imputed. He Preached Piety to the Army. He was Consecrated at Avignon
Archbishop of Canterbury, at which time he was accounted somewhat Clownish,
both because he could not mode it with the Italians, but chiefly because he was
advanced for his Merit, and not for his Money. In his excellent Book De Causa
Dei, he complains grievously of the prevalent Errors of Pelagius. He dyed
1349.

Tho. Arundel, Son to Robert, and Brother to Richard Fitz-Allen, both Earls of
Arundel, was Archbishop of York, the fourth Archbishop of Canterbury, having
been Bishop of Ely at 22 years of Age. He was thrice Lord Chancellor of
England, viz. an. 10. and 15. Rich. 2. and 11 Hen. 4. He was by Rich. 2.
banished the Land, after his Brother was beheaded; Restored by Hen. 4. to his
Archbishopric. In Parliament he was the Churches Champion for preservation of
her Revenues. He was the first who persecuted the Wicklevites with Fire and
Faggot. This Noble Person, who had stopped the Mouths of many Servants of God,
from Preaching his Word, was himself famished to death by a swelling in his
Throat, Feb. 20. 1413. and lies Buried in the Cathedral of Canterbury.

H. Burwash, of Noble Alliance, a Covetous, Ambitious, Rebellious and Injurious
Person, was recommended by Barth. de Badilismer (Bar. of Leeds in Kent) to Edw.
2. who preferred him Bishop of Lincoln. Having fallen into the Kings
displeasure, and forfeited his Temporalities (though afterward restored) he
was most forward to assist the Queen in the deposing of her Husband: He was
twice Lord Treasurer, once Chancellor, and once Ambassador to the Duke of
Bavaria. He dyed 1340.. There Is a merry Story, that he was condemned after his
death to be a Green Forrester, because in his life time he had violently
enclosed other Men's Grounds into his own Park.

Since the Reformation.
W. Barlow, D. D. was Canon of St. Osiths, then Prior of Bisham in Bark-shire,
afterward preferred by Hen. 8. Bishop of St. Asaph, whence he was Translated
to St. David's, thence an. 3. Edw. 6. to Bath and Wells. Having fled in the
days of Queen Mary, he was superintendent of the English Congregation at
Embden. Returning afterward into England, he was made by Queen Elizabeth
Bishop of Chichester. He had a numerous and prosperous Female Issue, He dyed
December 10, 1569.

W. Juxton, born at Chichester, was bred at St. John's College in Oxford, where
he commenced Doctor of Law, and became Pres. of the College. He was admirably
Master of his Pen and Passion. By K. Charles I. he was preferred Bishop first
of Hereford, then of London, and for some years Lord Treasurer of England, in
the legal and prudent management of which Office, Jo. 3.12.
He was well reported of all Men, and of the Truth it self. He beheld (with
much Christian Patience) those of his Order lose their Votes in Parliament,
much contempt poured on his Function, whilst their Enemies hence concluded,
their final Extirpation would follow. This Bishop was amongst others selected
as Confessor to King Charles I. at his Martyrdom. He formerly had had
experience (in the case of the Earl of Strafford) that this Bishops Conscience
was bottomed on Piety, the Reason that from him he received the Sacrament, good
Comfort and Counsel, just before the perpetration of that horrid Murder; a Fact
so foul, that it alone may confute the Error of the Pelagians, maintaining
that all sin comes by imitation, the Universe not formerly affording such a
precedent, as if those Regicides had purposely designed to disprove the
observation of Solomon, that there is no new thing under the Sun. King Charles
II. an. 1660 preferred him Archbishop of Canterbury, which place he worthily
graceth at the Writing hereof.

Acceptus Fruin, D. D. President of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, was by K.
Charles I. advanced Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and since by K. Charles
II. made Archbishop of York, and is now alive. This County has bred 5
Archbishops of Canterbury, at this instant claiming for her Natives, the two
Metropolitans of our Nation.

Statesmen.
Tho. Sackvil, Son and Heir to Sir Richard (Chancellor, Sub-Treasurer of the
Exchequer, and Privy-Councellour to Queen Elizabeth) by Winifred his Wife,
Daughter to Sir Jo. Bruges, was bred in Oxford, where he became an excellent
Poet, leaving both Latin and English Poems of his Composing to Posterity. Then
he became Barrister, and afterward in his Travels, was for some time Prisoner
at Rome, whence returning to the possession of a fair Estate, he wasted the
greatest part thereof, and afterward being made (as is reported) to dance
attendance on an Alderman of London, who had gained great penny-worths by his
former purchases of him, he was sensible of the incivility, and resolving to be
no more beholding to Wealthy Pride, he turned a thrifty improver of the
Remainder of his Estate. Others affirm that Queen Elizabeth (his Cousin Germ.
once removed) diverted the torrent of his profusion by her frequent
admonitions; after which she made him Baron of Buckhurst in this County, an.
1566. Sent him Ambassador into France, 1571, into the Low Countries, 1586.
made him Knight of the Garter, 1589. and Treasurer of England, 1599. He was
Chancellor of the University, where he entertained Queen Elizabeth, with a
sumptuous Feast. He was a person of so quick dispatch, that his Secretaries
seldom pleased him. Thus having made amends to his house for his misspent time*
both in increase of Estate and Honor, being created Earl of Dorset by King
James. He dyed April 19. 1608.

Capital Judges.
Sir Jo. Jeffrey Knight, was preferred Secondary Judge of the Common Pleas,
thence advanced an. 19. Elizabeth, to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. He
left one only Daughter and Heir, Married to Sir Edward Montague, (since Baron
of Boughton) by whom he had but one Daughter Elizabeth, Married to Robert Berty
Earl of Linsey, Mother to the truly Honorable Montague Earl of Linsey; and
Lord great Chamberlain of England. This worthy Judge dyed an. 21. Elizabeth.

Soldiers.
The Abbot of Battle, after the French had invaded this County, during the
Nonage of King Richard 2. (and the Dotage of his Council) and taken the Prior
of Lewis Prisoner, Fortified Winchelsey effectually against the Enemy, who in
vain had attempted to storm the place, and feared to venture a fair siege,
suspecting that they should be surrounded on all sides. The Monsieurs therefore
bid adieu to England, and made for France as fast as they could, An. Dom. 13...

Sir W. Pelham Knight, of an ancient and wealthy Family at Laughton, was by
Queen Elizabeth made Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, betwixt the death of Sir W.
Drury, and the coming in of Arthur Gray Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. In this
juncture of time Desmond began his Rebellion 1579. inviting Sir W. Pelham to
side with him, who though he could not cure the wound for want of Force, yet he
kept it clean, resigning the same in a recovering condition to the Lord Gray
his Successor. Afterward he was Commander of the English Horse in the
Low Countries, where he surprised Brabant.

Sir Anth. Shirley, second Son to Sir Thomas, set forth from Plymouth, May 21.
1596. in a Ship called the Bevis of Southampton, attended with six lesser
Vessels: His design for St. Thome was diverted by a Contagion, occasioned by
stinking Rain, which within six hours after it fell, turned to Maggots. Turning
therefore his course to America, he took, and kept the City of St, Jago, two
days and nights, with 280 Men (wherein 80 were wounded in the service) against
3000 Portugals. Hence he made for the Isle of Fuego, in the midst whereof was a
Mountain Aetna-like always burning, and the Wind did drive such a shower of
Ashes upon them, that one might have wrote his name with his Finger, on the
upper Deck. Whence passing by the Island of Margarita, he took St. Martha, the
Chief Town of Jamaica; After much distress and desertion, (by the other Ships)
he returned into England; Whose youngest Brother,

Sir Robert Shirley, was entered by his Brother Anth. in the Persian Court. Here
he performed so great service against the Turks, that it drew the envy of the
Persian Lords, and love of the Ladies, among whom one (reputed a Kinswoman to
the great Sophy) was afterward Married unto him, and came over with him into
England. He much affected to appear in the Persian habit. At last, having (as
it is said) given the Persian Ambassador a box on the ear, upon some contest
betwixt them, they were sent both together into Persia, to impeach one another,
Dr. Gough being joined in Commission with Sir Robert, but Neptune decided the
Controversy before they came thither, both of them dying on the Seas (as I
have been informed) about the beginning of King Charles I whose eldest Brother,

Sir Tho. Shirley, excited by the Atchievments of his two younger Brethren,
undertook Sea Voyages into Foreign parts, to the great honor of his Nation,
but small enriching of himself. As to the general performances of these three
Brethren, when Abatement is made for Poetical Embellishments (contained in the
Comedy made upon them, etc.) the Remainder will speak them Worthies in their
Generations.

Physicians.
Nich. Hostresham, (it seems from Horsham in this County) a famous Physician,
REM.
wrote many Books, amongst which, one Contra dolorem Renum, thus beginning, A
Stone is sometimes bred in the Kidneys, etc. Note this was long before Hops and
Beer made therewith, (accounted by some the Original of the Stone in this Land)
were commonly used in England, 1516. He having flourished 1443.

Writers
Lawrence Somercote, was Can. of Chichester. He studied the Law, S. N.
and went to Rome, where through the favor of his Brother (or Kinsman) Robert
Somercote Cardinal, he was made Subdeacon under the Pope. He wrote some Books,
and flourished 1240.

Jo. Driton, (alias Sicca Villa or Sackvil) bred in Fr. became the Chief
Moderator of the College of Paris, and together with W de Sancto Amore,
vigorously opposed the Hellish imposture of the Monks Eternal Gospel, though it
was much countenanced by his Holiness. He flourished 1260.

Jo. Winchelsey, bred in Oxford, turned a Franciscan in his old days, and when
gray, became a green Novice of the Order at Sarisbury. He dyed before the year
of his probation was ended, 1326.

Since the Reformation.
W. Pemble, maintained in a great proportion by Jo. Barker of Mayfield in this
Shire, Esquire, was bred in (or if you will, he bred) Magdalens-Hall in Oxford,
that house owing its late Luster to his Learned Lectures. An excellent Orator,
and a better Christian. He dyed in the Flower of his Age.

Tho. Chune Esquire living at Alfriston, set forth a Manual, Entitled,
Collectiones Theologicarum Conclusionum, which positions are brief and clear;
set forth 1635.

Tho. May, of a worshipful but decayed Family, was bred Fellow Commoner in
Sidney-Colledge in Cambridge, and afterward lived about the Court. Being an
Elegant Poet, he Translated Lucan into English; some affirm that he took some
disgust at Court, because his Bays were not gilded enough, nor his Verses
rewarded by King Charles I. according to his Expectation. He afterward wrote
an History of this State in the beginning of the Civil Wars. He died suddenly
in the night, 1652.

Jo. Seldom, born at Salvington, within the Parish of East Terring, was Son to
Jo. by his Wife Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Tho. Barker of Rushington,
descended from a Knightly Family in Kent. He was bred in Hart-hall in Oxford,
then in the Inner Temple in London; where he attained great skill in the Law,
and all Antiquity. He traced all the dimensions of Arts and Languages, as
appear by the many and various Works which he has written, whereof
Lay-Gentlemen prefer his Titles of Honor, Lawyers his Mare Clausum,
Antiquaries his Spicilegium ad Eadmerum, Clergymen like best his Book de Diis
Syris, and worst his History of Tithes; For which Book, having been called to
an account before the High Commission, it is said that afterward he was no
Friend to Bishops, never affecting the Men, nor cordially approving their
Calling. But it is certain Mr. Seldom did in a Letter to Archbishop Laud,
express his unfeigned contrition for setting forth of the said Book of Tithes.
That which afterward Entitled him to a general popularity, was his pleading
with Mr. Noy, for an Habeas Corpus, for such Gentlemen who were imprisoned for
refusal of the Loan. He had very many Ancient and Modern Coyns, and dyed
exceeding Wealthy. His large and excellent Library is now reposited ( Bodly
within a Bodly) in the matchless Library of Oxford.

Romish Exiled Writers.
George Martin, born at Macfield, bred in Oxford, was Tutor to Phil. Earl of
Arundel, Son to Tho. Duke of Norfolk. After he had Traveled to Rome, he became
Professor of Divinity in the English College of Rhemes. He wrote much in
defense of the Romish Faith; one of his Books being Entitled, A Detection of
Corruptions in the English Bible. He dyed 1582. and was buried in St. Stephens
Church in Rhemes.

Tho. Stapleton, born at Henfield, (of a very good Family) was observed by
those of his own Persuasion, to have been born in the same Year and Month,
wherein Sir Thomas More was beheaded, as if Divine Providence, had purposely
dropped from Heaven an Ac^^n. in place of the Oak that was felled. He was bred
in New-Colleage in Oxford, and became Canon of Chichester, which place he
quitted, an. 1. Eliz. and having fled beyond the Seas, he became Catechist at
Doway, which Office, he having discharged to his commendation* he was preferred
Kings Professor of Divinity in Lovain, and was (...) y^ars together* undertaker
General against all (...) Dr Whitaker Professor in Cambridge, (...) professed,
that Bellarmine was the fairer, and ^ap e^on the shrewde^ Adversary. He dyed,
and was buried in (...) in Lovain, 1598.

Benefactors to the ^ublick s^^ce the Reformation.
Richard Sackvil, Eldest Son of Thomas Earl of Dorset, had his barony, if not
his Birth at Buckhurst: A Learned Gentleman, to whom the Greek and Latin, were
as familiar as his own Native Tongue. Succeeding his Father in that Earldom, he
enjoyed his Dignity not a full ear. He erect^d a College at East Greensted in
this County, for 3 p^o^ p^^ple to serve Almighty (...) therein, endowing the
same with 330 pounds a year out of all his Lands ^n England. By Margaret sole
Daughter to Tho. Duke of Norfolk, he left two surviving Sons, Richard and
Edward, of admirable parts, s^ccessively Earl^ after him; and dying, was buried
in With^ham in this County.

Memorable Persons.
John, Henry and Thomas Palmer, were Sons to Edward Palmer Esquire, of
Angmarine, by his Wife, Daughter to one Clement of Wales, who for his effectual
assisting of King Henry 7. from his Landing at Milford Haven, until the Battle
of Bosworth, was brought by him into England, and rewarded with good Lands in
this and the next County. It happened that their Mother, being a full
fourthnight inclusively in Labor, was on Whitsunday delivered of John her
eldest Son, on the Sunday following, of Henry her second Son, and the Sunday
next after, of Thomas her third Son. These three were Knighted for their Valor
by King Henry 8. They have a Worshipful and numerous Posterity in Sussex and
Kent, amongst whom, Sir Roger Palmer, Aged 80 years, lately deceased, and
Cofferer to the late King, averred the Truth of the aforesaid Relation.

Leonard Mascal, of Plumsted, was the first who brought over into England, from
beyond the Seas, Carps and Pippins, about an. 5. Henry 8. 1514.

W. Withers, being a Child of about 11 years of Age, an. 1581. lay in a Trance
10 days, without any sustenance, and at last, coming to himself, uttered to
the standers by, many strange Speeches, inveighing against Pride, Covetousness,
and other outrageous sins.

Note, that an. 1378, (in the Reign of Richard 2.) the Sussexians (of Rye and
Winchelsey) embarked for Normandy, and afterward entered by night, into a
Town called Peter's Port, took all such Prisoners who were able to pay ransom,
and safely returned home with the Spoil, amongst which were some Bells, the
French had formerly taken from the Towns in this County, which they lately
invaded. It was a worthy advice which William Earl of Arundel gave to his Son
Henry Fitz-Allen, never to trust his Neighbors, the French, which I would
recommend to the Inhabitants of this County.

WARWICKSHIRE.
Warwickshire has Leicester and Northamptonshire on the East, Oxford and
Gloucestershire on the South, Worcester on the West, and Staffordshire on the
North thereof. It extends 33 Miles from North to South, and 26 from East to
West. This County is the Heart, but not the Core of England; The Woodland
thereof may want what the Fieldon affords; As for the pleasure thereof, an
Speed of this County.
Author says, that from Edge hill one may behold it as the Garden of Eden. The
Sheep here are very large, especially about Warm-Leighton. There is a plentiful
growth of Ashes in the Woodland of this County, and much Coal dug up at
Bedworth. As for Buildings, Coventry shows two fair Churches, yet such their
vicinity that the Archangel eclipseth the Trinity. Then St. Mary's in Warwick,
a beautiful Structure, owes its life to the Monuments of the dead therein, most
being Earls of Warwick. So numerous is the Church with its Appendances, that
the Minister can accommodate one Clergyman of all dignities and degrees, to
repose them in several Chapels and Vestries by themselves. Kenelworth had the
strength of a Castle, and beauty of a Princes Court; a vast, and withal a
comely Structure, the Porch being proportionable to the rest of the Fabric It
was demolished sinc^ the end of the Wars. The Castle of Warwick overlooketh the
Town, being pleasantly Situated on a rising Hill, affording a very fine
Prospect, mostly of the Lands of the present Owner Robert Lord Br^^k* The Cross
of Coventry (all for Ornament, nothing for Superstition) was begun 1541, an.
33. and finished 1544, 36 Henry 8. at the sole cost of Sir William Hollis Lord
Mayor of London, great Grandfather to the Right Honorable the Earl of Clare.
The wonders of this County are, that at Lemington, within two Miles of Warwick,
there issue out (within a stride) of the Womb of the Earth, two Springs, the
one salt, and the other fresh. On Friday, April 17, 1607. there happened in
Coventry such an inundation, (no considerable Rain preceding) that continued
for the space of three hours, wherein it overflowed more then 250 dwelling
houses, to the great damage of the Inhabitants; vanishing away as quickly as
it did rise; and note, the City has no River near it, save a small Brook, over
which generally one may make a Bridge with a stride. As for Medicinal Waters,
there is at Newenham a Spring, the water whereof drunk with Salt loosneth, with
Sugar binds the Body. It is sovereign against Ulcers and Imposthumes, and the
Stone, though Mr. Speed affirms that it turned Wood into Sto^e.

Proverbs.
I. He is the black Bear of Arden. By this is meant Guy Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick, a grim person, and surly of Resolution, who in spite of all
opposition, caused the death of Pierce Gaveston, that Minion of Edward 2. at a
Hill within two Miles of Warwick. Arden is a Forest, anciently occupying all
the Wood-land part of this County. It Is applied to such who (without any other
Authority then that of their Countenance or Disposition) strike terror into
others. II. As bold as Beauchamp. Though there was a series of successive
undauntedness in the Noble Family of the Earls of Warwick, yet I conceive that
Thomas first of that name gave the chief occasion to this Proverb; He being
arrived with King Edward 3. at Hogs in Normandy, 1346. was the first man who
landed, and being followed by one Esquire, and six Archers, is reported to have
fought against a 100 Armed men, and in hostile manner to have overthrown every
one who withstood him: having at one shock slain 60 Normans, and removed all
resistance, so that the Kings whole Army landed in safety. The Heirs Male of
this name, are long since extinct, though some deriving themselves from the
Heirs general, are extant at this day. III. The Bear wants a Tail, and cannot
be a Lion. This abated the jealousy the Dutch had of Robert Earl of Leicester
(descended from the ancient Earls of Warwick) Governor of the Low Countries,
being suspected to hatch a design of making himself Sovereign Commander over
the Low Countries, whilst he diffused his own Coat of the green Lion, with two
Tails, and signed all instruments with the Crest of the Bear and Ragged Staff.
Then it was that this Proverb was written under his Crest, set up in public
places, Vrsa caret cauda, non queat esse Leo.
The Bear he never can prevail,
To Lion it, for lack of Tail.
It is applied to such who aspire to what is above their power to atchieve. IV.
He is true Coventry-blew. It seems the best Blews are dyed in Coventry. It is
applied to such an one who is a faithful Friend.

Princes.
Anne Nevil, Daughter and coheir to Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, was
(probably) born in Warwick Castle; She was Married to Edward Prince of Wales,
(sole Son to Henry 6.) afterward murdered by Richard Duke of Gloucester, who
took to Wife the same Anne. She died for grief, 1464, though others suspect a
Grain was given her, for the greater dispatch to another World.

Edward Plantag. Son to George Duke of Clarence, was the last Male Heir of the
Royal Family. His Mother was Isabella, eldest Daughter to Richard Nevil, Earl
of Warwick, and he was born in Warwick-Castle. Being kept close Prisoner by
Edward 4. Richard 3. and Henry 7. he was rendered weak in his Intellectuals.
Upon the proposal of Marriage for Prince Arthur, with Katharine Daughter of
Ferdinand King of Spain, this Edward was taken out of the way, to the end all
Titles might be cleared. The Lady Katharine Dowager was wont to acknowledge the
death of her two Sons, an ill success of her match, as Heavens judgment on her
Family, for the murdering of this Earl, which happened 1499.

Saints.
St. Wolstan, born in Long Jetington, was Bishop of Worcester; a man of great
Candor, and an opposer of the French fickleness, and the Italian pride, for
which he was hated by William the Conqueror, and Lanfrak Archbishop of
Canterbury, and by them commanded to resign his Episcopalibus; Upon this the
Honest Bishop repaired to the Monument of Edward the Confessor, and there
offered up his Episcopal Habiliments. These (said he) from you I received, and
to you I resign them. This his plain dealing not only recovered his Bishopric,
but also purchased to him the reputation of a Saint. He was active in promoting
William Rufus to the Kingdom, in prejudice of his eldest Brother Robert.

Martyrs.
Laurence Saunders, a Priest, was Martyred in Coventry, February 8. 1555.

Robert Glove, born at Mancetor, Gentleman, was Martyred in Coventry, September
20. 1555

Cornel Bongey, born at Coventry, a Capper, was Martyred at Coventry* September
20 1555.

Jo. Carles, born at Coventry, a Weaver, was Martyred at the Kings Bench,
London.

Julius Palmer, born at Coventry, and bred in Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford, was
burnt in Newbury.

Confessors.
John Glover, Brother to the aforementioned Robert, escaped miraculously,
whilst his Brother, without the intention of his enemies, fell into their hands.

Cardinals.
William Macklesfield, born ('it is said) in Coventry, was made B. D. in Paris,
Dr. at Oxford, and became General of the Dominican Order. He was by Pope
Benedict 11. created Cardinal with the Title of St. Sabine, but dyed in London
before his Cap was brought him; yet this chief part of a Cardinal (I mean the
Cap) was with great solemnity set on his Tomb.

Peter Petow, of an ancient Family, flourishing for a long time at Chesterton,
was a Franciscan, afterward Cardinal, being created by Pope Paul 3. 1557. who
also made him Legate a Latere, and Bishop of Salisbury. Queen Mary in favor to
Cardinal Pole, prohibited this Legates entrance into her Court. He dyed in
France 1558.

Prelates.
John Stratford, Son of Robert and Isabel, was born at Stratford, and preferred
by the Pope Bishop of Winchester, whereupon falling into the displeasure of
Richard 2. for a time, he took it in so ill part, that he forsook that King
whilst in his extremity. This cost him the displeasure of Queen Mother, and
Edward 3. till at last converted by his Constancy, they turned their frowns
into smiles upon him. When Arch Bishop of Canterbury, he furnished the King
with great sums at his first setting forth for France, but when the King
afterward sent for another supply, instead of Coin, the Bishop sent him
Counsel, whereat the King returning into England, was so highly offended, that
the Bishop was fain to pass his public Purgation in Parliament, by which he
was restored to the Reputation of his innocence. He built, and bountifully
endowed a beautiful College in Stratford. He dyed 1348, having been a Man of
great Charity, Meekness and Moderation; Whose Kinsman

Ralph Stratford, was born in Stratford, where he built a Chapel to the Honor
of St. Thomas. He was first Canon of St. Paul's, and afterward Bishop of
London, 1539, about which time, there being a most grievous Pestilence in
London, this Bishop bought a piece of ground nigh Smithfield for the burial of
the dead, and named the same No-mans-land. He dyed 1355, whose Brother,

Robert Stratford, was in the Reign of Edward 3. made Bishop of Chichester,
being then Chancellor of Oxford, and of all England. He compremised a bloody
contest and difference, that arose about that time betwixt the South and North
parts of that University. He with his Brother Archbishop, being accused for
favoring the French, were afterward freed from that false aspersion. He dyed
at Allingbourn, 1362.

John Vesty, alias Harman, Dr. of Law, was born at Sutton Colefield, bred in
Oxford, was a vivacious person. He was appointed to celebrate Divine Service at
Sutton aforesaid, an. 20. Henry 6. was Vicar of St. Michaels Church in
Coventry, 23 Henry 7. Dean of the Royal Chapel, Tutor to the Lady Mary, and
President of Wales, under Henry 8. and being advanced to be Bishop of Exeter,
an. 11. of that King; which Bishopric he so destroyed, that Bishop Hall his
Successor complains, that the following Bishops were Barons, but Bare-ones
indeed. Some affirm the word Veize (that is in the West, to drive away with a
Witness) had its original from his profligating of the Lands of his Bishopric.
He robbed his own Cathedral to pay a Parish Church, ( Sutton in this County)
whereon he bestowed many Benefactions, and built 51 houses. He intended also
(but in vain) to fix the Cloth Manufacture of Devonshire, in the aforesaid
Town. He quitted his Bishopric, (not worth the keeping) in the Reign of Edward
6. He dyed being 103 years old, in the Reign of Queen Mary, and was buried in
Sutton, with his Statue Mitred and Vestred.

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Bird, born in Coventry, and bred a Carmelite at Oxford, was the Provincial
of his Order. For his smart Sermon against the Primacy of the Pope, preached
before Henry 8. he was preferred Bishop of Bangor in Wales, then of Chester in
England. Pitz says he returned to the Vomit of Popery, which I cannot believe,
though he might be guilty of a passive compliance, as appears by his telling
Mr. Hawks Protestant, (about the time of his Examination) I would not wish you
to go to far. He dyed 1556.

Statesmen.
Sir Nich. Throckmorton, Knight, fourth Son of Sir George of Coughton, was bred
beyond the Seas. Under Queen Mary, he was Arraigned for Treason (compliance
with Wyatt) and hardly escaped. Queen Elizabeth employed him her Lieger in
France and Scotland. He was of the opposite party to Burleigh Lord Treasurer.
He was Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and chief Butler of England, which offices
yielded him no considerable profit. He dyed at Supper, with eating of Salades,
not without suspicion of poison, the rather, because happening in the House of
no mean Artist in that Faculty, Robert Earl of Leicester. He dyed 1570, and
lies buried in St. Katharine Cree-Church in London.

Edward Conway Knight, was Son to Sir Jo. Knight, Lord and Owner of Ragleigh in
this County, who was made by Robert Earl of Leicester (Governor of the English
Auxiliaries in the United Provinces) Governor of Ostend, being a man of great
skill in Military affairs. His Son succeeding to his Fathers Wisdom and Valor,
was by King James made Principal Secretary of State, and by him created Lord
Conway of Ragleigh in this County, and afterward by King Charles I. Visc.
Killultagh in the County of Autrim; Lastly, an. 30. Car. I. Visc. Conway of
Conway in Carnarvan shire. He dyed 1630.

Jo. Digby, Baron of Sherborn, and Earl of Bristol, was employed by King James
in several Embassies to Foreign Princes. But his managing the Matchless Match
with Spain, was his Masterpiece. After the great Contest betwixt him and the
Duke of Buckingham, he fell into the Kings displeasure, during which he was
very popular with most of the Nation. And the King was afterward graciously
pleased to reflect upon him, at the beginning of the Long Parliament, as one
best able to give him the safest Counsel in those dangerous times; but how he
incensed the Parliament so far as to be excepted Pardon, I know not. After the
surrender of Exeter, he went over into France, where he met with that due
respect in Foreign, which he missed in his Native Country. He was a Cordial
Champion of the Church of England. He dyed in France, 1650.

Writers
Walter of Coventry, (where he was a Benedictine) was a Man (as ^ale affirms)
worthy of immortal Memory, and excelled in two Essential Qualities of an
Historian, Faith and Method, being only guilty of coursness of Style. From the
beginning of the Britons, he wrote a Chron. to his own time. He flourished 1217.

Vincent of Coventry, born in Warwick, was a Franciscan in Cambridge. He was
the first of his Order, who applied himself to Academical Studies, and became
public Professor in Cambridge. He set a Copy to the Carmelites, left some
Books to Posterity, and dyed 1250.

Jo. of Killingworth, was bred in Oxford, an excellent Philosopher, Astronomer
and Physician. He was Father and Founder to all the Astronomers in that Age,
being a Star of the first Magnitude amongst those of that Faculty He flourished
1360.

W. of Coventry, (where he was a Carmelite) being lame in his Hip, was called
Claudus Conversus, Conversus being properly one who is condemned (or turned) to
servile work in the Monastery. He preferred Charity to pilgrimages, and wrote
several Books, flourishing 1360.

Jo. Rouse* born at Warwick, and descended from the Rouses of (...) great (...)
of Learning in Oxford, whence (...), a most delicious place, within a mile of
Warwick; he wrote the Antiquities of Warwick, a Chronicle of the English Kings,
and a History of the two Universities. He was as good at his Pensil as Pen,
being an excellent Limner. He dyed 1491.

Since the Reformation.
W. Perkins, born at Marston, bred Fellow of Christs-Colledge, became Preacher
of St. Andrew in Cambridge. (See of him in my Holy State) He dyed 1602.

Tho. Drax, D. D. born at Stonely, and bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge,
was a pious Man, and an excellent Preacher. He Translated all the Works of Mr.
Perkins into Latin. He was beneficed nigh Harwich in Essex, and dyed 1616. The
Family of the Drax flourished a long time at Wood-hall in Yorkshire, and after
various Changes, has recovered and increased its former luster in Sir James
Drax, who has merited much of the English Nation, in bringing the Sugars, and
other Commodities of the Barbados to their perfection.

William Shakespeare, born at Stratford, was in some sort a Compound of three
eminent Poets, viz. Martial, Ovid, and Plautus the Comedian; The two first were
Charactered in a Verse made by Queen Elizabeth, coming into a Grammar School;
Persius a Crabstaff, Bawdy Martial, Ovid a fine VVag. Though the Genius of this
our Poet was jocular, he could be solemn and serious, when occasion required,
as appears by his Tragedies, so that He aclitus himself might afford to smile
at his Comedies, and Democritus scarce forbear to sigh at his Tragedies. His
Learning being very little, Nature seems to have practiced her best Rules in
his production. Many were the witty Combats betwixt him and Benjamin Johnson,
who (like a Spanish Gallion) was built far higher in Learning; solid, but slow
in his performances; whilst Shakespeare (like an English Man of War, less in
bulk, but lighter in Sailing) could turn with all Tides, tack about, and take
advantage of all Winds, by the quickness of his wit and invention. He dyed 16..
and was buried at Stratford.

Michael Drayton, born at Athelston, was a pious Poet, a Temperate man, and a
good natured Companion. He changed his Laurel for a Crown of Glory, 1631. and
was buried in Westminster-Abbey.

Sir Fulke Grevil Knight, Son to Sir Fulke Senior of Becham Court, was bred in
Cambridge. He came to Court backed with a fair Estate, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. He was a good Scholar, and a great Friend to Learned Men, Bishop
Overal chiefly owed his preferment to him, and Mr. Cambden tasted largely of
his Liberality. His Studies were most in Poetry and History, as his works do
witness. King James created him Baron Brook of Beauchamp-Court, as descended
from the sole Daughter and Heir of Edward Willoughby the last Lord Brook. He
was murdered 16.. by a discontented servant, who conceiving himself not soon or
well enough rewarded, first wounded his Master mortally, and afterward
dispatched himself. He lies buried in Warwick Church, under a fair Monument,
whereon he is styled Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Counselor to King James, and
Friend to Sir Philip Sidney, dying unmarried, his Barony descended on his
Kinsman, Robert Grevil Lord Brook, Father to the Right Honorable Robert Lord
Brook.

Nich. Byfield, bred in Queens College in Oxford, entering into the Ministry,
was invited into Ireland; But being wind-bound at Chester, and having preached
there, with great approbation, he was chosen Minister in the City, being
afterward informed that his going over to Ireland, would have been labor in
vain. He maintained the strict observation of the Lords day against Mr.
Breerwood. He was afterward Minister of Isleworth in Middlesex, where he
Preached for 15 years together, twice every Lords day, and expounded Scripture
every Wednesday and Friday. He dyed of the Stone (in his Bladder) which being
taken out after his death, was weighed and measured, being 33 ounces and more,
in length 13 inches and above, in measure about the breadth, almost 13 inches;
and about the edge 15 and. Being of solid substance, (to look upon) like Flint.
He was buried at Isleworth.

Philemon Holland, bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, a Doctor in Physic,
and fixed himself in Coventry. He was the Translator General of his Age, of
whom one says, Holland with his Translations does so fill us,
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.
Many of his Books he wrote with one Pen, whereon he himself versifies. With
one sole Pen I writ this Book, made of a Gray Goose Quill,
A Pen it was when I it took, and a Pen I leave it still.
He Translated Cambden's Britannia, with many excellent Additions, and was
himself Translated to a better Life 16...

Francis Holyoake, born at Whitacre, was Minister of Southampton. He set forth
Rider's Dictionary, and dyed 16...

James Cranford, born at Coventry, and bred in Oxford, was beneficed in
Northamptonshire, afterward Minister of St. Christophers in London; A learned
and pious man, and a painful Preacher, of much Humility, Moderation and
Charity. Having sadly sympathized with the Sufferings of Church and State, he
dyed 1657.

Romish Exile Writers.
William Bishop, Son (probably) to John a Protestant and Patron of Brails in
this County, went first to Rhemes, then to Rome, whence being sent back into
England, he was siezed on, and committed by Secretary Walsingham to the
Marshalsey. After 3 years, being banished the Land, he became a Doctor of
Sorbon. Afterward he returned into England, and for nine years labored in the
Popish Harvest; And after another visit to his Holiness, he returned to his
Station, till he was imprisoned at London. At last being enlarged, he went to
Paris. The Papists cry him up for a Glorious Confessor of the Popish Faith, who
(if any goodness in him) should also be a thankful Confessor of the Protestant
Charity, permitting him twice to depart Prison.

Benefactors to the Public.
Hugh Clapton, born at Stratford, and bred a Mercer in London, whereof he was
Lord Mayor 1491. built at Stratford a stately and long Stone Bridge, of many
Arches, over the ^von, many other Charities he bestowed, and deceased 1496.

Since the Reformation.
-- Hales Esquire, sounded and endowed a fair Grammar School in Coventry, the
Priory of which he had purchased from King Henry 8.

Jo. Lord Harrington, born at Combe-Abbey, was no less Pious then Noble. He
began the Fashion of a diary, wherein he registered his daily failings. Being a
wise Accomptant, he used that method of Christian Arithmetic, in numbering his
days with such exactness, that it seems he had but one day to account for* and
repent of, before his death. He was a most bountiful Benefactor to
Sidney-Colledge. He dyed in his prime, and unmarried, being the last Male of
that Honorable Family, as one complains by way of Anagram; Johannes Dominus
Harringtonius, insignis erat (Ah!) Vnus Honor Domi. He left his two Sisters his
Heirs, Lucy, Married to Edward Earl of Bedford, and Anne, who by Sir Robert
Chichester, had a Daughter Anne, married to Thomas Earl of Elgin, and Mother to
Robert Lord Bruce, who is at this day Heir apparent to no small part of the
Lands, but actually possessed of a large share of the Virtues of his great
Uncle.

Memorable Persons.
Thomas Underhill Esquire, was born at Neaher-Eatendon, lived with his Wife 65
years, (having by her 13 Sons, and 7 Daughters) in Worshipful Equipage, which
was rendered illustrious by their Exemplary Hospitality. She dyed in July, and
he in October following, 1603.

Noted Sheriffs.
Q. Eliz. An. 27. An. Shugburg Arm. The Surname of the Family is right ancient
in the place of their Name and Habitation, giving for their Arms, the Stones
Astroites (in Herauldry reduced to Mullets, which they most resemble, found
within their Manor.

K. James. An. 2. Richard Verney, Mil. hunted the Powder-Traytors (taking
desperate courses after the discovery of their Plot) out of this, into the next
Shire of Worcester.

16. Francis Leigh, Mil. was Created Baron of Dunsmore, and afterward Earl of
Chichester by King Charles I. His eldest Daughter and Heir was Married to
Thomas Earl of Southampton, his younger to George Villiers, Visc. Grandison.

K. Charles I. An. 12. Thomas Leigh, Mil. was Created by Charles I. Baron of
Stoneleigh in this County, and he is happy in his Son Sir Thomas Leigh, who
undoubtedly will dignifie the Honor which descends unto him.

The Battle on October 3. 1642.
Dr. Heyl. Hist. of King Charles.
The Fight at Edgehill was very terrible, no fewer then Five Thousand Men
slain upon the place; the Prologue to a greater Slaughter, if the dark night
had not put an end to that dispute. The Victory went on the Kings side, who
though he lost his General, yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of the
dead Bodies, and not so only, but he made his way open unto London, and in his
way forced Banbury Castle, in the very sight as it were of the Earl of Essex,
who with his flying Army made all the have he could toward the City, (that he
might be there before the King) to secure the Parliament. The King afterward
entered triumphantly into Oxford, with no fewer then 120 Colors taken in the
Fight. Yet here many of the Loyal Gentry of Lincolnshire, fell with the Earl
of Linsey their Countryman, and had not some miscarriage happened here, the
Royalists had totally in all probability routed their Enemies.

WESTMORLAND.
WEstmorland has Cumberland on the West and North, Lancashire on the South,
Durham and Yorkshire on the East thereof. I^ is in length from North to South
30 Miles, and in breadth 24. The County is neither stored with Arable Grounds,
nor Pasturage, the principal profit that the people of this County raise unto
themselves is by Clothing. Speed mentions but one Religious House in this
County, though it has several Kirks. As for Manufactures, Kendal Cottons are
famous all over England. Note, the Clothiers of Kendal, were the first Founders
of Sturbridge Fair.

Proverbs.
I. Let Uter-Pendragon do what he can, the River Eden will run as it ran.
Tradition reports, that Vter-Pendragon designing to Fortify the Castle of
Pendragon in this County, invited (in vain) the River Eden to forsake her old
Channel. The Proverb is applyable to such who offer a Rape to Nature, by
endeavoring to abrogate any of her Established Laws, to divert her course, or
invert her method.

Princes.
Katharine, Daughter of Sir Thomas Par, was born at Kendal-Castle, which
descended to her Father from the Brusses and R^sses of Werk. She was first
Married to John Nevil, Lord Latimer, and afterward to King Henry 8. She was a
great Favourer of the Gospel, and would earnestly argue for it. Once politic
Gardener had almost got her into his Clutches, had not Divine Providence
delivered her. Yet a Jesuit (who was neither Confessor nor Privy-Councellour to
the King) tells us, that the King intended, if longer surviving, to behead her
for an Heretic* She was afterward Married to Sir Thomas Seymour Baron of
Sudeley, and Lord Admiral, and dyed in Childbed of a Daughter 1548.

Cardinals.
Cristopher Bambridge, born near Appleby, was bred Doctor of Law in Queens
College in Oxford. He was afterward Dean of York, Bishop of Durham, and at
last Archbishop of York. Being employed an Ambassador to Rome, he was an
active instrument to procure King Henry 8. to take part with the Pope against
Lewis King of France, for which good service he was created Cardinal of St.
Praxis. A little after falling out with his Steward Rivaldus de Medena, an
Italian, and ca^eing him for his faults, the Italian (in short) poysone^ him,
July 14. 1511. He was buried in the Hospital of the English at Rome.

Prelates.
Thomas Vipont, descended of those ancient Barons who were Hereditary Lords of
this County, was by the Canons of Carlisle elected their Bishop, though King
Henry 3. with great importunity (why not Authority?) commended John Prior of
Newbury to them. He enjoyed his place but one year, and dyed 1256.

John de Kirby, born at Kirkby Lansdale (or Stephens) was first Canon,
afterward Bishop of Carlisle, 1332. He, with the Assistance of Thomas Lucy and
Robert Ogle, (persons of prime power in those parts) fighting in an
advantageous place, utterly routed and ruined the Scots, who invaded England,
with an Army of 30000 Men, under the Conduct of William Douglas, and had taken,
and burnt Carlisle. He dyed 1353.

Thomas de Appleby was legally chosen Bishop of Carlisle, yet he durst not own
the choice, till he had obtained his Confirmation from the Court of Rome. He
was consecrated 1363, and deceased 1395.

Robert de Appleby went over into Ireland, and there became Prior of St. Peter
near Trim, hence he was by the Pope preferred Bishop of Ossory in that
Kingdom. He dyed 1404.

W. of Strickland, descended of a right Worshipful Family, was elected Bishop
of Carlisle, yet Robert Read was by King Richard 2. and the Pope preferred to
the place, which affront Strickland bore with much moderation. He was
afterward (during a vacancy) chosen again, and Consecrated Bishop of Carlisle
1400. For the Town of Perith in Cumberland, he cut a passage from the Town into
the River Petteril, for the conveyance of Boatage into the Irish Sea. He dyed
1419.

Nich. Close, born at Bibreke, was one of the six Original Fellows, whom King
Henry 6. placed in his new College (Kings College) in Cambridge, having
committed the building of that house to his fidelity. He was first Bishop of
Carlisle, then of Lichfield, where he dyed within a year after his Consecration,
viz. an. 1453.

Since the Reformation.
Hugh Coren, was made by Queen Mary, Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, his
Predecessor having been deprived for being married. It Is very observable, that
no person in that Kingdom suffered death for their Religion in Queen Mary's
days. Indeed an. 3. Mary a Pursevant was sent with a Commission into Ireland,
to empower some eminent persons, to proceed with Fire and Faggot against poor
Protestants; On he went to Chester, where his Host, (a Protestant) having an
inkling of the matter, stole the Commission, putting the Knave of Clubs in the
room thereof. Some weeks after, he appeared before the Lords of the Privy
Council at Dublin, (of whom Bishop Coren a Principal) produced a Card for his
Commission, and was imprisoned for the affront. After his enlargement, he was
very willing to make a reparation, by getting the Commission renewed in
England, but was prevented by the Queens death. Bishop Coren conformed with the
first, to the Reformation of Queen Elizabeth, being ever sound in his heart. He
was for some time Chief Justice, and Chancellor of Ireland, till he quitted
all his Dignities in Exchange for the Bishopric of Oxford, which being
attended with more quiet, was more welcome to him in his old Age. He dyed 1567.

Barnaby Potter, was born within the Barony of Kendal, 1578. and bred in Queens
College in Oxford, whereof he became Provost. He was Chaplain in Ordinary to
Prince Charles, being accounted at Court, the Penitential Preacher, and by King
Charles I. was preferred Bishop of Carlisle. He was commonly called the
Puritanical Bishop, and they said of him in the time of King James, that Organs
would blow him out of the Church, which I do not believe, the rather, because
he loved Vocal Music, and could bear his own part therein. He was a constant
Preacher, and performer of Family duties, of a weak Constitution, Melancholy,
lean, and a hard Student. He dyed in Honor, being the last Bishop that dyed a
Member of Parliament, 1642.

Statesmen.
Sir Edward Bellingham Knight, of an Ancient and Warlike Family, was Servant of
the Privy Chamber to King Edward 6. who sent him over Deputy of Ireland. He
first extended the English pale, proceeding against the Irishry in a Martial
course, by breaking the Moors and Connors, two Rebellious Sexts; He built the
Forts of Leix and Offaly, to secure his new Acquisition, and had settled the
English Plantations therein, had he not been suddenly revoked before two years
were expired. His Soldiers never knew whither they went, till they were come
whither they should go; Thus he surprised the rude Earl of Desmond, brought him
to Dublin, reformed him in Civility, sometimes making him to kneel an hour
together, before he knew his Duty, till he became a new man in his behavior.
This Earl all his Life after, highly honored him, and at every Meal, would
pray to God for good Sir Edward Bellingham. When the Deputy returned into
England, he cleared himself of many faults laid to his charge, recovering the
King's favor, and had been sent over Deputy again, save that he excused
himself by indisposition of Body, and dyed not long after.

Writers.
Richard Kendal, an excellent Grammarian and Schoolmaster, extracted a
Quintessence from a vast number of Latin Grammars, and boasted (like a
conceited Pedant) that Latin only to be elegant, which was made according to
his Rules. He flourished under Henry 6.

Since the Reformation.
Bernard Son of Edward Gilpin, Esquire, was born at Kentmire, 1517. and bred in
Queens College in Oxford. He disputed against Mr. Hooper, (who was afterward
Martyred) when indeed he did follow his Argument with his Affections. He
afterward became a zealous Protestant. He was Rector of Houghton in the North,
and boarded in his house 24 Scholars, the greater number poor men's Sons, upon
whom he bestowed Meat, Drink, Cloth and Education. He kept a Table for his
Parishioners, every Sunday from Michaelmas to Easter. He commended a Married
life in Clergymen, himself living and dying a Batchelour. He bestowed 500
pounds, in the building and endowing of his School. He was accounted a Saint,
in the Judgments of his very Enemies, if he had any such. Being full of Faith
and good works, he was put in his Grave, as a heap of Wheat in due time, swept
into the Garner; dying March 4. 1583. Aet. 66.

Richard Mulcaster, of ancient Extraction, was born in this County (or
Cumberland) and bred in Kings College in Cambridge, AMP.
afterward in Oxford. He was chosen the first Master of Merchant Tailors
School in London, where his Scholars profited so well, that the Merchant
Tailors intended to fix him, as his Desk, to their School, till death should
remove him. This he perceived, and therefore gave for his Motto, Fidelis servus
perpetuus Asinus, but after 25 years, he was made Master of Paul's School; Such
his Discipline, that the Indulgence of Parents rather increased then mitigated
his severity on their offending Children. He was Plagosus Orbilius, and (which
quallified the matter) unpartial. Amongst the many excellent Scholars which he
bred, Bishop Andrews was most remarkable. At last, quitting the place, he
became Parson of Stanford Rivers, and dyed about the middle of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

Christopher Potter, D. D. Kinsman to Bishop Potter was bred in, and Provost of
Queens College in Oxford. He was Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles I. and
Dean of Worcester; one of a sweet nature, comely Presence, courteous Carriage,
devout Life, and deep Learning. He wrote an excellent Book, Entitled Charity
mistaken, answered by a Jesuit, against whom, Mr. Chillingworth took up the
Cudgels. He dyed in the beginning of the Civil War.

Benefactors to the Public.
Robert Langton and Miles Spencer, Doctors of Law, jointly built a fair School
at Appleby; Robert was bred in, and a Benefactor to Queens College in Oxford,
owing the Glasing of many Windows therein, to his Beneficence, on which Windows
he caused his Surname to be made in this manner, viz. Long (or Lang) ton.

Anne Clyfford, sole Daughter and Heir to George Earl of Northumberland, Wife
to Richard Earl of Dorset, then to Philip Earl of Pembrock and Montgomery, had
her greatest Estate in the North, She built and endowed a most beautiful
Hospital at Appleby in this County, and is still living.

Memorable Persons.
Richard Gilpin, who was enfeoffed in the Lordship of Kent-mire-hall, by the
Baron of Kendal, for his singular deserts; killed the wild Bore, that raging in
the Mountains adjoining, much endammaged the Country people, whence it is that
the Gilpins give the Bore in their Arms.

Note that in the Reign of King Edward 1. the Hereditary Sherivalty of this
County was conferred on the Lord Clifford, who married Sibel, eldest Daughter
to Robert de Vipont. Henry Lord Clifford was by Henry 8. an. 1525. Created Earl
of Cumberland, and when Henry the 5th. Earl of that Family, dyed lately without
issue male, the Honor of the Hereditary Sherivalty reverted unto Anne, the
third Daughter of George Clifford, the third Earl of Cumberland, the Relict of
Richard Earl of Dorset, (and since of Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery)
by whom she had two Daughters, the elder Married to the Earl of Thanet, and the
younger Married to James Earl of Northampton.

WILT-SHIRE.
WIlt-shire has Gloucestershire on the North, Bark-shire and Hamp-shire on the
East, Dorset-shire on the South, and Somersetshire on the West. From North to
South it extends 39 Miles, being in breadth 29. and in circumference
139-miles. A pleasant County, and of great variety. It is plentiful in all
English Commodities, especially in Wool, the Manufacture of Clothing being
vigorously pursued, and very good Whites made here. The best Tobacco-Pipes
(portable Chimneys) are made at Amesbury in this County. As for Buildings, the
Cathedral of Salisbury (dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) is paramount in this
kind, wherein the Doors and Chapels equal the Months, the Win^dows the Days,
the Pillars of Marble the Hours of the year; so that all Europe affords not
such an Almanac of Architecture. A Countryman viewing this Church said, I
once admired that there could be a Church that should have so many Pillars, as
there be hours in the year, and now I admire more, that there should be so many
hours in the year, as I see Pillars in this Church. The Cross Isle is most
beautiful, the Spire Steeple is of great height, and greater Workmanship. I
have been informed that some Foreign Artists, beholding this building, brake
forth into tears, which some imputed to their admiration, others to their envy.
Of Monuments therein, that of Edward Earl of Hartford is most Magnificent, that
of Helen Suavenburgh a Swede, (the Relict of William Marquess of Northampton)
is most commended for its Artificial plainness. In the Nave of the Church,
there is a Monument of a little Boy in Episcopal Habiliments, it having been
fashionable in that Church (in the depth of Popery) that the Choristers chose a
Boy of their Society, to be a Bishop among them, from St. Nicholas, till St.
Innocents day at night, who did accordingly officiate in all things, saying of
Mass only excepted. Of Civil Buildings in this County, Long-leat, the house of
Sir James Thynne was the biggest, and Wilton is the stateliest, and the
pleasantest for Gardens, Fountains, etc. As for Salisbury, the Citizens thereof
have derived the River into every Street therein, so that the City is (like
Venice) a heap of Islets thrown together, according to the Epitaph of Mr.
Francis Hide, a Native of this City, who dyed Secretary unto the English Leiger
in Venice. Born in the English Venice, thou did dye,
Dear Friend in the Italian Salisbury.
The Wonders of this County are Stone-henge, a Roman work, consisting of four
Equilateral Triangles, inscribed within a Circle, a double Portico, and
Architraves set without Mortar. It Is conceived, it was a Temple dedicated to
Heaven, being of a Circular form, built on a Plain, and being without a Roof.
The next is Knot Grass, growing 9 Miles from Salisbury, which is ordinarily 15
foot in length, and sometimes 24, and being built many stories high, from knot
to knot; it lies matted on the ground, whence it is cut for Provender, the
knots whereof will fat Swine. The Grass is conceived peculiar to this place.

Proverbs.
I. It is done according to the use of Sarum. This Proverb began on this
occasion; Osmund Bishop of Sarum, about 1090 made an Ordinal or Office, which
was generally received all over England, all speaking the same words in their
Liturgy. It is now applied to those persons which do, and actions which are
formally and solemnly done, in so regular a way, by Authentic precedents, and
patterns of unquestionable Authority, that no just exception can be taken
thereat.

Princes.
Margaret Plantagenet, Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, and Elizabeth
Nevil, eldest Daughter and coheir of Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick, was born
August 14. 1473, at Farrley-Castle in this County. She was Countess of
Salisbury, Heir to the Duchess of Burgundy, and Niece to King Edward 4. and
Richard 3. and Mother to Cardinal Pole. By Sir Richard a Knight of Wales, and
Cousin German to King Henry 7. she had (amongst others) Henry Lord Montague, her
eldest Son, when he was accused for Treason, she was charged to be privy
thereunto, in the Reign of King Henry 8. On the Scaffold as she stood, she
would not gratify the Executioner with a prostrate posture of her Body. The
Executioner at last dragged her by the Hair, (gray with Age) and may be truly
said to have took off her Head, ( an. 23. Henry 8.) seeing she would neither
give it him, nor forgive him the doing thereof.

Jane Seymore, Daughter to Sir Jo. Knight, (honorably descended from the Lords
Beauchamps) was born (probably) at Wulfal, and after was Married to King Henry
8. It is said, that at her first coming to Court, Queen Anne Bollen snatched at
a Jewel Pendant about this Jane's Neck, and hurt her own hand, with the
violence she used, but it grieved her Heart more, when she perceived it the
King's Picture, who from this day forward, dated her own declining, and the
others ascending into her Husbands affection. This Queen dyed some days after
the Birth of Prince Edward her Son, on whom this Epitaph, Phaenix Jana jacet,
nato Phaenice, dolendum
Saecula Phaenices nulla tulisse duas.
Soon as her Phoenix Bud was blown
Root-Phenix Jane did wither,
Sad, that no Age a brace had shown
Of Phenixes together.
She dyed in her Husbands favor, and was buried in the Quire of Windsor
Chapel, the King continuing in real mourning for her, even all the Festival of
Christmas.

Saints.
Adelme, Son to Kenred, Nephew to Ina, King of the West Saxons, (after Foreign
breeding) was Abbot of Malmesbury 30 years. He was the first Englishman who
ever wrote in Latin, the first that brought Poetry into England, and the first
Bishop of Sherburn. He wrote a Book for the reducing the Britons to observe
Easter, according to the Church of Rome. The Monks (those Babylonish Masons)
have built such lying Wonders on his Memory, and have vomited out such lies (to
his dishonor) that the loudness thereof has reached to Heaven; affirming that
this Adelme, by his Prayers, stretched out a Beam of his Church (cut too short
by the Carpenter) to the full proportion, and that he, at another time hung his
Vestment on the Beams of the Sun, which miraculously supported the same. Coming
to Rome to be Consecrated Bishop of Sherburn, he reproved Pope Sergius his
Fatherhood, for being a Father indeed to a Bastard, then newly born. And
returning home, lived in great esteem, till the day of his death, which
happened 709. His Corpse was inshrined at Malmesbury, and had in great
Veneration.

Edith, natural Daughter of King Edgar, by the Lady Wolfhild, was a devout
Abbess of Wilton. Being reproved by Bishop Ethelwold for her curious Attire,
she told him, that God regarded the Heart more then the Garment, and that sins
might be covered as well under Rags as Robes. It Is said, that after the
slaughter of her Brother Edward, holy Dunstan had a design to make her Queen of
England, so to defeat Ethelred the lawful Heir, had she not declined the
proffer. She dyed 984, and is buried in the Church of Dioness at Wilton, of her
own building. She was commonly called St* Edith the younger, to distinguish her
from her Aunt, of whom before.

Martyrs.
About 1503. there was a persecution of Protestants (in deed) in this County,
under Edmund Audley Bishop of Salisbury; One Richard Smart being burnt at
Salisbury, for reading a Book called Wickliff's Wicket, to one Thomas Stillman,
afterward burnt in Smithfield. But under cruel Bishop Capon, Wilt-shire
affords these Marian Martyrs, Jo. Spicer Free-Mason, William Coberly Tailor
in Kevel, burnt in Salisbury 1556. John Maundrel Husbandman.

Confessors.
John Hunt and Richard White, Husbandmen at Marleborough, were persecuted in
Salisbury 1558, and being condemned to dye, were little less then miraculously
preserved, as will appear hereafter.

Alice Coberly, Wife to William Coberly forenamed, failed in her Constancy. The
Jaylors Wife of Salisbury, heating a Key fire hot, and laying it in the Grass,
spoke to this Allice, to bring it unto her, in doing whereof she pitiously
burnt her hand, and cried out. O (said the other) if thou can not abide the
burning of a Key, how will thou endure thy whole Body to be burnt at the Stake;
whereat the said Alice revoked her opinion.

Cardinals.
Walter Winterburn, born at Sarisbury, and bred a Dominican Friar, was an
excellent Scholar, and a skilful Casuist, a quality which recommended him to be
Confessor to King Edward 1. Pope Benedict 11. made him (being 79 years of Age)
Cardinal of St. Savin, upon the news of the death of Maklesfield at London, who
dyed before the Cap was sent him; and this Walter's Cap (being not enjoyed one
year) was never a whit the worse for wearing; for having made a journey to
Rome, to procure it, in his return home, he left it, and the World, and was
buried at Genoa, but his Corpse (afterward brought over) was interred in
London, 1305.

Robert Halam is reported to have been born of the Royal Blood of England. S. N.
He was bred in, and Chancellor of Oxford, 1403. and was Archdeacon of
Canterbury, then Bishop of Salisbury, at last made Cardinal, June 6. 1411. He
was one of them who represented the English Clergy, both in the Council of Pisa
and Constance, in which last Service he dyed 1417. in Gotleby Castle.

Prelates.
Johannes Sarisburiesis, a Restorer of Learning, in most kinds, whereof himself
was most eminent. He was Companion to Thomas Becket, in his Exile, but not in
his disloyalty, for which he sharply reproved him. He was highly in favor with
Pope Eugen 3. and Adrian 4. and yet no Author in that Age has so pungent
passages against the Pride and Covetousness of the Court of Rome. For in his
Polycrat. he says, Scribes and Pharisees sit in the Church of Rome -- His
Legates do so swagge^, as if Satan were gone forth from the Face of the Lord,
to scourge the Church. They eat the sins of the people, with them they are
clothed, and many ways riot therein -- Who dissent from their Doctrine, are
condemned for Heretics or Schismatics, etc. He was generally esteemed a pious
man, and was by King Henry 2. made Bishop of Chartres in France, where he dyed
1182.

Richard Poor, Dean of Sarisbury, was first Bishop of Chester, S. N.
then of Sarisbury. He removed his Cathedral (most inconveniently seated for
want of water, etc.) to a place called Merry field, since Sarisbury, where he
laid the Foundation of that stately Structure, which he lived not to finish. He
was afterward removed to Durham. Pious was his life, and peaceable his end,
April 2. an. 1237. His Corpse was buried at Tarrent in Dorset-shire, in a
Nunnery of his own founding, and some of his Name, (and probably of his
Alliance) are still extant in this County.

William Edendon, born at Edendon, and bred in Oxford, was by Edward 3. made
Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer of England. He then first caused
^roats, and half Groats to be made, with some abatement of the weight. He was
afterward made Lord Chancellor, and erected a stately Convent for Bonhomes at
Edendon in this County, valued at the dissolution at 521 l. 12. s. 5 d.. per
Annum. Some condemn him for robbing St. Peter (to whom with Swithin, Winchester
Church was dedicated) to pay all Saints, to whom Edendon Convent was
consecrated, suffering his Episcopal Palaces to decay, whilst he raised up his
new Foundation. Whereupon* after his death, his Executors were sued for
Dilapidations by his Successor William Wickham, (an excellent Architect) who
recovered of them 1662 l. 10 s. besides his Executors were forced to make good
the standing stock of the Bishopric, which in his time was impaired, viz. Oxen
1556, Weathers 4717, Ewes 3521, Lambs 3521, Swine 127. He dyed 1366, and lies
buried under a fair Monument of Alabaster, near to the Quire.

Richard Mayo, born nigh Hungerford, of good Parentage, (whose Surname is since
extinguished) was bred in, and President of Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford. He
was sent by King Henry 7. into Spain, an. 1501, to bring over the Lady
Katharine to be Married to Prince Arthur. After his return, he was rewarded
with the Bishopric of Hereford. He dyed 1516, and was buried under a
Magnificent Monument in his Church.

Since the Reformation.
John Thornborough, B. D. born in Salisbury, and bred in Magdalens-Colledge in
Oxford, was a man of goodly Presence; By Queen Elizabeth he was made Dean of
York, and Bishop of Lymrick in Ireland, where he had a wonderful deliverance;
For an upper Floor in an old Castle, wherein he, his Wife and Children lay, did
fall down in the dead hour of the night, into his Room, and rested on some
Chests, (after it had crushed Cupboards and Tables, etc.) without hurting any
living Creature. An. 1. Jac. he was Consecrated Bishop of Bristol, holding his
other places in Commendam with it, and from thence was Translated to Worcester.
Being a great Chemist he presented King James with an Extraction, which was
reputed a preserver of Health, and prolonger of Life, though as for the Bishop
himself, I conceive that his merry heart was his best Elixir: Dying exceeding
Aged An. Dom. 164..

John Buckbridge, born at Dracot, was bred in Oxford, where he became D. D. and
President of St. Johns-Colledge. He was afterward Minister of St. Giles
Cripplegate, and on the 9th. of June 1611, he was Consecrated Bishop of
Rochester. He wrote a Learned Book against John Fisher, De Potestate Papae in
Temporalibus. He was afterward preferred Bishop of Ely. He dyed 163. and was
buried in the Church of Bromly in Kent.

Statesmen.
Edward and Thomas Seimor, Sons of Sir John Knight. of Wolful, are here joined,
because they were (only) then invincible, whilst they were united in Affection.
First, Edward Seimor Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector, and Treasurer of
England, being the eldest Brother, succeeded to a fair Inheritance. He was a
valiant Soldier for Land-service, fortunate, and generally beloved by Martial
men; a man of great Candor and Affability. He Married Anne, Daughter of Sir
Edward Stanhop Knight, a Lady of an high Mind, and undaunted Spirit. His
younger Brother Thomas Seimor, made Baron of Sudley, by the favors of his
Nephew King Edward 6. obtained a great Estate; Being well experienced in Sea
Affairs, he was made Lord Admiral of England. He was reserved, and more cunning
in his Carriage. He Married Queen Katharine Par, the Widow of King Henry 8.
Very great the Animosities betwixt their Wives, the Duchess refusing to bear
the Queens Train, and in effect just^ed with her for precedence, so that, what
betwixt the Train of the Queen, and long Gown of the Duchess, they raised so
much dust at the Court, as at last put out the eyes of both their Husbands, and
occasioned their Execution; The Lord Thomas an. 154^. the Lord Edward, an.
154.. These two Bullworks of the Kings safety being demolished, D. Dudley had
the advantage, the more easily to practice the destruction of King Edward 6. as
is vehemently suspected.

Sir Oliver St. John Knight, Lord Grandison, etc. was born of an Ancient and
Honorable Family, whose prime Seat was at Lediard Tragoze in this County.
Being bred in the Wars from his Youth, he was by King James appointed Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and vigorously pursued the Principles of his Predecessors,
for the civilizing thereof, and first advanced it to considerable profit to his
Master; and Ireland, which was the Land of Ire or Broils for 400 years, did
now become the Land of Concord. Being recalled into England, he lived for many
years in great repute, and dying without issue, left his Honor to his Sisters
Son, by Sir Edward Villiers, but the main of his Estate to his Brothers Son*
Sir Jo. St. John Knight and Barronet.

Sir James Ley, Knight and Baronet, (a younger Son of Henry Esquire, of great
Ancestry, who served King Henry 8. at the Seige of Bollen) was born at Ta^ant,
and bred in Brazen-Nose-College, and having studied the Laws, was by King James
made Lord Chief Justice in Ireland, and practiced the Charge the King gave him
at his departure, not to build his Estate on the Ruins of a miserable Nation,
making a good progress in civilizing that people, by the unpartial execution of
Justice. After he was recalled, King James made him Attorney of the Court of
Wards, Chief Justice of the King's Bench, an. 18. Reg. Lord Treasurer of
England; an. 22. Baron Ley of Ley in Devonshire the same year. King Charles I
created him Earl of Marleburg in this County an. 1. Reg. and Lord President of
the Council, in which place he dyed 1629. He was a person of great Gravity,
Ability and Integrity, and as the Caspian Sea, is observed neither to ebb nor
flow, so his Mind did not rise nor fall, but continued the same constancy in
all conditions.

Sir Francis Cottington Knight, was born near Mere, and bred when a Youth under
Sir -- Stafford. He lived so long in Spain, till he made the garb and gravity
of that Nation become him. He raised himself by his natural strength, without
any artificial advantage, having his Parts above his Learning, his Experience
above his Parts, his Industry above his Experience, and (some will say) his
success above all, so that at the last, he became Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Baron Hanworth in Middlesex, and Lord Treasurer of England, gaining also a very
great Estate; but what he got in few years, he lost in fewer days, since the
Civil Wars, when the Parliament made him one of the examples of their severity,
excluding him pardon, but permitting his departure beyond the Seas, where he
dyed about the year 1650.

Capital Judges.
Sir Nicholas Hide Knight, was born at Warder in this County, where his Father,
in right of his Wife, had a long Lease of that Castle, from the Family of the
Arundels. His Father, I say, (descended from an Ancient Family in Cheshire) a
fortunate Gentleman in all his Children, (and more in his Grandchildren) his
younger Children, (among whom Sir Nicholas) in Wealth and Honor exceeding the
Heir of the Family. Having studied the Laws, he was sworn Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, February the 9 th, 1626. discharging his Office with great
integrity, and dyed 1631.

Soldiers.
Henry D'anvers, second Son to Sir John, and Dame Elizabeth, Daughter and
Coheir to Nevil Lord Latimer, was born at Dantsey, 1573. being bred under the
Prince of Orange, he was made a Captain in the Wars of France, and there
Knighted for his good service, under Henry 4. the then French King. He was
Lieutenant of the Horse, and Sergeant Major of the Army in Ireland, under
Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Baron of Mountjoy, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; by King James he was made Baron of Dantsey, and Peer of this Realm,
as also Lord President of Munster, and Governor of Guernsey. By King Charles
I. he was created Earl of Danby, Privy-Councellour, and Knight of the Garter.
He dyed 1643. without Issue, leaving his Estate to his Nephew, Henry D'anvers.

Writers.
Oliver of Malmesbury, a Benedictine, being much addicted to Mathematics, and
to judicial Astrology, upon the appearing of a Comet, foretold the destruction
of the Inhabitants of this Land, which fell out accordingly at the Norman
Conquest. It Is said, he essayed the famous experiment of flying, and taking his
rise from a Tower in Malmesbury, made his way in the Air for one Furlong, then
fell down, and brake both his Thighs. Having written some Books of Astrology,
he dyed 1060, five years before the Norman Invasion.

W. (Summerset) of Malmesbury, where he was Canter and Library Keeper, wrote a
History of the Saxon Kings and Bishops, until his own time. He dyed 1142. and
was buried in Malmesbury.

Robert Canutus, born at Cricklade, (or Greeklade, where anciently Greek was
professed) became Chief of the Canons of St. Fridswith in Oxford. Having made a
Garland of the Flowers of Pliny's Natural History, he Dedicated the Book to
King Henry 2. He wrote also Comments on the greater part of the Old and New
Testament, and flourished 1170.

Richard of the Devises (anciently divided between the King and Bishop of
Salisbury) was a famous Benedictine in Winchester. He wrote a History of the
Reign of Richard 1. under whom he flourished; and an Epitome of the British
affairs. He dyed about 1200.

Godwin of Salisbury, Chanter of that Church, wrote a Book of Meditations,
flourishing about 1256.

Jo. of Wilton Senior, an Augustine Friar, studied in Paris; A subtle
disputant, wrote many Sermons on several occasions, flourishing under Edward 2.
1310.

Jo. of Wilton Junior, a Benedictine Monk in Westminster, was an Elegant
Latinist. He wrote Metrical Meditations, in imitation of St. Bernard, and a
Book Entitled the Dial of Wisdom. He flourished under King Edward 3.

Jo. Chylmark born at Chylmark and bred in Oxford, was a great Philosopher and
Mathematician, being the Archimedes of his Age. He wrote many Mathematical
Tractates, and flourished under King Richard 2. 1390.

Thomas Wilton, D. D, was first Chancellor, then Dean of St. Paul's in London.
He sided with the Bishops, whom the Poor Friars taxed for their pomp, for he
knew well enough that the Accusers opened the Coffers of all the Treasure in
the Land, by Feminine Confessions, and abusing the Key of Absolution. He wrote
a smart Book on this subject, Whether Friars, in Health and Begging, be in the
State of Perfection?

Since the Reformation.
William Horeman, bred in Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, became Vice-Provost of
Eaton; The most general Scholar of his Age. Having written of Orthography, the
Quantities of Syllables, a Chronicle, a Comment on Gabriel Biel, On the divorce
of King Henry 8. A Comment on Cato, Varro, etc. He dyed 1535. and lies buried
in the Chapel.

Masters of Music.
William Laws, bred in Salisbury, was of the Private Music to King Charles I.
He made several sorts of Music for Voices and Instruments. He disclaimed the
covert and privilege of the Office of Commissary, and valiantly venturing his
person, was casually shot at the Siege of Chester. The King commonly called him
the Father of Music. He, and his Brother, were the Authors of the Composures
of the Psalms. He dyed 164..

Benefactors to the Public.
Thomas Stumps of Malmesbury, an Eminent Clothier, entertained (as is said)
King Henry 8. and his Court-train, coming unexpected with the plentiful
Provision, which was prepared for his Workmen, who were forced to fast in the
mean time. He preserved Malmesbury Minster, at the time of the general
dissolution, buying the same with a great sum of Money, for the Townsmen, by
whom it was converted into a Parish Church. He bought the Demesnes of
Malmesbury Abbey, for 1500 l. 2 s.. may there be many branches of such Stumps!

Memorable Persons.
-- Sutton of Salisbury, a great Clothier in the time of King Henry 1. is by a
mistake, s^pposed to have bequeathed 100 l. to the Weavers of Salisbury, which
was not built till long after that King's time.

Michael, Undersheriff to Sir Anthony Hungerford, 1558. in the last of Queen
Mary, was a right Godly Man. When the Writ, de Haereticis Comburendis, for the
Execution of R. White and Jo. Hunt, was brought to him, instead of burning
them, he burnt the Writ; and before the same could be renewed, Dr. Geffrey (the
bloody Chancellor of Salisbury who procured it) and Queen Mary, were both dead.

Sir James -- Vicar Choral of the Church of Salisbury, in the time of King
Edward 6. was wholly addicted to the Study of Chemistry, and pretended he had
all his Skill by Inspiration. He dyed about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth.

Noted Sheriffs.
Edward 3. An. 35. Henry Sturmy, Lord of Woolfhall in this County, Bailiff and
Guardian of the Forest of Savernake, by right of Inheritance, as all his
Ancestors were, from the time of King Henry 2. Their Hunters Horn is kept by
the Seymours, Dukes of Sommerset, as a Monument of their descent from such
noble Ancestors.

King Henry 6. An. 23. Jo. Basket Esquire, had a dispensation from Pope
Eugenius the 4th, to choose a Confessor in the Parish of Salisbury, who was
empowered to commute his vows of Pilgrimage to St. Peter, Paul and James, (if
he had made any such) into other works of Piety.

Q. Elizabeth. An. 11. Thomas Thin Mil. for his sudden Wealth, was Summoned
before the Council, some suggesting he had met with Tresor trove, or used some
indirect means. He showed, that he had got the same by Marriage, Industry, and
Frugality, for the rest, (said he) you have a good Mistress, Our Gracious
Queen, and I had a good Master, the Duke of Sommerset. Cambden says that this
Thomas was descended from the Ancient Family of the Bottevils.

41. Walter Vaughan had for his Arms, S. a Chev. betwixt three Childrens Heads,
cooped at the Shoulders, Ar. their Peruques, O. inwraped about their Necks with
as many Snakes proper; -- One of the Family is reported to have been born with
a Snake about his Neck. His Lands descended to Sir George, a worthy Gentleman,
and after his issueless decease, to a Brother of his who was born blind, bred
in Oxford, and became Prebendary of Sarum.

K. Charles I. An. 1. Francis Seymour, Mil. Grandchild to Edward Earl of
Hartford, and Brother to William Duke of Sommerset, was by King Charles I.
Created Baron of Troubridge in this County, since for his Loyalty made Privy
Counselor to King Charles II. and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

Battles.
Lansdoune Fight, was fought in the Confines of this County and Sommerset, July
13. 1643. and it seemed not so much an entire Battle, as a heap of Skirmishes
hudled together. It may be said, Victus and Victor uterque fuit, The
Parliaments Forces beat the Royalists back five times, with much disorder; Sir
Bevil Greenvil being slain in the Head of his Pikes, (Major Lowre in the Head
of his party of Horse) yet the Kings Forces allege demonstration of Conquest,
that Prince Maurice, and Sir Ralph Hopton remained in the Heads of their Troops
all Night, and next Morning found themselves possessed of the Field, and of the
dead, as also of Three Hundred Arms, and Nine Barrels of Powder, the Enemy had
left behind them.

Round way Fight. Five days after, Prince Maurice, with the Earl of Carnarvan
returning, and the Lord Wilmot coming from Oxford, with a gallant supply of
select Horse, charged the Parliaments Forces, under the Conduct of Sir William
Waller; With him were the Horse of Sir Arthur Haslerigg, so well Armed, that
each Soldier seemed an impregnable Fortification. But these were so smartly
charged by the Prince, that they fairly forsook the Field, leaving the Foot
(which in English Battles bear the heat of the day) to shift for themselves. In
the mean time Sir Ralph Hopton hurt lately, (with the blowing up of Powder) lay
sick and sore in the Town of Devizes. His men wanted Match, whom Sir Ralph
directed to beat and boil their Bed-cords, and marching forth, they effectually
contributed to the total routing and ruining of the Parliaments Foot which
remained.

Note, King Edgar freed this Land from Wolves. May the Flocks of this County be
also freed from two legged Wolves, Spanish Ewes, (whereof one being formerly
brought over into England, brought with it the first general contagion of
Sheep) and) Hunger-Rot, the effect of an over dry Summer.

WORCESTERSHIRE.
Worcestershire has Staffordshire on the North, Warwickshire on the West,
Gloucestershire on the South, Hereford and Shrop-shire on the West; Being of a
Triangular form, it stretches from North to South 22 Miles, from South to
North-West 28, and thence to her North-East point 28 Miles. The natural
Commodities are Lampreys, in the River Severn; then Perry, a Wine made of
Pears. There is also fine Salt made in this County, which is reputed the second
Salt Cellar in England. There are found here many Salt Fountains, but stopped
up again for the preservation of Woods. As for the Buildings in this County,
the Cathedral of Worcester was much defaced in the Civil Wars. The Market Towns
are generally handsomely built, and no Shire in England can show a brace of
them, so neat and near together, as Beaudly and Kidderminster in this County,
being scarcely two Miles asunder.

Saints.
St. Richard, born at Which, (alias Droitwich) bred in Oxford, and beyond the
Seas, became Chancellor of Oxford, then of Canterbury, till at last he was
chosen Bishop of Chichester. He was a great Becketist, a stout Opposer of Regal
Power over Spiritual Persons, on which and other accounts, he wrote a Book to
Pope Innocent the 4th. against King Henry 3. Wherefore, after his death he was
Canonized by Pope Urban the 4th. As for their Report, that the Wiches or Salt
Pits in this County were miraculously procured by the Prayers of this Holy Man,
their unsavory lie has not a grain of probability to season it, it appearing
by ancient Authors, that Salt Water flowed there, time out of Mind, before
sweet Milk was given by Mother or Nurse, to this St. Richard.

Cardinals.
Jo. Cumin, bred a Monk at Eversham in this County, was by the Kings
procurement, chosen Archbishop of Dublin, and afterward by Pope Lucius
created Cardinal of St. Vellit in Italy.

Hugh of Evesham, so applied himself to the Study of Physic, that he became
the Phoenix in that Faculty, great was his skill in the Mathematics and
Astrology. Having satisfied Pope Martin the 4th. in some matters of great
difficulty, he was by his Holiness made Cardinal of St. Laurence, 1280. Seven
years after he was poisoned, though Cicaonius, to palliate the business, said
he dyed of the Plague.

Prelates.
Wulstan of Brandsford, was Prior of Worcester, and built a most beautiful Hall
in his Convent. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Worcester, 1338. He was Verus
Pontifex in the Grammatical Notation thereof, building a fair Bridge at
Brandsford, over the River Teme. He dyed 1349.

Jo. Low, an Augustine Friar in Which, was presented to St Asaph, and
afterward made Bishop of Rochester. He preserved many Manuscripts, and
bestowed them on the Magnificent Library, which he furnished at St. Augustines
in London; which Library vanished away, at the dissolution, with the fine
Steeple of that Church; one person, who shall be Nameless, imbezelling both
Books and Buildings to his private profit.

Edmund Bonner, alias Savage, was Son of Jo. Savage Priest, Son to Sir Jo.
Knight of the Garter, and Privy Counselor to King Henry 7. His Mother,
Concubine to this Priest, was sent out of Cheshire to cover her shame, and lay
down her Burden at Elmley in this County, where this bouncing Babe Bonner was
born. Being Dr. of Laws, he was employed by King Henry 8. in several Embassies
beyond the Seas, at which time he was Bonner, was not Bonner, being as yet
meek, and a great Cromwelite; Not long after he was Consecrated Bishop of
London. Under King Edward 6. being deputed to Preach publicly concerning the
Reformation, his frigid and faint Expressions concerning the same, occasioned
his deprivation and Imprisonment. Then it was, when one jearingly saluted him,
Good morrow Bishop Quondam, that Bonner as tartly returned, Good morrow Knave
semper. Being restored under Queen Mary, he caused the death of twice as many
Martyrs, as all the Bishops in England besides; justly occasioning these Verses
made upon him. No Body speaking to Bonner. All call thee Cruel, and the Sponge
of Blood,
But Bonner, I say, thou art mild and good.
Under Queen Elizabeth he was deprived, and secured in his Castle, I mean the
Marshalsea in Southwark, for as that Prison kept him from doing hurt to others,
it kept others from doing hurt to him, being so Universally odious, he had been
stoned in the Streets, if at Liberty. The Oath being tendered to him by Horn,
then Bishop of Winchester, he pleaded for himself, that Horn was no lawful
Bishop, which occasioned the ensuing Parliament to confirm him, and the rest of
his Order, to all purposes and intents. After ten years Imprisonment, he dyed
1569. and was buried in the Churchyard of St. George in Southwark; But enough
of this Herostratus, who burnt so many living Temples of the Holy Ghost; yet
let me add one thing, that being a very Corpulent Man, (a Constitution that
argues rather a Plethorie, then a Cacochymie, or ill humor) he seems by his
cruelty to have done violence to his own disposition, seeing the temper of the
Mind commonly follows that of the Body; But Quid non Religio potuit suadere
Malorum?

Since the Reformation.
Jo. Watson, born at Bengeworth, was Prebendary, then Dean, and afterward
Bishop of Winchester. It Is said he (being 60 years of Age) proffered the Earl
of Leicester 200 l. to be excused from the Bishopric, which the Queen
understanding, Nay then (said she) Watson shall have it, he being more worthy
thereof, who will give 200 l. to decline, then he who will give 2000 l. to
attain it. There were three Watsons Bishops in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
Thomas of Lincoln, our Jo. of Winchester, and Anthony of Chichester. He dyed
15.. and was buried in the Church of St. Mary Overies.

Statesmen.
Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, born at Croone, was eldest Son to Sir Thomas
Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. He was bred in, and Treasurer
of the Inner Temple, 1618. Being first Attorney General to King James, he was
afterward made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, November, an. 1. Car. I. by whom
he was created ( an. 4. Reg.) Baron Coventry, of Alesborough in this County. He
enjoyed the dignity of Lord Keeper fifteen years, if it was not more proper to
say, that dignity enjoyed him. This latter Age affording none better qualified
for the place, The Patent whereby he was created Baron, makes mention of his
most worthy Services to King James and King Charles I. his Prudence, Courage,
Dexterity, Integrity and Industry manifested toward the King and his Crown. He
dyed January, 1639. before the Civil Wars. Never Lord Keeper made fewer Orders,
which were afterward reversed; His being firmly grounded on the consent of the
Parties.

Writers on the Law.
Sir Thomas Littleton Knight, born in Frankley, was Son of Thomas Wescot
Esquire, and Elizabeth Littleton his Wife, and two great Kings had a great
Sympathy to him, who had an Antipathy each to other, Henry 6. whose Sergeant he
was, and rode Judge of the Northern Circuit, and Edward 4. who made him a
Judge, and in his Reign he rode the Northampton Circuit. His Book of Tenures
witnesses his deep skill in the Laws, and retains at this day, an Authentical
Reputation; Insomuch, that when in the Reign of King James it came in question,
upon a Demurrer in Law, whether a Release to one Trespasser, should be
available or no to his Companion, Sir Henry Hubbard, and Judges, Warberton,
Winch and Nicols, his Companions gave judgment according to the opinion of our
Littleton, and openly said, That they would not have his Case disputed or
questioned. He left three Families, signally flourishing in this and the
Neighboring Counties of Stafford and Salop. This Judge, and the Judicious Lord
Coke, who Commented on his Tenures, were the two great Luminaries of the Law of
England. He dyed an. 21. Edward 4. and lies buried in the Cathedral of
Worcester. See more of him in Staffordshire.

Soldiers.
Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, born at the Manor house of Salwape, Jan.
28. 1381. was a person so redoubted for Martial Atchievments, that Hercules his
Labors found in him a real performance. 1. Being hardly 22 years old, an. 5.
Henry 4. at the Queens Coronation he Justed and Challenged all Comers. 2. He
bid Battle to Ow^n Glendour the Welsh Rebel, put him to flight, and took his
Banner with his own hands. 3. He vanquished the two Piercies at Shrewsbury. 4.
Being challenged (in his Pilgrimage to the Holy Land,) at Verona, by Sir
Pandulph Malacet, an Italian, to fight with him at three Weapons, viz. with
Axe, Sword and Dagger, he had slain his Adversary at the second Weapon, had not
some seasonably interceded. 5. Fighting at Justs in France with Sir Collard
Fines, at every stroke, he bare him backward to his Horse, and when the French
suspected that he was tied to his Saddle, to con^ute their Jealousies, our Earl
^ighted, and presently remounted* 6. He was eminently active in the Kings
Victorious Battles in France, and might truly say, Quorum pars ego magna sui.
7. By King Henry 5. he was sent to the Council of Constance, with a Retinue of
800 Horse. 8. Here he killed a Dutch Duke (who challenged him) in the presence
of the Emperor. 9. The Empress affected with his Valor, took the Badge from
one of the Earls Men (being a plain Bear of Silver) and wore it on her
Shoulder. But the next day our Earl presented her with a Bear (which was his
Crest) made of Pearls and Precious Stones. 10. Being sent by King Henry 5. with
1000 Men in Arms, to fetch Queen Katharine, sole Daughter to the King of
France, he fought with the Earls of Vendosme and Limosin, killed one of them
with his own hand, routed the Forces of 5000 Men, and brought the Lady, whom he
saw safely Married to the King. 11. He was by the said Kings Will, appointed
Governor of his Son in his Minority, and made Lieutenant of all France. 12.
During his Life, our success in France was progressive, and retrograde after
his death. Sigismund the Emperor, coming into England, told King Henry 5. that
no Christian King had such another Knight, for Wisdom, Nurture and Manhood, and
by Imperial Authority (with the Kings consent) caused him to be named, The
Father of Courtesy. Being tossed with a great Tempest in his last Voyage to
Normandy, and despairing of Life, he caused himself, his Lady and infant Son,
to be bound to the main Mast, on this design, that being known by his Armor,
and Coat of Arms upon him, he might have a Christian Burial; Yet he dyed
afterward in his Bed at Roan, April 30. 14^9. and lies buried in a Chapel of
the Collegiate Church of Warwick, having a most stately Tomb. His Deeds of
Charity were little inferior to the Atchievments of his Valor.

Physicians and Chemists.
Sir Edward Kelley, alias Talbot, born at Worcester, was reported to have
jointly found with Dr. Dee, a great quantity of Elixir, in the Ruins of
Glassenbury Abbey That Doctor having Calculated Sir Edward's Nativity, might
possibly by some Mystical Equations, find out the place of that Elixir. They
afterward fixed at Trebona in Bohemia, where Sir Edward (being a skilful as
well as fortunate Chemist) is said to have transmuted a Brass warming Pan (by
warming it by the fire, and putting the Elixir thereon) into pure Silver, a
piece whereof was sent to Queen Elizabeth. Manuscr. Libr. Cott.
These two, (Sir Edward and Dr. Dee) kept constant Intelligence with a Spirit,
giving them advice how to proceed in their mystical discoveries, and enjoining
them, by way of preparatory qualification for the same, they should enjoy their
Wives in common; Though bogling hereat at first, they resolved to submit
thereunto, because the Lawgiver might dispense with his Laws, in matters of so
high Nature. Upon this ('it is thought) Dee left his Companion, to rant it in
Germany, who trusting too much to his Treasure, spent extravagantly 4000 pounds
on Rings, which he gave away at the Marriage of one of his Maidservants. Being
highly conceited of his Skill, he gives Advice to all Lovers of Chemistry, in
these words. To you, I say, how Learned soever you be,
Go burn your Books, and come and learn of me.
According to the malignant position of Aquarius (which has influence on the
Legs) observed in the Scheme of his Nativity; Being imprisoned by Radulphus the
Emperor, and endeavoring to escape out of an high Window, by a pair of Sheets
tied together, he fell, and brake his Leg, whereof he dyed 1595. From this
Compound Chemist, if you separate his Sublimate and Precipitate, that is his
Pride and Prodigality, there will remain an experienced Philosopher, worthy
recommendation to Posterity.

Writers.
Florence of Worcester, being learned and industrious, wrote Chronicum
Chronicorum, from the Creation, till his death, happening 1119.

Jo. Wallis or Welsh, a Franciscan in Worcester, was bred in Oxford, then in
Paris, where he was commonly called the Tree of Life; though the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil had been more proper, he having written 20 Volumes
of curious speculations. He dyed, and was buried in Paris, 1216.

Elias de Evesham a Benedictine, born of good Parentage, flourished about 1270.

VV. de Packington, a Layman, was Secretary and Treasurer to Edward the black
Prince. AMP.
Having lived long in France, and acquired an e^actness in the Language; he
wrote in French the Story of five English Kings, John, Henry 3. Edward 1.2. and
3. and a Book of the Atchievments of the Black Prince. He flourished 1380.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Edwin Sandys, Son to Edw. D. D. and Bishop of Worcester, was bred in
Cambridge, and attained to be a most accomplished person, right handed to any
great Employment, and constant in all Parliaments, as the Speaker himself,
being beheld by all as an excellent Patriot. He was Treasurer to the
Undertakers for the VVestern Plantations* the Bermudaes owing their happiness
to his care, and Sandys Tribe is no contemptible proportion therein. He had a
Commanding Pen; Witness his Book of the Religion of the VVestern World. I have
been informed that he bequeathed a considerable Sum to the building of a
College in Cambridge, but Debts not coming in according to expectation, his
good intention failed in the performance thereof. He dyed 1631.

Romish Exile Writers.
Riehard Smith, D. D. was bred in Oxford, where he was the Kings Professor,
till King Edward 6. sent for Pet. Martyr to supply that place; (betwixt whom
and Smith, there was great contest.) But in the Reign of Queen Mary, Peter
Martyr was glad to fly from that University, and make room for the old
pretender. Thus we see, that in such Controversies as were betwixt them, it
mattered little who were the disputants, whilst the prevalent power was the
Moderator. Dr. Smith flying again into the Low Countries, became Dean of St.
Peter in Doway, and the first Professor in the University founded therein. He
dyed 1563.

Jo. Marshal, born at Dalisford, was bred at New-Colledge in Oxford, where he
proceeded Batchelour of Laws, and was second Master of Winchester School.
Flying, an. 1. Elizabeth, he became Canon of Lisle in Flanders. He wrote a Book
against Jo. Calfield, an English Protestant. At his death, he bequeathed a Ring
with a rich Stone, to adorn a piece of the Cross in his Cathedral, and dyed
1597.

Robert Bristow, fled from Oxford to Lovain, whence he repaired to the English
College at Doway, where he was the first Priest, being the Right hand of
Cardinal Allen, who made him Prefect of that College. Going to Rhemes he wrote
a book (say the Papists) Against foolish Fulk, who indeed was a Grave and Godly
Divine. He returned for his Health into his Native Country, where having the
good hap to miss that which cures all diseases, he dyed in his bed at London,
1582.

Henry Holland, Fellow of St. John's College in Oxford, fled over to Doway,
where he took the degree of Batchelour of Divinity, and Order of Priesthood.
Hence removing to Rhemes, he assisted (as my Pitz de Scrip. Ang. p. 804.
Author says) Traductioni Bibliorum, in the (traduceing) Translating of the
Bible, He was living 1611.

Masters of Music.
Walter of Evesham, a Benedictine Monk, and eminent Musician, wrote a Learned
Book in that Faculty. He flourished under King Henry 3. 1240.

Benefactors to the Public.
Richard Dugard, B. D. born at Grafton Fliford, was Fellow of Sidney-Colledge;
An excellent Grecian, and general Scholar; old when young, such his gravity in
Behavior, and young when old, such the quickness of his Endowments. He
bestowed on the College 120 pounds for some perpetual use, for the Master and
Fellows, and 10 pounds for Books for the Library. At last he was Rector of
Fullebey in Lincolnshire, where by his Piety and Diligence he procured his own
security. He dyed 1653. and lies buried in his Chancel.

Memorable Persons.
Jo. Feckenham, born of poor Parents in Feckenham-Forrest, being a Benedictine
at Evesham, received at the time of the dissolution, an Annual Pension of about
20 pounds, which maintained him in Oxford, where he attained to Eminency in
Learning. He was imprisoned in the Reign of Edward 6. made Abbot of
Westminster by Queen Mary, with whom he was very gracious, laying out all his
Interest with her, to procure pardon of the faults, or mitigation of the
punishments, for poor Protestants. By Queen Elizabeth he was highly honored,
and proffered (as is currantly traditioned) the Sea of Canterbury, which he
refused, and was kept in easy restraint. By his bounty he gained the good will
of all persons. He dyed very Aged in Wisbech Castle, about 1585.

Henry Bright, born in Worcester, where he was for 40 years, School Master,
excellently skilled in, and Communicative of the Latin, Greek and Hebrew
Languages; and Canon of the Cathedral Church of Worcester. He dyed 1626, being
buried in the Cathedral, I behold him placed by Divine Providence in this City,
in the Marches, that he might equally Communicate the luster of Grammar
Learning to Youth, both of England and Wales.

Noted Sheriffs.
Henry 7. An. 3. Jo. Savage, Mil. was made Knight. of the Garter, and Privy
Counselor to King Henry 7. And he, or his Son, removed into Cheshire, and
Married the Heir General of the ancient Family of the Bostocks, and was
Ancestor to the present Earl of Rivers.

Henry 8. An. 8. VV. Compton, Mil. was highly favored by the King, in whose
Court no Layman, ( Charles Brandon excepted) was equal to him. His Son Peter
Married into the Right Honorable Family of Shrewsbury, and his Grandson Sir
Henry Compton, was one of the three H. C. ( Henry Carry, Henry Compton, and
Henry Cheney) who were made Barons by Queen Elizabeth, and Ancestor to James
Earl of Northampton.

Q, Eliz. An. 19. Jo. Russel, Ar. afterward Knighted, had a great quarrel with
Sir Henry Berkley, so that great bloodshed was like to have ensued, at the
Sessions of Worcester; but Dr. Whitgift, Bishop of Worcester, wisely prevented
the same, requiring both parties, with their Friends, to come well guarded to
his Palace, where disarming them, he put a Conclusion to that Affray, having
used persuasions and threatenings to good effect.

36. Jo. Packington, Mil. being a (...), but no assiduous Courtier, drew the
Curtain between himself, and the light of the Queens favor, and then death
overwhelmed the remnant, and utterly deprived him of recovery. And they say of
him, that had he brought less to the Court then he did, he might have carried
away more then he brought, for he had a time of it, but was no good husband of
opportunity.

King ^ames. An. 12. Richard Walsh, Ar. afterward Knighted, followed the
Powder-Traytors (ferreted out of Warwickshire by Sir Richard Verney,) out of
the bounds of this County, till they took covert in the house of Stephen
Littleton, at Hallbach in Staffordshire, and not standing on the Punctilio of
exceeding his Commission, in a case wherein the Peace of the Kingdom was so
highly concerned, prosecuted his Advantage, and beset the house round about,
till both the Rights were killed in the place, Catesby and Piercy slain with
one Bullet, Rookwood and Winter wounded, and all the rest apprehended.

The Battles. Worcester Fight, September the 3d. 1651.
His Majesty on the 1st. of August foregoing, began his March from Edinburgh
into England, not meeting with any considerable opposition (those at Warrington
being put to flight by his presence) until he came to Worcester. His Army
consisted of 12000 effectual fighting Men, (whereof 2000 English, the rest
Scotch Men) but neither excellently Armed, nor plentifully stored with
Ammunition; whilst the Parliaments Forces, under Cromwell, more then doubled
that number, wanting nothing but a Good Cause, that an Army could wish or
desire. The Royalists chief Strength consisted in two passes they possessed
over the River of Severn, which prove^ not advantageous according to
expectation; for the Enemy found the River fordable elsewhere, and the Bridge
and Pass at Vptern, though valiantly defended by Major General Massey (who
received a shot in his hand) was forced by Lambert, pouring in unequal Numbers
on the King's Forces; Besides Cromwell finished a Bridge of Boards and Planks,
over the main River, with more Celerity and less Resistance then could have
been expected, in a matter of such importance. Then began the Battle, wherein
his Majesty, to remember His Subjects good, forgot His own safety, and gave an
incomparable Example of Valor to the rest, by Charging in his own Person. This
was followed by few, to the same degree of Courage or Danger, but imitated in
the greatest measure, by the Highlanders fighting with the Butt-ends of their
Muskets, when their Ammunition was spent. But new Supplies constantly charging
them, and the main Body of the Scotch Horse not coming up in due time, from the
City, to his Majesty's Relief his Army was forced to retreat in at
Sudbury-Gate, in much disorder. If there were (which some more then whisper)
false and foul play in some persons of Principal Trust; as they have had a
great space seasonably, God grant them his Grace sincerely to Repent, for their
treacherous retarding the Happiness, prolonging and increasing the Troubles of
the Best of Monarchs, and Three Great Nations. Sure it is, here were slain the
Flower of the Scottish Loyal Gentry, with the most Illustrious William (formerly
Earl of Lannerick) Duke of Hamilton. As for Common Soldiers, some few who
escaped had a longer Life, to have a sadder Death, wandering in the Country,
till other Men's Charity* and their own Strength, began to fail them.

Since, how God has conducted his Royal Majesty through Labyrinths of many
difficulties, to the Peaceable Possession of his Throne, is notoriously known
to the Wonder of the World.

YORKSHIRE.
Yorkshire has the Bishopric of Durham, and Westmorland on the North,
Lancashire, and a snip of Cheshire on the West, Darby, Nottingham and
Lincolnshire on the South, and the German Ocean on the East thereof. It is a
Square of 90 Miles each side, of equal dimensions, with the Dukedom of
Wirtenberg in Germany. If the Goodness of this County (which is not inferior
to others) be drawn into the greatness thereof, the product will be a
denomination of the best Shire in England; Besides, in respect of the goodness
and plenty of some Commodities, it might be termed the Garden of England, save
that it is too far from the Mansion House, I mean the City of London. Dr.
Tonstal Bishop of Durham, showed King Henry 8. (in his Progress to York) a
Valley near Doncaster, the richest as he affirmed, that ever he observed in all
his Travails through Europe, for within 10 Miles of Haselwood, the Seat of the
Vavasors, there were 165 Mannor-houses, 275 several Woods, some of them
containing 500 Acres, 3 Parks and Chases of Deer, 120 Rivers and Brooks,
whereof 5 be Navigable, 76 Water-Mills, 25 Coal Mines, 3 Forges for making of
Iron. The natural Commodities of this County are Geat, found in the Clefts of
the Rocks toward the Sea side; being naturally of a reddish and rusty color,
it grows black with polishing. It may pass for the Emblem of our Memories,
attracting trifles, and letting pass matters of more moment. Alume, first found
nigh Gesburgh, some 60 years since, by Sir Thomas Chaloner, Tutor to Prince
Henry; The Mine thereof being afterward managed by three prime Workmen,
brought (not to say stolen) over in Hogsheads, from Rochel in France, was
adjudged a Mine Royal, who paid yearly to the King, 12500 pounds, to the Earl
of Moulgrave, 1640 pounds, to Sir William Penniman, 600 pounds, and though he
had in pay at one time, no fewer then 800 Men, he complained not of his
Bargain; Selling the Alume (whereof he had the sole Sale) at 26 pounds the Tun.
This the late Long Parliament Voted a Monopoly, and restored the benefit
thereof to the former Proprietaries, who now pursue the work at five several
places, viz. Sands-end and Ash-holme, belonging to the Earl of Moulgrave,
Slapy-wath, Sir William (formerly Penniman's) Darcey's, Dunsley, Mr. Thomas
Fairfax's, Whitlay, Sir Hugh Chomley's. The Commodity is now fallen 13 pounds
the Tun* Lime is made near Pontfract, no less (as I am credibly informed) then
20000 pounds worth yearly. This County does breed the best Race of English
Horses, which (generally) are not so slight as the Barbe, nor so slovenly as
the Flemish, nor so Airy as the Spanish-Gennets, (especially if as reported,
they be conceived of the Wind) nor so Earthly as those in the Low Countries,
and Germany; But being of a middle Stature and Strength, are both seemly and
serviceable. Well may Philip be so common a Name among the Gentry of this
Country, who are generally so delighted in Horsemanship. The Manufacture of
Clothing is vigorously followed in this County. As for edged and pointed
Tools, Sheffeild is the Staple Town for Knives, and many and good Pins are made
in this County. But come we now to the Medicinal Waters; about a Mile and a
half from Knares-borough, Westward, there is a Spring of Vitrioline taste and
odor; discovered by one Slingsby, about 1620, and is conceived to run parallel
with the Spaw Waters in Germany. Not far of^ is a Sulphur-Well, the stench
whereof is great, but the virtues greater. In the same Parish there is the
Petrifying Well, because it converteth spungy substances into a stone, or
crusteth them over round about. St. Mungus his Well is famous for the Sovereign
Virtue of the Waters thereof, and for four Springs near in Situation, and
distant in Operation. It has its Name from St. Mungo, a Scotch Saint; See Dr.
Dean's Spadsacrena Anglica. As for Buildings, the Church of Beverly is a fine
Fabric, of which more when I shall have occasion to speak of the Collegiate
Church of Rippon. Then Wresel-Castle is seated in the Confluence of Derwent and
Owse, built of square Stone, with four fair Towers at each corner, with a
Gatehouse, wherein are Chambers five stories high, and Gardens without the
Walls; It had a Study made with great Art, in an ^ight square Tower, called
Paradise, all which beautiful Building (belonging to the Earl of
Northumberland) is much impaired, if not wholly defaced by time.

Proverbs.
I. From Hell, Hull and Halifax, -- deliver us. This is part of the Beggars or
Vagrants Letany; Hull is terrible to them, as a Town of good Government.
Halifax is formidable to them for the Law thereof, whereby Thieves taken in the
very act of stealing Cloth, are instantly beheaded with an Engine, without any
further Legal Proceedings. II. A Scarborough Warning, that is none at all, but
a sudden surprise, when a mischief is felt, before it be suspected. It took its
Original from Thomas Stafford, who in the Reign of Queen Mary, 1557. with a
small Company, siezed on Scarborough Castle, before the Townsmen had the least
notice of his approach. However, by the industry of the Earl of Westmorland,
Sir Thomas Stafford was within 6 days taken, brought to London, and beheaded.
Others affirm this Proverb to be of more ancient Original, fetching it from the
custom of Scarborough Castle, in former times, in shooting of Ships which
struck not sail, warning and damnifying them both together. III. As true Steel
as Rippon Rowels. The best Spurs of England are made at Rippon, the Rowels
whereof may be enforced to strike through a shilling, and will break sooner
then bow. It is applied to Men of Metal, faithful in their Employments. IV. An
Yorkshire We Bit. That is an overplus, not accounted in the reckoning, which
sometimes proves as much as all the rest. V. Merry Wakefield. This Town is
seated in a fruitful Soil, and cheap Country, where there is good Cheer, and
good Company, and therefore, why should not the Town be merry? --

Princes.
Henry, youngest Son to William Duke of Normandy, but eldest to King William
the Conqueror, was born at Selby, 1070. (where his Father Founded an Abbey)
and afterward gained the Crown from D. Roberts his eldest Brother. He was bred
in Cambridge and Paris, where he so profited, that he attained the Surname of
Beau-Clerke He Reigned 35 years, and upwards, remitted the Norman Rigor, and
restored to his English, Subjects, a great part of the English Laws and
Liberties. His Princely Virtues were attended with some Amorous Extravagancies,
as appears by his numerous Natural Issue, no fewer then 14, all by him
publicly owned; the Males highly advanced, the Females richly Married. His
Sobriety otherwise was admirable, whose Temperance was of proof against any
Meat objected to his Appetite, Lampreys only excepted, on a Surfeit whereof he
dyed, 1135. He had only two Legitimate Children, William, dying before, and
Maude surviving him, both born in Normandy.

Thomas, fifth Son of King Edward 1. and the first that he had by Margaret his
second Wife, was born at, and Surnamed from Brotherton, a Village in this
County, June the 1st. 1300. He was created Earl of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of
England. He left no Male Issue; but from his Females, the Mowbrays, Dukes of
Norfolk, and from them the Earls of Arundel, and the Lords Berkley are
descended.

Richard Plantag. Duke of York, commonly called Richard of Connisborough, from
the Castle in this Shire of his Nativity, was Grandchild to King Edward 3. He
Married Anne, Daughter and sole Heir to Edward Mortimer, the true Inheritrix of
the Crown; But tampering too soon, and too openly to derive the Crown, in his
Wives Right, to himself, by practicing the death of the present King, he was
taken and beheaded for Treason, in the Reign of King Henry 5.

Edward, sole Son to King Richard 3, and Anne his Queen, was born in the Castle
of Midleham, in this County, and was by his Father created Prince of Wales* A
Prince, who himself was a Child of as much Hopes, as his Father a Man of
Hatred. But he consumed away on a sudden, dying within a Month of his Mother. A
Judgment on his Father, a Mercy to the Prince, that he might not behold the
miserable end of him who begot him; and a Mercy to all England, for had he
survived to a Man's Estate, he might possibly have proved a Wall of Partition,
to hinder the Happy Union of the two Houses of York and Lancaster.

Saints.
St. Hilda, Daughter to Prince Hererick, Nephew to Edwin King of
Northumberland, lived in a Convent at Strenshalt in this County, and was the
Oracle of her Age, being a kind of Moderatrix in a Sax. Synod, held about the
Celebration of Easter. The most Learned English Female before the Conquest, the
She-Gamaliel, at whose Feet many Learned Men had their Education. This our
English Chron. 34.12.
Huldah ended her holy life with a happy death, 680.

St. Benedict Biscop, fixed himself in the Dominions of Oswy, King of
Northumberland, and built two Monasteries, the one at the influx of the River
Were, the other at that of the River Tine, into the Sea; and stockt them in his
life time with 600 Benedictine Monks. He made five Voyages to Rome, and always
returned full fraught with Relics, Pictures and Ceremonies. He left Religion
in England, braver, but not better then he found it, the Gawdiness prejudicing
the Gravity thereof. His Monastery being but the Romish Transcript, became the
English Original, to which all Monasteries in the Land were suddenly conformed.
Being struck with the dead Palsy, his Soul retired into the Upper Rooms of his
Clay Cottage; much employed in Meditation, until the day of his death, which
happened 703.

St. John of Beverly, born at Harpham, was 33 years and upwards, Archbishop of
York, being bred under Hilda aforesaid, and after under Theodorus the Grecian,
and Archbishop of Canterbury; Venerable Bede (his Scholar) wrote his Life, and
supposed Miracles: Being Aged, he resigned his Archbishopric, and retired to
Beverly, where he had Founded a College, for which he procured the Freedstool
(a Sanctuary) from King Athelstan. He dyed May 7. 722. and was buried in the
Porch of his Collegiate Church. A Synod held at London, 1416. assigned the day
of his death, an Anniversary Solemnity to his Memory.

Thomas Plantag. was Earl of Darby, Lancaster, Leicester, a popular person, and
a great enemy to the two Spencers, Minions to King Edward 2. who being hated as
Devils, for their Pride, no wonder if this Thomas was honored as a Saint or
Martyr, by the common sort. Indeed he must be a good Chemist, who can extract
Saint out of Malefactor; and our Chronicles generally behold him put to death
for Treason against King Edward 2. But let him pass for a Provincial, though no
National or Loyal Saint, seeing he did not Travel far enough for Romish, and
too far for English Canonization. His (beheaded) Martyrdom happened at
Pontfret, 1322. Note, Lord Herb. in the Life of King Henry 8. speaking of
Relics, (The Bell of St. Guthlack, and the Felt of St. Thomas of Lancaster,
both Remedies for the Headache.) must mean this St. Thomas, seeing there is no
other English of the Name, found in any English Martyrology.

Richard Role, (alias Hampole, from the place of his Holy Life, Death and
Burial) was a Hermit of strict Life. He wrote many Books of Piety, which I
prefer before his Prophetical Predictions, as but a degree above Almanac
Prognostications. He threatened the sins of the Nation with future Judgments,
and his Predictions, if hitting were heeded, if missing not marked. Having
spoken much against the Covetousness of the Clergy of that Age, he dyed 1349.

Jo. Birlington, born in Birlington, and bred in Oxford, became Canon in the
Convent of Birlington, where he grew Eminent for exemplary Holiness. He refused
at first the Office of Prior, counting himself unworthy thy thereof, but upon
the second proffer accepted of it. It Is said Martha and Mary were compounded in
him, being as pious, so provident to husband the Revenues of his house to the
best advantage; A She-Ancorist accosting him thus, Jesus is my Love, and you so
honor him in your heart, that no earthly thing can distract you; He replied, I
came hither to hear from you some saving and savoury discourse, but seeing you
begin with such idle talk, farewell. He dyed 1379. being reputed, though (I
think) not Canonized a Saint, whose Friend,

W. Slightholme, asked of his friend Jo. aforesaid, what might be the reason
the Devil appeared so seldom in their days, etc. To whom Jo. replied, We are
grown so remiss in Godliness, that the Devil needs not put himself to such
pains, seeing less and lighter Temptations will do the deed. William is
reported to have been one of singular Piety, and to have wrought many Miracles
at his Tomb, after his death, which happened 1380.

A certain Maid, resisting the solicitations of a Bravo, was by him Murdered,
her Head being set up on a Yew-Tree, at Horton, called now Halifax. The silly
people conceited that the Veins, which in form of little threads, spread
themselves betwixt the Bark and the Body of the said Tree, were the very Hairs
of the Virgins Head, to whom they flocked in Pilgrimage. Note the prevalency of
Opinion, Her reputation for being a Saint is transmitted to Posterity, though
her name be lost.

Martyrs.
The County, and generally the Province of York, escaped from Popish
Persecution, which under Gods goodness, may be imputed to the tempers of their
four succeeding Archbishops, Thomas Woolsey, who was more Proud then Cruel;
Edward Lee, who persecuted to Imprisonment, none to Death; (save two) Robert
Holgate, who was a parcel-Protestant; Nicholas Heath, a meek and moderate Man.
And as there were no Martyrs, so were there no Confessors, which are Martyrs in
the bud.

Cardinals.
Jo. Fisher, born in Beverly, and bred in Michael House in Cambridge, whereof
he was first Chancellor, became Bishop of Rochester. He was accessory to the
dissembling of Elizabeth Barton, the Holy Maid of Kent. He opposed King Henry's
Divorce, and Title of Supreme Head of the Church; procured a Cardinals Cap from
the Pope, and forfeited his own Head to the King, being beheaded 1535. Having
been tried by an ordinary Jury, and not by his Peers.

Prelates.
Eustathius de Fauconbridge, was chosen Bishop of London, an. 6. Henry 3. 1222.
He was Chief Justice, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, and afterterwards
Treasurer of England, and twice Ambassador to the King of France. He dyed
October 31. 1228. and was buried in the Presbytery.

W. de Melton, Prove. of Beverly, and Canon, then Archbishop of York. Being
Consecrated at Avignon, and returning into England, he expended 700 Marks in
the finishing of his Cathedral. His Life was free from scandal, signal for his
Chastity, Charity, Fasting and Praying. He bought 3 Manors from the
Archbishop of Roan, with the Popes Confirmation, and settled them on his
Brothers Son. He compassed about the Old Baily in York, with a great Wall. He
dyed 1340. and was buried in his own Church.

Henry Wakefield, preferred Bishop of Worcester by King Edward 3. 1375. was for
one year Lord Treasurer of England, dying March 11. 1394. he was buried in his
own Church, which before his death he had enlarged.

R. Scroope, Son to the Lord Scroope, and brother to William Earl of
Wilt-shire, was D. D. in Cambridge, a man of great Learning and unblameable
life. He was preferred Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, then Archbishop of
York. Being netled with the News of his Brothers beheading, he joined with the
Earl of Northumberland and others, against King Henry 4. The Earl of
Westmorland complied with him in appearance, till he had trepanned him. It does
not appear that he desired to be tried by his Peers; if he was dealt with
therein but odly; the Executioner served him as odly, in having 5 strokes at
his Neck, before he could sunder it from his Body, an. 1405.

Stephen Patrington, born in Patrington, was a Carmelite, D. D. in Oxford, and
Provincial of his Order in England, and afterward Chaplain and Confessor to
King Henry 5. by whom he was deputed a Commissioner to proceed against the
Wicklevites, and during that service, he was made Bishop of St. David's: Hence
he was sent over to the Council of Constance; returning into England, he was
advanced Bishop of Chichester, but dying before his Translation was finished,
was buried in White Friars in Fleet Street.

William Peircy, Son to Henry Earl of Northumberland, and Eleanor his Wife,
(whose principal Seat was Topliff in this County) was D. D. in and Chancellor
of Cambridge, and made Bishop of Carlisle, 1452. He dyed 1462.

Cuthbert Tonstal, born at Hatchforth in Richmond-shire in this County, of a
Worshipful Family at Tonstal Thurland, was bred in Cambridge, to which he was
in Books a great Benefactor. He was afterward Bishop of London, and at last of
Durham; a great Linguist, Mathematician and Divine, and a fast Friend to
Erasmus. In the Reign of King Henry 8. he publicly confuted the Papal
Supremacy in a learned Sermon, 1539. but returned to his error, in the Reign
of Edward 6. continuing therein an. 1. Elizabeth, for which he was deprived of
his Bishopric. He showed Mercy, when in Power; and found it in his Adversity.
He dyed a Prisoner at Lambeth, 1560.

Ralph Baines, Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, was an excellent
Linguist. Going over into France, he became Hebrew Professor at Paris. He wrote
a Comment on the Proverbs, in three Volumes, and Dedicated it to Fr. 1 st. King
of France. Returning into England, he was by Queen Mary made Bishop of Coventry
and Lichfield, in which Diocese he caused great Persecution. He was deprived of
his Bishopric, an. 1. Elizabeth, and dying, he was buried in St. Dunstans,
1560.

Since the Reformation.
Thomas Bentham, Fellow of Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford, renounced Popery, an.
1. Mary. He assisted Henry Bull, one of the same College, to wrest out of the
hands of the Choristers, the Censer, when about to offer their Superstitious
Incense. Flying into Germany he lived at Basil, Preacher to the English Exiles.
Toward the end of Queen Mary, he was secretly sent over, to be Superintendent
of the London Conventicle, (the only true Church in the time of Persecution)
where with all his caution he hardly escaped. An. 2. Elizabeth, he was
Consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. He dyed February the 21st. 1578.

Edmund Guest, born at Afferton, was D. D. in Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. He
was Almoner to Queen Elizabeth, by whom he was preferred Bishop of Rochester,
then of Salisbury. Having written many Books, he dyed 1578.

Miles Coverdale, bred in Cambridge, became an Augustine Friar, but afterward
quitting that Profession, he went into Germany; he labored greatly in
Translating of the Bible, and writing other Books. He was made D. D. at Tubing,
and returning into England, was made Bishop of Exeter by King Edward 6. An. 1.
Mary he was imposed, though saved from Martyrdom, by the Mediation of Fred.
King of Denmark. Being enlarged he went over into Germany, whence in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth he returned to England, but not to Exeter. He was one of
those who solemnly Consecrated Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, at
Lambeth. He dyed 1588. and lies buried in St. Bartholomews, behind the Exchange.

Adam Loftus, bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, where he Commenced D. D.
was Chaplain to Robert Earl of Sussex, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and was first
made Archbishop of Armagh, an. 1562. and afterward Archbishop of Dublin,
1567 At last being made Chancellor of Ire^and he discharged that place with
singular Ability and ^ntegrity, until the day of his death. He was a principal
Procurer of, and a profitable Agent in the Foundation of the University of
Dublin, being the first Honorary Master thereof, whilst he was Archbishop, if
not Chancellor of Ireland. He dyed April 5. 1605. and was buried in the Church
of St. Pat. having been Archbishop almost 43 years.

George Mountain, bred in Queens-Colledge in Cambridge, was Chaplain to the
Earl of Essex, whom he attended in his Voyage to Cales, being indeed a man of
great Valor. He was afterward made Dean of Westminster, then successively
Bishop of Lincoln and London; whilst residing in the latter, he would often
pleasantly say, that of him the Proverb would be verified, Lincoln was, and
London is, and York shall be; which came to pass accordingly, when he was
removed to the Archbishopric of York. He was a good Benefactor to
Queens-Colledge, whereon he bestowed a fair piece of Plate, (called Poculum
Charitatis, with this Inscription, incipio) and Founded two Scholarships
therein.

Capital Judges.
Sir William Gascoine, born at Ganthorp, studied in the Inner Temple, and being
Knighted an. 1. Henry 4. he was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in which
Office he demeaned himself with great integrity. It happened that a Servant of
Prince Henry (afterward King Henry 5.) was Arraigned before this Judge for
Felony, whom the Prince, then present, endeavored to take away, coming up in
fury, striking the Judge; But he sitting without moving, committed the Prince
Prisoner to the King's Bench, there to remain until the Pleasure of the King his
Father were further known; who when he heard thereof, gave God thanks, who at
the same instant had given him a Judge who could minister, and a Son who could
obey Justice. He dyed an. 14. Henry 4.

Guido de Fairfax Knight, (whose Name has continued at Walton in this County,
more then 450 years) was bred in the Study of the Law, and became Sergeant
thereof. He favored the House of York, in those civil distempers; yet was he
by King Henry 7. advanced Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.

Roger Cholmley Knight, natural Son to -- Lieutenant of the Tower, under King
Henry 7. was an. 37. Henry 8. made Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and an. 6.
Edward 6. Chief Justice of the King's Bench. An. 1. Mary he with Sir Edward
Montague, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, was committed to the Tower,
for drawing up the Will of King Edward 6. wherein his Sisters were
disinherited; whereupon Sir Roger was deprived of his Judges place, though his
Activity had amounted no higher then to a Subscription of the said Will. He
built a free School of Brick at Highgate, about 1564.

Sir Christopher Wray Knight, was born in the Parish of Bedal, the motive which
made his Daughter Frances, Countess of Warwick, scatter her Benefactions the
thicker in that place. His Ancestor came out of Cornwall, where his Name is
right ancient. Being bred in the Law, he was an. 16. Elizabeth, made Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench. He was moved by no Fear, but that of the Judge of
the World. He was pro tempore Lord Privy Seal, and sat Chief in the Court,
when Secretary Davison was Sentenced in the Star Chamber, concurring with the
rest of the Commissioners to lay a fine on him. His Benefaction to
Magdalens-Colledge in Cambridge, was both bountiful and seasonable. We know who
says, The righteous man leaves an Inheritance to his Childrens Children, and
the well thriving of his third Generation may be an evidence of his well gotten
Goods. This worthy Judge dyed May the 8th. an. 34. Elizabeth.

Statesmen.
Sir Jo. Puckering Knight, born at Flamborough-head, being a second Son,
applied himself to the Study of the Common Law, and became the Queens Sergeant,
Speaker in the House of Commons, and at last Lord Chancellor of England. In
the House of Lords he made a Speech against those that were called Puritans,
wherein he charges them with the open profession of disloyal and seditious
Principles, and affirms, that they by this Separation of themselves from the
Unity of their Fellow Subjects, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Majesty
of their Prince, do both join and concur with the Jesuits, in opening the
door, and preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatened against
the Realm. He dyed 1596. He is Charactred by Mr. Cambden, (in Elizabeth) Vir
integer. His Estate is since descended (his Male Issue failing) on Sir Henry
Newton, who assumed the Surname of P^ckering, and I can never be sufficiently
thankful to him, and his Relations

Sir George Calvert Knight, was born at Kiplin, and bred first in
Trinity-Colledge in Oxford, then beyond the Seas. He was Secretary to Robert
Cecil Earl of Sarisbury, Lord Treasurer of England. Afterward he was made Clerk
of the Council, and at last Principal Secretary of State to King James, an.
1619. Conceiving the Duke of Buckingham highly instrumental in his preferment,
he presented him with a Jewel of great value, which the Duke returned again,
not owning any activity in his advancement, whom King James, ex mero motu,
reflecting on his Ability, designed for the place, which he resigned 1624.
confessing to the King he was become a Roman Catholic, so that he must either
be wanting to his Trust, or violate his Conscience. King James continued him
his Privy Counselor all his Reign, and created him Lord Baltemore of Balt. in
Ireland. When Secretary, he had a Grant from King James, to him and his Heirs
of a County Palatine (of Avalon) in the New Foundland. He built a fair House
in Ferry Land in America, and spent 25000 pounds in advancing the Plantation
thereof, consulting therein the enlargement of Christianity, and the Kings
Dominions. After the death of King James, he went twice in person to
New Foundland Here, with two Ships manned at his own charge, he chased away
Monsieur D' Arade (sent by the King of France to annoy the English Fishermen)
relieved the English, and took 60 of the French Prisoners. King Charles I. gave
a Patent to him and his Heirs, of Maryland, (on the North of Virginia) with
Royal Franchises. He dyed in London, April 15. 1632. and lies buried in St.
Dunstans in the West, leaving his Son the Right Honorable Cecil Calvert, now
Lord Baltemore, Heir to his Honor, Estate and Noble Disposition.

Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, Son to William Wentworth of Went.
Woodhouse in this County, was born in London; which see.

Seamen.
Armigel Waad, born of an ancient Family in Yorkshire, was Clerk of the Counsel
to Henry 8. and Edward 6. A man of great accomplishments, employed in several
Embassies, and the first Englishman who discovered America. He had by two Wives
20 Children, whereof Sir William Waad was the eldest, a very able Gentleman,
and Clerk of the Council to Queen Elizabeth. This Armigel dyed June the 20th.
1568. and was buried at Hampstead in Middlesex.

Martin Forbisher Knight, born nigh Doncaster, was the first Englishman who
first discovered the North way to China and Cathay, whence he brought great
store of black soft Stone, supposing it to be Silver Ore, but it proved
useless. He was Valiant and Violent. He was Knighted for his signal service in
88. Having (with 10 Ships) defended Brest-Haven in Britain, against a far
greater power of the Spaniards, he was shot in the side. His wound not being
mortal in it self was rendered such by the unskilfulness of the Surgeon, who
having taken out the Bullet, left the bombast behind, wherewith the sore
festered, and the worthy Knight dyed 1594.

George Clifford, Lord Clifford Vescye, etc. Earl of Cumberland, was Son to
Henry, second Earl of that Family, by his second Lady; A person wholly Composed
of true Honor and Valor. In order to the cuting off the Spanish Sinews of
War, their Money from the West Indies, this Earl set forth a small Fleet at his
own cost, and Adventured his own person therein, being the best born Englishman
that ever adventured himself in that kind. His Fleet may be said to be bound
for no other Harbor but the Port of Honor, though touching at the Port of
Profit in his passage thereunto; I say touching, whose design was not to enrich
himself, but impoverish the Enemy. He left Impressions of his Valor and Mercy
in all places where he came. Queen Elizabeth an. 1592. honored him with the
Dignity of the Garter. When King James came first out of Scotland to York he
attended him with such an Equipage, that he seemed rather a King, then Earl of
Cumberland. Here happened a Contest between the Earl, and the Lord President in
the North, about carrying the Sword before the King in York; which Office was
finally adjudged to the Earl, as belonging to him, and whilst Clifford's Tower
is standing in York, that Family will never be forgotten. His Anagram was as
really as literally true* Georgius Cliffordius Cumberlandius. Doridis regno
clarus cum vi fulgebis. He dyed 1605. leaving one Daughter and Heir, the Lady
Anne, Married to the Earl of Dorset.

Physicians.
Sir George Ripley, born at Ripley, was Canon of Bridlington in this County. He
went over into Italy, and there studied 20 years together in pursuance of the
Philosophers Stone, and found it an. 1470. as some collect from his words,
Cant. 3.4.
Inveni quem diligit Anima mea. An English Gentleman of good credit, reported
that he saw a Record in the Isle of Malta, which declares, that Sir George
Ripley gave yearly to those Knights of Rhodes, 100000 pounds toward
maintaining of the War against the Turks. This vast Donation might easily
induce one to think that he was Eques Auratus, though indeed never more then
Sir Priest, and Canon of Bridlington. Returning home he became a
Carmelite-Anchorite at Boston in Lincoln shire, where he wrote 25 Books, his
Compound Alchymy carrying away the credit of all the rest; It makes mention of
the 12 Gates leading to the making of the Philosophers Stone, viz. Calcination,
Solution, Separation, Conjunction, Putrefaction, Congelation, Cibation,
Sublimation, Fermentation, Exaltation, Multiplication, Projection. But all this
was but a Project with a Termination; for, because things did not answer his
expectation, I understood by my Author's Information, that Sir George made
afterward a solemn Recantation. He dyed about 1492.

Thomas Johnson born near Hull, was an Apothecary in London; the best Herbalist
in his Age. He made Additions to Gerard, He was of great Modesty, as being both
more Learned and Valiant then he pretended to be. After he was made Honorary
Doctor in Oxford, he performed a dangerous piece of service at Basing-house, at
the Siege of which he afterward lost his Life, on the Loyal side, in the late
Wars, 1644.

Writers.
Alphred of Beverly, bred in Cambridge, and Treasurer of the Convent at
Beverly, wrote a Chronicle from Brutus to the time of his own death, which
happened 1136.

W. of Rievaulx, a Monk of Rushford, wrote an History of his own Age, and dyed
1146.

St. Ealread, the Pious and Learned Abbot of Rivaulx, was intimate with Dav.
King of Scotland, and many persons of prime Quality. He had an active Soul,
which he employed for the benefit of the public. He is generally accounted the
English St. Bernard, and wrote de Virginitate Mariae, de Abusionibus Claustri.
He refused several Bishoprics, etc. proffered to him, and dyed 1166. Whose
Deacon

Walter Daniel, trod in his Masters footsteps, and wrote on the same subject,
De Virginitate Mariae. He flourished under King Henry 2. and was buried in his
own Abbey.

Robert the Scribe, Prefect of the Canons Regulars at Bridlington, was extolled
by Erasmus for his fair and fast Writing. Having left many Books to Posterity,
he dyed about 1180. and was buried in his Convent.

Peter of Rippon, Canon of that College, wrote a Book of the Life and Miracles
of St. Wilfred the Founder thereof. There was a narrow place in his Church,
through which chaste persons might easily pass, whilst the incontinent did
stick therein. Many suspected persons did prick their credit, who could not
thread his Needle. I confess there might be some such narrow place, the occasion
as well as Touchstone of incontinency, over which this Inscription had been
proper, Aut inveniam aut faciam Libidinosas. The Steeple of this Church was
blown down, the fall whereof beat down the Chancel. Peter flourished 1190.
under King Richard 1.

W. of Newborough, born at Bridlington, was Canon Regular of Newborough. A
fierce little Man. He charged Jeffrey of Monmouth with Forgery, and denies that
there ever was such a Man as King A thur, etc. It Is said, he was out of humor,
because Dav. Prince of Wales denied him the Sea of St Asaph; So it seems, for
William himself can tell an incredible story, and therefore its likely, he
would not have charged a Falsehood upon another for the sake of Truth only. He
affirms, That in the place of the slaughter of the English, nigh Battle in
Sussex, if peradventure it be wet with any small shower, presently the Ground
thereabouts sweateth forth very Blood, though it be the quality of the Soil
(naturally reddish) and nothing else. He flourished under King John 1200.

Roger Hoveden, of an Illustrious Family, bred in the Study of the Civil and
Canon Laws, became a most accomplished Courtier under King Henry 2. He is the
chief (if not sole) Lay-Historian of his Age, writing a Chronicle, beginning
where Bid ended, continuing the same until the fourth of King John, by which
Chronicle King Edward 1. did partly clear his Title to the Crown of Scotland.
He flourished 1204.

Jo. of Halifax, commonly called De Sacro Bosco, was bred in Oxford, then in
Paris; the prime Mathematician of his Age. All Students of Astronomy enter into
that Art, through the door of his book De Sphaera. He dyed an. 1256.

Robert the Searcher, a Dominican, great Mathematician and Philosopher, is
reported to have lighted his Candle at the Devils Torch, to seek after such
secrets as he did desire; Witness his Book of Ceremonial Magic. He flourished
under King Edward 2. 1326.

Thomas Castleford, was a Benedictine in Pontfract, whereof he wrote an
History, from a Ask a Saxon, the first Proprietor, to the Lacies, from whom
that Lordship descended to the Earls of Lancaster. He flourished about 1326.

Jo. Gower, born at Stitenham, of a Knightly Family; was first a Student in the
Law, then a Poet, and was the first Refiner of the English Tongue; But it seems
he was made a Judge in his old Age. He may be called the English Homer, having
grown stark blind with Age. He wrote (amongst other Books) Speculum Meditantis
in French, Confessio Amantis in English, Vox Clamantis, in Latin. He dyed 1402.

Jo. Mar, born at Mar, bred in Oxford, a Carmelite of great Learning, was
praised by Trithemius and others, chiefly for his writing against J. Wickliffe.
He dyed 1407. and was buried in Doncaster.

Thomas Gascoigne, younger Brother to Sir William, Lord Chief Justice, was born
at Huntfleet, and bred D. D. in Bal. College in Oxford. He was Commissioner of
that University, 1434. He was a great follower of St. Hierom, whose Life he
wrote. He Composed a Theological Dictionary, much esteemed by Divines in that
Age. He was 57 years old, an. 1460.

Jo. Harding, Esquire, of ancient Parentage, was bred a Soldier, doing good
service at Roxborough-Castle against the Scots, and following the Standard of
King Edward, adhered to him in his deepest distress. He adventured into
Scotland, not without the manifest hazard of his Life, where he so cunningly
demeaned himself, that he found there, and fetched thence out of their Records,
many Original Letters, which he presented to Edward 4. Out of these he
Collected an History of the several Solemn Submissions publicly made, and
Oaths of Fealty, publicly taken, from the time of King Athelstan, by the Kings
of Scotland, to the Kings of England for the Crown of Scotland, though the
Scots affirm that such Homage was only taken for Cumberland, and some parcels
held of England, on the South of Tweed. He wrote also a Chronicle of the
English Kings, from Brutus to King Edward 4. He was living 1461.

Henry Parker, a Carmelite at Doncaster, and D. D. in Cambridge, Preached a
Sermon in London, in which he endeavored to prove, that Christ's Poverty was
the Pattern of Humane Perfection, and drove the Nail so far, that he was
imprisoned by the Bishop of London for the same, and since his Holiness took
the Bishops part, Parker thought to recant at Paul's Cross, where he had
Preached before. And from this time we may date the decay of the credit of the
Carmelites in England, moulting their Feathers afterward, till King Henry 8.
cut off their Wings and Bodies Politic. This Parker flourished under Edward 4.
1470.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Francis Bigot Knight, wrote a Book against the Clergy, Of Impropriations.
He was slain 1537. among the Northern Rebels, who detained Loyal Persons in
their Camp, until the blind Sword, having Aciem but not Ocuium, killed Friend
and Foe in fury, without distinction.

Wilfrid Holme, of gentile Parentage, lived in these parts, when the two
Northern Rebellions happened, and when the Popish-party gave it out, that the
Reformation would ruin Church and State. Wilfrid stated the Controversy
truly, clearly and wittily, confuting the Priests false Reports, and the
Peoples causless Jealousies. He dyed 1536.

Thomas Roberson, D. D. in Oxford, was a Grammarian for Greek and Latin, and
an excellent Teacher of Youth. He wrote Notes upon Lilly's Grammar. Robert,
under whose name Quae Genus is written may be the same with this Thomas. He
flourished 1544.

William Hugh, bred in Corpus-Christi-Colledge in Oxford, wrote a Book,
Entitled, The troubled Man's Medicine, (dedicated to Queen Katharine Par.) for
the satisfaction of those who were troubled about the final State of their
Children dying unbaptized. He dyed of the breaking of a Vein, 1549.

Roger Ascham, born at Kirby-Weik, and bred in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge,
was Orator and Greek Professor of the University, and an. 1. Mary, wrote
Letters to 47 several Princes, the meanest whereof was a Cardinal. Traveling
into Germany he was familiar with Jo. Sturmius; After his return, he was a
Teacher to the Lady Elizabeth, to whom (after she was Queen) he became
Secretary for her Latin Letters. He was an honest man, a good Archer, and much
delighted with Cock-fighting. His Latin Style was facile and fluent, witness
his Letters. His (...) is a Book good for young men, his Schoolmaster for old,
and his Epistles for all Men. He dyed 1568. December 30. and was buried in St.
Sepulchers in London.

Sir Henry Savil Knight, born at Bradley, and bred in Oxford, became Warden of
Merton-Colledge, and Prove. of Eaton. He set forth an excellent Edition of
Hierom, with Annotations, Copies of which were stolen (before the Printing
thereof) by Popish Emissaries, and sent to France, and Printed there, with a
Latin Translation. His only Daughter was Married to Sir William Sidley of
Kent, Barronet. He dyed at Eaton, 1549. and was interred there. He was an
excellent Mathematician, witness his Learned Lectures on Euclide. He founded
Mathematick Professors in Oxford, whereof one was Mr. Briggs, who had mightily
pleased Sir Henry, with a certain curious demonstration in that Science.

Thomas Tailor, born at Richmond, bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge; entered
into the Ministry at 27 years of Age, continuing in the same at Reading and
London 35 years. A pious and charitable man, and a painful Pastor. A little
before his death (1632.) he avowed, that we serve such a Master, who covers
many imperfections, and gives much wages for a little work.

Nathaniel Shute, born at Gigleswick, and bred in Christs-Colledge in
Cambridge, was an excellent Scholar and solid Preacher, (at St. Mildred
Poultrey, in London) though nothing of his is extant in Print, save a Sermon,
called Corona Charitatis. He was an uncomfortable Preacher in one sense, in
that he left no hope of imitation for such as should succeed him. He dyed 1638.

Josiah Shute, Brother to Nathaniel aforesaid, was bred in Trinity-Colledge in
Cambridge, and was afterward Minister of St. Mary Woolnoth in London; One of
the most considerable Laborers in Gods Vineyard, that ever was beheld in
Lombard street. He was good at both Positive and Controversial Divinity, and
had a strain of Native Eloquence. Highly esteemed of his Parish, till the
beginning of our late Civil Wars, when some began to neglect him; distasting
wholesome Meat, because their Mouths were out of taste. He dyed 1640. and was
buried in his own Church. One hour before his death, he cheerfully entertained
some of the Parishioners who came to visit him, with this expression, I have
taught you, my dear Flock, for above 30 years how to live, and now I will show
you in a very short time how to dye. Note, there were three other Brothers of
this Josiah, who were Ministers, viz. Robert in Lyn, Thomas in Chester, and
Timothy in Exeter.

George Sandys, youngest Son of Sir Edwin Archbishop of York, was born at
Bishops-Thorp. A most accomplished Gentleman. He traveled to, and wrote a
description of the Holy Land. He most elegantly Translated Ovid's Metamorphosis
into English Verse, and Composed some spriteful and Masculine Poems of his own.
He dyed about 1642.

Jo. Saltmarsh, of an ancient, but decayed Family, was bred (chiefly at the
Charge of Sir Thomas Metham his Kinsman) in Magdalens College in Cambridge. He
was a Poet and good Preacher. Be it charitably imputed to his Conscience, that
of a zealous observer, he became a violent oppresser of Bishops and Ceremonies.
He wrote against my Sermon of Reformation, taking me for many points of Popery
therein. I defended my self in a Book called Truth maintained, to which he
answered not, being informed I was dead at Exeter. He dyed (1650) in or about
Windsor, (as he was riding to and fro in the Parliaments Army) of a burning
Fever, venting on his death strange and extatical expressions,

Jer. Whitacre, born at Wakefield, was bred Master of Arts in Sidney-Colledge.
He became Schoolmaster of Okeham, then Minister of Stretton in Rutland. Being
a Member in the late Assembly, he behaved himself with much Moderation. At last
he was Preacher at St. Magdalens Bermondsey, being a solid Divine, and a man
made up of piety, pity and patience. He was visited with many, and most acute
diseases, the Gout, Stone, and Ulcer in his Bladder, and another in his
Kidneys. His Liberality knew no bottom, but an empty Purse, so bountiful he was
to all in want: He dyed 1654. and was buried in his own Parish. All I shall add
is this distick, Whites ambo, Whitehead, Whitgift, Whitakerus uterque,
Vulnera Romano quanta dedere Papae?


Romish Exile Writers.
Jo. Young, was Fellow of St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, at first a
parcel-Protestant, Translating into English, the Book of Archbishop Cranmer of
the Sacrament, he became a zealous Papist, and great Antagonist of Mart. Bucer,
and an able disputant. He was Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, 1554 Master of
Pemb. Hall, Professor of Divinity, and Rector of Landbeach nigh Cambridge, but
lost all his preferment an. 1. Elizabeth, being deprived and imprisoned. He
dyed 1579.

Jo. Mush, bred in the English-Colledge at Doway, and in Rome, whence returning
into England, he fished for Proselytes for 20 years together, being for some
considerable time imprisoned, at last he procured his Enlargement. In his time
happened the Schism betwixt the Jesuits and Priests, which threatened Ruin to
the Church of Rome. Mush went to Rome about it, and was very instrumental in
Composing of those differences. Returning into England he was assistant to the
English Archpriest. He wrote (among other books) Vitam and Martyrium D.
Margaret^ Clithoreae, Whether D. be for Domina or Diva, Lady or Saint, I know
not; I take her for some Gentlewoman in the North, who for some practices in
maintenance of her Religion, became obnoxious to the severity of the English
Law. He lived 1612.

Benefactors to the Public.
Thomas Scot, born at Rotheram, (which he assumed for his Name) was Fellow of
Kings-Colledge, afterward Master of Pemb. Hall, in Cambridge, and Chancellor
of the University. He built on his proper cost (saving something helped by the
Scholars) the fair Gate of the School, with fair Walks on each side, and a
Library on the East thereof. This Thomas having felt the sharp tusks of the
Boar (when imprisoned by King Richard 3. for resigning the Great Seal of
England to Queen Elizabeth, the Relict of King Edward 4.) he advanced that
Kings Crest (being the Boar) on the aforesaid Gate, merely to ingratiate
himself. He was successively Provost of Beverly, Bishop of Rochester, Lincoln,
and lastly Arch Bishop of York; Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, and Chancellor
of England. Many were his Benefactions to the Public, of which none more
remarkable then his founding 5 Fellowships in Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford. He
dyed at Cawood of the Plague, 1500.

Jo. Alcocke, born at Beverly, (where he built a Chapel, and Founded a Chantry
for his Parents) was D. D. in Cambridge, and became Bishop of Ely, and was
preferred Lord Chancellor of England by King Henry 7. He turned the old
Nunnery of St. Radegund, (Founded by Malcolm King of Scotland) into a New
College, called Jesus in Cambridge. He was a Learned and Pious Man, deceasing
1500.

Since the Reformation.
Mr. -- Harrison of Leeds, built a new Church in that Town, the old one being
too small for the numerous Parishoners.

Memorable Persons.
Paulinus de Leeds, was so far from buying a Bishopric, that when a Bishopric
bought him, he refused to accept it. King Henry offering him the Bishopric of
Carlisle, with an Addition of 300 Marks to the yearly Revenue, which he refused.
He flourished 1186.

W. de la Pole, born at Ravensford, for Wealth and Skill in Merchandise,
inferior to none in England, resided at Kingston upon Hull. He lent King
Edward 3. many thousands of pounds, in recompense whereof the King made him
Valect ( i. e. Gent.) of the Bedchamber, and Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, etc. giving him the Precedence and Honor of a Knight Banneret,
though he was not made in the Field with the usual Ceremony. He dyed about 1350.

Noted Sheriffs.
Edward 2. An. 9. Simon Ward; the Male line of his ancient Family expired in
Sir Christopher Ward, Standard bearer to King Henry 8. at Bolleign. He lived at
Grindal, leaving three Daughters Married to the Families of Strickland,
Musgrave and Osborn.

Edward 3. An. 17. Thomas de Rokeby, was twice (1351, and 1355) Lord Justice of
Ireland. He in part extirpated the damnable Custom of Coigne and Livery in that
Kingdom, whereby the Commander in Chief extorted from the people Horse-meat,
Man's meat, and Money at pleasure, without any satisfaction for the same. This
Custom was begun in the time of King Edward 2. by Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Earl of
Desmond; In reference to which this Rokeby used to say, that he would eat in
Wooden dishes, but would pay for his Meat Gold and Silver.

Henry 4. An. 8. Thomas Rokeby Junior, Mil. overcame and took (by the sole
assistance of this Shire) Prisoners, Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and
the Lord Barldolfe, who began War against the King.

Henry 5. An. 8. Halvatheus Maulever, Mil. had his Surname (in Latin Malus
Leporarius) from his unskilfulness in hunting of the Hare.

Henry 6. An. 11. Henry Bromfleet, Mil. was sent the year following, with other
Ambassadors, to the Council of Basil, and returning was created Lord Vescy, in
the right of his Mother; And though in his Patent, that Title was entailed on
his Heir-Males only, yet Margaret his sole Daughter and Heir Married to Jo.
Lord Clifford, (Father to Henry, first Earl of Northumberland of that Surname)
derived the Barony into that Family, which at this day they enjoy.

22. Edmund Talbot Mil. (though not related to the house of Shrewsbury) was of
a Family of ancient extraction, ever since King Henry 2. He was Father to Sir
Thomas, one very zealous for the House of York, and a servant to King Richard
3. who bestowed an Annuity of 40 pounds per Annum on him. A Branch of these
Talbots are removed into Lancashire, and from those in Yorkshire, Col. Thomas
Talbot is descended.

Edward 4. Henry Vavasor Mil. It is observed of this Family, that they never
Married an Heir, or buried their Wives. The place of their habitation is called
Hasel-Wo^d; out of which Manor the stones were taken that built St. Mary's
Abbey in York.

Henry 8. An. 2. Radulphus Eure, alias Evers, Mil. was created Baron and Lord
Warden of the Marches toward Scotland, where he gave signal demonstrations of
his Fidelity and Valor, in resisting and opposing the Scots. From him the
present Lord Evers is descended.

5. William Piercy, Mil. was (probably of the Family of the Piercy's-Hays)
whose ancient possession was Riton, hard by the River Rhidals.

23. Nicholas Fairfax Mil. (the Surname signifying Fair Hair) had for his Motto
Fare, Fac, Say, Do. His Namesake Sir Nicholas of Bullingbrook, was Knight of
the Rhodes, (in the Reign of King Edward 4.) being Charactred, Cavaliero molto
spiritoso e Prudente.

Q. Mary. An. 3. Christopher Metcalfe, Mil. attended on the Judges of York,
with 300 Horsemen, all of his own Name and Kindred, well mounted, and suitably
attired. This Family was accounted the most numerous of any in England, an.
1607. He stocked the River Yower (nigh his house) with Crevishes.

Q. Eliz. An. 4. George Bows, Mil. had a great Estate in this County, and
greater in Durham. He was besieged by the Northern Rebels, an. 1569. in
Bernards-Castle, which he delivered, upon condition they might depart with
their Armor. After the suppression of the Rebels, their Execution was
committed to his care, wherein he was severe unto Cruelty, many well meaning
people having been (in their simplicity) drawn in, under a pretense of doing
the Queen service. These Sir George hung up by Scores, (by the Office of his
Marshalship) and had hung more, if Mr. Bernard Gilpin had not interceeded for
their Lives.

23. Robert Stapleton, Mil. descended from Sir Miles, one of the first Founders
of the Garter, and Sheriff 29. Edward 3. met the Judges, with 140 Men in
suitable Liveries, and was a very comely and eloquent Man, equally charming
both the senses of Discipline, the Eyes and the Ears. He married one of the
Coheirs of Sir Henry Sherington, by whom he had a numerous Posterity.

42. Francis Clifford, Ar. succeeded his Brother George, in the Earldom of
Cumberland, a worthy Gentleman, made up of all honorable Accomplishments. He
was Father to Henry the 5th, and last Earl of that Family, whose sole Daughter
and Heir was married to the Right Honorable the then Lord Dungarvon, since Earl
of Cork.

45. Henry Bellasis, Mil. was by King Charles I. created Baron Fauconbridge of
Yarum, as since his Grandchild by his eldest Son is made Visc. Fauconbridge.
Jo. Bellasis Esquire, who in the Garrison of Newark, and elsewhere, has given
ample testimony of his Valor, and all noble Qualities, is since advanced to
the dignity of a Baron.

K. James. An. 9. Henry Slingsby, Mil. of an ancient Family, whose Arms are,
Quarterly the first and the fourth G. a Chev. between two Leopards Heads, and a
Hutchet or Bugle Arg. the second and the third Arg. a Griffin Surgeant S.
suppressed by a Fess. G.

11. George Savil, Mil. and Bar. was of a Numerous, Wealthy, and Ancient
Family, of which Sir Jo. Savil was lately created Baron Savil of Pomfraict, and
his Son since Earl of Sussex.

K. Charles. Sir Marmaduke Langdale was Sheriff, 1641. who might have said, as
to the Kings side, of Northern Actions, Pa^s ego magna fui. But as for his
raising of the Siege of Pomfraict, (felt before seen by the Enemy) it will
appear Romance-like to Posterity, with whom it will find Plus Famae quam Fidei.
King Charles II. created him a Baron, the Temple of Honor being of due open to
him, who had passed through the Temple of Virtue.

The Battles.
That at Marston-Moor, July 2. 1644* was our English Pharsalian Fight, to the
Loyal Cavaliers. Prince Rupert having raised the Siege at York, drew out his
Men into the Moor, with intention to fight the Enemy, though his Soldiers were
weary, and the expected Recruits were not come; and besides if the Parliaments
Army had been then let alone, such were their Animosities, that they had fallen
foul among themselves, had not the Prince, preparing to fight them, cemented
their differences to agree against a General Enemy. But the Prince was not
informed of such differences. But being pressed by the Kings Command to fight
the Enemy speedily, and having received Intelligence that the Enemy had the day
before, sent away 7000 Men, (who yet returned before the Fight) he proceeded so
far, that it was too late to draw off, the Parliaments Forces necessitating
them to fight, and about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Battle began.
Some causlesly complain on the Marquess of New Castle, that he drew not his Men
soon enough (according to his Orders) out of York, to the Prince's succor.
Such consider not that Soldiers newly relieved from a 9 weeks Siege, will a
little indulge themselves. The Lord General Goring so valiantly charged the
left Wing of the Enemy, that they fairly forsook the Field. General Leslie with
his Scottish Army, ran away more than a Yorkshire Mile, and a Wee-Bet. Fame
with her Trumpet sounded their Flight as far as Oxford, the Royalists rejoicing
with Bonefires for the Victory; But within few days, their Bays, by a
mournful Metamorphosis, were turned into Willow; For Cromwell with his
Cuirassires, did the work of that day. Some suspected Colonel Hurry (lately
converted to the Kings side) for foul play herein; for he divided the Kings old
Horse into small Bodies, alleging this way the best way to break the Scottish
Lanciers. But those Horse always used to charge together, were much
discomposed with this new Mode. Besides a right Valiant Lord, severed with a
Ditch from the Enemy, did not attend, till the Foe forced their way unto him.
The Van of the Kings Foot being led up by the truly Honorable Colonel John
Russel, impressed with unequal numbers, and distanced from seasonable succor,
became a Prey to their Enemy. The Marquess of Newcastles white Coats (who were
said to bring their Winding sheet about them into the Field) after thrice
firing, fell to it with the But-ends of their Muskets, and were invincible,
till mowed down by Cromwell's Cuirassiers, they were almost all slain. Great was
the Execution of that day, Cromwell commanding his Men to give no Quarter.
Various the numbering of the slain of both sides; yet I meet with none,
mounting them above 6. or sinking them beneath 3000. I remember no Person of
Honor slain on the Kings side, save the hopeful Lord Carry, eldest Son to the
Earl of Monmouth; But on the Parliaments side, the Lord Didup (a lately created
Baron) was slain, on the same token, that when King Charles said, that he
hardly remembered that he had such a Lord in Scotland, one returned, that the
Lord had wholly forgotten, that he had such a King in England. Soon after more
then 60 Royalists, of prime Quality, removed themselves beyond the Seas; so
that hence forward, the King's Affairs in the North were in a languishing
Condition.

YORK.
YORK is an ancient City, built on both sides of the River Ouse, joined with a
Bridge of one Arch the largest in England. Here the Roman Emperors had their
Residence, Severus, and Valor. Constantius their death. What it sacketh of
London in bigness and beauty of Buildings, it has in cheapness and plenty of
Provisions. Of Manufactures, it challenges none peculiar to it self. They send
course Cloth to Hamborough, and have Iron, Flax, etc. in return. But the Trade
which is indeed but driven at York* runs of it self at Hull, which of a
Fishers Town is become a City's Fellow, within 300 years, being the Key of the
North. As for the Buildings of York, the Cathedral was built by Jo. Roman,
William Melton, and Jo. Thoresbury, successive Archbishops thereof, the Family
of the Piercy's contributing Timber, of the Vavasors, Stone thereunto. It is
famous all the World over for the largeness and workmanship thereof. Appending
to it, is the Chapter House, such a Masterpiece of Art, that this Golden Verse
is Engraved thereon, Vt Rosa Flos Florum, sic est Domus ista Domorum.

Proverbs.
I. Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be. True it is, that Lincoln is the
greatest City in the Kingdom of Mercia, that London is, we know, and if York
shall be, God knows. It was indeed in a fair way of preferment, when England
and Scotland were first United into Great Britain; But as for those who hope it
shall be the English Metropolis, they must wait, until the River of Thames run
under the great Arch of Ouse-Bridge. However, York shall be, that is, shall be
York still, as it was before.

Saints.
Flaccus Albinus, (alias Alcuinus) born (probably) in York, (where he was
advanced) was bred under Ven. Bid, and became a man of prodigious Learning. He
was Master to Charles I. Emperor, who owed unto him the best part of his
Title, the Great, being made Great in Arts and Learning by his Instructions. He
founded the University in Paris, so that the Learning of the French was a Taper
lighted at Our Torch. His Name puts me in mind of their malicious and silly
Anagram upon Calvin, viz. Calvinus Lucianus, who was an Atheist, though there
were many worthy persons of the same Name. The same Anagram is found in
Alcuinus. He was first made Abbot of St. Augustines in Canterbury, and
afterward of St. Martins in the City of Tours in France, and dying 780 he was
buried in a Convent appendant to his Monastery. Many of the Modern Saints in
the Church of Rome, must modestly confess, that on a due and true estimate, Our
Alcuinus was worth many scores of them, so great his Learning, and Holy his
Conversation.

Sewal, bred in Oxford, was Scholar to St. Edmund, who was wont to say to him,
Sewald, Sewald, thou will have many Afflictions, and dye a Martyr. Nor did he
miss much of his Mark therein, though he met with Peace and Plenty at first,
when Archbishop of York; But afterward opposing the Pope, who intruded one
Jordan an Italian to be Dean of York, he was for his contempt, Excommunicated.
Note, that at the same time, there were 300 Benefices possessed by Italians,
who did not only teach in the Church, but mis-teach by their lascivious and
debauched Conversations. Let us now return to Sewald, who never returned in the
Popes favor, but dyed of grief, in the state of Excommunication, 1258. Yet was
he reputed a Saint in Vulgar Estimation.

Martyrs.
Valentine Freese, and his Wife, both born in this City, gave their Lives
therein, at one Stake, for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, an. 1531. probably by
order from Edward Lee, the cruel Archbishop.

Confessors.
Edward Freese, Brother to Valentine aforesaid, was Apprentice to a Painter,
afterward a Novice-Monk, and leaving his Convent, came to Colchester in Essex,
where discovering his Heretical Inclinations, by Painting Sentences of
Scriptures in the Borders of Clothes, he was called to an account by Jo.
Stoaksley Bishop of London. Mr. Fox says, he was fed with Manchet, made of
saw-dust, and kept so long in Prison, manicled, till the Flesh had overgrown
his Irons, and he not able to Kemb his own head, became so distracted, that
being brought before the Bishop, he could say nothing, but my Lord is a good
Man. We must not forget how the Wife of this Edward, being big with Child, and
pressing in to see her Husband, the Porter at Fulham gave her such a kick on
the Belly, that the Child was destroyed with that stroke immediately, and she
dyed afterward of the same.

Prelates.
Jo. Roman, (whose Father was born at Rome) was (probably) born in York, seeing
he was very indulgent to that City: For generally Outlandish Mules, though
lying down in English Pasture, used to leave no hairs behind them. But this Jo.
being advanced Archbishop began to build the Church, and finished the North
part of the Cross-Isle therein. Pol. Virg. praises him for a man of great
Learning and Sincerity. He fell into the disfavour of King Edward 1. for
Excommunicating Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, and it cost him 4000 Marks to
regain his Prince's good Will. He dyed 1295. and was buried in his own Church.

Robert Walbey, an Augustinian Friar in York, went over into France, where he
was chosen Professor of Divinity in the City of Toulouse. He was Chaplain to
the Black Prince, and after his death, to his Father, King Edward 3. Now as his
Master enjoyed three Crowns, so under him, his Chaplain did successively
partake of three Mitres, being first a Bishop in Gascoigne, then Archbishop of
Dublin in Ireland, and afterward Bishop of Chichester in England. At last he
was Consecrated Archbishop of York. He dyed 1397.

Since the Reformation.
Thomas Morton, born 1564. was Son to a famous Mercer (reputed the first in
York) and allied to Cardinal Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury. He was bred in
York School (with that Arch-Traytor Guy Faux) and afterward in St.
Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, and (for his Merit) chosen Fellow thereof, before
8 Competitors. Commencing D. D. he made his Position on his second Question,
contrary to the expectation of Dr. Playfere, replying upon him with some
passion, Commosti mihi Stomachum, to whom Morton returned, Gratutor tibi
Reverende Professor de bono tuo Stomacho, canabis apud me hac nocte. He was
successively preferred Dean of Gloucester, Winchester, Bishop of Chester,
Coventry and Lichfield, and Durham. The Foundation which he laid, of Foreign
Correspondency with eminent persons, of different persuasions, when he attended
as Chaplain to the Lord Evers, (sent by King James Ambassador to the King of
Denmark, etc.) he built upon unto the day of his death. In the late Long
Parliament, the displeasure of the House of Commons fell heavy upon him,
partly, for subscribing the Bishops Protestation for their Votes in Parliament;
partly, for refusing to resign the Seal of his Bishopric, and Baptizing a
Daughter of John Earl of Rutland, with the Sign of the Cross; two faults, which
compounded together, in the judgment of honest and wise men, amounted to an
High Innocence. Yet the Parliament allowed him 800 pounds a year, (a proportion
above his Brethren) for his Maintenance. But the Trumpet of their Charity gave
an uncertain sound, not assigning by whom, or whence this Sum should be paid.
Indeed the severe Votes of Parliament ever took full effect, according to his
observation who did Anagram it, VOTED, OVTED. But their Merciful Votes found
not so free performance; however this good Bishop got 1000 pounds out of
Goldsmiths Hall, which afforded him support in his Old Age. He wrote against
Faction, in defense of three Innocent Ceremonies, and against Superstition, in
his Treatise called The Grand Impostor. He solemnly proffered unto me, to
maintain me to live with him, which courteous proffer, as I could not
conveniently accept, I did thankfully refuse. Many of the Nobility deservedly
honored him, but none more then John Earl of Rutland, to whose Kinsman Roger
Earl of Rut. he had formerly been Chaplain. Sir George Savil civilly paid him
his purchased Annuity of 200 pounds. He dyed at Easton Manduit, in
Northamptonshire, the House of Sir Henry Yelverton, 1659. Aet. 95.

Statesmen.
Sir Robert Car, Son to Thomas Lord of Funihurst in the South of Scotland,
(who being active for Mary Queen of Scots, was thereupon forced to fly to York)
was born in this City, and therefore he afterward refused to be Naturalized by
Act of Parliament, as needless to him, being born in the English Dominions.
It Is reported, that his first making at Court, was by breaking of his Leg at
Tilting in London, whereby he came first into the cognizance of King James, who
reflected on him, whose Father had been a kind of Confessor, for the Cause of
the Queen his Mother. Besides the young Gentleman had a handsome Person, and a
convenience of desert. Honors were crowded upon him, made Baron, Viscount,
Earl of Sommerset, Knight of the Garter, Warden of the Cinque Ports, etc. He
was a good natured Man, doing himself more hurt then any Man else. For abating
one foul Fact, with the Consequences thereof notoriously known and he will
appear deserving no foul Character to Posterity; but for the same, he was
banished the Court, lived and dyed very privately, about 1638.

Writers
Jo. Walbye, an Augustinian (Provincial of his Order) and D. D. in Oxford, was
a complaisant person, being Ingenious, Industrious, Learned, Eloquent, Pious
and Prudent. Though sharp at first against the Wicklevites, he soon abated his
own edge; and though present at a Council held at Stanford, by the King,
against them, was not well pleased with all things transacted therein. He dyed
in York 1393.

Jo. Erghom, an Augustinian, went to Oxford, and became an admirable Preacher.
He renewed the custom of Expounding Scripture in a Typical way, which crowded
his Church with Auditors, being more pleased then edified therewith. He wrote
many Books, and Dedicated them to the Earl of Hereford, (the same with Edward
Duke of Buckingham) and flourished under King Henry 7. 1490.

Since the Reformation.
Richard Stock, bred in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, was Minister of
All-hallowes Breadstreet in London, by the space of 32 years, till the day of
his death; where (if in Health) he omitted not to Preach twice every Lords day,
with the approbation of all that were Judicious and Religious. Dr. Davenant was
his constant Auditor, whilst lying at London. He prevailed with some Companies,
to put off their wonted Festivals from Mondays to Tuesdays, that the Lords day
might not be abused, by the preparation for such Entertainments. Though he
Preached often in Neighboring Churches, he never neglected his own, being wont
to protest, That it was more comfortable to him to win one of his own Parish,
then twenty others. Preaching at St. Paul's Cross, when young, it was ill taken
that he reproved the inequality of Rates in the City, (burdening the Poor to
ease the Rich) and he was called a Green-Head for his Pains. But being put up
in his latter days, to Preach on the Lord Mayors Election, and falling on the
same Subject, he told them, That a Gray-Head spoke now what a Green-Head said
before. He dyed April 20. 1626.

THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES. Nec Perfect nec Perfunctorie.
THIS Principality has the Severn-Sea on the South, Irish Ocean on the West
and North, England on the East, divided by a Ditch, drawn from the Mouth of Dee
to the Mouth of Wie. From East to West it is 100, and from North to South 120
Miles. The foresaid Ditch is called Claudh-Offa, because made by King Offa, who
Enacted, that what Welsh-man soever was found on the East side of this Ditch,
should forfeit his Right Hand, a Law long since Cancelled. And the Loyal and
Valiant Welsh have for many Ages past enjoyed the same Privileges with other
Subjects of the King of England.

It was divided into three parts by Roderick the Great, about the year 877. and
allotted to his three Sons.

1. North Wales 2. Powis 3. South Wales
Whose Princes chiefly resided at 1. Aberfrow. 2. Mathraval. 3. Dynefar.


This Division proved the Confusion of Wales, whose Princes were always at War,
not only against the English, but mutually with themselves, to enlarge and
defend their Dominions. Of these Three, North Wales was the Chief, being left
to Mervin eldest Son to Roderick aforesaid; the Princes whereof (by way of
Eminency, were styled the Princes of Wales, and sometimes Kings of Aberfrow)
paid to the King of London, yearly 63 pounds, by way of Tribute, the same sum
being like wise paid to the said King, by the Princes of Powis and South Wales.
However South Wales (called by the Natives Deheubarth, i. e. the Right-side,
because nearer the Sun) was of the three, the largest, richest, and most
fruitful; But this Country being constantly infested with the Invasions of the
English and Flemings, had North Wales preferred before it, as more entire, and
better secured from such Annoyances. Hence it is that the Welsh-Tongue
retains the purity thereof only in North Wales. The Soil mostly rising up
into Hills and Mountains, is of a lean and hungry Nature; yet is the ill
quality recompensed by the good quantity thereof; Whence it was that a
Worshipful Knight in Wales, who had a fair Estate therein, said to an English
Gentleman, (who bragged that he had in England so much Ground, worth 40
Shillings an Acre,) You have 10 yards of Velvet, and I have 200 of Frize, I
will not exchange with you. However there are in Wales most pleasant Meadows
along the sides of Rivers; and as the sweetest Flesh is said to be nearest the
Bones, so most delicious Valleys are interposed betwixt these Mountains. The
Inhabitants are Healthful, Strong, Swift and Witty, which is imputed to the
clear and wholesome Air of the Mountains, the cleanly and moderate Diet of the
people, and the hardness whereunto they are inured from their infancy.

Of Natural Commodities, there is Silver, whereof Cardigan-shire yields Royal
Mines; in these Mountains, viz. Comsomelock, Tallabant, Gadarren, Bromfloid,
Geginnon, and Cummerrum. The Romans began to Mine here, (as appears by their
Coins found therein) working in Trenches, (about 24 Fathom deep) and found
plenty of Lead. The Danes and Saxons wrought 100 Fathom deep, and found great
plenty of the same, till their Works were drowned with water. Customer Smith,
about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, discovered Silver in Comsomelock:
After his death the design was prosecuted, and more perfected by Sir Hugh
Middleton Knight, Coining the Silver to his great Charge, (as his Predecessor
had done) at the Tower; After whose death, Sir Francis Godolphin of Cornwall
Knight, and Thomas Bushel Esquire, undertook the Work. King Charles I. granted
to them power of Coinage at Aberrusky, in that County. Thomas Bushel (Sir
Francis dying, and Comsomelock being deserted) adventured on the other five
Mountains, and at last these Mines yielded 100 pounds a Week, (besides Lead
amounting to half as much) Coined at Aberrusky aforesaid. The Pence, Groats,
Shillings, Half-Crowns, etc. of this Silver, had the Ostrich Feathers (the Arms
of Wales) stamped on them. The Civil Wars discomposed all the Work. I will add
no more, but only make mention of that ingenious invention, whereby the Miners
are supplied with fresh Air: This is done by two Men's blowing wind with a pair
of Bellows, on the outside of Adit, into a Pipe of Lead, daily lengthned as the
Mine is made longer, whereby the Candle in the Mine is daily kept burning, and
the diggers recruited constantly with a sufficiency of breath. There is Lead
found in many places of Wales, but in Carnarvan-shire the best. Plenty of Goats
are bred here, especially in Montgomery-shire. As for Manufactures, the British
generally bearing themselves high, on the account of their gentile extraction,
are better pleased in the employment of their Valor then Labor, and therefore
there are only those few that follow, Frieze, of which Henry Prince of Wales,
having a Suit, and being checked by a bold Courtier for wearing the same many
Weeks together, Would (said he) that the Cloth of my Country would last
always. Then Cheese, very tender and palatable, the Pedigree whereof was by
one, merrily derived, thus, Adam's nawn Cusson was her by her Birth,
Ap Curds, ap Milk, ap Cow, ap Grass, ap Earth.
Lastly, Metheglen, derived by the Welsh from their nown Countryman, Matthew
Glin, the first Inventor, though others will have this word of Greek
extraction, from (...) contracted (...). It is a Compound of Water, Honey, etc.
being most wholesome for Man's Body. Pollio Romulus being 100 years of Age, told
Caesar, that he had preserved his Vigor of Mind and Body, Intus Mulso, foris
Oleo, by taking Metheglen inward, and Oil outward; It is the same in kind with,
but much stronger then Mede. Queen Elizabeth, who by the Tudors was of Welsh
descent, much loved this her Native Liquor.

As for the Buildings, generally they are like those of the old Britains,
neither big nor beautiful; the Italian humor of building having not affected
(not to say infected) the British Nation. Hoelldha Prince of Wales, about the
year 800. built a House for his own Residence of White-hurdles or Watling,
therefore called Ty Gwin, White-House, or White Hall, if you please. However
there are brave Buildings in Wales, though not Welsh Buildings, which the
English Erected therein, as Bridles to the Country.

Proverbs.
I. His Welsh Blood is up; and it is no wonder that a very ancient Shentleman
should digest his losses with great difficulty. II. As long as a Welsh
Pedigree; nay and as high too, seeing commonly a Welsh Gentleman can presently
climb up into a Princely Extraction. III. Give your Horse a VVelsh-Bait; That
is a stop on the top of the Mountains, where the poor Palfrey is forced to make
a shift with Chameleon's Commons, the clear Air.

This Principality was Modelled into Shires in the Reign of King Henry 8. The
General Catalogue that follows, is of those who were Welsh, though extant
before such Division into Shires.

Princes.
They are very Ancient and Numerous, yet Cambden observes, they never had any
Coin of their own.

Confessors.
Walter Brute, born in Wales, a Sinner, Layman, Husbandman, and a Christian,
(they are his own words in a certain Protestation which he made) was bred in
Oxford. Being accused to the Bishop of Hereford, he (by a solemn Subscription)
submitted himself principally to the Evangely of Jesus Christ, to the
determination and general Councils of Holy Kirk, to -- Austin, Ambrose, Jerome
and Gregory; and to his Bishop, as a Subject ought to his Bishop. It seems this
Brute was one of the first who was vexed for Wickliffisme.

Nicholas Hereford, (probably) of British extraction, D. D. in Oxford, AMP.
and a secular Priest, opposed Transubstantiation; maintained that Clergymen
ought to be subject to their respective Princes, that Monks and Friars ought to
live by their own Labor; That all ought to rule themselves by the Word of God.
He (with Philip Repington) was made to recant his Opinions at St. Paul's Cross
in London, 1382. After which Repington proving a Persecutor of his party, was
made Bishop of Lincoln, and afterward made a Cardinal. Hereford being not so
forward, was imprisoned (with John Purvey his Partner) by Archbishop Arundel.

Reginald Peacock, D. D. in Kings-Colledge in Oxford, was Bishop first of St.
Asaph, then of Chichester. For 20 years together he favored the Opinions of
Wickliffe, and wrote much in defense thereof, until in a Synod held at Lambeth
by Thomas Boucher, Archbishop of Canterbury, 1457. he was made to recant at
Paul's Cross, (his Books being burnt before his eyes) confuted with seven solid
Arguments, thus reckoned up, Authoritate, Vi, Art, Fraud, Metu, Terrore and
Tyrannide. Some believe, that he recanted his recantation, others that he was
privily made away in Prison.

Cardinals.
Sertor of Wales, (by some named Fontanerius Valassus) was General of the
Franciscans 1339. then Bishop of Massile, and afterward Archbishop of
Ravenna. He was made Cardinal by Pope Innocent 6. but dyed before he received
his Cap. Among many Books, he wrote a Comment on St. Austin, De Civit. Dei. He
dyed at Padua in Italy, and was therein buried in the Church of Saint Anthony.

Prelates.
Marbod Evanx went over into France, when the Danes were harassing this Land.
There he became Bishop of Renes. He wrote the Book called Carmina Sententiosa,
flourishing 1050.

Walter de Constantiis, Archdeacon of Oxford, was preferred Bishop of Lincoln,
then Archbishop of Rohan, by King Richard 1. whom he attended into the
Holy Land, by Sea and Land; Insomuch, that some will have him Surnamed from his
constancy to his Master in all conditions. He effectually suppressed the
Tyranny of William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely. He afterward interred King
Richard at Font-Everard, and invested King John with the Principality of
Normandy, and dyed about 1206.

Caducanus Bishop of Bangor, left his Bishopric, and became a Cistertian Monk
in Monasterio Durensi, and being no less happy then industrious in his
endeavors, wrote a Book of Sermons, and another called Speculum Christianorum.
He dyed under the Reign of King Henry 3. 1225.

Since the Reformation.
Hugh Johnes, Batchelour of the Laws in Oxford, was made Bishop of Landaffe,
May 5. 1566. The first Welsh-man, who for the last 300 years was Bishop
thereof. He dyed and was buried at Matherne, November 5. 1574

Dr. -- Philips, bred in Oxford, was preferred Bishop of Man. He Translated the
Bible into the Manks-Tongue, by the assistance of some of the Islanders, and
namely, Sir Hugh Cavol, Minister of the Gospel, and lately Vicar of
Kirk-Michael; though that work was never put to the Press; the Ministers there
being forced to read the Scriptures to the people, out of the English, in the
Manks-Tongue.

Physicians.
Robert Record, well descended, was bred in Oxford, where he proceeded Dr. of
Physic. He wrote five famous Treatises, viz. of Arithmetic, Astrology,
Geometry, Physic and Metals; and was well skilled in Anatomy, Cosmography and
Music. He wrote also of Auricular Confession, and De Negotio Eucharistiae,
with which subjects no Roman Catholic is to meddle. He flourished under King
Edward 6. about 1550.

Thomas Phacer, was bred (I believe) first in Oxford, then in London, a general
Scholar, and well versed in the Common Law, wherein he wrote a Book, De Natura
Brevium. He afterward proceeded Dr. of Physic He Translated out of the French
many useful Books, 1. Of the Pestilence. 2. Of the Grief of Children. 3. Of the
Nature of Simples. 4. The Regiment of Natural Life. He likewise Translated
Virgil's Eneads. He dyed and was buried in London, 1550.

Albane Hill, Dr. of Physic, wrote much on Galen, and was famous at home and
abroad, flourishing (as I conjecture) about 1550.

Writers.
Petrok, bred in Ireland, fixed himself in Cornwall, after his return, the place
of his abode being called Petrok Stow, corruptly Pad-Stow, where many eminent
Scholars were brought up under him. He delighted in, and wrote a Book of
Solitary Life. He was reputed a Saint, and there is a Church at Exeter,
dedicated to his Memory.

Gildas the fourth, studied in Ireland. He wrote of the Wonders, and first
Inhabitants of Britain, King Arthur, etc. of Perceval and Lancelot. He
flourished 860.

Blegabride, Langauride, a great Scholar, and Dr. of both Laws, was Archdeacon
of the Church of Landaffe. He to the Honor of his Country, and use of
Posterity, Translated the Laws of Howel, the most modest King of Wales, and
flourished 914.

Salephilax the Barde, set forth a Genealogy of the Britains, and flourished
920.

Gwalterus Calenius, Archdeacon of Oxford, highly prized for his great
Learning, went over into Britain in France, and thence retrieved an ancient
Manuscript of the British Princes, from Brutus to Cadwalader, and Communicated
the same to Jeffrey of Monmouth, to be Translated by him, into Latin. He
continued the same Chronicle for 400 years together, till his own time. He
flourished 1120. under King Henry 1.

Gualo Britannus, was from his youth a Servant to the Muses, and a lover of
Poetry. His Pen fell foul on the Monks, writing invectives against their
wantonness, impostures, and covetousness, with such caution, that he incurred
no danger thereby. He flourished 1170. under King Henry 2.

William Breton, a great Scholar, and deep Divine, was (as some affirm) a
Franciscan at Grimsby in Lincolnshire. He wrote (besides many other Books) an
Exposition of all the hard words in the Bible, and such the reputation thereof,
that in the Controversy betwixt Standish Bishop of St. Asaph, and Erasmus, the
former appeals to Breton's Book, about the interpretation of a place in
Scripture. He dyed at Grimsby, an. 1356.

Vtred Bolton, traveled to Durham in troublesome times, and there became a
Benedictine. The promptness and pleasantness of his parts, commended all things
that he did or said. Coming to Oxford in the heat of the difference betwixt
Wickliffe, and his Adversaries, he agreed in some things with him; Whereupon
one Jordan a Dominican falling foul upon him, he expressed himself more openly
for Wickliffe, especially in that his smart Book, Pro veris Monachis; With
which Jordan was so incensed, that he used his utmost endeavor to get Bolton
Excommunicated, who flourished under King Richard 2. 1330.

Jo. Gwent, a Franciscan in Oxford, became Provincial of his Order throughout
all Britain. He wrote a Learned Comment on Lombard's Common places, and was a
man of admirable prudence. He dyed at Hereford, 1348.

Jo. Ede, a Learned and Religious Man, wrote several Comments on Aristotle,
Peter Lombard, and the Revelation. He was chief of the Franciscans Convent in
Hereford, where he was buried, in the Reign of King Henry 4. 1408.

David Boys (in Latin Boethius) studied in Oxford. He procured the Writings of
Jo. Barningham, and bestowed them on the Library in Cambridge. He was
befriended by Eleanor Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester, whence we collect him at
least a parcel- Wickliffite. He wrote (amongst many others) a Book of double
Immortality, and another about the madness of the Hagarens. He was Prefect of
the Carmelities in Gloucester, where he dyed 1450.

Since the Reformation.
Sir Jo. Rhese, alias Ap Rise, Knight, Noble by his Lineage, but more by his
Learning, was well versed in the British Antiquities, and was a zealous
Assertor of the credit of Welsh-Authors, against Pol. Virgil. He wrote a
Treatise of the Eucharist, and was a favourer of the Reformation, flourishing
under King Edward. 6. 1550.

Jo. Griffin, first a Cistertian in Hales-Abbey in Gloucester, became a Preacher
after the dissolution of his Convent, Preaching many Sermons in English, and
writing them in Latin. He flourished under Edward 6. an. 1550.

Hugh Broughton, of gentile, but poor Parents, was sent by Mr. Gilpin to
Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, of which he became Fellow. He was famous for his
skill in the Hebrew, a great Ornament to that University. He was somewhat hot
and peremptory in his Opinions. He wrote many Books, whereof one called the
Consent of Times, carries the general commendation. It Is reported, that he
procured Mr. Gilpin his Maecenas, to be molested by Dr. Barnes Bishop of
Durham, in expectation of his Parsonage, as some shrewdly suspect. At last
being fixed in London, he taught many Citizens, and their Apprentices the
Hebrew Tongue. His Sermons were rather curious then edifying, which was the
cause that he had numerous Auditors. He dyed about 1600.

Hugh Holland, Fellow of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, was an excellent Latin
Poet; Being disaffected to the Protestant Religion, he Traveled into Italy,
where he let fly freely against the credit of Queen Elizabeth. Whence he went
to Rome, and in his return, he touched at Constantinople, where Sir Thomas
Glover, Ambassador for King James, called him to an account for his Scandalum
Reginae, and imprisoned him for some time. Being enlarged he returned into
England, where missing of preferment, he grumbled out the rest of his Life in
visible coffeehouse. He made Verses in description of the chief Cities in
Europe, wrote the Chronicle of Queen Elizabeth's Reign and a Book of the Life of
Mr. Cambden, which were never Printed. He had a competent Estate in good
Candle-rents in London, and dyed about the beginning of the Reign of King
Charles I.

ANGLESEY.
ANglesey, (in Latin Mona,) that is, the English Island is surrounded on all
sides with the Irish Sea, save on the South; where a small Fret (called Menai)
sundreth it from the Welsh Continent, having 20 Miles in the length, and 17 in
the breadth thereof. It is seemingly barren, and really fruitful, affording
plenty of good Wheat, and Millstones to grind it. There are several Trees
dug up here, out of marish places, which are firm and fit for Timber. They
are black within as Ebony, and are used by Carvers for inlaying Cupboards, etc.
Yea Hasle-nuts are found under ground, with sound Kernels in them.

Proverbs.
I. Mon Mam Cymbry, that is, Anglesey is the Mother of Wales, because when
other Countries fail, she plentifully feeds them with Provision, and is said
to afford Corn enough to sustain all Wales. Nor is she less happy in Cattle
then Corn. II. Crogging Crogging. The Original of this by word was in days of
King Henry 2. who had many men slain by the Welsh at Croggen-Castle. The
English afterward used it as a Provocative, when they had the Welsh at an
advantage. It is now without cause, uttered in disgrace of the Welsh* though
originally it was expressive of their Honor.

Prelates.
Guido de Mona, (that is of Anglesey) was Bishop of St. David's, and Lord
Treasurer of England under King Henry 4. though the Parliament moved, that no
Welshman should be a State Officer in England. He dyed 1407.

Arthur Bulkley, Bishop of Bangor, though bred Dr. of the Laws, never read, or
forgot the Chapter de Sacrilegio, for he spoiled the Bishopric, and sold the
five Bells, being so over-officious, that he would go down to the Sea to see
them Shipped. He was suddenly deprived of his sight, and dyed 1555.

William Glyn, D. D. bred in, and Master of Queens-Colledge in Oxford, was an.
2. Mary, preferred Bishop of Bangor. An excellent Scholar; being constant to
his own, and not cruel to opposite judgments; he caused no persecution in his
Diocese. He dyed an. 1. Elizabeth; whose Brother Jeffrey, Dr. of Laws, built
and endowed a Free School at Bangor.

Since the Reformation.
Rouland Merrick, Dr. of Laws, was born at Bodingan, bred at Oxford, where he
became Principal of New-Inn-hall, and afterward a Dignitary in the Church of
St. David's. He procured the imprisonment of Robert Ferrar his Diocesan, in the
days of King Edward 6. who was afterward Martyred in the Reign of Queen Mary.
Mr. Merrick was Consecrated Bishop of Bangor, an. 2. Elizabeth, 1559. He was
Father to Sir Gilly Merrick Knight, who lost his life for engaging with the
Earl of Essex, 1600.

Lancelot Bulkley, was born of a then Right Worshipful (since Honorable)
Family, one of whose fair Habitations is near Beumaris. He was bred in
Brazen-Nose-Colledge in Oxford, and afterward became first Archdeacon, and
then Archbishop of Dublin, October 3. 1619. Soon after, he was made by King
James one of his Privy Counsel in Ireland. He dyed about 16.

Seamen.
Madoc, Son to Owen Gwineth, ap Griffith, ap Conan, and Brother to Dav. Prince
of North Wales, was born probably at Aberfraw, then the principal Palace of
their Royal residence. He (1170.) made a Voyage Westward, and probably those
names of Cape de Breton Norvinberg, and Pengwin in part of the Northern
America, were Relics of his discovery.

BRECKNOCK-SHIRE.
BRecknock-shire has Radnor-shire on the North, Cardigan and Carmarthen-shire
on the West, Glamorgan-shire on the South, Hereford and Monmouth-shire on the
East. In length 28, and in breadth 20 miles. The fruitfulness of the Valleys in
this Shire makes amends for the barrenness of the Mountains. Brecknock the
chief Town hereof, does at this present time afford the Title of an Earl to
James Duke of Ormond, the first that ever received that Dignity. About 400
years since, a Daughter of Gilb. and Maud Becket, (and Sister to Thomas Becket)
was by King Henry 2. bestowed in Marriage on one Butler an English Gentleman.
Him King Henry sent over into Ireland, and (endeavoring to expiate Beckets
blood) rewarded him with large Lands, so that his Posterity were created Earls
of Ormond.

In this County there is plenty of Otters in Brecknock Mere, the Wool whereof
is much used in making of Beavers.

As for Wonders, it is reported by Speed, that Cloaks, Hats and Staves, cast
down from the top of an Hill, ( called Mouchy Denny or Cadier Arthur) and the
North-East Rocks, would never fall, but were with the air and wind still
returned back, and blown up again, nor would any thing descend, save a Stone or
some metallin substance. When the Mere Lynsavathan (within two Miles of
Brecknock) has her frozen Ice first broken, it yields a thundering noise; and
there is a Tradition, that where that Mere spreads its waters, stood a fair
City, till swallowed up by an Earthquake, which is not improbable, first,
because all the Highways of this County do lead thither, secondly, Ptolemy does
place in this Tract the City Loventrium, which Mr. Cambden could not recover,
and therefore likely to be drowned in this Pool; the rather because Levenny is
the name of the River running by it.

Saints.
St. Canoch, Cadock, Sons, and Keyne Daughter to Braghan King, builder and
namer of Brecknock (who had 24 Daughters, all Saints, though only St. Keyne
survived) flourished about 492. of whom St. Cadock is reported a Martyr; and
all had in high Veneration amongst the people of South Wales.

St. Clintanke was King of Brecknock. It happened that a Noble Virgin gave it
out, That she would never Marry any man except the said King, who was so
zealous a Christian. A Pagan Soldier, purposely to defeat her desire, killed
this King, who left behind him the reputation of a Saint.

Prelates.
Giles de Bruise, born at Brecknock, was Son to William de Bruise, Baron of
Brecknock, a prime Peer in his time. This Giles became Bishop of Hereford, and
in the Civil Wars, sided with the Nobility against King John, on which account
he was banished, but at length returned, and recovered the Kings favor. His
Paternal Honor and Inheritance was devolved upon him, and from him, after his
death, transmitted to his Brother Reginald, who Married the Daughter of Leoline
Prince of Wales. His Effigies on his Tomb in Hereford Church, holds a Steeple
in his hand; whence it is concluded that he built the Belfree of that
Cathedral. He dyed 1215.

Since the Reformation.
Thomas Howel, born at Nangamarch, bred Fellow of Jesus-Colledge in Oxford,
became a most meek man, and excellent Preacher. His Sermons, like the waters of
Siloah, did run softly, gliding on with a smooth stream. King Charles I. made
him Bishop of Bristol. He dyed 1646. leaving many Orphan Children behind him. I
have been told, that the Honorable City of Bristol has taken care for their
comfortable Education.

Statesmen.
Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, set up King Richard on the Throne,
endeavoring afterward in vain to depose him; the King compassing him into his
clutches, through the treachery of Humphrey Banister, the Dukes own Servant,
the Sheriff siezing him in Shrop-shire, where he was digging of a Ditch in a
disguise. He was beheaded at Sarisbury, without any Legal Trial, 1484.

Memorable Persons.
Nesta, Daughter to Gruffin Prince of Wales, and Wife to Bernard of Newmarch, a
Noble Norman, and Lord by Conquest of this County, was an Harlot to a young
Gentleman. Mahel her Son having got this Stallion into his hands, used him very
hardly, wherewith Nesta being madded, came into open Court, and on her Oath
before King Henry 2. publicly protested, that Mahel was none of Newmarch his
Son, but begotten on her in Adultery. This if true, spoke her dishonesty, if
false, her perjury; true or false, her Peerless impudency. Hereby she
disinherited Mahel, and settled a vast Territory on Sybil her sole Daughter,
Married afterward to Milo Earl of Hereford.

Note, that when Mr. Speed, in pursuance of his Description of England, passed
this County, 8 persons who had been Bailiffs of Brecknock gave him courteous
entertainment.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE.
CArdigan-shire is washed on the West with the Irish Sea, and parted from
Merioneth-shire by the River Dovi, from Brecknock-shire by Tovy, and on the
South, from Carmarthen and Pembroke-shire by Tyvy. Being in form like a Horn,
wider toward the North; and has a Cornu-copia, universal plenty. This County
though remotest to England, was soonest reduced to the English Dominion, as
being nearer to the Sea, which afforded a more convenient passage to the
English, who were potent in Shipping, and invaded this County in the Reign of
William Rufus; and Henry 1. bestowed the same entirely upon William de Clare.
In former times, plenty of Bevers did breed in the River Tyvy in this County.

Proverbs.
I. Talaeth, Talaeth, that is Fine, Fine: When Roderick divided Wales betwixt
his three Sons, he ordered that each of them should wear upon his Bonnet or
Helmet, a Coronet of Gold, set with precious Stones, called in British Talaeth,
and they from thence, Ytri trwys^c Talaethioc, that is, three Crowned Princes.
Now it is applied to the uppermost part of the head attire of Children, yea the
English men have that which they call the Crown of a Cap. II. B^ Arthur and
(...); That is, Arthur was not but whilst he was; It Is Honorable for old Men,
if they can truly say, we have been brave Fellows. III. Ne Thorres Arthur Nawdd
gwraig; that is, King Arthur did never violate the refuge of a woman; For that
King was the Mirror of Manhood. By the Woman's Refuge, many understand her
Tongue, and no valiant Man will revenge her words with his blows. IV. Calen y
Sais wrah Gimro; That is, the Heart of an Englishman toward a Welshman. This
was invented whilst England and Wales were at deadly Feude, and is applied to
such who are possessed with prejudice, or only carry an outward compliance with
Cordial Affection. V. Ni Cheitw Cymbro oni Gollo; That is, the Welshman keeps
nothing until he has lost it: When the British recovered their lost Castles
from the English, they doubled their diligence and valor, keeping them more
tenaciously then before. VI. A fo Pen, bid Bont; That is, He that will be a
Head, let him be a Bridge. This is of a fictitious Original. Benigridan a Welsh
General is said to have carried his Army (one by one we must imagine) on his
back, over a River in Ireland, where there was neither Bridge nor Ferry. These
Proverbs are generally used in Wales. Note that in this Principality of
Wales, there was an ancient Play, wherein the stronger put the weaker into a
sack, whence the English Byword, He is able to put him up in a Bag. VII. Na
difanco y Beriglawr; That is, Vilify not thy Parish Priest. This may be looked
upon as a true penitential Proverb, since the Citizens of Llan-Badern-Vaure
(that Lland-Badern the great) cruelly slew their Bishop, which City and
Bishopric afterward dwindled into nothing.

CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.
CArmarthen-shire has Pembroke-shire on the West, the Severn Sea on the South,
Cardigan-shire on the North, Brecknock and Glamorgan-shire on the East. This
County being not so Mountainous as others in Wales, affords plenty of Grain,
Grass, Wood and Fish. Here there is a place called Golden Grove, belonging to
the Right Honorable Richard Vaughan, Baron of Emelor in England, and Earl of
Carbery in Ireland, who plentifully relieved many eminent Divines, during the
late Sequestration. It Is said that in this Maritime-shire, there is a Fountain
which ebbs and flows conformable to the Sea. There are likewise here strange
Subterranean Vaults, conceived the Castles of routed people in the Civil Wars.

Martyrs.
Robert Ferrar, an English man, a prime Martyr of this County, was a Man not
unlearned, but somewhat indiscreet, or rather uncomplying; so that he may be
said with St. Lawrence to be broyled on both sides, being persecuted both by
Protestants and Papists. He was preferred Bishop of St. David's, by the Duke of
Sommerset, then Lord Protector, who was put to death not long after. Some
conceived that the Patrons fall was the Chaplains greatest guilt, and
encouraged his Enemies against him. Of these, two were afterward Bishops in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, viz. Thomas Young Archbishop of York, and
Rowland Merrick Bishop of Banger.

Soldiers.
Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight, little less then a Prince in his Country, was
called by the Author of Praelia Anglorum, the Flower of the Britains. He
repaired to King Henry 7. (lately landed at Milford Haven with contemptible
Forces) with a considerable accession of choice Soldiers, marching with them
to Bosworth-Field, where he right valiantly behaved himself. He was in reward
of his good service made Knight of the Garter. He rebuilt Emeline in this
County, and called it New Castle, being one of his Principal Seats, and one of
the latest Castles in Wales. In the 4th. year of King Henry 8. he conducted 500
Horse at the Siege of Therouene.

Walt. de Devereux, Son of -- Devereux, and Cicely his Wife (sole Sister to
Thomas Bourchier last Earl of Essex,) was born in the Town of Carmarthen, and
by Queen Elizabeth Created Earl of Essex, in Right of his Mother. Being a
Martial Man he Articled with Queen Elizabeth, to maintain such a proportion of
Soldiers at his own cost, and to have the fair Territory of -- Clandebuy in
the Province of Vlster (in Ireland) for the Conquering thereof. To maintain his
Army, he sold his fair inheritance in Essex. Over he goes into Ireland, with a
noble Company of Kindred and Friends, supernumerary Volunteers, above the
proportion of Soldiers agreed upon. Sir W. Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy of
Ireland, suspecting to be Eclipsed by this great Earl, sollicits the Queen to
maintain him in full power of his place. Hereupon it was Ordered, that the Earl
should have his Commission from this Lord Deputy, which with much importunity
and long attendance, he hardly obtained, and that with no higher Title then
Governor of Vlster. After many impressions (not over successfully) made in
Vlster, he was by the Lord Deputy remanded into the South of Ireland, where he
spent much time to little purpose. From Munster he was sent back into Vlster,
where he was forbidden to follow his blow, and use a Victory he had gotten: Yea
on a sudden stripped out of his Commission, and reduced to be Governor of 300
Men. He embraced all these Changes with prodigious constancy Pay-days in
Ireland came very thick, Moneys out of England very slow, his Noble Associates
began to withdraw, common Men to mutiny, so that the Earl himself was at the
last recalled home. Not long after he was again sent over, with the Title of
Earl Marshal of Ireland, where he fell into a strange looseness (not without
suspicion of Poison) and dyed 1576. Aet. 36. His Soul he piously resigned to
God, his Lands (much impaired) descended to his Son Robert. His Body being
brought over was buried in Carmarthen. His Widow Lady was soon remarried to
Robert Earl of Leicester. His Father and Grandfather dyed about the same time
of their Age, ( viz. the 36th. year) to which his Son Robert never attained.

Writers.
Ambrose Merlin, born at Carmarthen, is reported to have had an Incubus to his
Father, pretending to a pedigree older then Adam, even from the Serpent
himself. We will allow the Serpent to be Father to his own Child, I mean this
monstrous Lie about Merlin's Birth. Many are his pretended Prophesies, whereof
the British have a very high esteem, though their own Proverb says, Namyn Dduw
nid oes dewin, that besides God there is no Diviner. Indeed Merlin's Prophesies
did much mischief, when his Interpreters put Owen Glendower on his Rebellion
against King Henry 4. persuading him the time was come, wherein he should
recover the Welsh Principality, which occasioned the making of cruel Laws
against the British Nation. Some maintain Merlin to have been a great Chemist,
and that his Prophesies are to be expounded naturally, not Historically. One of
his Prophesies cited by Hist. of Irel.
Giraldus Cambrensis, hit the mark indeed; Being this, The sixth shall overturn
the Walls of Ireland, and reduce their Countries into a Kingdom. Accomplished
under King James the sixth, when their Fastnesses (Irish Walls) were
dismantled, and Courts of Justice set up in all the Land.

CARNARVON-SHIRE.
CArnarvon-shire has the Irish Sea on the West, Anglesey (divided by
Menaifret) on the North, Denby-shire on the East, and Merioneth-shire on the
South. All the Markets are Sea Towns, being five in number. The Natives hereof
submitted at last to the English, who were never more put to it then in the
Invasion thereof, which for natural strength exceeds any part of the
Principality. It is sufficiently plentiful, and Snow-down-hills therein are
fruitful of Wood, Cattle, Fowl, besides Fish in the Pools which are interposed;
Where there was (as Giraldus Cambrensis affirms) a Floating Island, and a
strange kind of Fishes found with one eye.

Proverbs.
I. Craig Eriry or Snow-don will yield sufficient Pasture for all the Cattle of
Wales put together. This is hyperbolical, importing the extraordinary
fruitfulness of the place. II. Di^nge ar Gluid a boddi ar Gonway. That is, to
escape Clude, and be drowned in Con^ay. Parallel to the Latin, Incidit in
Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim.

Princes.
Edward the fourth, (but first surviving) Son of King Edward 1. and Queen
Eleanor, was born at Carnarv^n, April 25. 1284. No Prince ever ascended the
English Throne with greater, or used it with less advantage to himself. The
Welsh generally accepted him for their Prince, as being Crowned Prince of
Wales (before he was born) in their Country, the King his Father, having
caused a Crown to be set on Queen Eleanor's Belly, when she was big with this
Prince. As this gave the Brita^^s a full interest in, so it begat in them a
particular veneration for the succeeding English Monarchs. This Edward
(succeeding to a Wise and Victorious Father) did strange himself from his
Subjects, and in effect subjected himself to Pierce Gaveston, his French
Minion, and after his Execution, to the two Spencers, Englishmen, yet equally
odious for their insolence. Hence it was that he first lost the love of his
Subjects, then of his Queen, (the vacuity of whose Bed was quickly filled up)
then his Crown, then his Life, being Murdered at Berkley Castle, September 22.
1327.

Saints.
The Corpse of 20000 Saints are said to be interred in a small Island called
Berdsey, lying within a Mile of the South promontory of this County. It is (I
confess) more facile to find Graves therein for so many Saints, then Saints for
so many Graves.

Statesmen.
Jo. Williams, born in Aber-Conwy, bred Fellow of St. John's College in
Cambridge, and Proctor of that University, was preferred Dean of Westminster,
Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and at last Archbishop of
York. He dyed March 25. 1649. See my Eccl. Hist.

Prelates since the Reforma^ion.
Richard Vaughan, born at Nuffrin, or else at Etrin, was bred in St.
Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, became successively Bishop of Bangor, Chester and
London, a very Corpulent Man, but Spiritually minded, an excellent Preacher,
and pious Liver. A pleasant man in discourse, especially at his Table; using
frequently this expression, At Meals be glad, for sin be sad, and indeed he was
a Mortified man. Nothing could tempt him to betray the Rights of the Church to
Sacrilegious hands, not sparing sharply to reprove some of his own Order on
that account. He dyed March 30. 1607. I will add, (according to an Epigram
which was made upon; and directed to him) -- Facienda docuit, docenda fecit.
Having been none of those unhappy men, Qui sciunt and non docent, or Qui docent
and non vivunt.

Henry Roulands, bred in Oxford, was Consecrated Bishop of Bangor, November 12.
1598. He bought 4 new Bells for the Tower of St. Asaph, whereof the biggest
cost 100 pounds. He also gave to Jesus-Colledge in Oxford, means for the
maintenance of two Fellows, He dyed 1615.

Note Speed's Maps of this County (as also of Denby and Flint-shire) are not
divided with points into several Hundreds, seeing the Author could not procure
the same out of the Sheriffs Books, fearing lest the Riches of their Shire
should be further fought into, by revealing such particulars.

DENBIGH-SHIRE.
DEnbigh-shire has Flint-shire, Cheshire and Shrop-shire on the East,
Montgomery and Merioneth-shire on the South, Carnarvon-shire on the West, being
from East to West 31. and from North to South 20 Miles. The East part of this
County is fruitful, but in the West, the Husbandman may be said to fetch his
Bread out of the fire, fertilizing their ground with the Ashes of burnt Turfs.
There is plenty of Rye (or Amelcorn) in this County. Of Buildings, the Church
of Wrexham is a fair and spacious Structure, having a stately Tower without,
and Organs within it. Note that Organs were brought into general use in
Churches about the year 828. and much improved by Bernard a Venetian, and an
incomparable Musician. But to proceed, Holt Castle was possessed by William
Lord Stanley, whose ready Money and Plate therein (besides Jewels and Rich
Household Stuff) amounted to 4000 Marks, got by the plunder of Bosworth field.
Upon the Owners Attainder, it was Confiscated into the Coffers of King Henry 7.

Prelates.
Leoline ap Llewelin ap Ywyr (or Leoline de Brontfield) was born in the
Marches. Under King Edward 1. he was Consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph, 1293. and
afterward appropriated some Churches to his Chapter. He reduced a portion of
Tithes in the Parish of Corwen, (appropriating to the Church) to its former
Estate. He ask^d leave of King Edward 1. to make his Will, whereby he
bequeathed much of his Plate, rich Vests and Books to the Canons of that
Church, and his Chaplains, dying 1313.

Since the Reformation.
Godfrey Goodman, born of Wealthy Parentage, bred under his Uncle (of whom
hereafter) in Westminster-School, then in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, where
he Commenced D. D. was successively preferred Prebend. of Windsor, Dean of
Rochester, and Bishop of Gloucester. He lived since, but was no friend to the
Reformation, constantly complaining of the first Reformers, amongst whom he
noted Ridley, as a very Odd Man; One being then present, My Lord, (says he) He
was an Odd Man indeed, for all the Popish Party in England, could not match
him with his equal in Learning and Religion. He is the only instance (amongst
200 Bishops since Queen Elizabeth) who was Popishly affected. He was a harmless
man, hurtful to none but himself, pitiful to the Poor, hospitable to his
Neighbors, against the ruining of any of an opposite Judgment, and gave the
most he left to pious uses. He was no contemptible Historian. He was made
Bishop 1624. and dyed about 1655. in Westminster.

Writers since the Reformation.
William Salesbury, born in this County, (where his Family flourishes at this
day) composed an English and We^sh Dictionary, Printed 1547. He dyed 1560.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
Sir Thomas, Son of Sir Richard Exmew, was born at Rithin, and bred in London a
Goldsmith, and was Lord Mayor thereof 1517. Besides Benefactions in his own
Country, and to St. Mary Magdalens in Milkstreet, London, (where he lies
buried)* he made the VVater-Conduit by London Wall, at Moor-Gate.

Gabriel Goodman, Son of Edward Goodman Esquire was born at Rithin, afterward D.
D. in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, and Dean of Westminster, (for forty
years). The Bible was Translated into Welsh on his cost. He founded a
School-house in Rythin, with a competent Salary, and erected an Almshouse
therein for 12 poor people. He repaired the House for the Minster (there called
the Warden) of Rythin, furnishing it with Plate, etc. which were to descend to
his Successors. He purchased a fair House thereunto, at Cheswick in Middlesex,
where with his own hands he set a fair row of Elmes, for a Retiring place to
the Masters and Scholars at Westminster. He was made one of the Executors of
the Will of our English Nestor, the Lord Treasurer Cecil, for the disposing of
great sums to charitable uses. He dyed 1^01. and is buried in the Collegiate
Church of Westminster, whereof he so well deserved, as of all England, Mr.
Cambden performing his perambulation about it on his Expenses.

Sir Hugh Middleton, Son of Sir Richard Middleton, was born at Denbigh, and
bred in London. This is that worthy Knight, who fetched into London, Water on
his own cost, more then 24 Miles, encountering all the way with an Army of
Oppositions, grapling with Hills, struggling with Rocks, fighting with Forests,
till in defiance of difficulties, he had brought his Project to Perfection. A
potent person, and an idle Spectator struck in, and by his greatness possessed
a Moiety of the profit, whilst the Honor thereof will remain Eternally fixed
to the Memory of Sir Hugh Middleton.

Note, Robert Earl of Leicester by his bounty, advanced the Building of a new
Church in Denbigh.

FLINT-SHIRE.
FLint-shire (named from Flint, formerly an eminent place therein) has the Sea
on the North, Shrop-shire on the South, Cheshire on the East, and Denbigh-shire
on the West. The smallest Shire in Wales. Flint the Shire-Town is no Market
Town, no nor St. Asaph, (a City and Bishops See) till made so very late; But it
is near to Chester, the Market General of these parts, and besides, every
Village has a Market in it self, as affording all necessary Commodities. This
County was Parcel of the County Palatine, paying 2000 Marks (called a Mize) at
the Change of every Earl of Chester, until the year 1568. For then upon the
occasion of one Thomas Radford, committed to Prison by the Chamberlain of
Chester, this County disjoined it self from the Earldom of Chester, and united
it self to the Principality, though I cannot see how the one or the other could
be done, without an Act of Parliament.

Proverbs.
I. Mwy nag un bw a yro Ynghaer; That is, More then on Yugh-Bow in Chester.
Cheshire men have been very famous for Archery. It is applied to such who take
other folks Goods for their own, being mistaken with the similitude and
resemblance.

Princes.
Elizabeth, the 7th. Daughter of King Edward 1. and Queen Lleanor, was born at
Ruthland Castle, where anciently a Parliament was kept an. Edward 1. This
Princess, at 14 years of Age, was Married to John, first of that Name, Earl of
Holland, Zealand, etc. and (after his death) to Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford
and Essex; High Constable of England, by whom he had a numerous Issue. She dyed
1316. and was buried in the Abby-Church of Saffron-Walden in Essex.

Saints.
Congellus or Comgallus is challenged by the Welsh for their Countryman, as
being first Abbot of Banch^r in this County, though Archbishop Usher makes him
the first Abbot of Bangor in the North of Ireland. He was one of a pious Life,
who wrote Learned Epistles, and dyed an. 600. Aet. 85.

St. Beno. Instructor to St. Wenefride, was it seems a good Surgeon to a
Miracle, who when VVenefride was beheaded by the Lustful Caradocus, set her
Head on again, she living 15 years after!

Asaph, born of Right Honorable Parentage, was bred at Llan-Elvy, under Mungo
the Scotch Bishop of that place, who had a Convent of 663 Monks (almost the
number of the Beast) whereof 300 being more -- unlearned then the rest, were
employed in Husbandry. Amongst the rest (who attended Divine Service) St. Asaph
was eminently conspicuous for Piety and Learning, insomuch that Mungo, (in
Latin Quentigermu) being called into his Country, resigned both his Convent
and Cathedral to him. Here he demeaned himself with such Sanctity, that
Llan-Elvy was after his death, called from him St. Asaph. He was an assiduous
Preacher, having this Speech in his Mouth, Such who are against the Preaching
of Gods word, envy Man's Salvation. He is thought by some to have dyed about
569. After which, his See was Vacant above 500 years, until Jeffrey of Monmouth
was placed there.

Prelates since the Reformation.
Richard Parry, D. D. born at Ruthin, was bred in Christs-Church in Oxford,
whence he was preferred Dean of Bangor, and at last Bishop of St. Asaph,
consecrated December 30. 1604. Bishop Godwin being near to him in time, and in
his studies, desires to be his equal in other Episcopal Qualities. Bishop
Parry dyed 16..

Soldiers.
Owen Glendower, born in his ancient Patrimony of Glendower-Wye, was bred in
London, a Student of the Common Law, till he became a Courtier and Servant to
King Richard 2. After whose death, being in the wrong side of preferment, he
retired into Wales, where there arose a difference between him and the Lord Gre
of Ruthen, about a Common, which Owen by force recovered from Gre, whom he
killed. Many spurred his posting Ambition, by telling him he was the true Heir
to all North Wales, and now or never the time to regain it; whereupon he brake
into open Rebellion. Being angry with the King, his Revenge fell upon God;
burning down the fair Cathedrals of Bangor, and St Asaph. Doing mischiefs to
others, he did no good to himself. King Henry 4. found it more easy to depose
King Richard then subdue this Owen, who had taken Roger Earl of March, and next
Heir to the Crown, Prisoner.

Writers.
Elvodugus Probus, was Vir sui Nominis; he lived at Bangor Monachorum, in that
Age the Cambridge and Oxford of all Britain. He wrote many Books, (and
particularly a Chronicle of his Nation) which the Envy of Time has denied to
Posterity. Amongst many eminent Men whom he had for his Scholars, there was the
Learned Nennius, commonly called Nennius Elvodugi. This Elvoduge flourished 950.

Since the Reformation.
Meredith Hanmer, D D. was born in this County, where a good Family of his Name
flourish at Hanmeer, at this day. He was Treasurer of Trin-Colledge in Dublin.
He Translated the Eccles. Histories of Eusebius. Socrates, Evagrius, etc. into
English, wrote an Ephemeris of the Irish Saints, and a Chronicle of that
Country. He dyed at Dublin of the Plague, 1604.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
Richard Clough, born at Denbigh, was a Chorister in Chester, whence he removed
to London, where he became an Apprentice to, and afterward Partner with Sir
Thomas Gresham. Having lived some time at Antwerp, he Traveled to Jerusalem,
where he was made Knight of the Sepulcher. Some affirm that some Thousands of
pounds were disbursed by him, for the building of the Royal Exchange, and that
it was agreed betwixt him and Sir Thomas Gresham, that the Survivour of them
should be Heir to the other, on which account they say, that the Knight carried
away the main of the Estate. He gave the impropriation of Killken in
Flint-shire, worth 100 pounds per annum to the free School in Denbigh, besides
his Benefaction to the new Church there. He dyed 15*.

Memorable Persons.
Thomas ap William ap Thomas ap Richard ap Howel, ap Evan Vaughan, etc. Esquire was
born of an ancient worshipful Parentage at Moston. This Gentleman being called
at the Panel of a Jury by the aforesaid Names, was advised by the Judge, in
the Reign of King Henry 8. to contract his Name, who thereupon denominated
himself Moston. A leading case to the Gentry in Wales, who (leaving their
Pedigrees at home) carry one Surname only abroad with them.

Note, Superstitious Pilgrimages do still continue of fond people in this
County, to the Well of St. VVinifrede, though their Proverb tells them, Goreu
Pererindod Cyrchu offeren Sull; That is, It is the best Pilgrimage to frequent
the Divine duties of the Sabbath.

GLAMORGAN-SHIRE.
GLamorgan-shire has the Severn-Sea on the South, Carmarthen on the West,
Brecknock on the North, Monmouth shire on the East. The North of this County is
full of Mountains, the South is a very fruitful Valley, and the Garden of
Wales. At St. Donat's (an ancient House of the Right Worshipful Family of the
Stradlings) grows a good fruit, and as soon ripe as any in England. Giraldus
Cambrensis reports, that in the Island Barrey, there is a Chink in a Rock, to
which if you lay your ear, you will hear a noise like that of Smiths at work,
one while blowing the bellows, another while striking of the hammer, etc. There
is also at Newton, on the Bank of Ogmore, a Well, the water whereof is so low
at the flowing of the Sea in Summer, you can scarcely get up a dishful of the
same; whereas at the ebb thereof you may easily recover a pailful. Mr. Cambden
who saw it, adds, that it is the same in Winter.

Civilians.
Sir Edward Carne, descended from a good Family, flourishing at Wenny, was bred
(I believe) in Oxford, Dr. of the Civil Law, and was Knighted by Chapter 5.
Emperor. He was dispatched to Rome by King Henry 8. for his Excusator to his
Holiness, (upon intelligence of his intention shortly to cite that King to
appear in Rome) to remonstrate, that his Grace was not bound by Law so to
appear. This he effectually performed, pleading, that the Emperor was so
powerful at Rome, that he could not expect Justice; declaring that unless they
desisted, he must appeal thence to some able Men in some indifferent
Universities; and if this were refused, he protested a Nullity in all that they
did. A behavior which spoke him of no less Valor then Ability. Queen Mary
highly prized him, and no whit the less for his cordial appearing for King
Henry, in the matter of her Mothers divorce, imputing it to the discharge of
his Calling, in him who otherwise was a thorough paced Romanist, and whom she
employed Ambassador to the Pope. After her death, he still resided at Rome,
and by Command from Queen Elizabeth, repaired to Pope Paul the 4th, to give him
an account, that his Mistress was called to the Crown of England; To whom the
Pope returned, That England was a Fee of the Church of Rome, and that she could
not succeed, as being illegitimate. This Pope would have no Prince as his
equal, but all subject under his Foot Besides, he commanded Sir Edward to lay
down his Office of Ambassador, and under pain of the greater Excommunication,
and confiscation of his Goods, not to go out of the City, but to take upon him
the Regiment of the English Hospital therein, So that I see not how Queen
Elizabeth can be taxed by the Papists for a Schismatic, being thrust from the
Church of Rome, by the Pope himself, so barbarously treating her Ambassador,
whilst as yet she had made no alteration in Religion; though I confess some
conceive that the crafty old Knight was well contented with his restraint,
wherein he dyed, 1561.

MERIONETH-SHIRE.
MErioneth-shire has the Sea on the West, Cardigan-shire on the South, and
Carnarvan and Denbigh-shire on the North. It is extreme Mountainous, yea so
high the Hills therein, that it is reported, that men may discourse one with
another on the tops thereof, and yet hardly meet (beneath in the Valley) in a
days time, On these Mountains great numbers of Sheep are fed. Mr. Cambden
takes special notice of the beauty and comeliness of the Inhabitants of this
Shire. There is a place at this day called Le Herbert upon this Account. During
the differences betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster, Dav ap Jenkin, ap
Enion, a stout Gentleman on the Lancastrian side, resolutely defended the
Castle Arleck against King Edward 4. until Sir William Herbert, (afterward
Earl of Pembroke) so furiously stormed it, that immediately it was surrendered.
There is a Lake in this County called Lhin-Tegid (in English Pimble-mear)
through which the River running, preserves his Stream by himself) discernable
by the discolouration thereof) with the Fishes peculiar thereunto. This same
Mear swells not with the many waters that fall therein, whilst a blast of
Wind will quickly make it mount above the bounds thereof. Dogelthy a Market
Town in this County, has Wells three Miles high, viz. the Mountains that
surround it, has a Steeple that grows therein, the Bell on a Yeugh-Tree, and
more Alehouses, then Houses, Barns, etc. being used for their Tippling
Conventicles, I mean good-fellowship.

Saints.
AMP. St. Thelian, bred under Dubritius Bishop of Landaff, was much envied for
his Holiness by one of the Commanders of the Picts, who harassed his Country;
That Bravo sent 2 lewd Strumpets, supposing by their tempting tricks to entice
this Holy Man. These Women counterfieting madness (whereby they might take the
more liberty to themselves of filthy discourse) returned distracted indeed, not
having understanding enough to relate the cause of their sad misfortunes, which
wrought so much on the Soldier, that he received the Faith, was Baptized, and
ever after had a great veneration for this our Saint, who afterward
accompanied Sir Dav. Bishop of Menevia to Jerusalem, and returning into his own
Country, by his fervent Prayers freed the same from the Plague, wherewith it
was then much infested. He dyed February 9. about 563.

Note, that this County (abounding with Sheep) was not a little beholding to
Ludwal their Prince, who (King Edgar imposing on him a yearly Tribute, the
presenting him with 300 Wolves) did free this County from Wolves.

MONTGOMERY-SHIRE.
MOntgomery-shire has Cardigan and Radnor-shire on the South, Shrop-shire on
the East, Denbigh-shire on the North, and Merioneth-shire on the West. in this
County are many high Hills, and many delightful fruitful Valleys. Montgomery is
the chief Town of the County; of which there never was any Earl, until the
Reign of King James, who created Philip Herbert, second Son to Henry Earl of
Pembrook, Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earl of Montgomery. There are
excellent Horses bred in this County.

Proverbs.
I. Y Tair Chiwiorydd; In English the 3 Sisters, whereby are meant the 3
Rivers, of Wye, Severn and Rhiddial, arising all 3 in this County. The
Tradition is, that these 3 Sisters were to run a race, which should be first
Married to the Ocean; Severn and Wye having a great Journey to go, chose their
way through soft Meadows, and kept on a Travelers pace, whilst Rhiddial
(presuming on her short Journey) staid before she went out, and then to recover
her lost time, runs furiously in a distracted manner, with her mad stream, over
all opposition. It is applyable to children of the same Parents, but of
different dispositions, and courses of lives, so that their Cradles were not so
near, but their Coffins are as far asunder. II. Pywys Paradwys Cymry, That is,
Powis is the Paradise of Wales. This Proverb refers to Teliessen the Author
thereof, at what time Powis contained all that pleasant Land lying betwixt Wye
and Severn. III. Gwan di Bawlyn Hafren, Hafren fydd hifel cynt; That is, fix
thy Pale (with intent to fence out his water) in Severn, Severn will be as
before, applyable to such who undertake projects above their power to perform.

Writers.
George Herbert, born at Montgomery-Castle, was bred Fellow in Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge, and Orator of the University, where he made a Speech of the
return of Prince Charles out of Spain. Waving worldly preferment, he served at
Gods Altar. So pious his Life, that as he was a Copy of Primitive, he might be
a Pattern of Sanctity to Posterity. He never mentioned the Name of Jesus, but
with this Addition, my Master, next God, the Word, he loved the Word of God,
being heard often to protest, That he would not part with one leaf thereof for
the whole World. By his good Example, he gained many to the Church. He was
Preacher at Bemmerton nigh Salisbury, (where he built a fair House for his
Successor) and Prebendary at Leighton, (founded in the Cathedral of Lincoln)
where he built a fair Church, with the assistance of some Friends free
Offerings. When a Friend of his went about to comfort him with the remembrance
thereof, as a good work, he returned, it is a good work, if sprinkled with the
Blood of Christ. He dyed 163.. Whose Brother,

Edward Herbert, Son to Sir Richard Herbert Esquire and Susan Newport his Wife, was
born at Montgomery-Castle, Knighted by King James, who sent him over
Ambassador to France. Afterward King Charles I. created him Baron of
Castle-Island in Ireland, and some years after, Baron Cherbury in this County.
He was a most excellent Artist, and rare Linguist, studied both in Books and
Men. He wrote a Treatise of the Truth in French, extant at this day, with great
Honor in the Pope's Vatican. He Married the Daughter, and sole Heir of Sir
William Herbert, of St. Julians, in Monmouth-shire, with whom he had a large
inheritance both in England and Ireland. He dyed in August, 1648. and was
buried in St. Giles in ths Fields, London. A fair Monument (of his own
invention) was begun, and almost finished in the Church of Montgomery.

Memorable Persons.
Hawis Gadarn, a Lady of remark, sole Daughter and Heir to Owen ap Gruffyth,
Prince of Powis Wenwinwin, was justly Surnamed Gadarn, i. e. Hardy. Her 4
Uncles Lhewelyn, Jo. Griffith, Vaughan and David, detained her inheritance from
her. Give (said they) a Girl a little Gold, and Marry her, God and Nature made
Land for men to manage. Hereupon Hawis complained to King Edward 2. who
commiserating her condition, consigned his Servant John Charleton (born at
Apple in Shropshire) a Vigorus Knight, to Marry her, creating him in her Right,
Baron of Powis. Being assisted with the Kings Forces, he took three of her
Uncles Prisoners, (about 1320) brought the fourth to a Composition; and finally
recovered all his Wives Estate, procuring also the Lands of her Uncles, in
default of their Issue Male to be settled on her.

Julines Herring, was born at Flambere-Mayre, 1582. His Ancestors (for the
space of almost 200 years) had been in their course chief Officers of Coventry.
Julines was bred in Sidney-Colledge in Cambridge, and became Preacher at Calk
in Derby-shire, Shrewsbury, and Rendbury in Cheshire, being one of a Pious
Life, but disaffected to Church Discipline, he was prohibited his Preaching
here, and called over to Amsterdam, where he continued Preacher to the English
Congregation, some years well respected, and dyed 1644.

MONMOUTH-SHIRE.
MOnmouth-shire may be called an English-Welsh County; For whereas formerly all
Welsh Counties sent but one Knight to Parliament, this had the privilege of
two, and it is not subject to the Welsh Jurisdiction, but to the Governance of
the itinerant Judges, who ride Oxford Circuit. As for Manufactures, the best
Caps were formerly made at Monmouth, where the Cappers Chapel does still
remain. The Statute of the 13th. of Queen Elizabeth, c. 19. (Enacting that Caps
should be worn by all persons) was repealed an. 39. Eliz.

Princes.
Henry of Monmouth, Son to King Henry 4. (by Mary one of the Daughters and
Heirs of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford) and whom he succeeded on the
Throne, (being the fifth of that Name) and began his Reign March 20. an. 1413.
Being extravagant in his Youth, he had been by the King his Father, expelled
his Council, (substituting his younger Brother, the Duke of Clarence President
in his stead) for the same. No sooner was his Father dead, but he reclaimed
himself, and became a Glory to his Country, and a constant Terror to his
Enemies; yea, and banished all his idle Companions from Court, allowing them a
competency for their subsistence. When the Lord Chief Justice (who had secured
him when Prince, for striking him for the Commitment of some of his lewd
Companions) he not only forgave him, but rewarded his Justice. In his Reign a
Supplication was preferred, that the Temporal Lands given to pious uses, but
abusively spent, might be siezed on by the King. This was wisely awarded by
Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, by putting the King on the design of
recovering France. Yea, this King by his Valor, reduced Charles 6. King of
France to such a condition, that he resigned his Kingdom into his hand, and our
King Henry 5. was accordingly Crowned in Paris King of France. There the French
found him as good (or rather worse) as his Promise, which he made to the
Dolphin, (who sent him a Barrel of Paris Tennis-Balls) sending such
English-Balls, that they proved fatal to them. He dyed at Boys St. Vincent,
ult. Aug. 1422. and was brought over with great Solemnity, and interred in
Westminster-Abbey.

Saints.
St. Amphibalus, a Citizen of Carlion. See the Saints in Hereford.

St. Aaron, a wealthy Citizen of Carlion, was Martyred under Dioclesian the
Emperor, 30^. Note, that the three first British Martyrs, viz. Alban,
Amphibalus and Aaron have, the first a Latin, the second a Greek, and the
third an Hebrew Name.

St. Julius of Carlion, suffered with Aaron aforesaid. Note, that Carlion (now
a small Town) was once a great City, reaching a Mile in length, and
comprehending St. Julian's, a House of late Sir William Herbert's, now a Mile
distant from the Town.

Cardinals.
Geffery of Monmouth, is avouched by some to have been made Cardinal, but it is
improbable, that so much honor should be done unto him whilst living, who was
so solemnly disgraced after his death; his Books being then publicly
prohibited by the Court of Rome. See Writers in this Shire.

John of Monmouth, D. D. and Canon of Lincoln, was chosen Bishop of Landaff,
1296. after that See had been 7 years vacant. He was a Learned and Pious
Divine. Besides other Benefactions to his See, he procured the Rectory of
Newland, in the Forest of Dean, to be appropriated thereto; But Bishop Kitchen
afterward impoverished the same, more then all his Predecessors had endowed it
in 400 years. This John dyed April 8. 1322. and was buried in St Mary's Chapel.

Walter Cantilupe, Son to William the elder, Lord Cuntilupe, (whose prime
residence was at Abergavennie in this County) was made (by Henry 3.) Bishop of
Worcester. He would not yield to the Popes Legate, who complained of many
Clergymen keeping their Livings against the Canons, intending to make room for
the Popes Favorites, or force such irregular incumbents to a Composition. He
was one of a keen nature, whose two-edged spirit did cut on both sides, against
the King and Pope. Against the former, he sided with the Barons, to whom he
promised Heaven for the reward of their Rebellion against their Prince, though
it cost him an Excommunication from the Pope, who was the more forward in
denouncing that fatal Sentence against him, because he had told Rusland his
Legate, coming hither 1255. that he would prefer him to be hanged on the
Gallows, rather then ever consent to such expilation of the Church, as
aforesaid. Lying on his death^bed, he was touched with true remorse for his
disloyalty, and obtained Absolution. He dyed February, 1267. whom I behold as
Uncle to Thomas, the Sainted Bishop of Hereford.

Soldiers.
Richard de Clare, alias Strongbow, born (probably) at Stringule Castle, was
Earl of Stringule and Pembrook. A person of effectual performance. It happened
that Mac Murugh, an. 1167. being expelled his Territories, for several
Tyrannies, by the Lords of Mead and Conaight, repaired to King Henry 2. and
invited him to Ireland. That Politic King sent over this R. Strongbow (with
1200 Men) who possessed himself of the Ports of Leinster and Mounster, with
large Lands thereunto belonging; insomuch that the King growing jealous of his
greatness remanded him home, and commanded him to surrender his Acquest into
his hands, which done, he received them by regrant from the King, save that
Henry reserved the City of Dublin for himself. This Strongbow is commonly
called Domitor Hiberniae, the Tamer of Ireland. Yet some of the great Lords
there did still retain the Power and Title of King; Witness the Preface in the
Commission, whereby King Henry 2. made William Fitz-Adelme his Lieutenant of
Ireland, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus, etc. Salutem. This Earl dyed at
Dublin, 1177.

Sir Roger Williams, born of an ancient Family at Penross, was first a Soldier
of Fortune under the Duke of Alva, and afterward served Queen Elizabeth. A man
extremely forward to Fight. When a Spanish Captain challenged Sir John Norris
to fight a single Combat (which was beneath him to accept, being a General)
this Roger undertook the Don. And after they had fought some time (both Armies
beholding them) without any hurt, they pledged each other a deep draught of
Wine, and so friendly departed. Another time at midnight, he assaulted the
Camp of the Prince of Parma, nigh Venloe, slew some of the Enemies, and pierced
to the Tent of the General. He bravely defended Sluse, whilst any hope of help.

William Herbert, Earl of Pembrook, with Sir Richard his Brother, were both
valiant Men, and as fast Friends to King Edward 4. as professed Foes to Richard
Nevil Earl of Warwick. Leading the Army of the Welsh, in the Battle of Banbury,
with their Poll-Axes, they twice made way through the Battle of the Northern
men (which sided with King Henry 6.) without any Mortal Wound. There passes a
Tradition in the Noble Family of the Herberts of Chierbury, that this Sir
Richard their Ancestor, slew that day 140 Men with his own hands, in passing
and repassing through the Army. Guns not being then in fashion, the Poll-Axe
was the next Mortal Weapon, especially in such a dead Hand as this Knight had.
He is reported also to be of a Giants Stature, the Peg being extant in
Montgomery Castle, whereon he used to hang his Hat at dinner, which no Man of
an ordinary height can reach with his hand at this day. However, both these
brave Brethren, circumvented with the subtilty of their Foes ( Odds at any time
may be bet on the side of Treachery, against Valor) were brought to Banbury,
beheaded and buried, the Earl at Tinterne, and Sir Richard at Abergaveny in
this County.

Writers.
Jeffrey of Monmouth, (alias ap Arthur) Translated and Compiled the various
British Authors into one Volume. He has many things from the British Bards,
which though improbable, are not therefore ipso facto untrue; yet Humanum est
errare; and Tradition having run a great way from its clear Original, may swell
into a rapide Stream, violently forcing Rubbish into its own Channel, which
shall render the waters thereof impenetrable by the Eye, and ungrateful to the
Palate His Book is prohibited by his Holiness, whilst the lying Legend is
permitted to be read without control. If Jeffrey be guilty of mistakes, they
are such as make not for the Popes advantage. He was Bishop of St. Asaph, and
flourished 1152.

Thomas of Monmouth, wrote an History of St. William, the Child that was
Crucified by the Jews in Norwich, in hatred of our Savior. He flourished 1160
under King Henry 2.

Benefactors to the Public.
AMP. Henry Plantagenet, first Duke of Lancaster, was born in Monmouth Castle,
the chief Seat of his Barony. He is commonly Surnamed the Wryneck, and by
others more rightfully the good Duke of Lancaster. He was Head of the Guild of
Corpus-Christi in Cambridge, and the first Founder of a College, so called in
that University. Indeed the Land was little he conferred thereon, but great the
Countenance of so eminent a person, in procuring and settling their Mortmain. He
dyed 1361. and was buried in the Collegiate Church at Leicester, which he
Founded. Blanch his only Daughter, which had Issue, was Married to John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.

Since the Reformation.
W. Johnes, born in Monmouth, was forced thence for not being able to pay 3 s.
and 4 d. Flying to London, he became first a Porter, and then a Factor, and
going over into Hamborough made such a Vent for Welsh Cottons, that what he
found Drugs at home, he left Dainties beyond Sea. He Founded a fair School in
Monmouth, allowing 50 pounds yearly for the Master, with 100 pounds Salary to a
Lecturer, besides a Stately Almshouse for 20 poor Folk, each of them having 2
Rooms and a Garden, with half a Crown a Week; All which Benefactions he
submitted to the oversight of the Honorable Company of Haberdashers in London,
who at this day right worthily discharge their trust herein. He dyed 16 --.

Memorable Persons.
William Evans, was two yards and an half in height, being Porter to King
Charles I. He was somewhat lame, knocking his Knees together, and going out
squalling with his Feet; yet made he a shift to Dance in an Antimask at Court,
where he drew little Jeffrey the Dwarf out of his Pocket. He dyed 163 --.

Note, this was made a Shire, an. 27. Henry 8. but not solemnly settled till 5
years after. An. 1607. the Moor in this County sustained by the breaking in of
the Severn Sea.

PEMBROKE-SHIRE.
PEmbroke-shire is surrounded on all sides with the Sea, save on the
North-East, where it boundeth on Cardigan, and the East, where it butteth on
Carmarthen-shire. It Is very plentiful of all things necessary for Man's
livelihood, and the East part thereof is the pleasantest place in all Wales. It
affords plenty of Fish, especially about Tenby-y-Piscoid, having its name
from the abundance thereof. A part of this County is peopled by Flemings,
placed there by King Henry 1. to defend the Land given them against the Welsh,
and their Country is called Little England beyond Wales. In this County there
is a Breed of very good Faulcons, called Peregrines. King Henry 2. passing
hence into Ireland, cast off a Norway Goshawk at one of these: but the Goshawk
taken at the source by the Faulcon, soon fell down at the Kings Foot, which
performance in this ramage, made him yearly send hither for Eyesses. Of
Buildings, the Cathedral of St. David is most eminent, begun by Bishop Peter in
the Reign of King John. The Roof thereof is higher then any in England. It
acknowledged subjection neither to Rome nor Canterbury, till the Reign of King
Henry 1.

Princes.
Henry Tuthar, Son to Edmund Earl of Richmond, and Margaret his Lady, was born
at Pembroke, in the Reign of King Henry 6. When a young man, he lived in Exile
in France, where he contracted a permanent habit of Frugality. Having
vanquished King Richard 3. in Bosworth-field, and Married Elizabeth, eldest
Daughter to King Edward 4. He Reigned King of England by the name of Henry 7.
He is generally conceived a most politic Prince; yet many think his judgment
failed him, when refusing the proffer of Columbus, for discovering of America;
but such his wariness, he would not tamper with costly Contingencies. He was
the first King* who secretly sought to abate the formidable greatness (the
Parent of many former English Rebellions) in the English Peerage. Hereby he
taught the Commons to claim Jurisdiction by the name of Privilege, and made
them able in time to contest with Sovereignty. He survived his Queen, by whom
he had the best Title to the Crown, about five years. His greatest fault was,
grinding his Subjects with grievous exactions. He was most Magnificent in those
Structures he left to Posterity; amongst which, his Devotion to God, is seen in
two Chapels, the one at Cambridge, the other at Westminster; His Charity to
the poor in the Hospital of the Savoy, his Magnificence to himself in his own
Monument of gilded Copper, and his vanity to the World, in building a Ship
called the Great Harry, of equal cost say some, with his Chapel, which soon
after sunk into the Sea. He much employed Bishops in his service, finding them
honest and able. He deceased at Richmond, April 22. 1509. and was buried in his
Magnificent Chapel at Westminster, having prohibited by his Will, the
Interment of any person or persons whatsoever therein, save those of the Royal
Blood.

Saints.
Justinian, a Noble Briton, with his own inheritance, built a Monastery in the
Island of Ramsey in this County, where many Monks lived happily under his
Jurisdiction, until three of them murdered him in hatred of his Sanctity, about
486. His Body was brought to Menevia, and there interred by St. David, and
since much famed for (supposed) Miracles.

Writers.
Giraldus Cambrensis, whose Surname was Barry, (and some say Fitz-Girald) was
born at Tenby, being Son to William Barry an Englishman by his Wife Angareth,
Daughter of Nesta, Daughter of Rhese, Prince of South Wales. He was Nephew to
David, the second Bishop of St. David, by whom he was made Archdeacon of
Brecknock. He was wont to complain, that the English did not love him, because
his Mother was a Welsh-woman, and the Welsh did hate him, because his Father
was an Englishman, though by his excellent Writings, he deserved of England
well, of Wales better, and of Ireland best of all, making a Topographical
description of all three: But acting in the last as a Secretary under King
John, with great industry and expense. Having Traveled to Jerusalem, he wrote
De Mirabilibus Terrae Sanctae. Having had ill success at Court, he attained to
no considerable Dignity. For a long time no preferment was proffered him, above
a beggarly Bishopric in Ireland: At last, the Sea of St. David was the highest
place he attained. Giraldus himself tells us the true reason thereof, that he
was ever beheld oculo novercali, because being a Welshman by the surer side,
and then such the antipathy of the English, that they thought no good could
come out of Wales. Being now Bishop of St. David's he went to Rome and there
stickled for an exemption of that See from Canterbury, whereby he highly
offended Hubert the Archbishop thereof. Whereupon, being rather overborn with
bribes then overcome in Cause returned re infecta, died and was buried in his
own Cathedral about 1215.

RADNOR-SHIRE.
RAdnor-shire, (in British Sire Maiseveth) in form three square, is bounded on
the North-West with Hereford-shire, and on the South (separated by the River
Wye) with Brecknock-shire, and on the North with Montgomery-shire. Nature may
seem to have chequered this County, the East and South parts thereof being
fruitful, whilst the North and West thereof (being Mountainous) can hardly be
bettered by Husbandry; Yet it is indifferently stored with Woods, and
conveniently watered with Rivers and Meers. Mr. Cambden tells us, that there
is a place therein termed Melienith, (from the yellowish Mountains thereof)
which stretches from Offa Dike unto the River Wye, which cutteth overthwart
the West corner of this Shire, where meeting with some stones which impede its
motion on a sudden, for want of ground to glide on, has a violent downfall,
which place is termed Raihader Gowy, that is the Fall of Wye. Hereupon he
supposes it not improbable, that the Englishmen forged that word for the name
of this Shire, terming it Radnor-shire.

Prelates.
Elias and Guilielmus de Radnor, were both born in Old Radnor, both Bishops of
Landaff, and both eminent, being eminent for nothing, the former dying May 6.
1240. the latter, June 30. 1256.

Note, when Owen Glyndower-dwy (inveigled by some skilled in Merlin's
Prophesies, that the time was come wherein the Britains, through his
assistance, should recover their ancient L^berty) raised a Rebellion, making
War against the Earl of March, Heir apparent to the Crown of England, and
Principality of Wales. King Henry 4. (enraged at his proceedings) Enacted these
rigorous Laws ensuing: First, That no Welshman should purchase Lands, nor be
chosen into any Office in City or Town, etc. or bear Armor within any City;
Besides, if a Welshman should sue an Englishman, it was ordained, that he
should be tried and judged by Englishmen. That all English Burgesses who
Married Welshwomen, should forfeit their Liberties. No Congregation or Council
was to be permitted to the Welsh but in presence of the Officers of the
Seigniory. That no Victuals should be brought into Wales, unless by the License
of the King and Council. That no Welshman should have any Castle. etc. That no
Welshman should be capable of any Office of State, or in any Court of
Judicature, and that no Englishman Marrying a Welsh woman should enjoy any
Office in Wales.

FINIS.
Books sold by Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
A French and English Dictionary, composed by Mr. Randolph Cotgrave, Folio.
Bakers Chronicles, folio. Heylins Cosmography, fol. History of Josephus, fol.
Herberts Harry the 8th fol. Mounsieur De Gray, Expert Horseman, with large
Additions Quarto. Cockers Arithmetic Vulgar, and now in the Press, his Decimal
Arethmetick with a Treatise of Algebra, made easy for all young Learners,
Collected from his own Paper by John Hawkins teacher of the said Arts, at St.
Georges Southwark. Mariners Magazeen in Folio. Royal and Practical Chemistry,
by Oswaldus Crollius, and John Hartman, faithfully rendered into English, Folio
price 10. s. Gods Revenge against Murder, by John Reynolds, containing thirty
Tragical Stories, digested into six Book newly reprinted, Folio, price 10 s.
Lord Bacon's Natural History, Folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels containing a
description of the Turkish Empire, of Egypt, and the Holy Land, of the remote
parts of Italy, and Islands adjoining, Folio, price 8 s. Markham's
Masterpiece. David's Repentance, by Sam. Smith. David's Blessed-man.
Lilligrows Travels. Dialogue between Life and Death. Seamans Calendar. Seamans
Practice. Mariners Calendar. Seamans Companion. Norwoods Triangles, his
Epitome. Seamans Glass. Geometrical Seaman. Gellibrands Epitome. Mariners
Compass rectified. Pilots Sea-Mirror. Practical Navigation. Boat-Swains Art.
Dr. Newtons Cosmography, a Treatise of Geometry and Astronomy and Surveying,
with an exact Description of the Globes. The famous History of the Destruction
of Troy, in three Books in Quarro, price 3 s, Valentine and Orson, price 18 d.
Chemical Essays by John Beguminus, price 1 s. 8 d. Monasticon Fevershamiense,
Or a Description of the Abbey of Faversham Octavo, price bound 18 d. The Path
way to Health, price bound 18 d. The Complete Academy, or Nursery of
Complements Bound one shilling. The Book of Knowledge in three parts, price 10
d. The Book of Palmistry in Octavo, bound 18 d. The Pilgrims Por^, or the weary
man's rest in the Grave, in twelves, price bound 1 s. The famous History of the
five wise Philosophers, containing the Life of Jehosaphat, Son of Avenerio,
Emperor of Corma, and his wonderful conversion to ^he Christian Faith. The
great Assize, by Sam. Smith. The Bear-baiting of Women. The History of Friar
Ba^on and Friar Bungy. New conceited Letters. The Jovial Garland, containing
all the newest Songs that are now used. Newton's Art of Logic. Newton's Art of
Rhetoric. The famous History, of Don Bellianis of Greece, in three parts being
now complete The famous History of Montelion, Knight of the Oracle. Ovid de
Tristibus in English. Bishop Hall's Soliloquies in twelves. The Poems of Ben
Johnson Junior.
Books Printed, for John Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate Hill.
Folio.
RUshworth Collections. Straffords Trial. Cawleyes Laws against Popish
Recusants* Modern Reports. Guillims display of Heraldry. Daltons Country
Justice. Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy. Wanleys wonders of the little World, or
a general History of man. Pharmacopeia Londinensis. Crooks Reports. Cooks
Reports.
Quarto*
History of the 7 Champions. History of Parismus. Mandeviles Travels. Assize of
Bread. Littletons Dictionary. Markhams Masterpiece.
Octavo.
Dr. Bright of prayer. -- of Judgment. History of the 7 wise Masters. Salmons
London dispensatory. -- his Doron medicum. Religio medici. Lethgows Travels.
Lucians Dialogues, Greek and Latin. Poseing of the parts, Gesta Romanorum.
Aristotle's problems. Gouges words to Saints and Sinners. Trial of the
Regicides.
Twelves.
Farnabys Rhetoric. Fetyplaces Holy Exercise. Brights Essays on Morality.
Mothers blessing. A Help to dis^ourse. Erasmus de Copia verborum. Poor Man's
Rest. Doctrine of the Bible. Butlers Rhetoric.
With many others, where any Chapman may be furnished with what B^oks he has
occasion for.

Books Printed for William Thackery at the Angel in Ducklane.
COuntry Man's Jewel or Mascal of Cattle in 8to. Fermers Divine Message in 8to.
The Epitome of Josephus or the Wars of the Jews in lage 8to. The Disease of
London or a description of the Scurvy, by Doctor Harvy 8to. The Complete
Courtier or Cupid's Academy in 12es. Christian Devotion in 12es. Cosmo Meros or
the Worldly portion, by Dr. Bushy. The Book of Knowledge of things unk^own 8to.
Epitome of the Turkish History, 8to. Poto of the Covenant in 8to. Epitome of
the Ecclesiastical History 8to. Josselyns Voyage to New England 8to. History of
Montelion Knight of the Oracle, in 4to. History of Parismus. History Gentle
Craft. 4to.
A TABLE of the most remarkable persons and things contained in this work.
THE end and matter of the Work Page 1, 2 Legenda non semper Credenda Page 3
Canonization costly ibid. And best after mature deliberation Page 4 The Office
of the Ancient Cardinals of St. Paul's ibid. The Constitution of Pope Paul II.
concerning the Cardinals Hat Page 5 Cardinal Norfolk, a rare, if not single
President ibid. The Clergy of Britain, the Glory of the World Page 6 The
Antiquity of the Office of Lord Chancellor of England Page 7 The value of that
great Office Page 8 The Etymology and office of Lord High Admiral of England
Page 9 King Henry VIII. first assumed the Title of King of Ireland ibid. Sir
Ed. Montague's choice Page 10 The first Circumnavigators of the World ibid.
King Henry VIII. his great skill in Music Page 12 The Heads of Charity,
Visito, Poto, Cibo, etc. Page 13 A persuasive to Charity ibid. The dates and
degrees of the English Reformation Page 14 Younger Sons are raised by their
Virtue to the dignity of Lord Mayors of London Page 15 The first division of
England into Shires Page 16 The Office of Sheriff ibid. Causes of the
alteration of Sirnames Page 19 Bark-shire had no Earl till an. 1607. Page 20
Popish Cavil, some for Martin some for Luther Page 21 Instances of fortunate
and eminent Sons of Clergymen Page 22 Of the English Gentry, by Nation and
Profession Page 25, 26, etc. Of the Queens Majesty Page 28 Of the Kings Majesty
Page 29
BARK-SHIRE.
Commodities, Oaks, Bark, Trouts Page 31 The Beggars reason for going naked,
viz. all my Body is Face Page 32 Exposition of the Proverb, When our Lady falls
into our Lord's lap, let England beware of a sad mishap Page 33 An observable
Proverb relating to Ireland Page 37 The Lives of four Children of King Edward
I. Page 37, 38 The life of King Edward III. King Henry VI. Page 38, 39 The life
of St. Edmund Page 40 The early dawning of the Gospel in Barkshire Page 41 King
Henry VIII. his pity toward 3 Martyrs Page 42 Humanum est errare, Answer to a
great Cavil Page 43 Archbishop Laud refused to be made Cardinal ibid. The life
of Bishop Godwin Page 44 The life of Archbishop Laud Page 45 The life of Sir
John Mason, who saw 5 Princes ibid. Of Sir Hen. Umpton Ambassador. His public
Challenge Page 46, 47. The life of King Alfrede Page 50 Of Jo. Kendrick, who
gave above 20000 l. to the poor Page 51 Of Tho. Cole the rich Clothier of
Reading ibid. The life of Sir Jo Howard Page 54 The lives of Sir Rob. Harcourt
and Will. Essex Page 55 The lives of Sir Humphrey Foster, Sir Francis
Inglefield, Sir John Williams, and Henry Lord Norrice Page 56 The life of
Richard Lord Lovelace Page 57 The Qualifications etc. of Baronets ibid. Of the
Battle of Newbury Page 58
BEDFORD-SHIRE.
Proverbs Page 60 The life of Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Darby
Page 61 King Henry III. his smart reply to Sylvester of Carlisle Page 62 The
life of Henry Gray Earl of Kent Page 64 The life of John Mordant first Baron of
Turvey Page 65 The life of Sir Francis Russel, afterward Earl of Bedford Page
68
BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE.
Proverbs Page 69 The life of St. Edburg ibid. A great Fiction about Sir
Rumbald, as I am a Christian Page 70 The life of Sir George Crook, Lord Chief
Justice of England Page 74 The lives of Sir William Windsor and Arthur Gray
Bar. of Wilton ibid. Of the Noble and Ancient name of the Cheneys Page 82
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE*
Proverbs Page 83 The life of Thomas Westfield Bishop of Bristol Page 87 The
life of Jo. Tiptoft Earl of Worcester ibid. The life of Matthew Paris Page 89
Will. Collet was Caterer to Seldom, etc. Page 95 The life of Sir Edward North
Baron of Catlidge The life of Sir Jo. Huddlestone
CHESHIRE.
The Antiquity of that County Palatine Page 98 The Life of W. Booth Bishop of
York, and Lawrence and John his Brothers Page 100, 101 The life of Bishop
Chader^on Page 102 The life of Bishop James ibid. The life of Sir Tho. Egerton
Lord Chancellor of England Page 103 The life of the Lord Chief Justice Crew
Page 104 The life of Sir Hugh Calveley Page 105 The life of Sir Robert Knowles
ibid. The life of John Speed, first Tailor then Historian Page 108 The life of
Sir Jo. Brereton Page 110 The life of Sir Hugh Cholmley The Battle of
Rowton-Heath Page 112
CHESTER.
The life of Bishop Dounham Page 114 The lives of David and Sir Henry Middleton
Page 115 The life of Tho. Offley Page 117 Who three dishes had of daily Roast
Page 117 An Egg, an Apple, and the third a toast Page 117

CORNWALL.
Commodities, Diamonds, Ambergrease, Pilchards, Tin Page 120 The wonders ibid.
The life of Will. de Greenvil Lord Chancellor of England Page 122 The life of
Jo. Arundel Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield Page 123 The life of W. Noy ibid.
The life of King Arthur ibid. The Enterprise of Jo. Arundel of Trerice Page 124
Richard D. of Cornwall, was High Sheriff of the County for term of his Life Page
128 The Battles of Liskerd and Stratton Page 130
CUMBERLAND.
Commodities, Pearls, black Lead, Copper Page 132 The life of Archbishop
Grindal Page 135 The life of Sir Richard Hutton the honest Judge Page 136 The
life of Sir Jo. Banks ibid. The life of Richard Crakenthorpe, D. D. Page 136
The life of Maud Daughter to the Lord Lucy Page 139 Richard D. of Gloucester,
Sheriff of this County Page 140
DERBY-SHIRE.
Commodities. The best Lead Page 141 The punishment of stealing Oar twice
ibid. The life of Cardinal Curson Page 142 The life of Phil. de Repingdon alias
Rampington Page 143 The life of Bishop Cook ibid. The life of Sir Jo. Cook
Secretary of State Page 144 The life of Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert ibid. The life
of Sir Hugh Willoughby Page 145 The life of Thomas Linacer Page 146 The life of
Elizabeth Hardwick Countess of Shrewsbury Page 147
DEVON-SHIRE.
The high Character of the Gentry given by Q. Eliz. Page 148 The wonders of the
Pit and Hanging-Stone Page 149 The life of Cardinal Courtney Page 151 Bishop
Foliot's encounter with the Devil ibid. The Character of Bishop Jew^^ Page 153
The life of D. Prideaux Bishop of Worcester Page 153, 154 The life of Sir
Arthur Chichester Page 154 The life of Lord Chief Justice Herle Page 155 The
life of Sir Jo. Carry ibid. The life of the unfortunate Judge Hankford ibid. The
life of Sir Jo. Fortescue Page 156 The life of Sir Lewis Pollard, and Sir Jo.
Doderidge ibid. The life of Sir Richard Greenvil Page 157 The life of James
Lord Audley ibid. The life of the ambitious Tho. Stuckley, Titular Earl of
Wexford Page 158 The life of the most Noble General Monk, Duke of Albermarl
Page 159 The life of W. Wilford Page 160 The life of Sir Humphrey Gilbert Page
161 The life of Sir Walter Rawleigh, who would demonstrate the errors of his
Traducers, a posteriori ibid, The life of the famous Hooker Page 163 The life
of the Lord Pomery Page 164 Nich. and Andr. Tremane, twins alike in all
lineaments, etc. Page 165 The Stratagem of Sir Richard Edgecomb Page 166
EXETER.
The Fatal Castle of Rugemont Page 167 The life of Princess Henrietta, Duchess
of Orleans Page 168 The Character of the famous Iscanus Bishop of Exeter ibid.
DORSET-SHIRE.
Commodities, Salt, Tobacco-pipe Clay, wild madder Page 171 The Life of St.
Edward Son to King Edgar ibid. The life of Archbishop Morton Page 173 The life
of Archbishop Stafford ibid. The life of Bishop Turbevil ibid. The life of the
valiant Sir Richard Bingham Page 175 The Original of White-Hart-Silver Page 177
The descent of the Newburgs ibid.
DURHAM.
The life of Cicely Nevil Daughter to the E. of Westmerland Page 178 The life
of Venerable Bede Page 179 The life of John Wickliffe Page 180 The lives of the
Nevils ibid. The life of Bishop Horn and Bishop Cosen ibid. The life of Anthony
Lord Gray, and Rector of Burbach Page 183
ESSEX.
Where Vulgar wits are said to multiply exceedingly Page 184 The Commodities
Page 185 The life of Henry Fitz-Roy, Son to Henry VIII. Page 186 The life of
St. Helen ibid. The Miracle of St. Osith Page 187 The life of Archbishop
Bourcher Page 188 The life of the facetious Dr. Jegon Page 189 The life of the
Lord Chancellor Audley Page 190 The life of Sir Anthony Cook, famous for his
learned Daughters ibid. The life of Tho. Howard, Earl of Suffolk Page 191 With
his Magnificent Entertainment of King James Page 192 The life of Tho. Ratcliffe
Earl of Suffolk Page 193 The life of Sir Francis Vere Page 194 The life of Tho.
Waldensis Page 195 The Character of Francis Quarles ibid. The life of Joseph
Mede Page 196 The life of Sir Walter Mildmey Page 197 The supposed occasion of
the Barons War ibid. The Siege of Colchester Page 200
GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
King James his Observation of fruitful Pastures Page 202 Commodities; Tobacco,
Steel, Syder ibid. The Legend of St. Kenelme Page 204 Bi^hop Ru^hal's fatal
mistake Page 205 The li^^ of Bishop Fox ibid. Local Treason* or a Treasonable
Castle Page 206 Neal's invention of N^gs Head Page 208 A treatise found in the
belly of a Cod ibid. The life of Sir Thomas Overbury ibid. The fatal effects of
Fear Page 212
HANT-SHIRE.
Commodities^ Honey, etc. Page 213 The life of King Henry I Page 214 The life
of P. Arthur, Brother to King Henry VIII. ibid. The life of St Edburg Page 215
The death of Katharine Gouches ibid. The (...) Sir Richard Rich Page 218 The
life of W. Pawlet, Marq^ess of Winchester ibid. King James his Character of Sir
Thomas Lakes ibid. Whi^ehead's blunt R^partee to Q. Elizabeth Page 221 The ^ase
of a T^eble Character, viz. Pits the Drone Page 222 A Plough drawn by dogs Page
223
HERTFORD-SHIRE
Is the Garden of England The life of Edmund Earl of Richmond Page 370 The life
of Pope Nicholas ibid. King Henry VIII his prediction concerning Sir Ed.
Waterhouse Page 371 The life of Sir Henry Carry Page 372 The life of Alexander
N^quam Page 373 The Character of Thomas Cartwright Page 375 The life of the
Loyal Lord Capel ibid. Thomas Conisby's Resolution Page 377
HEREFORD-SHIRE.
Of a good Al^ Page 377 The wonder of Bon^-Well ibid. Appearance of two
Parelion's ibid. Thomas Cantilupe the last Canonized Englishman Page 378 The
Life of Card. de Easton. The severe punishment of several Cardinals Page 379
The fatal Riddle concerning King Edward ibid. The Life of the Earl of Essex
Page 380 The Spend-thrifts Requiem Page 382 Woodstock Labyrinth Page 383 A
Religious President for Persuming ibid. The life of Sir James Crofts Page 384
HUNTINGTON-SHIRE.
Protestant Nunnery Page 386 The life of St. El^^ed Page 387 The life of Bishop
White Page 388 A through-paced Poet Page 389 The life of Sir Robert Cotton, the
great Antiquary ibid. The life of Stephen Marshal, B. D. Page 391 Cromwell's
Uncle Page 392
KENT.
Of the Royal Navy and Navigation Page ^^^ Proverbs Page 3^^ The life of King
Henry VIII Page 39^ The life of Q. Mary ibid* The life of Q. Elizabeth Page 399
King James in his Prayer resolved to have respect to the Virgin Mary Page 400
The lives of Princess Sophia, and Prince Charles ibid. The life of St. Elphage
The fatal death of Judge Hales Page 402 The life of Cardinal Kemp ibid. The
life of Sir Edward Poynings Page 405 The life of Sir Anth. St. Ledger Page 406
The life of Sir Henry Sidney ibid. The life of Sir Philip Sidney Page 407 The
life of Sir Francis Walsingham ibid. The life of Sir Henry Finch Page 409 W.
Adams the first effectual discoverer of Japan ibid. The life of Dr. Harvey Page
411 The Life of the Loyal Sir Thomas Wiat Page 412 Charnock's Miscarriage Page
413 The life of Dr. Bois Page 414 Sir John Philpot's Fleet Page 415 A strange
account of a Woman in despair Page 417 Sir Tho. Cheney Privy Counselor to
four Sovereign Princes Page 419
CANTERBURY.
The Life of Archbishop Langton Page 421 A vindication of Music in Churches
Page 422 The life of Simon Langton ibid.
LANCASHIRE
The Inhabitants generally devout Page 424 Fishing with Spades ibid. The life
and death of John Rogers Page 425 The life and death of John Bradford ibid. The
life of Cardinal Alan Page 426 The life of Bishop Barnes Page 428 The life of
Archbishop Bancroft Page 429 The 6 Properties of a good Scholar Page 432 The
^rance of George Walker an infant Page 433 Mr. Chetham's Benefactions Page 434
The Battle of Preston Page 435
LEICHESTERSHIRE.
Where the inhabitants of a certain Village have a rattling kind of speech Page
437 The life of Jane, Katharine and Mary Gray ibid. The life and death of
Latimer Page 439 The life of Bishop Langton Page 440 The life of Roger de
Martival ibid. The life of Dr. Hall Page 441 The life of the Duke of Buckingham
ibid. The life of Judge Belknap Page 442 The life of the Lord Chief Justice
Cateline Page 443 The life of W. Burton Page 445 The life of Richard Vines
ibid. The life of John Cleaveland Page 446 Sir John Poultney's Benefactions
ibid. The Pectoral Bird of Thomas Burdet, and the occasion of his death Page
448
LINCOLNSHIRE.
Foolish Fowls have fine flesh Page 450 The life of King Henry IV. Page 453 The
Lives of Gilb. de Sempringham, and Cardinal Somercote Page 454 A Remark on the
imprisonment of Pope Urb. 8 Page 455 The life and cruel death of W. Ascough, D.
L. Page 456 The life of Bishop Fox ibid. Archbishop Whitgifts Anagram Page 457
The life of Edward Fines Earl of Lincoln Page 458 The life of Thomas Lord Bury
ibid. The life of the Lord Treasurer Cecil Page 459 The life of Judge Skipwith
Page 460 The life of the Lord Chief Justice Husee ibid. The life of J. Anderson
ibid. The life of Peregrine Berty Lord Willoughby Page 461 The Tree of Food,
Raiment and Harbor Page 463 The life of Sir W. Mounson ibid. The Benefactions
of R. Sutton Esquire Page 467 The Blacksmiths Book of Herauldry Page 468
MIDDLESEX.
Commodities and Manufactures Page 470 Proverbs Page 471 The life of King
Edward VI. ibid. A c^s^om of the Jews Page 472 The benefactions of Alice
Wilkes Page 475 The benefactions of Sir Julius Caesar ibid. Branford Fight Page
477
LONDON.
The Millers Riddle applied to the Thames Page 479 The Fire that happened on
the Bridg^ ibid. Proverb Page 481 The Life and death of W. Sautre Page 486 The
life of Archbishop Heath Page 487 The life of Bishop Cotton Page 488 The life
of Dr. Davenant, Bishop of Sarum Page 489 The life of Bishop Wren The life of
Sir Thomas More Page 490 Sir W. Paget, Chancellor to 4 successive Princes Page
491 The life of the Earl of Strafford ibid. A politic Cordial Page 493 The
life of Sir Thomas Roper Page 494 The life of Edmund Spencer Page 497 Campian's
Life Page 499 An Innocent She-Pope Page 500 The Founder of Dulwich College
Page 501
WESTMINSTER.
Eastminster what? Page 503 The Life of King Edward I. etc. Page 505 The Birth
and Character of the King's Majesty, Charles II. Page 506 The Birth and
Character of His Royal Highness James Duke of York. Page 507 The life of Mary
Princess of Orange ibid. The life of Princess Elizabeth Page 508 The life of
Princess Anne Page 509 The life of Princess Katharine ibid. The life of Prince
Charles ibid. The life of Bishop Warner Page 510 The life of Sir Francis Bacon
ibid. The life of Benjamin Johnson Page 512
NORFOLK.
Mr. Aylmer took Sanctuary in a Wine-Butt Page 516 The life of Sir Edward Coke
Page 518 The life of Sir Clement Paston Page 522 Dr. Thorp's Life Page 524 The
life of John Skeleton ibid. D. Perne a notorious Trimmer, mortally wounded with
a Jest Page 527 The benefactions of Henry Howard Earl of Northampton Page 528
The punishment of striking within the Verge Page 529
NORWICH.
Dr. Goslin's Life Page 531
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
The chief Town stands on other Men's Legs Page 534 The County abounds with
Nobility ibid. The life of Queen Elizabeth, Wife to Edward II. Page 355 The
life of King Richard Crookback Page 536 The life of St. Werburgh ibid. The life
of W. le Zouch Page 537 The life of Francis Godwin, Bishop of Hereford Page 539
The life of Sir Christopher Hatton ibid. The life of Sir W. Fitz-Williams Page
540 The life of Sir Isaac Wake ibid. The life of Sir W. Catesbye Page 541 The
life of Sir Richard Empson ibid. The life of Lord Chief Justice Montague Page
542 The life of Sir Augustine Nicols Page 543 The life of Sir Robert Dallington
ibid. The life of John Fletcher Page 549 The life of Sir Henry Montague ibid.
The life of Dr. Preston Page 546 The benefactions of Henry Chichley Page 547
The life of Ed. Montague Baron of Baughton Page 548 An instance of Gratitude
Page 550
NORTHUMBERLAND.
Charity reversed, instanced in St. Ebba: Many are chaste that they may preserve
their Noses. She parted with her Nose that she might preserve her Chastity One
breeds Teeth at 110 years of Age Page 557
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
Where is the best Liquorish Page 558 The life and death of Archbishop Cranmer
Page 559 The life of Sir John Markham Page 560 The life of Robin Hood Page 561
OXFORDSHIRE.
A description of the University Page 573 The life of King Richard, Caeur de
Lion Page 576 The life of Prince Edmund Page 577 The life of Edward the Black
Prince Page 578 The life of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester Page 578 The
life of Anne Beauchamp Countess of Sarisbury ibid. The life of St. Frideswide
Page 579 The life of St. Edwold ibid. The life of St. Edw. the Confessor Page
550 The life of Cardinal Pullen ibid. The life of Cardinal Joyce ibid. The life
of Bishop Bancroft Page 582 The life of Sir Dudley Carleton ibid. The life of
Sir John Norris ibid. The life of Sir Francis Knowls Page 584 The life of
Thomas Lydgate Page 586 Anne Green hanged, and recovered Page 579
RUTLAND-SHIRE.
A large description of a small Gentleman Page 582
SHROP-SHIRE.
The life of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York Page 584 The life of St. Oswald
Page 585 The life of Thomas Gataker Page 586 The life of Robert of Shrewsbury,
Bishop of Bangor ibid. The life of Robert Burnel Chancellor of England Page
587 The life of Robert of Shrewsbury, Bishop of Bath and Wells ibid. The life
of Archbishop Talbot Page 588 The life of Lord Chancellor Bromley Page 589
The life of Sir John Walter Page 590 The life of Edward Littleton Lord Keeper
ibid. The life of the Martial Talbot Page 591 The life of Old Parr Page 594 The
life of Sir Roger Owen Page 596
SOMMERSET-SHIRE.
Lapis Calaminaris found here Page 797 The best Mastiffs bred here Page 740 The
Parable of Jotham misapplyed Page 741 The properties of the waters of Bath Page
742 St. Dunstan's Life Page 743 The life of Bishop Hooper ibid. The life of
Joceline Bishop of Wells Page 744 The life of Thomas Beckington, Bishop of Bath
and Wells ibid. The life of Sir Amias Poulet Page 745 The decision of Lord
Chief Justice Fitz-James Page 746 Tho life of Sir John Popham Page 747 The life
of the valiant Courcy Earl of Ulster ibid. Sir Amias Preston's Challenge to Sir
Walter Rawleigh Page 749 Ferguson Senior, or Henry Cuffee Page 750 The life of
Sir John Harrington Page 751 Silver-tongued Sidenham Page 751 The Life of
Robert Person Page 752 Coriat's Picture Page 754 The Skirmish at Martials Elm
ibid.
BRISTOL.
Bristol Milk a Remedy against Crudities Page 754 Hugh Eliot first discovered
the New found Land Page 756 The life of Thomas Norton the Chemist. Page 757 The
life of W. Grocine Page 758 Dr. White Founder of Sion-Colledge Page 759
STAFFORDSHIRE.
Wherein is found good Alabaster Page 760 The Life of Cardinal Pole Page 761
The life of Sir Thomas Littleton Judge Page 763 The life of Dudley Sir Richard
Empson's Partner Page 764 The life of Sir John Bromley ibid. The life of John
Dudley Duke of Northumberland Page 765 The Bagnols ibid.
SUFFOLK.
The life of Edmund Mortimer Page 773 The life of St. Edmund King of the
East Angles Page 774 The life and death of Dr. Tailor ibid. The strange
circumstances of the death of Robert Samuel Page 775 Cardinal Woolsey Founder
of Christ-Colledge in Oxford Page 776 The life of Bishop Gardener Page 778 The
life of Bishop Brownrig Page 780 The life of Sir Nicholas Bacon Page 781 The
life of Sir William Drury Lord Deputy of Ireland Page 782 The life of Sir
Robert Naunton Secretary of State Page 783 The life and violent death of the
Lord Chief Justice Cavendish ibid. The life of Sir Thomas Wentworth Page 784
Dr. Butler's Life Page 786 Scroop the Anchorite's life Page 788 The Tragedy of
Roxana Page 789 Foundress of Clare-Hall in Cambridge Page 791 The occasion of
the addition of the Dagger to the Arms of London Page 792 A Cordial testimony
of Loyalty, or a costly Pearl diffused in a Royal Health Page 792
SURREY.
Wherein the best Fullers Earth Page 794 Richmond and Non-such built by King
Henry VII. and VIII. ibid Virtue of Epsom Waters ibid, The life of Prince
Henry, Son to King Charles I. Page 795 The life of Archbishop Cranley Page 796
The life of Bishop Parkhurst Page 797 The lives of Archbishop and Bishop
Abbot's Page 798 The life of Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham Page 799 The
life of Sir Robert Dudley Page 800 The life of William Ockham Page 801 The life
of Dr. Hammond Page 802 The life of Dr. Sanders ibid. Elizabeth Weston a great
Scholar Page 803 Of the Family of the Sackvills Page 805 The Family of the
Ashburnhams ibid. The life of Sir Nicholas Carew Page 804 The life of George
Goring Earl of Norwich Page 806
SUSSEX.
Plentiful in Iron, Talk Page 807 The Manufactures are great Guns ibid.
Arundel-Castle, a Local Earldom Page 808 The life of Archbishop Winchelsey
Page 810 The life of Thomas Bradwardine Page 811 The life of the Lord Treasurer
Burwash ibid. The lives of Dr. Barlow, Bishop of St. David's, and Dr. Juxton
Bishop of Hereford Page 812 The life of the Lord Treasurer Sackvil Page 813 The
life of Judge Jeffrey Page 814 The life of Sir William Pelham Page 815 The life
of Sir Anthony Shirley, etc. ibid. The life of Mr. Seldom Page 818 The life of
Dr. Stapleton Page 819
VVARWICK-SHIRE.
A sudden inundation in Coventry Page 823 The life of Anne Nevil, Married to
Edward Prince of Wales Page 825 The life of Edward Plantagenet Son to George
Duke of Clarence ibid. The life of St. VVolstan ibid. The life of Cardinal
Macklesfield Page 826 The life of Bishop Stratford Page 827 The supposed
Original of the word Veize Page 828 The life of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Page
829 The life of Sir Edward Conway ibid. The life of John Digby Earl of Bristol
ibid. The life of William Shakespeare Page 831 The life of Sir Fulk Grevil Page
832 The life of John Lord Harrington Page 835 Edgehill Fight Page 836
WESTMORLAND.
The life of Queen Katharine Parr Page 838 The life of Cardinal Bambridge Page
839 A pleasant Adventure of the Knave of Club^ Page 841 The life of Bishop
Potter Page 841 The life of Sir Edward Bellingham Page 842 Foundress of Appleby
Hospital ibid. The Office of Sheriff made Hereditary Page 845
WILT-SHIRE.
The life of Margaret Plantagenet Countess of Salisbury Page 848 The life of
Jane Seymore ibid. The life of St. Adelme Page 849 The life of St. Edith Page
850 The life of Cardinal VVinterburn Page 851 The life of Johannis
Sarisburiensis Page 852 The life of the Lord Chancellor Edendon ibid. The life
of Bishop Thornborough Page 853 The life of Edward Seymor Duke of Sommerset
Page 854 The life of Sir Ol. St, John Lord Grandison Page 855 The life of Sir
Francis Cottington Page 856 The life of Sir Nicholas Hide ibid. Lansdown and
Round-way Fights Page 862
VVORCESTER-SHIRE.
The life of St. Richard Page 864 The life of Bishop Bonner Page 866 The life
of Sir Thomas Coventry Lord Keeper Page 867 The life of Judge Littleton Page
868 The life of Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick Page 869 The life of Sir
Edward Kelly, Chemist Page 870 The life of Sir Edwin Sandys Page 872
VVorcester-Fight
YORKSHIRE.
The life of King Henry I. The life of Richard Plantagenet Duke of York Page
883 The life of St. Hilda or the English Huldah Page 884 The life of St. John
of Beverly The life of St. Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Darby Page 885 The life
of Cardinal Fisher Page 887 The life of Bishop Melton ibid. The life of Dr.
Scroop Page 888 The life of Dr. Coverdale Page 890 The life of Archbishop
Loftus ibid. Prince Henry committed by Sir W. Gascoine Page 891 The life of the
Lord Chief Justice Wray Page 892 The life of Lord Chancellor Puckering Page
893 The life of Sir George Calvert ibid. The life of the Lord Clifford Page 895
The life of Sir George Ripley Page 896 The life of Dr. VVhitacre Page 903 The
Battle of Marston-Moor Page 910
YORK
The life of Edward Freese The life of Bishop Morton Page 915 The life of Sir
Robert Car Page 917
WALES.
The Division thereof Page 921 Cardigan yields Royal Mines Page 922 Matthew
Glin the supposed Author of Metheglin Page 923 The life of Cardinal Sertor The
life of Mr. Broughton Page 930 The life of Hugh Holland ibid.
ANGLESEY
The Mother of Wales Page 931
BRECNOCK-SHIRE.
The wonder of Mouchy Denny Page 934 The life of Giles de Bruise Page 935 The
life of Thomas Howel Bishop of Bristol Page 936 The life of Henry Stafford Duke
of Buckingham ibid. The Protestation of Nesta ibid.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE
First reduced to the English Dominion Page 938
CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.
The Life of Bishop Ferrar Page 940 The life of Sir Rice ap Thomas Page 941 The
life of Walter Devereux Earl of Essex ibid. The life of Merline
CARNARVON-SHIRE.
The life of King Edward IV. Page 944 The life of Bishop Vaughan Page 946
DENBIGH-SHIRE.
The life of Leoline Bishop of St. Asaph Page 948 The life of Bishop Goodman
The life of Sir Hugh Middleton Page 949
FLINT-SHIRE.
The smallest Shire in Wales Page 950 The life of Elizabeth, Countess of
Holland ibid. The life of St. Asaph Page 951 The life of Owen Glendower Page
952 Pilgrimages to St. Winifred's Well Page 954
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE.
The life of Sir Edward Carne Page 955
MERIONETH-SHIRE.
Wherein are comely Inhabitants Page 956 The life of St. Thelian Page 957 A
Tribute of 300 Wolves Page 958
MONTGOMERY-SHIRE.
Where excellent Horses are bred ibid. The Life of George Herbert Page 959 The
life of Edward Herbert Baron Cherbury Page 960 Hawis Gadarn a Lady of Remark
ibid,
MONMOUTH-SHIRE
Not subject to the Welsh Jurisdiction Page 962 The life of King Henry V. ibid.
The life of Cantilupe Bishop of Worcester Page 964 The life of Richard
Strongbow Page 965 The life of Sir Roger Williams ibid. The life of William
Herbert Earl of Pembroke Page 966 The life of Jeffrey of Monmouth ibid. The
life of Henry Plantagenet first Duke of Lancaster Page 967 The life of W.
Johnes ibid. W. Evans put little Jeffrey in his Pocket Page 988
PEMBROKE-SHIRE.
Peopled by Flemings Page 969 The Life of Henry Tuthar ibid. The life of St.
Justinian Page 971 The life of Giraldus Cambrensis ibid.
RADNOR-SHIRE.
The rigorous Laws of King Henry IV. Enacted for the effectual suppression of
Insurrections in Wales Page 974

