A Seasonable TREATISE FOR THIS AGE: Occasioned by a Letter written by one Mr.
Woolsey prisoner in Norwich, to the then-exiled Church at Amsterdam; in which
he endeavors to prove it unlawful to eat blood, things strangled, and things
offered to idols, now in the times of the Gospel. Which Letter is by the
consent of the said Church answered; the Grounds and Reasons therein, examined
and refuted; and the contrary thereunto proved from Scripture: By Francis
Johnson Pastor Henry Ainsworth Teacher Daniel Studley Elder Stanshal Mercer
Elder
Of the same Church. Written long since, but never published till now.

Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty that Christ has made you free; and be no
more entangled in the yoke of bondage. Col. 2.16,17.Let no man therefore judge
you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new moon, or
of the sabbath day; which are a shadow of things to come: but the body is of
Christ. London, Printed by J.C. for Tho. Wall; and are to be sold by J.
Briscoe, at the blue Bible in great Green-Arber. 1657.

To the Reader.
THe Lord has heen pleased, in his tender mercy toward his Church, in all
ages, to raise up faithful instruments, as these whose names are set to this
Treatise; especially that faithful godly man, Mr. Henry Ainsworth, who
appeared, whilst he lived, a bright Star in Christ's right hand, laboring
abundantly in the work of the Lord, in opening the Scriptures; as his
Commentaries on the five books of Moses, the book of Psalms, and the Song of
Songs, do manifest; as likewise, his Communion of Saints, Counter-poyson, and
Defense of holy Scripture; together with his Trying out of Truth, Arrow against
Idolatry, and diverse other Treatises written by him, in defense of the truth of
God, like a faithful Shepherd, who never fled from the flock over which the
holy Ghost had made him overseer, but like a valiant 2 Timothy 2.3. Rev. 19.14.
soldier of Jesus Christ riding upon the white horse of his Word, under the
conduct of Christ our Heb. 2.10 Heb. 11.4.
Captain, fought the good fight of faith, and finished his course: so that I
may boldly say, by what I have heard from some that remain alive, who saw his
life and death, and by what I have read in his Works, that he has received a
crown of righteousness; and as the Apostle says of Abel, whose works were
righteous, that he being dead, yet speaks; so in like manner, though he be
dead, yet he speaks in his Works, as in other, so in this Treatise; See the 5
Books of Moses, and Ains. Notes on them.
God having given him a gift in opening the mysteries contained in the Law of
Shadows. Many in these days are troubled about the eating of blood, things
strangled, and things offered to idols: wherein I doubt not, through the
blessing of God, if this Treatise be read with a single eye, here will appear
many reasons deduced from Scripture, satisfactory to any doubting soul in that
particular, who owns the Scripture, comparing spiritual things with spiritual,
according to the advice of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 2.13
To the law and to the testament, Isai. 8.20.
wherein is revealed the whole counsel of God: so that men need not say in
their hearts, Who shall ascend into heaven, etc. Romans 10. Act. 20.27.
as if the Lord had not left in his written Word a perfect rule for all his
Saints to walk by in the order of his Gospel, and to resolve all doubts. And
hereby Satan gets advantage to ruinate the communion of Sains, in that they are
carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
till through confusion they even deny the Lord that bought them; slighting his
Word, that shall judge them one day, calling it a dead letter, owning nothing
as the Word, but Christ; though the Scripture says, Prove. 30.4.
Every word of God is pure. But those that thus slight the Scripture, believe
it not: for those that believe it, and receive it not as the word of man, but
as it is in truth, the word of God, 1 These. 2.13
find its effectual work in them, as a light shining in a dark place. 2 Pet.
1.19
David says, Psalm. 119.104, 72, 162.
Through thy precepts I get understanding; therefore I hate every false way:
For the law of thy mouth [is] better unto me then thousands of gold and silver.
I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great spoil. Also Job also says, I
have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food. If
Gospel-professors would thus esteem of the words of God, surely there would not
be such distraction amongst them. I shall say no more in commendation of the
Authors of this Treatise, (though praise is comely for the upright) Psalm. 33.1.
but desire the Lord to set home what is here written, to the hearts of all
those that are troubled in this point, and preserve his elect from the
dangerous Errors of these times, keeping their garments always white, Rev. 3.4.
that they may be found worthy to enter into the joy of their Lord. Amen.

T. W.

The Elders and Brethren of the English Church in Amsterdam, To Mr. Woolsey
prisoner in Norwich, wisdom and grace be multiplied by Christ, to acknowledge
and walk in Christ, as we have received commandment from the Father.
AS it is a part of our joy and comfort, (amidst the many afflictions allotted
us in this life) to behold the truth of the Gospel prevail with those that are
upright of heart, and tread with a right foot in the practice of the same: so
it is no little grief to see or hear of the declining of any from the strait
paths of the Lord, to either hand: of which sort there is great store this day,
(as always has been before time) Touching whom we may complain to the Lord
with the Prophet, Isa. 9.3.
Thou have multiplied the Nation, but have not increased the joy.

And you which in your late Letter unto us blame the diversities of Opinions in
the small number of those that are Separated from the Idolatrous Church, ad
errors and lies, dissonant and contrary to the whole truth of God, and true
liberty of the Gospel, etc. should have laid to heart your own words, and
spared to publish so dangerous an error, under pretense of clearing your self
(as you say) both of error and heresy. But as all the rivers of Damascus could
not wash away Naamans Leprosy, 2 Kings 5.
so neither can all the reasons that you have rendered, excuse or cleanse your
Doctrine from the contagion of heresy; if you persist and go forward thus to
hold your self, to persuade and thrust upon others, your abstinence from
meats, which is reckoned by the Holy Ghost for a Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy
4.1.3.

Touching which point, although you have had heretofore sufficient answer (we
doubt not) by that faithful Martyr of Prove. 10.7.
blessed memory Mr. H Barrow, wherein as you ought and should, so we might and
would rest, without making further reply: Yet because we have (for the
present) no Copy of those writings, that might witness for us hereafter,
neither as we think were they sent unto you in the name of the whole Church
then at London, we have now written briefly what God has given us to see in
this matter; hoping that this joint sentence of our Church, confirmed by the
Word of the Lord, will take effect, (through his grace) for the dissuading and
reclaiming of you from your Error; otherwise, that you may have the less
excuse in the day of Christ. And God which has taught us from our youth until
now, forsake us not, even in our old age and gray heads, till we have declared
his Gospel unto this generation, and the truth thereof to so many of those that
are to come, as it shall please him. Psalm. 71.17, 18.


The Doctrine which in your Letter you would maintain for the truth of God,
wherein you are obedient unto him (you say) as all others must be, that truly
fear his Name, is, That you will not willingly eat blood, nor things strangled,
nor things offered to Idols.

For the abstaining from Blood, you allege three Reasons. 1. The commandment
of God to Noah, Genesis 9.4. 2. His commandment by Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 12.16.
Levit. 17.13,14. And 3. by the whole company of the Apostles, Elders and
brethren at Jerusalem, to the Churches of the Gentiles, Acts 15.23,28,29.

From which you conclude, that it remains firm and sure to this day, as any
other testimonies of holy Scripture, to be observed of all the faithful till
the coming of Christ. After this, you make answer to certain mis-alleadgings
(as you call them) of other Scriptures against this truth.

Noah, you write that nothing has been or can be said against it. Whereto we
answer, that we have cause to doubt of your fidelity, when you affirm nothing
has been said; and to blame your confidence, for avouching nothing can be said
against the perpetuity of that commandment. And for the first, (to free your
self of suspicion) we pray you send us a true and perfect Copy of all that Mr.
Barrow (to omit others) did write unto you: for there we are persuaded
something has been said against it. For the later, we wish you to follow the
counsel of the holy Ghost, that says Romans 12.3.16.
, Understand according to sobriety, and be not wise in your self; considering
that the Word of God 1 Cor. 14.36
came not out from you, neither came it unto you only. The abstinence from
blood commanded to Noah, we hold to be temporary, and was then a figure for the
time present, but is now disannulled Heb. 7.18.
for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof: And that for these Reasons.

1. Because the other observations of Religion in those times before the Law
was given by Moses, were for the outward things figures and shadows Genesis 8.20.
and 12.7
, as building of Altars, offering of Sacrifices, Genesis 7.
difference of beasts clean and unclean, Genesis 14.20,etc. 28.22.
paying of Tithes, offering of Genesis 4.4.
First Fruits, Genesis 17.
Circumcision, and sundry the like. So that it helps not to say abstinence
from blood was commanded before the Law of Moses, and therefore is now to
continue, more then it will help a Jew to say, Circumcision, etc. was commanded
before Moses Law, (Yea Christ himself says Joh. 7.22.
it was not of Moses, but of the fathers) therefore it is to continue still.

2. We understand (according to that small measure of light which God has
given us in those dark shadows) that abstinence from blood was a figure of our
sanctification, and that in three respects. 1. The first concerning Gods
Worship and Service, which that it might with the more holiness and reverence
be used and regarded, he would have some special things not profaned or in
common use of men. So he forbad the making or using of that holy Oil wherewith
his Sanctuary and Priests were anointed, Exodus 30.23,31-33. and the like of
that precious Perfume, Exodus 30.37. Also, he forbad them to eat that fat of
beasts which they should burn on the altar to the Lord, Levit. 7.25. And that
the blood was forbidden also in this regard, appears by Levit. 17.11. For
that the soul of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you (says
the Lord) for an atonement for your souls: So that the common eating of any
blood might have bred in them a contempt of the price of their atonement, which
was in figure the blood of beasts, but in truth the Heb. 9.14
blood of Christ. And for as much as this sacrificing of Beasts was in Noah's
time and Genesis 4.
before, it was meet in the wisdom of God, when he gave them flesh to eat, to
debar them of the blood, for the cause mentioned.

The second respect concerned thankfulness to God for the use of his creatures
which he gives unto the sons of men. Therefore of them all the Lord reserved
one principal part from himself, that thereby his people might acknowledge his
goodness. Such was the law of all Exodus 23.19.
first fruits, Deuteronomy. 26. which every man was to bring before the Lord,
acknowledging verse. 2,3. etc. verse 5,9,10.
his own unworthiness, and Gods mercy in giving him the increase of that good
land. In like sort they were forbidden to do any work with their firstborn
bullock, or sheere their firstborn sheep, or eat them otherwhere then before
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 15.19. Yea, all their own firstborn Children they must
redeem, and the very unclean beasts they were to redeem or kill, Exodus
34.19,20. Every tree that they planted for meat, they might not eat thereof the
first three years; in the fourth year all the fruit was to be holy to the
praise of the Lord, and in the fifth year they did eat, Levit. 19.23. When they
eat of the bread of the land, they must offer a cake of the first of the dough,
Number. 15.19,20. and sundry the like. Accordingly do we understand the Lords
mind here, that giving them flesh to eat, he restrained the blood, as being a
thing wherein they had no interest, but the Lord; for that it was the soul or
life, that is the Chiefest part of every beast; and so their restraint from
blood to be an occasion for them to praise the Lord, that had permitted them
the flesh to eat.

The third respect concerned the love of men each to other, that they should
abstain from Cruel affections, and salvage fierceness, and put on the bowels of
meekness, gentleness, compassion, etc. not only toward their friends, but
also their enemies; whereunto they were led by sundry figures; and taught their
duties to men, by their behavior to brute beasts. Of this sort were the
abstayning from any bird when they took the eggs or the Young, Deuteronomy. 22.6,7. The
helping of their neighbors (yea their enemies) beast when it is strayed, or
lay under the burden, Exodus 23.4,5. Deuteronomy. 22.4. The not muzling of the oxes
mouth that trod out the corn, Deuteronomy. 25.4. The resting of Beasts on the Sabbath
day. Deuteronomy. 5. which such like. And that the Lord in sparing the blood of
Beasts, had regard herein to the blood of men, appears by the next words in
Genesis 9.5. saying, And surely I will require your blood wherein your lives are,
at the hand of every Beast, etc. Whereby he shows how precious the blood of
men was in his eyes, that would punish the shedding thereof both on men and
Beasts: and therefore to the end they might forbear the spilling of each
others life, he withheld them from eating the life, that is, the blood of
Beasts. It might seem a kind of cruelty to eat Beasts blood, and want of
humane clemency: wherefore Solomon notes a righteous man even by this, that
he regards the life of his Beast; Prove. 12.10.
and adds on the contrary, But the mercies of the wicked are cruel. By which
opposition it appears, that God in restrayning the life or blood of Beasts,
intended hereby to restrain men from cruelty.

3. We hold the abstinence from blood to be figurative and temporary, upon
that which is written Col. 2.16,17. Let no man condemn you in meat and in
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or new moon, or sabbaths, which are a
shadow of things to come: but the body is of Christ. Where he plainly reckons
meat and drink among other shaddows; and excepteth not any meat, no not blood;
nor any feast, no not the Sabbath. If it be said, Paul speaks of meats and
drinks under Moses law only, and not of blood, which was forbidden long before
to Noah; we answer, 1. that blood was also forbidden in Moses law amongst
other meats, Levit. 17. Deuteronomy. 12.
therefore is here also abrogated among other meats. 2. Again, as much may be
said for the Sabbath of the seventh day, as for blood; yea more, both in regard
of the antiquity, and of the use and end. For the prohibition of blood began
but in Noah's time, but the seventh day was sanctified from the beginning of the
world: Genesis 2.2,3.
so that if blood may be exempted from the Apostles general abrogating of
meats, because that edict was more ancient then the Law, then much more may the
seventh day be exempted from amongst the other sabbaths, because it was of
far greater antiquity. The use and end also of the seventh day was more
excellent then that of blood: Genesis 9. Levit. 17. Exodus 20.10,11. Exodus 31.13.
for blood was forbidden (as you allege) because it was the life of the Beast,
but work on the seventh day was forbidden for a rememberance of the creation
of the world, and rest of God; and for a sign that we might know that the Lord
does sanctify us: so that the end of the sabbath in this respect excels the
end of blood. And if further it be said (as afterward in your Letter you urge)
that blood was forbidden because it was the life; and seeing it is the life to
this day, therefore to this day it may not be eaten: we answer, As much may be
said for the Sabbaths; that to this day, and always, a rememberance is to be
kept of the creation of the world and rest of God; now and always it is the
Lord that sanctifies us. Heb. 11.3. Reve. 4.11. and 14.7. Heb. 4.10,11. 1
These. 5.23.


Wherefore we conclude from this Testimony of Paul's, that if none may condemn
us in respect of the seventh day, more then of the other feasts and sabbaths,
so neither may any condemn us for blood, more then other meats or drinks,
which were shaddows of things to come, whose body we have in Christ.

4. That the prohibition of eating blood in Genesis 9. was figurative, appears
by the punishment of murder, there presently annexed; the Lord saying, verse.
6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. verse. 5.
Yea, at the hand of every Beast (as well as of every man) God required the
blood of man. And of the beast he required it thus (as at the publishing of the
law appears) that the ox which goared to death man or woman should be stoned
to death, and the flesh thereof not eaten, Exodus 21.28. And that this was
figurative, your self (we think) will not deny; for you mention no scruple
thereof in your Letter. But if any would make conscience of suffering such a
beast to live, or eating the flesh thereof, he might fetch his ground from
Noah's time, as well as you that will eat no blood.

5. It may be showed to be a Type or shadow, and now abrogated, by the same
reason that Paul alleges for eating all other meats, saying, 1. Cor. 10.25,26.
Every thing that is sold in the Shambles, eat ye, making no question for
conscience sake; for the earth is the Lords, and the plenty thereof: which
testimony of David, Psalm. 24.
if it be of weight to settle the conscience touching other meats, then of
blood also, seeing it is a part of the plenty of the earth, and the Lords, as
well as any other thing which now he has given us free use of by Christ,
according as it is written, that this world and all other things are ours; we
Christ's, and Christ Gods, 1 Cor. 3.21,22-23.

Thus have we showed you something of that which may be said against the
perpetuity of that law in Genesis 9. which is the ground of your erroneous
building.

The next reason by you alleged from the law of Moses, falls with the
former, and by all the arguments which we have brought, is showed to be
Typical: and you may as well deny any other of Moses ordinances to be shaddows,
as this: Yet you say that Levit. 17.11. is misalledged, where God says, For
the soul of the flesh it (is) in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the
altar to make atonement for your souls. If this be misalledged (as you write)
and proves it not to be a shadow; then we must believe it is the substance
and truth: Then atonement for men's sins is wrought by the blood of Beasts, in
deed and truth, not in Type and figure. See whither your error leads you. The
Holy Ghost says, It is unpossible that the Blood of Bulls and goats should
take away sins, Heb. 10.4. but it is the blood of Christ that cleanses us from
all sins, 2 John 1.7. Whereas therefore the Law says, I have given Beasts
blood upon the altar to make atonement for your souls, it must needs be
figuratively spoken. And you are greatly to blame to write as you have done,
that this Scripture is misalledged. Yet to qualify the matter, and help your
self* you write, that you confess as the truth is, that the sacrificial blood
had two causes why it might not be eaten; the one general, because it was the
life; the other particular, because it was the atonement. But this is not to
confess as the truth is; for you confess not at all that it was typical,
(which you must do, except you will renounce Christ who is the truth.) Nay,
afterward you write very peremptorily that It was not, is not, nor ever shall
be proved, that the not eating of all blood was typical: Yea, that it had not
any foot of type or ceremony in it. And further from the truth is that which
follows in your Letter, that the cause of forbidding common blood, was one
only, to wit, because it is the life, which remains still the cause before
the Lord, why it might not be eaten, and shall remain the cause till the
coming of Christ. Herein you deceive your self, and would deceive others,
making a figurative and temporary cause, to be a cause in truth and for ever.
For the strength of your reason seems to be this: Blood might not then be
eaten, because it was the life; the same cause continues now, for it is the
life still, and so shall continue till the coming of Christ: therefore it may
not now be eaten. verse 4.
The falsehood of which Argument we will show you by the like. In Levit. 11.7.
God says, The swine because it parts the hoof, but cheweth not the Cud, it
shall be unclean unto you, you shall not eat thereof. Whereupon the Jew might
thus argue; Of a swine we might not then eat, because it parted the hoof, but
cheweth not the Cud, and the same cause continues still, for to this day the
swine parts the hoof, but cheweth not the Cud: therefore to this day we may
not eat of swines flesh. The like may be said for the sabbath day, as before we
have showed.
Such is your reason against eating of blood, whiles you make the cause to be
in the nature of the Creature, which you should put in the will and appointment
of the Creator. For why might not Beasts that chewed not the Cud be eaten then,
as well as Beasts that did chew the Cud? but because it pleased God to exempt
them in Type and figure; for otherwise all Gods Creatures are in their own
nature good and clean, Genesis 1.31. Romans 14.14. Even so may it be said, Why
might not the blood be eaten as well as the flesh, but because God would exempt
it also in Type and figure, as before we have proved? He that said, Ye shall
not eat the blood because it is the soul, might also have said (if so it had
pleased him,) You shall not eat the flesh, because it is the body. But of his
mercy he permitted them the flesh, for the comfort of their Bodies; and of his
Sovereignty and like mercy, he restained the blood, for the instruction of
their souls, even as by other like shaddows he led them to Christ. If you say
the sacrificial blood was a figure, because it was used in the worship of God
upon the altar, etc. yet the common blood of all beasts was no figure, for
thereof was no use in the worship of God; it is not of weight: for neither was
there any use of swine or other unclean Beasts in the worship of God, yet were
they all Types and figures, as the Scripture teaches us, Act. 10.11,12, etc.
and so we have before proved all blood to be. Unto which proofs we will add
this one reason further, and so conclude this point.

The restraint of blood before Christ's coming, seems to be for the honor of
the Son, in whom and by whom the Father would give all good things to his
Church, both for soul and body; and without whom we have no right to any thing,
having lost our Sovereignty by Adams fall. And first, for spiritual things,
Paul teaches us Romans 16.25,26.
that the Revelation of the mystery (of the Gospel and man's salvation) was kept
secret since the world began, till now (under Christ) it is opened and
published among all nations by the scriptures of the Prophets, at the
commandment of the everlasting God. Reve. 5.
None in heaven or in earth could open the book, or loose the seals, but that
Lion of the Tribe of Juda: And as heavenly, so earthly things are loosed and
restored by Christ. Before his coming, the Land of Canaan was Gods peculiar
possession, and the Jews his chosen Heritage: now all the ends of the earth are
given to Christ, all peoples and nations are his, no difference either Jew or
Gentile, male or female, freeman or servant. Gal. 3.28.
In like sort men were debarred of many earthly Creatures before his coming,
and were nourtured as Children under the Schoolmaster of the law, Gal. 3.24.
with Touch not, taste not, handle not, and the like restraints: Col. 2.2,^8.
Mat. 28.18. Psalm. 8.6. 1. Cor. 15.27.
But now all power is given to Christ in heaven and in earth; all things are put
in subjection under his feet, sheep and oxen all of them, yea and the Beasts of
the field, the fowls of the air and the fishes of the sea: and now also by
Christ all things are made ours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.
we being the heirs of God through him Gal. 4.7. Romans 8.17.
so that no man may condemn us for meat or drink; Col. 2.16
for we know and are persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of it self, Romans 14.14.
neither can any thing that goes in at the mouth defile the man. Matthew. 15.11.
We may eat the soul of the Beast as well as the body, for the earth is the
Lords, and the plenty thereof. 1 Cor. 10.25.26. This honor has the Father
given to the Son, and the Son to all the Saints. Wherefore we conclude, that
this forbidding of any meat, even of blood, derogateth from the power and
liberty of Christ, which he has given to all that believe in his name; and so
it is a false and pernicious Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.1,3.
even a Doctrine of devils, as Paul calls it, turning men back from Christ,
to the beggarly rudiments Gal. 4.9.
and types of the Law. But you say, If it had any jet of Type or ceremony in it
the Apostles would never have forbidden it to the Gentiles no not for an hour;
Gal. 2.5.
for that had been to Bring them into bondage.

It remains therefore that now we examine your third reason, and see what it
was that they forbad the Gentiles, and for what cause.

In the 18. of the Acts it was determined that those Gentiles whom certain
Pharisees had troubled with words, and cumbred their minds, verse 5. verse 24.
should be written unto to abstain from pollutions of Idols (that is, things
offered to Idols) and fornication, and the strangled thing, and from blood:
verse 20. verse 39.
The reason hereof is also showed to be this; For Moses from old times has
them that preach him in every city, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath.
verse 21.
Now the occasion of this Edict, and the end thereof, with all other
Circumstances of the same, and the practice of the Apostles and Churches
afterward, all plainly teach us, that this was no permanent law, but for the
present time and occasion; not for any unlawfulness in the Creatures
themselves, of Idolathites, stangled things, or blood, but for bearing with the
Jews which were so zealous of Moses law, and for the quiet of the Church. And
this we confirm by these reasons.

1. Because we find not that such abstinence from meats was ever taught by any
of the Apostles before this present time and occasion; which if they had been
permanent, and not legal shadows, we are to think they would have preached with
other Doctrines of the Gospel.

1. In the disputation about this Question, Peter calls the Doctrine by them
urged a tempting of God, a yoke not able to be born. verse 10.
Paul and Barnabas confirm it, verse 12.
by telling the wonders that God had done among the Gentiles by them, without
exception or mention of this Doctrine of blood, etc. then James approves in
like manner Peter's words, verse 14,15.
and would not have the Gentiles troubled, verse 19.
but only written unto about these things; and makes the reading of Moses in
the Synagogues, a reason thereof; so that the Jews which had been accustomed to
Moses law from old time, were subject to be offended with these things; whose
weakness was to be born withal so much as might be, as the Apostles did teach
by their own example; for which, see Acts 21.20,21,23,24. 1 Cor. 9, 20.

3. The Apostle Paul having occasion to deal afterward with the Church of
Corinth about one of the things here mentioned, namely meats sacrificed to
Idols, 1 Cor. 8.
does plainly teach that they might eat such meats, if it were not to the
offense of any man's conscience; making this his ground, that all things were
lawful for him, but not all things expedient or edifying, 1 Cor. 10.23.
Wherefore any things sold in the shambles they might buy and eat, and
whatsoever was set before them at an unbelievers Table they might eat, asking
no question for conscience sake: verse 25. verse 27.
so that neither things sacrificed to Idols (whereof he there treats) nor
stangled, nor blood, nor whatsoever else that might be prepared at an Infidels
banquet, could defile them with the eating, or Trouble their conscience: and
this he proves by Scripture; for the earth is the Lords, and the plenty
thereof:: verse 26. Psalm. 24.1.
which testimony of David, if it be of weight to prove we may eat any meat (as
the Apostle alleges it to that end) then may we eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and strangled, and blood, 1 Cor. 3.21.22. 1 Cor. 8.28.
because they are a part of the plenty of the earth, all which is the Lords,
and by Christ ours. But for the offense of others he says, Eat it not; And
why? because of him that showed it (says he) and for that other man's
Conscience, not thine own; adding withal, For why should my liberty be
condemned of another man's conscience? whereby he evidently teaches, that it is
our Christian liberty to eat any thing, even meat sacrificed to Idols; which
yet was one of the things forbidden in the 15 of the Acts. And would we have a
better expounder of that decree then an Apostle, and one that was present and
employed in that business, and knew well the occasion and end of such writing
to the Gentiles, as then was, which by this his Epistle he makes so plain, as
none of any Judgment need doubt what was meant?

Now for your Objections; where first you say, If it had had any jot of type or
ceremony, the Apostles would not have forbidden it to the Gentiles for an hour:

We answer, that neither did they in that sense that you allege, Verse 4.
from Gal. 2.5. which was a bringing into bondage, and loosing the truth of the
Gospel; but in another regard, for the weakness of their brethren, they would,
did, and might.

For Paul an Apostle writing to the Romans which were Gentiles, says, Romans
15.1.
We which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak: and again,
Chap. 14.20,21.
All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for the man that eats with
offense; it is good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing
whereby thy brother is offended. And to the Gentiles of Corinth (as before is
showed) he says, 1 Cor. 10.
Eat not meat sacrificed to Idols, for the conscience of him that shows thee.
And himself gave an example; who because of the Jews that were zealous of the
law, purified himself, and offered in the Temple ( Acts 21.24,26.) which we
think you will not deny were types and figures.

Next, whereas you say touching 1 Cor. 9,20. that Paul became a Jew to the Jew,
etc. but he became not a Jew to the Gentiles; and if this thing were
ceremonial, he must needs be counted to become a Jew to the Gentiles, contrary
to his own Doctrine and practice, Gal 2.5. You show no reason of this your
assertion; yea, the contrary is most plain, in that the Commandment, Acts. 15.
was in the Jews behalf, whom the Gentiles were to bear with according to Paul's
example, and with him to become Jews to the Jews, that they might save and not
offend them. It is you rather that are become a Jew to the Gentiles, whiles you
thus observe, and urge all Christians of the Gentiles to observe the Jewish
Types and shadows.

Unto 1 Timothy 4.4. where Paul says, Every creature of God is good, and nothing
ought to be refused, etc. you answer, that Christians liberty there is all one
and the same, which God gave to Noah, no more nor no less, when he says, Genesis
9 3. Every thing that moves and lives shall be meat for you.

It is strange that you will thus write: For upon that liberty given to Noah,
there is presently restrained, even in express words, the blood of all beasts;
but in this place of Paul, every creature is permitted, without any manner
restraint, either in express words, or by any necessary Collection: so that
except you will deny blood to be a creature, you cannot deny it to be permitted
there of Paul. Neither are his words drawn by us further then himself, and
other places of Scripture do allow: for we have showed many Scriptures that
confirm this evident truth. But then we must needs affirm (you say) that Paul
in this behalf was yea, yea, with the rest of the Apostles, in Acts 15. and by
himself nay, nay, in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus. We answer, there is no
need thus to affirm; for he was yea yea, in Acts. 15. for the weakness of his
brethren (as before is proved) and so he always continued, even in his
Epistles: He was nay, nay, against observing legal Types, as touching the
things themselves, Romans 14^ 1 Cor. 10^ Chap. 15 2 To Corin. Gal. Col. Tim. Titus
both in the Acts of the Apostles, and in his written Epistles. But you that
would bring us back to the ordinances of Moses, and would burden us with
traditions of Touch not, taste not, handle not, are in this your error nay nay,
not only to the Epistles of Paul, but also to all other Scriptures, as has
been proved.

Finally, where you allege the confirmation of that decree Act. 15. was
ratified by Paul himself, Act. 21. after that the Epistles of Timothy and Titus
were written, and thereupon would infer that his words in those Epistles are
draw further then he intended; it is before answered and proved, that the
decree you mention, was but for the time, and for the quiet of the Church, and
for the bearing with the Jews; but the Doctrines in Paul's Epistles are
perpetual, and do concern the creatures themselves, and our liberty in Christ
to use them. So that nothing which you have said can turn away the evident
force of these Scriptures, which as a sharp sword do wound and cut down this
Jewish error, which you to the hurt of your own soul, and trouble of the
Church, have renewed in these last days; whereof we pray God to give you a
sight, and Christian sorrow for the same.

Idolathites.
In the next place, you write of Idolathites, or meats sacrificed to Idols, more
briefly and more fearfully, as seeming to have a Check in your own conscience.
For we agree (you say) in one thing, that no Christian may eat them in the
Idol-temple; but in the second point we differ, that some will eat them when
they be brought from thence, though it be showed them, that they are sacrificed
to Idols, not caring who be offended, etc. though the conscience of him that is
offended should stay him and his conscience from eating of it, as it is
written, 1 Cor. 8.13. and 10.28,29,30.

And is the difference between us but in this second point of eating with
offense, as you would pretend? Then we hope you will not blame them that eat
without such offense. Then is not the thing of it self unlawful, but in regard
of the Circumstances: and we which live here, and are not offensive one to
another for eating such things, may lawfully eat them, by your own grant. And
thus also you yield up one of your chiefest forts of your error, to wit, the
Edict in the 15 of the Acts; for there Idolathites were as fully and absolutely
forbidden as blood: whereupon it follows, that if Idolathices were forbidden
but in regard of offending others, then blood also was forbidden but in the
same regard. Thus the truth inforceth you in some sort to yield: In some sort
(we say) for you make no full nor free acknowledgment. You write not it is
lawful to eat them, if it be without offense of others, neither do you plainly
avouch (much less prove) the contrary, though both before and after you bewray
you erroniously hold the contrary. Before, you said you will not willingly eat
meat sacrificed to Idols: and after, when you allege the law of the damned
thing, Deuteronomy. 13. and say that the places to Timothy and Titus are misalledged
in this behalf, as for blood: we have before spoken of that 15 of the Acts, and
by comparing it with this place of Paul. 1 Cor. 10.23. etc. have proved it to
be the mind of the holy Ghost, not to forbid those meats in regard of
themselves, but for the present peace of the Church in bearing with the weak.
And so plain is the evidence of this Scripture for it, that your self (which
are so diligent to amove all doubts, as you leave not the scruple of fishes
blood unanswered) yet can say nothing at all against this. Wherefore we rest in
that which has been already said concerning it. But you allege that law,
Deuteronomy. 13.17. There shall cleave none of the damned thing to thine hand; and say
these things are so called; wherein you quite mistake and misapply the
Scripture: For 1. That law is made for such as being of the Church should
revolt from God, and fall to Idolathites, verse 12. 2. Not only the Beasts,
but the men also, with all that they had, were to be slain, and utterly
destroyed; the City to be burnt with fire, and made an heap for ever, and
might not be built again, verse 15,16. 3. Not only the beasts, but all other
substance of those Idolaters were alike damned things; neither were they only
forbidden to eat the flesh, but to have or use any of their Cattle alive or
dead: for nothing of that damned thing might cleave to their hand, verse 17.
But such is not the estate of meats offered to Idols; for they may be bought
and sold in the shambles, 1 Cor. 10.25. they may be eaten even at an Infidels
Table, without scruple of conscience, verse 27. Because the earth is the Lords
and the plenty thereof, and the Idol is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4. and 10.19, and so
cannot defile the good creature of the Lord. Therefore what God by his word
has sanctified, call not you unclean or damned Acts 10.14.

Lastly, you refer us to your answer by Acts 21.15. unto the places of Paul to
Timothy and Titus, for this, as well as for blood. And we which before have
discussed this point, refer you again to that which we there wrote in
refutation thereof.

Strangled.
As for things strangled, you count them as one thing with blood: for if the
thing strangled, were killed by letting the blood from it, it is lawful (you
say) to be eaten. This is all you write of it. And we, which before have proved
that blood was a figure, and may now be eaten of any Christian, have thereby
also proved it lawful to eat of the strangled thing; which is not otherwise
unlawful, but for the blood, by your own Confession.

There is yet another place misalledged (you say) by the ignorant, against all
these things; and that is Romans 14.17. that the Kingdom of God consists not
in meats and drinks, etc. which place by Paul (as you affirm) was altogether
alleged against them that did eat with offense, and not at all against them
that did not eat, or were offended with eating such things. Doubtless this
place was not alleged so ignorantly as you have answered it: for though Paul
applied it to the present particular occasion, yet the position is general, and
for ever true, that Gods Kingdom is not meat or drink: wherefore as it was
applied by the Apostle against them, so may it by us against you: For you by
your Letter would teach us the contrary, that the kingdom of God consists (if
not in drink, yet) in meats, as Idolathites, and strangled, and blood; which
you now urge as a Doctrine of the Gospel (which is the Gospel of Gods kingdom)
Mark 1.14
to be observed of all Christians (which are the Children of that kingdom) Mat.
13.38
as in obedience to Christ (who is the King of that kingdom. Psalm 2.6
And seeing the Law and the Prophets were to John Baptist, and since that time
the kingdom of God is preached, Luke 16.16 Acts 28.31
and Paul a chief laborer in, and preacher of that kingdom, has taught us
that it is not meat and drink; knowing and being persuaded in the Lord Jesus,
that nothing is unclean in it self, Romans 14.14
and therefore wills us to eat whatsoever is sold or set before us, without
any scruple of conscience: 1 Cor. 10
we cannot henceforward (if you persist thus to teach) esteem you herein for a
Preacher of the kingdom of God, but of the rudiments of the Law; and burdenous
traditions; yea, of the Doctrine of Devils (and so of the kingdom of Satan) as
it is called by the holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 4.1,3.

Again you should mind, that a general Doctrine (such as is that position of
Paul, Romans 14.17.) may be applied to all particular times, places and persons,
as occasion is offered; which if you will not learn of Paul, who applied those
words of David, 1 Cor. 10
The earth is the Lords, etc. to his particular Doctrine of meats, whereas
David himself never so alleged or applied them* yet learn it (at least wise)
of your self, who a little before alleged the law of the damned thing, from
Deuteronomy. 13, against eating of meats offered to Idols, though it were not by Moses
alleged to that end, neither can by any at this day be so applied, as before
we showed.

And as you teach contrary to Paul's Doctrine unto the Romans; so do you the
like to that which he taught the Corinths. 1 Cor. 10
For will you say unto us in Amsterdam, as he said to them in Corinth.
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat; and whatsoever is set before you by an
unbeliever, eat making no question for conscience sake? Then may we eat both
blood and strangled, seeing some such things are often sold and set on Table
before us. But you by your Letter would have us touch no Idolathites, eat no
strangled, taste no blood; Col. 2.21
and this you teach as firm and a sure Doctrine to this day as any other
testimony of holy Scriptures, to be observed of all the true faithful, till the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And if this be so, then it behooves us to ask many questions for conscience
sake, otherwise then Paul taught. For we must enquire at the shambles touching
every as coni^s, etc.
little beast and bird that we buy, whether it were duly slain or no, and the
blood let out, according to the law, Levit. 17.13. At every strangers table
that we come, we must do the like, both for strangled things and blood, which
often is mixed with other meats, especially of broths, wherein meat not
thoroughly cleansed of the blood, is boiled: Yea, we must come to the Jews
superstition, that buy not their flesh at the shambles of the Gentiles, but
flay them themselves, for the perfect letting out the blood; for otherwise we
may offend like the Israelites in the days of Saul, 1 Samuel 14.32 33,34.

Thus as Paul taught a Doctrine of Christian liberty and comfort for the
conscience in meats and drinks; 1 Cor. 10.29
so you teach a Doctrine of bondage, yea of fear and doubt, and distraction of
Soul (whiles you urge abstinence from these things, even as any other Doctrine
of the Gospel.)

The Lord Jesus which cast out that dumb spirit that rent and tare the
possessed man's body, Mark 9.17
and threw him to the ground, and sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the
water; verse 22
cast out by his grace this spirit of error from you, that thus distracteth and
tortureth the conscience, and casts it down to earthly traditions, and
rudiments of the world 1 Timothy 4.1
. At the least, he preserve us and all his from it, and stablish our hearts
with grace, not with meats, in which they have not been profited that have
walked. Heb. 13.9


These things have we written (according to the measure of grace given unto us)
for your good and reclaiming (if such be the will of God) which we desire: If
not, yet for the confirmation of others in the truth and liberty of Christ, and
discharge of our duties before him; who as he has in mercy vouchsafed us the
kingdom of his grace here on earth; so let him in like mercy give us and all
his people in due time, the kingdom of his glory in the heavens. Amen.

The Elders of the English Church at Amsterdam, subscribing in the name and
with consent of the whole Church. Fran: Johnson. Henr: Ainsworth. Daniel
Studley. Stanshal Mercer.

Amsterdam, Mon. 12. 7. 1602.
FINIS.

