Sacramentorum Encomium: OR THE PRAISE OF THE SACRAMENTS: IN A LETTER written
in the Year 1654 to the Preacher then at Barham in the County of Kent,
withholding the Holy SACRAMENTS from a great number of godly souls, unless
they would subject themselves against Laws and good Conscience to a Rigid
PRESBYTERIAN GOVERNMENT. Wherein the said Government is plainly and undeniably
proved to be (of all other) the most Injurious to the Magistrate, most
oppressive to the Subject, etc.

Published by a Member of the Parish of Barham, for the satisfaction of all
Well-affected Subjects, and good Christians.

The Prophet is the snare of a Fowler in all his ways

Hosea 9.8. London, Printed in the Year, 1661.

SIR,
THe eye of the world has now twice made his progress through all his 365
degrees, and you having received of the Parishioners of Barham, since you came
hither, well nigh so many pounds as there are degrees for his orb to move in,
during all which we a considerable number of the same Parish, having with no
ordinary pat^ence, as we (and others too) conceive, expected that you should
administer the holy and saving Ordinances of our most blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ amongst us; but to our wonderment, and grief, finding so great (we
will not yet say wilful) neglect in you therein, do now, (not out of any humor
of opposition, or cavelling with you, qualities which become not the servants
of our Lord and Master, who is the Prince of peace) but out of a sincere and
hearty affection to the glory of Almighty God, and the welfare of our souls, in
all hum^lity and meekness of Spirit, earnestly desire, and implore you, from
the very bottom of our hearts, as you are a Minister of Jesus Christ, and if as
truly sent amongst us, as never chosen by us or liked of us, that you will not
defraud us of that which we conceive belongs to us and our Children, and is no
less then the holy Sacraments ordained by the Lord Jesus himself till the time
of his second c^ing.

In this manifestation of our thoughts and desires, you cannot expect from us
plain Contrymen, any Rhetorical florishes, any depth of humane learning, any
wisdom, such as is that of the world; these faculties, as they are above the
sphaere of our capacities, so are they far beneath the level of our desires;
for we seriously confess we covet not the excellency of enticing words, or of
the wisdom of the men, or Princes of the world, but that which we daily and
hourly beg for, is, that we may receive the Spirit of God, thereby to know
Christ crucified and seasonably to apply his merits to our souls, by
participation of him in his holy Sacraments.

We know that the world knew not God, in the wisdom of God, and that natural
man perceives not, nor indeed can he perceive the things of the Spirit of God.

We also know that not many wise men, not many mighty, not many noble, no not
many Princes of the world has God chosen to be his favorites, but that he
has made choice of the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and the vile things of the
world, and things which are despised, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are: amongst which foolish and weak things, we rank our
selves, neither having attained to, nor indeed much affected the wisdom of the
world, or excellency of words.

God he knows, our meaning is honest, and very plain, and we shall sincerely
propose our very hearts and thoughts to you.

We truly confess, we speak (...) to your honor, we have not observed any of
those vices of drunkenness or prodigallity in you, which too too much abound in
some men, and we do as cordially wish, that spiritual pride, secret malice, and
immoderate covetousness, (affections which many times are too too predominant
in the Saints themselves) may not take up any lodging in the chambers of your
(as we hope) sanctified heart: yet we must really tell you, we cannot but
wounder with what face, with what reason, with what conscience you could
impose, or suffer your self to be imposed upon a people, which it should seem
you esteem to be no better then Infidels, or dogs; for upon what other ground,
we are to seek, why you should refuse to give that which is holy unto us? we
have not as yet denied to give you temporal things, the fruits of the labor of
our hands, the sweat of our brows, the issue of our brains; why should you
withold from us those which are spiritual, why should you keep back from us
those tokens which our Lord and Master has left for us? we beseech you tell
us, do you think it your whole duty to get up into the Pulpit, and there only
preach unto us, and by virtue thereof to extort tithes from us? in sober
sadness, is there nothing else in your opinion required of a Minister of Jesus
Christ? are there no signs and seals of the Covenant of grace to be delivered
by you to us? is it therefore you refuse to do it, because you may think there
be some amongst us, that have been railors, drunkards, wantons, fornicators,
adulterers or covetous persons? why? though not guilty, we can say, (it is to
be feared) such were some of you! and if you be now washed, sanctified, and
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, who knows,
but by the same spirit, we may be in the like manner, washed, sanctified and
justified, and if so, or desire to be so, pardon us, if we importune the seals
of Grace, which may conduce to our future glory.

But if you think us, like Turks, Jews and Heathen unworthy of them, tell us so:
if not, why have you witheld them from us all this while? if you will not give
them us, but necessitate us to seek for them elsewhere, we then desire you to
set down your reasons under your hand: in the mean while we demand of you, with
what conscience or honor you can refuse to restore back to the poorer sort
amongst us, out of that great income you receive, those moneys they have been
forced to expend upon other Ministers, for doing that which we conceive, of
right belonged ^o you to do; we say great income, because it is great in it
self, greater in respect of the very little content you give us: for when we
steadfastly look upon you, and behold you like Janus to have two faces, with the
one looking earnestly toward our Tithes without any regard to the Sacraments,
with the other toward Women's weuld, we cannot apprehend you to be other then
some strange Minister, (we will not say Monster) rushed in amongst us, and
indeed such an one, as neither we, nor our Forefathers ever saw in Barham
before.

None of your Predecessors, some of whom, without all peradventure were pious
and learned men, Hooker
ever, like unto your self, denied the Sacraments unto us: they knew them to
serve as bonds of obedience to God, strict obligations to the mutual exercise
of Christian Charity, provocations to godliness, preservations from sin,
memorials of the principal benefits of Christ, annexed for ever unto the new
Testament, as other Rites were before with the Old; they knew them to be
warrants for the more security of our belief, marks of distinction to separate
Gods own from strangers: heavenly Ceremonies sanctified by God himself, and
ordained to be administered in his Church as signs to know whereby God does
impart the vital or saving grace of Christ unto all that are capable thereof,
and as means which God requires in them unto whom he imparteth Grace. For since
God in himself is invisible, and cannot by us be disc^rned working, therefore
when it seems good in the eyes of his heavenly wisdom, that men for some
special intent and purpose should take notice of his glorious presence, he
gives them some plain, and sensible token, whereby to know what they cannot
see. For Moses to see God was imposible; yet Exodus 2.3.
Moses by fire knew where the glory of God extraordinarily was present. The
Joh. 5 4.
Angel by whom God endued the waters of the Pool called Bethesda with
supernatural virtue to heal, was not seen of any, yet the time of the Angels
presence known by the troubled motions of the waters themselves. The Apostles
Act. 2.3.
by fiery tongues, which they saw, were admonished when the Spirit which they
could not behold was upon them. In like manner it is with us; Christ, and his
holy Spirit, with all the blessed effects, though entering into the soul of man,
we are not able to apprehend, or express how, do notwithstanding give notice of
the times when they use to make their access, because it pleases Almighty God
to communicate by sensible means those blessings which are incomprehensible.
Our Predecessor knew the necessity of receiving the Sacraments, that grace is a
consequent of them, a thing which accompanies them as their end, that it is
not Gods ordinary will to bestow the grace of the Sacraments on any, but by the
Sacraments, which grace also they that receive by Sacraments or with
Sacraments, receive it from him, and not from them; they knew that saving grace
which Christ originally is, or has for the general good of the whole Church,
he severally deriveth (...) every member thereof by Sacraments, and that they
serve as the Instruments of God to that end and purpose, Hooker
moral instruments, the use whereof is in our hands, the effect in his; they
knew that for the use of them we have his express commandment for the effect,
his promise; so that without our obedience to the one, there is of the other no
apparent assurance, and we are not to doubt but that they really give what they
promise, and are what they signify; they knew that the Sacraments are not bare
resemblances, or memorials of things absent, or naked signs and Testimonies,
assuring us of grace received before, but (as they are indeed and in verity)
means effectual, whereby God when we take the Sacraments delivers into our
hands that grace available unto eternal life, which grace, the Sacraments
signify or represent: and are they such effectual means? are they necessary to
salvation? are they by God himself for ever annexed unto the new Testament? how
great then is the neglect? how great the Offense? how detestable the wilfulness
of those men, who though empowered, set apart in a great measure for that
purpose, and required by God himself to communicate them, in order to the
salvation of his people, shall notwithstanding be careless in performance of
his will, yea peremptorily deny to put his most sacred and saving Ordinances in
execution?

Has the great Judge of all the world said, that Joh. 3.33.
unless a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, and except you eat of the Joh. 6.53.
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood ye have no life in you; and has
the mirror of piety, and Learning affirmed, that we may with consent of the
whole ^hristian world, Hooker
conclude the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord to be necessary,
the one to initiate, or begin, the other to consummate, and make perfect our
life in Christ; who then can imagine otherwise? but great must be the ignorance
or obstinacy of those kind of men, who deny the administration of those
heavenly Mysteries which are so necessary to eternal life.

For as concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, in the first place, we believe as
we are not naturally men without birth, so neither are we Christian men in the
eye of the Church of God, but by new birth, nor according to the manifest
ordinary course of divine dispensation new born, but by that Baptism which both
declares and makes us Christians; In which respect we justly hold it to be
the door of our actual entrance into Gods house, the first apparent beginning
life, a seal perhaps to the grace of election before received, b^t to our
sanctification here, a step which has not any before it.

The Law of Christ tyeth all men to receive this baptism, expressly specified by
water and the Spirit; water, as duty required on our parts; the Spirit as a
gift God bestows; for unless as the Spirit is a necessary inward cause, so
water were a necessary outward means to our regeneration; what construction
should we give unto those words to be new born, and that (...), even of water?
why are we taught Ephesians. 5.2.
that with water God does purify and cleanse his Church? wherefore do the
Apostles of Christ term baptism Tit. 3.5.
a bath of Regeneration? what purpose had they in giving men advice to Act.
2.38.
receive outward baptism, and in persuading them it did avail to remission of
sins? If then Christ himself who gives salvation, do require baptism, it is
our duty who look for salvation, seriously to do that which is required, and
religiously to fear the danger which may grow by the want thereof, and it
behooveth all Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who have any fear of God
in their hearts, and care of delivering men's souls from sin, to teach men the
necessity thereof, and not omit (when ocasion is offered) this their necessary
duty in their own persons. For though we grant that those sentences which make
Sacraments most necessary to eternal life, are no prejudice to their salvation
that want them by some inevitable necessity, and without any fault of their
own, yet we say it ought in reason to be acknowledged likewise, that for as
much as the Lord himself makes Baptism necessary; necessary, whether we
respect the good received by it, or the Testimony yielded unto God of that
humility and meek obedience, which reposing wholly it self on the absolute
authority of his commandment, and on the truth of his heavenly promise,
doubts not but from creatures despicable in their own condition and
substance, to obtain grace of inestimable value, or rather not from them, but
from him, yet by them, as by his appointed means: and howsoever he, by the
secret ways of his own incomprehensible mercy, may be thought to save without
Baptism, this clears not the Church from guiltiness of blood, if through her
superfluous scrupulositie, lets, and impediments of less regard, should cause a
grace of so great moment to be witheld, wherein our merciless strictness may be
our own harm, although not theirs toward whom we show it; and we for the
hardness of our hearts may perish, albeit they through Gods unspeakable mercy
may live.

God which did not afflict that innocent, whose circumcision Moses had overlong
deferred, was about to have killed Exodus 4.24.
Moses himself for the injury, which was done, through so great neglect, giving
us thereby to understand, that they whom Gods own mercy saves without us, are
on our parts notwithstanding, and as much as in us lies, even destroyed, when
under unsufficient pretenses, we defraud them of such ordinary outward helps as
we should exhibit. Not that we hereby make Baptism a cause of grace, but say
that the grace whch is given with baptism, does so far forth depend on the
outward Sacrament, that God will have it embraced not only as a sign or token
what we receive, but also as an instrument or mean whereby we receive Grace.

And as concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we say, that he which
has said of the one Sacrament, wash and be clean; has said concerning the
other, Eat and live. Life being therefore proposed unto all men as their end,
they which by Baptism have laid their foundation, and attained the first
beginning of a new life, have here their nourishment and food, prescribed for
the continuance of life in them. Such as will live the life of God, must eat
the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of man; because this is a part of
that diet, which if we want, we cannot live: whereas therefore in our infancy
we are incorporated into Christ, and by Baptism receive the grace of his
Spirit, without any sense or feeling of the gift which God bestows, in the
Eucharist we so receive the gift of God, that we know by grace, what the grace
is which God gives us, the decrees of our increase in holiness and virtue, we
see and can judge of them, we understand that the strength of our life, began
in Christ, is Christ, that his flesh is meat, and his blood is drink; not by
surmized imagination, but truly, even so-truly, that through Faith we perceive
in the signs of the Body and Blood Sacramentally presented, the very taste of
Eternal Life: The grace of the Sacrament is here as the food which we eat and
drink. The Sacrament is a true and real participation of Christ, who thereby
imparteth himself, even his whole entire person as a mystical head, into every
soul that receives him; and every such receiver does thereby incorporate or
unite himself unto Christ, as a Mystical member of him, yea, of them also whom
he acknowledges to be his own. And to whom the person of Christ is thus
communicated, to them he gives by the same Sacrament his Holy Spirit to
sanctify them, as it sanctifies him which is their head; and what merit,
force, or virtue soever there is in his sacrificed body and blood, we freely,
fully and wholly have it by this Sacrament; the effect whereof in us is a real
transmutation of our Souls and Bodies from sin to righteousness, from death and
corruption, to immortality and life; and though the Sacrament it self be but a
corruptible and earthly creature, yet he by the strength of his glorious power,
will bring to pass that the Bread and Cup which he gives us, shall be truly
the thing he promises.

This Sacrament keeps Christians, in a continual remembrance of that
propitiatory sacrifice, which Christ once for all offered by his death upon the
Cross, to reconcile us to God: He was himself once really offered, and as often
as this Sacrament is celebrated, so often is he spiritually offered by the
faithful. This Sacrament confirms our Faith; for God by it does signify and
seal unto us from Heaven, that according to the promise and new Covenant which
he has made in Christ, he will truly receive into his grace and mercy all
penitent believers who duly receive this holy Sacrament, and that for the merit
of the death and passion of Christ, he will as verily forgive them all their
sins, as they are made partakers of this Sacrament. It is also a pledge, and
Symbol of the most near and effectual communion which Christians have with
their Head, from which communion there follows to the faithful, many
inestimable benefits, as his taking by imputation all their sins and guiltiness
upon him, to satisfy Gods justice for them; and he freely gives by imputation
unto us all his righteousness in this life, and all his right unto eternal
life, when this is ended; and counts all the good, or ill that is done unto
us, as done to his own person: there likewise flows from Christ nature into
our nature united unto him, the lively spirit, and breath of Grace, which
renews us unto a spiritual life, and so sanctifies our minds, wills, and
affections, that we daily grow more and more conformable to the Image of
Christ; he also bestows upon us all saving graces necessary to attain eternal
life, as the sense of Gods love, the assurance of our election, with
regeneration, sanctification, and grace to do good works. This Sacrament also
feeds the Souls of the faithful in the assured hope of life everlasting, and
withal does seal unto them the assurance of the enjoyment of that life. Manna,
Angels food, fed the Israelites forty years in the wilderness, but behold a
better food is prepared for them, even the body, and blood of our most blessed
Savior, the bread of life, on which whosoever by a sincere and steadfast faith
do feed, it will nourish their souls for ever unto a blessed life without end:
in order to which, it is an assured pledge of the spiritual resurrection of our
souls from the death of sin here, and of the corporal resurrection of our
bodies at the last day; of the first resurrection our Savior has said, John
6.57.
He that eats me even he shall live by me;; of the second He himself has
also said, 57.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him at the last day: for this Sacrament signifies and seals unto us,
that Christ died, and rose again for us, and that His flesh quickens and
nourishes unto eternal life, and that therefore our bodies shall surely be
then raised unto that life; for seeing our Head is risen, all the members of
the body shall likewise surely rise again, for how can those bodies fed and
nourished with the body and blood of the Lord of life, but be raised up with
him again at that day unto life? it being given by Him for their eternal
salvation.

It was neither Saint nor Angel, but the Son of God himself who ordained this
holy Mystery, and is the chiefest memorial left by Him of our Redemption; our
Redemption, which was the chiefest benefit that ever man needed from God, or
that God ever bestowed up on man; and there fore every Christian should account
this holy supper the chiefest and most joyful feast in this world, and come
unto it with praise and thanksgiving: the sinner laying aside his sins must
come to this feast, the envious man his enmity and come; he that has variety
of secular employments must lay aside his secular employments and and come and
converse with God. He that is well grounded in grace must come, because he is
excellently disposed to so holy a feast, but he that is but in the infancy of
his piety, had need to come, that so he may grow in grace; the strong must
come, least they become weak, and the weak, that they may become strong; the
sick must come to be cured, the healthful to be preserved: they that have
leisure must come because they have no excuse; they that have no leisure must
come hither, that by so excellent Religion they may sanctify their business:
The penitent sinners must come, that they may be justified; and they that are
justified, that they may be justified still; they that have fears and great
reverence to these mysteries, and think no preparation to be sufficient, must
receive, that they may learn to receive the more worthily, and they that have a
less degree of reverence, must come often, to have it hightned: Here are
remedies for all sick and sorrowful sinners, the very letter of the word of
Christ gives plain security that these mysteries do as nails fasten us unto
his very Cross, that by him we draw out as touching efficacy, force and virtue,
even the blood of his gored side, in the wounds of out Redeemer, we there dip
our tongues, we are dyed red both within and without, our hunger is satisfied
and our thirst for ever quenched; they are things wonderful which he feels,
great which he sees, and unheard of which he utters, whose souls is possessed
of this Paschal Lamb, and made joyful in the strength of this new wine; this
Bread has in it more then the substance which our eyes behold, this Cup
hallowed with solemn benediction, avails to the endless life and welfare both
of soul and body, in that it serves as well for a medicine to heal our
infirmities and purge our sins, as for a sacrifice of thanksgiving, which
touching, it sanctifies, it enlightneth with belief, it truly conformeth us
unto the Image of Jesus Christ, who by virtue of his divine benediction, with
hands and eyes lifted up to heaven, first blessed, and consecrated those chosen
elements of bread and wine, and made them for ever instruments of life, for the
endless good of all generations: O how inexpressibly comfortable are the
benefits devolved upon us hereby! O how infinite are the joys, such as eye
has not seen nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart of man prepared for
the worthy receivers! to such belongs life, life indeed, life everlasting; with
those is the Tabernacle of God, and God himself shall be their God, and He will
wipe away all tears from their eyes, no more death, no more sorrow, no more
crying, no more pain shall trouble them: He that is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end will be their God, and they shall be his Sons, they shall
inhabit the great City, the holy Jerusalem enlightened with the glory of God,
and walled with a great and high wall, founded upon twelve foundations,
garnished with all manner of precious stones, and the names of the Lambs twelve
Apostles; the gates belonging to this City being no less in number then twelve,
and every one of them made of Pearl, Rev. 21.21
and the pavement of it of pure Gold; a City having no need of Sun or Moon to
shine in it, having the glory of God to light it, and the law to be the light
of it; to this City all the Kings of the Earth shall bring honor and glory, and
all those who religiously hunger and thurst after the body and blood of this
Lamb, and worthily partake of it, shall walk in the light of it: And shall any
hunger and thirst after this soul-saving heavenly banquet? Shall some be set
apart on purpose, by an Almighty, gracious and liberal inviter freely to
deliver it unto them? And are all these mentioned benefits and privileges,
yea, Heaven it self promised to them that hunger and thirst, and partake of it?
and yet shall there be any who will not only wilfully neglect, but also
peremptorily deny to minister at this holy feast, and thereby suffer the hunger
and thirst of poor souls to remain unsatisfyed? Shall any in like manner whom
our most merciful Savior Jesus Christ has commanded to Suffer little
children to come unto him, for to such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, be so
wickedly hard-hearted, so maliciously bent, so without all natural compassion,
as to shut the door against those poor little infants, deny them a little water
Sacramentally to wash away their sins with; keep back from them the sign and
seal of Gods promise, and as much as in them lies put them out of the Covenant
of Grace, and thrust them into the woeful pit of everlasting Perdition?
Certainly, if we had not seen such creatures with our eyes, we should hardly
have believed our ears at any men's mentioning of them; such there are amongst
us, and our children after us will declare the mighty work of division they
have wrought in our days; which they first prepared under color of Religion,
to accomplish their own crooked ends thereby. And these people do separate
themselves from others, desiring to be thought more holy then they. These the
Apostles long since foretold should come to deceive in the latter times; they
have thrust out pious and learned men out of their seats, and exalted Dunces,
and themselves in the room of them; they have caused Schisms and Heresies
amongst the people, which happen by reason of our sins, through the just
judgment of our God, wherewith from on high he has visited us, by permitting
those false lights to shine in these times of darkness, to lead our feet out of
the way of peace, and deny us the Holy Sacraments, which were ordained for the
remission of our sins: such strange lights there are now; and what makes them
such? Semblably it is to be feared, ignorant obstinacy, and self-seeking ends;
for who can imagine it to be other then ignorant obstinacy in these crabbed
Doctors, who allege no other then unsatisfactory reasons, for their omission
of holy and necessary duties; as because forsooth the people (whom they expect
should do just as they would have them, be it right or wrong) will not
presently go out of the old, and instantly come into a new Church way; and that
even before they are shown what it is, or where it lies, or the contrivers of
it, themselves have thoroughly agreed what it shall be; a way which when by
themselves (as they may think) perfected, will in all likelihood be as little
liked of, and followed by the most godly, most wise, and most learned men of
this Nation, as it has been practiced by them, since the time of our blessed
Saviors coming into the world, till the first year of Liberty, for every one to
take upon him what Religion he pleases, broach what Heresy he fancieth, and
be of what Sect he conceives most to his own advantage.

And is it any other then an unsatisfactory reason in those Austere Doctors,
which will not administer the holy Sacrament of Baptism to those children,
whose Parents though visibly in the Covenant of God, and visible members of
Christ's Church, though they acknowledge themselves to believe in him, and by
virtue of his merits to obtain everlasting life; and though they desire to
partake of his Ordinances, yet because they will not in every thing dance after
their pipe, will not have a hand with them in renting in pieces the seamless
Coat of their Savior, will not apprehend all their errors to be truths, will
not suffer themselves to be rid upon by these unmercifull horsemen, under
pretense of Church discipline, will not break the bond of unity amongst
themselves, but maintain a sociable familiarity, and sometimes as they have too
too much cause, speak against Pharisaical practices, yet because they will not
confess all that these teachers say to be true, all that they practice to be
good, all that they would have done to be of absolute necessity to be done,
shall therefore be denied the benefit of the Holy Sacraments, though accused by
no other then themselves to be ignorant, scandalous and scoffers at Religion,
and hereupon be rejected as Children of wrath, plain Aliens, altogether without
hope, utterly without God in this present world. Miserable were the condition
of man, if it were by a perpetual Law established, that these partial and
hard-hearted Rulers should be his Accusers and Judges. For should not God
through his unspeakeable goodness, show mercy unto thousands of poor Children,
whose remote forefathers loved him? They must forever go without it for these
men, and all because their immediate parents were such as would not every way
square themselves according to their wild fancies, and unrectified judgments.
But suppose those immediate parents were wicked indeed, as they many times only
pretend them to be so: Has not God told them plain enough by the Prophet
Ezekiel, Ez. 18.20.
That the child shall not suffer for the iniquity of the Father? and is it not
evident that the Children of wicked Parents amongst the Jews were circumcised?
and if so, why may not Children proceeding from the like Parents of the
Christians be baptized, since (it is not to be doubted) his hand is not
shortened, and he has given as large privileges to us under the Gospel, as he
gave to them under the Law: otherwise we should be loosers by the coming of
Christ, which Credat Judaeus Apella, non nos, though the circumcised Jew will
believe, we will be far from giving credit to any such monstrous improbability
Nisi forte arbitramur Christum in suo adventu. Patris gra^am imminuisse aut
decurtasse, quod ex^crabi^ blasphemia non va^ C^l. Inst. lib. 4. c. 16. sect. 4.


We read that Saint John the Baptist sprang for joy in his Mothers womb, at the
salutation of the Virgin, Luke 1.41. but are to seek for the cause of so great
joy, had his birth been so disadvantagious to him, and others in that
condition; the coming of Christ, witness the testimony of an Angel from heaven,
and the Holy Ghost bearing witness of the truth of that Testimony, was joyous
to all: Lu. 2.20.
all sexes, all conditions, all ages, advantageous to all, even to Infants. Our
most blessed Savior brought grace along with him: Grace and Truth says John
Joh. 1.17.
came by (and with) Jesus Christ; Grace in the superlative degree reaching and
spreading farther under the new, then the old Testament. The grace of God which
brings salvation has appeared, says the Apostle, Tit. 2.11.
to all men i.e. to all sorts of ages and conditions of men. The grace of God
in an ordinary dispensation was first appropriated to the Jews, they were then
his favorites, to whom his grace in Christ, was manifested; but now that grace
has appeared to all men; the grace of the Gospel is more ample; and every
ways greater Grace then that before, or under the Law: God having provided
some better things for us (says the Apostle) Heb. 11.40
more, greater, and better privileges for us under the Gospel, then for them
under the Law; and by consequence for the Children of the Christians, then for
the Children of the Jews, which could not be, if our Children had not right to
the Covenant, as well as theirs. Had these Teachers who are thus scrupulous in
administering this holy Ordinance, perused and minded holy and learned Perkins
his works, as much as they use to read, and and study the noval and
schismatical Pamphlets of the time, they might have been taught by him that The
Children of Parents that are professed members of the Church, (though cut off
for a time, upon some offense committed) have right to Baptism, because it is
not in the power of man to cut them off from Christ though excommunicated;
which being so, why may not the Children descending from Parents (though in
their persons wicked) not excommunicated, have right to the sacred Ordinance of
Baptism, since those of the very excommunicated (in the Judgment of so profound
a Master as Perkins) have right thereunto.

But behold the opinion by the practice of a greater then Perkins, even of John
the Baptist himself, who baptized all that came unto him for his Baptism, Mat.
3.5. amongst others even those very Pharisees and Sadduces, whom at the same
time he called a generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7. and the latter of whom denied
the resurrection it self.

And as they are no other then unsatisfactory reasons, which are given for not
administering the holy Sacrament of Baptism, what are they better which are
rendered for their not admitting those that are Religious and knowing Christians
to the supper of the Lord, because peradventure there may be some in a Parish
who may be Scandalous or ignorant; or others who will refuse to make answer to
some needless questions may be demanded by such as rake it to be a part of
their function, to make a deeper search into consciences, then any Law of God
or reason of man inforceth, and upon this denial they shall be put off to
another time, from the mystery of heavenly grace, though for piety, and
knowledge they be sufficiently capable: in like manner others who deny not to
submit themselves to this severe inquisition, yet if they be persons any way
distasted by them, if these do not make answer iisaem terminis to that they
would have them, though in effect knowingly enough, they shall notwithstanding
be put off to farther trial; in which men, although there should be found some
weakness indeed, (as it is too too often only pretended there is,) yet should
they in diverse considerations be cherished, according to the merciful example
and precepts, whereby the Gospel of Christ has taught us, toward such to show
compassion, to receive them with lenity and all meekness; if any thing be
shaken in them, to strengthen it, not to quench with delays and jealousies
that feeble smoke of godliness which seems to breath from them, but to build
wheresoever there is any foundation, and to add perfection unto slender
beginnings, and that, as by other offices of piety, so by the Ordinances which
Christ has left in his Church, not only for preservation of strength, but also
for relief of weakness.

Far differrent from these men was the practice of the Church of Corinth, unto
which (it seems) many came over from Heathenism, and as many as came in unto
them, all were admitted to their Communion, amongst whom some were such
lukewarm Christians, that they were sometimes ready to go to their Idols, and
sometimes to Church (to say nothing of those Corinthians who were (as it is to
be doubted) 2 Cor. 12.20.
given to strife, envying, wrath, contentions, backbiting whisperings, pride,
and discord: v. 21.
and others of them who were given to uncleanness, fornication, and wantonness,
2 Cor. 15.12.
and other some who were so scrupulous as to make a doubt of the Resurrection
it self) 2 Cor. 11.18,21.
yet these Idolatrous Corinthians whom we shall also find mutinous, and even
drunken together at this Table, whilst they are but willing to profess Christ,
are admitted with the rest to the Sacrament True it is, they are reproved (as
they justly deserved to be so) for their profanation, and directed to examine,
and carry themselves better for the future, but as for their coming together,
and general participation, that was but their duty, and nothing said against it.

And this general participation of the Corinthians appears plainly by the sense
of the words of the Apostle to them, 1 Cor. 10.5.
showing them, that all the Israelites that passed through the Sea, and
wilderness, were admitted to both Sacraments as well as they, even those very
scandalous ones, with whom God was not well pleased, but like to them destroyed
in the wilderness, yet it was a just punishment upon them, when they ran to
Idols, as they in like manner did, and therefore bid them take heed, and not
think that they should escape Gods judgments, if they walked not answerable to
their profession, notwithstanding their admittance to the Sacraments.

And this is not only evident by the example of the Corinthians and Israelites,
but by that notable one of our blessed Savior himself, who admitted even Judas
that Arch-Traytor to the Passover, if not to his supper, (however it is the
same in signification) so that those who will not be otherwise moved to a more
free admission of the Sacrament, then is of late days allowed of, might very
well be enduced to do it, if not by what the Corinthians and Israelites did,
yet by the example of the Son of God himself; unless they will wilfully shut
their eyes against that light which came into the world to illuminate all those
who have a desire to see the right way, and walk in it.

And that some withold the Sacraments from those they ought to minister them
to, may it not be doubted they do it out of selfish ends? which if well looked
into, will prove the state of many questions which go under the notion of
Religion in these days, as well as it has in the times of old: hence it is
that they account they shall be the more sought unto, the more held in
reverence, the more engrandize their power, and hold men in obedience and
slavery under them, and they themselves be in subjection to none; this
selfishness, if thoroughly searched into, will be found secretly to contain that
poison which has so powerfully wrought upon the brains of so many
Presbyterians and other Sectaries, and caused them to cast so many stumbling
blocks in the way, and set so many fences between the people and the body of
their Savior: (mistake us not we beseech you, we mean not all, but some of
your profession:) hence is it that so many heart burnings, so many contentions,
so many divisions has happened between Churchmen and Churchmen, as well as
between them and the people: however in this particular, as Herod and Pilate,
though they differed otherwise, yet agreed against Christ; so in this, too too
many of each sect join hand in hand in scrupuling to give the bread of life to
poor sinners, which might nourish and comfort their hungry souls unto life
everlasting.

But we hear you say, If we will come under a Presbyterial Discipline, you will
administer the Sacraments to us, otherwise not.

To this we demand of you, Would you have us to subject our selves to a
discipline against our consciences, a discipline not established by Law, nor
congruent to our Liberty? would you have us put our necks under the yoke of a
discipline, which we truly conceive has been the anvil upon which so many
engines have been framed, which have so much battered down the quiet and peace
both of Church and State? Declaration of the Lords and Commons to the Scots
Commis. p. 49.
Have not the favorers of this discipline grasped at unlimited power, such as
neither deriveth its beginning, nor willingly receives its commands from the
Magistrate? whom they would have countenance them in all their Actions, and yet
not allow of his rules and direction; they would have him censure and condemn,
or others by his Authority, which is all one, and yet will not allow him to
know and judge: they will call for his hand to strike, and yet not allow him an
eye to see.

Without offense, be it in a good hour spoken, we apprehend this discipline to
be of all other most injurious to the Magistrate, most oppressive to the
Subject, and most pernicious to both: it is the very quintessence of refined
Pouery, and a greater Tyranny then ever Rome brought forth, inconsistent with
all forms of Civil government, destructive to all sorts of policy, a rack to
the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall upon a people, and so much
the more dangerous, because by the specious pretense of divine Institution, it
takes away the sight, but not the burden of slavery.

How it is injurious to the Magistrate, appears by that little has been said
already; but will farther appear, 1. By overthrowing his Rights in convocating
Synods to order Ecclesiastical affairs, and reform the Church within his
Dominions. 2. By robbing him of the last appeal of his Subjects. 3. By
exempting the Ministers from due punishment. 4. By subjecting the supreme
Authority to their Censures, even to the highest Censure of excommunication,
that very engine by which the Popes exalted themselves above Emperors. 5. By
robbing the Magistrate of his dispensative Power. 6. By cheating him of his
Civil Power in order to Religion. 7. By challenging an exorbitant Power by
Divine Right. 8. And by making a very Monster of the Commonwealth. 9. And
little more then a Cipher of Parliaments.


All which are evidently demonstrated, not by some extraordinary practices,
justified only by the pretense of invincible necessity (a weak patrociny for
general Doctrine) nor by the single opinions of some capricious fellows, but by
the Scottish book of Discipline, by the Acts of their general and provincial
Assemblies, by the concurrent votes and writings of their Commissioners, as is
exactly to be seen in the fair warning to take heed of this Discipline by Dr.
Joh. Bromwel L. Bishop of Londonderry in Ireland. And how it is oppressive to
particular persons, and full of rigor, and like Dracos laws that were written
in blood, it will appear by inflicting Church censures upon slight grounds; as
for an uncomely gesture, a vain word, for suspicion of Covetousness or Pride,
for superfluity of raiment either for cost or fashion, for dancing at a
wedding, or of servants in the streets, for wearing a man's hair al a mode: They
scarce allow a man a Latitude of discretion in any thing: all men, even their
superiors must be their slaves, or pupils. If a man will not confess himself a
Delinquent, be sorry for giving the Presbyters any offense, and conform himself
in his hair, apparel, diet, every thing, to what these rough-hewen Cato's shall
prescribe, they will proceed against him to excommunication.

By this Discipline a man is punished twice for the same crime; first by the
Magistrate, according to the Laws of God and the Land, for the offense; then by
the Censures of the Church, for the scandal. To this agrees their Synod,
nothing forbids the same fault in the same man to be punished one way by the
Political power, another way by the Ecclesiastical; T^or. 63.
by that, under the formality of a crime with corporal or pecuniary punishment;
by this, under the formality of scandal, with spiritual censures.

Thus their Liturgy in express terms, All crimes which by the Law of God
deserves death, deserves also excommunication. Yea, though an offender abide an
assise, and be absolved by the same, yet may the Church enjoin him public
satisfaction. Or if the Magistrate shall not think fit in his Judgment, or
cannot in ^onscience prosecute the party upon the Churches intimation, the
Church may admonish the Magistrate publicly. And if no remedy be found,
excommunicate the offender, first, for his crime, and then for his being
suspected to have corrupted the Judge. By which we observe, how these severe
Disciplinarians bring all crimes whatsoever, great and small, within their
Jurisdiction; how that a Delinquents trial for his life is no sufficient
satisfaction to them; and how that to satisfy their own humors, they care not
how they blemish publicly the reputation of the Magistrate upon frivolous
conjectures.

And as they bring all crimes great and small, so do they bring all degrees
under their Jurisdiction. The supreme Magistrate shall be bearded and mated by
every ordinary Presbyter; witness that insolent speech of Mr. Robert Bruce to
King James, Sir, I see your resolution is to take Huntley in favor; if you do,
I will oppose: you shall choose whether you will lose Huntley, or me, for us
both you cannot keep. It is nothing with them for a pedant to put himself into
the balance with the Prince, and most Potent Peer of the Realm. And as for the
common people, they shall have an high Commission in every Parish, and groan
under the Arbitrary Decrees of ignorant unexperienced Governors, who know no
Law but their own wills, who observe no order but what they list: under these
men, Parents shall lose the free disposition of their own Children in marriage:
1 Book disc. 9. head.
if the child desire a husband or a wife, and the Parents gain-stand their
request, and have no other cause then the common of men have, to wit, lack of
goods, or because the other party is not of birth high enough, upon the child's
desire, the Minister is to travail with the Parents, and if he find no just
cause to the contrary, may admit them to the marriage: For the work of God
ought not to be hindered, by the corrupt affections of worldly men. This
doctrine is very high, but their practice yet much more high; for the
Presbyterians will compel the wronged Parent to give that child as great a
portion as any of his other children.

All Masters and Mistresses of families, of what age or condition soever, must
come once a year before the Presbyter, with their household, to be examined
personally, whether they be fit to receive the Sacrament, in respect of their
knowledge and otherwise; and if they suffer their children or servants to
continue in wilful ignorance (though they cannot help it) they must undergo the
severity, and extreme rigor of their excommunication; 1 Book disc. 9 head.
after which sentence, no person (his wife and family only excepted) may have
any kind of conversation with him that is excommunicated, they may not eat with
him, nor drink with him, nor buy with him, nor sell to him; they may not salute
him, nor speak to him, except it be by license of the Presbytery. 1 Book disc.
7. head.
His Children begotten and born after that sentence, and before his
reconciliation to Christ, may not be admitted to Baptism, until they be of age
to require it, or the Mother, or some special friend, being a member of that
Church, present the child, abhorring and damning the iniquity and obstinate
contempt of the Father. And all this being not enough, they proceed to an
outlawing of the party, and a confiscation of his goods, and putting him out of
the Magistrates protection, so as any man may kill him and be unpunished: yea
the party excommunicated is not so much as to attend or hear these fatal
letters granted.

And that the people may the more patiently suffer all this harshness from
them, may the more quietly endure all their heavy oppressions, and the more
humbly submit themselves to all their rigid Ordinances, they persuade them,
that they are bound in conscience to hear and obey their voice, and reverence
the Majesty of the Son of God speaking in them; for having made their
Consistories the Tabernacles of Christ, they expect that their determinations
shall pass for the sentences of Christ; and thus these proud Vicars having
mounted themselves aloft, they sit upon the Temple of God, and exalt themselves
above all that the Scripture calls God.

And how can any man be so ignorant, so stupid, so void of reason, as to think
that these men can be led by an infallible spirit, who in this manner, like the
Lords of the Heathen, seek for Dominion and Power! who aim at Authority and
Rule in this world, of which they cannot but know their Masters Kingdom is
not! who being puffed up with an unparalled pride have made themselves drunk
with the spirit of Antichrist, and so drunk, that they begin to stagger, and
are in danger of falling down even level with the the ground!

But since they, the better to support themselves from falling, have thought fit
to join unto them a sort of men whom they have Christened by the name of lay
Elders, and will have them looked upon as Commissioners of Christ; we will let
you know, that we are not ignorant of the true reason of their annexing this
conjunction copulative unto them; for the politic projector and founder of
this new discipline, by name Calvin (a man famous for his great wisdom) the
more surely and easily to bring that beast of many heads, the people, to assent
and contribute their labor and endeavors toward the erecting of the
building, whereof he had before hand conceived an Idea in his mind, thought
good to tender an offer to them (plausible enough in outward show) that for
every Minister, who should sit perpetual Judge, they should annually choose two
lay Elders out of every Parish amongst themselves, and they to sit with them in
the standing Ecclesiastical Court which was to be established, to be Judges
together with them in the same: and these two sorts should have a care of all
men's manners, power of determining all kind of Ecclesiastical causes, and
Authority to convene, to control, to punish, as far as with Excommunication,
whomsoever they should think worthy, none either small or great excepted: now
the people (who are ever taken and deluded with fair shows, (and to the worlds
end will be so) rather then realities,) conceiting this ods of two to one, to
be sufficient to remedy any inconvenience might arise by the Ministry,
willingly enough embraced the Offer, and jointly set to their helping hands and
heads to bring the business to perfection; and accordingly, after no small
opposition which was made by the wiser sort, effected what they intended; we
say, no small opposition, for the more quick-sighted, and men of profoundest
judgment among the layty, foresaw that this filling up of the seats in the
Consistory with so great a number of laymen, was but to please the mind of the
people, to the end they might think their own sway somewhat; but when things
came to trial of practice, their Pastors learning would be at all times of
force to over-perswade simple men, who knowing the time of their own
Presidentship to be but short, would always stand in fear of their Ministers
perpetual Authority: and hereupon professed with greater stomach their
Judgments, that such a discipline was little better then Popish Tyranny,
disguised and tendered unto them under a new form. But how much soever the more
prudential men gainsaid this upstart discipline, yet certain it is, in those
times of distraction (as the City of Geneva was then in) (as we have in like
manner seen in these our days by woeful experience) Anno Do. 1541.
not the wise, but the many, like a boisterous torrent, bears down all before
them, and to the disturbance of the world, do what they list, so (they)
established this discipline. A discipline which they peremptorily affirmed to
have been taught by Christ and his Apostles in the Word of God; and yet full
fifteen hundred years have passed from the birth of our Savior till the
setting up thereof, and they cannot, during all that time, show us one Church
upon the face of the whole earth which ever found out or erected it, till this
present time: and now forsooth this discipline is become The Scepter of Christ,
the eternal Gospel: and where did this Scepter lie hid during all these
hundreds of years, that we cannot find out the least foot-step of it in the
meanest village of Christendom? This world draws toward an end: was this
discipline fitted and contrived for the world to come? or how can it be the
eternal Gospel?

We should be injurious unto Charity it self, if we should affirm all these men
who are of this stamp, to have wilfully gone out of this right way into this
Labyrinth, and accordingly to have led others a long with them in a maze; or
should surmise all those who have been misguided, knowingly to continue in an
error; no, we have a better opinion of some of them, who no doubt have a
conceit of the divinity of their discipline, and yet are truly godly men in
their hearts, sincere in their affections, upright in their meanings: but we
say, certainly godly men in all ages have erred, and without all peradventure
so do the best of these; and that the founder hereof himself was but a man, we
all know, we no less know men are but men, and humanum est errare: what moved
him at first to fancy this discipline, and afterward to establish it, is to be
seen at large in judicious Hooker his preface.

Nature works in us all a love to our own counsels. The contradiction of
others is a fan to in flame that love. Our love set on fire to maintain that
which once we have done, sharpneth the wit to dispute, to argue, and by all
means to reason for it: wherefore a marvel it were, if a man of so great
capacity, having such incitements to make him desirous of all kind of
furtherances unto his cause, could epsy in the whole Scripture of God, nothing
which might breed, at the least a probable opinion of likelihood, that Divine
Authority it self was the same way somewhat inclinable. And all which the wit,
even of Calvin was able from thence to draw, by sifting the very utmost
sentence and syllable, is no more, then that certain speeches there are, which
to him did seem to intimate, that all Christian Churches ought to have their
Elderships endued with power of excommunication, and that a part of those
Elderships every where should be chosen out from amongst the Layty, after that
form which himself had framed Geneva unto. But what argument can be shown
whereby it was ever proved by Calvin, that any one sentence of Scripture does
necessarily enforce these things. Or that those Elders were Laymen?


Author to the Petition directed to his Majesty.
And his followers, who with all their learning have endeavored to extol his
Tenants to the highest, have notwithstanding acknowledged, that with whom the
truth is they know not: neither do they all agree in one opinion: and of them
which are at agreement, the most part through a courteous enducement have
followed one man as their guide, and that one man therein most assuredly has
swerved from the Truth.

And what can they be thought but selfseeking ends in some, who when they know
themselves infinitely short of that learning has been in their Predecessors,
and therefore not knowing how to get unto themselves fame, by walking in the
plain and beaten road leading to happiness marked out for them, will attempt to
get unto themselves a name, by pretending to have found out a nigher way unto
it, then any else have done before them, and amuzing the unlearneder sort with
a belief hereof, get unto themselves followers after their own horrid
inventions, whom they entice into such a path, as neither our blessed Savior
nor any of his holy Apostles ever traced out for them; and insensibly by
degrees bring them into such a Labyrinth, which when they are once entered into,
they become amazed, and know not which way to get out of it, and then run out
of one error into another, from bad, to worse, till at length they become as
dreadful Comets to all that behold them. These kind of pernicious leaders
imitate him, who knowing not by any other act, set the Temple of Diana on fire,
with an intent to memorize themselves by that strange one.

And what can be thought better of these, than of that Monster of men
Bernardinus Ochinus, whose zeal at the first seemed to be so violent, as no
former Religious institution, though never so rigorous, was strict enough for
him: he from thence fell to be an Heretic, then a Jew, then a Turk, and last
of all an Atheist, and then wrote a furious invective against the three grand
Impostors of the world, amongst whom he ranked -- Horresco referens -- Jesus
the Prince of Peace, Savior of mankind, and Moses as well as Mahomet.

And what can they be construed, but self seeking ends in those men, by whom
those who are rich, who are powerful and able to do either good or hurt, though
they be as ignorant and scandalous to the world, and perhaps more than those
who are poor, shall notwithstanding be diligently invited, gladly received, and
earnestly entreated to partake of those comfortable mysteries, and saving food,
which the Redeemer of Mankind has prepared for all true believers, without all
peradventure, in as large a measure for those indigent ones, to whom the
Kingdom of Heaven belongs, as for those great ones, who will find it easier
for a Camel to enter through the eye of a nedle, than for the proud ever to come
there.

O let this sly generation of men know, who are guilty of this wilful
omission, and such as upon unwarrantable pretenses, deny the holy Sacrament of
Baptism to those it belongs to, and who thrust by hungry and thirsty Souls from
the saving banquet of of the Lords supper, who prefer obstinacy and selfish
ends before the will of their Lord and Maker, that though they may take to
themselves the glorious name of Gods dear Children, it is to be feared, they
may at last be found out to be Children of Belial, in having in the day of
their fast sought their own will, rather than the will of their great
Commander; let them take heed, that though in their own conceit they may be
lifted up to Heaven, they be not brought down as low as Hell; for most
assuredly it will be easier for those in the Land of Sodom in the day of
Judgment to enjoy the new Jerusalem, than for obstinate and self-seeking
Hypocrites to come within the gates thereof.

Which kind of people profess to know God, Tit. 1.16.
but (it is to be feared) in their works deny him; they shut up the kingdom of
Heaven before men, going not in themselves, nor suffering those that would
enter to come in. They say, stand apart, Esaias 65.5.
come not near to us, for we are holier than you. Jer. 6.13.
Yet they bend their tongues like bows for lies, and proceed from evil to
worse. Pro. 12.22.
Their lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, and their throats as open
sepulchers. Esaias 7.9.
Their hearts is as hard as the Adamant stone, and deceitful above all things:
Esaias 9.16.
They are leaders of the People, causing them to err, and at last devour them.
Esaias 15.26.
They lay wait as he that sets snares, and make nets to catch men. Jude.
They have men's persons in admiration because of advantage. Esaias 5.16.
They draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin with cart ropes. They are
much given to be drunk with malice, though not with wine; and to stagger, their
heads being full of whimsies, though not with strong drink; which causes them
to be Eagleeyed in spying the mote in their brothers eye, and blind in
beholding the beam that is in their own; they are strainers at gnats, and
swallowers of Camels. Esaias 59.5.
They hatch the Cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web. 64.6.
They are as an unclean thing, and their very righteousness as a filthy clout.
From the least of them, to the greatest, they are commonly given to
Covetousness, 6.13.
and from the Prophet to the Priest they all deal falsely; the Prophets among
them being a company of crafty fools, and the spiritual men no less then mad.
These are they which separate themselves from others, walking after their own
lusts, murmuring, complaining, mocking and speaking evil even of those they
know not. Clouds they are without water, carried about with every wind of
doctrine, favorers of damnable Heresies, raging waves of the Sea foaming out
their own shame, wandering stars to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness
for ever.

Ju^.
But here by the by, we desire there may be notice taken, that it is no part of
our thought, to bring within the circumference of this description of
Hypocrites, any truly sincere and godly soul; neither have we the least aim to
any particular holy persons alive, that we are acquainted withal, and therefore
if any shall account him or themselves deciphered hereby, and thereupon take
offense, it must necessarily arise, even in the opinion of all indifferent men,
from the check of his or their own restless consciences, which we heartily wish
had no just cause to accuse them, as we are truly innocent of any intent of
doing so.

We leave this way of accusing and censuring particular persons, to that
Pharisaical generation of people, who being rapt up by a spiritual kind of
pride into the aerie Region of a conceited degree of holiness in themselves, do
from thence look upon others as sensual, polluted, and wicked, yea, as dogs and
swine, altogether unworthy to eat with them either at their own or the Lords
Table, or so much as to come within the verge of their select company.

We thank our God we have not in such manner learned Christ as to place our
selves in the seat of the Judge, accuser, censurer or scorner of our Brethren;
we shall leave all men to the great day of Judgment: for who is he that dares
anticipate that day, and enter upon the throne of the great Judge? We confess
that the serious acknowledgment of our own vileness makes us afraid at heart,
that we our selves are the greatest of sinners; such, as when we consider our
own deservings, we cannot but tremble with terror, and amazement at the just
and dreadful punishment due unto us for sin, and hereby have learned to pity
others as fellow sinners, and not think our selves too good to accompany them
in civil, or religious duties.

We do withgreif, and shameconfess, that we have erred willingly, and strayed
willingly from the ways of our Almighty and most merciful Father, and that
more like untamed Bulls then lost and wandering sheep, we have followed too much
even altogether the absurd devices, and brutish desires of our own hearts, we
have been offended against, nay been offended at his holy, most holy laws, we
have left undone, not lone at all those things which we ought to have done, but
instead thereof done those things which we should not have done, insomuch as
there is no health, no hope of health in us miserable, most miserable, and the
greatest of sinners: all which when we seriously lay to our guilty consciences,
how can we possibly prefer our own wicked, and abominable selves, whom we
certainly know to be thus polluted, and defiled, before others, whose hearts we
are no way so able to search and dive into, as we may into our own?

And being in so great a measure sinful, from the crown of our heads to the
soles of our feet all over contaminated and infected, in so much as no part of
us remains sound, we know no certain cure for our sick and wounded souls,
laden with so many and so grevious sins, but to cast our selves into the arms
of our most blessed Redeemer, and by a lively faith (though we cannot as
Saints, yet) lay claim unto him as sinners, (as wounded and penitent sinners)
whom he came to save; and his coming being to save such, he will certainly
afford the seals of his Grace to such, and having appointed the Ministers of
his Gospel to deliver them to such, we look upon you (Mr. Barton) if you be a
Minister of Jesus Christ as bound in duty (having thrust your self upon us, and
thereby kept off those who might otherwise have done it) to perform your
office, according to the dispensation of God, Col. 1.25.
which is given to his Ministers to us ward to fulfill the word of God.

And we also say to you as the Apostle commands the Church of God to say to
Archippus, Col. 4.17.
Take heed to the Ministry that thou have received in the Lord, that thou
fulful it: a part whereof is the Communication of the Sacraments of the Lord
Jesus Christ, which (we wish we had no cause to say so) to our grief, and your
own shame, you have hitherto omitted.

And therefore give us leave to tell you that the Ministers total omission of
administering the Sacraments to the generality of the people under his charge,
because there may perhaps some wicked persons, not known to be scandalous creep
in amongst the Godly, is, as an erroneous, so an upstart way, never used in the
Church, from the time of the first planting of it, till of latter days the
wild Boar of the forest has rushed into Christ's vineyard, to the danger of the
rooting out of the hearts of men the zeal to the frequent practice of applying
the seals of Grace to their souls; and instead thereof to the planting of a
peculiar and superstitious holiness in the Ordinances, thereby quite to invert
the charitable use of them, and to bereave them of the great Legacy which the
Savior of the world has left to his people.

And we do wonder there can be any person so obstinate and selfish, as thereby
to have the eyes of his understanding so blinded, to force himself to believe
that an upstart unused way, should be the right way, when God himself has
said, Ask for the old way, and with all told us, that it is the good way, and
given us a charge that we should walk in that way, with a promise, that in so
doing, we should find rest to our souls.

He has also said by his Scripture for our instruction, Call to remembrance
the days of old, ask thy Fathers and they will show thee, ask thy Elders and
they will tell thee.

And now can any man (who is not utterly void of reason) think that He for whom
it is impossible to lie, has promised rest unto our souls by our walking in
the old way, and has promised to guide his Church all ways in the right way,
should notwithstanding break his word, and suffer it to wander out of the way,
and that for above 16 hundred years together, even till these times, these very
latter, and perrillous times, in which the spirit speaks evidently, that
there should come diverse Hypocrites, men having their consciences seared with a
hot iron, who should depart from the faith, giving heed to the spirit of error.
1 Timothy 4.1. 2. Tim. 3.1. Jude 19.

And shall that spirit of error have so much power, as contrary to Gods
direction to entice us into new ways, by persuading us to embrace novel
opinions, or unwarrantable practices in Religion, schisms or heresies? shall
any, under any plausible pretense whatsoever, go about to make us believe that
the Sacraments are not necessary to Salvation, or that the Celebration of them
does not belong to the Ministerial Office, we shall boldly aver such to be of
Yesterday, and not to be yet come to their understanding.

And we shall not be ashamed to say, they are altogether out of the old right
way, and have made to themselves crooked paths, wherein they grope as blind
men, without eyes, and stumble at noonday as in the twilight, their feet
treading the pavements of desolation and destruction, run to evil, far off from
the way of peace and equity; which, it should seem, they never would be enduced
to follow; which is the reason why judgment is so far from them, and justice
comes not near them.

And we do here for our selves profess, that if an Angel should come from
heaven, and preach to us any doctrine in order to the putting us out of the
right way, we would neither follow nor believe him.

For as it has been hitherto, so shall it be ever far from us, of the Parish
of Barham, in these licentious times, in which some would have the golden
reins of discipline and government let loose in the Church, in so much that
single Ministers and private persons might take up what form of divine worship
they pleased to follow: so dangerous an example, far be it from us, to be led
by; wandering stars, new, but false lights; bold, but blind guides: far be it
from us to make small or no account of the precious Ordinances of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by neglecting the holy Sacrament of Baptism, and by
counting the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing: far be it from us, to
exchange the truth which we have received, for falsehood which ought not to be
believed; or to undervalue the sound doctrine which has been taught us, by
giving ear to old wives tales: for it is our firm resolution to embrace that
truth, which the great Doctor and Author of truth it self, has commanded, the
blessed Apostles taught, the holy Martyrs confirmed, and the most godly, and
most learned men in all ages, practiced; we shall desire to be washed, that we
may be cleansed, we shall desire to eat that we may live.

Thus much have we thought fitting to declare, to the end that posterity, as
well as those now living, might know what our Judgments are, concerning the
sacred and saving Ordinances which our most blessed Savior (whose name be for
ever praised) has left to his Church, and that in a time in which so slight a
regard has been had of his heavenly Mysteries we did not with silence, and
patience behold such horrible contempt, and detestable neglect: but on the
other side might understand our reverend esteem, and opinion of the necessity
and use of those Seals, that are to continue in his Church, until He, the
Author of them, come to Judge the World, and that a more free and large
admission ought to be to them, than of late has been permitted, or allowed of:
and also that obstinacy and selfish ends have been stumbling blocks in the way
to this free admission, and that Tyrannical Presbytery of some, which has cast
those stumbling blocks in, is both new in erection, and erroneous in execution.

And as we have declared thus much, so we thought our selves bound in
conscience to do it, to the end that we might not foolishly, like the
unprofitable servant, hide our Talent in a Napkin, or perfidiously put our
light under a bushel.

Non nobis nati sumus, was the saying of a Heathen, we are not born for the
good of our selves alone, but for the welfare of others also; and we say of our
very Enemies, as well as friends; to whom we have in some measure held out our
light, as we have done to our nearest Relations, whereby they may (if they
please) see how to distinguish realities from apparances, substances from
shadows, truth from falsehood.

And notwithstanding though they may have but little or no regard to our care,
and endeavors for their good; nay, though as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, they may stand in direct opposition to, and contradiction against us,
yet shall not we say with the great Cardinal, Si populus vult decipi,
decipiatur, (If the people will be deceived let them be so,) but shall, to the
utmost of our power, prevent such delusion, and as much as in us lies, guide
their feet in the blessed ways of truth and peace.

And in Order thereunto shall advise them, as we do the like to all others, of
what condition, and quality soever they be, to beware of such as come in sheeps
clothing; and to mark those who make division, experienced in the old Maxim,
Divide and Impera, Divide and Command.

Of such it has been said of old, Quasi vulpes in deserto Prophetae tui, O
Israel: O Israel thy Prophets are like Foxes in the desert: and it is justly to
be feared, that some of that breed, are crept in amongst us.

Of whom that we may the better take heed, we shall continually and fervently
pray to Almighty God, to give us a discerning spirit, and a right apprehension
of the necessary use of his holy, heavenly and saving mysteries, so as we may
not neglect, much less contemn them, but frequently and piously hunger and
thirst after them, and withal that we may not be Cajoled by the selfish ends of
any erring Presbyterians or others, how seemingly-holy soever they be, that we
may be able to discern wolves clothed like sheep, and that he will arm us with
the wisdom of the serpent, whereby we may understand and avoid the subtilties
and deceipts of those foxes, who earnestly desire to prey upon our goods and
intellects, that so being safe under the shadow of our most Gracious Protectors
wings, we may humbly, religiously and joyfully worship him according to his
Word and Sacraments, ascribing unto him all Honor, Power, and Dominion both now
and for ever.

FINIS

