A SERMON Preached in the Chapel of HIS EXCELLENCY THE SPANISH AMBASSADOR, On
the Second Sunday of ADVENT, December 4. 1687.

On which was Solemnized the Feast of St. Francis Xaverius, of the Society of
JESUS, Apostle of the INDIES and Kingdom of JAPAN.

By the R. F. LEWIS SABRA^ of the same Society.

PERMISSU SVPERIORVM.

LONDON, Printed by, Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.

A SERMON Preached in the Chapel of his Excellency The SPANISH Ambassador, On
the Second Sunday of Advent, December 4. 1687.
Caeci vident, claudi ambulant, leprosi mudantur, surdi audiunt, mortui
resurgunt, pauperes Evangelizantur, and beatus qui non fuerit, scandalizatus in
me.

Matt. 11. 5, 6. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead rise to life, the poor have the Gospel preached to them,
and happy is he who is not scandalized in me.


IT is a weighty Doubt which, in this Sundays Gospel, St. John moves by his
Disciples, his Chains not allowing him the liberty to offer it himself to our
Blessed Lord to be resolved; Tu es qui venturus es. Matt. 11.
Are you he who is to come? Are you that Savior whom for so many Ages the
sighing Prophets have asked, gracious Heaven has promised, the longing Earth
expected? An Important Quaere! For what can be of a nearer concern, than not to
mistake our God? Haec est vita aeterna ut cognoscant te solum Deum verum and
quem misisti Jesum Christum. Joan. 17.
It Is that Life everlasting which we hope for, to know by the light of Glory,
our sole true God, and him he has sent, Jesus Christ: And it is the only way
leading to that Life, to know Both here by the light of Faith. But does the
Voice then question the Word that formed and sent it? Is that Head-Mystery
concealed from St. John, than whom a greater Prophet is not born of a Woman? No
certainly: The Eternal Father lately bore in his presence witness to Christ at
the Bank of the River Jordan; Even when yet enclosed in his Mothers Womb he
owned his Lord, and Prophesied of him before he could speak; Lately he
proclaimed him to be the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World;
It Is at the very proposal of this Doubt, that he receives that high Character of
Major inter natos mulierum propheta Joanne Baptista nemo est. Luc. 7. Joan. 1.
More than a Prophet, becoming by this his Embassy also an Apostle: for, Ut
sibi quaerens, illis disceret. Hier ad Aglas.
as St. Jerome observes, St. John proposes the Doubt of his mistaken Disciples,
that they may be instructed by Jesus his Answer. It Is their Ignorance, Non suae
sed discipulorum ignorantiae Joannes consulit. Hill. sup. Matt.
says S. Hilary, that he designs to remove, not his own Knowledge that he would
improve. Christians of England, (if I may call by one Name People of so
different a Belief, of such opposite Persuasions) the Church of God asks in her
Gospel the same Question this Day. Tu es? Are you the Lord? And well she may,
when she finds her Subjects so divided about him. Matt. 24.
Here is Christ, says one, with my Band only. No, There is Christ in that other
different Party, says a Second. He is within, says a Third; this Private Spirit
of mine singles him from amongst the false ones. He was in the Wilderness,
another pretends; there he had been hidden for many Ages, till we lately
discovered him. Thus each Sect, each Party, each Division challenges him. He is
not in all these so different, so opposite Beliefs: for he is not Non enim est
dissentionis Deus sed pacis. 1 Cor. 14.
the God of Dissension, but of Peace and Unity. To correct these various
Errors, to redress so dangerous Mistakes, the true Church, in imitation of St.
John, asks him this Day the same Question, Tu es? Are you the Lord? you that
are Adored by my Children, Worshipped on my Altars?

I know each Sect will answer, Here he is, this is his true Worship which I
pay. But we are never the nearer, some unquestionable and potent Proof must be
offered. Hence our Blessed Lord answered not the Disciples of St. John by a
bare Assertion, I am he. All Deceivers and Antichristian Cheats could give in
that Answer for themselves; each false Prophet was ever the readiest to cry
out, The Word of the Lord, the pure Word of the Lord. Jesus brought Facts in
lieu of Words; and elsewhere assures us, that if he had Si ego testimonium
perhibeo de meipso, testimonium meum non est verum. Joan. 5. 31.
with bare words born witness to himself, and challenged thereupon to be
believed, it ought to have been held as a false one, and not to have been
regarded. This was his Answer, The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise to life. Behold the First Proof and
Mark, Miracles, unquestionable by reason of their greatness, number, evidence.
The poor are preached unto; behold the Second, to wit, those unusual Means
(humanly of no force) used to convert and subdue the World, by poor, silly,
ignorant Men; and again, their refusal of all human Helps toward so vast an
Enterprise. And happy is he who is not scandalized in me; behold the Third, to
wit, those eminent supernatural Gifts and Blessings bestowed on those who
embraced his Poverty and Abjection, so unknown unto, or despised by the World,
which were undeniable Proofs of his Apostles Holiness. We agree all about the
Messiah, convinced by those undoubted Marks now observed; but many are the more
miserable and guilty, whilst they debate about his Doctrine and Law, and so
neither receive the one, nor obey the other. How shall a well-meaning Man clear
these Doubts, and find out his true, Doctrine, Church, Worship, whom he owns to
be his God and Redeemer? Could any of this Churches Witnesses give the same
Evidence and Proofs which Christ gave for himself, our Differences would be at
an end, our Doubts cleared, our Faith settled. Christian Auditors, God most
mercifully offers us many, one I will produce this Day, the great Apostle of
the Indies, and the Kingdoms of Japan, Xaverius. All things concur to move me
to speak of him. First my Text; for I intend to prove, that his Life and
Actions give the same Answer, the same Proofs for the truth of the Catholic
Church, which Christ gave to evince himself to be the true Messiah: So that if
we proceed on those Motives which Christ himself judged the clearest and
safest, we must all be Catholics, or no Christians. Next, the general Devotion
of the pious World toward this great Apostle of our Days, during this Octave
of his Feast, exacts it of me. Again, the Habit I have the Honor to wear, the
Society I am an unworthy Member of, challenges it; a Society he won such a
Credit unto, and reciprocally so valued, that his last Letters from Cochino
into Europe^ own, that he miraculously escaped an infinity of Dangers, by
recommending himself to the Merits and Prayers of the living and deceased
Members of it, that he could make no end when he spoke of the value of, and
love for it which he had; that he should sooner forget his Cum oblitus fuero
tui, societas Jesu, oblivioni detur dextera mea. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2. Ex Card.
Anton. Zapata.
own Right Hand, than that tenderness. In fine, this very Chapel of the
Catholic King forbids me to pass by a Saint of the Royal Blood of Navar, whose
prodigious Success in Apostolical Labors, has gained to Spain the glorious
Character which St. Prosper gave to Catholic Rome, to wit, That Quidquid non
possidet armis Religione tenet. Carm. de Ing.
what Parts of the World her Sword has not subdued to her Empire, her Piety
and Religion has Conquered for Christ.

Maria sancta Matter Domini nostri Jesu Christi, obtine pro nobis ab amabili
filio tuo ut credamus hanc veritatem sine ullo dubio. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 5.
Sacred Virgin, the great Xaverius never begun a Sermon or Catechism, without
begging by your Intercession the Knowledge and Practice of the Virtue he
treated of: In Imitation of him, I beg of your Divine Son, by the Mediation of
your Intercession, that I may even to the most wilfully blind of Sectaries,
show in the Life and miraculous Actions of Xaverius, the most evident Proofs of
true Religion and Piety, to be found only in the Catholic Church; and to the
Members thereof, the Security of their Faith, the Sanctity of their Law, the
Piety of their Practices.

AVE MARIA. OUR Blessed Lord being to give convincing Proofs of his Divinity to
St. John's Disciples, such as by their Evidence should lay them and the whole
Nation of the Jews under a clear Obligation of owning him; drew them not from
the written Law, or any part of Holy Scripture, nor from any Character of
Divinity, or any such self-persuading Truth that appeared in his holy Word,
though uttered from his own Blessed Mouth, or from the Holiness of his
Principles, the Sanctity and Congruity of his whole Doctrine; such Marks could
be comprehended by few, or were the very Points in Debate. He took them from
plain Matters of Fact, exposed to the dullest, proportioned to the meanest
Capacities; for such ought to be the Proofs of a Religion, which excluded none
from its Profession, but opened Heaven equally to all. This was the first, the
grand and certain Motive of Credibility, disposing all to reduce their
Understandings unto a due, humble subjection to Faith, The blind see, the lame
walk, the leprous are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised to life. By
which he left to each Man this Argument to frame; Where such evident Prodigies
are wrought, it is clear, that Gods Hand subscribes to the Doctrine in Evidence
whereof they are brought; But Gods infinite Veracity cannot attest, and his
equal Bounty cannot admit us to be most credibly persuaded, that he does attest
an Untruth; Therefore all that Christ teaches is true, he is then the Son of
God, since he declares himself to be so. In the beginning of his Preaching he
had exposed to the Jews the same Motive, by which he pretended they were to be
convinced of their Obligation of receiving him, to wit, because Hunc enim
signavit Deus. Joan. 6.
his Father Sealed his Commission by which he authorized him to Preach. Some
Ages before the Prophet Isay warned that incredulous Nation, that the clear
Marks by which they should undoubtedly know this great Prophet, should be these
self-same Tunc aperientur oculi caecorum and aures surdorum tunc patebunt; and
saltet tanquam Cervus claudus. Isa. 35.
miraculous Cures of their Sick, their blind, their lame, their leprous. Which
Wonders were so convincing, that our Blessed Lord owned to the Jews, that
although they refused to yield to those Motives which he offered them in his
Sermons, yet they could not without obstinacy refuse Opera quae Ego facio
testimonium perhibent de me, illis credit si verbis non vultis. Joan 10.
a Belief to his Works, which could part from no other Hand but that of God.
Such was their Blindness, yet such also was the Light his Miracles did yield
toward the discovery of the Truths which he taught them, that he acknowledged
they might have found an Excuse for their Insidelity, and without sin have
refused to submit to him, had he not Si opera non fecissem in illis quae nemo
alius fecit, peccatum non haberent. Joan. 15. 1 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 12.
wrought greater Miracles than any before amongst them, to which consequently
no other like Miracles could be pretended to be opposed; and therefore nothing
that might weaken their Divine Authority, to which they could not without a
heinous sin refuse Obedience and an entire Submission. This was the Method used
by Christ, as the most natural and clear, the most capable to conquer Men's
proud, yet dull Minds, and to fasten their unsteddy and wavering Hearts, to
Faith and Religion.

His Apostles used the same. To instance in one; St. Paul challenges a
submissive Belief to what he had Preached, from the Corinthians, because he had
proved himself an Apostle, not only by his Patience, (the true Test of Real and
Solid Virtue) but also by Signs, Prodigies, and Power: And there being some
false Apostles who opposed him, seduced from him his Neophytes, and valued
themselves much on their Preaching and Discourses; he minds them that the Word
of God is not chiefly attested by Words, but by Power. And indeed, as St.
Chrysostom observes, Quando novum a liquid, fit and praecipuum, signa Deus
facere confuevit, praestat qurdam pignora suae potentiae, iisqui legem ejus
accipiunt. Chrysostom. ho. 14. in Mat.
when God declares any new thing, or orders any of great importance, (and such
is, if any, a General Reformation in Faith) he uses to work Wonders, yielding
some pledges of his Power to those who receive his Law. Adjuncta sunt
paaedicatoribus miracula ut Fidem verbis daret virtus ostensa: and Nova
facerent qui nova praedicarent. Greg. hom. 4. in Evang. Ut magnitudinem
promissorum probet magnitudo signorum. Hier. Matt. 10. Infirmos curate, etc.
He joined, says St. Gregory, Miracles to Preaching, that such an appearance
of Power should give credit to Words, and their Works should be unusual, whose
Doctrine was new. That their great Promises, says St. Hierom, should find a fit
warrant in equally great Wonders. Hence we no sooner read that Christ had
chosen Twelve Apostles, and had sent them, but that we find him signing their
Mission with these following words: Health Sick, raise the Dead, cleanse the
Leprous, cast out Devils. And that we might not believe these singular Graces
to attend only the first Apostles, he assures us, without any limitation of
Time or Place, That those who believe in him, (John 14.) shall do the same
Works which He did, and greater than those; that such Signs and Wonders shall
follow those who believe. From this clear Method, and plain Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, and from this following unquestionable Truth, grounded on
God's Goodness and Justice, to wit, That as men are bound to receive the
Doctrine which God sends his Servants to preach to them, so he cannot induce
them into an Error, by permitting it to be proposed in his Name, and upheld by
Prodigies, which may prudently be believed to be wrought by his hand; it
follows,

First, That Miracles are clear proofs by which may be resolved all doubts
about questioned Revelations, and consequently that there be undoubted Marks to
know them by, otherwise they would be useless.

Secondly, That God in his Mercy cannot permit that a man, slily covering his
false Doctrine, pretending to be sent by him, and to teach only what is
conformable to what he has hitherto revealed in holy Scripture, should work
Miracles to uphold Falsehood; and that no one of those who oppose him, should
work greater in defense of Truth. These Principles being thus cleared and
settled, I form this Argument for Christianity against a Jew or Pagan, to which
I crave your attention, that you may observe if it faulters in any part, or
whether it concludes not rather in favor of Us Christians an impossibility of
being mistaken in adoring Christ, and an evident Obligation to it.

If there were such Persons as Christ and his Apostles, and if they wrought
such clear Miracles in Proof of the Doctrine which they taught, as are related
in the Testament; it is certain that all men, sufficiently informed of those
Miracles, are bound to receive their Doctrine as a Truth revealed by God. But
there were such Men, and such Miracles wrought by them, and we are all
sufficiently informed of them; therefore we are all bound to believe and
profess the Doctrine taught by Christ and his Apostles, that is, to be
Christians.

Is this Argument plain and convincing, or no? May not the Major Proposition,
if denied, be easily proved beyond the possibility of a Reply, out of the two
Principles before laid open? As for the Minor, no one can refuse his assent to
it, who considers how those Miracles were wrought, in the sight of great
Multitudes, of which most were declared Enemies to Christ and his Disclples;
how the Records we find them in, were handed to us from Eyewitnesses, without
any probable Objection ever being opposed to their Truth; how they were owned
by the very Enemies of Christ for true Records; how the miraculous Effects of
those Prodigies remain in the wonderful Conversion of the World to
Christianity; how they have equally been sealed with the Blood of Martyrs, the
Virtues and Heavenly Gifts of Confessors; how these Persons, and their
miraculous Works, were prophesied before, and such Prophecies, preserved in the
hands of their Enemies, did point out all the Circumstances that attended their
Persons and Miracles; how (to conclude) no other Religion or Belief was ever
thus evidently attested by the Omnipotency of God, ever thus visibly subscribed
unto with his Hand, and marked with his Seal.

Say, Christians, are these Proofs clear and convincing? Yea, or No? Do you
believe your selves strictly bound under pain of Eternal Damnation to believe
God, speaking to you as plainly, as these Miraculous Proofs convince you, that
it is He who spoke by Christ and his Apostles? Yes, or No? Yes? we may then well
conclude our selves all bound to be Christians, and we may convince Jews and
Gentiles, such as are not wilfully obstinate, of their obligation to become
Prosely^es to our Religion.

But now we are at variance amongst our selves. These Arguments I have offered
convince indeed each of us, that what Christ and his Apostles did teach was the
Truth; that all who can come to the Knowledge of that Faith which they
preached, that Religion which they settled, that Church which they formed, are
bound under pain of Eternal Damnation to embrace that Faith, to profess that
Religion, and to be Members of that Church: but we differ as to the other main
Point, to wit, what Faith they did preach, what Religion they settled, what
Church they formed. To reduce then all dissenting Christians to one Faith, one
Religion, one Church, what can be a more infallible and unquestionable Motive,
than to use the same Argument which moves us all to be Christians? Which I thus
offer, altering only such words in it which fit it to our Case, without taking
away any thing from its force.

If there was such a man as Xaverius, and if he wrought such clear Miracles in
proof of the Doctrine which he taught, as are related in all the Histories of
the Indies, and of Japan, and in his Life written in all Countries and
Languages; it is certain that all men, sufficiently informed of those Miracles,
are bound to receive his Doctrine, as a Truth revealed by God. But there was
such a Man, and such Miracles wrought by him, and we are all (or may be when we
please) sufficiently informed of them; therefore we are all bound to believe
and profess the Doctrine taught by him, that is to be Roman Catholics.

Is this Argument clear and convincing? If so, why are we not Catholics? If
not, how are we Christians, induced to it by the former, which is the very same
with this? All that needs then to be attempted, is only to evince the parity;
which I shall do, first, by exposing in short to your view those admirable
Miracles of Xaverius, which will appear to be the same with those that were
wrought by the Prophets, by Christ, by his Apostles; next, by showing that no
Objection can be made against them, which may not be of equal force in a
Pagan's or a Jew's mouth, in opposition to the Miracles and Prodigies wrought
by the Prophets, by Christ, by his Apostles. If I make good these two Points,
this Conclusion will unavoidable follow: Whoever is a Christian on the true
grounds of Christianity, must also be a Catholic; or if no Catholic, no
Christian.

The Prodigies which God wrought by St. Xaverius were such, that I dare say of
them in general, they are the best Instance the Church of God has had, from
the first Apostles time, of the truth of two Promises of Christ; the first,
Ecce, ego vobiscum sum usque ad consummationem saeculi.
Mat. 28. Behold, I shall be with you to the consummation of Ages; the second,
John 14. The Works which I do, they shall do; and greater than these they shall
do. What greater Miracles can be an evident proof of a Prophet's or an
Apostle's Mission, than to command and alter b Opera quae ego facio ipse faciet
and majora horum saciet.
the Elements, to cure all Diseases, to be obeyed by the mutest Fishes and
wildest Beasts, to dive into Human Hearts and Thoughts, to break even the Bonds
of Death, and restore to Life? Add to these, the Gift of Tongues, and that of
Prophecy. All these Graces St. Xaverius possessed in a large measure, and the
Miracles he wrought are in their credibility as unquestionable, as those we
ground Christianity upon.

To instance in some few, but wrought in such circumstances as remove all
doubt: A great Miracle it was, when after three years drouth the Heavens, at
the moment foretold by Elias, gathered into Clouds, these yielded to his first
request abundant 3 Reg. 18.
Rain: But was it a lesser Wonder, or less Illustrious, when St. Xaverius in
the Island of Vlata, the King whereof with his Bartoli. Afia.
whole People were ready to yield up their Liberty and Life to their Enemies
Chains or Swords, who held them besieged, and by turning the Course of those
Waters which relieved their Town, had already almost killed them with drouth;
when Xaverius, I say, promised those Mahometans and Idolaters a supply of Water
from Heaven, and drew it by his first Prayers in such abundance, as forced
their Enemies to raise the Siege; by which Miracle he converted, with which
Waters he baptized them? Let us reverence the Prophet Elizeus, who turned
bitter Waters 4 Reg. 4.
into sweet, to refresh the Children of the Prophets: but let it not appear
less prodigious in Xaverius to relieve several times in a greater distress
Seamen and Passengers, changing by his Blessing salt Water into fresh, whilst
he broke by his Commands Tursell. Vit. Xav.
the most swelling Billows, stilled the most stormy Winds. The Air, Fire,
Earth, obeyed his voice as readily as the Water; when in the Island of Mero,
the one gathered into Clouds, these were torn with Thunder and Lightning,
followed by most terrifying Earthquakes, to strike fear into the more unmovable
and deaf hearts of the most savage and barbarous Inhabitants. To cure the Sick
was the Power by which our blessed Lord first and chiefly enabled his Apostles
to prove they were sent by God: whoever had it in a fuller proportion than
Xaverius! Behold him in the City of Pasim, surrounded by Three Thousand
Idolaters all stricken with the Plague; who by his first Blessing (after a
fervent Prayer) were all suddenly cured; by his second (after a sufficient
Instruction) baptized. Most remarkable was 4 Reg. 5.
the Cure of the Leprous Syrian General Naaman, who obeying the Orders which
the Prophet sent him by his Servant Giezi, washing himself seven times in the
Waters of Jordan, was cleansed, and perfectly cured. The hand of God appeared
not less evidently at Xaverius's request, when sent for in Japan by an Ulcerous
Lazarus of Noble Birth, unwilling to break off his Catechism, he commissioned
his Companion to go, and cure him, by forming on him the holy sign of the
Cross. But with what Bartoli V. Xav.
luster did this unlimited Power appear at Malaca, when after he had walked
many nights through the Streets of that equally Rich and Sinful City, warning
all, with the ringing of a Bell, and with a loud Voice, to pray for those who
most unhappily perserved in Mortal Sin; finding at last he had but few to join
in Prayers with him, that he might stir in those insensible Sinners, dull to
all the threats of the Justice of God, some sense of his Mercy, he caused all
the Sick to be brought forth, and at once healed them all; at the sight whereof
a Rabbi, and Prince of the Jewish Synagogue, numerous in that City, was
converted. The Fishes of the Sea paid that Obedience they owed to our Blessed
Lord, when after the useless endeavors of a toilsom Joan. 21. 3.
Night, they sill'd the Nets of the three obedient Fishermen: the same blessed
Lord honored his Servant Xaverius with a more illustrious Miracle, when in the
Japan-Sea of Cangaxima, at his Prayer, by his Lord's Power, not only the Nets
and Boats of some Idolatrous Fishermen were filled, but that very Sea, by a
Miracle continued to this day, was stored with abundance of Fish, having till
then been very barren. Did Jesus our God show more patently his Divine Power,
than in casting on the ground with two words, Ego sum, I am He, that wicked
Band which came to lay Hands on his Sacred Humanity in the Garden of Getzemani?
Yet, to verify his own Promise, he wrought a greater wonder by Xaverius, when
the Saint, to protect the newly-converted Christians of Travancor, met
undauntedly a fierce Army of the most Warlike and Cruel Nation of the Indians,
Joan. 18. 6.
the Badages, and with these words, I forbid you in the Name of the Living God
to advance one step further; Moreover, I T^rsel. V. Xav.
order you to go back; first fixed them all by fear, then put them to flight,
being on that occasion first styled, the Great Father, and all the Subjects of
the great King of Travancor being by Proclamation commanded to pay to this
Saint the same Obedience which they owed to their Sovereign. That Power seems
to be the most boundless, which is heard even by those who lie so low, Proc.
Canoniz.
so fast asleep in their Graves, to which even Death it self is not deaf. Never
did God more fully communicate this Power, than to Xaverius; five and twenty
stood on Record, to whom he restored Life: To an Arabian Mohammedan he restored
his Son alive the fourth day after he had been drowned, falling from off a Ship
on full Sails. In the City of Mutan he copied the Miracle Luca 7. 11.
wrought by Christ at Naim, in the sight of the whole Town, which mournfully
followed the Corpse of their chiefest Burgess's Son; in Memory whereof a lofty
Cross was erected on the place. At Travancor he moved that other Nineve,
equally sinful, but more deaf to her Prophet's Summons, to ask what Miracle
they pleased for proof of his Mission; then, at their instance, caused a Body
buried the day before to be dug up, viewed by them, owned even by its
insupportable stench to be half corrupted, and rendered it its Soul. He opened
another Grave at Malaca the fourth day after it had received the dead Son of a
pious Matron, and restored him alive to his comfortless Mother. What shall I
say of that miraculous Gift of Tongues? That it was, which worked the
Conversion of the greater part of those three thousand which St. Peter added to
the Flock of Christ at his first Sermon. Actor. 2. 6.
This Grace appeared most frequently given to Xaverius: In a Sea-Voyage to
Amboyna he was at once understood by the Portugezes, and Indians of most
different Nations and Languages, which moved all these to ask Baptism: But much
more unusual, and no where else that I remember recorded in Sacred History,
Bartoli in Asia.
was that Gift of his, so admired by the Japoneses, especially at Amanguchi, to
wit, by one Answer to satisfy six or seven several Questions, moved to him at
once by those Bonzies in the heat of Disputation. In that Kingdom it was, that
twice a day he catechized the Chinese Merchants in their own Language, he had
never been taught one word of, and so became their miraculous Apostle. In fine,
the Gift of Prophecy, which was in the greatest Prophets but by measure, seemed
wholly to reside in Him: In his familiar Discourses, unobservable to himself,
he frequently foretold future Events, which no probable circumstance could
suggest a guess of; to Voglio, a charitable Merchant, he foretold the day of
his Death, assigning him a clear Signal or Warning that he should have of it;
to most loose Livers he foretold not only their future Conversion, but the
Religious Order they should enter into, and the Crown of Martyrdom they should
at last receive. No Prediction could ever bear a more lasting Miracle, than
that by which he assured the Pilot who brought him out of Japan, that his Ship
should never suffer Shipwreck, but at last, without any Damage or Loss, should
fall to pieces in the very place it had been built: Many Heathens several years
after were converted, seeing this Prophecy so miraculously fulfilled, this Ship
ever coming safe to the Haven through Tempests which Shipwrecked all others
that set to Sail with it, the Pilot never fearing Rocks, Shelves, Quicksands,
Hurricanes, or those ever fatal Typhons of the Tapanian Seas, which he owned he
should not have dreaded the more, had his Ship been made of Glass, knowing it
safe enough under the Protection of so unerring a Prophet. I conclude with a
Prodigy that might seem (so unusual it is) almost to exceed Belief, had not
Fifteen Eyewitnesses on the one hand, and Six score on the other, attested it;
to wit, that for Three days he did at the same time comfort in their Ship those
Portuguezes who had so faithfully shared his Dangers in the Kingdoms of Japan,
assuring them that certainly they should recover their Friends, whom a dismal
Tempest had born away in the Cockboat; and bare those Fifteen others company in
their Cockboat, driven above Threescore Miles from the Ship, guiding and
preserving it in the midst of the raging Billows and the highest Storms, till
it bore up to the Ship again.

Here I stop, to know whether any one can make any Objection against these few,
but clear Instances of a Power Divine ever attending Xaverius, and Confirming
his Doctrine, which would not equally strike at the Miracles wrought by our
Blessed Lord and his holy Apostles. I shall neither omit nor disguise any one.
Let us weigh them, if you please.

Miracles (says one) are wrought in the dark, are believed on the Credit of few
particular Persons, which pretend to have received some unusual Favors, and
creep thence into a Legend, by the help of some superstitious Person, whose
Weakness or Interest inclines to be willingly deceived, or slily to impose on
others. Thus he. But how little can such a Censure reach Miracles, exposed to
the view of whole Towns or Nations, wrought in favor of Mahometans, Idolaters,
Jews, to oppose their Law, and condemn their Practices, owned by the Public and
Sworn Depositions of several hundreds? If these Surmises can blast such
Miracles, wrought to persuade a Religion, of which the Witnesses to them
disowned each Article; how easily on the like ground shall a Pagan or Jew deny,
and even ridicule those which we read in the Holy Gospel.

But what Security, says another, have we, what Evidence for the matter of
Fact, of these Miracles? The same as can be produced for the Miracles of
Christ, or for the Bible in which they are couched. If Eyewitnesses, sworn to
the truth, of unblemished and unquestionable Credit, be a good Proof; such, and
many in number, by the Command of John the Third, King of Portugal, were
produced by the Bishop of Goa, Grand Vicar of Malaca, and all the other
Prelates spread over the Indies. If Historiographers never are refused a Belief
when all agree in the same Narrative, even Enemies, even such whose Interest
would lead them to assert the contrary; If standing Monuments, if the fresh
Memory of an incident of high concern, uncontrouled, delivered by the general
consent of many Nations, be an undoubted and certain Proof; all these jointly
attest these Miracles. This (to instance Witnesses which lie not open to the
least suspicion, being Enemies of the Chapter of Rome) our English Minister R.
Hackluit styles him, The Evangelical Workman, and Divine Master of the Indians,
of whose excellent Virtues and Praec. Argl. Navig. Vol. 2. P. 2. Collect. Var.
Rel. Ling.
miraculous Works the Indian Histories are full. The French Calvinist Tavernier
owns him another St. Paul, the true Apostle of the Indians. Baldaeus in his
Indian History acknowledges him a true Copy of St. Paul, whose Gift cannot be
expressed or conceived, whom in wonderful Works no one is capable to imitate.
The very Mahometans, moved by the certain Fame of his unquestionable Miracles,
built him a Mosque in the Coast of Comorino; the Heathen King of Travancor
built him a Temple, as the Heathens of Lystris in Lycaonia would have
sacrificed to St. Paul, whom by his Miracles they would needs judge to have
been one of their Gods in Human, Actor. 14.
shape; and from his time the Indian Infidels have ever used to swear by him in
most weighty matters. If any one, in favor of the Apostles Miracles, urges the
Conversion of Nations procured by them; how clear a proof is drawn from thence
for St. Xaverius his Miracles? So many Nations have by their evidence been
drawn from a Lewd, Libertine, and Barbarous Life, to the Meek and Chaste
Humility of Christian Conversation; so that I may confirm his Miracles with
that Observation of St. Augustine concerning those which the Apostles are said
to have wrought, That if any one would obstinately deny those of St. Xaverius,
it were a far greater Miracle that without the working of any he should have
converted an infinity of Mahometans, Jews, Gentiles, in places so remote from
any Christian Power, where there was none to countenance or protect those he
brought over from their Established Religion to the Christian Relief and
Practices; so as to baptize with his own hands above twelve hundred thousand
Infidels.

Some one may, perhaps, object, That such Proselytes were all rash and
inconstant Barbarians, who suddently took up a new Faith, and as easily parted
again with it, having Entered themselves into a Religion of which they scarce
knew more than the Name. Whatever place this Cavil might find in other
Conversions, it has none in these; not one small Village that Xaverius
Converted, ever abandoned the Faith so miraculously received, except the only
Town of Tolo, which yet soon resumed it, and ever since constantly retained it.
Such was the servor of Xaverius's Neophites, that many Slaves he had Christened,
I^ piscaria Boubours. V. X. lib. 6.
especially amongst the Paravais, having recovered their Liberty, chose to
forfeit it again by returning to their old Masters, rather than to lose the
opportunity of frequenting the Sacraments. Almost all the Inhabitants of the
Island Manar, by an illustrious Martyrdom, consigned to Posterity their Zeal
for Religion, equal to the most generous Instances of the Primitive Church of
Christ, near the whole Nation being destroyed by their Neighbor Heathen Kings,
whilst not one would disown his Baptism, the very Mothers producing their
Children, and alleging their Baptism as a Title to Martyrdom. In Congoxima, a
Kingdom of Japan, he left but a hundred Christians, without the help or comfort
such new Converts seemed to stand in need of from some Priest, yet not one fell
off from his Faith, though pressed to it by a most severe and bloody Persecution
raised against them by the Bonzies; their Blood and good Example of truly
Christian Virtues, swelled up the number of Converts to Four hundred, and
obliged their King by a solemn Embassy, to ask some Priest from the Viceroy of
the Indies, who should Confirm so miraculously established a Christianity.
Neither were his Converts only inconsiderable, unlearned and stupid People; He
Baptized several Crowned Heads, their Families and Courts; He had the comfort
to see Princes divested of their States and Personal Wealth, following him with
Joy thus naked for Christ into Banishment, and that in Japan, a Country where
Superstition was raised to its greatest height.

What can be objected more against these Miracles, which if allowed, would not
equally disprove those which the Apostles wrought? If we give belief to the
one, how can we refuse it to the other? If these be of force to make us
Christians, why shall not those convince us as unavoidably, that we must be of
that Catholic Religion which Xaverius, Legate a Latere of the Bishop of Rome,
and Priest of the Society of JESUS, did profess himself a Member of, and
Converted so many Kingdoms unto? If any one puts this difference betwixt
Xaverius's Miracles, and those of Christ and his Apostles, that these were
foreseen by Prophets, whose Writings were preserved in the Hands of the very
Enemies of Christ; that most pregnant Proof for Christian Religion, equally
supports the Catholic Cause and Xaverius's Miracles; for not only Xaverius's
Aunt, a Religious Virgin, of eminent and approved Virtue in the Monastery of S.
Clare at Gandia Magd. Jasse, by Letters persuaded the Saints Father In proc.
Canon.
not to withdraw him from the University of Paris, as he designed, on the
account of the great Expenses he put him unto there, because (writ she) he is a
chosen Vessel of God, designed to be the Apostle of a new World; but the very
barbarous Indians of Travancor acknowledged him their promised Apostle,
according to the ancient Prophecy carved by St. Thomas on a Pillar of
Freestone yet standing there, which assured them, that White Men should come
from another World to teach them the way to Heaven, and to restore to its
luster decayed Christianity; when the Sea, then Eighty Miles distant, should
reach that Pillar, which it did few Years before Xaverius came thither; and
Xaverius in particular was foretold by the Proto-Martyr of the Indies, Peter
Couillan, at the moment that stuck with Darts he shed by many Wounds his Blood
for the Name of Christ, Fifty Years before Xaverius's Arrival into the Indies,
Thirteen before his Birth. Now such Prophecies are the most infallible Tests of
Miracles and Missions, because they take off all whatever Habemus propheticum
sermonem certiorem voce delapsa de coelo. 2 Pet. 1.
suspicion of private Ends, which incredulous Men are willing to fasten on
actual Miracles, as St. Augustine observes; which made St. Peter own such
Prophecies to be more certain than a Voice coming down from Heaven.

One further Objection some may offer at, to wit, That these Miracles were
wrought only in proof of those common and general Certiorem dixit non meliorem,
non veriorem, etc. Aug. Ser. 115. in Nov.
Articles of Christian Religion, not in debate amongst those who have the Name
of Christian, and therefore are no Proof of the Catholic Faith, as to those
Points which are not owned by Dissenting Sectaries. I had not believed this
could have been objected, had I not met with it even in the studied Writings of
those who pretend to Sense, and own, I believe, no small share of it, but
employ it unsuccessfully in a bad Cause, against the very most authentic
Declarations from God. Could not the Jews have returned the very same Objection
to our Blessed Lord and his Apostles Miracles, and said they were brought only
to prove the Sanctity of the Law which he owned that he came not Non veni legem
solvere sed adimplere.
to break or repeal, but to fulfill. Again, If Miracles may thus be wrought in
Confirmation of some Points only of a Doctrine, false otherwise in others and
erroneous, how happens it, that no one ever, who was not a Catholic, happening
to be in those Countries by the occasion of Reformed Plantations, could work a
Miracle to persuade those Infidels of the truth of Christian Religion. But to
clear this important Point, there is not an Article of Catholic Belief, not a
Part of Catholic Practice, which this Saint has not proved by evident
Miracles, to be revealed by, and acceptable to God. To instance in few.

If Devotion to the blessed Virgin, and the Rosary in particular, be a part of
Catholic Belief and Practice; this Saint Confirmed it by an evident Miracle,
when at Meliapor giving his Beads to a Merchant then Sailing off, he said to
him, 'Twill not be of small use, be but devout to the Virgin Mary: For the Ship
splitting on a Rock, this Merchant and some few others reached it; then on a
Plank committed themselves again to the merciless Waves, to escape certain
Death by Famine: He said his Beads, the only comfort or hope then left him
being in that Devotion, and Xaverius's Prediction; when on a sudden, after a
short Ecstasy, in which he seemed to Converse with S. Xaverius, he found
himself alone on the Shore, without knowing where he lost his Companions, who
perished all in the Stormy Waves.

If Invocation and Litanies of Saints be our Practice, he has proved both to
be acceptable to God; for a little Prayer Book, containing only the Saints
Litanies, being left by him with the Princess of Ekandono, applied by her to
her Lord, suddenly recovered him from the Agony and Convulsions of Death, and
restored him to perfect Health.

If we Honor their Relics, 'twas his Reliquary the Saint put usually in his
young Neophites Hands, when he sent them to cure the Sick, or to cast the
Devils out of possessed Persons, both which they scarce ever failed to perform by
applying it.

Do we value Holy Water? (on the account of the Holy Churches Blessing, and the
Prayers said over it) Armed with it alone he Encountered those Tigers, who in
numerous Troops came out of their Forest in the Island Sancian, and ever
devoured those Portugueses who ventured out of their Trenches: Casting it at
them, he so put them to flight, that they have not since been seen in that
Island.

Do we believe God is Honored by our Vows, but most singularly by the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass? It was by vowing a certain number of Masses, that this
Saint in a moment conquered the stubborn Heart of a Great Man at Malaca,
recalling him from an impious Despair the whole City was equally scandalized
and afflicted at, and disposing him to a due Contrition, a firm Confidence in
the Sacred Merits, and precious Blood of Christ, a happy Death.

Are Pilgrimages to Places of particular Devotion in use amongst us, as
approved by the pious Practice of all Ages and Christian Nations? This Saint
undertook one of Fifty Miles to the Sepulcher of St. Thomas, and God approved
his Devotion by a Revelation of his Divine Will, touching what he asked to be
directed in.

The Gift of Prophecy he often made use of, to call upon the Prayers of the
Faithful for the Dead at the moment they departed this Life, at a vast distance
of Place, as in particular for John Galvan, and at another time for John
d'Araos, two Portugueze Merchants.

If we Honor the glorious Trophy of our Redeemer's Cross, he planted it in
almost all the Towns and Highways of the East Indies, and of several Kingdoms
of Japan. Such Miracles were wrought in favor of those who resorted to them,
that in their presence they might adore their Crucified Lord, as raised a
tender Devotion in all those pious Neophites toward that glorious Standard,
the Pledge of Jesus's Victories over Sin and Death; So that the Christians of
Amboyno, Besieged in their Castle by the Javares, a Heathenish and Barbarous
Nation, unconcerned for themselves, only sought to withdraw from the Savage
Fury of their Enemies, that Cross which Xaverius had arbor'd there, well
knowing that Jesus could equally be Honored or Insulted over in his Cross. They
covered it with Cloth of Gold, and hid it under Ground, then opened their Gates
to their Enemies; who having sought in vain the Cross, could not prevail with
any one, even of the weaker Sex or tenderest Age, to discover where it lay;
though most of them were maimed, many killed for that Refusal.

I conclude with an Observation of St. Augustine on Miracles; which he says are
wrought either per publicam Justitiam, or per Lib. octog. trium Q Q.
signa publicae Justitiae; that is, by a Virtue which God publishes to the
World, or by the Signs, Sacraments, Practices of Piety and Virtue. That is,
whenever a Miracle is wrought, it is certain, either that the Person, or that
which he uses or would persuade to, is very Holy, and that God declares it so.
Take whether you please: Do these Miracles wrought by Xaverius prove him a
Saint, a Servant of God, who had intimate Communications with his Lord, was
highly favored by him? If so, can any one be persuaded, that so holy a Man used
not his sincerest Endeavors to attain the Knowledge of the true Faith and
Religion, or that God, who so extraordinarily favored him, refused to reveal
unto him so important a Truth? Can we conceive a Man of a Sanctity so approved
by Almighty God, to have been an Idolater, a Man of an unsound Faith?
Superstitious, Ignorant, Deluded? If you had rather conclude the Means he used
in the working of these Prodigies, were holy, and that God declared them such,
it follows, That all Catholic Devotions and Practices, and those Points of
Belief from which they naturally flow, in which all Sectaries dissent from us,
are very holy, and confirmed by the Divine Authority of Miracles.

I must confess, I cannot conceive what a Thinking Man can yet object to these
Miracles wrought by Xaverius, whereby he may lessen the Obligation laid on him
to betake himself to the Bosom of that Catholic Church, to the Sincerity of
whose Doctrine only, to the Piety of whose Practices God gives so miraculous an
Approbation as all these Prodigies make up!

Can it be objected by any particular Man, that he himself has seen no one of
like Miracles? This would be as plausible a Plea for an Atheist against the
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles. Herod himself, if this be received, is not
guilty for mocking Erat cupiens signum Videre.
our Blessed Lord; he never saw him work a Miracle, though he much desired and
sought it from Christ himself. It Is the same Impiety to require a fresh Miracle
for the truth of Catholic Belief, after these so publicly wrought by Xaverius,
as to exact the like in proof of Christ's Divinity, after those which he and
his Apostles wrought. And considering the Conversions in the greatest part of
the new World, effected by Xaverius's Miracles, I cannot but say to such an one
in St. Augustin's words, Accepimus Majores nostros visibilia miracula sequutos
esse, per quos id actum est ut necessaria non essent posteris. -- Nec jam nobis
esse dubium debet iis esse credendum qui cum ea praedicarent quae pauci
assequuntur, se tamen sequendos populis persuadere potuerunt. Aug. de ver.
Relig. cap. 25. Quisquis etiam number quaerit prodigium, magnum est ipse
prodigium, qui mundo credente non credit. De Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8.
We are taught that our Ancestors followed visible Miracles, after which none
others are necessary to guide us: We cannot doubt but that we ought to believe
those Apostles, who Preaching such things as few can conceive or reach, yet
persuaded whole Nations to follow them: For, what Doctrine it was Xaverius
confirmed by his Miracles, is a known thing, and out of debate. Whoever after
such, requires yet a Miracle, is to me himself a great Prodigy, who refuses to
believe, what a World does not doubt of.

I know some will object, That should an Angel come from Heaven to teach them
otherwise than the Gospel does, we ought even not to return him any other
Answer than Anathema; That Miracles are then only to be considered and valued,
when the Doctrine in favor whereof they are wrought, is known to be true and
sound. This had been an excellent Plea for the Scribes and Pharisees against
Christ. The Jews had a positive Command to believe no Worker of Miracles,
(Deuteronomy. 13.) that should teach them a Doctrine contrary to what they had received
from Moses; they were bid, in Doubts of that nature, to have their recourse to
the High Priest, and they forfeited their Life who refused to obey him. The
Scribes, Pharisees, Priests judging of the Miracles of Christ by his Doctrine,
condemned both, as when he Cured upon the Sabbath Day, and reproached him as a
Magician, for casting out Devils in the Power of Beelzebub. Did Christ alter
his Method? Did he prove the reality of his Miracles by the soundness of his
Doctrine? No; but charged the Jews with the Sin of Incredulity, (Joan. 15.)
chiefly for not submitting themselves to him, for not embracing his Doctrine on
the account of his Miracles. Does this Method of Christ contradict the Law of
God? Not at all; for Christ opposed neither Moses nor his Law, but was foretold
by the one, accomplished the other. The Jews gave a false Sense and
Interpretation to Moses, and the other Patriarchs and Prophets Predictions,
they pretended Christ mis-expounded them; this was the Debate, in which the
Jews were obliged in Conscience to own Christ, to take from him the true Sense
of the Prophecies, convinced by his Miracles that God sent and Commissioned him
to Teach. So in our Circumstances, should any Person own (as Antichrist will)
that he opposes himself to Christ, or a new Doctrine to his established one;
it is clear, that no seeming Miracle could in reason move us to follow such a
Person, the Predictions and Miracles of Christ would fence us against all the
deceitful Temptations such a Person could offer. But when the Question is, What
Doctrine Christ did teach, (to the decision of which Question no Miracles
wrought heretofore by Christ can be of any use) when evident Miracles are
wrought by those who are in a possession of the Doctrine delivered by Christ and
his Apostles, such Miracles as Christ himself promised they should be empowered
to work, who should believe as he had taught, to plead against these, that the
opposite Doctrine is true, therefore those Miracles are of no force; and that
Miracles are of no use, but when the Doctrine they are brought to uphold is
owned and followed: This Answer has less (if possible) of common Sense, than
he who should maintain, That an excellent Antidote is of no use, but Regula
Credend. per J. K.
for such as have not taken any Poison, as are out of all danger of any
Infection: Less than that Criminal, who having heard clear, positive and
unquestionable Evidences brought in against himself, should confidently say in
his own defense, That he cannot indeed on any score reject or disprove the
Witnesses, yet that the Judges cannot but see that they are not to be heard or
minded, because he is innocent, and no Witnesses ought to be regarded, who
depose against an innocent Person.

Thus I have showed how insignificant all the Objections are, which may be
offered against the undoubted Authority of S. Xaverius's Miracles: One Scruple
I will yet remove, which I have known raised in some; it is this. If the
Authority of these Miracles be so weighty, how come so many Learned Churchmen
of our Persuasion not to yield to it? I could be willing to pass by that Quaere
without an Answer, which must reflect somewhat severely on many; but I must not
forget my meek Savior's sharp and severe Replies to those Scribes and
Pharisees, whose Credit with the People, and Infidelity, put an equal stop to
the Conversion of the Jews. How many Scribes, Pharisees, or Jewish Priests do
we read of, Converted by Christ? Scarce a Gamaliel, a Nicodemus, and those also
Concealed Disciples, Night-Friends: the immediate Voice of Christ, his Hand,
and a heavy one, were necessary to Convert a Saul. Xaverius affords a plain
Instance in the Case; amongst the Twelve hundred thousand which he Instructed
and Baptized, how many Brachmans, Bonzies, and such blind Guides, that Lead
others into Errors, were reckoned? But one only, or two. Then sure to teach
Errors is that Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is so seldom pardoned, as to
be said Matt. 12, 32.
never to be. Why then, thick is that Cloud which People ever raise before
their Eyes who impugn Truth; and Error defended once with Heat, is commonly
maintained with an incorrigible Stubbornness: No Miracle can equal such Peoples
stubborn Insensibility, and alter them. It was such Scribes and Pharisees which
Christ styled an Evil and Adulterous Generation, to whom a Matt. 12. 39.
Generatio prava and adultera signum, petit and signum non dabitur ei.
Miracle should not be given. Many, it is true, were wrought in their Presence,
but of which not any one was given them, that is, no such interior plentiful
Grace was allowed them, as would so far move their stubborn Souls, as to submit
to Truth made out by such Prodigies. Besides, two other main Lets stop such
People in the pursuit of Truth; which appeared in the following Passage.
Xaverius had convinced Two hundred Brachmans of the Errors of their Law, and
the Sanctity of the Christian, they had owned both, all of them in one
Assembly; The Saint hoped this Effect of Gods Grace would prove a mighty
inviting Example; But he no sooner pressed these Men to own the Favor God had
done them, and demand Baptism, than he discovered his Error. Their general
Answer was, And what will the World Bouhours l. 2. fol. 156.
think of us, who have so long plausibly taught so opposite a Religion? And
next, who will maintain our Wives and Children? Alas! these are still the two
unconquerable Difficulties of many at this day; that are like to those
Disciples of the Learned Plato, who (as St Augustine observes) Probe sciebant,
knew well that their whole Religious Frame was the Work of Man, occasioned by,
and followed on Human Designs: But a long and public Custom had nursed them in
it; it was established by Law, and could not easily be Ex Consuetudine tamen
publica quae quoniam Legibus erat confirmata convelli non poterat and ne
populos offenderent, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 8. and 12.
taken to pieces; in fine, not to offend the Crowd, they still sacrificed to
those Idols which had no being but by the mere invention of men, by a
Lay-Scripture of National Laws. And can such men's Examples be of any force with
conscientious men, or prove a let to their Conversion? But so much the more
are to be admired the Riches of the Goodness of God, and the force of his
conquering Graces, whilst we see daily amongst us those in no small number, who
discerning at last the true Religion through the mist of those false Aspersions
and disfiguring Misrepresentations under which it had ever been concealed from
them, remove all those strong Prejudices instilled with their first Education,
deeper sunk in by a studious Application, slight the bitter Invectives and
severer Raileries of those whose Errors they relinquish, abandon plentiful
Livings, overlook all their ancient Interest, the Esteem of their Friends, the
Kindness of their Relations, the Favors of their greatest Supports, follow
with Fidelity through Infamy and good Fame God's gracious Call, rejoicing with
the two Apostles, that they are judged worthy to suffer such disgraces for his
Holy Name. ONE such Example ought to counterpoise a thousand, whom Human
Interest, a darling Credit, the Spirit of Opposition and Pride, have wedded
unchangeably to their Error.

Whoever, having well weighed the Authority of these Miracles of St. Xaverius
as here discussed, will yet refuse to receive the Word of God from this his
Apostle, whose Mission is by them so unquestionably proved; and will still
reject the Catholic Faith which he offers, because he pretends obscurity and
difficulty in some of her Mysteries: With whom can I rank such, but with those
Jews who seigned to seek with Zeal and Concern the true Faith, saying to
Christ, How long will you afflict our Soul with suspense by these obscure
uncertainties? If you are the Christ, Quousque animam nostram tollis? si tu es
Christus dic nobis palam -- Loquor vobis and non creditis -- Opera quae ego
facio in nomine Patris mei, haec testimonia perhibent de me, Joan. 20.
say so plainly to us. What answered our blessed Lord to these Hypocrites? I
speak clearly and distinctly enough, yet you believe not. But where, O Lord,
where do you in plain and express words tell them you are their expected
Messiah, and the Son of God? The Miracles I work in the Name of my Father (by
my Servants) are a sufficient witness to me, (to the Truth which I teach by
them.) It Is in vain to seek for a clearer; we have none for the general
Articles of Christianity. I conclude then, that all who act reasonably in the
choice of their Religion, and own those grounds to be the surest which our
blessed Lord proposed as such, and will not bottom their Salvation on any
other, must declare themselves necessarily Catholics, or no Christians.

Pauperes Evangelizantur; the Poor have the Gospel preached to them. St. Hierom
observes, That Poverty in Effect, and in Spirit, is the twofold Character of a
true Apostle, and the most unquestionable proof of Divine Wisdom and Power in
him, who thus qualifies those he singles out to preach his Doctrine, and blesses
their endeavors with a success which could not possibly attend their condition,
so seemingly despicable, if a Divine Power supplied not their want of all those
Materials which Human Wisdom would judge absolutely necessary for so great a
Work. It follows, that the most surprising of those Miracles which accompanied
the Apostles Preaching, was the Conversion of so great a part of the World from
Errors and Vices: From Errors, sucked in with the first Milk, established by
Laws, confirmed by Custom, strengthened by Superstition, proportioned to the
short sight of Human Sense and Misapprehensions, fitted to the universal
Corruption of Manners, sympathizing with the most general and violent
Inclinations, fostering the most pleasing Sins. From Vices, authorized by
Example, heightened by Evil Habits, followed with Passion, changed into a
second Nature. And this by Men who were to teach a Doctrine that soars above the
reach of Reason, that contradicts our Senses, that requires a contempt of what
vicious Nature most covets, a free choice of what she most dreads, or repines
at; and offers on all hands a severe Check to that loose Liberty all men are
naturally so fond of: By Men who promised not in this Life any of those
so-valu'd Advantages of Fortune, but rather threatened with Crosses,
Afflictions, Losses, Miseries, Separation from Kindred, Relations, Friends;
Contempt, Persecution, Banishments, Chains, and those other severe Trials which
the Gospel proposes as a necessary Test of the sincerity of those who undertake
to serve God: By Men, in fine, not countenanced by Great Ones to whose Ends
they served not, not supported by the Interest of Friends, not considerable by
their private Fortunes, not upheld by any siding Faction; but Poor, Abject,
unknown to all, Single, Proclaimers of harsh Truths, and appearing at first
under the odious Character of Unknown Strangers, superciliously condemning the
ancient Laws, Customs, Devotion, Faith, Religion of the Land. This, O this is
the great Miracle, not exposed to the least Jealousy of Forgery, to any
suspicion of Deceit. All these Circumstances attended Xaverius's Mission: He
was sent to convert a newly-discover'd World; the which savage Cruelty, blind
Superstition, and all the odious Vices which Human Souls and Bodies are capable
of, held enslaved. With reason did Paul the Third, sending St. Xaverius to the
Indies, mind him that God (whenever he employs any one in a Work that surpasses
Human Forces) supplies him with a strength capable to effect whatever is
impossible to Nature; with reason he warned him that he was sent to tread on
the footsteps of the first Apostle of the Indies, St. Thomas. What
Preparatives, think you, are made for so vast a Conquest? He has one Evenings
warning allowed him to put himself in readiness, and his whole Equipage is his
Breviary. Truly, O Lord, these strange Methods of yours Abscondisti haec a
sapientibus and prudentibus, and revelasti ea parvulis, Mat. 11. Contemptibilia
primo elegit Deus ut confunderet eos qui apud homines magni habentur, 1 Cor. 7.
are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed to little ones; thus still
you choose those first who are contemptible, to confound those whom the world
esteems great. This Man, whose Employ is to destroy Idolatry in one half of the
World, to root out Vices, to alter the Laws and Customs of Nations, to oppose
himself to all the Corruptions of Nature and bad Habits, to change the Belief
and Practices of Courts and People; observe him well in his first or last
Missions, and promise, if you can, any success to his Undertakings. After that
for some time he bestowed his Labors on the Reformation of the Christians at
Goa, his first Mission is to Comorino, 600 miles distant; thence he passes to
the great Kingdom of Travancor; Piscaria is his next station; whence he brings
the Light of the Gospel to the Molucan Islands, and thence to those of Moro.
Some of these Nations were so barbarous, that they either furiously shot with
Arrows, or treacherously poisoned, such Strangers as unhappily entered their
Country; and fed on the Bodies of their nearest Relations: Others, parched by a
scalding Sun, so barren as scarce to yield a small part of the Necessaries for
Life: All, wholly Idolatrous, or acquainted with the sole Name of Christianity,
abandoned to the foulest Vices, barbarously Savage, or most stupidly Dull.
These Xaverius attempts to conquer; alone, without the help often of an
Interpreter, or any knowledge of their Language; able only (without a Miracle)
to yield some mute Services to their Sick; without any Provision to relieve him
in most pressing wants; without any Human Help or Comfort; wandering through
Deserts; crossing Valleys swelled with floods; breaking his way through thick
Woods, without any other Guide besides God's Providence; in Hunger and Thirst,
in Sweat and Labors, in Dangers from savage Beasts and fiercer Men. If he
projects the Conversion of Japan, what Difficulties does not offer a Voyage of
many thousand miles, by Seas beset with Pirates, exposed to merciless
Whirlwinds, full of unknown Quicksands and Rocks; no Christian Power even known
or heard of there, to support him, or protect those whom he shall convert. When
Landed, if he goes toward the Royal City Meaco, I invite you to view this
Great Champion, fitted for his Mighty Achievements: Behold a poor despicable
Man, bare-headed and barefoot, in ragged Clothes, and that in a Country where
Poverty is held such a Disgrace, and so heavy a Curse of Heaven, that they
believe the Poor out of a possibility of being Happy even in the next Life;
with one Companion and an Interpreter, himself knowing but few Words of their
Language; carrying on his Back a Pack of Church-stuff; and for his whole
Provision a little Rice dried by the fire. Thus he continues two months Journey
through Mountains of Snow, such that even in Towns no House has there any
Communication with another, but by covered Galleries; endeavoring in every
little Town to preach the Gospel, beaten and kicked out of each, dragged by the
feet out of two, to be stoned to Death, if a sudden miraculous Storm had not
rescued him, putting his Enemies to flight. Behold, being lost in a Wood, he
accepts to carry the Portmanteau of a Japonian Gentleman, only to have him for
Guide, and follows him well mounted a whole day, sweating under his double
Burden, till in the Evening he is found by his Companion and Interpreter
fainting under it, half dead, his Feet and Legs wounded all over with Brambles
and Thorns, and covered with gore Blood. Is not this a sad Original of a poor
contemptible Wretch? Can any thing be possibly performed by so slighted a
Creature, in such hard Circumstances? Humanly speaking, Nothing. Yet this Man
converts a considerable Part of different Kingdoms, subdues Kings and whole
Courts, has whole Towns following him into the open Fields to hear him Preach
from a Tree; is offered Divine Honors by the chiefest Bonzies of those
Kingdoms; even, if he will accept them, Churches, Altars, and Sacrifices; this
man converts the lasting Errors of many Ages, breaks inveterate Customs,
destroys (there, and in other Kingdoms) 40000 Idols worshipped in that degree of
violent Superstition, that those blind Infidels offered to many Human Blood,
and sacrificed their very Children; subdues Hearts, Barbarous, Inhuman, Lewdly
loose, and prodigiously Profane, to Meekness, Humility, Chastity, Devotion; so
that Isay's Prophetical Promises made to the Catholic Church, were then
perfectly accomplished: The Children of Aliens shall build up thy Walls, and
their Kings shall serve thee: Thou shall suck the Aedificabunt silii
peregrinorum murostuos, and Reges eorum ministrabunt tibi, Is. 60. Suges lac
gentium, and mamilla Regum lactaberis, Isa. 49.
Milk of Nations, and the Breasts of Kings shall nurse thee. And after such an
Apostolical Conversion of Nations to Christianity, can any one wish for a more
unquestionable, a more convincing Proof of the True Faith, and Admirable
Virtues of Xaverius?

But observe now with me, How highly he values that strange disproportion of
his Condition and his Employ! what a Poverty and Abjection, what Sufferings he
courts! the most certain Mark of a true Apostle. It Is the first evident Proof
which St. Paul gave of his Mission, a complete Patience; that is, which loves
the Burden that it bears. One night Xaverius sleeping in In omni patientia, 2
cor. 12.
the same Chamber with Father Simon Rodriguez (who first deserved ^mplius,
Domine, amplius.
in Portugal the Name of Apostle, and bequeathed it to his whole Order) was
observed by him with a most pressing eagerness to cry out often, More! Oh more,
Lord! Though often importuned, he would never open to Father Rodriguez the
occasion and meaning of those words; till taking his last leave of him at his
Embarquing for the Indies, he owned that God had then offered him a large view
of vast Seas swelled with Billows, torn with Tempests, covered with Shipwrecks;
of deserted Islands, of barbarous Wildernesses, and every where Want, Poverty,
Hunger, Thirst, Wearisomness, Dangers, Persecutions, Sweat, and Toil; thus
discovering to him what he was to suffer for his holy Name. Behold a double
Picture of Xaverius; a double Prospect, the one of his Life, the other of his
Mind; that full of Sufferings, Wants, Miseries; this of a high value for so
holy though so heavy a Cross. What was the whole Treasure of this Legate a Latere
of the Pope, sent to a whole New World? An old patched Cassock, a Mat to lie
on, a little Box of Writings and Catechisms, a Crucifix, a Breviary, a
Hair-shirt, Ironpointed Chains, and Disciplines. Behold the whole Inventory!

From the beginning he courted Want and Misery. His first perpetual Vow made at
Venice, in the hands of His Holiness's Nuncio Veralli, was of Poverty. Next, to
prepare himself to his first Mass, he withdrew to Monselire near Padua, for
forty days, where he took up in a forlorn Hovel, deserving well the Name he
gave it of his Bethlehem, where exposed to all the injuries of the Air, he lay
on the cold ground, begging the little Bread he eat. His following station was
at Bolonia, where though he labored incessantly the whole Day, and prayed the
best part of the Night, yet he refused the pressing Charity of those who
offered him their Table, and accepted only what Bread he begged from door to
door. The Count of Castagnera enquiring of him in the King's Name what he
likely would want in his long Voyage to the Indies, urging him to use freely
his Master's Royal Bounty, had this answer from him, My Lord, he wants nothing
who stands in need of nothing; I owe much to His Majesty's gracious care for
me, but much more to my God's Providence; you will not dissuade me from relying
on it, and on it only, till it abandons me. On Shipboard he refused the
Viceroy's Table, and lived of what he begged in the Sip, where he cooked the
poor Soldiers and Passengers Meat, washed their Linen, served day and night
the Sick, laying them in the Chamber and on the Bed assigned for him, sleeping
himself ever on the Cables. When from Goa he begun his first Mission of 600
miles, all the Viceroy could oblige him to accept of toward it, was one pair
of Shoes to keep off the excessive heats of burning Sands.

I know some, less acquainted with the secrets of God, will ask, what need
there was of ambitioning so naked a Poverty? Why there should be so much
Virtue, where there appears so little Discretion? Why Human helps should be
cast away, as if it were not enough to obey that Scripture, If you abound with
Divitiae si asfluant, nolite cor apponere, Psalm. 61. 11.
Riches, fasten not your heart to them? Such men have forgot our Blessed Lord's
Instructions given to his Apostles, when he first sent them to preach. They
are, I fear, as little disposed to seek true Perfection, as the young man in
Matthew 19. 1. who counseled by Christ to sell all, give it to the poor, and
follow him; not able now to pretend Ignorance, steptback, and dejected at the
very thought of abandoning all, withdrew from Christ. I know that is a harsh
word to those that live at ease, and would willingly compound with God for some
part, when he advises the giving up of the whole. And since it was a principal
part of the Godly Reformation by suppressing all Religious Houses, to abolish
the very Memory of Voluntary Poverty, no wonder if the Teachers in a
Congregation grounded on Principles so opposite to the Counsels of Christ,
cannot produce One in their numerous Multitude who would ever serve God gratis,
and professedly follow this, or any other Evangelical Counsel. No; God would
not permit that so holy an Imitation of Jesus should make a part of their
Sheeps-cloathing. But sure those who discover not in this twofold Poverty a
Divine Virtue, have forgot the Condition those Men of God lived in even under
the Old Law, of which the World was not worthy; they forget in the New the
Poverty Circuierunt in melotis in pellibus caprinis, egentes angustiati, etc.
Heb. 11. 37.
of Jesus from Bethlehem to Calvary; from the poor Hovel he was laid in the
Manger of: to the borrowed Sepulcher he was laid in; they forget that the Happy
in the first Rank amongst Jesus's Disciples are the Poor of Spirit, who by this
Virtue have a just Claim to Heaven; they forget the Apostles first, left not
only Unlawful Gains, and the Publican's Counter, but also both their Boat and
their Net, that is, the enjoyment of present Possessions, and the hopes or
desires of future Purchases; and then were imitiated by all the faithful
Believers, who laid at the Apostles feet without any reserve, (the sin of
Ananias and Saphira) after so holy a Profession, the value of all they had.
These, these our Apostle did imitate, not without an infinity of Christian
Motives. He believed Christ teaching him that Riches and Wealth are Thorns, and
it would have been impossible to have overrun all the East as he did, in a way
strewn with Thorns. His Life was short, only ten years being allotted him to
preach the Gospel to above twenty Kingdoms or Nations; he was then following
the Apostle's Advice, to redeem time because the days are Ephesians. 5. Etiam cum
detrimento corporalium commodorum ad quaerenda and capescenda bonaaeterna,
spatia temporis comparare, Hom. 1, and 10. Ex. 50, Ipsi mundo omnes divitiae,
omnes dignitates, and universarum cupiditatum materiae refundantur, and sancto
beatoque commercio ematur Christiana Libertas fiantque Filii Dei de paupertate
divites, etc. Ep. ad Demet. A^ctius terrena constringunt adepta quam concupita,
-- Illa velut extranea repudiantur; ista velut membra possidentur, Ep. 34. ad
Pauli^.
evil; that is, says St. Augustine, to withdraw the least part of it from the
anxious cares of acquiring, increasing, preserving Earthly Goods, that all may
be bestowed on the seeking and attaining Eternal Bliss. He was to break the
Chains of others; and consequently, first to secure to himself a full Liberty;
following that advice of St. Prosper, Let the Children of God return to the
World its Riches and Dignities, the food of all our sensual desires, and by a
holy and blessed Trafique buy Christian Liberty rich in their Poverty, and the
contempt of transitory things; which, as St. Augustine observes, it is easier to
slight when dispossessed of them, than not to love whilst we enjoy them: Those
we easily reject, as not belonging to us; these we hugg, as our own members and
parts of us. For these reasons Xaverius, by the help of God's Grace, most Poor
in Effect, Poorer in Spirit, measured several times the whole Extent of the
Indies, content in his Sufferings, happy in his Wants, till in the Island of
Sanciano he died, as he had lived, as poor, as abandoned as an Apostle, in an
open Cottage, on a poor Mat, destitute of all Human Help or Comfort, having
nothing of the Earth to leave but his Body, the readier to take possession of
that Kingdom of Heaven to which he had so good a Title of Evangelical and
Apostolical Poverty.

Beatus qui non fuerit scandalizatus in me. Thrice happy is he to whom the
Poverty, the Abjection, the Cross of Christ is not a Scandal that frights from
his Service, who dares seek in them the Gifts of God; in what an unmeasurable
proportion does he receive them! Witness Xaverius, who might have wrote from
almost each part of the Indies what he writ from the most miserable Coast of
Piscaria, where Nature seemed to have forgot to provide for the Necessities of
the Inhabitants. If there be true Joy possessed on Earth, it is that which they
experience who labor here; I hear one say sometime, O Lord, moderate your
Favors here below, or take me to your self; it is too severe a Punishment thus
to love, and to live thus far from you. These Joys his Heart then swelled with,
when he single and alone, had all the Sick of that Coast to Tend, all the
Afflicted to Comfort, the Ignorant to Instruct, the Sacraments to Administer to
all; so that he seldom could allow himself three Hours to rest. These interior
Joys ever attended him at the holy Altar, and when he was at his Meditations,
often forced him to rip open the Clothes that covered his Breast, and by the
application of cold Water to moderate those Divine Flames that consumed his
Breast, ever sighing out amorously, Enough, O Lord, this is more than frail
Nature can support. Even when all the Powers of his Soul were oppressed with
Sleep, that habitual Flame raised such pious Dreams, as forced from him devout
Expressions of his tender Love for God; when awake, his Soul was so entirely
possessed with that Love, that Rays of Glory frequently environed his Face,
bright Glimmerings of that pure Flame within; which drew so violently his Soul
toward Heaven, as to heave frequently his Body from the Earth, especially at
that admirable Sacrifice of Love, the Holy Mass. No wonder he should pass the
whole Night, when on Land, at the Foot of Altars in Churches, or in some Grove,
where he could give a larger scope to his warm Affections. No wonder, when at
Sea, he ever should be absorpt in Contemplation from Midnight to Sunrising;
during which time the Seamen never seared a Storm; That besides the two Hours
of fixed Meditation which he stole from his daily Apostolical Labors, even in
these his Mind should be so lodged where his Love ever dwelt; that his God
never was entirely ecclipsed from his sight. If then Virtue, according to St.
Augustin's Definition, be nothing else but well ordered Love; Definitio brevis
and vera virtutis est ordo amoris. De Civit. l. 15. c, 22. Ille dilectionis
nobis ordo servandus est, Deum principaliter diligamus, and propter ipsum and
in ipso ea quae diligenda sunt quantum ipse praecipit diligamus. l. 3. 10. V.
cont. Apocal. 3. 18.
how great was this Saint's Virtue, that put so great a distance in his Love
betwixt God and all things else, that they all vanished frequently from his
Thoughts, whilst God only ever reigned in his Heart? If the Second Duty of
Charity be to love all things else for Gods sake, in view only of the Report
which they have to him, and in the Measure he requires, as St. Prosper
observes; how perfect was the Love of Xaverius for God, when for his sake he
embraced so tenderly what Nature so much loathes, so much abhors? As Toils,
Want, Disgraces, Dangers, Pains, Death; and even hated all what Sense is
charmed with, or what natural Inclinations most affect, whenever it failed that
they opposed the increase of his Charity. This, this is the surest Test, the
infallible Proof of a Divine and truly Apostolical Mission, that richest of
Gods Gifts, that Flaming Gold so prized in the Revelations, the Love of God.

The Second unquestionable Mark by which, if we may believe our Blessed Lord,
his true Disciples are to be discerned, is their tender Love for their
Neighbor, a passionate Zeal for In hoc cognoscent omnes quod discipulimei istis
si dilectionem habueritis ad invicem. Joan. 13.
his Salvation. In this Virtue Xaverius perfectly Copied the great Apostle of
the Gentiles. His Voyages over most dangerous Seas, and his Journeys ever afoot
by Land, in the pursuit of such Sinners as wandered from God, led him so far in
Ten Years time, that he might with a far flower Motion have gone often round
the Globe of the Earth: Yet in the Transports of his Zeal he designed (as his
Letters witness) not only to Preach the Gospel to the vast Empire of China and
Tartary, but after he had subdued those to the sweet Yoke of Christ, to return
thence by the North into Europe, that he might retrieve those Lost, recover
those Separated Heretics, and gather them again within the Pales of that One
Sheepfold of the Catholic Church, where they should hear again with due
Submission the Voice of their own only Shepherd. Nothing could fright his Zeal,
not the three Shipwrecks he had suffered, not the Danger he had run, like
another St. Paul, for three Days and Nights exposed on a narrow Plank to the
mercy of the most boistrous Waves, and loudest Storms. He often dreamed before
he was designed for the Conversion of the new World, that he carried an Indian
on his Shoulders; he groaned under that Burden. 'Twas not One, but a Million of
them he bore after in his Heart, weeping often most bitterly when he reflected
on the almost inevitable danger of Eternal Misery they unhappily were exposed
unto. He highly valued the Conversion of any one single Soul, rightly
apprehending its worth, Redeemed with the most precious Blood of his Savior,
and capable to love and possess God for all Eternity. Hence he suddenly engaged
himself in a long Sea-Voyage, only to use that Opportunity of winning to a true
Repentance One single loose Liver who was on Shipboard. To retrieve three
Soldiers from their wicked Life, he consined himself for a whole Lent to their
most uneasy Company Day and Night. He sent word to the only two impenitent
Sinners he had left at Ternate, that whenever they should let him know that
they had a thought of Repenting, and altering their lewd Life, he should
instantly repair to them from the utmost Extremity of the East, to favor their
pious Disposition, and direct them in so happy a Design. He seemed comfortless,
when he observed that some Merchants, led by Covetousness, had discovered
Countries, to which his Zeal for the Instruction of the Ignorant and Conversion
of Sinners, had not yet brought him. As long as he found Children to Catechize,
Europeans to Preach unto, Indians to Instruct, unmindful of himself, he joined
Nights unto Days in those Apostolical Functions, without allowing his wearied
Body and decayed Spirits the least refreshment of Food or Rest: Then, and then
only, he conceived himself, with the blessed Martyr Ignatius, Nunc incipio esse
discipulus Christi. S. Ig. Epist. ad Romans
to begin to be a Disciple of Christ, a Member of the Society of JESUS.

All other Virtues ever wait on their Queen, Charity. They were in Xaverius in
as large a measure: His Humility was so unfeigned and great, that he never
blamed the Stubbornness, Blindness, or other ill Dispositions of those Souls,
in whose Conversions his Endeavors were frustrated, or who opposed the progress
of the Gospel, but sincerely persuaded that his Sins put the whole obstruction
to Gods Graces, condemned himself to severe Penances for their Expiation. Though
the Character of Legate a Latere from his Holiness, seemed to add such a Luster
to his Mission, and on several occasions could favor his Apostolical Attempts,
yet his Humility never permitted him to publish it, or to use the Power it
conferred, save once not long before his Death; when he conceived that nothing
else could open him an Entrance into the Empire of China, which the Avarice and
Envy of Alvares, Governor of Malaca, had shut up.

His Obedience was so ready, so punctual, so nicely exact, that he consulted
his Superior and Father, St. Ignatius, on every occasion, even at that vast
distance, and never swerved from his precise Orders; acknowledging that the
least Letter of the Alphabet, the least i, which in Latin signifies Go, dropped
from Ignatius's Pen, should move him to abandon, without the least reluctance,
his greatest Enterprises for the Glory of God; though at the same instant the
largest prospect of certain Hopes, the fairest appearance of Success, should
Court his Stay; yet that small Letter should lead him with Joy to any part even
of the unhabitable World.

His Chastity was so Entire, that his Confessors judged him to have preserved
that tender Virginity unsullied, without the least Blemish. So well guarded,
that when the Enemy not daring to assail him awake, attempted by immodest
Dreams to disturb the innocent Repose of his Soul, the violent motion of his
Body in rejecting from him those Phantomes of tempting Objects, and the more
eager reluctance of his Soul, made him bleed.

To omit the Particulars of his other Virtues, I shall conclude with the Maxim
and Practice which gave them their first birth, favored their growth, and
preserved them in their full luster. This great Principle of a Christian Life
he had learnt from St. Ignatius at his first Conversion, it had from that
moment been deeply engrave in his Memory, and the sense of it in his Heart:
Tantum proficies, quantum tibi ipsi vim intuleris.
Your Self-denials, your Mortifications, the violence you use in curbing your
own Inclinations, are the measure of your advancement in Gods Service. He knew
that Sacrifices have ever been the chiefest part of Divine Worship, and that no
Victims are so acceptable as a mortified, Cor contritum and humiliatum Deus non
despicies. Psalm. 18.
a contrite and humble Heart. He had learnt from our Blessed Lord, how the
Kingdom of God, that especially of his particular Graces and Favors possessing
and guiding our Hearts, said therefore by Christ to be Regnum Dei intra nos est.
within us, Regnum Dei vim patitur and violenti rapiunt illud.
suffers violence, and those only attain to it, who use such force; that who
loves his Soul will lose it, and who hates his Soul seemingly, by a severe and
hard usage, will preserve it to Eternal Life; and esteemed those happy, with S.
Augustine, Si male amantris tunc odisti, si been oderis, tunc amasti; felices
qui custodiunt odiendo perdant amanda. Aug. Tract. 51. in Joan.
who support by that holy hatred, what by an indulging love they had destroyed;
he knew that such Mortifications serve to stop those violent Inclinations which
bear away our Souls from all attention to our Spiritual and Eternal Concerns,
riveting them, as it were, in Temporal and Sensual ones; that such Affections
being by those exterior checks driven back into our Hearts, increase mightily
the strength of a Soul moving with united Forces toward God. Therefore in
imitation of Gods holy Servants, with a S. Paul Perimat and amittar usum ejus
scilicet perversum quo inclinatur temporalibus ut aeterna non quaerat. De Doct.
Chr. l. 3. c. 16.
he chastized his Body with frequent bloody Disciplines; with St. Benedict, he
tore his Flesh with Brambles and Thorny Rods, Per cutis vulnera eduxit a
corpore vulnus mentis quia voluptatem traxit in dolorem. G. G. l. Dial. c. 2.
by those wounds of his Body applying a Salve to those of his Mind, and driving
away dangerous Pleasures by Pains. With holy Judith and virtuous Anna, he
covered himself with a rude Hair Shirt, and passed his Life in long continued
Watching and Praying; with Gregory Nazianzen, he lay on the bare Ground, or
Cables, or when most at ease, on a Matt. 'Twas by the same Principle he acted,
when aplying his Mouth to the purulent Ulcers of the Sick he attended, he
sucked the filthy Matter out of them. Led away by the same, he refused passing
near the Castle of Xavier, to see his loving Mother before he begun his Mission
to a new World. And our Blessed Lord confirmed by a continued Miracle, how
acceptable the Sufferings and Toils of Xaverius were; for a large Crucifix to
be yet seen in the said Castle, the Side, Arms and Feet, remaining yet covered
with a Crust of Blood, did from those Wounds yield abundance of it, whenever
Xaverius was in imminent Dangers, or extraordinary Toils in the Indies. That
Year the Saint died it issued every Friday, to that which fell on the Second of
December An. 1552. the Forty sixth of his, the last Day of his Life on Earth,
and the first of his, Happiness in Heaven.

But if Xaverius during the Course of his Missions, to the end of that of his
Life, was ever attended by those singular Graces from Heaven, which authorized
so many different Nations to give him the Title of Apostle; God by a singular
Providence equally glorifying himself in this Saint after his Death, has added
such an unquestionable Proof of his Mission, that no false Prophet nor Impostor
was ever followed beyond Life by any shadow of it.

Both Worlds know the frequent Miracles wrought, the innumerable Blessings
obtained through his Intercession from Heaven. His Body left on Earth entire,
after it had been buried near three Months in quick Lime, and after at Malaca,
above five more in dampish Earth, bleeding afresh several Years after when hurt
in the Foot, ever yielding a sweet Perfume, is a sufficient Instance, how
glorious in the sight of God his Soul is in Heaven. If Elizaeus's his Bones
were said in holy Writ to Prophetize after Death, by reason of the Miracle
wrought at their touching a dead Corpse to which Life was restored; may I not
say, that in Boubours To. 2. V. X.
Xaverius's dead Body still dwells an Apostle, so great Prodigies having ever
waited on it. A raging Plague ceased suddenly at Malaca, when it was received
there; Rocks split and divided themselves, to make way for the Ship it was
conveyed in; All the Sick who saw it when brought to Goa, received their Health
at that instant. And ever since, this Apostle, has favored with miraculous
Graces obtained by his Intercession, all Nations in the old and his new World,
which have brought even Mahometans, Jews and Infidels to his Sepulcher, to view
that miraculous Body of a more miraculous Soul; which must force all, that
shall stand to that most impartial Trial which our most Blessed Lord recommends
to us, By their Fruits you shall know them, to own Ex fructibus eorum
cognoscetis eos.
Xaverius an Apostle most highly favored by Almighty God with most
unquestionable Miracles, and equally prodigious Virtues.

You are then still, great Saint, you are to this Age, to our Kingdom an
Apostle; the Miracles you wrought when on Earth, and obtained since, still
Preach the truth of that Catholic Religion which you Planted in so many
Kingdoms. We are all forced to use those words to you, which Nicodemus spoke to
our Blessed Lord when he owned him as yet but a Prophet, Scimus, Rabbi, scimus
quia a Deo venisti Magister. Joan. 3.
We know God sent you to Preach and Teach; for no one can do those Wonders
which you work, if God be not with him. Obtain, great Saint, obtain for this
Nation a due Acknowledgment of this Truth, a pious Assent to it. This Kingdom
has a particular Title to your Protection, since the Alms which your holy
Father St. Ignatius gathered here, enabled him to win himself into your
Acquaintance and Favor, and so to work, under God, your total Conversion to a
pious Life. One Favor more then a Neighboring Kingdom that obtained the like
through your Intercession, minds me to crave through your Merits, by the joint
Prayers of this pious Assembly. Marguerit of Austria, after twenty years
Barrenness, obtained from Heaven a Son, who sits now on the Throne of France,
and she ever owned, that you were the Saint by whose Intercession she sought
chiefly that great Blessing for her and her Kingdom. These three Kingdoms
expect a like Happiness from our Most Gracious and Pious Queen; Permit not,
great Saint, that your devout Clients be disappointed in their Expectation of a
Prince: May we owe to your Intercession so great a Blessing; a Prince, who may
equal in Learning the great Alfred, in Piety St. Edward, in Prowess the Third
and First of that Name, in Victories Henry the Fifth, the Seventh in Wisdom;
that is, in a word, who may inherit soon his Royal Father's Virtues, and late
his Throne.

Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam.

FINIS.

