A Sacramental-Question Concerning ASSURANCE.

A Sacramental-Question CONCERNING ASSURANCE: How far Necessary to A Worthy
Communicant, Practically Answered, in a SERMON, Preparatory to The
Lord's Supper. Saturday, March 2. 1699/1700.

LONDON, Printed by J. Brudenell, for John Fawkner, at the Talbot, on the
Bridge. 1700.

TO THE READER.
HAving reason to believe the following Discourse was of some Use to several
who heard it, to comply with their Desire, and in hope of doing good to Others,
it is now Published. If it be objected, That the Style is too Negligent and
Copious; and the same things expressed over and over in different Phrases, and
sometimes the same repeated, which may be well enough in Preaching to a mixed
Auditory, but more exactness should be used in Printing; I have only to say,
That I apprehend the same Pulpit Style will best answer my End, as to the
Service of those, for whom I principally intend it.

May I find Mercy of the Lord to be Faithful, whose I am, and to whom I am
devoted! If any are brought upon their Knees, seriously to bless God, for what
they Heard, or shall now Read, I shall more heartily Rejoice in it, than to
have the Approbation and Applause of all the Witty People upon Earth, who have
not Wisdom enough to know themselves, and consider their latter End, and
prepare for Death and Judgment, which cannot be without seeking to Jesus
Christ, as the only Redeemer and Savior of Sinners, to reconcile us to God,
and save us from Wrath to come. His Grace, and Mercy, and Love, is above all we
can think. Oh be Humble and Thankful; adore Him, and admire His rich, free, and
glorious Grace, but abuse it not!

J. S.
London, April 17. 1700.
A Sacramental-Question, concerning ASSURANCE, How far necessary to Worthy
Receiving.
1 Cor. XI. 28. -- But let a Man Examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread. --


IN this Verse you have it plainly supposed, That it is a Christian's Duty to
partake of the Lord's Supper. The manner of the Performance is regulated, but
the substance of the Duty is presupposed, viz. to Do this in remembrance of
Christ. He ought to eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, and show forth
the Lord's Death this way; only take heed not to rush hastily, without previous
Self-Examination.

^. That solemn Preparation is necessary to the right performance of this Duty,
may be argued from the Instance given of one special part of that Preparation,
The due Examination of our selves. Let a Man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that Bread. -- It Is a Christian's Duty to partake of this Solemn
Ordinance: He must not do it rashly and unpreparedly: And it is one special
Part of necessary Preparation, to Examine himself.

Quest. But some will be ready to say, I have Examined my self, and endeavored
to know the true state of my Soul, but I cannot come to a Determination;
Whether I have Sacramental Graces in truth, and am partaker of Life from the
Spirit of Christ, or no; and consequently, how is it my Duty to come to this
Ordinance for Spiritual Nourishment? After all my Examination, I cannot
positively conclude, that I am in a state of Grace; at least, I have many
Doubts and Fears; I have no Certainty, no Assurance of my good Estate toward
God. May I nevertheless come? Is it my Duty, while I have so many Doubts and
Difficulties unresolved, and am so far from full Assurance and Joy? This I
shall endeavor to Answer, by considering how far Assurance is necessary to our
Worthy Receiving: You will have my Thoughts of it, in the following Particulars.

Answ. First, That in the diligent use of God's appointed means; it may
ordinarily be known, Whether you have truly Repented of your Sins, and do
unfeignedly Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ: And so, whether you are sincere
in your Christian Profession, or no. By Self-Reflection, and comparing your
selves with the Word of God, endeavoring to prove your selves, and making use
of the Assistance of Books, and Ministers, with Prayer to God, to enable you to
discern the true state of your Case, you may ordinarily come to the knowledge
of your selves, and your Spiritual Condition. I speak not of the grossly
Ignorant, or of such as live at that rate of Licentiousness, that they cannot
but know they are Impenitent, or may easily know it on a little Reflection, but
of such as doubt, and have some reason for it.

Secondly, He that endeavors not to know the true state of his Soul, that with
a prepared Heart he may join with his Brethren and Fellow Christians, at the
Table of the Lord, lives in continual Sin. He that will not endeavor to come
Worthily, and accordingly Examine himself, that he may be disposed, and fitted
for this Ordinance, he continues to disobey an Order of Christ. It Is not
enough to say you have no Assurance, or are afraid to come without it; that
will not excuse you from Sin. Many keep off, on such pretenses, lest they
should Eat and Drink Unworthily, and so Sin: But consider not the Sin and
Danger on the other hand, of staying away, upon such grounds as will not excuse
them before God. Consider therefore what is the faulty cause of your Ignorance
of your selves, and of your true state toward God? Is it not Sloth and
Carelessness, Negligence and Remissness, Earthly Cares, or the Hurry of Worldly
Business? And if the doubts of your Sincerity arise from a faulty Cause, you
must not plead those Doubts, as a sufficient Excuse for not coming to the
Lord's Table.

There is a faulty Carelessness in some good Christians, that they do not
observe and record the Workings of God's Spirit upon their Hearts, and so the
time of His Love is not taken notice of, nor remembered. To allude to what God
says to Ephraim, Hos. xi. 3. When Ephraim was a Child, I taught him to Go,
taking him by the Arm, but he knew it not, did not observe it. You must
reflect, enquire, and consider what God has wrought in you, and done for you:
Whether you have been brought, humbly to acknowledge your Sin with Shame and
Sorrow and Self-abhorrence, seeing your need of Christ, and His Grace, have
been persuaded thankfully to take hold of the Covenant, to accept the offered
Mercy of the Gospel, and yield your selves to be the Lord's. We lose much of
our Comfort, for want of bringing our Doubts to a Determination; and this
through Laziness, Sloth and Carelessness. It Is true, the want of Assurance will
not argue a Man under the Power of Unbelief, but it shows the Weakness of
Faith; and we ought diligently to clear it up, whether we are in the Faith, and
whether Christ be in us, or no; and whether with all our Hearts we love Him?
Which, for the most part, may be known, as well as our Love and Affection to
Persons and Things, in other Cases. If we reflect and bethink our selves, we
may ordinarily know, that we Love.

Are you not willing that Christ should be your Savior, and bring you to
Heaven, in God's appointed way? Do you not make Religion your great Business in
this World? Is not your being accepted of God, in Christ, your great Concern?
Is there any thing in all the World your Hearts are set more upon, than that
you may be Saved by Jesus Christ, and not be found Hypocrites at last? Would
you not account the Certainty and Assurance of this, a greater Privilege, than
to be Owner of all the Riches and Treasures of the Earth? Is it not your
heaviest Burden, that you fear you shall fall short of Heaven? And you dread
nothing more, than to be mistaken about your Interest in the special Love of
God? Whence have you these Apprehensions, these Desires, this Choice? Can the
Devil ever persuade you this is from corrupt Nature; or, that that you don't
love God, when you would give all the World to be assured of His Love? You
abhor every thing that you think will displease him: There is nothing he
requires, but, by His Grace, you are willing to comply with: You would fain
love, and serve, and enjoy Him better: There is nothing would better please or
more rejoice you, than to please Him more, and to be more conformed to His
Image, be filled with His Spirit, and live to Glorify Him more in the World:
There is no Lust that you would indulge, but desire to mortify; and are
accordingly diligent in the use of Christ's appointed Means, to subdue
Corruption: It Is your Trouble and your Complaint, that you are not more Dead to
Sin and the World; you feel the remainders of Ignorance, Pride, Selfishness,
Carnality, Unbelief, Deadness, Dullness, etc. You groan under 'em, as a
continual Burden; and would rather be rid of 'em, than of any outward
Affliction whatsoever. Does not all this argue true Love to God and Holiness;
true Love to Christ, and Hatred of Sin? And can you not infer from hence, What
he has done for you, and wrought in your Souls? Oh bear not false Witness
against your Selves! But labor, by such Reflections, to know your State, that
you may come to the Table of the Lord, with Joy and Praise.

Thirdly, As it is ordinarily some Sin that keeps a Man unresolved, and in the
dark (which does not excuse him from the Duty) so for a Man to mistake his true
State, and doubt and question his Integrity toward God (if he be Sincere) even
that Doubt is his Sin.

He ought to endeavor to know himself, and make a right judgment, and then
come to receive the Seal of the Covenant. His mistake in judging of his own
Case, is faulty, and will not excuse him from the obligation of judging more
truly and justly of himself. Upright Christians are obliged to judge of
themselves according to Truth, what really they are, and so to receive what
belongs to them, as the Children of God, and Members of Christ, within the Bond
of the Everlasting Covenant.

Fourthly, It Is a common and dangerous mistake (by which many are deceived) to
place the nature of Saving, Justifying Faith, in the Assurance of God's Love;
and the Knowledge and Persuasion that we are Pardoned, and Justified, and
Accepted of God: Whereas, many truly Believe, and have Faith unfeigned, and
shall inherit Eternal Life, who yet doubt and fear, and dare not say all this;
and others may be persuaded that is their Case, who did never yet Believe in
Christ, with all their Hearts: The one shall be ashamed of their Fears, as the
other of their Hopes.

To place Faith in a mere Assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel, is one Extreme;
to place it in assurance of my good Estate toward God, that is another. There
is a Blessedness pronounced to such as Mourn, and are Poor in Spirit, and
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness: They may do so without Assurance. The
Unbelief that Condems, is not the not Believing we are already Justified;
therefore the Faith which Saves Men, is not the believing that they are
Justified. He that believes he is Justified and Pardoned, must be so, before he
can believe it. By him all that believe are Justified, Acts xiii. 39. We have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified, Gal. ii. 16. Assurance
follows Faith: In whom after ye believed, you were Sealed with the Holy Spirit
of Promise, 1 Ephesians. 15.

All that hear the Gospel Preached are commanded to Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ; but all are not commanded or obliged to believe their Sins are already
pardoned, and that they are in a justified State; then many would be commanded
to believe what is not yet true. And to believe my Sins are forgiven, that they
may be forgiven, is very absurd: And yet, if Faith be necessary to
Justification, this will follow. To believe I shall certainly be Saved, is not
justifying Faith. I must be so justified before I can believe it, or be assured
of it. The Scripture makes a plain difference between these two, 1 John v. 13.
These things have I written to you, who believe on the Name of the Son of God,
that ye may know ye have Eternal Life; that is, have it in the Seed, and Root,
in the Earnest, and Beginning of it. They might have said, we do this already,
if Faith consist in believing I am Pardoned, and shall be Saved. And many that
have had Assurance, have lost it, as well as many, who have true Faith, may not
have reached Assurance. I say, many have lost Assurance who have not lost their
Faith; unless a Man may be a Believer and no Believer several times in a Year.
There are several States, Ages, and Ranks of Believers; some whereof are yet
short of Assurance. And must not the Child be allowed to be a Child, before he
can speak for himself, and say he is one? How many of the Children of God must
we then turn out of Doors, whom he receives and loves?

Some of the first Reformers, who fell into this mistake, were Eminent for
Faith, and Holiness, and Joy; and by what they found in themselves (speaking
what they felt) they described Faith, by such a full Persuasion of the Love of
God, as many real Christians have not attained; by such Assurance and Joy of
Faith, as they themselves experienced: But the Lord knows who are His, when
many of them do not know it themselves. It Is the Reality and the Sincerity of
our Faith that is necessary to Salvation, not the certain Knowof that Sincerity.

I dare not come, says One and Another, to the Table of the Lord, because I
cannot Believe. I have not true and saving Faith. I cannot Believe: But I would
ask such, What is it you cannot Believe? Don't you Believe the Witness given by
Christ, in the Holy Scriptures, to be true? Don't you Believe Him to be the
true Messiah, the only Savior of Sinners? That he has Ability and Willingness
to save to the Uttermost, All that come to God by Him? That He is Constituted
and Empowered, by Office, to do this, as the Christ of God? Don't you Believe,
from your Hearts, that he is able to Reconcile you to God? That His Blood can
Cleanse from all Sin? That you are lost and undone without Him? That if ever
you are Reconciled, Pardoned and Saved, it must be by Him? Don't you desire
this above all things? Are you not willing to take Him as your Savior and Lord
in all His Offices; to be taught by His Word, to be guided by His Spirit, to be
governed by His Law, to depend on His Righteousness, Sacrifice, and
Intercession, for all your Hopes of Acceptance with God? Don't you look for all
your Supplies of Grace and Strength, to conquer Temptation, and perform every
Duty from His Spirit, as the Purchase of His Blood? Don't you Believe all the
Promises He has made, shall be fulfilled? and desire nothing more than that
you may have a Share and Interest in the Blessings of the New Covenant,
purchased and promised by Christ? And from your very Souls, are willing to be
His, upon any terms; so that, there is no Sin but you would be free from,
rather than keep; and accordingly are faithful and constant in following after
Holiness.

You cannot deny this; and yet, after all, you will say, you have no Faith,
because no Assurance. Does not all this argue true Faith? You want the
Knowledge of your true State; but you don't want true Faith in Christ.
Therefore you ought to come to the Table. Nay, though you have not conquered all
your Doubts about the great Truths of the Gospel; and the Life to come; and the
Mediation of Christ; if yet you have such a prevailing Persuasion of those
Truths, as brings you to consent to the Covenant of Grace; to take God for for
your God, and Christ for your only Savior; and the Holy Ghost for your
Sanctifier and Guide; His Law for your Rule, His Promise for your Security, and
the Heavenly Glory for your Rest and Happiness; resolving, by the Grace of God,
to forsake all that stands in Competition; you are True Believers, and ought to
come, to Eat of the Children's Bread.

Fifthly, There is a vast difference, as to the Lord's Supper, between the Case
of an Hypocrite, who does not know himself to be one, and the Case of a
sincere, real Christian, who does not know himself to be Sincere. You must not
imagine these two Cases to be alike: The one has true Grace, though he discern it
not, and consequently has a right to the Blessings of the Covenant, and is
bound to know and discern his Title, and so come and partake of the Privileges
that belong to his State. But suppose another Professor comes to the Lord's
Table, who has no true Repentance, or Faith, and so his Heart not right with
God, but he is under the Reign, Power, and Dominion of Sin. He has, as yet, no
right to the Blessings of the Covenant; but is bound to know his true State,
that he may be brought to Repentance; it is a greater Sin for him do demand, and
take what does not belong to him, than to tarry away for a while, in order to
his Recovery and Preparation: For, if such a one comes, he Hypocritically
professes that Repentance, Faith and Devoutness to God, which he has nothing
of, but is secretly an Enemy to God and Holiness: He comes and claims the
Childrens Bread, with a Lie in his Mouth and Heart, against the Holy Ghost; and
he takes the Name of God in vain. There is a great difference in this Case,
from that of a doubting Christian, who truly Believes, and cannot say he is
assured of it. There is a further difference, in point of Comfort; for a real
Christian, though he come with many Doubts and Fears, yet there are some secret.
Testimonies of the Love of God; there is some Influence of the Holy Spirit to
bear up his Hope; which is much better than all the groundless Joys of
Hypocrites, in a false persuasion of the Goodness of their State.

The Penitent, Upright Believer, who wants Assurance, has a right to the
Ordinance, and is accepted with God, though he cannot affirm it; or say, that he
unfeignedly Believes in Christ, and Loves God with all his Heart, yet he hopes
it is true: He is willing to be the Lord's on his own terms. It Is the favor of
God in Christ that he values, and seeks above all things: This he aims at;
nothing else will content him; he would rejoice in it, more than in any Earthly
Prosperity, if he could attain more certain knowledge of it. Is not such a one
accepted of God? And supposing a competency of knowledge about the nature of
the Sacrament, (to understand his Work, and to discern the Lord's Body,) he
has a right to come; though his timorous Scruples may keep him off a while, yet
they cannot deprive him of his Right, or disoblige him from his Duty, to show
forth the Lord's Death this way. He does truly consent to the Covenant, and
should come to signify that Consent, and receive the Seal of the Covenant.

And remember this, That the Covenant of Grace is mutual between God and You;
so that, from your Consent to be the Lord's, you may infer that He is Your God:
Your choice of Him is an Evidence of your Interest in Him by a
Covenant Relation. The Relation is mutual, equally, and at once, on both sides;
therefore, as soon, and as long, as you can say, Lord, I am Thine, and I desire
to abide, continue Thy Servant, I would not depart from Thee. As soon, and as
long as you find within you such a Disposition of Heart, you may be assured
that God is your God, and will be your God for Ever, and Guide unto Death.

Sixthly, There is a true discerning of our Faith and Repentance, which is
short of Assurance, upon which we may act, though we are not fully certain. There
is true Love to Christ, that is short of delighting and rejoyceing Love; even
desiring and mournin Love: Though there be not the Witness and Seal of the Holy
Spirit to give Joy, there may be so much knowledge of our good Estate attained
in a way of Duty, as to prevent trouble and terror of Mind; even a good Hope,
through Grace, short of Certainty, and full of Persuasion.

And, if a Man may not act upon some good Hopes (though he have not an assured
certain Judgment concerning his State) a great deal of God's Service in the
Christian Church would be laid aside. For Instance, He only that is Penitent,
should profess himself Penitent; only he that truly desires Christ and His
Grace, should say he does desire it; only they that have received Saving Grace,
should give God thanks for having received it: And yet, if none should confess
Sin, and profess Repentance, but such as knew certainly, and with Assurance,
that they are truly Penitent; and if none should beg Grace, with a Profession
that they desire it, till they have Assurance of the truth of those Desires; if
none should give Thanks to God for Redemption, Effectual Calling,
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, but such as have full Assurance,
that they have received all these; there would be little Confession, Prayer,
and Thanksgiving in the Christian World. Is it unlawful to say, I Believe,
while there is a mixture of Unbelief? We must let alone a great part of our
Religion, if we may not act upon Hope, short of Assurance. And if all doubting
trembling Christians should be debarred the Lord's Table, till they have
Certainty and Assurance, there would not only be very few to partake of it; but
we should exclude some of the fittest, the most acceptable, and most welcome
Guests at that Feast of Love. Therefore we may have many Fears, and Scruples,
yet if Conscience, enlightened by the Word of God, do not positively condemn us,
(though upon Self-Examination, it does not clearly and fully absolve us,) we may
come in Hope.

Seventhly, Though you have not yet attained Assurance of the Love of God, and of
your reconciled, justified State; yet, by waiting on God, in the use of His
Holy Ordinances, you may expect and hope to attain it. You may and ought to
wait for, the Communications of His Grace and Love, in the use of all His
Appointed Means; and it is one End and Use of The Lord's Supper, to strengthen
weak Faith, and to help doubting Christians. You have there a Sign, and Seal of
the Righteousness of Faith: The Blood of Christ is there represented as shed
for the Remission of your Sins: The Benefits of Redemption are offered to you
in particular; and you are called to apply them to yourself, as if your Names
were mentioned. You are there called to profess your Acceptance of Christ, and
the offered Salvation of the Gospel; and to surrender, and give back your
selves entirely to be the Lord's. This Feast was not appointed only for those,
who are the most perfect Christians, and highest in Grace; but for the Relief
and Supply of your Spiritual Wants: You come there not only to be Thankful for
what Grace you have received, but to receive more. What would you think if one
should tell you, You must not eat, till your Hunger be first satisfied; or not
come to the Fire, till you are first Warm; or not take Physic, till you have
recovered your Health? The Seals of the Covenant are appointed for our greater
Confirmation, that the Heirs of the Promise might have more abundant
Consolation and Joy: And, in this Ordinance, our Savior Speaks more solemnly,
more, particularly, and more pathetically to us, for the help of our Faith,
than by the Ministry of the Word. What is spoken in general, by the Preaching
of the Word, is here particularly applied to individual Persons; to support
Weak and Doubting Christians, as well as to confirm the Joy of their Stronger
Brethren. You may as well neglect hearing the Word, and pray and hope for
Faith, as expect Assurance, and neglect the Lord's Table. The Primitive
Christians, who walked in the Fear of God, and in the Comforts of the Holy
Ghost, continued in the practice of breaking the holy Bread (partaking of this
Ordinance) and so could Eat their common Meat with gladness of Heart, praising
God. It may be you will find, as Jesus made Himself known to the two Disciples in
breaking of Bread, (to allude to that Expression, though I think it not meant of
Sacramental Bread,) so you may find, by waiting on God in this Ordinance, your
Doubts scattered, your Jealousies removed, your Difficulties cleared, your
Objections answered, and the goodness of your State, which before was doubtful,
made manifest and evident, to the Joy of your Souls.

Therefore refuse not o pay Homage to your Crucified Savior, by partaking of
this Ordinance, believing that you shall not do it in vain: It may be, ever you
are aware, your Souls shall be, as the Chariots of Aminadab; you cannot tell but
your Attendance on this Institution, shall be the happy means, which God will
make use of to scatter and cure your Doubts. And, by your neglect of this
Ordinance, you not only take the most likely course to increase and continue
your Doubts and Fears, but are in danger to lose that Seriousness of Spirit,
and sense of Religion, which you now have, by denying your self those Means and
Helps, by which it is preserved and maintained in other Christians.

Eighthly, Consider, that after Self-Examination, you may sometimes find one
Grace more evident than another. A Christian can say sometimes, more hopefully,
that he lives by Faith; sometimes that he has true Repentance, and Godly Sorrow
for Sin; sometimes he can say more concerning the truth of his Love to Christ;
sometimes concerning his Hunger and Thirst after Christ, and the Spirituality
and Earnestness of his Desires: And if you can discover Truth and Integrity of
Heart, as to any of these, you may so far take Comfort. But especially, as to
Faith and Love, the two Radical Graces, which do influence and strengthen all
others; and by which you may make the best judgment of your self.

And a difference you must allow, for different Times and Seasons. Though, it may
be, you cannot now say so much concerning this or the other particular Grace;
yet, at such a time, upon serious Reflection, you could say a great deal to the
Glory of God, and to your own Consolation; you think that it is much better now
with others than with you; but it may be the last Month, at the last Sacrament,
you could say truly, concerning your Communion with God, and the Evidence of
His Love, and the Expression of your own, and the Exercise of other Graces, a
great deal more, than any of those Christians and Brethren, whom you apprehend
to be so much above and before you.

Remember, how at such a time, according to such a Scripture Character of an
Upright Christian, your Hearts could bear witness, and God did bear witness, by
his Spirit, that you were not Hypocrites. Did you not record it? Did you not
promise to remember it, and improve it? Call to mind what has passed between
God and your Souls, as to such things: And, if there be no notable declining to
the World and the Flesh, or commission of gross Sins, or wilful Carelessness or
Remissness, (which must be particularly repented of, and reformed, in order to
Pardon, and Peace,) you may take comfort in former Evidences, and Experience.
If a Father have forgiven a Child that had offended him, and told him so; must
he be every day telling him again and again, that he has forgiven him, or he
will not believe it? If God has comfortably resolved your Doubts, though some time
since, you may be encouraged by it; for you have not always the same Opportunity
or Help, outward or inward, to discern aright the State of your Soul; not always
the same clearness of Apprehension, or sedateness of Mind, or Assistance of
God's Spirit, to determine and resolve the great Question. It Is unreasonable,
on every turn, to expect a new Answer from God; as if he had given you none
before.

Ninthly, As to the Apostle's Expression, which is frequently objected in this
case, Romans xiv. 24. He that doubts is damned, if he eat, because he eats
not in Faith; and what is not of Faith is Sin. You ought to consider, that the
Word we render Doubting, is (...), making a difference between Clean, and
Unclean Meats: It Is not meant of Eating at the Lord's Table, but of Eating
those Meats, which were forbidden by the Law of Moses to the Jews; or such as
had been offered to Idols, and afterward sold in the Market: Meats to be Eaten
at an ordinary Table, concerning which, one who believed the Obligation of the
Law of Moses thought to be Unclean. He was persuaded of the Unlawfulness of
Eating, but he knows he may Lawfully forbear. This is quite another matter,
than the case of an ordinary doubting Conscience; where a Man only doubts on
one side of an Action. It Is there but reasonable to choose that side, where he
has no doubt, rather than the other, where he suspects he may transgress some
Law of God, though he be not certain. While the Doubt lasts, till a Man be better
informed, (supposing he be mistaken,) he should forbear acting against his
present Opinion, and Judgment: Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, i. e.
Whatever a Man does, without being persuaded of the Lawfulness of it, though it
be not a Sin in it self, it is so to him, who does it against his Conscience.
But as to matter of plain Duty, such as, Doing this in Remembrance of Christ,
and showing forth His Death, by coming to His Table, it is otherwise. The Doubt
will not excuse him in the neglect of his Duty: His Doubt is double, whether he
be not bound, by the Command of Christ, to Communicate; but on the other side,
he doubts whether, by some other Law of God, he ought not, as yet, to forbear,
as not thinking himself duly qualified. In such a case, What should a Man do,
but endeavor to fit, prepare, and qualify himself, as soon, and as well as he
can; that he may not continue to offend God, by the neglect of Obedience to an
Order of Christ. And can such a ^ne say, he is as certain he is not qualified
to come, as he is certain, in the general, that it is his Duty to come?

As to the Expression, He is Damned if he Eat: The meaning is, He is
Self-condemned, his Conscience condemns him; for he knows it is lawful to
forbear; and he believes it to be unlawful to Eat: If he do Eat, he acts
against his own Judgment, and so is Self-condemned. As to matter of Duty, an
Erring Conscience, be sure, will not cancel the Obligation of the Law of God:
If we doubt concerning that, which God has made our Duty; our Doubt will not
excuse us from Sin; for God has bound us to know our Duty and do it. Whatever
our Opinion and Persuasion be, the Obligation to obey the Command of God
remains: Our doubting whether it be our Duty, does not make it cease to be so.

However some Melancholy Persons, under great Conflicts and Temptations, may
suspend and stay away for a while, lest they should run into Despair, on the
Apprehension of having Eaten and Drank their own Damnation. They ought not to
cherish such Doubts and Fears, but endeavor to overcome them, and ask Advice
and Counsel, and use all other fit means in order to it; that, being better
acquainted with themselves, they may come with Peace and Comfort. If your
Hearts consent to be the Lord's, according to the tenor of the Covenant of
Grace, you ought to come, and Declare that Consent, with your Fellow Christians.

Tenthly, Consider that there is a Scrupulous Conscience, which though resolved
and satisfied, in the main, concerning Duty, when it comes to act, is perplexed
and hindered by unaccountable Fears. Though there be no just, rational, Scripture
Grounds of Fear or Doubt, yet a Person of weak Parts, little Knowledge, and of
a timorous Disposition, is easily disquieted with general Jealousies and Fears,
as to himself and his state toward God. He fears (though he cannot tell
particularly from the Holy Scriptures why) that he is not qualified, that he
shall receive unworthily if he come, and eat and drink Judgment to himself: Ask
why he thinks so, He has only some conjectural Suspicions, some uncertain
Surmises of his own Condition, arising from some mistaken Notions of the
Qualications, and Preparation necessary to a Worthy Communicant. These general;
unscriptual Doubts, Jealousies, and Fears, if countenanced and indulged, will
increase, and, like Circles in the Water, continue and beget one another. But a
good Man would not deal with his Neighbor, after this manner, as with himself:
He would not, he ought not, to judge hardly of a Neighbor, by general Rumors
of Accusation, or every idle Objection, and imaginary Supposition, that may be
made to his Prejudice, if, when particularly Enquired into, solid and positive
Proof is wanting. You must not judge hardly of your selves, any more than
favorably, but according to the Word of God, the Rule of Judgment.

Lastly, If you have not Assurance, yet if your Hearts accuse you not of
Hypocrisy, and double Dealing; if you can say, As far as I know my own Heart
and Life, I think I do sincerely consent to the Covenant of Grace, and am
really changed as to my Principles and Ends; I am unfeignedly willing, without
reserve, to be the Lord's; You may come, to renew and seal your Covenant. Can
you say, I believe the Gospel to be true; I am willing to have Christ for my
Savior and Lord, and absolutely to resign my self to Him; to be ruled by His
Laws, and saved by His Righteousness: My Imperfections I bewail, my Corruptions
I strive against, and endeavor to Mortify; and, as far as I know my self, am
willing to part with every known Sin: I am not certain, I am a true Believer,
but I would fain be delivered, by Christ, from the Dominion of Sin, as well as
the Condemnation of it. Now, where the Case is thus, what should be a bar to
your coming to the Lord's Table? Such a sense of Sin, and striving against it,
and desire to be rid of it, is your very Fitness. And in this, as well as other
cases, we may act according to the best of our Judgment, notwithstanding some
considerable Doubts.

Christians, You may come with Humility and Reverence, paying Homage to a
Crucified Savior, having found your Sins, and being humbled and penitent,
judging and condemning your selves for 'em; though you have not so clearly
discovered your Graces, as to be able to Rejoice, you may come with broken and
contrite Hearts, as Penitent Sinners, if you cannot come with Assurance, that
you are Pardoned Sinners; you may come, sensible of your need of Christ, if you
cannot come with the clear knowledge of your Interest in Him. Come with Humility
and Contrition of Returning Penitents, though you cannot come with the Joy of
Faith, as Assured Believers. Come with Hunger and Thirst after Christ, and His
Righteousness, though you dare not yet say, My Beloved is mine, and I am His.
Come humbly, and Apply yourselves to Him as you can, if you cannot Apply Him to
your selves as you would. Honor Him as your Lord, when you cannot appropriate
Him to your self, as your Savior. Own His Propriety in you, though you are not
assured of your Interest in Him. Come, and say, Lord, I Believe, help my
Unbelief! If you cannot triumphantly say, He Loved me, and Dyed for me: You
cannot, with Certainty, say, He is Mine; but you can say it, with Sincerity,
that you desire to be His: You resolve to be so, and accordingly give up your
selves to Him. Lord, help me; Lord, save me; Lord, strengthen me; Lord, deliver
me, for I am Thine, as the Psalmist frequently speaks. You may use such
Language; Lord, I am Thine, Devoted, Dedicated, Resigned, Willing to be Thine,
though, I cannot say, with present Joy and Comfort, (what that truly infers,) That
He is Mine. You can say, Lord. If I am rejected, refused, cast off, and left to
Perish, there shall One Perish, who did heartily and unfeignedly Desire to be
the Lord's: But, you may be certain, that such shall never Perish, if they
follow on to know the Lord, and seek him.

Let me therefore bring this home to Doubting, Trembling Christians, who are
afraid to tarry away from the Lord's Table, and yet, for want of Assurance, are
doubtful, whether they should come or no. You have Examined your selves, and
found out your Sins, so as to be humbled for them: You are among such as Hunger
and Thirst; you cannot deny it: And is not Blessedness promised to such? Matthew.
v. 6. You are in the Number of such as are weary and heavy laden for Sin; and
is there not Rest promised to the Souls of such? Matthew. xi. 29. The Blessings
of the Covenant have been offered to you; you consent to the Terms on which
they are proposed, and desire to trust in Christ to do all this for you, which
he has promised: Why should not you come and Seal this at the Lord's Table,
and profess this to be the Sense of your Hearts? Is all this no Evidence of
Faith? You may have true unfeigned Faith, though you don't know certainly that it
is true. If Sin be a Burden, and you are weary of it, and would fain have it
more subdued, and you ong for more Conformity to Christ, that the same Spirit
may be in you, that was in Him; If you long to have the Love of Christ rule and
reign more in your Souls; If it be thus, you may come in Hope, and plead his
Word, and pray for His Grace, and devote and give up your selves to be the
Lords. You may do this Acceptably at His Table, without a certain Persuasion,
and assured Knowledge, that you are passed from Death to Life, and made an Heir
of Heaven. Though you have some Fears of Hypocrisy, you dare not say, but you
have some Hopes that you are Sincere; and a mixture of some Fear with your Hope
should not discourage you. Doubts concerning the Truth of your Faith, are very
consistent with the Reality of it: The shaking of a Tree, will not argue it is
not a Tree, or not Alive.

Our Lord has told you, He is willing to be your Savior; I tell you again,
that He is Willing to be Yours, in all His Offices, as Prophet, Priest, and
King: He has done and suffered enough (one would think) to testify His
Willingness, to declare His Love, and express His Kindness and Good Will. Can
you think of His Bloody Death and Sufferings, and question His Willingness to
Receive, and Pardon, and Save Sinners? Now, dare you deny, that you are willing
to be His? To forsake all Compeditors and Rivals, and accept Him for your only
Savior? If you are heartily Willing; you are accepted, you are united to
Christ, and interested in Him; And will you not lift up your Heads in Hope?
Will you still cherish unscriptural, unreasonable Doubts, that have no
foundation in the Word of God? Will you continue to doubt of His Love, though you
cannot deny the Evidence of it? Do you not love Him so, that you can part with
All, in this World, to be assured of His Love; and the want of this Knowledge
and Assurance, is the daily Burden of your Hearts, and the Matter of your
continual Complaint? If He should ask you, as He did Peter, this Evening, or to
Morrow Morning, Soul, Love thou me? What Answer could you make but this;
Lord, I cannot say Thou love me, (O that I could,) but, as far as I know my
own Heart, I do love Thee, I desire to love Thee, I would fain love Thee: I
approve, esteem, and judge those the happiest Souls, that love Thee most, and
live in Thy Love. Oh, what would I not give, or do, or part with, if I might be
One of them!

The Reflections I would make on what has been said, will concern two Sorts of
Persons, of a very different Character.

First, I would Caution some, not to abuse, or mis-improve this Discourse, by
emboldening themselves to come to the Lord's Table, in their Hypocrisy, and
under the reigning Power of Sin. Let them not think that it is enough, if they
can but make themselves uncertain, whether they are Hypocrites, or no. There
are some who have no Assurance of their Salvation; and it is impossible they
should; their State will not admit it: They are under the Dominion of Sin, and
live in the Impurities of the Flesh, and under the prevailing power of an
Earthly Mind, destitute of Love to God, and Strangers to Faith in Christ, and
yet will adventure to come frequently to the Table of the Lord. It Is a terrible
Passage, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation
to himself. (Temporal Judgments and Calamity in many Cases, Spiritual in
others, and, without Repentance, Eternal,) which frightens Some from
Communicating at all, which it should not; but does not deter Others from
coming unworthily, which it should.

There are diverse such, who through Sloth and Negligence, and Inconsideration,
for want of Enquiring into their true State, are ready to flatter themselves,
from some little things (as transient Affections in the public Duties of
Religion, etc.) that their State is good, but they do not allow themselves
leisure, to think what they are; and with many, the hurry of their Earthly
Business will hardly permit them to retire, for Self-Examination: And yet they
will come, they will do as others, and, without further search, take it for
granted, that they may and ought to come to the Table of the Lord. Sometimes
they have checks of Conscience, and if they think of Dying, are afraid; and
well they may; there is reason for it. Such Professors should take heed of
abusing what has been said to Others, who need it. They like to hear, that
many who have Doubts and Fears, concerning their State, may yet come to the
Lord's Table; it is good News to them; for they have sometimes Doubts, and no
Assurance, (nor will their present State allow it,) and yet they will
adventure. Oh, beware how you misapply, and misimprove, to your own
Destruction, what has been said for the Encouragement and Support of Sincere
Christians, under Doubts, and Scruples, Weakness, and Temptations.

Let such consider the Guilt they contract, and the unspeakable Hazard they
run, by professing to belong to Christ's Family, and so partaking of His
Supper, as Living Members of His Body, while they are secret Enemies unto
Christ, in Heart and Life, and hate to be reformed. Such are Guilty of His Body
and Blood, they join with the Murderers of JESUS, whose Death they pretend to
show forth; His very Blood will cry for Vengeance against their Hypocrisy, and
sink 'em under more dreadful and intolerable Wrath. They, of all others, Eat
and Drink their own Damnation, who thus wilfully profane the Ordinance, and
take the Name of GOD in vain, by pretending Love to CHRIST, (to serve some
little Secular turn, and be thought better than they are,) while they Live in
secret allowed Wickedness; in stated Enmity and Rebellion against Him.

I may say of the Worthy or Unworthy Receiver, as Solomon did of Adonijah, 1
Kings 1.25. If he be a Worthy Man, not a Hair shall fall from his Head; but if
Wickedness be found in him, he shall Dye. If you come to the Lord's Table
humbly and penitently, in Obedience unto Christ, in such a manner, and for such
holy Ends, as He has appointed, you shall meet with Welcome, you shall be
feasted with the fat things of His House, you shall partake of the Treasures of
His Grace, and receive of His Fullness. But, if you come without Sorrow for Sin,
and without Resolution against it; if you come Impenitent, and Unreformed,
without Desires, and Purposes, and Endeavors, to forsake Sin, and subdue
Corruption, and be devoted to God, etc. You increase your Guilt, you harden
your Hearts the more, you receive a Curse instead of a Blessing, and will be
more under the Power, and in the Possession of the Devil. And You shall dye
for it, unless Sovereign Grace do timely prevent it, by your Repentance and
Conversion. I cannot speak with too much Terror to such. But,

Secondly, There be Others, Humble and Sincere, Weary and Heavy-laden, Contrite
and Broken in Heart, who have many Doubts, and yet much Love, who Fear and
Tremble if they come, and yet fear to tarry away. There are many Such who need
this Encouragement. They have the Call of Christ, to remember His Dying Love;
their Duty is plain; They ought to make an Adventure of Faith, as Peter (when
unlikely to take any Fish) yet, at Christ's Command, let down the Net with
astonishing Success: Or, as the Disciples said to the Blind Man, Be of good
Comfort, Arise, for the Master calls thee, Mark x. Let Faith in the Authority
of Christ, bring you to Remember His Death, this way; If you obey the Precept,
you don't know the Success as to Comfort.

Is there no Encouragement in the Invitation, Let him that is a Thirst come,
and Who Ever will, let him come, and take of the Waters of Life freely, Rev.
xxii. Are not sensible, weary, thirsty Sinners invited? Therefore, Lord, I Will
not exclude my self; I am one of them; surely there may be Mercy for Me, among
the Rest, however Unworthy and Vile I am. The Invitation is not to such as are
Worthy, but Thirsty. We come to Him that we may partake of His Grace, and
receive more of the Spirit of Holiness, according as we need it.

And here, I would not forget the Case of Those, who are in Doubts, because
they have had a Religious Education, and by the Restraining Grace of God, and
the Precepts instilled into them, by their Parents and Ministers, they have
lived unblamably in the World, as to their outward Conversation: They are
afraid, all their Religion is the Fruit of Education only; and not of Special
Grace: And they are further doubtful concerning themselves, for want of feeling
those Pangs of Sorrow, and Bitter Repentance, which they hear, and read others
have had, in their Conversion to God, who have been reclaimed from a Prostigate
Life. They apprehend, on that account, that they may be still Strangers to the
great Change, by Regeneration and the New Birth. On the one hand; I wish they
would look to it, that it be not really the Truth of their Case; that they have
indeed proceeded no further, than a good Education may carry a Man; which too
many, I fear, do Rest in. Yet Others there are, who have had a Religion
Education, and, by God's Blessing on it, have had Early Experience of the
distinguishing Grace of God. They cannot say precisely when they were Born
again, but can discover the Effects of it in Heart and Life: These should not
be discouraged on that account; Nor for want of those Terrors, which the
Repentance and Conversion of Some is accompanied with Early Contents, who seek
the Lord, and serve Him from their Youth, commonly escape such Terrors: We find
not, that it is true of All.

If the Spirit of Christ has wrought such a Change in your Judgment, Choice,
Affections, Conscience, and Life, as will make up the Character of those that
are Sanctified; you should not be uneasy and perplexed, for want of knowing
when this Change was first made; you may know a Man is Alive though you know not
when or when he was Born. And what if you cannot say those things, concerning
the Time, Manner, Antecedents, and Concommitants of your Conversion from Sin to
God, that Others, it may be, can say, who had great and presumptuous Sins,
scandalous and notorious Abominations to Repent of, which God never suffered
you to fall into? Such are not sufficiently sensible of the Blessing of a good
Education, and what a Mercy it is to be saved from such Terrors. It may be,
some of the Best Christians in all this Nation are of this Sort; who may
sometimes fear they have gone no further than Education (without the saving
Grace of God) may lead 'em. But if you can prove your Sanctification, by the
real, genuine Fruits of it; And that there is such a Change of Heart and Life
wrought, it matters not that you know not the exact Time. You are certain,
Corrupt Nature could never incline you to love God, and be devoted to Him; to
hate Sin and watch against it; and to take Heaven for your Portion and Christ
for your Savior: This Change must be from the Divine Spirit, however Early,
Gradual, and Insensible it seems to have been Effected. If you find the Image
of God upon your Souls, and the real Fruits of the Spirit in Heart and Life,
(though you never were acquainted, with the Throws, and Pangs, and Terrors, that
introduce or accompany the Conversion of others) you have Reason to be
Thankful, and not be discouraged on that account.

Your great Business now, should be to walk Circumspectly, and to live more a
Life of Faith and Love: And as your Faith in Christ, and Love to God, and Care
to please Him, does increase, Comfort, and Peace, and Joy, will ordinarily
follow. The Just Live by Faith, not by Assurance. Without Faith it is impossible
to please God, not without Assurance. You ought to observe God's Influence by
His Holy Spirit upon your Souls; and be much in Prayer, and in acts of
Dependence and Resignation* and labor to know yourselves (...): To Record what
God does for you, and how you carry in toward Him, and what Progress you make
in Practical Godliness, and Inward Religion; by comparing yourselves with your
Selves, at different times.

Be thankful that you have good Hope, through Grace, and resolve to follow on
to know the Lord and to know your Selves better. Though it be our Duty to give
all Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, and to use Means in
Expectation of Success, it is not at all strange that but few do attain to
Certainty and full Assurance. There must be more than a little Grade to make it
clear and discernible; and it is Grace in Exercise is best discerned: There must
be a good understanding of Spiritual Things and of the Tenor of the Covenant of
Grace; some good Acquaintance with our own Hearts, and with the Wiles of the
Devil; and some Cure of that confusion and disorder of Thought which most
complain of: There must be Diligence, Resolution, and Patience, in the Trial of
our Selves, with earnest Prayer to Heaven: There must be upright Walking a Pure
Conscience, and great fear of sin, etc. Such things as these being necessary,
in an ordinary way is it any wonder that few, very fe^ attain it* When Grace is
so weak, where it is true, and the Knowledge of our Selves so little, and most
are so backward to Self-Examination, or so little skilled in it, and so little
acquainted with Satan's Temptations, and their Mind so confused, and their
Thoughts so ungoverned, and their Consciences have so little Tenderness, and
are so often wounded by wilful Sin, no wonder if the generality of Christians
have not Assurance, even of such as are Sincere, and accepted of God.

There are many things to be known and understood concerning the Nature and
Application of the Promises of the Gospel, which every real Christian has not
attained. And besides the discerning of their own State and Condition to be
such, as that they may apply the Promises to themselves, there must be the
Influence of the Holy Spirit, or there will be no Comfort. You must therefore
continually beg the Light and Influence of the Holy Spirit, which is promised
to Believers, that they may know the things freely given 'em of God. The Holy
Spirit himself Witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God.
Lord! I have endeavored to search my Heart, and examine my Ways, according to
thy Command; I have some good Hope, but am not Certain; Oh enlighten me to
discern and understand the Truth of my Case. Let me know, by Experience, the
meaning of that Scripture, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. After you believed, you were sealed
by the Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the
Redemption of the purchased Possession. This (...), this Seal (for Distinction,
and for Certainty) God gives to Believers. It Is by the Holy Spirit we know the
things freely given us of God; by His witness with our Spirits, we have
Confidence toward God, we discern His Work upon our own Souls, and are enabled
to judge concerning the great Change he ^^th made, and with Comfort to (...),
we are passed from Death to Life. The Testimony of the Divine Spirit, added to
that of the Conscience, enables us to cry, Alba Father, and fills us with Peace
and Joy in Believing. He that believes, has the witness within himself, ^ John
v. 10. He has that in him to which the Promises are made (...) has the Seal
of Sanctification by which he is distinguished from Unbelievers; but the Holy
Spirit must discover and witness this, or we shall not feel any thing of Joy.
It Is, in part, because we do not understand, or value, or pray for, this
Influence of the Holy Spirit, as we ought, that so few have Assurance.

And now, for the Close of this Discourse, let me ask you a few serious
Questions, which in many Books you may find more largely insisted on.

First, How stand you Affected to Sin, deliberate Sin, against God? Don't you
dread and fear it more than formerly? Are you not more ashamed of it, of the
Baseness, Iniquity, and Disingenuity of it, as against the Holiness, and
against the Grace, and Love of God? Would it not be a harder matter to draw you
to a deliberate Sin against God, than heretofore? or to persuade you to omit a
known Duty, such as Closet Prayer?

Secondly, What is your Judgment and Opinion concerning God, and Christ, and
Holiness, concerning the Holy Scriptures, and the Gospel way of Salvation, by
Faith in Christ? Is it not more your Desire, and Choice, to have your Portion,
in both Worlds, with those that believe on Christ, and follow Him, as their
only Savior? Resolving to adhere to revealed Christian Religion, let Atheists
and Infidels talk as they please, and venture as they will? Are you not
endeavoring with success to be more established in the great Foundation Truths
of Christianity?

Thirdly, Don't you find some Growth, Progress, and Improvement, in Holiness,
by being more confirmed and established in the Truth of the Principles of
Christian Religion? And don't you desire and endeavor more, to know, and do
the Will of God? To please, and serve, and obey Him better? Is it not your
Comfort and Pleasure, to honor God, and be kept from Sin; to Worship and Adore
Him, and have Communion with Him? To be found in the way of your Duty, and to
keep an undefiled Conscience? And is it not your Grief, on the contrary, when,
by Temptation, you neglect your Duty to God, and fall into Sin?

Fourthly, As to the Church of Christ, and the Interest and Honor of God in
the World; are you not Rejoiced, when you hear that real Godliness is any where
promoted? That the Oppressed, or Defiled Churches of Christ, are delivered and
reformed? That Truth and Holiness, Pure Worship, and Holy Conversation, does
prevail and spread, and get ground, in any part of the World, or of the Nation?
That open Wickedness is suppressed, and the Mouth of Iniquity stopped? etc.
And, on the contrary, don't you mourn for other Men's Sins, as well as your
own, and for God's Dishonor, by National Provocations, and Public Crimes? And
are ready to give what Assistance you can, to promote Reformation?

Fifthly, How are you Affected toward such as are truly Serious and Religious,
though of different Sentiments, in several things, from you? Do you love the holy
Image of God, wherever you can discern it? Can you heartily embrace All that
love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity? But for such as Defy God, and Dishonor
Christ, and the Gospel, and live in open Rebellion against Him, don't you, from
your very Hearts, dislike such? you would not, you do not choose Familiarity
with them; you would not live or dye with them? You have made another Choice,
as to your Portion, Way, and End.

Sixthly, Can you bear to have your Consciences searched? Are you content, to
have your closest Lusts discovered, your most beloved Sins struck at, by the
Ministry of the Word? So that, there is no Iniquity but you would know, and
hate, and part with? And are most of all desirous, to mortify and overcome the
Sin which you did once most love; and that did, or does most easily beset you:
But it is your daily Burden, that your Victory is so imperfect, and your daily
Care is to watch against it.

Lastly, Is it not the Desire, Purpose, and Resolution of your Souls, though you
have not Assurance, (and supposing you never had it, and never should,) that
yet, by the Help of God, you will be true to your Baptismal Covenant, to be
faithful Followers of Christ, as long as you live; to deny all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this World, seeking
Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, by Jesus Christ, in hopes of Eternal Life;
depending on no other Savior; looking for Acceptance with God no other Way,
but only by the Merit, Blood, Sacrifice, and Righteousness, of our Lord Jesus
Christ? This you unfeignedly Resolve and Purpose, and accordingly,
(notwithstanding your Doubts and Fears) you have held on for some time in such
a Course; and, by the Grace of God, do intend still to hold on, whether you
have Assurance or No.

To such of You, my Brethren, who can truly say, this is your Case: That all,
or any thing considerable of this, is a true and real part of your Character: I
may say, that Peace and Comfort belongs to you. The breathings of Faith argue
the Reality of it, as much as the loudest Voice. To be able to creep, is as
true an Evidence of Life, as to be able to run. You may lift up your Head with
Hope, and avouch the Lord to be your God; you may come to the Lord's Table with
Cheerfulness and Thanksgiving. I do, in the Name of my Great Master, invite
you: I doubt not but He will bid you Welcome.

O let us All join, in begging His Gracious Presence! That He would meet us
Here, and in every part of the City and Country, where this Holy Feast, on the
Sacrifice of Christ, shall be celebrated to Morrow!

O that He would display the Banner of His Love toward Us! and Seal His
Covenant-Promise, with all the Sweetness, and Joy of His Salvation, unto our
Souls! O that He would speak by His Holy Spirit, to our Spirits, with such a
Powerful Voice, as shall make us hear, and feel it, that it is His own! saying,
Son, or Daughter, be of good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee. I AM THY GOD, I
have loved thee with an Everlasting Love, I have accepted thee for mine; I have
blotted out all thy numerous, heinous Transgressions, and will remember 'em no
more; I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine; and I am not
ashamed to be call- THY GOD, I will never, never, never, leave thee nor forsake
thee, but Guide thee by my Counsel, and afterward receive thee to Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

