The Second part OF CRAFTY CRVMWELL OR OLIVER IN HIS GLORY AS KING.

A Trage Commedie Wherein is presented, the late treasonable undertakings, and
proceedings, of the Rebels, their murdering of Capt. Burley, with their
underhand workings to betray their KING.

Written by Marcurius Pragmaticus.

Sit round, and let us Treason talk
against the Houses twain,
It Is dangerous abroad to walk
and not return again.
Here we can freely sit and sing.
In a melifluos tone,
And drink full cups unto the King
Wishing him in his Throne.
Confusion, Horror, Dreadful, Hell
upon the Rebels wait
So let them pine, who durst Rebel:
and govern by deceit.
The Crimson Devils wallow now
In pride, and Luxury
But I Will their plots Dissect I vow.
and whip their Treachery.
Non ego pro nihilo, Carcere clausus ero.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

THE PROLOGVE.
IF you were pleased before how much more now
Must you needs smile, and your applause allow.
When you behold Barkstead a Courtier gay,
Who was a Plow-boy, but the other day.
And Raignsborought, a Skippers boy to Reign,
Uice-Admirall, on Froathie Neptunes maine.
Burligh's illegal Trial (wondrous thing)
Oliver, Metamorphiz'd, to a King.
With various passages, that will invite,
Your sense at once to wonder and delight.
Here then with candar; but be ruled by me,
Speak not a word, what er'e you hear or see.
For this Auther, bid me to you say,
Heed live, to see this played another day.
Dramatis Person.
Cromwell, Fairfax, Ismeno an Independent, Solon a Royalist, The 3 Furies
Megara, Tysiphone, Alecto. Capt. Burleigh, a Judge, a Jury. Harry Martin, Col.
Pride, Ireton, Ioice, Col. Raignsborough, 2 Sailors, Servants, Muley, Chorus:
To the Readers of my former piece.
ONce more I come again, for it is not all
The threats the Members use, can me fore-stall
When moved with spleen, I justly on the Stage,
Do whip the crimes of this Vicentions Age.
And it is but requisite, that those who do
Open offenses, should in public too.
See themselves laughed at, and be made a scorn
To those Plebeans, have their burdens borne.
And though their Ignorance, prevails so.
They hate those Lines, do from the learned flow.
Have Voted down all Plays, on this pretense
Their Sceans are lavish, and to God offense.
Yet let them know St Paul himself had Read
And weigh, what learned* Epemerides said. A Cretian Poet.

Yea, and that same Apostle, held it fit
To grace that Poets Lines, in holy writ.
What other does a Commedie express
Then Lovers Bliss, or their Vnhapinesse,
What does the Stately Tragedy set down
But Vices punishment, and virtues Crown,
and then if so, ye Dolts, how do you dare
So to wound Learning and those learned are.
Let the whole crowd of Poets, SENECA
SOPHOCLES, SHAKSPEARE, JOHNSON now in clay.
EVRIPIDES, with famous WEBSTER, and.
SVCKLIN, and GOFFE, leave the Elizian Land.
And hurrying hither, with their Delphick baies.
Blast their black souls, who do despise their lays,
But stay, I hold you now to long at Gate
Enter all you, that love the muses state.
And if you like it, love him that unknown
Writes for your sollace, somewhat for his own. Vale.

CRAFTY CROMWELL Or OLJVER in his Glory.; Secunda pars.
(ACTVS PRIMVS)
Enter Ismeno, an Independent; Solon A Royalist. Ismeno. Well be it as you
said concerning King, and that our Charles; is free from those great crimes,
the Houses charge him with, yet do you think we cannot without him live, and
thrive.


SOLON; surely no; he is the head, and we the members be, he is our Father,
and we are his Children, Kings of their Kingdoms as the Centers are, to which
each weighty thing it self exposes for as all mighty Rivers, flowing
streams, the liquid powers what ere they be, do seek in sundry parts by
several currents, great Neptunes bosom who as a Steward of the tumid deeps,
does send them back by many secret windings, and as fame tell us, when the
moisture needs, send forth her humed treasurs to refresh the Sunburned parched
plains, so are Kings breasts, the depths where daily slow clear streams of
knowledge, for he that has Intelligence over all, does commonly communicate to
Kings, all accidents of weight perchance may happen, no doubt great Jove since
they supply his place, so with their charge to make their virtues even, does
give them supernatural prescience, and were not our State-mongers grossly
blinded, they would perceive the virtues of their Sovereign, and bow to
CHARLES their King, as best of Princes, but their black souls are so
orewhelm'd with guilt, they dare not to be reconcild unto him, and rather then
they will meet deserved Desteny, they will be perjurd, both to God and man, which
while they do, England sweats blood, bathing it self in tears, yet thus twill
be

Until the powers, show more benignity,
The worlds a Tenniscourt, the Rackets Fates
Great Kings are Balls, when God will toss their States.

Ismeno. The King did trust to much unto himself, which made him fall into so
many snares of all men else, great Monnarks have most need, to square their
actions, and to weigh their words, Just* as the Inferior spears of force do
move, as the first framer, does their course allot, so does the peoples manners
still attend, on what their Prince, most usually does do, Kings for the use of
many are ordaind, not for to feed themselves luxuriously, keep Rioters, and
Roisters, to attend them, whose pride for to maintain how oftentimes, have we
oath Communalty been rackt and torn? how many Gavestons K. Charles once kept,
whose words were orders, and whose wills were Laws, then Shipmoney, and
Polemoney together; Subsities, six at once were not enough, for to maintain*
those Epicures at Court, Kings like the Sun, should quite exhale all mists,
which often dim the eyes of the rude vulgar, as precious stones, are the
ornament of Rings, the Stone decores the Ring, the Ring the hand, so Kings
decore the Court, the Court the Kingdom, and as one drop of poison spent
alone, infected fountains does with venom fill, even so the greatest states by
one man's means, may be corrupted, tainted above thought.

A vicious Prince, is a contagious ill,
A Bassilisk, that all he sees does kill.

Solon; Thou art Ismeno, all for Anarchy since CHARLES did ebe, thy fortunes
have sweld high, it is wealth and honor that your gang adore, and yet that your
wild course might darkened be, your care does seem, all for your Country bent,
then maskt with Zeal, your Crimes are counted pure* A show of good, does
vulgar minds content, yet this I Will give, as your due Eulogie in all your plots*
there is courage Joined with art, a slow advice, but quick dispatch, used naught
but success, your ends does justify who must command, or come to be accused
what heinous thing so odious is by nature, that has not been committed for a
crown.

I wonder not, at these insatiate men
They have no other God, but Gold, how then.
Can they be constant who so live by change.
Who sell themselves, fell all nor is it strange.

Ismeno, Well Royallist, thou have now shown thy Zeal, in vindication of thy
faulty King, but you, and all your Gang, may talk, not do, for all the power
is our's by Sea and Land, and maugre all your hopes of Jockey's aid, supplies
from France, and Spain, and Denmark too, Oliver, shall be Rector of the Land.
what think will Jocky come,


Solon No trust is to be given unto them, for Gold they will sell their God, for
silver pawn their souls.

Their faith is never firm, their love not bright
As Ankers without hold, fires without light.
Naught Constant is below, no not true worth.
It melts South, and freezeth in the North.
(exeunt. Enter Chorus THe first that spoyld our public rest,
Was avarice, the greatest pest.
Thou did disturb our quiet state
O Monster most insatiate,
This Daughter of stern Pluto still.
Her Fathers Dungeon, strives to fill.
We were all Rich, but not content
And therefore came a parliament.
Who has Reformed us; of our Lives
Our Goods, our Children, and our Wives
Have quite undone the public weal
Yet all out of their hearty Zeal.
They quite have spoyld, our Church, and Laws
Yet this in a most Righteous Cause.
And to pr'eserve us from decay
Have ceazd on the Militia
From out his hand who was our father
Before these Traitors met together.
and for the Cities Honnour it is
that now their Mayor, a prisoner is*
While the fool warner in his stead,
About the street in Pomp is lead.
But sure this cannot always be,
Now let us dare our destinee:
And since no worse can happen to us,
Thou Oliver can not undo us.

Exit. Actus secundus
Enter Fairfax as frighted from his bead a Taper in his hand. Fairfax. CAn
Heaven behold one stand to stain these times, yet to the Stigian streams, not
headlong hurled, and can the earth bear him, whose crims are such, that to
himself he seems a monster fell, why sends not Heaven to have my course
confind, a death denounceing flash of rumbling thunder, else [roaring terror]
clouds of circkling Wind by violence, to tear me limb from limb, what corner
yet unknown remains for me both burnd with rage, and freezing in despair where
none but monsters live, thither I Will go whom all the world detests, and
barbarise amongst the brutish beasts, where Tigers rage, roads spew and
Serpents hisses: But though in scorn vast zone I find a field, where
Malencholy might a monarch be, while silent deserts not a man inhabits, to
shrink for horrer, all my strange approach, yet of my deeds when all the World
does talk, this cannot raze the still proclaimed scrole, since in my breast, I
bear my Hell about me, and cannot escape those terrers hemb me round, those
fearful monsters of confused aspects Chimera, Gorgon, Hidra, Plutoes Apes,
which now at midnight fearful mortals fright, their divelish forms which do
the World confound, not half so horrid as my self I deem, when on my own
deformities I gaze, amidst black depth, of a polluted mind, yet whether it was
Fortune, or my Fate, or some Hell Hag, that did so cause my spleen to rise in
arms against my gracious King, and having him subdued, to shut him up, close
prisoner, under a dire restraint, O Plague abhord, I have undone the land, and
am the Instru -- meant of all their harms, then Mountains a vault opens.
fall, and bruise me, by your rounds, with my offense, no torment can be even.

Arch Traitor to my King, i will stand alone,
Here, though Pandorus plagues were all in one.

While he is in this Fury, arise the three Furies of hell Megara Tisiphone,
and Electo, they dance about him, to a kind of horrid noise, singing this song
Megara 1
Horrer, death, and Dismal houses,
Such as are sent, from damned souls*
Shreekings, Yellings, forced groans,
Able to rive, the hardest Stons,
Dwells round about thee, for to shoe,
whither thou must shortly go.

Tysiphone 2
Cromwell shortly, must descend
And thou accompany thy Friend.
Fire, ardent as the Lemniam flame
Which Buckets full of blood cant tame,
Ascend alloft, in expectation
When you will leave your earthly Station.

Alecto 3.
The sacred guider of the Heaven
You both, into our hands has given,
Bellona, and Erinnis both,
To Scourge you on, have pledgd their troth.
Seek Plutoes throne for to Invade.
You now must to Avernae's shade.

Omnes 4
There Cataline, you shall behold,
And mighty Nimrod, famd of old;
There Spartacus, cathegus too,
With Bickris son one like to you,
Have, O have, and come away,
That hell may keep an holiday,

[The furies decend] Manet Fairfax Fairfax O rigorous Judgment, O outrageous
fate, must I survive, the Funerals of my fame, some wail for want of friends,
but I of foes, to wound this breast, where all hells host do reign, what man
not wondering, can by deeds behold, the providence of all commanding Jove,
whose Brazen edicts cannot be repulst, when sleep, the Brother most resembling
death, locks up all others eyes, I am disturbed, with horrid Dreams, and
dreadful Visions, sometime me thinks my King Plast on his throne, haz past his
doom and I must die.

And then soon after fancy does persuade,
I am surrounded with a multitude,
Heaven ore my head, Hell burns beneath my feet
As both enraged, to fight with flames would meet.
(Exit running) Enter Chorus OF all the passions, which possess the soul,
Ambition, most disturbeth, mortal minds,
The restless stone that Sysiphus does roll,
Though it be still in ure more respit finds.
Fairfax is first in name Cromwell in power*
The upper house are Peers, the lower sway:
All topley turney; since that evil hour
Their base projections drove their King away.
MARTIN can rail, against the Lords anointed,
And SAY revile him, in a fleering vain,
Yet how will all their hopes, be disapointed,
When Jove shall place him, in his Throne again.
Then every Traitor, will seek out a cell
To hide him from his Sovereigns wrathful look
But where them holes to find: they shall not tell
They shall desire, but be denide, their book.

Exit: Actus Tertius:
Enter Rainsborow drawn in a Chariot, Six Trumpeters sounding before him.
RAINSBOROW. THus like great Caesar* when he did triumph, over the several
Nations of the World, that was lately but a Skippers Boy now Reign, as King,
on froathije Neptunes brime, prosper me Saturn, and those wicked stars,
whose Influence makes Villains fortunate, the Navy that was lately stild the
Kings, is now to be commanded by my will, CHARLES is immund, within a Cage of
stone, despised, contemned, and stinted of his fare, while we his Conquerors,
live in height of glory Revell Luxuriously, extort even what we please, from
those we trample on, Nor shall thy Fate O England it prevent,
But thou shall ever have A Parliament.
A mutual band, must made amongst us be, to make one fortune common to us all,
and from henceforth, we must be surely fixed, to fall together, or together
rise, and now since CHARLES, is dead unto his Crown, weel take his state, yea
and his Title too, we must be crowned, yea and be known for Kings, the diadem
of greatness, is the tower all vulgar Judgments lean on, yet of my thoughts
some doubt new counsel claims, and with huge horror, aggravate disgrace, the
stain of Treason, still attends our fate, and with our error, burdens, our
Posterity, and we though pomp a space appease our souls shall find
afflictions to disturb our Reign, the sacred title of a Sovereign does work a
terror, more then can be thought, but how dare my fond thoughts, thus rashly
chide me,

Drive on, drive on, while Brazen Trumpets sound
He cannot die, whom terror cannot wound.

Enter two SAYLORS. 1. Sailer, 2. Sai. GOd save your Excellency, and send you
temperat weather on the Seas.


Rains. Thanks my kind Subjects, be you true to me, and weel not fear, Grim
Neptunes enmity, let Spain now load the Seas with lazy Hulkes, the Dutch
with their broad shallops, yet Maugre all will so guard the Maine, no foreign
force shall land on English ground, yea Gods of Seas, and all you watrie
powers, be you propitious, let your aid be given, and weel not fear his power
that sits in Heaven.


1. Saylor, Why bears a noble Gods-head


2. Sailer, a water Rat in folio does the Fool think for ever thus to Lord it.


Exit, The Trumpets sounding. 1. Sailer, Yes if our Parliament prove
everlasting, but they have mortal hearts, and steel can pierce them, pierce
um until they groan. But lets away, my Cabins are not cleansed, yet I swear


2 Sailer: nor have I hanged the Halsers,


1 Let the earth gape, and quick destruction bring

2 And the Sea swallow, those that hate their King.

Exeunt Enter Chorus. THis Race of Ixion, to embrace the Clouds,
Contemned the happy State, wherein they stood,
And to be famed, among the Valgar crowds.
Resolve, for to Manure the ground with blood.
Their thrones, they on dead bodies do erect,
While they all fear, as virtue do reject.
While Ireland mourns, Environed with all ills,
Sword, Famine, Fire, confusion, dreadful sorrow,
While sad complaints, the echoing Heavens fills,
And air afflictions, take birth with each morrow,
They busy are, and make it their chief vent:
To bring us here, to that predicament.
All Laws Devine, they basely abrogated.
When Reverend Laud, was martyred by their power,
All Regal sway, by heavens will created,
When Noble Strafford, fell in evil hour,
And that all human Laws they may untie,
Therefore ere long, must Learned Ienkins die:

Exit. Actus Quartus,
(A Court) Enter Captain Burley as to his Trial, a Judge, Heighes, Cooper,
Knight, Brown, Barnham Andrews, Doling Cole Percivall Fisher, Lipscomb, Hilokir
Eliot Hunt, Smith, Bidlecomb, Casbert Jurymen, Steel, an Attorney, Officers
with a guard. JVDGE, BRing forth the Prisoner, Officer, room for the Prisoner,
bear back those fellows bear back there,


Steel, Why comes he not forward?


Officer, Captain Burley, hold up thy hand, thou art indicted by the Name of
-- Burley for that thou the said -- Burley, did tumultuously and traitorously
attempt to raise a party to destroy the parliament of England, upon pretense of
rescuing their Prisoner King Charles out of their hands, Speak art thou guilty
or not guilty?


Burley, Not guilty, ye Hell Hounds.


(Judge, whispering to Steel) art thou sure these men have open souls: who
dare do any thing be it never so wicked


Steel. Do you doubt um Sir, why these are Plutoes Eldest Sons, who had they
breasts transparant, would frighten all Mortality to Monsters, I have already
told them what to do, and the reward proposed them by the state.


Judge, Let us proceed then,


Steel* What can thou vile Burley to excuse thy late most treasonable action.


Burley, to you who are on purpose chosen to receive my innocent life, I am no
Traitor, he a Traitor is that does oppose his (...) not he that serves him,
those, whose sworn servants you are, the men whom by all Law, I Traitors call,
they that under a pretense of purging errors clean from out Gods Worshp have
op't a gap to all licenciousnesse, Blasphemies and Profaneness. those whose
pretenses, once were for the King, and made their boast to elevate his Throne:
above the chiefest of his Ancestors, and yet Imprison him within a Castle, not
suffering those that love him to come near him, those who would seem to
maintain the power of Parliaments, and yet will suffer none to sit amongst um,
that dare but speak one word for an agreement, or stipulation with the King.
Those who impose each day, new Cessements and taxations on the people, for to
maintain their own vile Luxury, awing them daily with Committee Laws, who
give to those are of their creation, an Ordinance of Indemnity, for Murders,
Treasons, Rapes and Robberies, or whatsoever else, they dare to act, those are
the men deserve the Name of Traitors, Grand, Famous, Glorious Traitors.


Steel, Proud fool, thou shall repent this saucy Language:


Burley, Repent, do thou repent vile man who dare be partial, and urgent
against him nere did thee wrong, only to currie favor with my Murderers, but
do I repeat my thoughts to you, since private hopes your Judgments do
bewitch, but yet for such a cause as I maintain, he that would faint at the
conceit of death, is trebly damd, not worthy to survive, except among Furies,
pound me like Anacharsis in a morter', precipitate me from some pinnacle heat
Phalaris, his Bull, until it, and throw me in, to bellow out my woes, yet I Will
not flinch, nor shall fear force my tongue, for to recant the least that I
have done.

So shall you to your terror find and see
That he is Martyred, dies for Loyalty.

Steel, Well Sir, your large oration, cannot save your Life, Nor, no nor the
King whom you seem so to love, was it not enough you durst oppose the State;
and rise in arms against them but must now revile them before us, who really
adore their virtuall power, O thou incorrigible hateful Traitor.


Judge, Proceed unto the Sentence, Jury, bring in your Verdict?


Bernham: So cordial we are unto the states, that had we each of us his Father
here, standing in this man's stead, we would proclaim him guilty, right or
wrong, we need not go aside for to confer, we did agree amongst our selves
before to find him guilty of high, were he as innocent, as is the light.


Judge, Then take him hence, as a pernicious traitor, to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered for high treason, and that on


Steel, Thursday next, return him back to Prison


Exit. Burley. It must be so, the Fates do so ordain,
My fall must help to raise my Sovereign,

Steel, Troth I would pity thy distressed ease
But dare not forfeit, the Recorders place,
Excunt omnes. Enter CHORUS. As those to whom all other things are free,
Must have their life and Reign both of one date
So private men once grasping Regaltie,
are hardly forced into their former state.
Our statesmen Fortunes, in the Book of Fates,
Is written down, Cromwell shall be a King
Martin the Secratarie to the states
And poor Tom Fairfax, Tom a Bedlam sing.
Both Joyce and Pride, with Ireton to boot
Are privy Counselors, and counsel well
But if they do not look, the better toot.
The Bonny Blew Caps, will their places sell.
Then Cromwell, Fairfax, Ireton, Ioice, and Pride
With the whole Knot of Traitors else beside
Shall wish, they had kept to their pristine state.
When hangum tuum, ends the grand Debate.

Exit Actus quintus
Recorders, enter Cromwell in state, a Canopie borne over his During Ceremony
the Song singing.
head, by Harry Martin, Pride, Ireton, and Joyce, they place him in a Throne,
and then put a Crown upon his head, then they all bow the Knee, saying,
(Omnes) long live King OLIVER. SONG.
Now OLIVR Ascend the throne
Fear not to tumble down
Come all you Furies every one
And bring the burning Crown.
But look how ore thy head does hang
A sharp and threatening sword
Denouncing terror to thy gang
And thee their perjurd Lord.
The furies sally forth of Hell
Rhamnusia, is their guide
For to chastize those dare Rebel
Persisting in they pride.
What folly prompts you, ye profane
To usurp CHARLES his Right Love

But thus you tamper with your bane run

And play with acconite.
CROMWELL. Cromwell descends. THanks to you all, my faithful Coadjutors you
that resolve to live and die with me this glorious wreath, that circles, now
my temples does Hierogliphically show our * Love, that my true care shall still
* run in a Ring for all our preservations how Harry why are thou so sad,


Martin, me thoughts Sir, I heard one sing but now behind the arras,
prophetically appointing at our fall,


Crom: thou art too superstitious, our dear Harry, it is not puffes must shake
our resolutions, come sit down

They sit about a Table. What shall we do now to confirm our Kingdom? what
Laws shall we invent meet for our purpose.


Pride; The people ever hunger after change, and theirfore it is not heard their
laws to alter.


Ioice; We must be sure by some queint wily train, to send King Charles to
the invissible land, which may be brought to pass and yet the vulger not Imagine
it, no not in twelve months after.


Cromwell; I do applaude thy council.


Ireton; Then next we must dissolve this parliament, they have a name of power
which, should they once combind against us, might much obstruct our hops:


Cromwell; Thou speak all Oracle, come no more of this at present, we will now
unto our palace;

And if we can the peoples pleasures gain,
We may perchance, in peace and quiet Reign,
Else we are lost, and O I greatly dread,
At once to loose my Kingdom, and my head.
[exeunt omnes, Enter Chorus. Why Oliver, should thou so high aspire,
Phaeton like, to manage Charles his Waine,
When thou art in, thou can not back retire.
That man is Mad who glory for to gain.
Does cast himself upon the Lightning Fire.
Kings do admit no fellows if thou Reign,
CHARLES must surrender, but I surely hope
To see him Rule, thou Ruled in a Rope:

Exit. FINIS.

