A TRVE RELATION of the Powerful HAND OF GOD UPON JOHN INGRAM.

At the reading of the Book called The Leaves of the Tree of life for the
healing of the Nations: lately written, by the light of God shining upon
WILLIAM SEDGWICK.

The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness: because that
which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto
them: for the invisible things of him from the Creation are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made; even his Eternal Power and Godhead.

Fear God, and give Glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold at the black spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's. 1648.

Upon the reading of the Book called THE LEAVES OF THE TREE OF LIFE, For the
healing of THE NATIONS. Lately written by the light of GOD shining upon WILLIAM
SEDGWICK. I was smotte dead by the power of GOD: and by the same power raised
up again; his light shining on me wherein I saw the truth of the Book; and
that is was THE WORD OF GOD: I was also at the same time constrained to write
these following lines.

O Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the voice of thy Lord; who was contented to dye
for thee, that thou might live; and to be slain by thee, that he might
overcome thee with love: Thou have left him, and followed after strangers; thou
have murdered him, and filled the Earth with cruelty: He cannt show thee his
face of love until he has slain thee; until he has been within thee, in that
Garden where thou wentest to betray him, and eaten up thy flesh there; thy
great Adversary, that continually torments thee, and will not let thee have any
rest, nor know where thy rest is; that makes thee such a stranger unto thy
Brother that thou can not see how evceedingly heloves thee; he was contented
to have served thee; but thou have rejected being Lord over him: thou have sold
him into the hands of strangers, who carried him into a far Country; and yet
thine eye did not pity him: thou wast in distress for want of those husks
which the stranger tempted thee to follow him into Egypt for: (telling thee
thou should have thy fill thereof, deluding thee.) And until then it came
not into thy thoughts that thou had a Father, that would have fed thee with
the finest wheat; that put thee into a most pleasant Garden, abounding with all
varieties of excellencies: If thirsty, a spring to refresh thee, that thou
can not draw dry; a river for thee to swim in: If thou would please thy
palate, there thou have the choicest fruits; if thy senses, there thou have
the sweetest frankinsense: If thou would please thine eyes, there thou
may have a view of the most gloriousest Objects: would thou have Gold,
there thou may have the finest, the Gold of Opher: What art thou capable of
desiring? What can thou mention, but it may be found there. Would thou
have rule and power? All things there are subject to thee. Would thou be a
servant? There thou may be employed by the King of Kings who exceedingly
rejoices in thy being made willing to do his will; that would not that thou
should have gone ut of that Paradise; that is exceedingly satisfied with thy
being there, to behold the riches of his treasure, the glory of his Kingdom;
etc. He has no Queen to show it to, but thy self: he has none to inherit
it, but thy self; and yet thou did run from him, and would not believe
him: He called unto thee to to stay, but thou would not: He sent thy
Brother to entreat thee to return, but thu consentedst to his death, and did
cast him into a Pit; then came strangers by and they presented him with all
manner of Spices, and took him away, and made him the chief Steward of all they
had: And when he was taken out of the Pit; then did thou fall into it thy
self: thou wentest to buy food, and it was thine own Brother Joseph that sold
it to thee, but thou knew him not; he was pained until he made himself
known unto thee, and in making known himself, he weeps over thee, crying alas!
alas! my Brother.

AWAKE therefore, stand up and thou shall see none but thy brother Joseph
himself; whose Silver Cup (wherein he drinks, who will Judge thee) is hid in
the mouth of thy sack WITIN THEE; there the BABE JESUS has lain ever since
thou wast, and yet thou knew it not.

Oh if thou feel HIM stir there, be not afraid, its thy dearly beloved, RUN
and meet him: if he puts thy flesh to pain in coming forth out of thee, be
contented to endure it: and remember that if thou do in sorrow Conceive, yet
thou shall have Joy when the MAN CHILD is born; yea, he will fill thee so with
Joy, that thou shall be even broken with it: though sorrow may endure for a
Night, yet Joy will come in the Morning.

The bright Morning Star APPEARS, and LOOKS THEE IN THE FACE, The dawning
of the day is past, and the SUN is ready to shine in the strength of its
Glory: Awake therefore, and let no voice be heard in the street of the NEW
JERUSALEM (within thee) but the voice of Melody, etc. and the next word that
thou hear him speak to thee will be this, That he will take thee into his
Banqueting House: he will carry thee up into his Heavenly Kingdom, and give
thee to drink of his own new Wine eternally with himself, and thou shall
thirst no more: He will wipe away all tears from thine eyes, and cause sorrow
and sighing to fly away from thee: Yea, he will change thee into his own
likeness; and thou shall be even as he is, Singing GLORY, GLORY, GLORY, BE TO
GOD ON HIGH, for ever more.

FINIS.

