NEPTUNE to the COMMONWEALTH of England.
(1)
OF Thee (great STATE!) the God of Waves
In equal wrongs, assistance crave's, defend thy self and me:
For if over Seas there be no sway,
My Godhead clean is taken away, the Scepter plucked from thee.
Such as over Seas all sovereigntie oppose
Though seeming friends, to both are truly foes.
(2)
Nor can I think my suit is vain,
That Land the Sea should now maintain, since retribution's due:
And England has great wealth possessed
By Sea's access, and thereby blessed with plenties not a few:
Which, next the virtue of thy watchful eyes,
Will her secure from foreign miserles.
(3)
Thy great endeavors to encreas
The Marine power, do confess thou act'st some great design.
Which had Seventh Henry don, before
Columbus lanch'd from Spanish shore, the Indies had been thine.
Yet do thy Seas those Indian Mines excel
In riches far: the Belgians know it well.
(4)
What wealth or glory may arise
By the North-West discoveries is due unto thy care.
The adopting them with English names,
The greatness of thy mind proclaim's, and what thy actions are.
New Seas thou gain'st; and to the ancient FOUR
By Edgar left, thou addest many more.
(5)
If little Uenice bring's alone
Such waves to her subjection as in the Gulf do stir;
What then should great Britannia pleas,
But rule as Lady over all seas, and thou as Queen of her.
For Sea-Dominion may as well be gained
By new acquests, as by descent maintained.
(6)
Go on (great STATE!) and make it known
Thou never wilt forsake thine own, nor from thy purpose start:
But that thou will thy power dilate,
Since Narrow Seas are found too straight For thy capacious heart.
So shall thy rule, and mine, have large extent:
Yet not so large, as just, and permanent.
(...).

Of the DOMINION, Or, Ownership of the SEA

TWO BOOKS.

In the FIRST is showed, that the SEA, by the LAW OF NATURE, or NATIONS is not
common to all men, but capable of PRIVATE DOMINION or Propriety, as well as
the LAND.

In the SECOND is proved, that the Dominion of the BRITISH SEA, or that which
incompasseth the Isle of GREAT BRITAIN, is, and ever has been, a Part or
Appendant of the Empire of that Island.

Written at first in Latin, and Entitled, MARE CLAUSUM SEU, De Dominio Maris,
By JOHN SELDOM, Esquire.

Translated into English; and set forth with some Additional Evidences and
Discourses, By MARCHAMONT NEDHAM. Published by special Command.



LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, by the appointment of the Council of
State: and are to be sold at the Sign of the Ship at the New-Exchange. Anno
Domini 1652.

TO The Supreme Authority OF THE NATION, The PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND.
(Right Honorable!)
I Should not have presumed thus, in the midst of so many great affairs, to
press into your presence, did I not bring a Present in my hand most worthy of
your acceptance. It is that Learned and elaborate Work, entitled MARE CLAUSUM;
A Piece so fully vindicating your Right of Soveraigntie over the Seas, by the
clearest evidences of Reason, and Record from all Antiquity, that it stand's
more impregnable against the Pens, than the Island it self against the Attempts
of Foreign Nations. It was written Originally in Latin, for the asserting of
this Right before all the world; and how they have been convinced by it,
appears hitherto by the universal Admiration that attend's it: But considering
what pity it was, that so rare a Jewel as this, which has drawn the envy of
some few, but the Approbation of All, should lie so long locked up in a Language
unknown to the greatest part of that Nation whom it most concern's; and how
necessary it is, in this present Juncture, to let the People have a clear
understanding of their nearest interest, and how that Right has been received
in all Ages, which a strange People in this latter Age have been bold to
undermine; it was judged very requisite to unlock the Cabinet, and expose the
Jewel to the view of the whole Nation, that they may prize it, and apprehend
not only their own Interests and Concernments, but how far we and our
Posterity must stand indebted to the name and memory of the noble SELDOM.

As for my self, though it be accounted one of the meanest Services to
Translate; yet when I consulted with my own Thoughts, which way I might best
express my duty and affection to your present Cause, and considered, that
little could be said or collected upon this subject of the Sea, which is not
abundantly set forth in this irrefragable Treatise, I conceived it a Task of no
less importance than difficulty. And now it is don, if it were well don, I
should believ my self to have atteined no small happiness, in having my name
any way related to the Learned Author; who shall ever live like himself in this
excellent Book, as long as there is any memory of Britain, or of the Sea that
flow's about it.

It was a work begun (it seems) in the Reign of King James, and then laid
aside again for above sixteen years; but afterward revived, altered, and
enlarged by the Learned Author (as he says in his Epistle) at the command of
the late Tyrant; And as it was written for him, so it was dedicated to him, as
being supposed one who was, or ought to have been, a fit Patron of the
Dominion here asserted: However, this I find, that as he seemed, by his naval
Preparations in the year 1635, to resent the many injurious usurpations of our
unruly Neighbors, and did in words also strenuously assert the Jurisdiction at
Sea; so he set a value upon this Book, as it is main Evidence: and in the 12
year of his Reign it was upon his special command, delivered by the hands of
Sir William Beecher (one of the Clerks of his Council) to the Barons of the
Exchequer in open Court; and by immediate Order of that Court, it was placed
among their public Records, where it remain's to this day. Now, had he
persisted with the same firm resolution in this honorable business of the Sea,
as he did in other things, that were destructive to the Nation's interest, the
Netherlanders had been prevented from spinning out their long opportunity to
an imaginary Claim of Prescription; so that they would have had less Pretense
to Act those Insolences now, which in former times never durst enter the
Thoughts of their Predecessors. The truth is, too much easiness and indulgence
to the Fathers and Grandfathers of the present Generation, was the first
occasion of elevating them to this height of Confidence, in pressing upon the
Seas of England: For, who know's not with what tenderness, and upon what terms,
they were first taken into the bosom of Queen Elisabeth? yet they were no
sooner warm, but they showed their sting, and proved the only great vexation
(because deceitful friends) to that excellent Lady, who, in those Infant-daies,
was both Mother and Nurs of their ungrateful Republic. Too much of the same
tenderness was expressed afterward by King James, because (as in the former
Reign, so in his) it was counted Reason of State to permit them to thrive; but
they turning that favorable Permission into a Licentious Encroaching beyond due
Limits, put the King to a world of Trouble and Charge, by Ambassies and
otherwise, to assert his own interest, and dispute them into a reasonable
submission to those Rights which had been received before as indisputable by
all the world. For the truth whereof, I am bold to refer your Honors to the
Memorials of several Transactions in those days, which I have added at the end
of this Book; and for which I stand indebted (as I am also for many other
Favors) to a Right honorable Member of your own great Assembly. By the same
also it will appear, how this People perceiving that King to be of a temper
disposed to use no other arguments but words, held him in play with words
again, and while they trifled out his Reign in Debates and Treaties, carried on
their design still to such a height, by a collusion of Agencies and
Ventilations to and again, and a daily intrusion upon the Territory by Sea,
that in time they durst plead and print Mare Liberum; and after his Son Charles
came to the Crown, they in effect made it so: For, though he were not ignorant
of his own Right, as appears by his esteem of this Book, his Preparations, and
Proclamation for Restraint of Fishing without License, etc. Yet he never made
any farther use of them, than to milk away the Subjects money under pretense of
building Ships to maintein his Authority by Sea; which end of his being
served, he immediately let fall the prosecution of what he pretended: So that
through the overmuch easiness and indulgence of preceding Princes, they in a
short time arrived to so lofty a Presumption, as to seem to forget and
question, and now at length, by most perfidious actings, to defy the Dominion
of England over the Sea.

These things being considered, it was supposed this Translation (it being a
noble Plea asserting that Dominion) would be a very seasonable Service; which
(how poorly soever it be apparel'd in our English dress) is bold to lay Claim
unto your Honors as its proper Patrons, conceiving it ought to be no less
under your Protection than the Sea it self: And therefore let me have leav
here (without Flattery or Vanity) to say, though in other things I may injure
the eminent Author, yet in this he will be a Gainer, that his Book is now fallen
under a more noble Patronage, in the tuition of such heroic Patriots, who,
observing the errors and defects of former Rulers, are resolved to see our
Sea-Territorie as bravely maintained by the Sword, as it is by his Learned Pen.
It is a gallant sight to see the Sword and Pen in victorious Equipage together;
For, this subdue's the souls of men by Reason, that only their bodies by
force. The Pen it is which manifest's the Right of Things; and when that is
once cleared, it give's spurs to resolution, because men are never raised to so
high a pitch of action, as when they are persuaded, that they engage in a
righteous cause; according to that old Versicle, Frangit, and attollit vires in
Milite causa.


Wherefore seeing you ( Right Honorable!) have had so frequent experience of
the truth of this in our late Wars, wherein the Pen Militant has had as many
sharp rancounters as the Sword, and born away as many Trophies from homebred
Enemies in prosecution of your most righteous cause by Land, certainly you will
yield it no less necessary for the Instruction of this generous and ingenious
people, in vindicating your just Rights by Sea, against the vain Pretenses and
Projects of encroaching Neighbors. For, what true English heart will not swell,
when it shall be made clear and evident (as in this Book) that the
Soveraigntie of the Seas flowing about this Island, has, in all times, whereof
there remain's any written Testimony, both before the old Roman Invasion and
since, under every Revolution, down to the present Age, been held and
acknowledged by all the world, as an inseparable appendant of the British
Empire; And that by virtue thereof the Kings of England successively have had
the Sovereign Guard of the Seas; That they have imposed Taxes and Tributes upon
all ships passing and fishing therein; That they have obstructed and opened the
passage thereof to strangers, at their own pleasure, and don all other things
that may testify an absolute Sea-Dominion; What English heart (I say) can
consider these things, together with the late Actings of the Netherlanders, set
forth in your public Declaration, and not be inflamed with an indignation
answerable to their Insolence; That these People raised out of the dust at
first into a state of Liberty, and at length to an high degree of Power and
Felicity, by the Arms and Benevolence of England; or that they, who in times
past durst never enter our Seas to touch a Herring, without License first
obtained by Petition from the Governor of Scarborough-Castle, should now
presume to invade them with armed Fleets, and by a most unjust war bid defiance
to the United Powers of these three Nations? Had they dared to do this in the
days of our Kings, I suppose, they (even the worst of the^) would have checked
and chastised them with a Resolution suitable to their monstrous Ingratitude;
For, however some of them were wholly busied in vexing and undermining the
people's Liberties at home, yet they were all very jealous of the Rights and
Interests of the Nation at Sea; and good reason they had for it, since without
the maintenance of a Soveraigntie there, the Island it self had been but a
great Prison, and themselves and the Natives but so many Captives and Vassals to
their Neighbors round about; not so much secluded, as excluded from all the
world beside. Upon this ground it was, that Kings ever conceived and maintained
themselves as much Monarchs by Sea as by Land; and the same you will find here
was received by all other States and Princes, the Land and Water that
surround's it, making one entire Body and Territory. Moreover, our own
Municipal Constitutions every where declare the same, as may be seen by the
several Presidents and Proceedings thereunto relating; which manifestly show,
that by the Common Law of the Land, our Kings were Proprietarie Lords of our
Seas; That the Seas of Engl. were ever under the Legiance of our Kings, and
they sovereign Conservators of the peace as well upon the Sea as Land.

Now therefore ( Right honorable!) when I look upon you, and behold you more
highly entrusted than Kings, and far more nobly adorned upon a better Ground
than they were, with all the Rights, Interests, and Privileges of the People;
when I consider how God has wrested the Sword out of their hands, and placed
it in yours for our Protection, with the Conservation of our Peace and
Liberties, and made you the happy Instruments of freeing us from the yoke of
Kings; When I call to mind, how nobly you asserted the Rights of England
against Domestic Tyranny, upon the neck of the late King, and laid the
foundation of our Freedom upon the highest Act of Justice (when Justice sat
more gloriously inthroned than ever it did before on any earthly Tribunal) I am
raised with more than ordinary confidence, that the same Spirit of Justice,
which acted you in your former atchievments, for our establishment by Land,
against him and his posterity, will carry you on (as you have begun) with the
like zeal and magnanimity, to vindicate those Rights by Sea, against all
Foreign violations and invasions. It is your honor, that God has made you
Founders of the most famous and potent Republic this day in the world; and
your felicity, that all your Enemies have no other Ground of quarrel, but that
you are a Republic: For, though these Netherlanders speak it not out in words,
yet they have often told you so in behavior; not only as they saw a barbarous
stab given you in the person of Dr Dorisla, yet let slip the^ Murderers by
delaie, (the States General not having issued out so much as a warrant for
their apprehension) but after, in neglecting, slighting and slender protecting
(to say no more) of your two Ambassadors, and at length in the louder language
of the Cannon, during a Treaty of Peace for a more strict League and Union;
when Tromp proclaimed to all the world, that their infamous design was by
Treachery to surprise and destroy our Fleets at Sea, which (to use your own
language) are, under God, the Walls and Bulwarks of this Nation. It is not my
business here to recite their many unkindnesses throughout the late wars, their
designed protracting them by a mischievous underhand-siding and supplying the
public Enemy, together with the many indignities, affronts, injuries, and
intolerable provocations, both before and since your settling in a State of
Freedom. That egregious attempt upon your Shipping, under pretense of a
friendly salutation, considered in all its Circumstances, may serve in stead of
all, it being indeed such a Barbarism, that the world cannot parallel, and
none but themselves would have acted; And therefore we may the less wonder at
their denying it when don, since the owning must have rendered them and their
present enterprise detestable to the Nations. Nor is it any great marvel, that
after the many matchless affronts given you, when your Honors out of a
Christian inclination to Peace, were pleased to over-pass them all, and in your
Answer of the 25 of June to their Ambassadors, to declare notwithstanding,
that, if you might have satisfaction for the Charges they put you to in that
Summer's Preparations, and Security for time to com by both States contracting
a firm Alliance, you were ready to set an end to the present differences (it
is no marvel, I say, after so great condescension on your part) they should
choose War rather than Peace, since it now appears they had War in their hearts
from the very beginning, and stood resolved to propagate their ambitious ends by
ways of violence, and become yet more unjust, rather than do any thing, though
never so reasonable, that might seem to import an acknowledgment of their late
injustice. And to the end that England may have a true taste of their
intentions, it is well worthy consideration, that as they have refused to give
any reasonable satisfaction or security, and with a brazen-front outface the
matter in their public Manifest, declaring therein, That they will never lay
down arms so long as you steer the course you are now in; so by consequence they
seem resolved never to admit Peace, but upon such terms as are inconsistent
with your Honor and Interest, and ^ix themselves (as long as they so continue)
in an irreconcilable enmity to the Good of our Nation. In Cases of this
nature, when Adversaries place themselves at an unreasonable distance, there is
no security for a State, but in a strict Bent to its own Interest; nor any
thing more dangerous than Middle-Counsels, while an Enemy stand's out upon
extremities; And what greater extremity than to invade a Neighbor's
Territory, and prosecute the Invasion by a design of Conquest: The Sea is
indeed your Territory no less than the Land; It has been held so by all
Nations, as unquestionably subject, under every Alteration of Government, to
them that have enjoied the Dominion by Land; so that the Netherlanders having
entered your Seas, in defiance of your Power, are as absolute Invaders, as if
they had entered the Island it self. It is just as if Hannibal were again in
Italy, or Charles Stuart at Worcester; and the late affront given near Dover,
was like the one's braving it before the walls of Rome, and as if the other had
com and knocked at the gates of London, or rather at your very Chamber Door;
for, that insolent Act was don in that place, which our Kings heretofore were
wont to call and account their Chamber. How nearly these things touch the honor
of your Selves and the Nation, is well apprehended by your faithful friends, who
have been very amply instructed and quickened by your public Declaration: And
it is their exceeding Joie, while they see you acting and engaging upon just
and honorable Grounds, to make good that Right and Reputation which you have
received as inviolable from our Ancestors. For, it has been their great
satisfaction to observe, with what excellent expressions you acquit your selves,
when, stating the case of this Quarrel, you make it known, with what affection
and constancy you have labored for the friendship of the United Provinces; how
carefully you have avoided all differences, and occasions of a war between the
Nations; yet that all Overtures of Amity and nearest Alliance have been
rejected; and how that in stead of giving satisfaction for all the injuries
they have don you, nothing would satisfy them, unless you should quietly and
tamely have laid your selves down at the feet of those who have thus endeavored
to ruin you; or unless you should have betrayed into those hands the Rights
and Safety of the People of this Nation: So that be^ing compelled and
necessitated into a most unwelcom wa^ begun upon you, you resolv to use such
ways and means, wherewith God shall enable you, to defend your selves, and
thereby to gain that just satisfaction and security, which cannot otherwise
be had. May you ever persist in this heroic Resolution, as to do no wrong to
any, so to defend your own Rights against all that shall dare to ravish them;
May you always have an ear open to receiv full Satisfaction and Security,
when offered, and a heart nobly enkindled with a magnanimous indignation, to
retort violence in the faces of bold Usurpers and Invaders. Had the
Netherlanders been content to keep within their proper Bounds, it had been
still our Interest (as of old) to have had Peace with them above other Nations;
but since they break out like an Inundation, and with a drawn Sword declare
prodigious Principles of Enmity against the Rights and Liberties of England,
it is presumed a thing unquestionable, that due Defenses ought to be made, till
they be reduced within their ancient Limits: For, if they should be permitted
in the least to Lord it at Sea; as they want not will and advantages, and have
given you experience of their encroaching and ambitious temper, so it is to be
feared they would be ever seeking opportunity, to impose a Lord upon you by
Land.

May you go on therefore ( Right honorable!) as you have begun, and do, and the
God of Heaven go along with you, upon terms of honor and Justice, in such a way,
that men may understand (as you will do no wrong) at what rate they must offend
you. Not only our eyes, but the eyes of all the world, are fixed upon the
carriage and conduct of this noble enterprise by Sea; when you have acquitted
your selves there* as no doubt you will do, having already given the same
demonstrations of wisdom and courage that you have don by Land, your Wars
(through God's blessing) will at once be ended; It will draw such a reverence
and repute to your affairs, that men will beware how they provoke you, and your
worst enemies despair of any future opportunity. The late Engagements and
Successes of your Fleets at Sea have shown, that the great God has owned you
there; That he has not left you destitute of means; That the old English
blood and sens of honor, run's still in the veins of your Seamen; and thereby
given you to understand, that he who has appeared so gloriously for you, in
the midst of wondrous difficulties, by Land, will also manifest his wonders in
the Deep, to make a final Accomplishment of the good Work by Sea; and being
himself alone invested with the absolute Soveraigntie of Sea and Land, be
pleased to continue you and your Successors his Lievtenants in both, for the
establishment of this Commonwealth, in a plenarie possession of its Rights and
Liberties to all Posterity. I am in my prayers and endeavors

(RIGHT HONORABLE!) Your Honor's most humble, and faithful Servant Marchamont
Nedham.
November 19. 1652.
THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
Some things there are that I thought fit here to forewarn the Reader; part
whereof may be necessary even for those who are in other things very well
instructed. The rest likewise not unprofitable for them, who, while they salute
Books by the way, are wont through a customarie vice of temeritie to stumble in
the very Threshold. Those things concern either the place of such Testimonies,
as are alleged; or some Circumstances of the Sea-Dominion which is proved; or
the Title of the Work. Among Testimonies, besides such as are in Print, and
Manuscripts reserved in private men's Libraries, there are not a few
(especially in the second Book) brought out of Records or public Monuments,
whose credit I suppose every indifferent Judge of matters will, as once the
Marcellus, l. 9. ff. tit. de Probationibus.
Senate of Rome did, allow better than other Witnesses (at least if there be
any difference) and therefore full. Those which lie in private men's Libraries,
you will find where they are kept, in the Margin: If omitted there, they are
in my own. But as to the Testimonies taken often out of public Records, some
likewise have the Place either of the Archive or Rolls, or the name of the
Record-keeper's Office so noted in the Margin, that thereby you may know
immediately where to find them. But some of these Records (that are very
frequently cited) have no place at all, nor any name of the Record-keeper
expressed, but the King for the most part and the Year, besides the name of the
Court-Roll, are only noted. As many as are of this kind, do relate some to
those years that pass betwixt the beginning of the reign of King John and the
end of Edward the Fourth; others to those years that succeed down to our time.
They which are of the former sort, having no place nor name of the
Record-keeper noted, are kept in the Archive of the Tower of London; but those
of the latter sort in the Chapel of the Rolls. It had been too slight a
matter, to have signified thus much here to such as are acquainted with our
English Records; because by the very name of the Court-Roll (as Rotulorum
Patentium, Rotulorum Clausorum, Rotulorum Parl^mentariorum, Rotulorum Franciae,
Vasconiae, Alemanniae, and others of that kind, which are Records belonging to
the English Chancerie) and by the name of the King, the very place also of the
Records is sufficiently known. But it is necessary to premise this in the
first place, as well for the sakes of my own Countrie-men who have been
Strangers to the Rolls, as in the behalf of Foreiners, to the end that, if
either of them perhaps have a mind exactly to consult the Original of any
testimony thence alleged, they might, when the Places are so described, the
more conveniently do it themselves at their own leisure, if present, or, if
absent, obtein it by the assistance of friends. For, the Record-keepers (who
have a special care to preserv them safely) do usually give admittance, at
seasonable hours, to all that pleas to consult them, and have them so placed
(as Novel Constit. 15. cap. 5. 2.
Justinian commanded concerning the Records of the Empire) (...), that they may
easily be found by them that search.

As to what concern's the aforesaid circumstances of Sea-Dominion, whereas
there are two Propositions here (so far as the term may be born in things of a
civil nature) made evident; The one, That the Sea, by the Law of Nature or
Nations, is not common to allmen, but capable of private Dominion or propriety
as well as the Land; The other, That the King of Great Britain is Lord of the
Sea flowing about, as an inseparable and perpetual Appendant of the British
Empire; it is not to be conceived, that any other kind either of Causes or
Effects of Sea-Dominion are here admitted, than such as have been of the
Dominion of an Island, Continent, Port, or any other Territory whatsoever or
Province, which is wont to be reckoned in the Royal Patrimony of Princes. Nor
that a less Dominion of the Sea than of the Land, is derived from the nature of
the Law received among Nations about the acquiring of Dominion and of Justice
it self, as from the Causes; nor that the Effects thereof are any other than
what are variously subservient to Compacts, Agreements, Leagues and Treaties,
Constitutions or Prescriptions of servitudes, and other things of that nature,
in the same manner as the effects of Dominion by Land. And therefore Seneca in
Mede^, Act. 2.
he said well of old, Nunc jam cessit Pontus, and Omnes
Patitur leges;
The Seals now made appropriate,
And yield's to all the Laws of state.


That is to say, all which are admitted in any other kind of Territories,
according to the difference of things, persons, times, and the Law of War and
Peace. And so Valerius to the Emperor Tiberius, The consent of men and gods,
says Prologo.
he, would have the regiment of Sea and Land be in thy power. There are other
Passages of the same kind in ancient Authors, whereby the Dominion of Land and
Sea is so conjoined, that they would by no means have it divided in respect of
each other, or that either the effects or causes of the Dominion of this should
be different from that of the other. But this, I suppose, is sufficiently
manifest to the more intelligent sort of men, without any Advertisement; though
it be necessary for such as too rashly, without any regard had to the
interposition of Leagues and Treaties, Agreement, or Law, dare boldly affirm
sometimes, that the cause of Sea-Dominion consist's only in the strength of
powerful Fleets, sometimes also of such as belong to Videsis Lud. Servin. in
placit. tom. 2. page 260.
Pirates; but the effect in restraining all others simply and perpetually.

But the Title of the Book need's a defense also among some, whose palate I hear
it does not pleas very well. They would not have, forsooth, the Mare Clausum
here handled, as an assertion of the Dominion of the Sea, but to denote the
time wherein the Seas were said to be shut or closed by the Ancients, as not
fit for Navigation. Every man know's, that from the third of the Ides of
Vegetius, de Re Militari, lib. 4. cap 39.
November until the sixth of the Ides of March, or betwixt some other l. 3. C.
tit. de naufragiis, and l. 3. tit ^od. in Cod. Theodosiano; Jul Ferret. de R.
Navali, lib. 11. 2. and 3.
beginning and ending of such a kind of winter-season, the Sea was, and was so
called, heretofore Clausum Shut; as the rest of the time, or in the
Summer-season, it was called Apertum Open, that is to say, more apt and
convenient for shipping. According to which sens it was said by Ad Quinctum
Fratrem, lib. 2. Epist. 5.
Cicero, while he was in exspectation of Letters from his brother Quinctus;
Adhuc Clausum Mare scio fuisse, I know the Sea has been shut until now. So
that in this sens, the Sirnames both of Clusius and Patulcius, might rightly
enough have been given to Neptune, as well as Janus. But yet, though the Title
had been taken from this Nation of the Seas being shut or closed, it would not
truly have been so reproveable. For, seeing it is in the power of an Owner, so
to use and enjoy his Own, that without some Compacts of Agreement, Covenants or
some special Right supervening, he may lawfully restrain any others whatsoever,
it cannot be amiss for any one to say, that the Seas, which might pass into
the Dominion of any person, are by the Law of Dominion shut to all others who
are not Owners or that do not enjoy such a peculiar Right; in the same manner
almost as that, whereby in that Winter-season they become unnavigable by the Law
of Nature, as says Vegetius. But truly there is another and far clearer
meaning of the Title. The simple sens of its terms does denote, that the Sea is
so shut up or separated and secluded for private Dominion, no otherwise than
the Land or a Port, by bounds, limits, and other Notes and circumstances of
private Dominion, and that by all kind of Law, that without the consent of the
Owner and those special restrictions and qualifications of Law, which variously
intervene, vanish, and return, all others are excluded from a use of the same.
For, most certain it is, that Claudere, to shut does not only denote the mere
simple Act of shutting, as we say de Januis oculisve clausis of gates or one's
eyes being shut, clauso agmine, or as it is in that of Pharsal. 3.
Lucan,* Brachia nec licuit vasto jactare Profundo;
Sed Clauso periere Mari. --


(which is spoken of the Seamen's being covered with the keel of their ship
turned upward) but also it very often signifie's that which is consequent
either to a denial of the free use of the thing shut, as also the propriety
and Dominion of him that shut's it; So says Venus in AEneid. 1.
Virgil to Jupiter; Quid Tro^s potuere? quibus tot funera passis
Cunctus ob Italiam Terrarum Claudiditur Orbis.


Clauditur Orbis, the World shut; that is to say a free use of the world is
forbidden them, or not permitted. And Lib. 4. Eleg. 10.
Propertius,

Non Clausisset aquas ipsa Noverca suas. He speak's of the sacred Fountains of
Juno, which were appropriate to the Female Sex as Owners, and so prohibited to
Hercules and all Males whatsoever. The Ambassador of the Tencteri speak's to
the same sens also to the Agrippinenses in Historiar. 4. ^*
Tacitus; We rejoice in your behalf, that at length ye shall be free among
them that are free. For, to this day, the Romans had shut up the Rivers and
Lands, and in a manner the very Aer, to hinder and restrain our Conferences and
Meetings. And in the same Author, Cerialis plead's to the Treveri and Lingones.
Except Tributes, says he, Other things remain in common, ye your selves for
the most part command our Legions; ye rule these and other Provinces. Nihil
separatum Clausumve, Nothing is separate or shut. Many other passages there are
of that kind. Pliny also says of the Seas themselves, Hist. Not. ^ lib. 2.
cap. 9.
Interiora Maria Clauduntur ut portu, the inner Seas are shut as in a Haven.
And the same Author in Ibid. lib. 36. cap. 15.
another, says, Mare Tyrrhenum a Lucrino molibus seclusum, the Tyrrhen Sea was
secluded or shut apart by Piles from the Lucrine. And Histor. 2.
Tacitus, tutum, seclusum Mare, the Sea was safe, being secluded. I hat
Panegyrist also to Constantius, says of the Franks that robbed heretofore in a
Piratick manner, as well in the Mediterranean as the open Sea, eventu
temeritatis ostenderant nihil esse Clausum piraticae disperationi quo navigiis
pateret accessus, they made it appear by the event of their rashness, that
nothing could be shut against the desperation of Pirates, where there might
be an access for Shipping. That is to say, the Sea was not so shut against
Pirates by the Roman Emperor, but that they freely used depredation therein. In
a word, that which is said by Hexaemer. lib. 5. ca. 10.
Ambrose, possidere fretum, and spatia Maris sibi vendicare Jure Mancipii, to
possess a Narrow Sea and challenge spaces of the Sea by right of subjection, is
the very same with that of De Re Rustica, lib. 8. cap. 16.
Columella; Maria ipsa Neptunumque claudere, to shut the Seas themselves and
Neptune; and so Mare Clausum is the Sea possessed in a private manner, or so
secluded both by Right and Occupation, that it cease to be common; that is,
being claimed by Right of subjection. Upon this ground it was, that those
Angles were called Anguli Clausares, whereby the A Centurie 2^^ Ac^^s
Centuries in the Assignations of the ancient Romans did so touch one another,
that it might be known thereby, how far the right of the possession of
particular persons did extend, as you may see in Lib. de Limitibus
Constituendis.
Hygenus. Neither is it necessary, that what may be rightly said in this sens
to be shut, should be shut or enclosed by some continued Fence, or by a
continued Tract of some eminent Limit like a Mound: But any kind of imaginary
Line, by straight Lines, crooked windings and Turnings and Angles, has taken
place in the designation of private Dominions, or in the shutting or enclosing
of a thing possessed in a civil acception (as it was usual among the Ancients
in those Fields which were termed Agri Occupatorii and Arcifinii) as well as
any eminent and continued Limit or Mound whatsoever. From whence it came to
pass, that in the Assignations of Colonies, they called those places Clausa and
Extraclusa whose Limits ^ere divided only by such kind of Lines. Lib. de
Limitibus Agrorum.
Julius Frontinus says; That Field my be called Ager extraclusus which lie's
within the bordering Line and the Centuries, and therefore extraclusus, because
it is closed with the bordering line beyond the limits. So the Territories,
assigned as well in the Colonies at this day carried into America, as in that
prodigious gift of Pope Alexander VI in the former Age, which is bounded by an
imaginary Line from the Laertius Cherubinus, Bullar. ^om. 1. page 393.
Hieronym. de Monte Brixiano, lib. de sinious regundis, cap. 7. ^8.
Artic to the Antarctic Pole, are closed by Lines of Longitude and Latitude
drawn through the degrees of Heaven, that they may be possessed in a private
manner. So the Greek Sea, which is within the Cyanean and Chelidonian Islands,
was by Plutarch. vita Cimonis.
Agreement shut and prohibited by the Athenians to the Persian Emperor. So the
Sea flowing about is shut or closed within the compass of the Royal Patrimony
of the British Empire. Other passages there are every where of the same kind.
But I enlarge my self too much in a thing so manifest. Therefore I forbear to
light a Candle to the Sun. Farewell Reader. From the Inner Temple, IV November
MDCXXXV.

The Contents of the first BOOK, according to the several Chapters.
CHAP. I. THe Division of the Work, and the Method of the first Book. Page 1
CHAP. II. What Occurrences seem to oppose the Dominion of the Sea, and what
Arguments are wont to be made against it. page 3 CHAP. III. What is meant by
the word SEA, in the question. Also a division of the Law, in order to the
Discourse. page 11 CHAP. IV. Of Dominion, both common to all, and Private. Also
its Original, either by Distribution, or Primarie Occupation. page 16 CHAP. V.
The Effects of private Dominion. And what regard has been had of the SEA, in
the more ancient Distributions and Divisions of things. page 24 CHAP. VI. That
the Law of God, or the Divine Oracles of holy Scripture, do allow a private
Dominion of the Sea. And that the wide Ocean also, which washes the Western
Coast of the holy Land, or at least a considerable part of it, was, according
to the Opinion of such as were learned in the Jewish Law, annexed to the Land
of Israel, by the Assignation or appointment of God himself. page 27 CHAP. VII.
That the Natural-Permissive Law (whereof any use may be in this place) is to
be derived out of the Customs and Constitutions of the more civilized and more
noble Nations, both ancient and modern. page 42 CHAP. VIII. The manner, whereby
the Law Permissive touching private Dominion of the Sea, may be drawn out of
the Customs of many Ages and Nations. That there were Testimonies hereof
manifest enough in the Fabulous Age. Also a word by the way, touching the
Mediterranean Sea, in possession of the Romans, when the command thereof was
committed to Cneius Pompeius. page 46 CHAP. IX. The first Dominion of the Sea
among the Greeks in the Historical Age; that is, the Dominion of King Minos, or
the Cretan. page 53 CHAP. X. That after Minos of Crete, seventeen Nations of
renown in the East, succeeding each other, did for very many years even without
intermission enjoy a Dominion of the Syrian, Egyptian, Pamphylian, Lydian, and
AEgean Sea, no otherwise than of the Continent or Islands. page 56 CHAP. XI.
Touching the Sea-Dominions of the L^^^demonians and Athenians. Moreo^er also,
that it was acknowledged not only by the Greeks, but also by the Persians, in
a Treaty of Peace. page 65 CHAP. XII. Other Testimonies, which are found
scattered up and down, touching the Dominion of the Sea, in the Customs of the
Eastern Nations. page 69 CHAP. XIII. Of the Spinetans, Tuscans, Carthaginians,
and other Lords of the Sea in the West. page 74 CHAP. XIV. The Sea-Dominion, of
the people of Rome, and of such as followed their Customs in the Eastern
Empire. page 77 CHAP. XV. The Dominion of the Sea, as it belonged to private
persons under the Roman Empire, together with that Sanction established in the
Eastern Empire; whereby the perpetual community of the Sea which was pretended
to by some, being utterly abolished as a thing unjust, the Dominion even of
private persons therein is asserted. page 89 CHAP. XVI. Touching the Dominion
of the SEA, according to the Customs of such Nations as are now in being.
First of the Adriatic Sea belonging to the Venetians; the Mare Ligusticum is
now called Mar Leone, and M^rdi G^nova.
Ligustick to the Genoeses, the Tyrrhen to the Tuscans, and lastly of the Sea
belonging to the Church, or Pope of Rome. page 99 CHAP. XVII. Concerning the
received Customs of the Portugals and Spaniards, about the Dominion of the Sea.
page 107 CHAP. XVIII. How far private Dominion over the Sea is admitted
according to the Customs, or opinion of the French. page: 111 CHAP. XIX. The
private Dominion of the Sea, according to the received Customs of the Danes,
the people of Norway, the Sweds, Polanders, and Turks. page 118 CHAP. XX. An
Answer to the objection, concerning Freedom of Passage to Merchants, Strangers,
and Seamen. page 123 CHAP. XXI. An Answer to that Objection concerning the
uncertain fluid nature of the Sea, and its continual Alteration. It is proved,
that Rivers also, and the adjoining Aer (which are more fluid and uncertain)
may become appropriate. page 127 CHAP. XXII. An Answer to the Objections
touching the defect of Bounds and Limits in the Sea; as also concerning its
magnitude and inexhaustible abundance. page 135 CHAP. XXIII. An Answer to such
Testimonies as have fallen from Writers treating of other subjects, and which are
usually alleged against Dominion of the Sea. page 145 CHAP. XXIV. An Answer to
the Objections taken out of Ancient Lawyers. page 150 CHAP. XXV. Touching the
Emperor Antoninus his Answer that himself was Sovereign of the world, but the
Law (as it is commonly translated) of the Sea; in L. Deprecatio, ff. tit. de
lege Rhodia. The true meaning of the said Answer, and a new, but genuine
Exposition of it. Also, that it comprehend's nothing which may in any wise
oppose a Dominion of the Sea. page 157 CHAP. XXVI. An Answer to the Opinions of
modern Lawyers, so far as they oppose a Dominion of the Sea; especially of
Fernannandus Vasquius, and Hugo Grotius. page 168
The Contents of the second BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe order or Method of those things that are to be handled in this
Book. The British Ocean divided into four parts. page 181 CHAP. II. That the
ancient Britains, did enjoy and possess the SEA of the same name; especially
the Southern and Eastern part of it, as Lords thereof, together with the
Island, before they were brought under the Roman power. p. 188 CHAP. III. That
the Britains were Lords of the Northern Sea, before they were subdued by the
Romans. And that the Sea and the Land made one entire Body of the British
Empire. page 201 CHAP. IV. That the Dominion of the British Sea, followed the
Conquest of great Britain it self, under the Emperors Claudius and Domitian.
page 205 CHAP. V. Touching the Dominion of the Romans in the British Sea, as
an appendant of the Island, from the time of Domitian to the Emperor
Constantius Chlorus, or Diocletian. page 211 CHAP. VI. Touching the Dominion of
the Southern and Eastern Sea, as an appendant of the British Empire, from the
time of Constantine the Great till the Romans quitted the Island. That it was
all under the Command of the Count of the Saxon Shore throughout Britain. Also
concerning the British Navy under the Romans. page 217 CHAP. VII. An
Examination of the Opinion of some learned men, who would have the Saxon Shore,
from whence that Count or Commander of the Sea throughout Britain had his Title
to be the British Shore on this side of the Sea; which is plainly proved to
be falls. page 231 CHAP. VIII. Some Evidences concerning the Soveraigntie and
inseparable Dominion of the Isle of Britain and the Sea belonging thereto, out
of Claudian, and certain Coins of the Emperor Antoninus Pius. page 242 CHAP.
IX. Touching the Dominion of the British Sea, after that the Inhabitants had
freed themselves from the Roman power. page 247 CHAP. X. It is proved, both
from the very beginning of the Saxon's Reign, as also from their Forces and
Victories by Sea, that the English-Saxons, and Danes, who ruled the South part
of Britain, had Dominion over the Sea. page 251 CHAP. XI. The Sea-Dominion of
the English-Saxons, and Danes, during their Reigns in Britain, observed in like
manner, from such Tributes and Duties of their Fiduciarie Clients or Vassals,
as concerned the maintenance of the Navy. Also concerning the Tribute or
Payment called Danegeld, which was wont to beelevied for the Guard of the Sea.
page 259 CHAP. XII. The Testimonies of Edgar and Canutus, Kings of England,
with others, expressly declaring the Dominion which they and their predecessors
had over the Sea. Together with an observation touching the Nations which in
that Age were seated upon the opposite Shore. page 273 CHAP. XIII. Several
Testimonies concerning the Sea-Dominion of the Kings of England, since the
Norman Conquests, set forth in general heads. page 284 CHAP. XIV. That the
Kings of England since the coming in of the Normans, have perpetually enjoied
the Dominion of the Sea flowing about them, is in the first place proved from
the Guard or Government thereof, as of a Province or Territory; that is to
say, from the very Law of the English Admiraltie. page 287 CHAP. XV. The
Dominion of the English Sea asserted from those Tributes or Customs that were
wont to be imposed, paid, and demanded for the Guard or Protection thereof
after the Norman Conquest. page 295 CHAP. XVI. Observations touching the
Dominion of the English and Irish Sea, from the tenor and variety of those
Letters Patents or Commission Roial, whereby the Admirals of England were wont
to be put in Authority. page 305 CHAP. XVII. It is proved by words plain
enough in the form of the Commissions for the Government or command of the high
Admiral of England, from ancient to the present time, that the Sea, for whose
guard or defense, he was appointed by the King of England as Lord and
Sovereign, was ever bounded toward the South, by the shore of Aquitain,
Normandy, and Picardie. page 312 CHAP. XVIII. Touching the Admirals of the
Kingdom of France, or those constituted upon the opposite Shore; their
Original, nature, and variety. That the Sea it self flowing between Britain
and France, is not contained in that command of his, as of one that is Governor
of a Territory or Province; nor is there any thing in it that may oppose the
Dominion of the King of England by Sea. page 321. CHAP. XIX. That in the
Dominion of those Islands lying before the shore of France, which has ever
been enjoied by the Kings of England, it appears that the possession of the
Sea wherein they are situate, is derived from their Predecessors. page 333
CHAP. XX. The Dominion and possession of the Sea asserted on the behalf of the
Kings of England, from that leav of preter-Navigation or passage which has
been usually either granted by them to Foreiners or desired from them. page 344
CHAP. XXI. That License has been usually granted to Foreiners, by the Kings of
England, to fish in the Sea; Also, that the Protection given to Fishermen by
them, as in their own Territory, is an ancient and manifest Evidence of their
Dominion by Sea. page 355 CHAP. XXII. The Dominion of England made evident from
the Laws and Limits usually set by our Kings in the Sea, to such Foreiners as
were at enmity with each other, but in amity with the English. And concerning
the King's Closets or Chambers in the Sea. Also touching that singular
privelege of perpetual truce (or exemption from hostility) in the Sea about
those Isles which lie before the shore of Normandy. page 363 CHAP. XXIII.
Certain public Records, wherein of old the Dominion of the Sea is, by the way,
asscribed to the Kings of England, both by the King himself, and also by the
Estates of Parliament, debating of other matters, and that in express words, and
with very great deliberation, as a known and most undoubted Right. page 375
CHAP. XXIV. Of diverse Testimonies in our own Law Books, and the most received
Customs, whereby the Sea-Dominion of the King of England, is either asserted or
admitted. page 382 CHAP. XXV. Son ancient Testimonies of less account, touching
the Sea-Dominion, whereof we treat. page 394 CHAP. XXVI. That the Sea-Dominion
of the Kings of England is acknowledged by Foreiners, whom it most concerns, by
their usual striking of Sails, according to ancient Custom. Also concerning two
Edicts or Ordinances that were set forth about this thing, by the Kings of
France. page 398 CHAP. XXVII. A Recognition or Acknowledgment of the
Sea-Dominion of the King of England, made by very many of the Neighbor-Nations
round about, in an ancient Libel publicly exhibited, or in a Bill of Complaint
instituted by them, together with the English, against Reyner Grimbald Governor
of the French Navy. Also, touching a Recognition of this kind implied in his
defense. page 403 CHAP. XXVIII. A Copy, or Transcript of the Libel or Bill of
Complaint, mentioned in the former Chapter. page 415. CHAP. XXIX. A Recognition
or acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominion of the Kings of England, made by the
Flemings in an Ambassy to Edward the Second. page 429 CHAP. XXX. Of the
Dominion of the King of Great Britain in the Irish and Western Sea, considered
singly and apart by it self. page 433. CHAP. XXXI. Touching the Dominion of the
King of Great Britain in the Scottish Sea, especially toward the East and North.
page 443 CHAP. XXXII. Touching that Right which belong's to the King of Great
Britain, in the main and open Sea of the North. And the Conclusion of the Work.
page 447
Amend the Errors thus.
Page 2. lin. 31. read Question. p. 15. l. 25. r. Hostages, blot out Right. p.
29. l. 2. also over all other. p. 33. l. 7. r. Thus it is. p. 38. l. 27. r.
within the Creeks, p. 49. l. 31. r. that of Neptune. p. 53. l. 29. r. in any
wise. p. 56. l. 6. r. or which. ibid. l. 14. r. translation. p. 61. l. 2. r.
hereto. p. 64. l. 22. r. in the first. p. 70. 31. r. they required. p. 71. l.
9. r. Antigonus wittily replied, that he himself: p. 74. l. 6. r. Counsel. p.
75. l. 21. r. first. ibid. l. 28. r. League that was. p. 79. l. 28. r. Misc^um.
p. 82. l. 5. r. account. ibid. l. 26. r. Theodosius. p. 87. l. 13. r. that it
cannot. p. 94. l. 30. r. that servitude. p. 95. l. 14. r. that servitude was
imposed. p. 95. l. 19. r. this servitude. p. 98. l. 2. r. ^^lls. p. 105. l. 12.
r. of. p. 106. l. 10. r. or. p. 123. l. 25. r. places according. p. 129. l. 11.
r. I run. p. 142. l. 32. r. might be. p. 144. l. 11. r. Alcia^^^. p. 156. l.
1. r. contemporatie. p 161. l. 19. r. were it (says. p. 163. l. 9. r. cotton.
p. 184. l. 12. r. Bacang^. p. 189. l. 4. r. too much. p. 190. l. 23. r. Their.
p. 192. l. 27. r. trimming. p. 203. l. 2^. r. I am. p. ^^^. l. 4. r. thrive. p.
218. l. 30. r. throughout Britain. p. 221. l. 6. r. throughout Britain. p. 232.
l. 17. r. at that time. p. 243. l. 31. r. or strand. p. 250. l. 28. r.
Danemarc. p. 255. in the margin. r. Co^^onian^. p. 281. l. 12. r. Achilles
Tatius. p. 303. l. 29. r. enten^. p. 306. l. 8. r. Office of our. p. 315. l.
25. r. ^uis^es. p. 316. l. 20. r. Guis^es and Amiens. p. 317. l. 6. r. the
opposite. p. 322. l. 31. r. piece-meale. p. 328. l. 24. r. Account. p. 333. l.
14. r. Casarea. p. 336. l. 2. r. so that it. ibid. l. 5. r. knew. ibid. l. 23.
r. English by Norman. p. 339. l. 16. r. the Islanders. p. 384. l. 31. r. of a
public. p. 413. l. 1. r. was his Plduciarie. p. 448. l. 11. r. Fero^.

OF THE DOMINION, OR, Ownership of the Sea. BOOK I.
The Division of the Work, and the Method of the first Book. CHAP. I.
THE Design being to treat of the Dominion or Ownership of the Sea,
incompassing the Isle of Great Britain, as belonging to the Empire of the same;
two main, particulars are chiefly to be* considered. The one concern's matter
of Law, the other matter of Fact; both of them being denominated (as is usual)
from the major part: For, as the point of Law has many things mingled with it,
which manifestly arise from matter of Fact; so this of Fact comprehend's not a
few which relate unto that of Law. As to what concern's the point of Law, this
Question falls chiefly under debate, to wit, Whether by Law the Sea be
capable of private Dominion, or Propriety? And by matter of Fact is meant only
such a collection of Testimonies, or clear showing forth of Evidences by which
may be proved and maintained, The long and continual conjunction with the
British Empire, of enjoiment and possession, or lawful prescription; whereupon
as on a most strong Title, the Dominion or Ownership of the same Empire herein
may be founded; it being first made manifest, that the Sea it self is not
only not repugnant by any Law to Dominion or Ownership, but every way capable
thereof. To each of these Particulars a several Book is allotted. In the first,
is discussed matter of Law: In the second, that which concern's matter of Fact:
For, except manifest proof be made of the first point, it will be utterly in
vain to discourse about the second. But for those things which are to be
handled in the first Book, it seemed meet to observe such a Method, as in the
first place to lay open the Rise or Original ground of those Disputes that have
occasioned this inquiry into the point of Law, together with the Opinions of
those men, who deny that the Sea is capable of private Dominion or Ownership,
or that it may pass into the Propriety of any one particular, so as in the
mean time to exclude it from being common to the rest of mankind. Next are
premised some things, for explaining the terms of the Questions, that it may be
clearly thence understood, as well what kind of Mediums are to be used, as
what the Thing is, whereof we intend to Treat; lest by neglect of such a
Course, we be perplex't with Doubts about the notion and acceptance, either
of the Terms themselves, or of the Subject in Controversy. After this
preparation thus duly made, it is then demonstrated, that not only no kind of
Law whatsoever, rightly understood, does deny a Dominion over the Sea, but that
all kinds of Law, even the most known and approved, whereof there may be any
use in Disputes of this nature, do acknowledge and allow a propriety and
private Dominion over the Sea, as well as the Land. Lastly, the Objections
usually brought against such Dominion or Ownership of the Sea, are cleared and
answered; And with these we shall now begin; for the Method of the second Book
is more conveniently put there before it.

What Occurrences seem to oppose the Dominion of Sea, and what Arguments are
wont to be made against it. CHAP. II.
THe Arguments usually brought against the Dominion of the Sea, are of three
sorts. Some are drawn from freedom of Commerce, Passage, and Travel; Others from
the nature of the Sea; and a third sort from the Writings and Testimonies of
learned men. And as to what concern's the freedom of Commerce or Traffic, and
Travel, this some men affirm to be so natural, that they say it can no where
be abolished by any Law or Custom; yea, and that by the Law of Nations it is
unjust to deny Merchants or Strangers the benefit of Port, Provisions,
Commerce, and Navigation; Adding moreover, that wars have been justly commenced
upon denial of Port, Trade, and Commerce; And for proof, they produce the
example of the Megarans T^u^idid. lib* 1* (...) Diodor. Si^ lib. 12.
against the Athenians, the Bononians Sigon. de Regno Italiae, lib. 20.
against the Venetians, and of the Spaniard against those of the West Indies;
for that, the expedition of Spain against the Americans is pretended, by very
learned men to be upon a Franciscus Victoria de Indis, tract. 2.. 2. 3. and 4.
Joannes Solorzanos de Indiar. Jure lib. 2. cap* 20.. 34 and seqq. Gregor. Lopez
in Partid. 2. tit 23. l. 2.
just Ground, because they denied them a freedom of Commerce within their Shores
and Ports. And in justification hereof, They use that of Virgil, as spoken out
of the Law of Nations; Quod genus AEneid. 1.
hoc hominum, quaeve hunc tam barbara morem
Permittit patria? ^ospitio prohibemur Arenae.
What barbarous Land this custom own's? what sort
Of men are these? We are forbid their Port.


Now, if such a Propriety or Dominion of the Sea were admitted, that men might
be forbidden the liberty of Navigation and Ports, at the will of any
Proprietor, then, say they, it would be an infringement of that Law of
Commerce and Travel (by them styled the Law of Nature) which they would not
have to be endured.

Touching the second sort of Objections drawn from the nature of the Sea it
self, it is commonly alleged; That the Sea is altered and shifted every moment,
and the state of it, through a continued Succession of new waters, always so
uncertain, and remain's so little the same in all things (the Channel only
excepted) that it is impossible it should ever be retained in the possession
of any one Particular. Moreover, they say the nature of Possession consist's
chiefly in a separation or distinction of Limits and Bounds, but no such
Materials or Instruments can possibly be found in the Sea, as that the Law for
regulation of Bounds, which has a principal place in all Controversies about
Dominion or Ownership may be grounded thereupon. They produce also a saying
out of Hexaemer. lib. cap. 10.
St Ambrose, speaking about the lurking-holes or holds of Fishes; Geometram
audivimus, Thalassometram nunquam audivimus; and tamen Pisces mens^ras suas
norunt. I have heard of a Geometrician, or one that could measure Land; but
never of a Thalassometrician, one that could measure or lay out Bounds in the
Sea; and yet the Fishes know their own Bounds. They are pleased likewise to
insinuate, what a world of Sea room there is, that all Nations may have
sufficient for watering, fishing, and Navigation: And therefore that the
peculiar Dominion thereof is by no means to be appropriated unto any.

A third sort of Arguments lie's in those Testimonies that are drawn out of
ancient Writers; partly out of old Poets, Divines, and others writing of other
subjects; partly from such Lawyers as handle the matter purposely. Of the first
kind is that of Gripus the Fisherman, and Trachalio the Slave, as they are
brought upon the Stage by Plautus, quarrelling about a Bag that was found in
the Sea. In Rudente, Act. 4.
Gr. Mare quidem commune certo est omnibus. Tr. Assentio.
Qui minus hunc communem quaeso mihi oportet esse vidulum?
In Mari inventum est. Commune est. --
Gr. The Sea is common certainly to all.
Tr. True.
Why not this Bag to me then too, thou braw^*
It was found within the Sea.
Therefore common it must be.


They produce likewise a piece of a supplicatorie speech of Latona, to a
rustic Rout in Lycia, as it in Ovid (...)
, Quid prohibetis Aquas? usus communis Aquarum est.
Nec Solemn proprium Natura, nec Era fecit,
Nec tenues Undas. In publica munera veni.
-- why hinder you, said she,
The use of Water, that to all is free?
The Sun, Aer, Water, Nature did not frame
Peculiar; a public Gift I claim.


And that of Virgil too (...)
-- Littusque rogamus
Innocuum, and cunctis und^mque, Aur^mque patentem.
Nothing but what is common we implore,
Free Aer, and Water, and a harmless shore.


Phaenicides says also in Athenaeus (...).
, (...), that the Sea is common. To which may be added that memorable saying
of certain Jewish Rabbis, who, when they acknowledged Alexander to be Lord of
the whole world, did it nevertheless with this Caution, that they conceived he
had by his Conquests gained a Soveraigntie only over the Earth or dry Land,
but none at all over the Sea; it being subject only to God himself, as its
sole Commander. The words are these out of the Ebrew, Gemara Hierosolymit.
(...). A^^da Zara, s^^ de cultu extraneo. fol. 42. col. 3. ^^p. 3.
Non Dominabatur in Mari, sed Deus O. M. Dominatur, tam in Mari quam in
Tellure. He ruled not over the Sea, but God Almighty is he only that rule's
by Sea as well as by Land.

The second kind of Arguments here, found among the Lawyers, are of two sorts.
Naturali jure, omnium communia sunt illa, Aer, Aqua profluens, and Mare, and
per hoc littora Maris. Item, Nemo ad littus Maris accedere probibetur piscandi
caussa, dum tamen villis and aedificiis and Monimentis abstineatur; quia non
Juris Gentium, sicut and Mare. Idque Divus Pius piscatoribus Formianis and
Capenatis rescripsit. By the Law of Nature, the Aer, Rivers, the Sea, and its
Shores, are common to all. Also, None are prohibited to use fishing upon the
Shores, as long as they meddle not with Lowns, Buildings and Monuments, in
regard these are not common by the Law of Nations, as is the Sea; And this was
prescribed by the Emperor Antonius Pius, to the Fisher men of Formiae and
Capena; which are the very words used by L. 2. and l. 4. ff. de Rerum Divisione.
Marcianus the Lawyer* and by Tit. eodem, and quidem.
Justi^^ion in his Institutions. And Ulpian, L. 13. ff. tit. communia
praediorum.
Mari, quod Natura omnibus patet, servitus imponi privata lege non potest. The
Sea, being by Nature free for all, cannot be vassalised by any particular
Law. And in another place, says he; L. 13. 7. ff. tit. Injuriis, and vide eum
l. 24. ff. de damno infecto.
Mare commune omnium est and litora, sicut Aer. Et est saepissime rescriptum,
non posse quem piscari prohiberi. The Sea and Shores are common to all, as the
Aer. And we find it very often prescribed or commanded by the Emperors, that
none be prohibited from Fishing: With which agree's also that saying of L. 3.
ff. N^ quid in publico ^ 1.
Celsus. Maris esse usum communem omnibus hominibus ut Aeris. A freedom of the
Sea, as well as of the Aer, is common to all men* In like manner, some would
have it that the Roman Emperor himself was Lord only of the Land, and not of
the Sea; for proof whereof, they mention an Answer given by the Emperor
Antoninus; D. D. ad lib. 9. ff. ad lege^^ Rhodiam.
Se quidem mundi Dominum esse; legem autem Maris; That himself was Lord of the
world, but the Law of the Sea; pretending this Answer of his to be commonly
understood, as if he refused to arrogate the Dominion of the Sea unto himself.
And in the Eclog. basilic. lib. 50. tit. 1. cap. 13.
Basilica or Laws of the Eastern Empire, we find it thus written, (...) The
Shores are within the power of all men. So also says Michael Attaliates, a man
learned in the Laws of that Empire, Pragmat. tit. 2.
(...) Some things are common to all, as Aer, Fountains, the Sea, Shores, and
Rivers. And the sum is, that some ancient Lawyers of both Empires write, that
the Sea is common to all men, by the Law of Nature and Nations; which if it
were truly proved, either from the nature of the Sea it self, or from either of
those Laws, then it could not possibly be admitted, that the Sea might become
the peculiar possession of any one, unless a change were made of the Law of
nature, which is commonly said to be altogether unchangeable; or that the
consent of Nations, that have interest herein, were obtained to admit of such a
Dominion or Ownership. And therefore from thence they seem to hold, that a
Dominion over the Sea cannot be atteined by any ancient usage, custom or
prescription, nor under any other pretense or title whatsoever, for (faie they)
no Plea or Bar is to be allowed against nature, Nor (as Neque praescriptio
longae possessionis ad obtinenda loca jure Gentium publica solet concedi. li.
45. tit. de usucapionibus and usurpationibus.
Papinian says) is a Prescription of long possession wont to be admitted for
the holding of such places as are public and common by the Law of Nations. And
these ancient Lawyers here mentioned are followed by no small Train of
Interpreters; though nevertheless there are not a few even of them, who
restrain and qualify that ancient opinion more ways then one, touching the
necessity of a common Intercours and freedom at Sea, as we shall show
hereafter.

But of our modern Lawyers, those that have appeared most forward in opposing a
Right of Dominion over the Sea, are only two, both indeed very eminent men,
but of unequal learning and elegancie of wit; by name Fernandus Vasquius the
Spaniard, and Hugo Grotius the Hollander: the former an honorable Counselor to
King Philip the 3. of Spain in his high Court of Exchequer. The later was
heretofore Advocate Fiscal of Holland, Zeland, and West-Friesland, and most
deservedly adorned with diverse other honors in his own Country; a man of an
acute judgment, and for his excellency in all kinds of learning incomparable.
But Vasquius, in his discourse both of the Law of Nature and Nations, as also
concerning the Rights of Dominion, Prescription, and other things of that
nature, speak's to this effect. Fernandus Vasq. Controvers. illustr: lib. 2. c.
89. ^ ^. Ex his apparet quam suspecta sit etc.
From hence (says he) it appears how little esteem is to be had of their
opinion, who suppose that the Genoeses or Venetians may without injury, forbid
others to sail through the Gulf in their respective Seas, as if they could
have laid claim to those Seas by Prescription; which is not only contrary to
the Imperial Laws (above mentioned) but also against the Primitive Law of
nature and nations, which cannot be altered. And that it is against this Law,
is evident; because by the same Law not only the Seas, but all other immovable
things whatsoever, were common. And although in aftertime that Law came to be
abolish't in part* so far as concern's the Dominion and Propriety of Lands,
which being enjoied in common, according to the Law of nature, were afterward
distinguished, divided, and so separated from that common use; yet it has been
otherwise, and is still, as to the Dominion of the Sea, which from the
beginning of the world to this present day, is, and ever has been in common,
without the least alteration, as it is generally known. And though I hear many
of the Portugals are of this opinion, that their King has had such an ancient
Title by Prescription in that vast Ocean of the West Indies, so that other
Nations have no right to sail through those Seas; and also that the ordinary
sort of our own Nation of Spain seem to be of the same opinion, that no people
whatsoever, but Spaniards, have any right to sail through that immens and most
spacious Sea, to those Indian Countries that have been subdued by the most
mighty Kings of Spain (as if they only had a right by Prescription thereto;)
yet all these men's opinions are no less vain and foolish, then theirs, who use
to dream the same things of the Genoeses and Venetians. The folly of which
opinions appears the more clearly even in this respect; because neither of
those Nations singly considered can prescribe ought against themselves; that is
to say, neither the Republic of Venice against it self; nor that of Genoa
against it self, nor the Kingdom of Spain against it self, nor that of Portugal
against it self; for there ought ever to be a difference between the Agent and
Patient: Much less can they prescribe ought to the prejudice of other Nations,
because the Law of Prescriptions is purely Civil. Therefore such a Law can be
of no force, in deciding Controversies that happen betwixt Princes or people
that acknowledge no Superior: For the peculiar Civil Laws of every Country are
of no more value, as to Foreign Countries and Nations, or their people, then if
such a Law were not in Being, or never had been; and therefore in
Controversies of that nature recours must be had unto the common Law of
Nations Original or Secondarie; which Law certainly did never admit of such a
Prescription or usurpation of Title over the Sea. Other matters he has of the
same kind, being a very confident opposer of any peculiar Dominion over the
Sea.

But in the year MD CIX (it being the year after that large Treaty held at
the Hage betwixt the Spaniard and the Hollander, about freedom of Trade and
Navigation to the East Indies) there was published that Book of Hugo Grotius,
entitled MARE LIBERUM, or a discourse concerning that Right which the
Hollanders have to Trade in the Indies. Wherein he endeavor's first to prove,
that, by the Law of Nations, there ought to be such a freedom of Navigation
for all men whatsoever, which way they pleas, so that they cannot, without
injury, be molested at Sea. Next, that the Atlantic and Southern Ocean, or
the Right of Navigation to the Indies, is not, nor indeed can be, any peculiar
of the Portugalls: forasmuch as the Sea (says he, according to the Mari
Libero cap. 5. Mare proprium omnino alicujus fieri non potest; Quia natura
commune hoc esse nonpermittit, sed jubet.
Laws and reasons already mentioned) can in no wise become the Propriety of any
one; because nature not only permit's, but require's it should be common.
Several other passages he has about this matter, in his excellent Book De
Jure Belli and pacis; of which more hereafter. Thus much in brief, concerning
those arguments that are usually brought against the Dominion or Ownership of
the Sea. The next thing therefore is to explain the sens of the Question, and
its terms.

What is meant by the word SEA, in the Question. Also a division of the LAW,
in order to the discourse. CHAP. III.
AS to what concern's the present Question, Whether the Sea be capable of
private Dominion, we take the word CAPABLE in the same sens, as it was used by
the Emperor Traian in an Epistle of his, to his beloved Pliny; Plin. (...).
10. Epist. 59.
Solum peregrinae civitatis capax non esse dedicationis quae fit jure nostro;
The soil of a strange City is not capable of such a dedication as is made by
our Law Moreover, we shall explain what is meant by the SEA, as also by those
Terms of LAW and DOMINION. By the SEA we understand the whole Sea, as well the
main Ocean or Out-land Seas, as those which are within-land, such as the
Mediterranean, Adriatic, AEgean or Levant, British, and Baltic Seas, or any
other of that kind, which differ no otherwise from the main, then as
Homogeneous or Similary parts of the same body do from the whole. But the Law
(as it is the rule, measure, and pointing out of things lawful or unlawful)
falls under a twofold consideration. Fither as it is Obligatorie, which is
called also Preceptive; or as it is Permissive, which is also by writers
commonly termed Concessive. As Obligatorie, it is known by such things as are
commanded or forbidden, as to give every man his due, not to forswear, and the
like. As Permissive, it is set forth by things whose use is neither commanded
nor forbidden, but permitted; as in the very Act of buying, selling,
infranchisement, framing conditions of contract according to the will of the
contractors, and many more of the same nature. But both these kinds of LAW
concern either mankind in general, that is, all Nations, or not all. That
which relate's to the generality of mankind, or all Nations, is either
Natural or Divine. That is, either manifested by the light of nature or the use
of right reason, being elegantly described by Tertullian to be the Lex
communis in publico mundi, and Tabulis naturalibus scripta. Lib. de Corona
militis.
Common Law written throughout the whole world, in the very Books of nature;
and by the Grecians called (...) Thucyd. l. 4. Polyb. l. 2. and alij.
the Law of mankind, and by the Civilians the Primitive Law of Nations; or else
it is^ declared and set down in those Divine Oracles that have been committed
to writing: Both which may properly be termed the universal Law of Nations, or
the Common Law of mankind. And whatever is Obligatorie in either of these,
either out of the nature of the thing it self, or rather from the authority of
the father of nature, is reputed by men to be unchangable; according to that
saying so often used by Andronic. Rhodius, Michael Ephesius,, Eustratius, alii,
ad Arist. Nicomach. 5. cap. 10. Cicero, apud Lactantium lib. 6. cap. 8.
Philosophers, D. Thom. Aquin. 1. 2a. q. 94. art. 5. etc.
Divines, and Instit. de Jure Not.. sed Naturalia.
Lawyers, That the rights and Laws of nature are immutable, Which cannot be
said of the Permissive Law, whether Natural or Divine, relateing to mankind in
general: for it is obvious to every man, that as Permissive, it must needs be
various and changable, according to the judgment and pleasure of persons in
power; and therefore subject to Repealings, Qualifications, and daily
Alterations; whereas in the mean time that kind which is Obligatorie may admit
Additions or Inlargements (such as may serve for more certainty and convenience
of observation,) but no Alterations, in any wise to diminish it is authority.
Out of such Additions as are made to that which is Obligatorie, and Alterations
of that which is Permissive, another kind of Law takes it is rise, which is of
a more narrow Sens and Acceptance, and relate's, not to all Nations or the
Universalitie of mankind, but only to some particulars thereof, and it is
ordinarily well termed Positive (as being positively ordained either by God or
men;) Sometimes also it is termed Philo Judaeus, lib. de Joseph seu de Viro
Clvili.
Civil, and an Addition of right Reason. This Positive Law may be divided into
that which is singular and peculiar to any one particular Nation or Society of
mankind (as was the Instit. tit. de p^tri^ potestate ^. Jus au^em
Law concerning Paternal power among the Romans, and the custom of the
Demost^hen. Orat. contra Aristocratem.
Athenians touching the same;) or into that which is received by diverse
Nations. Again this last is divided into two parts; either into that which
bind's diverse Nations jointly, equally, and indifferently, by some common
obligation; or ell into that which bind's diverse Nations or people, not
jointly, and equally, or by any common obligation, but singly and by Accident.
And of this threefold kind of Positive Law, we may call the first the Law
purely Civil, as it relate's to any one particular civil society. The second
the Common Law of diverse Nations, so named from some common tie or obligation
betwixt them. The third the Law of some or diverse Nations, Civil or Domestic,
by reason of that Domestic and Civil tie only, whereby they are bound singly
among themselves, without any obligation to each other in common. As for
example, the Laws of the XII Tables that were brought from Athens to Rome,
remained in force in both Nations, as well in the Roman, as in the Athenian;
but not by any common or mutual obligation between them: And therefore that Law
of the XII Tables ought much more properly to be called the Civil Law of those
Nations, then simply of both Nations (in any such sens as import's a
Joint-Interest or Communion.) But as to that which jointly concern's diverse
Nations by mutual obligation, that is, the Common Law of diverse Nations, it is
divisible likewise into two parts, to wit, into that which is Imperative over
diverse Nations or people; or that which is Intervenient. By the Imperative Law
of Nations, is meant that which is observed or receiv's Authority among several
Nations or people, who are subject to supreme Powers that otherwise are
distinct, and this by reason of an Obligation equally common to them all, but
derived from some other, and enjoined by some special Command, either from God or
man. Of this kind was that Law of the D^lopes, the Magnesians, Phthiotae,
Thessalians, and other people of Greece, who being equally obliged by the
command of Pausanias in Phocicis, Strabo lib. 9. AEschines in Orat. (...).
Acrisius King of the Argives, submitted to the jurisdiction of the grand
Parliament or Assembly of Amphictyones. Of the same kind likewise was that
Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
Military Law enjoined by God, not only to the People of Israel, but also to
the Canaanites with whom they were to wage war: For, they were both obliged by
the Authority of him that commanded, though after a diverse manner. And when any
Nations, in obedience to the Pope's Authority and command, do alike submit to
one and the same Law, it may be rightly called the Imperative Law of Nations.
But that is to be called the Intervenient Law of Nations, which take's it is
rise, not from any command imposed upon several Nations in common, but through
the intervention either of some Compact, or Custom; and it is commonly styled
the Secondarie Law of Nations: The principal heads whereof are contained in the
Laws about proclaiming War, Ambassie, Prisoners of War, Hostages, Right,
Remitter upon return from Captivity, Leagues and Covenants, Commerce, and
other matters of that Nature which usually intervene betwixt diverse Nations.
For, as much as in these Laws here spoken of, it is in several Nations wholly
composed of such Additions as have been made to the universal Obligatorie Law
of Nations, and of such Alterations as have accrued to the Universal
Permissive, and no more may challenge the name of Imperative or Intervenient.
And it is most plain, that the rest retain's still the name of the Universal or
Primitive Law of Nations. Moreover also, the Imperial Law, which usually take's
place in all Controversies about the aforesaid Particulars of the Intervenient
Law, so far as it agree's with the Universal Law of Nations, Natural or Divine,
is to be comprised under the same Notion; But as by the consent of some
certain Nations, with whom it is in use, diverse principal heads and
determinations of it (being no part of the Universal Law) are so made use of,
it most clearly falls under the name of the Intervenient Law of some Nations.
Lastly, as it is received and used at home by some particular People in their
Courts of Judicature, it is to be called the Law Civil or Domestic of diverse
Nations. And thus having given you a plain Scheme of the Law, in all those
various Notions and Acceptions that are to be used in the Controversy; it
remain's that in the next place that of Dominion or Ownership be taken into
consideration.

Of Dominion, both Common to all, and Private. Also its Original, either by
Distribution, or Primarie Occupation. CHAP. IV.
DOminion, which is a Right of Using, Enjoying, Alienating, and free Disposing,
is either Common to all men as Possessors without Distinction, or Private and
peculiar only to some; that is to say, distributed and set apart by any
particular States, Princes, or persons whatsoever, in such a manner that others
are excluded, or at least in some sort barred from a Liberty of Use and
Enjoiment. As to the first kind of Dominion, or that which is Common to All,
frequent mention is made of it, in relation to that State of Community, which
was in ancient times. And of which Virgil speak's in his Georgicks Georgic.
Nec signare quidem, aut partiri limite Campum
Fas erat; in medio quaerebant --
Nor was it lawful then their Lands to bound;
They lived in common All upon the Ground.


And Seneca In Octavia, Act. 2.
, -- pervium cunctis iter;
Communis usus omnium rerum fuit.
All men might pass what way they pleased to choose,
And all things were exposed for common use.


And Tibullus Ad Messalam. Eleg. lib. 1. 3.
, Non domus ulla fores habuit; non fixus in agris,
Qui regeret certis finibus arva, lapis.
Men did not then with doors their Houses build,
Nor were they wont with stones to bound the Field.


Many more there are of the like nature. But yet Divin. Institut. lib. 5. seu
de Iustitia. cap. 5.
Lactantius would have them to be so understood, not that we should conceiv
that nothing at all was private or peculiar in those days; but in a figurative
sens after the manner of the Poets, to let us know that men were then so free
and generous, that they did not hoord up the fruits of the Earth for themselves,
nor dwell in an obscure solitary manner, but admitted the poor to partake of
the benefit of their labors. And truly, we find diverse passages plainly
pointing out this state of Community, in that Divine Act of Donation, whereby
Noah and his three sons Shem, Cham and Japhet (who represented as it were the
person of Adam, for the restoring of mankind after the flood) became
Joint-Lords of the whole world. The form of Donation, is expressed in these
words, Genesis cap. 9. v. 1. 2.
Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the Earth. And the fear of you, and
the dread of you shall be upon every Beast of the Earth, and every Foul of the
Aer, upon all that moves upon the Earth, and upon all the Fishes of the Sea,
into your hands are they delivered. Also, Justin the Historian speak's aptly
and to the purpose, Erant Saturni aevo omnia communia and indivisa omnibus,
veluti unum cunctis Patrimonium esset. lib. 43.
In the Age of Saturn (says he) all things were without distinction common to
all, as if all men had lived upon one stock or Patrimony. From whence it came
to pass, that in the Festivals of Saturn all things were enjoyed in common. To
which likewise accord's that of Cicero Privata nulli natura* sed aut veteri
occupatione, ut qui quondam in vacua venerunt; aut bello, etc. Offic. lib. 1.
, No thing is private or peculiar to any by Nature; but either by occupation of
old* as in the case of those who first inhabited Vacancies; or who became
possess't by right of War and Conquest; or by virtue of some Law; or by Compact,
Covenant, or by Lot: Yet'tis not probable, that this kind of Community was of
any long continuance. But as for Private Dominion, or that distribution of
Possessions and Bounds which depriveth or in any sort barreth all others,
besides the known possessor, from a liberty of use and enjoiment, they say it
was not in being till those golden days were over. And so, as the Poet sings
Ovid, Metamorph. 1.
, Communemque prius, ceu lumina solis and Aurae,
Cautus humum longo signavit limite Menser;
The Earth, as commou once as Light or Aer,
They then by Art did measure, bound and share.


It appears also by holy Writ, that the Earth was divided by the Posterity of
Noah, some Ages after the Flood. Genesis 10. 5. 5. and 25.
By Japhet and his sons were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their Lands,
every one after his Tongue, after their Families, in their Nations; as it is
recorded by Moses: That is to say, they settled themselves as private Lords, and
appointed Bounds accordings to the number of their Families, from the River
Tanais even as far as the Atlantic Sea, or through a great part of the Western
Asia, as it bend's toward the North, and throughout all Europe. In like
manner, Cham and his Posterity possessed themselves of that Part which lie's
open to the South and South-west; as Shem did the Eastern Countries as far as
India: As you may see it in Josephus, Eusebius, the Author of the Chronicle of
Alexandria, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Eustathius of Antioch, Freculphus, and others.
It has been received also by Tradition, that Noah himself, as if he had been
absolute Lord or Arbiter of the whole world, was the first man after the Flood
that revived this kind of distribution or private Dominion; which they say
also he did by Command from God, and that in the nine hundred and thirtieth
year of his Age (which was three hundred and thirty years after the Flood, and
twenty before his death) he confirmed it by Will, and delivered it a little
before his death into the hands of Shem his eldest son, admonishing them
altogether, that no man should invade the Bounds of his Brother, nor should
they wrong one another; because it would of necessity occasion Discords and
deadly Wars among them: As it is expressly mentioned, both in Eusebius and
Cedredrenus. But howsoever the matter has been; this is very certain, that
private Dominions or Possessions were revived again after the Flood, in the
same accustomed manner as they had been before from the days of Adam. For, he
also received such a Genesis cap. 1. 2, 28.
Donation from God, as we have told you Noah and his Sons did afterward, and
so became Lord of the whole World, not without such a peculiar possession or
propriety to himself, which (so far as we are able to judge of Affairs of that
Age, according to the ways and means received by Posterity) did exclude his
children from all Right, but by his voluntary Grant or Resignation: But yet,
whether it were by Donation, Assignment, or any other Grant whatsoever, it
appears (before he died or left any Heir to succeed him) his children did
enjoy their several Bounds and Territories, in a way of peculiar Dominion or
Possession. Thus Abel had Cattle and Pastures of his own; as Cain had Lands and
Plantations that were his own. He possessed himself also of the Land of Nod or
Naida, where he built the City of Enoch, and settled his abode. After this,
Joseph Orig. Judai^. lib. 1. c. 3. Eustath. Antioch. ^exa^m. page 46.
Exchanges, Buying, and selling came in fashion; and besides Weights and
Measures, they appointed Judges of Covenants and Contracts, and added Bounds or
Limits to Fields and Pastures. And of Cain, it is said, that (...)
he first set Bounds unto Fields. So at length came in private Dominions or
Possessions; which (whether by virtue only of a preceding universal dominion
of a single person, as in Adam; or of some universal and common interest in
Things, as betwixt Noah and his Sons) happened first by the Donation, Assignment,
or some other Grant of those whom it concerned, either to Princes, or
Communities representing a single person, or to any others whomsoever, as
particular Lords. So that neither the Law Natural nor Divine which was
universal (except you pleas to credit that Divine Oracle said to be given unto
Noah) has expressly commanded or forbidden, but permitted both; that is to say,
a common enjoiment, as well as a private dominion or possession of the Things
of this life.

But in this division of Bounds and Territories, there intervened, as it were,
a consent of the whole body or universalitie of mankind (by the mediation of
something like a compact, which might bind their posterity) for quitting of
the common interest or ancient right in those things that were made over thus
by distribution to particular Proprietors; in the same manner as when Partners
or Coheirs do share between themselves any portions of those things which they
hold in common. But as for the rest, which neither are possessed in several,
nor expressly held in common, that is, which have continued vacant or desert,
what shall we say? It has been truly a custom of old, and which hold's to
this day in the more eminent Nations, that Vacancies are his who apprehend's
them first by occupation; as we use to say of those we call, no man's Goods.
This appears plain in the Imperial Law; nor do we know of any Nation where it
is not received, save in those where by the Municipal.
Civil Law of some Nations, any things of this nature are appropriated to their
Princes, that their Subjects gain not an interest by occupation: For there
others have sufficiently disclaimed the acquiring of any title by occupation;
and in the present case we must ever have respect unto this Qualification. But
as concerning such a right by occupation, there is an ancient and very famous
decision made in a Controversy that happened betwixt the people of Andria and
Chalcidia. Both of them being upon an expedition against Thrace, for the
finding out of Plutarch in Quaest. Graec.
new habitations, news was brought that the Barbarous people had quitted the
Town of Acanthus, hereupon, two men were chosen, and sent out as Spies, the one
being of Andria, the other of Chalcidia, who being informed of the enemies
flight, began both to run, and strive which of them should first reach and take
possession of the City thus forsaken. It happened that he of Chalcidia
out-ran, but the man of Andria darting a Javelin stuck it in the Gates: This
cried out he got thither first with his Javelin, but the other, that he was
first with his body. A controversy happening hereupon, the Erythraeans,
Samians, and Parians, are called to decide it. The Andrians had most voices;
for the Samians and Erythraeans gave judgment for them. But the Parians were
for the men of Chalcidia. The Reasons alleged on both sides are very well
described by Rerum judicatarum, lib. 5. tit. 21.
Petrus AErodius, not fit here to be repeated: But in the mean time it is
manifest, that all those men, even the persons contending, as well as the
Nations to whose determination the matter was committed, were of opinion, that
places abandoned and forsaken become theirs who first acquire them by
occupation; nor is there any other ground in reason for that Law or Custom,
whereby wilde-Beasts, Fishes, Birds and the like, whether yet unpossess't or
relinquisht, become theirs who catch them: which is usual likewise, according to
the Laws and Customs of the Misna and Gemara utraque tit. Baba metzia cap. 1.
and Maimonides tit. Zachia W^mithna cap. 1.
Hebrews and Alcoran. Azoar. 12. de venatu; and Azoari 34.
Mahometans, as well as the Christians* But now, if so be that all men were
indifferently and without distinction Lords of the whole, before a division was
made of some parts, then of necessity we must conceiv, they all ought to
remain, equally and without distinction, Lords of those parts which never came
under a division, even as they were before; unless some Compact or Covenant
intervene, whereby all kind of ancient Right or Title of common Interest shall
be so renounced, that any persons whatsoever might afterward become particular
masters of those places which should remain vacant or undisposed, who should
first corporally seiz them, with an intent of possessing, holding, using, and
enjoying. Nor can it otherwise be conceived in the case of Partners or
Coheirs (such as all men seem to have been in the State of Community) how
those things which com not under division, should not continue common, as
before. Therefore (I suppose) it must be yielded, that some such Compact or
Covenant was passed in the very first beginnings of private Dominion or
possession, and that it was in full force and virtue transmitted to posterity
by the Fathers, who had the power of distributing possessions after the flood*
So that we may conclude no less concerning distribution by Assignment, then
touching Seizure by occupation of things relinquish*t at pleasure, that a
general compact or Agreement was made or ratified, either expressly in words,
or implicitly by custom. And truly, the self same thing seems to be the
opinion of the most excellent Hugo Grotius De Jure Belli ac pacis lib. 2. cap.
2.. 2.
, who speaking of the original of Propriety says* Things became appropriate,
not by the bare Act or Intent of the minds (for some could not know what others
desired to possess, so as to abstein from the same; and perhaps many might
desire one and the same thing) but by some Compact and Agreement either express,
as in the case of Division; or Tacit, as in that of Seizure or Primarie
occupation. For as soon as men grew out of love with Community, and no
Division was yet appointed, we must conceiv they agreed all together, that
what every man held, he should possess as his own. And truly there is a
pa^i^ie of Reason also for this; that any man might afterward make Seizure of
that which was left.

The effects of private Dominion. And what regard has been had of the SEA, in
the more ancient Distributions and Divisions of things. CHAP. V.
BY the introducing of private Dominion, in the aforesaid manner, it came to
pass, that the same Territory or Field, whose use before was free for all men
alike in Tillage, Building, Pasturage cutting of wood, gathering of Fruits,
egress and regress, was either by distribution or occupation so peculiarly
appropriated unto the possessor, that he might lawfully hinder such a
Community of use and enjoyment, nor might any other man use it lawfully
without his permission* And from this Original sprang every Dominion or
Propriety of things, which either by Alienation, or any other kind of
Cession, is transferred upon others, or held by a continued possession; respect
being always had to those particular Forms and Qualifications, which usually
relate unto Dominion, either by Law, Custom, or compact, according to the
various Institutions of several people* For by these, the free and absolute
power of the Proprietor, in what he enjoie's, is lesned and restrained; but
when this Reason wholly cease, then what the Proprietor possesses is so his
own, that it cannot lawfully in any wise, without his consent, become another
man's. And all these things are derived from the alteration of that Universal
or Natural Law of nations which is Permissive: For thence came in private
Dominion or Possession, to wit from the Positive Law. But in the mean while it
is established by the Universal Obligatorie Law, which provide's for the due
observation of Compacts and Covenants.

These things being thus premised, we shall next see what respect has been
had unto the Sea, either in the very first or any more ancient Distribution or
Division of things. For if it appear that the Sea also has been assigned over
with Lands, it must certainly be confessed, that from the same original there
spring's a private Dominion of the Sea, as well as the Land, and so that it is
equally capable of the same, with this. And truly, in the distribution of Land
which was renewed after the flood (so far as we are able to collect by
Tradition from the Ancients) we find no express mention made of any Sea, as a
part assigned: But yet sometimes the Sea is added as a Bound to a part assigned.
As where the part first assigned unto the Sons of Cham, is extended from the
Borders of Egypt through Africa as far as Hercules's Pillars, or African. apud
Eusebius. in Chronic. page 10. Cedrenus page 10.
unto the Western and African Sea. And the Portion of the Canaanits (situate
within the Territory of the Sons of Cham) is twice so described in the
Samaritan Pentateuch, that it is expressly said to reach from the River of
Egypt or Nilus, to the great River, that is, the River Euphrates, and
Pentateuch. Samar. M^. Genes. 10. 19. and Deuter. 34, 2.
unto the utmost Sea, or the remotest, which is the great or Western Sea. Which
last words are used in the laying out of that Portion which the Sacred
Scripture mention's in Deuteronomie. Sometimes also, some Seas may seem to be so
comprehended in the part assigned, that they appear to be no less assigned
then the Land* For unto the Sons of Japhet were assigned Eusebius. and Cedrenus
locis citatis.
those Countries which extend from Media toward the North and the West, as far
as Cadiz and the Islands of Britain. We see also, that certain Seas are
included within the compass of Assignments as the N^^ called the ^evant.
AEgean, Mediterranean, Adriatic, and British Seas: whether by Donation, or
not, we cannot say. But in that ancient apportioning of the holy Land (whereof
God himself was Author) the Sea seems rather to have been accounted a
boundarie, then any part of the Territory allotted. Concerning the
South-Quarter, the words are these; Nam. 34. 3, 5, 6, 7, 12.
The Bounds of it shall be the outmost Coast of the salt Sea Eastward. And a
little after; The Border shall fetch a Compass from Azmon unto the River of
Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the Sea. Also concerning the
West-Quarter, its Border shall begin at Sea, and ipso fine claudetur, and by it
it shall be bounded, as it is in the vulgar Translation; to which ^ens agrees
also the modern: But concerning this place, and the rest here quoted, we shall
speak more in the next Chapter. Then it fallows, according to the true sens of
the Hebrew, And this shall be your North-border: From the great Sea you shall
point out for you Mount Hor. And a little farther, speaking of the
East-Quarter; Its Border shall descend, and shall reach unto the side of the
Sea of Chinnereth Eastward; And the Border shall go down again to Jordan, and
the goings out of it shall be at the salt Sea: This shall be your Land with
the Coasts thereof round about. Which is repeated almost word for word, in the
distribution that was made by Josh. c. 15. etc.
Joshua: And in another place of holy Scripture, the bounds of the Dominion is
said to be Psalm. 72. 8. Syracid c. 44.
from Sea to Sea. But, suppose at last it were granted, that the Seas came not
into those more ancient distributions of Territories, then it remain's next to
be considered, whether they might not lawfully be acquired afterward by
Title of occupation, as things vacant and derelict; that is, either by the
Natural or Divine universal Law which is Permissive, or by the Law of diverse
Nations, Common or Civil, which, in judging matters of this nature, is the best
Interpreter of the natural Law which is Permissive. For, if in the Permissive
which is Universal, nothing be repugnant thereto; or (which is in a manner all
one) if by the Positive Law of Nations, such a Dominion of the Sea, as we
intend, has been introduced and admitted by the consent of the more famous
Ages and Nations; then (I suppose) it will not be doubted, but that the Seas
are, by all manner of Law, every way capable of private Dominion, as is the
Land.

That the Law of God, or the Divine Oracles of holy Scripture, do allow a
private Dominion of the Sea. And that the wide Ocean also, which washes the
Western Coast of the holy Land, or at least a considerable part of it, was,
according to the Opinion of such as were learned in the Jewish Law, annexed to
the Land of Israel, by the Assignation or appointment of God himself. CHAP. VI.
AS to what concern's here the Law of God, we find very plain passages
therein, which do not a little favor a Dominion of the Sea. In that first and
most ancient Donation of things after the Flood, whereby God invested Noah and
his Posterity, in the Dominion of the whole Earth (of which Globe the Seas
themselves are a part) and of the conterminous Aer, seems to be no otherwise
granted, then as mention i^ made of the living Creatures, the Earth, and the
Fowls of the Aer. That is, by an express grant of the free use and benefit of
the thing, the thing it self was granted or conferred. Nor is the Dominion of
the Sea otherwise granted there, where it is said, Genesis 9. 2.
The fear of you, and the dread of you (which are Terms signifying Dominion)
shall be also all the Fishes of the Sea. Little different from this is that
which was spoken to our first Parents, Genesis 1. 28.
Replenish the Earth and subdue it, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Fowl of the Aer, and over every living thing that moves upon the
Earth: So here also, the grant of the thing it self is signified by its use and
enjoiment. It Is confess't, that these words were not meant of private Dominion,
or that which was not common to all men: But yet it appears thereby, the Earth
and Sea did so pass together at first, and after the same manner, into the
common enjoiment of mankind, that from this Donation or Grant of God, we may
well conclude; that their condition, as being both but one Globe, must needs
be alike, at the pleasure of men, in the future distribution of Things, or the
introducing of private Dominion therein. Neither is the Propriety, nor the
Community of either appointed but both seem equally permitted by the very form
of Donation. And therefore that is very vain which is objected by some Psalm.
115. 16.
, That the Earth is given to the children of men, but that Psalm. 95. 5.
the Sea belong's only to God himself; as if Dominion not common indeed, but
only a common use of the Sea, were permitted by the words of holy Scripture:
And as if it were not said in like manner, Psalm. 24. 1. 50. 12. 89, 11. 95, 4.
The Earth is the Lord's, and fullness thereof: The tops of the Hills are his
also. Who know's not, that such sayings as these cannot in any wise weaken the
Dominion of Mankind? For, whatsoever is acquired by men, still God Almighty,
as Father of the Univers, retein's his supreme Dominion both over men, as also
all other Things; which never was denied yet by any sober man. But the
Controversy is about the Dominion of man, to wit, that which comprehend's any
enjoiment or propriety whatsoever, saving still that right of the Dominion of
God, which cannot be diminished. And the distinction about this matter is very
ordinary in the Schools: According to the first sort of Dominion, nothing
whatsoever, much less may the Sea belong unto men: According to the second, all
things indeed are or may be theirs, which can be apprehended, seized, and
possessed. And moreover, that in the old Testament express mention is made more
then once of such a Seizure, possession, or private Dominion as this whereof
we Treat; and that as of a Thing lawfully brought in use. There we find that
the men of Tire were Lords and Masters of the Phaenician, and the Egyptians of
the Alexandrian Sea. Concerning the Phaenician, says the Prophet unto Tyrus;
Ezech. c. 26. v. 16.
All the Princes of the Sea shall com down from their Thrones, etc. And they
shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, how art thou destroyed
that wast inhabited of Seafaring men! the renowned City, which wast strong in
the Sea! Here the Dominion of the Tyrians at Sea is plainly set forth. And in
the following Chapter Cap. 27. 4.
, Thy Borders are in the midst or heart of the Sea; as we read it in the
Hebrew, and also in an In Biblioca Arundeliana.
Arabian Manuscript, which render's it to the same purpose: For, both the Greek
and vulgar Translation differ there from the Original. It fallows also thus;
Verse. 9.
All the Ships of the Sea with their Mariners were thine to occupy thy
Merchandise. In stead of which last words, these are put in the Greek Copies,
(...), even Westward of the West, or through a great part of the main or
Western Sea; that is, the Phaenician or Syrian. Again, Cap. 28. verse. 2.
Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou have said, I am a God, I sit in the
seat of God, in the midst of the Sea. He threaten's not the Tyrian, because
he had gotten him a Dominion over the neighboring Sea, but because being
lifted up with pride, he had taken unto himself the name of God. The Tyrian is
called likewise in another Scripture the Isai. 23. 4.
Sea it self, and the strength of the Sea. But concerning the Egyptian Sea,
another Prophet speak's thus unto Ninive; Art thou better then populous
Alexandria (in the Original the City is called No, taken here for Alexandria)
which is situate among the Rivers, that has the waters round about it, whose
Riches and strength (as it is in the Hebrew) or (as the Greek render's it)
(...), that is, whose Empire or Dominion is the Sea. Moreover, it seems to
make mention of Kings of the Sea, as well as of Islands; Ps. 72. 10.
The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents. For, Tarshish or
Tharsis in Hebrew signifies the Sea, Hieronym. ad Isaiae c. 2.
as it is often confessed both by the Greek and Chaldee Interpreters. Although
Munster, a man otherwise very learned, speak's unadvisedly upon the
forementioned place, and will not have Tharsis there to signify the Sea,
because (says he) Kings have nothing to do at Sea, but rule only upon Land;
forgetting (what we have already told you) that express mention is made by
Ezechiel concerning Princes of the Sea. With which agree's also that saying,
Ps. 89. 25.
I will set his hand in the Sea, and his right hand in the Floods; upon which
place Aben-Ezra note's, that God Almighty assigned the Dominion of the Sea
there unto King David, That he might rule over those that sailed either
through the Sea or the Rivers. It is written thus likewise in the Apocrypha;
Esdras. l. 1. chap. 4.
O ye men, do not men excel in strength that bear rule over Sea and Land, and
all things in them? But yet the King is more mighty; for, he is Lord of all
these things and has Dominion over them. And in another place, says the Angel
to Esdras, Esdras, l. 2 cap. 7.
The Sea is set in a wide place, that it might be deep and great. But put case
the entrance were narrow, and like a River, who then could enter the Sea, to
look upon it, and have Dominion over it, i^ he went not through the narrow?
The Dominion of the Sea and of the Land is granted alike in both these places.
It is said also of King Ahasuerus; Esther. 10. 1.
That he made not only the Land, but all the Isles of the Sea to become
tributarie, which words truly do clearly show a Dominion of the Sea; for, so
they are expressed in the vulgar Edition, out of the Hebrew Original, which is
lost. But the Greek Copies are more plain there; (...)
The King wrote to his Kingdom of the Land and Sea. Nor must we omit that of
Moses when he blessed the people; Deuteronom. cap. 33. 23.
And of Naphtali he said, Naphtali shall enjoy abundance, and be full with
the blessings of the Lord; he shall possess or inherit the Sea and the South;
as the ^^lgar and the Greek do render that place. But by many others, the Sea
is taken there for the West-Quarter, as it is often in the Scriptures. Yet
truly, it is clear those words are meant of the Sea of Galilee, or of the Lake
of Tiberias, not of the great or Phaenician Sea, which lie's Westward, because
the Land of Naphtali was situate near that Lake, which also is often called the
Sea. As it appears likewise out of Onkelus his Paraphrase, where express
mention is made of the Sea of Genesareth, called also the Lake of Tiberias, or
the Sea of Chinnereth, and by this name it passes with the salt Sea, or the
Lake of Asphaltites, in the Numb. 34. 11. and 3.
sacred description of the Eastern part of the holy Land. But the former place
of Deuteronomie is ^usly rendered by Rupert the Abbot of Tuitiu^; Ad Deuteronomy. lib.
2. c. 18.
Ma^e and Meridiem possidebit, for Mare and Meridiem, he shall possess the
Morning and the South, for the Sea and the South. However, it is clear (I
suppose) out of the places alleged, such plain Testimonies are found in holy
Writ touching such a Dominion of the Sea, that in the mean time it must be
granted, that according to the Universal Permissive Law, any man may acquire it
as well as the Land. And truly, as for those places quoted in the foregoing
Chapter, concerning the South, West or Sea and Northen Bounds of the holy Land,
they are so understood both by the Jewish Lawyers and Divines, that they would
have either the great or Phaenician Sea it self, or at least some adjoining part
of it to be assigned also by God unto the Israelites, as Lords of it for ever;
of which point we shall discourse a little more fully. As for that which is
rendered there out of the vulgar Edition, touching the South Border, Usque ad
Torrentem AE^ypti; and ma^ni Maris littore fini^^^^.
As far as the river of Egypt; and it shall be bounded by the shore of the
great Sea, the Hebrew says, ad ^orrentem AEgypti unto the River of Egypt (or
the North entrance of Ni^us, which divided the ^and of Israel from Egypt, at
the Sea) and erunt exitus ejus in Mare* and the goings out thereof shall be
into the Sea. So that concerning that Borders being bounded by the shore (as
it is in the vulgar) we find it no otherwise expressed there in the Original.
Then, it is added next, concerning the West-border or that which is at the
great Sea, word for word out of the Hebrew. As for your Sea-border, you may
have the great Sea, And let this be your border, or let it be your Sea
border, or border of the Sea And there the Greek Interpreter's render it thus,
you shall have the bounds of the Sea, or they shall be your bounds. The great
Sea shall bound you: wherein (after their usual manner) they plainly follow the
Text of the Samaritan Copy: For, there we read it thus, And you shall have a
Sea-border. The great Sea shall bound you. Let this be your Sea or
Western-border. And thus the word SEA being used as well for the Western
Quarter as for the Sea it self, that place is for the most part so rendered,
that in so short a period the Sea is taken for both. As for the West-Border,
you shall have the great Sea. And this Border shall be your West-Border. As it
is expressed by the Jews of Spain; y Termino de ponente; y sera a vos el mar el
grande: y Termino este sera a vos Termino de ponente. Thus is also in Onkelus
and Erpenius his Arabic; save that Onkelus render's it thus, But your
Westborder shall be the great Sea and the Border thereof; the same shall be
your West-border. But an Arabian Translation in manuscript, for which we are
beholden to the Earl or Arundel's Library, after these words, unto the River
of Egypt, add's also, And the going out thereof shall be at the Coasts or
parts of the Sea. And the Border of the Sea shall be your Border. Also the
great Sea in their Borders. Thi^ shall be your Border from the Sea Coast. But
the North part, as appears by the particulars alleged in the former Chapter,
is bounded by mount Hor: so that it appears hence, that the more Northerly
entrance of Nilus, that is the Pelusiock (as it seems; for they are not well
agreed about the very particular place) served instead of Bounds to the South
part of the Land of Israel, which bordered upon the Sea, as also to that part
of the Promontorie or foot of mount Hor, which was situated North-East by the
Sea. But this mount is that which in the vulgar edition is called an exceeding
high mountain. In the Jewish Commentaries it is known also by the name of
Amana, and Amanon, and Amanus, and by some it is taken for that mountain in the
Canticles, called In gloss'd Jarchii ad cap. 4. Cant.
Amana. And in the Jewish Targum, In Number. 34 and vide gloss. talmud ad tit:
Gittin. cap. 1. fol. 8.
Manus is put for mount Hor. It is taken also for Libanus, by such as in their
Lyran. ad Numer. 34. Andr. Mosius ad Josuam. Adricomius, Jacob Bar Abraham in
Tab. Chorographica Terrae sanctae etc. Et vide Abulens. ad Number. 34. q. 2.
Descriptions of the Holy Land, are wont to make mount Libanus its Northern
Border. But as touching this mount Hor or Amanus (of the same name with that
mountain, which but's out into the Gulf now called Golfo dell' Aiazza by some
also taken for the same Gloss. ordinar. ad numee. 34.
or rather mount Taurus) it is described after this manner by Solomon Jarchius,
it is seated in a north west corner. It Is head bending downward stretches out
into the very sea. And it is washed in diverse places by the main. Betwixt these
Bounds, to wit, the Southern part or the Pelusiack entrance of Nilus, and the
North-East Bound or Promontorie of the aforesaid mount, the great sea, which is
reckoned the Western Bound or Border, haivng diverse windings and turnings along
the shore, is stretched out in such a manner above 200 miles, that if a straight
line should be drawn from the North-East Border to the Southern, a great part
of the Sea that extend's it self within the line for so many miles, must needs
be intercepted* which also is very easily to be understood without the help
of a Map.

These things being thus premised, briefly, but so far as the matter in hand
require's, to discover the western part of the Holy Land, bordering wholly upon
the Sea, and that according to the judgment of the ancient Hebrews, not by
modern Descriptions; it is to be considered, that the Jewish Divines and
Lawyers, when they discourse about the precepts and Laws belonging to the Land
of Israel, that is, of those to which they conceiv themselves not bound by the
Holy Law, without the Limits of that Land, use to treat very precisely, even to
an hair, touching the Borders of their Dominion, as it was appointed by the
Command of God. To wit, touching the Bounds of their Territory, as the name
Territory signifie's the whole, not only Lands and Fields, but Rivers also
and all other waters within the circuit of each City, as it is rightly taken
also by the Caepola de Servitutibus Rustic. Praed. cap. 26.. 26. Hieronym. de
monte, l. de finibus regundis cap. 6. 8. Alberic. Gentilis de jure Belli lib.
3. cap. 17. Dd. in l. 9. ff. de judiciis.
Civil Lawyers. The Precepts spoken of, are those which are received by the
Jews, touching the observation of the Sabbaticall year, oblations of Fruits,
the L^vitical custom of Tithing, and others of that kind. For by the Law of
God, they will not yield that those things should be observed out of the
Israelitish Dominions, although, Moses Maimonides halach. Therumoth cap. 1. and
Mikotzi, Praecep. Affirm. 133.
by Tradition of their Ancestors, they were usually observed in Egypt, Jdumaea,
the Land of Moab, and Shinar, both by reason of their neighborhood, and the
frequent convers of the Israelits among them. But now so far as concern's the
western or Sea-bordering of the Land of Israel, as it was assigned at first by
God, in observing Precepts of this kind, according to the holy Law, we meet
with two opinions in their Commentaries, from both which indeed it will appear,
that the Sea was assigned by God Himself unto the Israelites, as Lords thereof,
in the same manner as the Land, though one opinion assign's larger Bounds, the
other much more narrow: So that they all agree about the thing, differing only
about the latitude. The first opinion is of those who affirm, that the whole
western Sea (as it lie's before the western Coast of the Land of Israel or as
it is bounded inward by straight lines drawn on both sides, from the North-east
and South border before mentioned, through that Ocean into the west) together
with the Continent was given unto them by God; and therefore that those
Precepts are to be observed in that vast Ocean, as in the Territory of
Israel. The chief Author of this opinion was an ancient and very famous
Interpreter of the Law, by name Rabbi Jehuda, who also from the express words
of the Holy Law abovementioned, conclud's that the western Ocean, thus
bounded on both sides, was assigned. His Doctrine is delivered after this
manner, as we find it in the most ancient Digests of the Jewish Law. Gemara
Babylonia ad tit. G^^in, seu de libellis Divor^ii and manumissionis cap 1. f^l
8* a. Idem, ^ed depravate legitur in Gemara Hierosolymitana, ad tit. Sh^biith
seu de Anno Sabbatico. cap 6. fol. 36. col. 4.
Whatsoever lie's directly opposite to the Land of Israel, it is of the same
account with the Land of Israel, according as it is written; Numer. 34. 6.
As for your West-Border, let your Border be, or you shall have, the great
Sea. Also let this be a Border to you, or your Border. To wit, the Border of
the Sea, or of the West. Also the Collateral Islands situate on both sides in
the same direct line, fall under the same account with the sides themselves. So
that if a line were drawn from Cephaloria through the Isles to the main Ocean,
and from the River of Egypt to the Ocean, then that which is within the line,
is to be taken for the Territory of Israel, and that which lie's without the
line to be out of the Dominion of Israel. The line drawn from Cephaloria, was
directed by the Promontorie of mount Hor or Amanus, as is said before: For that
City was seated on the top of that mountain, which is here the North-east
Border; as it is observed in the Gloss upon the place alleged, and in many
other. There also this opinion is thus explained. According to this opinion of
Rabbi Jehuda, all that Sea which lie's opposite to the length of the Land of
Israel, even to the main Ocean, Westward, where the world it is self is
bounded, is to be reckoned within the Territory or Dominion of Israel; even
as it is written, the great Sea, and your Border (the whole place we gave you
a little before out of Numbers) where [and your Border] is added the more fully
and plainly, to intimate that the great and wide Sea is contained also within
it is Border. And it fallows there thus; Between those little Cords or Lines
(directed, as we said, on both sides to the main Sea) there are Islands
belonging to the Territory of Israel; the Islands and waters have both the
same Law etc. Hence also the ordinary Jewish Gloss upon those words in
Numbers, And you shall have the great Sea, says, The Isles that are in the
midd^st of the Sea, even they also are part of the Bound or Border. But the
Jewish Paraphrase is more plain there, And let your Border be the great Sea,
that is, the main Ocean, and it is Isles, and Cities, and Ships, with the
principal waters that are in it. Nor was it upon any other ground, that Ad
Numer. 34.
Rabbi Aben-Ezra, Ad Numer. page 199. col. 3.
Rabbi B^chai, and others, conceived so great a part of the Sea, did belong to
the Israelites by this assignation, that they interpret the great Sea also to
reach through the Sea (...) that is, the Spanish Sea, distant so many miles
Westward from the Continent of Israel. In both the forenamed places, the words
are, The great Sea, to wit, the Spanish. And your Border; as if it had been
said, The great Sea shall be your possession, which of it self also is your
Border. But in the mean while it is to be considered, that the whole western
Ocean as far as the narrow channel of Cadiz* is by the Arabians and so by the
modern Jews, who were their Disciples, indifferently called the Roman Sea,
mare Al-shem, or the Sea of Damascus (that is the Syrian Sea) mare Al-Andalus
(or the Spanish) and lastly, the mediterranean Sea; the whole being
denominated from the Coasts of some particular Countries: As it may be clearly
collected both out of the Nubian Geographie, as also out of the Geographical
Abridgment of M^* in Bibliothec a Oxoniensi.
Abu Elchasen Hali an Arabian. But this is most certain, that the name of the
Spanish Sea has been used here by the Rabbis, not from such a promiscuous or
common denomination of the Sea; but according to the explanation of such an
ancient Assignation of the Dominion of Israel as we have mentioned. And so
this first opinion would have the whole Western Ocean, as far as the streights
of Cadiz, which the Ancients thought the utmost Bound of the world, to be
reckoned for that part of the Territory of Israel, which is included within
the lines drawn from the Promontorie of mount Hor or Amanus and the entrance of
Pelusium, into the West. But by the other opinion, which seems much more
agreeable to reason, it is determined, that the Divine Assignation of the
Territory of Israel is comprehended indeed within more narrow Bounds of this
Sea, but yet Sea-room large enough: so that according to this opinion, the
North and South-Borders do end at the very shore, or at the utmost point of the
said Promontorie, North-East, and at the entrance of Pelusium, toward the
South; not stretching any farther, into the West. But indeed the Autors of this
opinion would have a straight line drawn from that Promontorie to the entrance
of Pelusium, to wit from the North-East into the South, thereby to limit and
bound the Western part of the Dominion of Israel; so that what portion soever
either of the Sea or the Isles should be comprehended within such a line, or
lie on the East side of it, the whole were to be reckoned a part of the
Territory of Israel, as well as any Coast upon the Continent or main Land. And
so after this manner, the aforesaid line, included within the nooks and
windings of the shore of that Territory (possessed by the Tribes of Asher,
Ephraim, Dan, Zabulon, and Simeon) was situate before very large spaces of of
the Sea, for above two hundred miles; and supposed to be of the same account
with the shore it self. In the Digests of the Jewish Law, this opinion is
explained thus; In Gemara Babylonic^ ad tit. Gittin seu de libellis Diver^^i
and Manumissionis. cap. 1. fol. 8.
That it may be known what com's under the name of the Territory of Israel,
and what is to be reckoned out of that Territory (as to the North-East and
Western bounds;) whatsoever is stretched forth on this side and within Mount
Amanus, is the Territory of Israel. And that which is placed beyond that
Mountain, is without this Territory. And so by the same reason it is to be
determined touching the Isles of the Sea that are seated over against that
Mountain. Let a small Cord or Line be drawn over those Islands, from Mount
Amanus to the river of Egypt; that is contained within the Line, is the
Territory of Israel; but that which lie's without the Line, is no part of that
Territory. With this agree's that of Ezekiel, concerning the Seacoast of the
holy Land, after he had described the South part which is near the Sea; Ezekiel.
cap. 47. 20.
The West, side also [ shall bee] the great Sea from the border till a man com
over against Hamath. This is the West, or Seaside (or Coast.) The vulgar read's
it thus, The great Sea also shall be its Sea-border, strait along from the
border till you com to Emath. This is the Seaside: Which the Greeks render
thus; (...). This part is South and South-west, according to the translation of
the foregoing words. Then, according to what has been alleged out of the
Hebrew, it fallows in the Greek, This is part, or this divide's part of the
great Sea, until a man com over against the entrance which lead's to Hemath,
even to the entrance thereof. These are they which lie near the Sea of Hemath.
So that every Translation speak's to the same purpose. But that which we have
added to the Hebrew, agree's both with the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the
Exposition of the Spanish Jews. Moreover, Solomon Jarchius expound's it there
after this manner, according to the doctrine of the Ancients; From the
South-Corner (for, so he interpret's this word, from the Border) which is the
river of Egypt, till a man com over against the entrance which lead's to
Hamath; that is, to the Corner situated under the Northwest, which is the very
Mount Hor over against the entrance unto Hamath. For, Hamath was seated on the
North-west side near Mount Hor. And so that which is cut off here by the Border
in a strait line (as the vulgar has it) drawn from the entrance of Nilus to
the Promontorie of Mount Hor, contein's no small portion of the Sea as assigned
unto Israel. And this later Opinion is the better received, whereby only the
nearer Parts of the Sea are, by God's appointment, conceived to be in the very
same condition with the continent; as appears not only out of the more
ancient Digests, or both Volums of the Talmud, but also by the Testimony of
those most learned Rabbis, Halach Therumoth, seu de Oblationibus, c. 1.
Moses Maimonides and Praecept. Affirmat. 133.
Moses Cotzensis, besides others of a less account, who in express terms
embrace it. Also, according to both these Opinions, that is in the mean time of
sufficient Authority, which is delivered in general terms touching the
Beyond Sea Provinces, by Ad Tit. Gittin. cap. 1. fol. 1.
Solomon Jarchius, Ad Alphesium, part. 2. page 554.
Rabbenu Nissim, Ad Misnaioth, tit. Gittin, cap. ^. ubi and vide Rabbi Jom Tob.
Obadiah Bartenorius, and others; to wit, That whatsoever lie's without the
Territory of Israel, that whole Province or City is often comprised under the
Notion of the Sea, except Babylon. After the example of the Sea-Provinces,
situated afar off in the West, without the Lines drawn according to this or the
other Opinion, the Mediterranean Provinces and Cities also, which were ^eated
in other remote Parts, without the Borders of Israel, have in stead of being
called a strange Land, been termed the Provinces or Cities of the Sea. Which
point is very well handled by Rabbenu Nissim in the former place. But as these,
which were seated without their Territory in the continent, were only by the
said Custom of speech called Cities of the Sea, so also it is clear by what we
have shown you, that according to the same way of speaking it is granted, that
other Cities also within their Territory were seated in the very Sea. And so
at length, from both the Opinions, here recited, we have sufficiently proved,
that such an Exposition of the divine Assignation was received by the ancient
Interpreters of the Jewish Law, to whom that Assignation was made, that they
made no doubt but the Sea was every jot as capable of private Dominion, as the
Land; and so reckoned those Islands placed in the neighboring Sea, as belonging
to the Territory of Israel, because of their Dominion over the Sea that did
flow between them. Nor does it hinder at all, that in their Assignations or
Distributions we so often find this Particle usque ad Mare, unto the Sea, as
appears in the former Chapter; or that the Sea was their Border. For, the word
usque, until or unto, is not only often Bartol. ad lib. 35. Patronus ff. tit.
de legate. 3. and l. Nuptae ff. de Senatoribus.
inclusive, but also the Borders or Limits themselves are Archidiac. in. c.
Ecclesias 13. q. 1. Hieronymus de Monte, lib. de Finibus Regundis, 23.
many times all one with the thing limited; after the same manner as all Bounds
that are bounded. Touching which Particular, both the Canonists and Civilians
are very Copious; as also the Jews in those other Particulars already
mentioned. And therefore we conclude out of the Premises, that neither the
Divine Law which is universal; nor the Positive, as it appears, in Scripture,
to be Imperative or to have a command over some certain Nations (for, there is
a true picture of the Imperative Law in the aforesaid distribution of Bounds)
does oppose a private Dominion of the Sea; but that both of them do
sufficiently allow it; and afford also very clear examples of such a Dominion
(if we may believ the Jews themselves.) In the next place then, let us consider
(what is yet behind) of the Law natural and of Nations.

That the natural-Permissive Law (whereof any use may be in this place) is to
be derived out of the Customs and Constitutions of the more civilized and more
noble Nations, both ancient and modern. CHAP. VII.
AS to what concern's here the Law Natural, as one head of the universal or
Primitive Law of Nations, in our former Division of the Law, commonly derived
from a right and discreet use of Reason; that it does in no wise gainsay a
private Dominion of the Sea, but plainly permit it, we shall prove hereby;
because by the positive Law of Nations of every kind, which is humane, (for we
have already spoken of the Divine) to wit, as well by the Law Civil or
Domestic of diverse Nations, as the Common Law of diverse Nations, whether it
be Intervenient, or Imperative; that is to say, by the Customs of almost all
and the more noble Nations that are known to us, such a Dominion of the Sea is
every where admitted. It is not indeed to be denied, that a right use of
humane Reason, which usually serv's as an Index of the natural Law, cannot well
be gathered from the Customs of several Nations, about things Divine or such
as relate unto Divine Worship. Nor are the Points either of the Obligatorie or
Permissive kind of natural Law relating thereunto, to be thence determined.
For, it has been the common Custom of men, in all Ages and throughout all
parts of the known World, to conclude of such matters, either without exact and
convenient examination, or else for the serving of their own Interests, or else
to suit with the humor and disposition of the people whom they are to rule and
keep in order; as do the Pagans, Mahometans, and others of that sort, as well
modern as ancient. And therefore Antisthenes of old taught well and boldly at
Athens, Cicero de Natura Deorum, lib. 1.
as many other Philosophers have don, Populares Deos esse multos, sed naturalem
unum esse, That there are many National Gods, and but one Natural, contrary to
what the most usual practice of men and Custom had introduced among the
ordinary sort of People. So that as of old in the Jewish Church, so also in
the Christian, the use of humane Reason among the vulgar, though free in other
things, yet when it dived into the contemplation or debate of Religious
matters, it has often been most deservedly restrained, by certain set-Maxims,
Principles, and Rules of holy Writ, as Religious Bolts and Bars upon the Soul;
lest it should wantonize and wander, either into the old Errors of most Ages
and Nations, or after the new devices of a rambling fancy. And truly, such a
course as this has ever been observed in Religious Government. But in such
things as are merely humane, and so humane that they reflect only upon matters
of duty betwixt man and man, and are not forbidden by any command of God (of
which kind you cannot so much as imagine any thing more plainly to be, then a
distinction of the Dominion of Territories, and the manner thereof which is
wholly grounded upon the consent of men) that which shall be permitted by the
Law Natural, is no less rightly determined by the Laws, Placarts, and received
Customs of diverse Ages and Nations, both ancient and modern, then it may be
collected what every Clime will or will not bear, by the diligent observation
of Countries, Shrubs, Trees, Plants, and other things which belong unto the
body of Husbandry. For, as many Nations as have admitted such a private
Dominion as we inquire after, whether by a Law Civil or Domestic of their
own, or by any Law common to themselves and their neighbor-Nations, are either
to be allowed competent Witnesses of the natural permissive Law (so far as
there is any use of it here;) or else it must be said (which I believ no man
dream's) that so many and those the more famous Nations, have for so many Ages
erred against Nature. Concerning the Law Natural, Justinian says, Instit. de
Jure Not.. Jus Natural.
Quod Naturalis ratio inter omnes homines constituit, id apud omnes populos
peraeque custoditur, vocaturque Jus Gentium, quasi quo Jure omnes Gentes
utuntur. What Natural reason establishes among all men, that is observed by
all people alike, and is called the Law of Nations, as it were by a Law which
all Nations use. And Caius; L 1. ff. de Adquir. rerum Domino.
Jus Gentium ratione naturali inter omnes homines peraeque servatur; The Law of
Nations is by natural reason observed alike among all men. But where are all
Nations? It is not yet discovered how many there are, much less upon what
Customs they have agreed. Nor is that in any wise found in the Customs of all
those Nations that are discovered, which some notwithstanding embrace as a part
of the Law Permissive. What have the midland Nations to do with that Law
concerning the Confiscation of wrecks at Sea, which has been used by the
English, Britains, Sicilians, and some other Nations bordering upon the Sea. The
inslaving of Prisoners of War is grown out of date, as a thing not permitted
among Christian Nations, which nevertheless is in use still among the
Mahometans. In vain therefore is a Rule and Direction sought here out of the
Customs of all Nations; but especially seeing some are not wanting who -- non
foedera Legum
Ulla colunt, placidas aut Jura tenentia mentes;
Whom neither League nor lawful compact binds;
Nor Laws that rule and pacify men's minds.
as he says Val. Flacc. Argonauti^. 4.
of the Bebrycians. That there have been some such Nations, is expressly recorded
also by Nicomach. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Aristotle. And Salust, out of the mouth of In bello Jugurthino.
Hiempsal, says concerning the Getuli and Libyans, the ancient Inhabitants of
Africa, Neque moribus, neque Lege, neque Imperio cujusquam regebantur, They
were ruled neither by Custom, nor by Law, nor by the command of any. And in
another place concerning the In conjurat. Catilinar.
Aborigines; Genus hominum agreste, sine Legibus, sine Imperio, liberum atque
solutum; A rude sort of men, without Laws, without Government, free and
dissolute. Therefore we must have recours here unto the more civilized and
more eminent Nations of the past and present Age, and of such whose Customs we
are best acquainted with. And among them truly, not only such as those very
Nations, whom it may chiefly concern here, have ever highly esteemed; but also
those Nations, who are concerned at present, shall be proved competent
Witnesses.

But of the Testimonies, that we intend to use there is a twofold kind. Some
are those which show, that a Soveraigntie and private Dominion of the Sea has
been by Historians and other Writers, almost in all Ages, acknowledged and
granted to Princes, People, and others. Other Testimonies there are which
demonstrate out of Lawyers, also by Leagues and Treaties, and other particulars
of that nature, that such a Dominion of the Sea, is in like manner agreeable
unto Law. Both which we interweav, as the order of Things direct's us. But yet
so, that what matters, either of Fact or Law, do appertain unto the British
Sea, are wholly pretermitted in this collection of Testimonies, with an Intent
to dispose them apart in the second Book. And so at length it will be very
clearly manifested together, both what the Civil Law of Nations, as also what
the Common Law of diverse Nations; and lastly, what the natural permissive Law
(which in this case is to be drawn out of the Customs of Nations) has
determined touching private Dominion of the Sea.

The manner, whereby the Law Permissive touching private Dominion of the Sea,
may be drawn out of the Customs of many Ages and Nations. That there were
Testimonies hereof manifest enough in the Fabulous Age. Also, a word by the
way, touching the Mediterranean Sea in possession of the Romans, when the
Command thereof was committed to Cneius Pompeius. CHAP. VIII.
THe Ages, out of whose Monuments and Actions the aforesaid Customs,
determinations, and Decree's of People and Nations, are to be derived, I
divide into two parts. Into the Fabulous Age, and the Historical. But we do
not, according to Varro, call that Fabulous which wholly preceded the beginning
of the Olympiads; but that which is obscured only by the most ancient Fables,
at least under a fabulous Representation; The Historical being in the mean
time divided into that which is more ancient and comprehend's the Customs of
such Empires and Commonwealths as expired some Ages past; And into that which
is modern, and shows the practice of those Nations, in the present case, which
are now in Being. But in applying our selves unto the fabulous Age, we do not
ground Arguments upon Fables, as they are mere Fables; but we manifest
Historical Truth out of the most ancient Historians, though wrapped up in the
mysteries of Heathen Priests and Poets. For, (as De falsa Religione, lib. 1.
cap. 11.
Lactantius says well) even Those things which the Poets speak are true, but
covered under a certain veil or Figure. And yet they have so veiled the Truth
with Fiction, that the Truth it self might not take off from the common belief
of the People. They write, that in the fabulous time aforementioned, the
Titans being subdued, the Brother-Deities, Jupiter, Pluto, and Neptune,
divided the world by Lot; And that Heaven was allotted unto Jupiter, Hell to
Pluto, the Sea to Neptune. But omitting those Trifles, whereby the vulgar
suffered themselves with patience to be cozened, touching the Heaven or Sky,
the kingdom of Hell or of the dead, and of the whole Earth's being common,
after this division, to all the Homer. Iliad. 15. seu ^.
Brothers, some of the Ancients have taught, that the Truth it self which lay
couched in this Fable, was quite another Thing. They say these were not gods,
but men. Also that Jupiter was not King of Heaven, but of the Eastern part from
whence the Light first dawn's upon mortal men; by which means also it seemed
the higher part, and therefore was called Heaven: And that Pluto was King of
the West, which point's at the Sun's setting and Night, from whence it was said
to be lower and Hell. Lastly, that Neptune was Lord of the Sea and the Isles
scattered therein. Thus it appears here, that a private Dominion of the Sea,
no otherwise then of the Land, arose from Humane distribution. And that the
case stood thus, it was affirmed long since by Euhemerus Messenius, an old
Author, in his History of the Affairs of those men who were supposed gods,
recorded and translated by Ennius. For, Lactantius says thus; Loco jam citato.
Concerning the lot or share of Neptune, it is manifest I say, that his Kingdom
was such as was that unlimited command of Cneius Pompeius, who, by decree of
the Senate, had Authority given him over all the Seacoast for suppressing
Pirates, and scouring the whole Sea. Thus all things belonging to the Sea with
its Islands fell by lot unto Neptune. But how may it be proved? To wit, by
ancient Histories. Euhemerus an old Author, who was of the City of Messina,
has collected the Affairs and Atchievments of Jupiter and others that are
reputed gods, and compiled a History of th^se sacred Titles and Inscriptions
that were found in the most ancient Temples, and especially in the Temple of
Jupiter of Triphylia, where a golden Pillar was placed by Jupiter himself, as
appeared by the Inscription: Upon which Pillar he wrote his own Actions, that
it might remain a Monument of his Affairs unto Posterity. This History Ennius
did both translate and follow, whose words are these; Jupiter grant's the
Dominion of the Sea unto Neptune, that he might reign over all the Islands,
and all Places near the Sea. But both the Translation of Ennius, and the
Commentaries themselves of Euhemerus, are utterly lost; nor is it to be
thought, that they were lost without the knowledge and design of the chief
Priests of Jupiter and other Deities. For, doubtless whatsoever had been
written touching the Originals of the gods, was so much the more odious, by how
much the more it did lay them open, and discover, that those great Names which
were magnified in their Chapels and Temples, were taken out of the List either
of great Kings, or Heroes, and obtruded upon the credulous vulgar. For, from
hence it was, that Euhemerus, with Diagoras and some others, was branded an
Atheist, who is used as a singular Author, not only by Lactantius, but also by
Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Augustine, Arnobius, and others; to whom we
know very great credit is given in those Arguments that are pieced together
against the vain Theology of the Heathen. It is (I suppose) the same man that
is called by Plutarch De Placitis Philosophorum, lib. 1. cap. 7.
Tegeata, when he is ranked in the same form with Diagoras. But he is by the
same Author called Messenius, when as being very obstinate in the Plutarch.
lib. de Iside and Osiride.
superstition of his Ancestors, he brand's him as a great Patron of
Impostures, and being induced (it seems) by hatred against Euhemerus, he
conceit's there never were any such Nation, as the Triphylians or Panchaeans,
whereas Panchaea is an Island situate about Arabia in the more Southern Ocean,
wherein Euhemerus places the Temple of Jupiter Triphylius, from whence that
Story touching the Dominion of the Sea was taken. Truly Bibliothec. lib. 6.
atque apud Eusebium de praeparat. Evangelic. lib. 2. c. 4. Add Gerard. Vos^ium
de Graecit Historicis, lib. 1. cap. 11.
Diodorus uses him also, as a grave Author. A late Lawyer also make's use of
that Neptune in Homer, (...) --


But of those things which were distributed by lot, I have taken the Sea for my
share, that I might dwell therein for ever; so he translate's it, that he may
with the more confidence take the whole matter related concerning the three
Deities, as meant of Noah's three sons. His words are these; Jo. Gryphiander,
de Insulis, cap. 31. * 75.
Id proculdubio ex partitione terrarum inter tres filios Noachi, ex quibus
Japheto Insulae obvenerunt, causam traxit, It may without question be proved
from that partition of Lands which was made verwixt Noah's three sons whereby
the Isles of the Sea fell to Japhet.

So that in that fable he would have Genesis 10.
the Dominion not only of the Isles, but also of the Sea, to be assigned unto
Japhet. But that which Lactantius says touching the unlimited Command of
Pompey, as parallel to the example of Neptune's Dominion, it is so to be
understood, that regard be had also, as well of those that gave the Command to
Pompey, as of him to whom the Command was given. As for instance, the Cilicians
had infested the Seas (as Florus says) and having spoiled commerce, behaving
themselves like enemies of mankind, they shut up the Sea with war as it were a
tempest. Therefore the Romans, having a special eye to their provision of
Corn, did by a decree of the Senate, procured by Gabinius, send out Pompey to
Plutarch. in Pompeio, and Appianus Alexandrin. in Mithridaticis.
free the Sea from Pirates. And there was granted unto him by that decree, a
Command of the Sea which lie's within Hercules's pillars; and also of the
continent about 400 furlongs from the Sea. Hereupon, being master of a huge
Navy, and having disposed diverse Lievtenants through all parts of his Command,
He so scoured the whole Sea from the straits of Cadiz to the Cilician shore,
Dio. lib. 36.
that none was able to stand before him either by Sea or Land. Certainly
Pompey had a Commission only as Admiral of the People of Rome, as, Paterculus
says; Mark Antony had the like about two years before. But that people which
entrusted him, was Lord of this Sea, as the Roman Territory, as well as of
those 400 furlongs of the Continent, which were joined alike with the Sea in
the Grant of that Commission, though no more liable to Dominion then the Sea it
self. Florus says also; lib. 3. cap. 6.
that Tiberius Nero (who was one of Pompey'es Lievtenants) blockt up the
streights of Cadiz, at the first entrance of our Sea. He being a Roman
rightly call's it our Sea (as also In bello Jugurthino.
Salust does more then once) because it was so wholly subdued under the Roman
power. And Dio Cassius; He scoured the whole Sea, which was under the Roman
obedience. And, says Mela, of the Mediteranean Sea, all that Sea, whencesoever
it flow's, or whithersoever it spread's it self, is called by one name, Our
Sea. So it is called likewise by others. Orosius. lib. 1. cap. 2.
And Mela uses the name our Sea very often afterward. But more of this
hereafter, where we treat more largely concerning the Dominion of the Romans
by Sea. Nor did Pompey's commission extend only against those Pirates, as
enemies of humane society (after the same manner as we see Commissions daily
granted against Pirates, that rob and spoil in any Sea not yet possessed) but
that very Sea-Territorie, which the Cilicians had invaded, was recovered by
Arms. From whence Astronomi^. lib. 4.
Manilius break's forth in a Poetical rapture, Quis te Niliaco peritarum
littore, Magne,
Post victas Mithridatis Opes, pelagusque receptum,
Crederet? --
Who would have thought, great Pompey, when for Rome
Thou Mithridates forces had o'recom,
And did from Pirates hands the Sea restore,
Thou should have perish'ton the Egyptian shore?


Therefore, Lactantius ought not so much to have resembled Neptune to Pompey,
as to the People of Rome, in being Lord of the Sea. Other matters there are in
the fabulous time, which being spoken of the Gods, may seem to show, what
opinion the Ancients were of touching the right and custom of men in this
particular. For, when they cloth their Gods with the persons of men, they
commonly speak such things of them as belong unto men. From whence H^siod
says, Jupiter granted unto Hecate, that she should possess part of the Sea,
as well as the Land. Hereunto also belong's that of Oppianus, concerning
Halieutic. lib. 1.
Amphitrite's being made Queen of the Sea by Neptune, -- (...),
He constituted Her Queen of the Sea.


Also Nonnus, Dionysiac. lib. 34.
-- (...).
Beroe had the Empire or Dominion of the Sea.


Instances of this kind are innumerable. And therefore thus much concerning
the fabulous time.

The first Dominion of the Sea among the Greeks in the Historical age; that is,
the Dominion of King Minos, or the Cretan. CHAP. IX.
THe former part of the Historical time, or that which comprehend's Kingdoms
and Commonweals, which expired some ages since, we begin from the Empire of the
Cretans at Sea. Afterward we trace a catalogue not only of very many People
of old Greece, and other nations famous heretofore in the East, of like Command
and Dominion in the Syrian, Egyptian, Pamphilian, Lydian, and AEgean Seas, and
the several changes thereof; but also we show, that the Dominion both of the
Romans and Carthaginians in their adjoining Seas, as the upper, the lower, the
more Easterly Sea also, and others of that kind in the West, has been
received into Custom, as a thing very usual, and agreeable to Law.

I.
MInos the son of Lycastus, said to be the son of Jupiter King of Now called
Candia.
Crete, possessed the Cretan Sea on every side and a great part of the Now
called the Levant.
AEgean as Lord and Sovereign. So says Thucydides, lib. 1.
(...), Minos held the greatest part of the Greek Sea as Lord thereof. So
truly, the word (...) is to be construed both here and in the following
instances. Nor is it any wise to be imagined, that so to have Command (as
(...) commonly signifie's) can be otherwise meant, than very plainly thus,
that any one who is Lord, or at least does Act as Deputy or by permission of
him who is Lord, may prescribe Rules and Laws to the number of other men's
ships, and passage, Tolls or Tributes, throughout the several limits of the
Sea, after the same manner as when he withold's or permit's the use of his
Land to husbandmen, according to his own will and pleasure. Which in this case
is all one. Howsoever, we are not ignorant, that (...) sometimes signifie's
only Is. Casaubon in Comment. ad Polyb. page 209.
to be strong and powerful in shipping. In like manner, Biblioth. 4.
Diodorus Siculus, Apud Stob^um Eclog. cap. 42.
Nicolaus Damascenus, ^^ograph. 10.
Strabo, Page 11.
Cedrenus, In Minoe.
Suidas, and others speak expressly. And Phaedra likewise in Seneca. In
Hippoly^o act. 1.
O magna vasti Creta Dominatrix freti,
Cujus per omne littus innumerae rates
Tenuere pontum; quicquid Assyria tenus
Tellure, Nereus pervium rostris secat.
O mighty Creet, thou Mistress of the main, Fuseb. Hieronym. Number. 765.

Whose many ships have filled both Sea and shores;
As far as Nereus does, to Ashur's Land,
Plow out a passage with his stemm's and oars.


And the first Dominion of the Sea, that is, the first possession of that part
of it which was not yet possessed but remained vacant (from whence this kind of
Dominion does arise) they attribute for the most part unto Minos. But there is
an error touching this matter, in Jerome's Traslation of the Chronicle of
Eusebius; nor is it to be passed by, unless we will carelessly neglect that
which in plain terms may seem to oppose the most eminent Soveraigntie of the
Sea among the Grecians. The Translation run's thus, Minos Mare obtinuit and
Cretensibus Leges dedit, ut Paradius memorat, quod Plato falsum esse convincit,
Minos possessed the Sea, and gave Laws to the Cretans, as Paradius records,
which Plato prove's to be falls. What then? Does Plato prove it to be falls,
that Minos gave Laws to the Cretans, and held the command of the Sea? or that
either of Them is false? The place is plainly falls and very much corrupted, both
in the fained name of Paradius, an Author, never heard of in any other place, as
also in the very Translation of the Greek words of Eusebius. Paradius, I know
not by what negligence (for I would not believ it of Jerome a pious and most
learned man; but perhaps of some smatterer in learning, who presumed to enlarge
those brief summarie discourses of his in that Chronicle) did arise even from
Para Dios, that is, ex Jove, from Jupiter, which is found in the Greek words of
Eusebius? For, there Eusebius says, Chronic. Canon. 110. in Thesauro Temporum.
Minos (...) possessed the Sea, and gave Laws unto the Cretans, which he
brought (...) from Jupiter, out of the Cave where he had retired himself for
nine years. Touching those Laws received from Minos, which Eutropius, lib. 6.
expired not before Crete was subdued by Caecilius Metellus, also concerning
his Cave in Mount Ida, and the nine years, the matter appears very plain out
of Homer, Plato, Porphyrie, and others. But in the Greek of Eusebius it
immediately fallows; (...), which certainly here signifie's, id quod Plato in
Legibus adprobat seu confirmat, that which Plato in his Laws approve's or
confirm's. For, Minos his receiving of of such Laws is the very Plato de
legibus, lib. 1.
foundation of Plato's Books concerning Laws. So little reason is there it
should have been translated, Quod Plato falsum esse convincit, aut quod Plato
refellit, which Plato prove's to be falls, which Plato disprove's: whereas
notwithstanding that eminent man Joseph Scaliger, using far less diligence here
then was meet, or then he has been wont to do, would have the latter to be
added in that place. For, howsoever according to the meaning and more common
usage of the word (...), it may seem rightly translated; yet the matter it
self, and the other signification of the word, does manifestly prove our
trans-action to be true. But we read the very same too, according to Jerome's
Translation, as copied out, by Marianus Scotus Anno Mundi, 2944.
, and Florentius of Worcester, save that in Florentius we read Plato falsum
esse affirmat, Plato affirm's to be falls.

That after Minos of Crete, Seventeen Nations of Renown in the East, succeeding
each other, did for very many years even without Intermission, enjoy a Dominion
of the Syrian, Egyptian, Pamphylian, Lydian, and AEgean Sea, no otherwise than
of the Continent or Islands. CHAP. X.
AFter the times of Minos the Cretian, we find in the Chronicles of Eusebius
and Africanus no less then seventeen Eastern Nations, part of Europe, part of
Asia, who for very many years so held the inner neighboring Sea, as Lords one
after another, that, according to the Intervenient Law of Nations, it is most
evident a private Dominion of the Sea took place among them all. For, changing
by course, and by length of time after long possession, through War, Victory,
or some other kind of Cession, they every one shared their period of
Domination, accomplishing among them all above five hundred and sixty years
without Intermission. But from the beginning of the Sea-Dominion of Minos or
the Cretan, to the next which fallows in the aforesaid Chronicles, there fell
out one hundred seventie five years. Those beginnings are placed about the time
of the Judges of Israel. They which succeeded, are ranked after this manner.

II.
IN the second place the Lydians were Lords of the Sea. The Greek of Eusebius
says, Page 31. and page 115. number. 940.
(...), The Lydians, called also Maeonians, were Lords of the Sea XCII years.
The beginnings of this Dominion are reckoned about the time of AEneas. But as
to what concern's the number of years, although it has been the same both
throughout the whole History of Eusebius, as also in his Chronicle; yet since
the Empire of the Pelasgi, which next fallows, is severed by the space of CXX
years or thereabout, perhaps it ought to be amended, and (...) or CXX to be
put in its place. Which that most excellent man Isaac Casaubon observed
doubtingly, also in his Commentary upon Polybius, where he treat's very
learnedly concerning those, who have had Dominion of the Sea in the East.
Likewise, Marianus Scotus and Florentius the Monk do mention the Sea-Dominion
of the Lydians, as also of the Pelasgi, without any number of years.

III.
THe third Lords of the Sea in this Catalogue, were the Pelasgi. Yet Eusebius
says, Chronic. lib. 1. p. 34. and number. 960.
(...), The Pelasgi in the second place possessed the Sea LXXXV years. Which is
referred to the times of Solomon, and those which follow. But the beginnings of
the Thracians, who immediately succeed, require that they should be reckoned
here rather LV years. And indeed the Pelasgi were second Lords of the Sea, if
(according to some) you either make the Lydians the first, or place them the
first after Minos or the Cretans. For, so the Pelasgi are plainly the second,
otherwise the third. Which also is to be observed in the following particulars.

IV.
Fourthly, the Thracians were Lords of the Sea, (...), or LXXIX years (as we
find in the Ibid. and number. 1014.
Greek of Eusebius;) which nevertheless are not reckoned above nineteen in
Jerome's Translation. But Isaac Casaubon is of Opinion, being induced thereto
from the beginnings of the Rhodians, who were next Lords, that it ought to be
written (...) or LXXXIX. Marianus and Florentius, following the translation of
Eusebius, account only XIX years to the Dominion of the Thracians. And it is
observed more then once by them, as well as in the aforesaid translation, that
the Thracians were Lords of the Sea. This was in the time of King Jeroboam.

V.
FIfthly, the Rhodians held the Sea, as Lords Chron. Canon. page 128. and number.
1100.
XXIII years. And hereupon Lib. 4.
Strabo commend's their industry in matter of Navigation, who says, Rhodes
was sovereign Lady of the Sea a long time, and suppressed Pirates. In the
Latin of Eusebius, the Rhodians are said to have been the fourth in order that
were Lords of the Sea. But in the Greek, that they were the fourth Lords of the
Sea, and according to some, the fifth. Whence this difference arose, appears by
that which has been said about the Pelasgi. Of all the ancient Lords of the
Sea the Rhodians are most renowned; chiefly in this respect, because the
Sea-Laws which were used and in full force and virtue in both the Empires, were
borrowed from them, and put into the Digests by Justinian. Says the Emperor
Antoninus to Eudaemon of Nicomedia Ad Legem Rhodians ff. l. 9. (...) De Legibus
hisce vide etiam Basilic. lib. 53. tit. 8.
, Lege Rhodiorum decidantur lites Nauticae, Let Suits about Navigation be
decided according to the Law of the Rhodians. And by the Testimony of
Constantinus Harmenopulus a Prochir. Juris lib. 2. tit. 11.
Judge of Thessalonica, they are the most ancient of all Sea-Laws, that have not
been lost. They were taken into use among the Romans from the time of Jus
Graeco* Romans Tom. 2. page 265.
Tiberius. Their beginnings are placed about the Reign of Jehosaphat: But the
Rhodians are wholly omitted both by Marianus and Florentius.

VI.
SIxthly, the Phrygians had dominion over the Sea XXV years; but (as it is in
the Chro. Canon. p. 129. number. 1127.
Greek of Eusebius) according to others XXVI. In the Latin we find only
XXV, as also in Marianus and Florentius. But yet seeing, in the Greek of
Eusebius, the Phrygians are (for the aforesaid reason) counted the fifth Lords
of the Sea, Isaac Casaubon (I think) well observe's that that number of six
does not denote the years, but the order of Dominion. This Lordship is reckoned
in the time of Lycurgus.

VII.
SEventhly, the Cyprians possessed the Sea, as some say, XXIII years; according
to others, XXXI. For, this is found in some Edit. Basil. 1549.
Editions of Jerome's Translation of Eusebius. That in the Chronicles of
Marianus and Florentius, compiled for the most part out of Eusebius and Jerome.
But neither in the Greek Copies of Eusebius, which are extant, nor in the
Translation set forth by Joseph Scaliger, is any mention made of the Cyprians:
nor truly in the account of Isaac Casaubon. This was in the time of Joas.

VIII.
Eighthly, the Phaenicians possessed the Sea. So Eusebius, Marianus, and
Florentius; save that they make them the seventh by reason of that different
manner of account, which has been shown you. Touching their Dominion the holy
Scriptures themselves speak plainly enough; which also we have noted before in
our discourse concerning the Divine Law. The memorial of this Dominion is placed
about the Reign of Uzziah King of Judah. Also this Nation of the Phaenicians
became renowned for their skill in Navigation, as we are instructed by Pliny,
and others. And heretofore (perhaps) that ought to be referred, which is
delivered by Antipater Tarsensis and Manaseas, two ancient writers, touching
Gat^^ Queen of the Syrians (who themselves also were Phenicians) whom they will
have therefore to be called Atergatis, because ( as Antipater says) she set
forth an Edict, (...). Apud Athen^um, dipnosoph. 8.
that none should eat fish without Gatis; or, as Manaseas says, that no man
should eat fish without her license and permission, but that every one should
bring the fish they caught unto her. That which they hold concerning the
Original of the word appears sufficiently ridiculous, whilst they derive a
Syrian or Phenician name from the Greek fountain. But the very thing which (I
suppose) they would have, is this; That Atergatis was Queen or Sovereign Lady,
not only of Syria or Phenicia (which is the Sea-cost of Syria) but also of the
Sea lying before it, in such a manner that it was not lawful for any one to
fish freely therein, at least not to enjoy the benefit of fishing, without her
consent. From whence it was a Custom to consec^a^e fishes of Gold and Silver to
her, after she was placed among ^he Deities.

IX.
NInthly, after the Phenicians, the Egyptians Eusebius.. Number. 1230.
possessed the Sea under their Kings Psamnitis, and Bocchoris who lived
immediately before the beginnings of the Olympiads. Mention is made of them
also in Marianus and Florentius.

X.
IN the tenth place, the Milesians were Lords of the Sea. The books of Eusebius
do not show the number of years. But both in Marianus and Florentius we read,
that the Milesians possessed the Sea XVIII years. Stephanus, concerning Cities,
says, Naucratis, a City of Egypt, was built (...)
by the Milesians then possessing the Sea. And Eusebius also mention's the
building of that City, together with their Dominion at Sea, about the time of
Romulus. In like manner they built Sinope, seated by the Euxine Sea, which (as
Strabo says) lib. 12.
commanded that Sea which flow's within the Cyanean Islands.

XI.
ELeventhly the Eusebius. Number. 1281.
Carians possessed the Sea. Their Sea* Dominion is remembered by Biblioth. 5.
Diodorus Siculus. It was about the time of Hezekiah.

XII.
TWelfthly, and next to the Carians, the Lesbians held the Sea in possession.
Eusebius. Number. 1341.
LXIX years. So it is in the Latin of Eusebius. But Marianus renders it LVIII
years.

XIII.
THirtenthly, the Phoceans possessed the Sea, about the Captivity of Babylon.
Their Dominion lasted XLIV years. So says the Greek of Eusebius, Chron. lib.
1. page 42.
(...) the Phoceans were Lords of the Sea XLIV years. Before which words the
number (...) or of twelve is prefixed, whereby it is signified, that they were
the twelfth after the Lydians, and the thirteenth from Minos.

XIV.
FOurteenthly, the Corinthians were Lords of the Sea. I do not find, that they
were thus ranked. But it appears clearly out of lib. 1.
Thucydides, that they were very potent ar Sea, and did so repress Piracies by
their strength in shipping, that they gained themselves a very large command by
Sea, as well as by land. The same author also mention's their extraordinary
industry in restoring the affairs of Navigation. Nor does time gainsay, but
that we may well place them here, as also the Ionians next. But we do not as
yet find, that these fourteenth and the fifteenth are received by writers into
the Catalogue of those, who have thus held the Sea in possession.

XV.
FIfteenthly the Ionians were neighboring Lords of the Sea. Concerning them
Thucydides says, Lib. citato:
A good while after, (to wit after the power of the Corinthians by Sea) the
power and interest of Navigation was in the hand of the Ionians, in the time of
Cyrus the first King of the Persians, and of his son Cambyses; And (...)
contending also with Cyrus, they enjoyed their own Sea for some time. where the
old Scholiast add's by way of observation, (...), the neighboring Sea; but not
all.

XVI.
SIxteenthly, the Naxians, were Lords of the Sea. Eusebius says, Chronic. lib.
1. page 43.
In the fifteenth place the Naxians possessed the Sea, ten years. About the
time of Cambyses. It is spoken of the Naxians, named from the Island Naxos,
which is one of the Cyclades, or Isles in the Archipelago.

XVII.
SEventeenthly, the Eretrians succeeded into this Sea-Dominion. Eusebius, when
he speak's of the Naxians, says, (...) etc. And after them the Eretrians, in
the seventeenth place, held it VII years. Eretria was heretofore a famous and
wealthy City in the Island of Euboea.

XVIII.
And lastly, the last or eighteenth Lords of the Sea in this Catalogue were the
People of AEgina. The Latin of Eusebius says, Number. 1058.
the People of AEgina possessed the Sea XX years, even until Xerxes his
passage; which is noted in the fourth year of the sixty seventh Olympiad. But
Xerxes made his passage in the seventy fifth Olympiad, and in first year
thereof. Therefore there passed XXVIII years between. But truly Joseph Scaliger
observe's here, from this carelessness in counting of years, that those are mere
triflings which are found in the Latin. And he says, they are s discovered
by the Greek, wherein we read only (...). The people of AEgina held
possession of the Sea X years. Which truly we find as well in the former
Chronicle of Eusebius, as in his Canon: nor is it otherwise placed then in the
Latin. Also Lib. 8.
Strabo and Var. Histor. lib. 12.
AElianus make mention of their Sea-Dominion.

Touching the Sea-Dominion of the Lacedaemonians and Athenians. Moreover also,
that it was acknowledged not only by the Greeks, but also by the Persians, in
a Treaty of Peace. CHAP. XI.
NOr are those Particulars which are to be applied hither out of the East,
found only in the Customs and Sea-Dominion of so many famous Nations thus
continued one after another (the years of whose Empires have usually been
reckoned from their subduing the Sea;) but in the Customs of others also, who
truly were more famous, though they be not registered any where in such a
kind of Catalogue. It is written of Polycrates, that renowned King of the
Samians, who about the beginning of the Persian Empire, vanquished the Lesbians
and M^lesians in a Sea fight, that he so earnestly aspired after a
Soveraigntie of the Sea, that it was manifestly acknowledged to be capable of
Dominion. Herodotu^ says, Polycrates is the first of those that we have
known, who had an intent to acquire the Dominion of the Sea unto himself,
except Minos of Crete, and if there were any other that enjoyed the Sea before
him. He speak's, I suppose, of Kings. For, those Greeks in whose hands the
Dominion of the Sea was (as we before have shown you) so often changed, were
commonly governed either by a Popular, or an Aristocratical form of Government.
Nor could Herodotus, I think, be more ignorant of their Dominion, then of King
Minos. For, he lived after the forementioned Dominion of the People of AEgina
was ended, or about the eightieth Olympiad. Therefore, either he spoke only
of Kings, or was extremely mistaken.

About the eightieth Olympiad, and the times following unto the Grecian
Monarchy, those most renowned People of Greece, not only the Athenians, but
the Lacedaemonians also, did sometime enjoy a Dominion of the Sea flowing about
them. Demosthenes says of the Lacedaemonians, Philippic. 3. vide etiam
Themistoclem. Epist. 14.
They had Dominion over the Sea and the whole Land. Others also have testified
as much. Concerning the Athenians either the same man, or Hegisippus, in that
Oration touching An Island in the AEgean Sea, now called the Levant.
Halonesos, making mention of Philip K. of Macedon's affecting a Dominion of
the Sea, speak's thus, De Praedonibus aequum esse ait Philippus etc? Concerning
Pirates, Philip says, it is meet, that both he and you should by common
consent, drive away such as offend upon the Sea, requiring no other thing than
this, that he may be put in command over the Sea by you, and that you would
confess your selves unable to defend and guard the Sea (which hitherto has been
yours) without the help of Philip. They did also by League impose a certain
size and proportion upon all sorts of Bottoms, both for quality and quantity,
which their neighbors should have leav to use. It is an Article of the Treaty
made with the Lacedaemonians; Thucydides* lib. 4.
That the Lacedaemonians and their Consederates might indeed use the Sea, but
not sail in a long ship, but any other kind of vessel; which being rowed with
Oars should not exceed the freight of five hundred Talents: That is to say,
not in a vessel with one range of Oars, much less in one of two or three
ranges, or others that were men of War, but in vessels to be rowed
nevertheless with certain pairs of Oars, being vessels only for carriage, and
those small enough. other passages of this kind there are in Thucydides.
Hereunto belong's that of AEmilius Probus, touching Timotheus a famous Captain
of the Athenians. He brought Corcyra (says he) under the command of the
Athenians, and made the people of Epirus, the Athamanians, Chaonians, and all
those Nations which border upon that Sea, to be their Confederates. Whereupon
the Lacedaemonians desisted from long contentions, and of their own accord
yielded a pre-eminence of Sea Dominion to the Athenians, and settled Peace upon
this condition, that the Athenians should be chief Commanders at Sea. Which
Victory was received with so much joy among the Athenians, that Altars were
then erected unto PEACE, and a Temple appointed for that Goddess. And
Demosthenes concerning Orat. advers. Leptinem.
Archebius and Heraclides, who when they had delivered Byzantium to
Thrasybulus, they made you (says he, speaking to the men of Athens) Lords of
the Sea, so that ye might sell the Tenth; To wit, the Customs of the
Merchandise of such Merchants as should trade in the Hellespont; which is noted
there by Ulpianus the Rhetorician. From hence also, Cicero would have that
barbarous Decree of this Nation to have had its rise concerning the people of
AEgina sometimes Lords of the Sea. De Offici^s lib. 3. sic Valerius Maximus, l..
9. c. 2.
The Athenians, says he, dealt very cruelly, who passed a Decree, that the
AEginetans, who were powerful in Shipping, should have their thumbs cut off; to
the end, that they might not grow strong in Shipping hereafter, or by force
enter upon that Sea then possessed by the Athenians: For, in some Books we
read, quia class valebant, because they grew strong in Shipping, as it is noted
by Carolus Langius. Though it be conceived by Var. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 9.
AElian the Decree was therefore made, that they might not be able to use a
Spear, and yet to handle Oars. This cruelty is detested by Writers. But it is
evident, that by this means they were deprived of a free use of the Sea. Nor
was such a Dominion of the Sea approved only among those people of Greece; but
also by the Persians, who at that time ruled the East, as appears in that
notable League made after the Victory at Eurymedon. For truly, Cimon Captain of
the Athenians having vanquished the Naval Forces of Artaxerxes Longimanus King
of the Persians (which had infested the Sea about the Chelidonian Islands) the
King's courage was so broken, That (as Ex Cratero in ^imonis vita.
Plutarch says, and In Panathena^ca.
Aristides almost the same) he concluded that notable Peace, upon such terms
that he was to keep the distance of an hors-race from the Greek Sea, and that
he should not have a Ship built long or beaked, within the Cyanean and
Chelidonian Islands. So that the King was to keep out of every part of the
AEgean, Rhodian, Carpathian, and Lydian Sea, and that which bend's thence into
the West toward Athens: Because the Athenians were clearly Lords thereof. For,
the Greek, which of old was called the Carick Scholiast. lib. 1. Add Dionys.
Halicarnass. lib. 1.
Sea, spread its self to a very great latitude, from Caria or the shore of the
Western part of Asia. Moreover, subjection was imposed upon the Sea of
Pamphylia and Lycia, as also the Euxin Sea, that no Ship of the King's which
should be long-built or beaked (that is to say, a man of War) could according
to the League be admitted, either in this beyond the Cyanean, or in that
beyond the Chelidonian Islands. This certainly was the very meaning of In
Panathenaico.
Isocrates, when making mention of the Athenian Dominion, he says, it was not
lawful to sail in long Ships or Galleys beyond Phaselis. For, Phaselis, a Town
either of Lycia or Pamphylia, is situate in the same direct line with the
Chelidonian Islands. But Suidas tell's us, that Castor Rhodius, an ancient
Writer, had compiled an History (...) of such as have enjoied a Dominion of
the Sea Jos. Scaliger in Eusebianis ad number. 840. Gerard. Vossius de Historicis
Graecis, lib. 1. cap. 25. Alii.
Learned men are upon very good ground of Opinion, that those Lords of the Sea,
reckoned up in the former Chapter, were taken by Julius Africanus and Eusebius
out of that Author. It is almost out of question too, that he added the
Soveraigntie both of the Athenians and Lacedaemonians by Sea. Castor lived about
the time of Augustus Caesar. That work of his is utterly lost.

Other Testimonies, which are found scattered up and down, touching the
Dominion of the Sea, in the Customs of the Eastern Nations. CHAP. XII.
MOreover, very many things are found scattered up and down in those Writings
that concern the Customs of the Eastern Nations, which clearly prove it to have
been a most received opinion touching private Dominion of the Sea. Antiochus
Epiphanes, King of Syria says, speaking of the Syrian Sea, Josep^ ^^n. Gorion.
lib. 3. cap. 12. Edit Munster. Ebra olat^in sol.
Are not both the Sea and the Land mine? And Xerxes that Persian King, when in
a ridiculous humor he scourged the Hellespont, stigmatized it, and cast a pair
of Fetters into the Waters, said, Herodotus, lib. ^.
(...), Thy Lord inflict's this punishment upon thee. Also, whereas
Agatharcides, following the story of Boxus the Persian, write's that the red
or Erythrean Sea was so called from King Erythras or Erythrus (that is, from
Edom bordering thereupon who also was Jos. Scali^er ad Festum, verb.
AE^^ptinos, and Nicol. Fuller, Miscellan. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Esau, and signifies the same that Erythrus or Rubrus does in Ebrew) he add's
also this Exposition does imply apud Photium, cod. 250.
(...), A man enjoying the Dominion of that Sea. And truly we read in De vita
Apollonii, lib. 3. cap. 11.
Philostratus, that there was an old contract touching the Red Sea, which King
Erythras had contracted, when he had Dominion over that Sea, that no Egyptian
ought to enter that Sea in a long Ship, but to employ there only one of
Burden. And De Relus Alexandri, lib. 4.
Quintus Curtius says of the City of Tire, that being built by Agenor, she
made not only the neighboring Sea, but what Sea soever her* Ships sail into,
to be of her Dominion. From whence also Tyria Maria, Tyrian Sea's, became a
A^ranius apud. Festum, v^r^. Tyria Maria.
Proverb, to signify a Sea so possessed, that free passage could not be had,
without leav of the Lord or Possessor. There was also a very ancient Custom
used in the Fast, that when great Kings having designs to bring any Nations
under their power, commanded the pledges of Empire and Dominion to be
delivered to them, they were wont to demand Water and Earth together. That is
to say, there quired them (...), to bring earth and water, and (...), to
prepare Earth and Water. They conceived that their Dominion of the Sea as well
as the Land, was signified by such a kind of pledge or token. Thus Herodotus
lib. 4.
Darius demanded Earth and Water from Indathyrsus King of the Scythians; Thus
Polybius, lib. 9.
Xerxes from the Lacedaemonians; and thus both of them from the People of Coos,
which is witnessed by the Coans themselves in a public Decree or Epistle, in
answer to Artaxerxes his most imperious demand, that Hippocrates should be
rendered up to him; wherein the Coans slighting the threats of that great King,
decreed that what hazard soever they might seem to run, Hippocrates should by
no means be rendered. They added also to that Decree Hippocrates, Epistol. 9.
(...) etc. How that when his Predecessors, Darius and Xerxes, had by their
Letters demanded Earth and Water, the people of Coos did in no wise yield it;
forasmuch as they were satisfied, that those who had sent unto them were
mortal, as well as other men. And in the Greek Copies of the History of
Judith, Nabuchodonosor being about to denounce War against the
neighbor-Nations, says expressly, the form of submission which he expected
was, Judith, cap. 2. 7. Grace.
that they should provide for him Earth and Water. Unless they conceiv
themselves to be Lords of the Waters as well as the Land, I do not well see
wherefore they should demand Earth and Water as tokens of universal Dominion.
Moreover also, Achmes Ben Seirim, an Arabian, writing of the Sea says, that
according to the Doctrine of the Indians, Persians, and Egyptians, in
expounding of dreams, Cap. 178.
If any one (in a dream) seem to himself to be made Lord of the Sea, he shall
be heir of the whole Kingdom, and shall reign. Add hereunto that Oracle of
Delos concerning the Sea-Dominion of the Athenians. The men of Athens offering
sacrifice in Delos, a Boy that drew water to wash their hands, poured Fish out
of the pot together with the water. Hereupon this Oracle was delivered by the
Priests, (...), That they should become Lords of the Sea. The Author is one Semus
an ancient Writer in Dipnosoph. lib. 8.
Athenaeus; where Phylarchus also relate's, how that when Patroclus, a Captain
of Ptolomie, the son of Lagus, had sent fish and fresh figs together unto King
Antigonus, and those that stood by were in doubt what was meant by that
present, Antigonus, said he, himself very well apprehended what might be the
meaning of Patroclus: For, says he, either Patroclus mean's, (...)
That we must get the Sovereignty or Dominion of the Sea, or else gnaw figs. Or
that he must seem slothful and effeminate, or become Lord of the Sea. Therefore
he made no doubt touching private Dominion of the Sea. And there also the
Glutton in Antiphanes the Comedian says, it is neither profitable for life,
nor to be endured, That some of you should claim the Sea as peculiar to
themselves, and spend much money upon it, but no victual for Navigation, not so
much as a bit. Add also that of Theocritus, touching the Dominion of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt, over the Sea as well as the Land, Jellio. 17.
(...)
He is Lord of much Land, and also of much Sea.


And a little after, he speak's of the Pamphilian, Lycian, and the inner part
of the remaining Sea, that the whole Sea, and Land, and Rivers were subject to
King Ptolomie. Also, Lib. de plantatione Noe.
Philo Judeus says, let not Princes glory in that they have conquered many
Nations, or that they have brought all the rivers and Seas so exceeding vast
both in Number and magnitude under their power. Moreover, though Isocrates in
his Oration concerning Peace seems to hint, that the Sea-Dominion and
Sovereignty, which the Athenians endeavored to maintain, brought many mischiefs
upon them; and also that it sometimes occasioned them to use Tyranny against
the Neighbor-Cities of Greece; yet he dispute's it as a thing that may com
into examination, under the account of profitable and unprofitable, and by
accident, of unjust; but he does not in any wise endeavor to prove it unjust
from the nature of the thing it self. Yea, in another place he sufficiently
commend's that Dominion, though not all things in preserving it. And the same
In Panathenaico.
Author says expressly, of both Cities, the Lacedemonian and Athenian; It happened
that both Cities did enjoy a Command of the Sea; which when either of them
held, they had most of the other Cities obedient thereto. We read also a
dispute in Aristotle, (...)
concerning a Communion or common enjoyment of the Sea; to wit whether it may
be convenient or not for a well ordered City? whether it were better it should
remain common to all men, so that no man might in any wise be denied passage,
traffic, merchandise, and fishing; Or that the use of it may be so
restrained, that it might be received into the Dominion of any City, so as to
exclude forreiners? He dispute's this point whether it be profitable, or
unprofitable, but question's it not at all as unjust; having been abundantly
instructed out of the Customs of the Nations round about, touching a propriety
of the Sea as well as the Land. Also his Scholar Alexander the Macedonian,
being victorious in the East, prepared for an expedition against Europe, that
He, might become Lord of the whole Land and Sea, as says the Emperor In
Oratione 3. seu Eusebiae Encomio.
Julian. And truly among the People of Greece, especialy such as bordered upon
the Sea, and others of that nature in the East, to hold supreme power and
Soveraigntie above others, and to enjoy a Soveraigntie of the Sea, were
acoounted almost one and the same thing. Nor did they conceiv that could be
obtained without this. From whence arose that Council of Themistocles, which
Pompey the great also followed at Rome; Cicero ad Atticum, lib. 10. Epist. 7.
Plutarch. in Themistocle.
Qui mare teneat, eum necesse esse rerum potiri etc. He which can possess the
Sea, must need's have Command of all. So also says Jsaac Comm. in Polybinm
page 199.
Casaubon upon Polybius; To have Dominion of the Sea (which is expressed by the
Greeks (...)) is wholly, and ever has been a great strengthening, and as it
were a pledge of extraordinary power. Therefore, the old writers of Chronicles
among the Grecians, seeing before the institution of the Olympiads, there was
no Sovereign power of any People of Greece in being, upon whose actions a
knowledge of times might be grounded, therefore among the other times that they
made use of for the computing of times, they omitted not that particular, but
carefully kept an account of those People, who had once enjoyed a Dominion of
the Sea, and they exactly observed in their Chronologies all such changes as
happened in that matter. But you have more then enough touching those Customs
that have been received in the East, about the Dominion of the Sea.

Of the Spinetans, Tuscans, Carthaginians, and other Lords of the Sea in the
West. CHAP. XIII.
NOr is such a Dominion of the Sea, as I have mentioned, less clear and
evident, in the ancient Customs of the Western Nations. The spinetans, so
called from the City Spina situate near the entrance of the River Po, were a
long time Lords of the upper or Adriatic Sea, being wont to send very liberal
Tenths out of their profits by Sea, to Apollo at Delphos. So says Lib. 5.
Strabo and De Orig. Romans lib. 1.
Dionysius Halicarnass. Who write expressly in like manner of the Tuscans, that
they were (...), in command of the lower Sea, or that which washes the
South-Coast of Italy; that is in plain terms that they were Lords of the Sea.
And Biblioth. l. 5. (...).
Diodorus Siculus says, the Tyrrheni (or Tuscans) possessing the Sea a long
time as Lords, called it by their own Name. But afterward, the Diodorus Sic.
lib. 20.
Carthaginians became Lords of almost the whole Mediterranean, which is more
westward, to wit of the Sicilian and African Sea; who being overcom in battle,
Agathocles King of Sicily enjoied the same power for some time; from whom the
People of Africa revolting, that Dominion was soon restored to the
Carthaginians. These things were don in CXVIII Olympiad. Then, for 40. years or
thereabout, the Carthaginians continued Lords of the Sea, and gave Laws
thereto; that is to say, until the fist Punick War, whch began in the last year
of the CXXVIII Olympiad. So also Polybius, Histor. lib. 1. and 3. Add Appian.
Alexandrin. sub. Initiis Belli Punici.
The Carthaginians enjoying the Dominion of the Sea without controversy. And a
little after; The Carthaginians enjoyed the command of the Sea without all
controversy, as received from their Ancestors. But the Carthaginians enjoyed
the same, even long before the time of Agathocles, as it sufficiently appears
by that League of all that was made first of all betwixt them and the Romans,
at the beginning of their Consuls, or about the sixty eight Olympiad. One
Article thereof is in Polybius, who only mention's it to this effect; That
neither the Romans nor their Confederates were to sail beyond the A
Promontorie of Africa, near Car.
fair Promontorie, unless driven by Tempest, or forced by enemies. That was a
promontorie of Africa; and the Carthaginians were so far Lords of the Sea, that
they would not permit the Romans or their Confederates, to sail beyond that
Promontorie: which the Romans themselves acknowledged to be just in the League
that they made. But in the second League or Treaty of Peace betwixt these
famous Nations in the West, it was farther provided; that no Roman should
touch either upon Africa or Sardinia, unless it were either to take in
Provision or repair their Ships, as you may see also in Polybius: so that the
use of the Sea was taken away, or restrained. And hereunto belong's that of In
verbo, Tyria Maria.
Pompeius Festus, touching the Paeni or Carthaginians; The Carthaginians having
their original from Tire, were so powerful at Sea, that Navigation was
hazardous to all men; For, the Carthaginians were the chief of the Poeni.
Moreover, De Bello Gallico, lib. 3. cap. 8.
Julius Caesar writing of the Veneti a people of Western Gallia about the
entrance of the River Loire, and of old very industrious in Sea-affairs above
their Neighbors, says, That in a great and open current of the Sea, having but
a few Ports lying here and there which are in their possession, they make
almost all men pay Custom, that were wont to use the same Sea. Tribute was paid
to them as Lords, for the use of the neighboring Sea. Nor must we pass by that
here, which De Gestis Longoba^dorum lib. 3. cap. 33. quod memorat etiam
Sigonius de regno Italiae, lib. 1.
Paulus Warnfredus relate's of Autharis King of the Lombards. There was a
Pillar placed within the very waters of the Sea, which wash the City of
Rhegium. To that Pillar (says Warnfredus) King Autharis came on horse back, and
touched it with the point of his spear, saying, even in this place shall be
the bounds of Lombard^e. But we must treat next concerning the people of Rome,
the most noble precedent of all both for Law and Custom.

The Sea Dominion of the people of Rome, and of such as followed their Customs
in the Eastern Empire. CHAP. XIV.
BEfore the first Punick War, the Carthaginians and the Romans, both strove
with equal Forces and affections for the Empire of the World; save that they of
Carthage seemed the more potent, by reason of that Dominion of the Sea by them
held so many years. But then C. Duillius being made General of a Navy of CLX
Ships, riding at Anchor, and armed within sixty days after the wood had been
cut, almost undid Carthage in that Sea, and wholly reduced it under the Roman
power. And Florus says, Lib. 2. cap. 6.
when the Sea and the Isles were taken away, it shamed that noble Nation to pay
Tribute, who were wont to command it. So, the Carthaginians being deprived of
this kind of Dominion, the Romans got it by the Law of Arms and Victory; so
great and so constant honor being, for this cause, paid to so renowed a
General, that Minstrels were ever sent to make him music after Supper, and a
Torch was carried before him. Moreover, both the Phaenicians and Cilicians had
Dominion over the Romans Sea, as appears by the League made betwixt them and
Antiochus King of Syria; wherein it was thus provided: That Antiochus should
surrender his long ships and their warlike furniture; and not have more than
ten nimble Galleys (none of which should be rowed with above thirty Oars) nor
so much as a Galley with one range of Oars when he shall have any occasion to
make a War. Nor should he sail on this side the Promontories of Calycadnus or
Sarpedon; unless it be a ship employed to convey money, pay, or Ambassadors,
or Hostages. So says Decad. lib. 8.
Livie. But we read in Polybius, Nullam habeto triginta remis actam navem, Let
him have no Ship rowed with 30 Oars. In like manner Hannibal, in a speech made
unto Scipio, says thus, Livie, lib. 30.
We deny not, but that all those places are yours for which the War has been
undertaken, Sicilie, Sardinia, Spain, and all the Isles contained in the whole
Sea, betwixt Africa and Italy. And may we Carthaginians, that are confined
within the shores of Africa, see you (when it so pleases the Gods) ruling
foreign Dominions by Land and Sea. And a little after, the Peace being agreed,
five hundred Ships of the Carthaginians that were rowed with Oars, were by them
seized and burnt. To wit, that they might not use the Sea, which was then to
be in the Dominion of others. Afterward also, the Senate of Carthage was
chastised, Epit. Live. lib. 48. and 49.
because they had an Army, and materials for shipping, contrary to the League:
And it was decreed, that War should be proclaimed against them, because they
had caused their Army to march beyond their bounds, etc. Also, Pliny says
expressly concerning Pompey the great; Not. Histor. lib. 7. cap. 26.
That he freed the Seacoast from Pirates, and restored the Dominion to the
people of Rome. Moreover, as touching the vast Sea-dominion of the Roman
people, Dionysius Halicarnass says; Orig. Romans lib. 1.
Rome is Lady of the whole sea, not only of that which lie's within
Hercules's Pillars; but also of the Ocean it self so far as it is navigable.
This is indeed an Hyperbole; But in the mean time a clear Testimony of a very
large Seadominion. As also that of In praefatione.
Appianus Alexandrinus; The Romans (says he) hold the Dominion of the whole
Mediterranean Sea. Other instances there are of the same nature. But truly,
that expression of a very Hugo Grotius, de Jure Belli and pacis lib. 2. cap.
3.. 15. Possun^ enim ut singuli, i^^ and populi, etc.
eminent man is not to be admitted, who says of examples of that kind, that
they do not prove a possession of the Sea or of a Right of Navigation. For as
particular private men, so also people and Nations may be Leagues and
Agreements, not only quit that Right which peculiarly belong's to them, but
that also which they hold in common with all men, in favor and for the benefit
of any one whom it concern's. And for this he referr's himself unto Ulpian,
who will have that Cessation of fishing for Tunies in the Sea (of which more In
capi^ proximo.
hereafter) to be derived from the Authority of some stipulation or Covenant,
not from any vassalage imposed upon the Sea. Surely by such a kind of
distinction, whereof Ulpian is indeed the Author, the same may be said either
of Dominion or vassalage (as we call it) of every kind. If to occupy and
enjoy in a private manner, by Right to hinder, and forbid others, be not
Dominion, it is nothing. Moreover Cassandra in Lycophron, prophesied that the
people in Rome should have such a Dominion, where she attribute's to them
(...).
The Scepter and Monarchy both of Land and Sea.


Hereunto belong those things above mentioned, touching the Command of Pompey
held by Commission from the people of Rome, as also those other which we meet
with now and then among writers, concerning the Sea-Dominion of the Romans.
Suetonlus says of Augustus Caesar, In Augusto, cap. 49.
Het placed one Navy at Mesinum and another at Ravenna, to guard the upper and
lower Sea. But In Rome encomio.
Aristides says this Dominion was not limited to the Romans by certain Bounds
(as of old (...) the Athenians) but that it encompassed their Empire round like
a girdle. And Themistius speaking of the Emperor Theodosius the elder, says;
Orat. 5.
what would you say of him, who is Emperor or Ruler of almost the whole Earth
and Sea. In like manner, Procopius making mention of a Statue of a Roman
Emperor, holding a City in his left hand, says, that the Statuarie's meaning
was, De aedificiis Justiniani, cap. de Augustaeo.
that the whole Land was subject to him, as well as the Sea. To the same
purpose speak's Nicephorus Callistus in the Preface to his Ecclesiastical
History. And Mathese^s, lib. 6. cap. 1.
Julius Firmicus, speaking of such persons who have in the Schemes of their
Nativities, the Moon increasing in the thirtieth Degree of Taurus, fortified
with a friendly Aspect of Jupiter, says, they shall possess the Dominions of
Sea and Land, whithersoever they lead an Army. Oppianus says to the Emperor
Antoninus, -- Halieutic. lib. 3.
(...)
Under thy Laws or Scepter the Sea role's,
And Fishes swim throughout thy Sea in sholes.


And Venus to Jupiter, concerning the future Empire of the Romans Virgil
AEneid. 1.
Certe hinc Romanos, olim volventibus annis,
Hinc fore ductores, renovato sanguine Teucri,
Qui Mare, qui Terras omni ditione tenerent,
Pollicitus: quae te, genitor, sententia vertit?
Hence Romans their Original should take
In after-years, thou once did promise make,
And Leaders spring, to rule both Land and Sea,
From Teucer's blood: what alter's thy decree?
From whence the same Poet, in another place, speak's of Augustus Caesar,
Georgic. lib. 1.
An Deus immensi venias Maris, ac tua Nautae
Numina sola colant; tibi servia^ ultima Thule,
Teque sibi generum Tethys emat omnibus undis.
Translated by my worthy friend Thomas May.
Or whether thou the God wilt be
Of the vast Sea, and Thule's farthest shore,
Or thee alone the Sailors shall adore,
As Thetys Son-in-law with all her Seas
Given for a dower, etc.
And Claudian of Scipio Africanus, Praefat in lib. 3. de Laudibus Stilic^nis.
Ergo seu patriis primaevus Manibus ultor
Subderet Hispanum legibus Oceanum.
Then whether in revenge to's Father's ghost,
He quelled the Sea upon the Spanish Coast.


Or what other business soever he did, Ennius was still at his elbow. In like
manner, Constantinus Monomachus is, by John Bishop of Euchaita, in his
Iambicks, called indeed Emperor of the East; but according to the custom of the
Western Empire, (...),
Lord and absolute Sovereign both of Land and Sea.


As also the Emperor Leo by Varadatus, Council. Chalced. part. 3. Tom. 2. part.
1. Edit. Binianae. 1618.
Terrae Marisque Dominus, Lord of the Land and Sea. So that in the Empire of
Constantinople, which followed the Customs of the Western, the AEgean Sea it
self was reckoned among the Provinces, no otherwise then Samos, Cyprus, or
other Islands or Territories of any kind whatsoever. This appears out of Lib.
1. Them. 17.
Constantinus Porphyrogennetus his Themata, where also the Hellespont is
expressly assigned to the Commander in chief of the AEgean Sea, together with
the Territories lying round about. And truly the Customs out of this Sea were
very great, only upon the account of Fishing. Sometimes ten, sometime twelv
thousand Crowns, were collected out of it yearly. We learn this also out of a
Decree, whereby Andronicus Palaeologus, one that kept the State of an Emperor,
but lived a chambering idle life within his Palace, had for the victualling of
himself and his retinue, the yearly profit of the fishing before
Constantinople, wont to b^e valued at that time, at ten thousand Crowns, as
says, Lib. ^.
Nicephorus Gregoras. The same is by some called Topiaticum, Vide J.
Can^acuz^num, hist. ^b 2. c. 1. (...) lib. 4. cap. 42. ^raet^r Jo. Meursium in
Glossario, verb. (...) Et Jul. Caes. Bullinger. de Imperio Romano, lib. 9. cap
72.
Topicum, it is named also Piscinica and Topice. Moreover, in the servey or
breviarie of the Dignities of the East, only three Provinces are reckoned
under the Proconsul of Asia, after this manner:

These Provinces underwritten are under the charge of that eminent person the
Proconsul of Asia.
Asia; The Isles; Hellespont.
Also, the Office of the Consular Governor of Hellespont is mentioned in the
Decree of the Emperors L. unic. C de Officio Comi^^^ sacri Patrimonii.
Honorius and Thedosius, where it is transferred out of the power of the
Deputy of Asia into that of the Proconsul of Asia (who at that time was
Simplicius.) In another place also, in the Novels of Justinian, we find
Hellespont joined with So called from Polem^^on a City of Cappadocia.
Pontus Polemoniacus by the name of a Province or Lievtenantship. I know indeed
that Hellespont is taken here by learned men, not so much for that narrow Sea
which divide's Europe from Asia, as for the Seacoast of Asia. So In Notitia
Orient. cap. 102.
Guidus Pancirollus upon the Breviarie. In this place (says he) that Country
of Asia is signified which is situate near the the shore of Hellespont.
Certainly, it is seldom enough I suppose, that we find the name of Hellespont
used elsewhere for any Country of Vide Ortelium in Thesauro Geograph, verb.
Hellespont.
Asia, but rather Hellespontia. But if not the narrow Sea it self, but a
Country of the same name were described in the Breviarie, wherefore then is
this Country only so remarkably named with Asia, whereof it self could be
but a small part? If you take it for that very Sea, the matter is evident, and
seems to agree very well with it self. It is most consonant to reason, that
the spacious Province of the Proconsul of Asia was denoted by Asia it self, the
neighboring narrow Sea, and the Isles; Not thus, by Asia it self and the Isles,
adding moreover I know not what petty Country, obscure enough, and supposed
also to be a part even of Asia. Also the Custom of the following Age seems to
interpret a more ancient Government in this place. The very AEgean Sea (which
comprehend's almost all this neighboring Sea) is expressly numbered by the
aforesaid Constantinus Porphyrogenitus, among the Jurisdictions,
Lievtenantships, or Provinces of the East. His words are, Lib. 1. Them. 17.
But the AEgean Sea it self also is reckoned among the Provinces. And a little
after also concerning the Isles, he says, There belong to the command or
Government of the AEgean Sea the Isles called Cyclades, and the most eminent of
the Sporades, Mytilene, and Chios, and Lemnos it self. So that the Isles and
the Sea it self might be contained here, as particular parts of the Government
or Province, as well as any other Regions whatsoever. Moreover, it is to be
observed out of the Notitia or Breviarie of the East, that in the Badges or
signal Ornaments of the Proconsul of Asia, which were usually painted in that
Commission whereby he was established in his Government, there were contained
(besides the effigies of the Princes, and the Book of instructions)
representations of three women, set forth alike with towred Diadems on their
heads, according to the pattern which we shall present you with by and by,
representing those three Provinces together, to wit, Asia, the Isles, and
Hellespont in such a manner, and so remarkbly noted by an addition of their
names, that there is not the least shadow of Reason, why we should grant the
last to have been a part or Region of the first. I thought fit also, to add
here Pancirollus his description of those Pictures or Represensentations, who
has made use not only of the printed Books of the Breviarie, set forth by
Alciatus (from whom we have taken the Figure) but also of the Manuscripts of
Fulvius Ursinus and others. This Proconsul (saie's Pancirollus) underneath the
Book of Instructions, has the pictures of three women which represent the
Provinces committed to their charge, to wit, Asia, the Isles, and Hellespont,
as the Inscriptions of their names upon them do show. These bear a kind of
royal Ornament on the head (the printed Books say, each of them had a towred
Diadem) and vessels full of coin in their hands, which signified that the
levying of Tributes in those three Provinces, belonged to the Proconsul. They
were apparelled also in long garments of Gold. The Manuscripts say they have
white or skie-colour'd. Asia wears shoos or Sandals and a sky colored
Mantle; The other are without shoos: She which represent's the Isles wears a
purple Mantle; She which represent's Hellespont a green one. But in the Book
of Ursinus, they are all shod high with red Buskins, not differing in their
habit. In Mandrucianus they are set forth in long garments, which almost cover
their feet. Thus far he. And now judge ye, whether it be likely or no, that
any petty Country of Asia should be set forth in these Ornaments in an equal
state and majesty with Asia it self, seeing even this had comprehended that
also, no otherwise then the whole does the smallest part.

Their towred Diadems, equal Stature, majesty and wealth not differing at all,
seem to point out such an equality, that neither of them, can appear, by this
form of description, to be reckoned a part of another. And so, that Hellespont
cannot in that place be any other then the Sea it self, or that Arm of the Sea
flowing between; which being thus joined with the Isles to the Proconsulship
of Asia, upon one and the same account of Dominion, the Provinces of Asia and
Europe became in a civil sens, either continual or contiguous. Yea, when there
was no such distinction of Provinces, the adjacent Isles and the Sea it self,
made one entire Provincial body also with the continent. And hence it came to
pass that the Isles of Italy were L. 9. ff. tit. de Judiciis, de qua vide J.
Gryphiand. Tract. de Insulis, cap. 15.
part of Italy; as also of every Province; and such as were divided from Italy
by a small arm of the Sea, as Sicily, they L. 99. ff. de verb. signif.
were to be reckoned rather among the Provinces of the Continent. The Seas
lying between did not hinder, but that one continued Territory might be made
of the continent and the Isles. And that also by the Authority of Ulpian, who
notwithstanding uses to say, that the Sea is common to all men. But of this
hereafter in our Answers to the Objections. The same Ulpian also in another
place says, L. 13.. si quis ff. tit. de Injuriis.
Si quis me prohibet in mari piscari vel everriculum, etc. If any man forbid's
me to fish in the Sea, or to draw a Drag*net (which the Greeks call (...)) may
I sue him or no at Law upon an action of Trespass? Some there are of opinion
that I may sue him upon a Trespass; So Pomponius, and many others say, he is
in the same condition with him that hinder's one to wash in a public Bath, or
to sit in a public Theater, or to act, sit, and convers in any other place, or
put case, there be any one that permit's me not to use that which is my own.
But the Ancients allowed an Interdict to him that hired the Sea, if so be he
hired it in a public manner. For, force by that Interdict is allowed, that he
may enjoy what he has hired. Therefore the Sea, because it was possessed by
the people, was reckoned among public things; that is, those things which are
proper and peculiar to the people of Rome, not common to all men, after another
manner then public Baths, Theaters, and other things of that kind. And what
does to hire in a public manner signify in this place, but to become a hirer
or Conductor of the Sea, as the people was Lord thereof and Letter or Locator?
I suppose no man does affirm, that any thing may be let for Rent or hired,
which may not so belong to one man, that can not be another. But because
public Places, by the Roman.
Civil Law do serve for the uses of L. 2. ff. Ne quid in Loco. 2.
private persons, therefore Pomponius and others were of opinion, that there
might have been here an action of Trespass. Moreover, it was an Edict of the
Praetor, That you do nothing in a public place or cast any thing into it,
whereby it may be endamaged. Hereupon Ulpian says Loc. citat.. 8. and 9.
, against that man who has cast a Dam or Pile into the Sea, an Interdict is
allowed him who perhaps may be endamaged thereby. But if no man sustain
damage, he is to be defended who build's upon the shore, or cast's a Pile
into the Sea. If any man be hindered from fishing or Navigation by Sea, he
shall not have an Interdict; nor he likewise, who may he restrained from
playing in the common Field, or from washing in a public Bath, or from being
a spectator in a Theater. But in all these Cases he must use an Action of
Trespass. Therefore a Prohibitorie Interdict or Decree was to be used, when
dams were cast into the Sea no otherwise then when damage was don to a Theater,
Bath, Court, or any public place whatsoever. To these things, which manifestly
belonged to the people of Rome, and were not common to all men, is the Sea
every way compared, even by Ulpian himself. There is also the same account
made of the shores and Sea Instit. de Rer. Divis. litorum. Marcianus, l. 2. ff.
de Divis. Rer.
by those that speak for a Community of the Sea. Nor are they said to be less
common by L. 14. ff. de Acquir. Rer. Dom. l. 13. ff. de Injuriis. 7.
some, who treat of them apart, as by Neratius, and Ulpianus. But L. 3. ff Ne
quid in publico loco.
Celsus says* I think those shores do belong to the people of Rome, over which
the people of Rome have dominion. But that which fallows there, that the use
of the Sea is common to all as the Aer, and that the Piles cast into it belong
to him that cast them, is plainly qualified, and manifestly restrained to the
manner of the Dominion of the people of Rome, in the words immediately
following, where Celsus says, That is not to be granted, in case the use of
the shore or Sea may by that means become the wors. Certainly, if the former
words were meant of such a Community or enjoyment common to all men, as would
not in any wise permit the Dominion or propriety of a particular person, what
mean's that then, that the use may become the wors? For, if a place should become
the propriety of him that does possess it, in the same manner as that which
had before been possessed by no man, and no regard should be had here of the
Dominion or Right of another, then it would be no less lawful for him that
should possess it, to make the use thereof the wors to others for the benefit
of himself, then for him that shall settle in a Field that never was seized yet
in the possession of any. Therefore, Celsus would have the Shores and Sea so to
belong to the people of Rome, that the condition of them, as serving the uses
of all private persons (and that, as has been said, according to the Roman.
Civil Law, and such qualifications as are added out of the Edicts of the
Praetors, and the like) could not without injury be made wors, to the
prejudice of the Commonweal. Of the same mind is Scevola, In litore, jure
gentium aedificari nisi usus publicus impediret. L. 4. ff. ne quid in loco
publico.
That by the Law of Nations men may build upon the shore, if the public
concernment do not binder. And Aristo, L. 10. de rer. divisione.
quod Mari occupatum est fit publicum, that which is possessed in the Sea
becom's public. It passes into the patrimony of the people of Rome; for so
the word Publicum Public does signify; which the Greek Lawyers term (...) or
that which belong's to the people, not equally common to all men; by whom also
the Sea it self is Glossae vet. juris verb. (...).
in that sens called Public. Other Instances there are of the same nature:
Whereby it is made manifest, as well out of the determinations of Lawyers, as
the Transcripts of Leagues and Treaties, and the writings of Historians,
Orators, and Poets, that a Dominion of the Sea was in use among the Romans,
after the same manner as the Land.

The Dominion of the Sea, as it belonged to private persons under the Roman
Empire, together with that Sanction established in the Eastern Empire; whereby
the perpetual community of the Sea which was pretended to by some, being
utterly abolished as a thing unjust, the Dominion even of private persons
therein is asserted. CHAP. XV.
WHat has been delivered in the foregoing Chapter, touching the Dominion of
the Sea, has relation to the Dominion of the whole body of the Roman people,
that is to say, to the public patrimony of the State, wherein a private
Dominion is proved, no less then in that of particular persons. Moreover, there
are to be found among the Roman Customs, very ample testimonies to prove that
a propriety in the Sea has been instated also on particular men; such, to
whom either the people or Emperor of Rome according to the Civil Law and Custom
of the Romans, demised, rented, or made a grant of any part of their Sea
within the Empire. The rich and more magnificent sort of Citizens, for the
conveniencie of larger* Fish Ponds, bringing the Sea into their grounds, made
it their own, and became Masters thereof with as good a Title as they had to
their adjacent Land. There being (says De re Rustica, lib. 3. cap. 1^.
Varro) two kinds of Fish Ponds, one of Fresh, the other of salt water; the
former sort are ordinary and little worth, such as our Country Fish Ponds
that are supplied with water by little streams; but those saltwater-Ponds are
to be found in the possessions of Noblemen, and are supplied by the Sea as
well with Fish as water; yet they yield more delight then profit, the filling
of those Ponds being commonly the draining of the Owners purs. Now what was
this, but to become proprietaries of the Sea, so far forth as it was derived, or
enclosed in their possessions?

And De re Rustica, lib. 8. cap. 16. ^ 1^.
Columella, who lived in the time of Claudius, relate's that the Romans in
ancient times for the most part used none but inland Fish Ponds, storing them
with Spawners of the larger size; presently adding; Not long after that good
husbandry was laid aside, when the wealth and luxury of the succeeding age
made enclosures of the Ocean and Seas themselves. And the yearly Revenue of such
Demains, which bordered upon the Sea, was advanced by those Ponds or Enclosures
of the Sea as well as by any Lands, Lakes* or Vineyards appertaining thereunto.
The same Columella discoursing hereupon, has this passage, But seeing the
custom of the times has so far prevailed, that these things are not only in
use, but have gotten the reputation of magnificent and noble contrivances, we
also, least we should seem morose and importune reprovers of so long and
settled a practice, will show what profit may redound from them to the Lord of
the Manor; how he may raise an incom by the Sea, if having made a purchase of
Islands or Lands bordering upon the Sea, he cannot reap the fruits of the
Earth, by reason of that barrenness of the soil which usually is near the
Shore. So that we see the Revenues of a Manor were improved by managing the
Sea, as well as Land; and the Possessor was counted Lord of the one no more
then of the other.

This usual right of Dominion over the Sea is mentioned also by Hexa^mer. lib.
cap. 5. 10. and lib. de Nabuthe cap. 3.
St Ambrose; For the serving of their prodigious luxury (says he) the Earth
by digging of channels is forced to admit the Ocean, for the making of
artificial Islands, and bringing little Seas into their own possessions. They
challenge to themselves large portions of the Sea by right, and boast that the
Fishes, like so many bondslaves, have lost their former liberty, and are
subjected to their service. This Creek of the Sea (says one) belong's to me,
that to another; Thus great men divide the Elements among themselves.

For Examples, there are the Fish Ponds of Lucullus; famous for his
expensiveness in this kind: He, having made way through a Mountain near
Naples, enclosed the Sea and became master of those watercourse which In
Lucull^.
Plutarch call's Sea-Courses and Chases for the breeding of Fish. Whereupon
Pompey the Great, in merriment (says Histor. lib. 2.
Paterculus) was wont to call Lucullus the Xerxem togatum.
gowned Xerxes, in regard that by damming up of Channels and digging down
Mountains, ^ee took the Sea into the Land. The same Lucullus (says Plin Not.
Histor. lib 9. cap. 54.
Pliny) digging down a Mountain near Naples at greater charge then he built
his Villa, took an arm of the Sea into his Manor, which gave occasion to Pompey
the Great, to call him the gowned Xerxes. The same conceit in Plutarch is
attributed to Tubero the Stoic. That concerning Xerxes is very famous
Epigramm. Vet. lib. 2.
Hoc terrae fiat; hac Mare, dixit, eat:
Here run the Sea, he said;
There, let firm Land be made;
When he commanded the Sea to be brought round about the Mountain Athos. Lib.
9. cap. 30.
And Valerius says of Caius Sergius Orata, That he might not have the serving
of his palate depend upon the pleasure of Neptune, he contrived Seas of his
own, intercepting the waves with his trenches, and so enclosing diverse sholes
of Fishes with dams, that what tempestuous weather soever happened, Orata's
Table was never unfurnished with variety of Dishes. The same liberty was used
upon the Formian shore by Apollinaris, of whose Fish Pond Martial Lib. 10*
Epigr 30.
speak's, Si quando Nereus sentit AEoli regnum,
Ridet procellas tuta de suo Mensa.
Piscina Rhombum pascit, and Lupos vernas.
When winds do Lord it over the Sea, and fright
The Fisher, his Table laugh's at their spite;
By its own private store secured from need,
While captived Pikes and Turbot's Fishponds breed.
All the variety of Fish which the wider Sea afforded, Apollinaris had ready
at hand in his Fish Pond; which was nothing else but the Sea let in from the
shore into his possession. Contracta pisces AEquora sentiunt,
Jactis in altum molibus. --
Such dams are cast into the main,
The Fish for want of room complain.
So says Horace: and in another place, Lib. 3. od. 1. and 24.
Caementis licet occupes
Tyrrhenum omne tuis Mare Ponticum.
-- though thou thy walls do raise
Through all the Tuscan and the Pontick Seas.
And says Salust; In Conjurat. Catilinae.
To what purpose, should I relate those things which cannot seem credible to
any, but those who have been eie-witnesses; how Mountains have been removed by
several private persons, and Seas brought into their places? Of this sort,
were the Fish Ponds of Varro, de re Rustica, lib. 3. cap. 3.
Philippus, Hortensius, and others, all made by taking in the Sea. Moreover,
we find that Soveraigntie and Dominion over the Sea, has been sometimes
conferred by the Patents of Princes. The Emperor Trajan, when he endowed the
City of Tharsus with Immunities and Privileges, besides the Territory of Land
lying about, added also a grant of Jurisdiction and Dominion over the river
Cydnus and the adjacent Sea, as may be seen in Dion Orat. 34.
Chrysostom. And it is very probable, that the Maritimate rights of Neocesarea
In Council. Chalcedon. can. 4. and in can. 12. Synod. 7.
, which Theodorus Balsamon says, were compiled by the Metropolitan of that
City, had respect unto the like Original: as also those privileges in the Sea,
which the Emperor Comnenus granted to a great number of Monasteries, according
to the same Author.

The ancient Lawyers also are not silent, as touching the Dominion of
particular persons in the Sea. Lib. 1* (...) Injuriis.
Paulus, one of greatest note among them, declare's himself expressly thus;
Verily, whenever a propriety in some part of the Sea belong's to any person,
that person may sue out an interdict of uti possidetis, in case he be ^indred
from the exercise and enjoyment of his right; because this matter concern's a
private, not a public cause; seeing the suit is commenced for the enjoying of a
right which arises not from a public but private Title. For, interdicts are
proper to be used in private cases, not in public. Nothing could have been
more plainly spoken, to show, that, beyond all controversy, he admit's a
private Dominion in the Sea, even of single persons. Yea, Ulpian himself, who
was so fondly inclined to favor the opinion of a perpetual community of the
Sea, does sufficiently acknowledge, that common practice and received custom was
for the other part. ^ 13 (...) de (...)
In case (says he) I forbid any man to Fish before my House or Roialtie, what
can be said? may he sue me upon an action of Trespass, or no? The Sea and
the shores indeed are common to all, as the Aer. And it has been declared,
that no man can be prohibited from Fishing, or fowling, any otherwise then as
he may be debarred from entering upon another man's ground. Yet for a man to
be forbidden to Fish before my House or Royalty is the common custom, although
grounded upon no Law. Wherefore if any man be prohibited, he has for all
that an Action of Trespass. He grant's it was a received use and custom, that
subjection should be thus imposed on the Sea, and so a private Dominion
thereof be admitted; but least he should be found unconstant to his espoused
opinion of the community of the Sea, he has presumed to declare it don
without any Law or Justice. Yet he himself deliver's his judgment in another
place thus, The vender or seller of the Geronian Farm imposed such a condition
on the Botrojan Farm, which he still kept in his hands, that from that time
forward no fishing for Tunies should be used upon the Coast thereof, although
no private contract can lay a restraint upon the Sea which nature set's open to
all. Yet in regard honesty and faithful dealing in the agreement require that
this Article of the sale be observed, the persons that are in present
possession, and they that succeed into the said Farm, are obliged by the
condition of the covenant or bargain. In this case, the owner of the Botrojan
Farm renounceth his right of Fishing. And Ulpian might as well have said, that
restraint or subjection was imposed upon that adjacent Sea (as indeed it was)
but that he was so unwilling to forgo his Opinion of the Seas unalterable
community. Moreover, the purchaser of the Geronian Farm was so fully possessed
of the Sea that lay before the Botrojan, that by virtue of this subjection
really imposed on that Sea-territorie, the Owner of the Botrojan Farm could
never after justly claim or exercise a privilege of Fishing for Tunies, without
his permission. Whereupon, In Cupidin^ juris perito. cap. 9.. 3.
Stephanus Forcatulus, once Professor of the Civil Law at Tholose, conclude's
to the purpose; That there is nothing to hinder, but that the Sea, though
common to all, may by public decree be subjected to a Prince by the same
right that he hold's his adjoining Kingdom; since the same thing may in a
manner be effected by virtue of a private compact: Where, by private compact,
he mean's that concerning the Purchaser of the Geronian Farm, as he himself
says expressly in the same place. But the opinion of Ulpianus for a perpetual
community of the Sea, was so entertained as authentic by the Lawyers of the
Eastern Empire, that there was no Law in force among them whereby an adjacent
Sea might be made appropriate, or any man be debarred the liberty of Fishing
by the Owner of such Lands as bordered thereupon. And if any one were debarred,
he might have an Action of Trespass. Which is manifest enough, not only in
the Basilica Eclog. lib. 53. tit. 6. (...). seu de Piscatoribus.
(which before the dismembring of them were a body of the Law of the Grecian
or Eastern Empire) but also by the Decrees established by the Emperor Leo; by
virtue of which that stale opinion of the community of the Sea, being utterly
cashiered, as not agreeing with equity, that ancient one of the lawfulness of
a possession and private Dominion in the neighboring Sea, backed with the
Authority of other eminent Lawyers, was entertained again. Moreover also, it
was so firmly ratified by an Imperial Sanction, that from that time forward it
passed over all the AEgean Sea without control. That Law (says that Eastern
Leo Imperator in Novel 56.
Emperor, who reigned about the nine hundredth year of our Lord) which so take's
away the right of possessions bordering on the Sea, as to make the Lord thereof
liable to an Action of Trespass if he prohibit others to Fish upon those
Coasts, in our judgment (...).
seems to determine that which is not equitable or just. He add's the reason,
because whatsoever com's into the possession of any man, by good and lawful
Title, whether by succession, art and industry, or any other way which the Law
approve's, there is no reason that other men should have the use and benefit
thereof without the owners leav. Thus the matter being duly examined he
judged, that he who held any part of the Sea in the aforesaid manner, had a
Title grounded upon a very clear Right. Therefore, says he, we decree that
every man possess his vestibula or Seas lying before his Lands and be master
of them by an unquestionable right, and that he have power to keep off any
persons whatsoever that go about to enjoy the benefit thereof without his
permission. And in that which fallows, he make's the Propriety of Sea and
Land altogether equal. The Seas which lay thus in the face of Manors, were
called (...), Sea-Courts or Entries, nor did this sanction of Leo serve only
for the ratification of former Titles, founded either upon particular
possession, or any other, but ordained in general, that every man for the
future should be Lord of that neighboring part of the Sea which lay before or
flowed by his Lands, although he had never been possessed thereof before. In
this very sens it is taken by Constantinus Harmenopulus, a Judge of
Thessalonica; Prochir. Juris, lib. 2. tit. 1.
Touching Sea-Courts or Entries by Sea (says he) it is decreed in the
thirtieth Novel of the Emperor Leo, that every one be master of that which is
adjoining to his Lands, and that power be given him to prohibit such as at any
time go about to make any benefit of these Vestibulas or Entries without his
permission. Harmenopulus, following a different order of the Novels call's that
the thirtieth, which in the printed Copies is the fiftie-sixth.

But now how much of the Sea directly forward did pass into the possession of
the same person that was Lord of the adjoining Lands either by ancient custom,
or by virtue of this decree is not yet certainly known, nor is it necessary to
our purpose, but for latitude, even as it were in a field, those Vestibulas or
Entries of the Sea were bounded by the same limits with the adjacent Lands. And
it was the custom for particular owners to have their Epoches or Pens for fish
(which the Michael Athaliates, Pragmatic. tit. 95.
later Greeks call T (...)) that is to say, Nets spread between stakes driven
into the Sea; but limited upon this condition that every Epoche should be
distant from the other Leonis Novella 57. 102. 103. 104. and Athaliates loco
jam citato.
three hundred sixtie-five Cubits if so be the breadth of Land could
conveniently permit. And such an equal distance was observed on both sides,
that a direct line from each Epoche to the extremity of the Vestibulum or
Entry was extended one hundred eighty two else and a half; but this rule for
limitation became useless after a ten years prescription.

The Lord of a Manor bordering upon the Sea improved his yearly Revenue by
these as by other commodities, which profit arising from those Entries is
usually styled by the Eastern Lawyers (...), and (...), which may be
translated locarium, for the price which was paid for hire of a Stall, Shop or
Farm, is called in Varro de lingua latina. Et de Topiatico videlis Jac.
Cujacium Observat. lib. 14. cap. 1.
Latin locarium; so that we see private persons raised their topiatica or
locaria, that is, their Rents, out of the adjacent Sea. And out of those Rents
they paid to the Prince a yearly Tribute amounting to no inconsiderable sum
(as was showed before) levied upon that account. So that by the custom of the
Eastern Empire, not only the Soveraigntie of a Prince (which is the point in
question) but also the Dominion of private persons in the Sea, being ratified
by Authority of public decrees, enacting it, and repealing as unjust
whatsoever gainsai'd it, it was in use beyond all dispute above five hundred
and fifty years: for so many are reckoned to the taking of Constantinople from
the date of the aforesaid decree of Leo; which concerned not only Bosphorus in
Thracia, the Hellespont, the AEgean and the narrower Seas, but all those that
were under the Dominion of the Emperor of Constantinople. And this may serve to
be spoken of the more ancient Historical Age or that which contain's the
customs and Laws of Kingdoms and Common-weals that are long since exspired.

Touching the Dominion of the Sea, according to the Customs of such Nations as
are now in being. First of the Adriatic Sea belonging to the Venetians, the
Mare Ligusticum is now called Mar Leone, and Mar di Genoua.
Ligustick to the Genoeses, the Tyrrhen to the Tuscans, and lastly of the Sea
belonging to the Church, or Pope of Rome. CHAP. XVI.
IF we take a view of later times or the Rights and Customs of Nations which
at this present are in high repute and authority, there is nothing that can
more clearly illustrate the point in hand then the Dominion of the Adriatic
Sea, which the most noble Commonweal of Venice has enjoyed for so many Ages.
The truth of this is every where attested and acknowledged, not only by
Historians and Chorographers, but by very many Lawyers Ad ff. tit. rer. divis.
and ad l. sane 13. tit. de injuriis.
Bartolus, Baldus, Angelus, and a company of above thirty the most eminent
among them; unless they be mis-reckoned by Franciscus de Ingenuis, who says
he counted so many, in that Epistle of his to Liberius Vincentius, written some
years ago, in defense of the Dominion of the Venetians over the Adriatic Sea,
in answer to Johannes Baptista Valenzola a Spaniard, and Laurentius Motinus a
Roman; who (as he says) to gratify the Duke of Ossuna Viceroy of Naples
whose creatures they were, wrote against the Right of Dominion which belong's
to the Venetians by Sea.

Venice is commonly styled the Mistress of the Sea, and the Queen of the
Adriatic Sea, though the Controversy ahout its Bounds be not yet decided.
And Epigr. lib. 1.
Sannazarius write's thus of this City, Viderat Adriacis Venetam Neptunus in
undis
Stare urbem, and toto ponere jura Mari.
Neptune saw Uenice in the Gulf to stand
Of Adria, and all the Sea Command.


Nor does this Dominion arise from any jurisdiction or protection over the
persons of such as frequent the Sea (as is imagined by some, miserably Vid Jul.
Pacium de Dominio Maris Adriatici. Alb. Gentilis, de Jure Belli, lib. 1. cap.
19. Roderic. Suarium, de* usu maris. Angelum Matthaeacium de via and ratione
artificiosa juris universi lib. 1. cap. 36.
carried away with the authority of Ulpian, so often affirming that the Sea by
the Law of nature is commnn to all men;) nor is it a qualified Dominion (as
says Angelus Matthaeacius, professor at Padua;) but this Sea does so properly
belong to the Venetians, that it is not lawful for any other to use or enjoie
the same without their permission; forasmuch as they have right to prohibit any
to pass, to impose custom upon those whom they permit, to do any other thing in
order to the raising of benefit and advantage out of the water, as any man may
do in his proper possessions by Land. As concerning Navigation in that Sea,
that it may be prohibited at their pleasure, and that by approved right, we
have the testimonies of many Lawyers. It cannot be denied; (says Consil. 190.
Idem ad l. 13. ff. tit. de Injuriis.
Angelus de Ubaldis) but the Venetians and their Signiory, for very many Ages,
have been and are in possession as it were of the aforesaid Gulf: wherefore the
Venetians by virtue of that ancient possession which they have had so long, and
do yet enjoie, may by putting a restriction into the form of their Covenants,
hinder the Genoeses or any other whatsoever that shall offer to sail through
their Gulf. The same sa^e others also, quoted by Tract. de Navigatione,. 8.
Benevenutus Straccha, De jure fisci, lib. 8.. 14.
Antonius Peregrinus, De juris dictione, lib. 1. cap. 33.. 25. and 26.
Marta Neopolitanus, Lib. de Dominio maris Adriatici.
Julius Pacius, Fragment. de Venetiis subnex. Epitome de juris consultis
illustr.
Mantua Patavinus, Franciscus de Ingenuis, In Epist. de Venet. jure.
Franciscus de Ingenuis, and Fulgentius Monachus Venetus, who all have written
more particularly, and made it their business to assert the right of the
Venetians. And there are examples to be produced which show, how Princes, as
well neighbors as others, have made it their suit to the State of Venice to
obtain leav to pass through that Sea, which sometimes was granted, and sometimes
denied. In the year 1399, December 12. Radulphus Earl of Otranto made a request
to that State in the behalf of Uladislaus King of Naples and William Archduke
of Austria, that leav might be granted to pass through the Adriatic Sea with
Galleyes and other Ships, to conveigh the Sister of the King out of Apulia to
the Territories of the Archduke her husband, which the Republic granted, but
with this condition, that no person that had been banished from Venice, or was
guilty of any capital crime against the State, should be taken aboard those
Ships. Which the Austrians, imbarking at Trieste, faithfully observed both in
their voyage and in their return. There are extant also two Letters, Anton.
Peregrin. de Jure Fisci, lib. 8.. 19.
wherein the Emperor Frederick the third, in the years 1478, and 1479, desire's
of Giovanni Mocenigo Duke of Venice, and of the State, that leav might be
granted him, to transport corn from Apulia through the Adriatic Sea.
Franciscus de Ingenuis make's mention of others to the same purpose, written to
the same Duke from the Kings of Hungary. And this they entreat as a matter of
great favor, for which they shall acknowledge themselves obliged. Matthias King
of Hungary in a Letter to Duke Mocenigo dated 1482. write's, That whereas the
State has been wont to give leav to the Earls of Frangipanis and Zenga, and
others whose Territories lay upon the Sea Coasts every year to transport a
certain store of corn, from Apulia through that Sea, he desire's that the same
liberty might be vouchsafed to himself, who had now succeeded into the
Dominion of the very same Countries.

And as touching the right which the Venetians had to impose custom on
passengers, as traveling through their peculiar Territory, there are frequent
testimonies among the Lawyers. Ad L. 3. De Nautico Foenore.
Salicetus mentions a Decree of the Venetians, that all who passed through
the Sea should bring in their merchandise to Venice, and there pay custom. And
says De servitutibus Rusti^orum Praedi^rum, cap. 26.. 10.
Bartholomeus Cepola, The Venetians within their Dominion have several
Roialties and Rights belonging to their Exchequer: and, de facto at least,
acknowledge no Superior; so that they have power to impose Gabels, to confiscate
goods and commodities in the aforesaid Sea, as well as in the City of Venice;
having as full jurisdiction in the Sea, as in the City. Antonius Peregrinus
also, who was advocate of the Exchequer at Padua, after a large discourse upon
this subject, De Jure Fisci, lib. 8.. 43. and lib. 1. cap.. 18.
the conclusion, says he, is this; that the right of Fishing in the Adriatic
Sea is one of the Roialties belonging to the Duke of Venice; and therefore he
has power to forbid, permit, and charge Gabels upon it. Julius Pacius, Marta,
and others both modern and ancient treat at large of this particular. And the
reasons of some Neapolitans that are the most obstinate opposers of this right,
are only drawn either from that Franciscus de Ponte, de potestate Pro^egis,
Collateralis Consi^^, ^t. 11. ^. 19. and seqq.
opinion for so many Ages since exploded by the custom of Nations, that the Sea
is naturally common to all; or from that chimera of the universal Dominion of
the Roman Emperor. Whereas De Jurisdictione part. 1. cap. 33.. 25.
Marta himself, who was a Lawyer of Naples, writes thus; The Venetians are
Lords of the Adriatic Sea, the extent whereof is 80 miles, reaching from that
place heretofore called Aquae Graduatae unto the Town of Loreto, seated now
near the River Po. And Francisco di capoblanco, a Neopolitan, also De Jure
Baronum Pragmatic. 14.. 27.
confesses that now the Rivers and Seas are passed into the hands of Lords and
Patrons. And in a Letter of Apud. Goldastum in Constit. Imperialibus, Tom. 1.
page 198. and Baronium, Annal. Tom. 10. ann. 871.
Lewis the 2d to Basilius Emperor of the East, Nicetas Patricius is mentioned
under this title, The Protector of the Adriatic Sea. And the Gulf, says De
Jure statuum in Imp. Romano membro 25.
Cardinalis Tuschus, does properly belong to the Venetians, by virtue of a long
prescription of possession, as it has been declared in an agreement made
between the States of Venice and Genoa. For confirmation whereof, he cite's
Angelus and Jason. But the first time, they say, wherein custom was charged
upon those that passed through the Adriatic Sea, was the year 1263* when
Lorenzo Tepulo was Duke of Venice. The Republic of Genoa being distressed
with war and famine, and their neighbors not releiving them with provisions,
this Tepulo (says Decad. 2. Lib. 8.
Flavius Blondus), began to impose a new custom, or to speak more plainly, lay
a Restraint upon those that sad'd through the Adriatic Sea. For, upon that
occision a Law was made, which remain's in force to this very d^ie; that all
who sailed between the Gulf de Quevera, and the Capo di Pola.
Promontory of Sola, and Coast of Ravenna, should com into Venice, to pay
Custom, and (if the Officers thought fit) to unlade their Merchandise and
Goods. And an Officer was ordained for that purpose, to scout day and night
with his Barks, about the Coasts and Harbors of shores to see to the
Observation of this Statute. But above all, we must not pass by that
Controversy which happened about this time, between the people of Ancona, and
the Venetians, in a general Council at Lions the Anconitans complained that the
Venetians had usurped the Sea and Custom, and other things against all right.
Pope Gregory the tenth referred the matter to the examination of the Abbot of
Nervosia. He rejected the allegations of the Anconitans, as weak and wanting
proof, and by the Authority of the Pope (says the aforenamed Blondus)
commended to the Venetians, the care of defending the aforesaid Coast of the
Adriatic Sea, against the Saracens, and Pirates; allowing them withal the
rights of their Customs and Impost. Whereat the Ambassadors which were then
present, did not interpose a word; but the debate was thus determined with the
approbation of all, except the Complainants. But the Dominion of Venice over
that Sea, is of far greater Antiquity; to signify which, they have an annual
cerimonie, instituted, they say, by Pope Anton. Peregrin de Jure F^^^i, lib.
8.. 18.
Alexander the third, I mean the use of the Ring, which every year, upon
Ascension day, the Duke, in a solemn manner, rowed in the Bucentoro,
accompanied with the Clarissimos of the Senate, cast's into the midst of the
water, for the perpetuating (says Cosmograph. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 36. de quo
more it^m Stephanus Forcatulus, de Gallorum imperio and philosophia lib. 3,
alii, praeter Scriptores d^ Venetorum Republica.
Paulus Merula) of their dominion over the Sea; signifying by that love-token,
that he betroth's the Sea to himself in the manner of a lawful Spous, using
such a form of matrimony, We take thee to our wedded wife, O Sea, in token of
a true and perpetual Dominion. What should hinder then, but that we may
conclude, that the Venetians were looked upon, not only by themselves, but by
their neighbor Princes, as Lords of that Sea, by as unquestionable and full a
title, as of their Land and City?

There are other States also in Italy, that have Maritim Rights of the same
nature. Princes (says Lib. de Censibus artic. 16. ^ 40.
Benedictus Bonius) have right to lay impositions upon the Sea shores,
forasmuch as what nature ^ad left at liberty, is brought by them into
servitude and propriety: as the Tyrrhen Sea, which is under the command of
Pisa and Tus. canie, the Adriatic of Venice; the Ligustick of Genoa, which is
affirmed in like manner by Consil 290.
Angelus, Ad l. ^. and de Sentent. ex Brevic. recitan^a.
Baldus, De Servitutibus Rustic. praed. cap. 26.
Cepola, and others. The Bishop of Rome also has his Sea, which is called
likewise the Churches Sea. The Bull, entitled Coenae Domini, which is Laertius
Cherubinus in Bullario, ^^m 3 p. 251.
wont to be published every good Friday, for the excommunication or
Delinquents, run's thus; Item, we excommunicate and anathematize all Pirates,
Rovers, and Robbers upon the sea, th^se that haunt and infest our sea,
especially that part lying between the Mountain Argentaro, and Terracina. And
De Censuris Pontifici reservatis, part. 2. cap. 3. 1.
Bartholomaeus Ug^inus, a famous Lawyer, says, that this Excommunication did
involv Pirates, Rovers, or Robbers upon the Sea, such as haunted the Churches
sea, especially that part lying between the Mountain Argentaro, and Terracina.
The same is called by others the Pope's Sea. And although a Graffi^s, lib. 4.
dec^s. cap. 18. n. 53.
certain Author would there by Our Sea, have the whole Sea understood in all
parts of Christendom, yet it is the unanimous consent of the most famous
Interpreters of that Bull, as Summa, li. 1. cap. 20.
Tolet, De Censuris Disp. 21. ^ect. 2. number. 18.
Suarez Ugolinus, Relict. de Censuris Bull^ Coenae, cap. 4. disp. 25. and seqq.
Antonius de Sousa, and others, that by that name is signified the Sea which is
part of the peculiar patrimony of the Pope* Nay, more then this, some of those
Autors now mentioned, will have this curs of Excommunication to be incurred
not only by committing piracie, but by a harmless passage of Pirates through
this sea; it being all one as if a profanation or injury were committed upon
Church-land. So that such a dominion over the sea is plainly avouched by the
Canon Law. And it is confirmed by what may be gathered out of the gloss of
that body. If Herrings were taken upon an holy day, a convenient part of them,
by the Canon Law, are due to the next neighboring Churches. There the Gl. ad C.
licet. 3. tit. de Ferris.
gloss add's especially to those in whose. Territories the Fish were caught. By
a Decree of a General Council at Lions, if the Pope dyed being out of the
City, the Cardinals are to meet for the Election of his Successor in that
City, within whose Territory of Jurisdiction he died. If the Pope die upon
the Sea, the Election is to be made in that City or Gl. ad C. ubi peri^ulum,.
3. porro 6. de Electione, and ibi Jo. Andraeas.
place which is next to the Sea. This intimation is given by the gloss, and
acknowledged by others.

But notwithstanding this, the Citizens of Rome were allowed the privilege of
Fishing, in the Sea of the Church (as they call it) or of the Pope; as the
Inhabitants of a Village bordering upon a pasture-ground, may by virtue of some
compact, usage, or custom, put in their Cattle to grase there, though perhaps
it be in the possession of some particular person. This is a Statute of the
City of Statuta, urbis Romae, lib. 3. cap. 72.
Rome. Every Citizen of Rome and Inhabitant of the City, and within the
liberties thereof, shall have liberty to Fish, at any time, and with any
instruments whatsoever, in the stream both of Tiber, Anien, and in the Sea, so
far as the Banks of the Rivers and the Sea shore do reach. And no person ought
to prohibit or forcibly take any thing away from them, so long as they forbear
to trespass upon any Lands, Houses, and Fish Ponds, which belong to private
Owners; or to com upon the Banks of the Coast of Arenula, namely, of St Severia
and Paul, in which places it is not lawful for any to Fish without warrant from
the State's Advocate. And such a kind of privilege as this, qualified either
by grant, or covenant, or custom, is very often found in such places as enjoy
a Dominion of the Sea.

Concerning the received Customs of the Portugals and Spaniards, about the
Dominion of the Sea. CHAP. XVII.
THat Dominion over the Sea, is acknowledged in the Customs of the Portugals,
is apparent to any man that will but observe the usual Title of their Kings;
King Emmanuel in his preface to the Laws of Portugal style's himself; Dom
Manuel, per grace de Deos Rey, etc. Senhor de Guinee, and da conquista and
Navagacam and commercio d' Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and da India a todos etc.
which elsewhere is rendered in Council. general. Lateran. sub. Leone, 10. se^^. 9.
Barbarous Latin thus, Emanuel Dei gratia Rex etc. Dominus Guineae and
conquistae Navigationis ac commercii AEthiopiae, Arabiae, Persiae etc.
Emmanuel* by the grace of God King etc. Lord of Guinee, and by Conquest of the
Navigation and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia etc; where conquista in the
language of Spain and Portugal, signifies that which is acquired by War. The
same Title is often found in the Letters Patent and Commissions of the ancient
Kings of Portugal: whereupon Jacobus De dignitate Regum Hispan c. 12.
V^ldesius write's, that they are, and are acknowledged to be Lords and
Masters of Commerce, Traffic, and Navigation. But for any person to be Lord
of Navigation and Traffic by Sea, without Dominion over that Sea, is all one,
as to use and enjoy a piece of Land, to have right to prohibit all other from
doing the like, and yet not to be owner thereof. But among the Laws of
Portugal there are yet clearer evidences for private Dominion over the Sea;
even of the Atlantic or Ocean it self. For, therein it is forbidden that any
person either Forraigner or Native (the words of the Law are O Quinto libro de^
Ordenn^^mes, tit. 112.
Assi Naral common estrangeiro) in any shipping whatsoever to pass, ditas
partees, mares de Guinee and Indias, and qualsquer outras terras and mares and
lugares de nossa conquista, tratar, resgatar, nem guerrear, sem nossa licenca
and autoridade, sob pena que fazendo ^o contrario moura por ello morte natural
and por esso mesmo seito percapera nos todos seus beens moveis and de rays;
that is to say, to the said countries, lands and Seas of Guinee, and the
Indies, or any other Lands, Seas, and places under our Dominion, for Commerce,
or Tra^^i^k, or making of W^r without our License and Authority, under pain of
death and total confiscation of estate, to be inflicted upon any that shall
presume to do the contrary. And for the execution hereof, the Commanders of
those Fleets, who had leav from the King to sail thither, had Commission given
them, to call to account all whom they found in any kind transgressing this
Law. So that, we see the Nation of Portugal also made no question, but that
Dominion might be justly acquired over the Ocean it self. And this Law, in the
extent of at, reached as well to forraigners, as to the King's subjects.
Although forraigners do not acknowledge that Portugal has acquired any such
right. However, that in the Law of Nature which is obligatorie, there is
nothing to hinder, but that such a right may be acquired, is (I suppose)
acknowledged by all the Nations in Europe, except some perhaps who are not yet
in fair and lawful possession of any Sea; if so be at least a man may rightly
gather their acknowledgments from their received customs. And truly, about the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, there was a hot dispute between In
Schedis ejusd. Temp. in Biblioith. Cottoniana.
her and Sebastian King of Portugal touching the Dominion of the Atlantic and
South Sea that open's the way to the East Indies, which was claimed by the
Portugals. But the question in that dispute was not, whether or no Sebastian
could be Lord of that Navigation or Sea, but whether he had made any lawful
acquisition of such a Dominion. But in the Common Law of Spain or Castile,
although, it be true, that the use of the Sea is most free, and that in such a
manner almost as if no positive Law had ever laid any restraint upon the
natural Vide Alphons. ad Azeved. ad Constit. Regias, l. 7. tit. 8. Partid. 3.
tit. 28. l. 3. Recopilat. l. 7. tit. 10. l. 9. and Partid. 5. tit. 9. l. 7. and
8.
Community thereof; yet the Spanish Lawyers, and those not of the meanest
account, do in most express terms declare it capable of Dominion, yea, and that
it was acquired by the King. The Prince (says Gregorius Ad Alphonsinas,
Partid. 3. tit. 28. l. 11.
Lopez) may grant any man a privilege to fish in a certain part of the Sea. And
the Sea (says Joannes Lib. de expensis and Meliorationibus, cap. 21. number. 34.
Garcias a Spaniard) belong's to him, who is Lord of the adjoining land: This
he speak's of some particular Sea belonging to Spain; for to speak it of the
sea in general, were idle. There are other also, as Didacus Couvaruvias,
Laberinto de Commercio, lib. 3. cap. 1.. 12.
Joannes de Hevia, who are plainly for the Dominion of the Prince, as well for
a controlling the liberty of Navigation, as restraining the common use of
Fishing. And how frequent this Opinion In Relect. peccatum, part. 2.. 8.
is among the Lawyers of Spain and Portugal, is acknowledged by Fernandus
Vasquius, (though he himself do extremely oppose it) as appears by those
words of his already cited in the second Chapter.

Moreover, it is sufficiently manifest, out of Consil. de usu Maris 13.
Rodericus Suarius, that such rights and privileges were exercised by private
persons, grounded either upon custom, or some grant of the Prince, which
demonstrate a dominion over the Sea among the Spaniards; although that Author
taking the measure of Law, rather from the Dictates of the Schools, then the
received Customs of Nations, is the more earnest for that ancient opinion of a
perpetual community. Yea, the very title of the King of Spain has that in it
which may seem to import, that he call's himself King of the Ocean;
especially, if you consider those words which we find sometimes among Germane
Writers, in the Title of Charles the fifth Emperor, and King of Spain. In the
Preface to the constitution concerning public Judicatories, in the Empire, he
is called King of the Canarie Islands, also of the Islands of the Indies, and of
the Continent, and of the Ocean, Archduke of Austria etc. And in the Imperial
Sanctions published in high Dutch Konig-under Jnsulen Canariae, auch der
Jnsulen Indiarum, und Terrae firmae, des Maers Oceant etc. as you may meet with
it at least six hundred times. The word Ocean is added, as if he entitled
himself King of the Ocean. But this is a mistake: for, the same in Spanish is
Rey etc. de las Islas, y terra firma del mar Oceano etc. that is, King of the
Islands and of the Terra firma of the Ocean; namely, the Islands or Continents
of, or lying in the Ocean, (which Pope Laert. Cheru. bin. Bullar. tom. 1. page
392. de qua donatione fuse Joannes Solorzanus de Jure Indiarum, lib. 2. cap. 22.
Alexander the Sixth, gave to Ferdinand the Fifth King of Spain, all of them
lying Westward from the very first Meridian) of those he entitle's himself
King, not of the Ocean it self.

How far private Dominion over the Sea is admitted, according to the Customs,
or opinion of the French. CHAP. XVIII.
AS concerning Dominion of the Sea according to the Customs of the French, some
perhaps may seem to have met with very ancient evidences thereof, in those
Officers deputed for the guard of the Seacoasts, whom we read of in the
Capitular. Caroli and Ludovici Impp. lib. 4. tit. 5.
Statute-Books, and in that Rotlandus, Governor of the British (that is, the
Aremorican) shore, mentioned in the life of Charle-maign by Eginhartus a Writer
of that time. But those dignities have relation, not so much to the Sea it
self, as to the shore and Seacoast, or the border of the Land confining with
the Sea; notwithstanding that Rotlandus is, by the Frenchmen of this and the
former Age, promiscuously styled Choppinus de Domanio, lib. 1. tit 15.
Pasquier, en les recerches de la France, lib. 2. cap. 14. Simon Marion,
Plaidoye, 5. edit. Paris. 1591. Tilius, and alii.
Governor both of the Sea and Shore, as if there were no difference. But it
cannot be denied, that Princes heretofore upon the Shore of Aremorica or
Bretaign (as the Veneti The Veneti were an ancient people inhabiting that part
of France now called Bretaigne.
of whom we spoke before, did upon the same Shore) impose Custom upon Ships,
as for the use of the Road upon their Coasts, and challenge to themselves other
Rights of the like nature, called Nobilitates super navibus. So it is to be
read in an ancient Record, made in the time of Duke Alanus in the year
MLXXXVII, concerning Precedence of Place among the Nobles of Bretaigne. In that
Record, the second place is assigned to the Viscount of St Pol de Leon, who (as
the very Apud. Bertrand. Argentraeum, in hist. Britan. minori^, lib. 1. cap. 13.
words of it are) had very many of those Customs called Nobilitates super
navibus, imposed on such as passed the Ocean upon the Coasts of Osismer or
Leon; which (as it was said) Budicius, an ancient King of Aremorica or Bretaign
in France.
Bretaign, did give and grant to one of his predecessors, upon Marriage, in
reward of the virtue, fidelity and valor of that Viscount: but with the
consent of the Prelates, Counts, Barons, and Nobles of Bretaign. What these
Nobilitates were, and whence they had their original, is partly declared by
Bertrandus Argentraeus, sometime President of the Province of Renes, where he
discourses also of the right of giving Pass ports (which they call brefs de
conduicte) at this time in use on that shore. Ad Consuet. Brit. Art. 56. 44.
That (says he) whereas till then it had been a right peculiar to the
Princes, being given, by way of Dowry, to the Barons of Leon (of which we
have already spoken out of the aforesaid Record) remained an hereditarie and
proper right to that Family, until Joannes Ruffus the Duke redeemed it for a
vast sum of money, of Guynomarius Baron of Leon, after that Peter Mauclerc of
Dreux, Duke of Bretaign had in vain attempted to re assume it by force of arms.
It had its original, they say, upon this occasion: When our Princes and ancient
Kings considered the daily Shipwracks made upon that shore, where there were
many Rocks and but few Havens, they made a Law that none should set to Sea
without their leav. Such as did set out, paying a certain rate, had passes, and
guides appointed them, that were well acquainted with the Sea and Shores: They
that refused, forfeited their ships with all their tackling and furniture
thereof: and if the Ship were cast away, their goods also were confiscate. They
that had leav were in no danger of confiscation, and if they suffered
Shipwreck, had liberty to recover as many of their goods as they could. And
these guides were paid their (...) or Conduct-money, which we have mentioned
elsewhere, called by them droit de salvage. These Tickets or Passes are given
out now, as heretosore, at a certain price: And among other Revenues of the
Exchequer, they also were rented out to the Farmers of the Custom. So far
Bertrandus, from whom Renatus De Domaenio, lib. 1. tit. 15.. 10. and and Thom.
Cormer. Cod. Hen. 4. lib. 7. tit. 1. cap. 6.. 106.
Choppinus borrows almost the very words. But In Consuetud. Brit. Art. 51.
Petrus Berlordaeus, Advocate of the Parliament of Reins, tell's us, that the
Custom of taking forfeiture in that manner of all shipwrack't goods, was
abolished there, by an Edict, in the year MDLXXXIII. But in the mean time, for
so much as concern's any part of that Western Sea lying next the Shore, these
are manifest evidences, either of Dominion or of subjection in the Sea; which
indeed sufficiently prove, by the Customs of that people, that the Sea is
capable of Dominion. Moreover, upon occasion of these Passes, there have been
controversies raised sometimes between the Dukes of Bretaign, and the Kings of
England; as may be seen in certain In Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
memorials of the affairs of Bretaign, which have relation to the times of our
Richard the second, and John the Fourth, Duke of Bretaign. But this we know
for certain, that in the agreement made between our Edward the Fourth, and
Francis the second, Duke of Bretaign, in the year MCCCCLXVIII, concerning
mutual traffic and free passage to and fro for the subjects of each Nation,
during a Ibid. and Rot. Franciae 8 Ed. 4. membran. 20. and seqq.
truce of thirty years, there is an express proviso concerning Wrecks; but
such a one as left an equal right to both of them; not altogether unlike that
which for many ages has been in use upon the English Shore: No mention at all
being made in the Articles of the Truce, either of the right or use of these
aforesaid Passes, as being a thing in no wise admitted by the English. But some
modern Lawyers among the French do vainly affirm, that their King is Lord not
only of a part of the Sea neighboring upon the Territory of Bretaign, but of
the whole Sea that is adjoining to any part of France, and so of the British or
English Sea also: By which very Assertion of theirs, they sufficiently declare
their judgment, that there may be a sovereign over the Sea. The King, says In
not. al Co^ic. Henrici, 3. l. 20. tit. 7. Constit. 28 and constit. 1.
Charondas Caronaeus, is supreme Lord of the Seas, which flow about his
Kingdom: the ground whereof is this, because the Universal right of all those
things which were common, either by the Law of nature or Nations, is
transferred into his Dominion. And other passages he has much to the same
purpose; as also R^cerches, live 2. c. 14.
Stephanus Paschasius, Playdotes t^m. 2. played. 11
Ludovicus Servinus, sometime Solicitor general for the King, ^ Amiral de
France.
Popellinerius, and others. If they speak of the Sea of Ma^seille or Narbon,
we shall not oppose them. But as to what concern's the body of the Sea which
lie's Northward or Westward of the French, or that flow's between France and
the Islands of great Britain (for that which lie's Westward from them upon that
crooked Shore, or the gulf of Aquitaine, does indeed flow between the more
Westerly Coasts of our British Isles, and of France, as well as that which
lie's Northward from them, flow's between England and Normandy) they neither
produce any Testimonies of Antiquity, nor indeed can they if they would:
Unless you will have that admitted which has been cited out of Caesar
concerning the Veneti of Now Bretaign in France.
Aremorica, and that which we said before of the Sea bordering upon that
shore. Both which indeed do rather import some service, called heretofore
Nobilitates super navibus, then any kind of Dominion. But the soveraigntie of
this Sea which flow's between them and us, became absolutely appropriate to the
Kings of England, as we shall make it appear in the next Book. And the truth
is, if we look upon the Customs most in use among the French, or the Civil Law
of that Nation, there is nothing in it that derogate's from the ancient
community of the Sea, but as to them it remaine's as yet not possessed, but
common to all men, and therefore not to be reckoned among the Revenues or
Patrimony of their Kings; if so be credit may be given to that Treatise
lately published of the Civil Roman and French Law, by Thomas Cormerius
Counselor to Francis Duke of Anjou in his Parliament of Alencon. The matter
that it pretend's to treat of, is the Roman Gallick Law. There are in it the
Customs of France, decrees of Princes, and Privileges often ^ntermingled. But
under the Cod. Hen. 4. lib. 3. tit. 1. cap. 2.
Title of things common ^o all, he make's the Sea and Shores common to all,
according to the ancient Law of the Romans, as if in this matter it did
exactly agree with the Law of France: which certainly is an argument, that the
French have no Dominion over the Sea. Nor must we let it pass, that somwhile
since, there were two Constitutions pretended to in France, one of Ann. 1555.
Henry the Second, the other of Ann. 1584.
Henry the Third, wherein they required that the Ships of Forraigners which
sailed through the Sea bordering upon France, should strike their top-sail
forsooth, in acknowledgment of that Dominion the French had over the Sea. But
neither of them were autorized, or (as they speak) simply verified by the
Estates in Parliament, yea, nor so much as admitted into Custom. Nay, the later
of them was plainly rejected as to any effect in Law. And this the French
Lawyers themselves confess in a ^ud. Servinus in ^la. it. vol. 2. P^a^it. 11,
12. d^c. 1592. pa^. 26^. b Edit. 1609.
notable case between some Merchants of Hamburgh, that were Plaintiffs, and
Michael Butardus and others Defendants, in a Parliament held at Tours, in the
time of Henry the Fourth. But that cerimonie has by most ancient right and
custom been observed and paid to the ships of the Kings of England, out of
respect, and in acknowledgement of their Dominion, as is shown in the following
Book, where we treat of this particular more at large. I know very well,
Edict. Francis^. 1. promul^. 1513. art. 11. Chop^in. de dom. Franc. lib 1. ^^15
and Edict. Franc. tom 3. tit. 2.
it was ordained by an Edict of the French King, that one third part of all
goods, recovered out of the Sea, should belong to the King, another to the
Admiral, and the remainder to the Seamen that found them. And that the French
do reckon very many Commanders in Chief at Sea, or Admirals in a line sometime
continued, and sometime interrupted, which for the most part they begin from the
time of Philip the son of St. Lewis; that is, from the year MCCLXXXIV. as is to
be seen in Catalo^. Admiral. Franc.
Joannes Feronius, Recerches, lib. 2. cap. 14.
Stephanus Paschasius, and others. But that division of goods recovered out of
the Sea being simply considered, does prove any Dominion over the Sea, no more
then the Tenths of any Prizes taken from an Enemy at Sea, which, by the grant
of the King also, were allotted to the Edict Fran. Tom. 3 ^it 2. Constit. 4.
and 5.
Admiral of the Navy. Rights of this nature are grounded upon the consent of
persons, to wit, subjects; transferred unto the King, not upon any title of
Dominion, whereby any Pretense may be made to an acquiring of the Sea it self;
and they are paid no otherwise then Imposts or Customs, in the importation or
exportation of Merchandise. But no man (I suppose) will imagine that from such
Imposts or Customs upon Merchandise any proof may be made of a Dominion over
those passages through which the Merchants sail before they arrive. Neither
indeed was there any such custom as this in use among the French, before the
time of Francis the first; that is to say, plainly, not being Lord of the Sea,
he desired to be and was made a Sharer of those goods which should be drawn
by his subjects, out of any Sea whatsoever. Whereas the King of Great Britain
by virtue of his Dominion over the Sea, is wont to take as his own whatsoever
is left or lost in the sea, besides other emoluments of the like nature, and
that by so ancient a right, as (for ought we know) bear's a date no less
ancient then the Kingdom it self. And as for those Admirals of France, they
were no other then Chief Commanders of Navies and Persons, and of the Forces by
sea, and Judicatories at home: but not qualified as Presidents of a
Sea-Province or Territory, as the Custodes ipsius Maris, the Guardians of the
sea among the English, and the Admirals of England. But more of this in the
Second Book. Nevertheless, from what has been alleged concerning the Customs,
Opinions, or Constitutions, among the French, I suppose it sufficiently
appears, that they do also acknowledge, that private Dominion over the sea, is
not repugnant to the Law either of Nature, or Nations; which serve's fully for
the clearing of the point in question.

The private Dominion of the Sea, according to the received Customs of the
Danes, the People of Norway, the Swedes, Polanders, and Turks. CHAP. XIX.
WE find clear Testimonies in the Customs of other Nations, also of Europe,
touching private Dominion of the sea; as the Danes, the people of Norway, the
Polanders, to whom may be added also the Turks. We have observed by the Tolls
or Customs of Denmark and Norway, what Revenue the King of Denmark raises out
of the very Navigation of the Baltic Sea (as is commonly known) and what is
paid out of the Roialtie of the Norwegian sea to the King of Norway, who at
this time is also King of Denmark. For, in the year MDLXXXIII. Frederick, the
second, King of Denmark and Norway, made a Grant of the use of the Northern or
Norwegian sea, for a certain time, to our Merchants of the Muscovie Company in
such a manner, as if he had rented out any Land whereof he stood fully seized
and possessed. He limited the Grant also with such conditions, as he thought
fit. The public Instruments or Records about this Particular, are In Thesauro
Cottoniano.
yet extant; whereby the King had an annual Tribute in recompense, other
Merchants were excluded, and the Grant it self was to continue no longer then
the Peace made between that King and the Moscovit. We read also in the ancient
Histories of Denmark, of King Harald Hildetan; that no man did presume to usurp
a Domination in the Sea without his consent. And that which fallows next,
ought especially to be taken notice of as to this Particular, because the
Empire of Land and Sea was once divided in the Republic of Denmark. And Olo
(who afterward was King) succeeding his Father in the Dominion of the Sea,
vanquished LXX Kings of the Sea by Sea Fight. Which things are written by
Daniae Hist. lib. 7.
Saxo Grammaticus, and other also of that kind. And in the 20 Jan. 1613. in
Rot Tract. Amicit. Temp. Jacobi Regis.
Treaty held at Koppenhagen betwixt Christiern the fourth of Denmark, and
Gustavus Adolphus of Swedland, the King of Swedland renounceth the right,
Soveraigntie, and Dominion of the Sea, and the other Roialties by him formerly
claimed over the said sea, in Norway, Norland, and in the Jurisaiction of
Wardhuisen. But touching the Sea of Norway, as it lie's more Northward, we
shall add more at the latter end of the second Book.

Mention is made likewise of the Sea belonging to the Re^lm of Poland, and the
Dominion thereof, in that Promise which was made by the French Ambassadors, in
the name of Henry III of France, when he was elected King of Poland. The
aforesaid Ambassadors do promise, in the name of the most illustrious King now
chosen, that as soon (God willing) as he shall com to his Kingdom, he will at
his own charge maintain a convenient Navy, sufficient to defend the Ports and
the Soveraigntie of the Sea, belonging to the Kingdom and the Provinces
adjoining, even to the utmost bounds of the whole Dominion of Poland; as it is
recorded by Janus Januszowskius in his Lib. 3. tit. 1. fol. 109.
Syntagma of the statutes of Poland. But the Turkish Emperor, (who by Conquest
succeeded in the right of the Emperors of Constantinople, and so purchased both
the AEgean and Euxin sea, calling this the black, the other the white sea) is
wont solemnly to entitle himself Lord both of the white and black sea; as you
may see in the League betwixt Achmet the Ottoman Emperor, and Henry the IV. of
France, made above thirty years since, and 20 Martii, 1604. Paristi^, 1615.
printed both in the French and Turkish Tongue. Moreover, in the same League,
the Turk grant's the French free leav to Fish, and search for Coral, in certain
Streits and Creeks of the African Sea, within his Kingdoms of Algier and Tunis.
And he farther confirm's all that had been granted to them by his
Predecessors, for freedom of Fishing in those parts. In like manner De Ast^tico
Bello, lib. 2.
Coriolanus Cippicus, relating the Actions of Pietr^ Mocenigo, General of the
Venetians, says; The Ottoman Emperor built two Castles very well fortified,
over against each other, on both sides the Hellespont in its narrowest passage,
which he stored with Ordnance of an extraordinary bigness, and charged the
Governors of the Castles to shoot and sink any ship, that should endeavor to
pass without leav. Which is plainly to domineer over the Sea, and agreeable to
his Title, of Lord of the white and black Sea. Neither is that to be slighted
here, which we find in the Letters of David, Emperor of Ethiopia, or the
Abassins, to Emmanuel King of Portugal. He entituleth him Apud Fran^^l^^m
A^^arum d^ rebu^ A^hiopicis, (...) Da^ianus a^ ^s, lib. de ^^^^^pum mo^^lus.
Lord of Africa and Guinee, and the Mountains and Island of the Moon, and of
the Red Sea, Arabia and Persia, and Armutia, great India, etc. He uses here
an Hyperbole, after the manner of the African Princes, and attribute's those
things to Emmanuel which were none of his: But in the mean time, he admit's
that he might have been Lord of the Red Sea, as well as of any other
Territory, and that that Title does not entrench upon the Law of Nature or
Nations, any more then this.

Now that we may at length conclude this part touching the Dominion of the
Sea, as admitted among those things that are lawful, and received into the
Customs of Nations; there are not only very many Testimonies every where (as
has been shown you) concerning it; but nothing at all (I suppose) can be
found to impugn it in the Customs of those Nations that have been of any note
in later times; unless it be where some of them, that are Borderers upon the
Sea-Dominions of others, do strive to violate or infringe the Rights of their
Neighbors, under pretense of that Natural and perpetual community, so often
insisted on out of Ulpian by such Writers, as too much prefer that obsolete
Opinion before the Universal and most ancient Customs of Nations. Of which
kind truly the first Article of that League seems to be, which was made
above twenty or about thirty years past, betwixt the States of the United
Provinces and some of the Hans-Towns, as it was translated out of Low Dutch by a
Eman. Meteranus, Histor. Belgic. lib. 36. and apud. Gasper. Flockum, lib. de
Contributionibus, c. 14.
Dutchman, to this effect: That this Conjunction or Union ought not to be
intended for the offense of any, but only for the preservation and maintenance
of the freedom of Navigation, Commerce and Merchants, in the Eastern and
Northen Seas, and also in all Rivers and Streams running into the Eastern and
Northern Seas; nor ought any other thing to be meant in this place, so that
their Citizens and Subjects joined in this League respectively, may according
to the Law of Nations use and enjoy the Liberties acquired and obtained,
together with the Rights, Privileges, and Customs received from their
Ancestors, throughout the Eastern and Northern Seas aforesaid, and in the
aforesaid Rivers, Streams, and waters, without any Let or Impediment. They
promise also to aid each other, in opposing any that should hinder such a
freedom of Navigation in that Northern and Eastern Sea; that is to say, the
Baltic, and that which washes the Coasts of Denmark, Lituania, Pomerania, and
the Dominions of the King of Poland: where it seems they pretend not only
Rights and Liberties peculiarly granted to them long since, but also to the
very Law of all Nations. It is no hard matter to guess what the Intent of that
League might be; For, about that time, the King of Denmark had raised his Toll
in the Baltic Sea, and in like manner the King of Poland within his
Territories by Sea. And that for the maintenance of that Dominion which they
enjoyed; which that kind of League betwixt the States of the Hans Towns and
United Provinces did seem to oppose. But, to pass over these things, seeing a
private Dominion of the Sea, which is the point in Question, is founded upon
such clear Testimonies, out of the Customs of so many famous Nations both
ancient and modern (whereto we shall add many other also, when we treat of
the British Sea in the next Book) nothing now, I suppose, hinder's why we may
not determine, that the Sea is capable of Dominion as well as the Land, not
only by the Law Natural-Permissive, but also by the Law both Civil and Common
of diverse Nations, and in many places almost according to the Intervenient Law
(which in cases of this nature is the surest demonstration of the
Natural-Permissive) unless there remain any impediment in the objections, which
are next to be handled.

An Answer to the Objection, concerning Freedom of Passage to Merchants,
Strangers, and Seamen. CHAP. XX.
THe usual Objections (as has been more fully shown before in the second
Chapter) are derived, some from the Freedom of Commerce, Travel, and Passage,
pretended to be common to all: Some also from the very Nature of the Sea: And
others out of the Testimonies of Writers. As to what concern's the first sort;
the Offices of humanity require, that entertainment be given to Strangers,
and that inoffensive passage be not denied them. So Cause. 23. Quest. 2. c. 3.
and videsia Hug. Grotium de Jure Belli and Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 2.. 13.
Gratian out of In Numer q. 41.
Augustine says, It is to be observed how the war of the Israelites became
just against the Amorites: For, they were denied an inoffensive Passage, which
ought in all equity to lie open by the Law of humane Society. And Offic. lib.
3.
Cicero says, It is an inhumane thing, to deny Strangers the use of a City.
Very many other Passages there are of that sort, which seem to strengthen the
Objection; to wit, as it relate's unto the Office of Humanity, not disturbed
by war, fear, jealousy, enmities, or any other of the same kind. But what is
this to the Dominion of that thing, through which both Merchants and Strangers
are to pass? Such a freedom of Passage would no more derogate from it, (if so
be it were without question free and open to all upon that account) then the
allowing of an open way for the driving of Cattle, or Cart, or passing through
upon a journie, or any other Service of that nature, through another man's
Field, could prejudice the Ownership thereof. Suppose it be granted, that, by
the Law of all Nations, the Spaniards had a free Passage over the Pyrenean
Mountains into France; the French over the Alps into Italy; the Italians into
Germany: What does this concern a Dominion of the Pyrenies or the Alps? And
for any man to allege here, what is commonly talked, of the lighting of one
Candle by another, of the not denying a common use of Water, and other things
of that nature, it is plainly to give over the disquisition of Law and Right,
to insist upon that of Charity. At the request indeed of Asclepiades Bishop of
the City of Chersonesus, under the Emperors C. Theodos. lib. 10. tit. (...).
l. 24. and C. just. tit. (...) ^^^is* l. 25.
Arcadius and Honorius, certain persons, who had taught the barbarous people
the Art of building ships, whereof they were ignorant before, were for
Charitie's sake freed from the pains of Prison and punishment. And though the
Art of those that taught them was no whit the less, because of that skill which
the Barbarians had gained; yet by the Law, it was death to communicate that Art
unto them. And at this day, there are other instances of the same nature: So
that it in no wise diminishes from any man's Right or Power, to permit another
to participate of what is his, when he himself loses nothing thereof. And
that we may determine this point in brief, it is most evident from the Customs
of all times, that free Passage (as they call it) is wont ever to be so
limited by Princes in their Territories, that it is permitted or prohibited,
according to the various concernments of the Public Good, and not otherwise.
Albericus Gentilis, upon that Passage concerning the Amorites, says, De Jure
belli, lib. 1. cap. 19.
I am of the same opinion, with Augustine, in case there be no fear of hurt;
and an assurance that no hurt may be don. Princes are concerned to be wary
and careful, that they admit no such strangers, or Commerce, where, pro re
nata, the Commonweal may receiv any damage thereby. Upon which ground also it
is often provided in Leagues; Induciae Hispan. and Ordin. Foede^at. Belg. Anno
1609. and Art. 12. etc.
That it shall not be lawful for either Party to sail unto each others Ports,
Coasts, or Harbors, (and this when neither of them has any right to the way
by which they pass) with such a number of ships or Men of War, as may give a
just occasion of any fear or jealousy that force is intended, except leav be
first had of that Party under whose Jurisdiction those Places are; or unless
they be driven thither by Tempest or some other necessity, to avoid a greater
force, or the danger of Shipwreck. According to the fear or suspicion of the
Lord in possession, and at his discretion, all Merchants, Strangers, and
Foreigners whatsoever may be prohibited, unless some other special right or
custom do intervene. And Polit. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Aristotle says plainly, Provision ought to be made by Laws, with whom
subjects may, or may not convers. De Repub. lib. 1. cap. 7. and 6. and vide
eum, lib. 4. ca. 1. and lib. 6. cap. 2. ubi de Aditu ad Moluccas.
Bodin also says well, That the Laws of Commerce are contained in the
particular Compacts and Agreements of People and Princes. And in another place
he add's, It is lawful to forbid a Foreigner from entering the Borders, and
also to force him out if he have entered the Borders, not only if a War be on
foot, but also in time of Peace, that the manners of the Inhabitants may not
be corrupted by convers with Strangers. But that Wars have been lawfully
undertaken for a denial of Commerce, unless the denial were given contrary to
some ancient League, or unless that freedom depended upon some special Title to
Commerce, we do as easily deny as any other man can affirm. And though,
according to the opinion of Tit. de Indis.
Franciscus Victoria, who also is followed chiefly by De Jure Indiar. lib. 2.
cap. 20. 55.
Joannes Solorzanus I. V. D. it be affirmed, that the Spaniard had a lawful
Right to subdue the Indians, because they denied Commerce and Entertainment; yet
they are in plain terms opposed by De Justitia and Jure, Tract. 2. Disputat.
105.
Ludovicus Molina, who will have no Nation or Common weal bound, either with or
without danger to it self, to admit Commerce or Foreigners, but in case of
great and imminent necessity, or unless any League, Agreement, or some other
special privilege do intervene. But there are other pretenses not a few which
the Spaniards allege for the Con. quest of the Indies: For, they pretend also a
Right of Discovery, primarie occupation, Conversion to the Faith, and other
things of that nature, besides the Donation of the Pope. Of all which,
Solorzanus treat's at large. And it is strange, how the Spaniards should have a
Right to acquire the Indies, upon a denial of Commerce, since it is Georgius de
Cabedo Decis. Lusitan. part. 2. Decis. 47. and diploma Regis Hispan Mari
Libero. Hug. Grot. subnexum.
very well known, that both They and the Portugals do openly profess, that they
may lawfully prohibit Commerce in both the Indies. Nor does it prejudice the
point at all, that according to the Imperial Law, no Prince, nor any other
holding Royalties by his Grant, can Rothens^l. de Jure Feudali, cap 5. de
Regalibus, conclus. 21. Sixtinus de Regalibus, lib 2. cap. 2. etc.
forbid men passage in the common Road without some just cause, which must be
determined in an Imperial Diet; nevertheless, it is wrested by some to prove a
freedom of Navigation at Sea. For that happened by a particular Law, agreed
upon by the Estates of the Empire, who themselves also are subject to a Diet.
But other Nations that are under several and distinct Soveraignties, have not
as yet made any such Agreement, that there should always be a liberty of
Passage to and fro; nor have they (like the Germanet, and others within their
Dominion) referred themselves unto an Umpire to determine the business.

An Answer to that Objection concerning the uncertain fluid nature of the Sea,
and its continual Alteration. It is proved, that Rivers also, and the adjoining
Aer (which are more fluid and uncertain) may become appropriate. CHAP. XXI.
BUT they say, that the very Nature of the Sea render's it unfit for private
Dominion; both because it is ever in Motion, and in no wise remain's the same;
as also because a convenient matter, as well as Instruments, are wanting therein
to make a distinction of Bounds; without which private Dominions cannot well
consist: yea, and because by reason of its vast and spacious Body, it is always
sufficient for all. As to what concern's its fluid Nature, are not Rivers and
Fountains much more in a perpetual Flux or Motion? Rivers always run forward,
wherewith the Sea being compared, it seems to stand immovable, as says
Geograph. lib. 1.
Strabo. And Ad Iliad. ^
Eustathius says, that Homer therefore call's the Sea by the name of a
standing Pool; because it run's not forward (as Rivers do) but is very stable.
And Seneca, Suaser. 1.
another says, the Sea stands without Motion, as it were some dull heap of
matter that Nature could not bring to perfection. But suppose we grant it be
so fluid, as is usually said of the most Northernly Seas and Channels; yet
certainly the Channels and places out of which the waters flow, remain ever the
same, though the waters themselves do shift and change continually. Nor yet can
it be supposed that the Right of private Dominion over Rivers, is any whit
prejudiced thereby. In the Romane-Germane Empire, Rivers, according to the
Civil Law, are of public use; yet they are reckoned in the Emperor's Feud.
lib. 5. tit. Quae sint Regalia. Rothe^sal. de Jure Feud. cap. 5. Conclus. 23.
^. 2^. Sixtinus de Regalibus, lib. 2. cap. 3. etc.
private Patrimony, and among the Rights or Roialties belonging to his
Exchequer: so that either the Emperor or others by his Grant, have in like
manner a yearly Revenue out of the Fisheries in them. Upon which account it
come's to pass, that they of Lombardy, and other particular People throughout
Italy, enjoie all the Rivers of their Territories, as proper and peculiar to
themselves by Prescription, as we are told by De Servi^^^. Rusti^. Praediorum,
cap. 31.
Caepola. Nor is any thing more common, then an asserting of the private
Dominion of Rivers as well as their Banks, in the Laws of Spain, France,
Poland, and Venice; and in a word, of all Nations whose Customs are known to
us. Nor, as to what concern's this Objection (fetched from the fluid
Constitution of the sea) is there any difference in nature between a greater
and a lesser, a private and a public River. Even Lib. 1. 4. (...) de
^luminibus.
Ulpian himself concerning Rivers, says, There is no difference between a
private River, and other private Places. And ^* 7. ff. de Diverse. Temp.
Pr^^^ript. Vide l. 45. ff. de Usucapionibus.
Martianus; If a man has fish't all alone many years in a Corner of a public
River, he may hinder any other from using the same Liberty. Moreover,
oftentimes heretofore in the Roman Empire, Rivers were made over as well as
other Parts, after the manner of Lands assigned. Lib. de Conditionibus Agrorum.
Siculus Flaccus says, In some Countries, even the Rivers themselves are
assigned out by measure. But in some the subcesive or remanent part only is
left out unassigned; and yet it is excepted out from the parts assigned, as
belonging still only to the river it self. After the same manner also Comm. ad
Jul. Frontin. de limitibus Agrorum.
Aggenus Urbicus. For, it was never conceived, that the Rivers were otherwise
acquired by the People or Emperor of Rome then the adjoining Lands; accordding
to that of the river Danubius, speaking to the Emperors; Ausonius, ^pigr* 4.
Danubius penitis caput occultatus in oris,
Totus sub vestra jam Ditione fluo:
Et qua Dives aquis Scythico solvo ostia Ponto,
Omnia sub vestrum flumina mitto Jugum.
Danubius, I, whose Fountain few do know,
Now wholly under your Dominion flow:
And when full-charg'd run to the Euxin sea,
I make all Rivers to you Tribute pay.


We know, that an Island newly sprung up in a river, as also a Chanel that is
deserted, is even by ancient Custom L. 7. 29, 30 65. F. de Acquir. Rer. dominis
and Instit. de Rerum divis. ^ Insula.
common to such, as upon the Bank of any river do possess Lands that are not
limited, that is to say, after the manner of Lands or Possessions; unless there
be some special Law or Custom to the contrary. And touching the Division of
such an Island according to the nature of several Lands, situate near one Bank
or both, Bartolus in Tiberiade, has written long since; but of later time
Joannes Buteo, Baptista Aymus, Antonius Maria, Joannes Gryphiander, and others.
Therefore, in that case, a Propriety of the Chanel, and so of the River (even
of that which according to the Civil Law, is of public and common use; as well
as of a Field that has a common Thorowfare) was common before to the Owners
that had Lands lying on both sides. By the same reason almost, an Island newly
sprung up in any sea, that never was possessed by any, and whatsoever shall be
built upon it, become's his that first enter's it by occupation: For, the
Chanel and that Sea, at first belonged to all men in general. But by virtue of
that Universal Compact or Agreement (before mentioned) whereby things not yet
possessed, were to become the Propriety of him that should first enjoie them by
Occupation; he that shall so possess them by Occupation, receiv's the Island
and Building as it were by a Surrender of Right from former Owners. Seeing
therefore that a Propriety and private Dominion of Rivers has been every
where acknowledged, why should it not be acknowledged in like manner that
there may be Owners of any Sea whatsoever? Since the fluid nature of water can
no more hinder a Dominion in the one, then in the other. Yea, the Rivers
themselves are only lesser Seas, as also the Fenns and Lakes; even as the Sea
it self (as to its fluid Constitution) is no other then a River, Fen, or Lake,
differing only in bigness from the rest: And so it has been taken by the
Ancients. In the very story of the Creation, all the Gatherings together of
the waters are called Seas; which has been observed also by the Eucherius ad
Genes. 1. D. Hieronymus. and alii. Add Jo. Phil^ponum de Mundi Creatione, lib.
4. cap. 6.
Fathers to this purpose. There are also very eminent examples in holy
Scripture touching the two Lakes of Asphaltites, and Tiberias, both which are
equally called Seas; Asphaltites, is by Pliny, Ptolomy, Josephus, Solinus, and
Vitruvius, termed a Lake: But by Moses Genesis 14. 3.
the salt Sea; and by most of the late Writers, the dead Sea. Tiberias is in
like manner by the Ancients, and also by St Luc. 5. 1.
Luke, called a Lake; by the other Evangelists a Sea, as also in the Syriack
and Arabic Translation of St Luke. And Meteorologic. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Aristotle says, that about the Mountain Caucasus, there is a Lake or (...),
but the neighboring People call it a Sea. He speak's of the Lake Maeotis,
which by reason of that abundance of Waters which it discharges through the
Cimmerian Bosphorus into the Euxin Sea, is by the Ancients called Herodotus, in
Melpomene. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 7. Dionys. After, and ad eum Eustathius.
Mother of the Sea, or Mother of the Euxin Sea. From whence also it was the
opinion of some, that Maeotis stood in the same relation unto Pontus, Propontis,
and the AEgean Sea, as the Ocean does to the Mediterranean. Oceanunque negant
solas admittere Gades,
They do deny, that Cadiz Straight
Alone, admit's the Ocean's Freight;


As Pharsal. 3.
Lucan says concerning it. But Histor. lib. 13.
Agathia tell's us, that in Justinian's days, it was called The little Sea.
And says In oris Maritinis.
Festus Avienus to Probus; Thou did question me (if thou do remember)
about the situation of the Maeotick Sea. By which means it has happened, that
even at this day it is called Mar delle Zabach, and Mar della Tana. So seven
Lakes of the River Po in Italy are usually termed Plin. lib. 3. c. 16.
Herodian. lib. 8.
Seven Seas. And we read in Variar. lib. 11. Formul. 14.
Cassiodorus, that Addua, a River of Cisalpin Gallia, emptie's it self into the
Lake called Lago di Como, as into its proper Sea. Hence it is, that in
Hesychius and Suidas, a Lake or (...) denote's the Ocean and Sea, and (...), or
a River, the Ocean it self. Nor is it in this place impossible, that a River
should contend with the Sea; However, otherwise it has been used as a Proverb,
of such as strive with men mightier then themselves. Also in Homer, -- Iliad. ve
(...).


The depth of a deep Lake is used for the depth of the Sea. And in another
place he put's (...), a very fair Lake in stead of the Sea, as it is observed
also by Ad Aristot. Meteorolog. lib. 1. prax. 16.
Olympiodorus. Yea, some of the Ancients have said, that the Ocean it self is
one of those Plato in Phaedone.
four huge Rivers, which spring out of such a Hell, or such a deep Gulf; as
Vide Girald. Cambrens. Topograph. Hibern. did. 2. cap. 14.
some feign to be found toward the North; the other three being imprisoned in
secret Passages of the Earth. Moreover, Lucan call's the British Ocean, --
Pharsal. 2.
Incerti stagna profundi
An unstable deep standing pool.


And in barbarous Latin, the word Mariscus, as a Diminutive Claudius Salmasius,
in Plin. Exercitat. ad Solinum, page 577.
of Mare the Sea, is used in many Places for a Marsh or Lake, under which
notion also it has been Translated into some other Languages, being varied
according to their diverse forms of Expression. Other observations have been
made by J. Drus. Obs. 9. cap. 20. and ad difficil. loca. Numer. cap. 133. and
Albericu^ Gentilis in Lectionibus Virgilianis, cap. 17. Coel. Rhodigin. lect.
Antiq. lib. 26. cap. 14.
others to the same purpose. So then, both in Substance, Nature, and Name, the
Seas, Rivers, and other Bodies of Waters (so far as concern's the Point in
question) are all the same, that whatsoever may be said of these, may be
applied in like manner also to the other; save that there may some difference
be alleged only from the largeness of the one and the narrowness of the
other, which in the Point of Dominion (as it relate's to Possession) is of no
account. Add moreover, that the usual Objection touching their fluid Nature, or
the continual shifting of Waters in the Chanel, does here no more prejudice the
cause of Dominion and Possession, then the fluid nature of the Aer does the
Dominion and Possession of that space which confine's a House from the
Foundation upward. That space seems as a Chanel to the whirling Aer; whereof
notwithstanding he, according to the Civil Law, is the undoubted Owner, who
possesses the Ground and Building. Hereupon Servitutes sunt Jura Praediorum.
Servitudes have been imposed, against the rearing of Houses higher then
ordinary, also against hindering of Light, or Prospect, and other of that kind
in the very ambient Aer; So that where a In novo Opere Nunciato.
Prohibition of a new Building has issued, Pomponius says, the Aer ought to
be measured as well as the Ground. And it is evident, that the Aer L. 21. ff.
tit. quod vi aut Clam. 2.
is his who is owner of the plot of ground. So that as to that saying of
Paulus, that a Tree growing in the very Confine betwixt two Lands is L. 83. ff.
tit. Pro Socio.
common to the Owners on both sides, for so much as grow's in the ground of
either; Joannes Buteo discoursing of the Division of the fruit of such a Tree,
says, Tract. de Divisione Fructus arboris in confinio natae.
we must suppose the ground to be the Aer it self that is spread over the
ground, which he measures by direct lines from the outmost boughs. And
therefore, surely, we are owners of the ground, house, and space, which we
possess in several as owners, that every one, for his best advantage, may
freely and fully use and enjoy his own bordering Aer, (which is the element of
mankind) how flitting so ever it be, together with the space thereof in such a
manner, and restrain others thence at pleasure, that he may be both reputed
and settled owner thereof in Particular. Much less then does the fluid nature
of Waters, which is far less then the other, in any wise hinder an ownership or
Dominion over them. And even those things which naturally are thus flitting, do
notwithstanding in a Civil sens remain ever the same; as the ship of Theseus, a
House, or a Theater, which has been so often mended and repaired, that there is
not so much as one part or plank left of the first building.

But they which make use of so frivolous a subtlety as this to oppose a
Dominion of the Sea, should be turned over to the Philosophers; especially
Diog. Laert^in Heraclito, etc.
Heraclitus, and Epicharmus, whose Doctrine was, that every thing is so
changed, altered, and renewed every moment, that nothing in the world
continue's at this instant, the same, that it was in the instant immediately
going before. No man (says Epist. 58.
Seneca, in imitation of Heraclitus) is the same in the Morning, that he was
the day before. Our Bodies are hurried like Rivers. Whatsoever thou see,
run's with time. Not one of all those things that are visible, continue's. I,
even whilst I speak of these Changes, am changed my self.

It was seriously affirmed also by Heraclitus, that not only the same River
could not receiv a man twice, but also that the same man could not enter twice
into the same stream. So that to cast all into Heraclitus his River, became an
usual Proverb, to express a continued and perpetual change of every thing from
it self. But let such as dream, that the fluid inconstant nature of the Sea
disprove's the private Dominion of it; entertain the same opinion (if they
pleas) with these men, of things that fall under a Civil consideration, and
then they must of necessity grant also, that themselves are not Owners or
Possessors, either of Land, Houses, Clothes, Money, or any other thing
whatsoever.

An Answer to the Objections touching the defect of Bounds and Limits in the
Sea; as also concerning its magnitude and inexhaustible abundance. CHAP. XXII.
THe Objection, touching the defect of Limits and and Bounds, fallows next.
And truly, where Dominions are distinguished, nothing can be more desirable
then known and certain Bounds in every place: Nor was it without cause, that
Plutarch. in Numa.
Terminus, the God of Bounds, was received heretofore among the Romans for the
God of Justice. But the nature of Bounds is to be considered either upon the
Shores, or in the open Sea. And why Shores should not be called and reputed
lawful Bounds, whereon to ground a distinction of Dominion in the Sea, as well
as Ditches, Hedges, Meers, rows of Trees, Mounds, and other things used by
Surveyors in the bounding of Lands, I cannot fully understand. Nor is Sylvanus,
made by Heathens the God of the woods, and Neptune of the Sea.
Sylvanus any whit more a Guardian of Bounds, then Neptune. But yet a very
learned man says, Hugo Grot. de Jure Belli ac Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 11.. 3.
there is a Reason in nature, why the Sea under the aforesaid consideration
cannot be possessed or made appropriate; because possession is of no force,
unless it be in a thing that is bounded; So that Thucydides call*s a Land
unpossessed, (...) unbounded; and Isocrates the Land possessed by the
Athenians, a Land bounded with Limits. But liquid things, because of themselves
they are not bounded, cannot be possessed, save only as they are contained in
some other thing; after which manner Lakes and Ponds are possessed, and Rivers
also, because they are contained within Banks. But the Sea is not contained by
the Earth, it being of equal bigness, or bigger then the Earth; so that the
Ancients have affirmed the Earth to be contained by the Sea. And then he
bring's diverse Testimonies of the Ancients, whereby it is affirmed more then
once, that the Sea is the girdle or Bond of this Globe of Earth, and that
fetching a compass, it incloseth all the Parts thereof together; and it is very
often said by the Ancients, that the Land is contained and bounded by the water
or Sea; as if the whole Earth made as it were one Island, being Cicero in
Son. Scipious. and vide Jo. Philoponde Mundi Creat^^ne, lib. 4 cap. 5.
surrounded by the Sea. But admit it were to be granted (which, I suppose,
neither that learned man nor any other will grant;) yet I do not well see, why
the thing containing should not in truth be bounded by the thing contained, as
well as this by that. May not a lesser body that is spherical, or of any other
form, being contained by a greater which is every way contiguous to it, be
said to bound and limit the Concave of the greater Body, as well as this to
limit the Unequal of the lesser? But Julius ^xe^^^^. 37.
Scaliger says very well of the Sea and Land; That the one is not so contained
by the other, but that it may also contein. Nor are they so disjoined from each
other, but that they may both encroach upon each other and retire by Turns. The
Sea and Land mutually embrace one another with crooked windings and turnings;
this with Peninsula's, and Promontories butting forth, and Creeks bending
inward; that working up its waves about all the Passages of its vast Body.
Thus it is evident that the one indifferently set's Bounds to the other, no
otherwise than Banks, and Lakes, or Rivers; which also appears more evident in
the A Sea near (...), like a huge Lake, being encompassed with Land, and has
no passage into any other S^a.
Caspian Sea that is encompassed with Land. And in like manner in the
Mediterranean; before that Hercules, or (as the Geograph* Nubiens. Climat. 4.
part. 1
Arabians say) Alexander the great did, by cutting the Mountains, let in the
Atlantic Ocean through the streights of Cadiz. And thereby it is made up one
single Globe, wherein diverse Seas are bounded, as well as the Isles or main
Land: as it is more clearly proved out of holy Scripture. There the waters are
gathered together, and limited by their Places and Damascen. de Or^hodoxd fide,
lib. 2. cap. 9.
Bounds. And says the Lord himself of the Sea, Job 38. 10.
I encompassed it with my Bounds, and set Bars and Doors; and said, hitherto
shall thou com, but no farther. And in another place, Pro. 8. 29.
He gave unto the Sea his Bounds, his Decree unto the waters that they should
not pass their Bounds: So that it cannot be doubted every Sea has its Bounds
on the Shore; as the Land it self. Nor had I made mention of this Particular,
had I not found it impugned by so eminent a person. And truly there is but a
very little more difficulty, to find out Limits and Bounds in the main Sea,
for distinguishing of private Dominions. We have high Rocks, Shelvs,
Promontories opposite to each other, and Islands dispersed up and down, from
whence as well direct Lines, as crooked windings and turnings, and angles, may
be made use of, for the bounding of a Territory in the Sea. Mill jacent
mediae, diffusa per aequora, terrae;
Innumeri surgunt Scopuli, montesque per altum.
A thousand Lands within the main do lie;
Rocks numberless, and Mountains rise on high
Throughout the deep.


The ancient Cosmographers also reckon up the Seas of the world, no otherwise
then Towns, Rivers, Islands, and Mountains, as being no less distinguished
from each other by their respective Bounds. In Cosmographia.
AEthicus says, Every Globe of Land has XXX Seas, CCCLXX Towns, LXXII
Islands, LVII Rivers, and XL Mountains, etc. After this also, he reckon's the
Seas of the Eastern, Western, Northen, and Southern Ocean one after another,
after the same manner as he does the Provinces and their Isles. How truly, I
dispute not; but in the mean time he made no question, but that the Seas are
sufficiently distinguished by their Names and Bounds. Add hereunto that useful
invention of the sea-man's Compass, and the help of Celestial degrees either of
Longitude or Latitude, together with the doctrine of Triangles arising
therefrom. Also in those Plantations that in our time have been carried out of
Europe into America, the degrees of Latitude and Longitude do serve the
Proprietors in stead of Bounds; which with as little difficulty are found in
the Sea. In like manner A^ial. ^manu^l. M^tera^* Rer. (...). lib. 28.
some would have had the Tropic of Cancer and the Equinoctial Line to have been
the Bounds in the Sea, for the limiting of that Agreement, which was to have
been made in the year MDCVIII, between the States of the United Provinces, and
the House of Austria. And in the late Agreement betwixt the Kings of Great
Britain and Spain, Anno 1630. Art. 2.
the Equinoctial Line is the Bound appointed in the Sea. Other Instances there
are of the same nature: Eor, Sarpedon and Calycadnus, two Promontories of
Cilicia, were designed as Bounds for distinguishing the Dominion of the Sea, in
that League made betwixt the Polyb. in Eclog. de Legationibus, cap. 35. and
Livius, decad. 4 lib. 8.
Romans and Antiochus King of Syria. Also, by Decree of the Emperor Leo, of
which we have already spoken, the An Epoche was a device to keep store of
Fish, made of Nets that were spread between Stakes driven into the Sea.
Fishing Epoches or Fish-pens that were by men placed in the Sea lying over
against their Lands, were limited to certain number of Cubits. The case was the
same likewise touching the Cyanean and Chelidonian Islands, in the League made
by the Plutarch. in vita Cimonis.
Athenians with the King of Persia; which has been mentioned also before.

Moreover, Pope Alexander VI and his Cardinals, or the King of Spain's Agents
made no scruple touching Bounds of this nature, when the King obtained that
famous Bull, whereby he had a Grant of the Western world; but so to be
limited, that the thing given should, in the hither part of it, be bounded by
an imaginary Line drawn from the Artick to the Antarctick Pole, Laert.
Cherubin. Bullar. Tom. 1. page 393.
which should be distant from each of those Islands called de Los, Azores y
cabo verde, one hundred Leagues toward the West and South (which are the very
words of the Bull.) Whereupon Tractat. de finibus regundis, cap. 7. 8.
Hieronymus de Monte, says, Bounds were set in Heaven and in the Aer, in the
time of Pope Alexander VI between the Portugals and Castilians, in dividing the
Indian Isles then newly discovered by the degrees of Heaven; and so all that
was found Eastward, was allotted to the Portugals, and that which lay Westward
to the Castilians. Certainly, in this place, no more regard was had to the
portions of Land, whether Islands or continent, in the measuring of Bounds,
then to the spaces of the Sea. Moreover, it is ordinary among the Lawyers,
even those who are most earnest for a Community of every Sea, to limit an
hundred miles Bartolus Tract. de Tiberiade and D. D. in l. Insulae Italiae ff.
tit. de Judiciis.
jurisdiction to the Lord of the adjacent Coast. Sometimes we find sixty. It
is in a manner received (says De Repub. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Bodin) by the common custom of all Princes bordering upon the Sea, that for
sixty miles from the shore, any Prince may give Law to those that sail near
their Coast; and it was so adjudged in the Case of the Duke of Savoy. Which he
observes out of Cacheranus his decisions of Piemont. Yea, and it is maintained
by very Hieronym. de Monte, Tract. de Finibus regundis, cap. 39. Baldus, and
alii ibi citati.
eminent Professors of the Civil Law, that an Action at Law may be allowed for
regulating of Bounds in the Borders of the Sea. Therefore they sufficiently
acknowledge the Custom of measuring and setting Bounds, even in the Sea.

But as to what concern's that saying of Ambrose; Geometram audivimus,
Thalassometram nunquam audivimus, We have heard of a Geometrician, one that
measures land; but never of a Thalassometrician, or one that could measure and
lay out Bounds in the Sea; This truly is rather a quibling of words, then any
Argument against the point in hand. And the holy man speak's in that place, of
the various lurking-holes, or holds of diverse Fishes, which God has appointed
for them in the Sea, not touching a civil distribution of the Sea. Nor was
there any reason why he should speak thus of a Thalassometrician, as a thing
never heard of before. For, we know that even Thalassometricians were
ordinary among the Grecians, who had Dominions by Sea, with very frequent and
various distinctions of those Dominions; And that the Sea was measured
according to the Rules of Geometry, no less then the Land. Proelus a famous
Mathematician, treating about the excellency of Geometry, says, In Euclidis,
lib. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3. in Craecis, page 18.
It has discovered the Situations of places, the measures also of Voiages by
Sea, as well as journies by Land. Moreover, they had Instruments to measure the
Sea, which the Grecians, or at least the modern Greeks, called (...)* measures
of Sea-voiages; and have written that Hero, Anthemius, and other ancient
Mathematicians, learned the Art from Archimedes, and transmitted it to
Posterity. Yea, it is said by Chiliad. 13. cap. 457.
Joannes Tzetzes, that those men discovered both water and winde-instruments
out of the Books of Archimedes, and Engines to move things of weight, and
instruments called Thalassodometrae, for measuring of Sea-voiages: so that as
concerning the business of measuring the sea, there is nothing to hinder, but
that both matter and instruments may be had for the distinguishing of its
Dominions.

Lastly, that which is objected, touching the vast magnitude of the Sea, and
its inexhaustible abundance, is of very little weight here. Suppose it be
inexhaustible, so that he which shall appropriate it to himself, can receiv no
damage by other men's using it, what more prejudice is this to the right of
Ownership or Dominion, then it is to the Owner of a Fire or Candle, that
another man's should be lighted by his? Is he therefore less Master of his
own Fire or Candle? But truly we often see, that the Sea it self, by reason of
other men's Fishing, Navigation, and Commerce, becom's the wors for him that
own's it, and others that enjoie it in his right; So that less profit arises,
then might otherwise be received thereby. Which more evidently appears in the
use of those Seas, which produce Pearls, Coral, and other things of that kind.
Yea, the plenty of such seas is lessned every hour, no otherwise then that of
Mines of Metal, Quarries of stone, or of Gardens, when their Treasures and
Fruits are taken away. And it is a custom of the Mahometans (who are very great
and Potent Nations) to estimate their seas no less upon this account, then by
the Revenue either of Fishing or Navigation; as we may see in that their falls
Prophet, when speaking of the most holy God he says, (...).
It is he that has prepared the Sea for your use, that thence ye may take
fresh Food (and use Fishing) and also that out of it ye may draw ornaments to
adorn you, Mahomet Ben Achmed, the best Expositor of the Alcoran, interpret's
those ornaments by Coral and Pearls; which words also are used in another
Azoar. 55. (...) in Cod. (...). 65.
place of the Alcoran, for the chief Commodity of the Sea. From whence also it
is, that a special License to search for Coral, has sometimes been granted in
Leagues made by the grand Seignieur, as is observed before. Yea, and Hist. Not.
(...). cap. 35.
Pliny speaking, especially of the more Easternly Seas, says; It had been
counted a small matter, that men swallowed whole Seas into their throats, if
both men and women also did not wear them up and down upon their hands, ears,
heads, and all parts of the Body. But it is well known to us, that precious
Stones and Pearls, are very often found also in the Western Seas, and he
tell's us, they were frequently found in ancient time. Moreover (says he) It
is certain that in Britain they are produced, though small and ill colored (as
we all see at this day) forasmuch as Julius Caesar would have it understood,
that the breast*plate which he consecrated to Venus in her Temple, was made of
British Pearl. Yea, it is written by many, and testified by (...).
Suetonius, that Caesar went to Britain in hope of Pearls. It is obvious
therefore to every man, that the gain of such a Voyage into Britain, may be
lessned, and that the abundance either of Pearls themselves, or of those
shell-fishes, which produce them, may through a promiscuous and common use of
the Sea, be diminished in any Sea whatsoever. Where then is that inexhaustible
abundance of Commodities in the sea, which cannot be impaired? There is truly
the same reason also, touching every kind of Fishing. But what need many words
about this Matter? Do we not at this day find it pressed home to the utmost
every where by Lawyers, especially those of the Empire? and was it not a
thousand times said of old when the Roman Empire was in its prime, L. 9. ff.
tit. ad Legem Rhodiam. etc.
that Caesar is Lord of the whole world? Thus Ovid, according to the Roman
custom, says; Fastorum, lib. 2.
Gentibus est aliis tellus data limite certo:
Romanae spatium est urbis and orbis idem.
All other States have Limits to their Ground:
Rome and the world, have but one common Bound.
The Sea (I suppose) is not more inexhaustible then the whole world. That is
very much inferior to this, as a part is to the whole, in greatness and plenty.
And therefore a Dominion of the Sea is not to be opposed upon this account,
unless also we in like manner affirm, that not only that saying of the
Emperor's Dominion over the world is manifestly falls, (as it must be) but also
contrary to natural reason it self, because of the worlds extraordinary
greatness and abundance. Therefore they are more justifiable in their Opinion,
who, as they say, that the Roman Emperor, according to the ancient Law, is Lord
of the World or Land, (that is to say, a large part of it) so also Jo.
Griphiander Jurisdictione Insulae* cap. 14. 65. etc.
they would have him to be Lord of the Sea.

Nor is there any difficulty in that expression of the Emperor Antoninus,
wherein he call's himself Lord of the World, but the Law (as it is commonly
understood) Lady of the Sea; which (if it were granted that his Answer ought L
D precati^ 9. ff. ad l^^^m ^^^diam.
so to be understood) does signify no other thing, then that the Rhodian
Laws, where they did not thwart the Roman, were so far in force about
Sea-affairs, that (however he were Moderator and Lord of both) he would by no
means determine ought contrary to those Laws, by any Rescript of his own.
Dispunctionum lib. 2. (...). 5.
Alcialus, and other very Learned men also, make almost the same
interpretation: But concerning that Answer of Antoninus, I shall add more In
the 25 Chapter.
by and by. So that it seems the Ancients, in that so often repeated speech,
concerning universal Dominion, conceived the Roman Empire to be no less or
narrower, then it is represented by Petronius Arbiter, who set's forth the
matter in these words; Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat,
Qua Mare, qua Terrae, qua Sidus currit utrumque.
The Roman Conqu'rer then the world,
Both Sea and Land did sway,
Wheresoever the Moon travel's by night,
Or the bright Sun by day.
And (...).
the Ancient Inscription in honor of Augustus Caesar was, ORB MARI ET TERRA
PACATO, IANO CLUSO, etc. Peace being restored to the world by Sea and Land,
he shut up the This ^e^ple (...) op^n in time of w^^, but was ^^^t in time of
pe^^^.
Temple of Janus; according to which sens it is recorded also by Suetonius
(...) Octavio, cap ^2.
Historians, that he shut Janus his Temple three times, having settled Peace
by Sea and Land; whereby they would have us to understand (the very same thing
which we have proved more fully before) that the Seas were comprehended as
well as the Land, within the huge Body of the Roman Empire.

An Answer to such Testimonies as have fallen from Writers treating of other
subjects, and which are usually alleged against Dominion of the Sea. CHAP.
XXIII.
IT remain's in the next place, that we consider of what validity the
contrary Opinions of Writers are whereof we formerly made mention. As to what
concern's those Passages of the Poets, Plautus and Phaenicides; it is clear in
Plautus, that the lewd slave Trachalio was but in jest with Gripus the
Fisherman: He says in general, that the Sea is common to all, which
signifies a Sea that never was possessed, as well as that which is necessarily
and naturally common; and in that place, that, rather then this. Wherefore it
may be understood, that Fishing was common or not yet appropriated; that, is,
that the people either of Rome or Greece, had such a Dominion over any kind of
Sea (for, by what has been already mentioned, it appears both of them had a
Dominion over some Sea before Plautus his time) that either of them might use
their respective Seas at their own pleasure, in hindling others from sailing
through them, and removing such impediments of Trade and Commerce as should
happen therein: And yet that hitherto they had prohibited no man from fishing
in that Sea (mentioned by Plautus and Phaenicides) in such a manner, but that
the use of it might remain common either to Natives or Neighbors, as the use of
a ground for feeding of Cattle; though there may indeed be a particular Owner
in possession, reserving the other Commodities of it to himself, as it often
come's to pass. But afterward also, especially in the Eastern Empire, or among
the Greeks, it is clear out of what we have already shown you, that a
peculiar Right of Sea-fishing has passed into the hands of private persons, as
well as of Princes: So that such Expressions as these being applied against
private Dominion of the Sea, soon vanish and com to nothing.

As to that passage out of Ovid, Quid prohibetis aquas? Why do ye forbid
water? etc. (then which nothing is more usual in Disputes about this matter) it
is not so much an Assertion of the community of waters, as a vehement and
hyperbolical reproof of the inhumanitie of that rustic Rout in Lycia. Latona
being thirsty and weary, asked for a draught of water; and that out of a
Lake. The barbarous people deny her; and therefore she most deservedly
reprove's them. But she does it not more earnestly, then Ampelisca in In
Rudent^. Act. 2.
Plautus did merrily, to Sceparnio a slave that denied her water; Cur iu
(inquit Ampelisca) aquam gravare amabo, quam hostis hosti commodat? Why (says
Ampelisca) art thou so loath to let me have water, which one stranger afford's
another.

For, whatsoever may be afforded or communicated without prejudice of the
Owner, he is concerned many times in humanity to impact it to a mere stranger
that asks him. For, the word Hostis in that place signifie's a Stranger, as
we often find among the Festus in verb. Hostis, and Cic. de Offic. lib. 1.
Ancients; And it appears also by the question of Sceparnio, whereby he
jeer's the wench, Cur tu (ait ille) operam gravare mihi, quam civis civi
commodat? Why (says he) do thou deny me that help, one Citizen afford's
another?

Here he opposes Citizen to Stranger. From the same Office of humanity those
particulars are derived; as not to deny running Water; to suffer one Fire, or
one Candle to light another; and other things of that nature, which are
profitable to the Receiver, and not troublesome to him that give's or permit's
the Favor. And upon this Rule of Morality only, which is the Rule of
Charity, are those demands both of Latona and Ampelisca grounded. They deny
not the private Dominion of waters: Neither Latona of the Lake (whose private
Dominion is confess't by all) nor Ampelisca of the Well, from whence she
demanded water for the Priest of Venus. Moreover, those words of Latona are
spoken concerning a Lake of little water; as Ovid shows in that place, Forte
lacum mediocris aquae prospexit in imis
Vallibus. --
By chance a little Lake she did epsy,
Which in the Uallies far beneath did lie.


And after she had said that she came to claim a public gift, she add's,
Quae tamen ut detis, supplex peto. --
Which notwithstanding I humbly beg you would bestow.


Nothing in that place opposes a Dominion of the waters, more then of any
other things whatsoever, whereto that saying of Ennius may have relation, Cic.
de Offic. lib. 1.
Nihilo minus ipsi lucet, quum illi accenderit,
His own light is not the less, when he has lent light to another.


And as Cicero tell's us, all things of the same kind seem common to men.
Which community notwithstanding derogate's nothing at all from the Dominion
here in Question, unless any will be so unadvised as to affirm, that the Laws
of friendship (wherein Philosophers say all things are common) with those of
Charity and Liberality, may overthrow private Dominion.

Nor is there any more weight in that which is objected out of Virgil. What is
this to the purpose? Virgil, or Ilioneus speaking of the Tyrrhen Sea, said,
That the water is open to all. Ergo, by Law the water must lie open at all
times to all men. A very trifling Argument! There was no Land that was omitted
in the first distribution of things, which did not remain open to all, before
it came under particular possession. But in that passage of Virgil, there is no
demand made of Right, but only an Office of humanity requested from the King
of Latium. Yea, and a promiss made of recompense, saying; Non erimus regno
indecores, nec vestra feretur AEneid. li. 7.

Fama levis, tantique abolescet gratia facti.
We Will not disgrace your Realm, nor lightly set
Your Fame, and so great courtesy forget.
Therefore in the Poets sens, the benefit was to be received and acknowledged
from the grace and favor of the Prince, not claimed by any Law of nature common
to all. Yea, we know that in many places an excise or payment is made sometimes
for the very use of water. As among the Hollanders they have in Delph-land a
Custom called Jus Grutae; which has ever been under the care of those Officers
called in Latin Comites Plumarii or Officers of the Feather; their place is to
see that Birds or foul be not transported thence.
Comites Plumarii, in Dutch, Pluymgraven, and whereby the Beer-brewers (as In
Histor. Bat. c. 19.
Hadrianus Junius tell's us) are bound to pay them the hundredth part for the
use of water. Other instances there are to be found of the same nature.

Lastly, as to that saying of the Jewish Rabbis concerning Alexander, it
shows only they were of Opinion that Alexander had not gotten a Dominion over
the Sea. They do not say at all, that he could not lawfully get it; nor truly
could they say it without gross indiscretion, unless they would renounce their
own Right (which we have already mentioned out of their determinations) in
the great or Phaenician Sea. And whatsoever those Rabbis may lightly say of
Alexander; yet truly Flavius De Bello Judaico, lib. 3. cap. 27.
Josephus a Jew; and (if we may believ himself) the most eminent Lawyer of his
time among the Jews, call's the Emperor Vespasian, Lord both of Sea and Land.
And Orat. 3.
Julian says, that Alexander aspired after an Empire by Sea as well as by
Land: which has been mentioned also by Suasor^
Seneca.

But all these Objections are brought out of Writers treating of other matters,
which ought also to be considered. And therefore in the last place, let us
take such opinions of the Lawyers into consideration, as are opposed against it.

An Answer to the Objections taken out of Ancient Lawyers. CHAP. XXIV.
OF those Lawyers that are of the contrary opinion, some are ancient, some
modern. If we look into the most notable Testimonies of the Ancients, this
only is to be collected from them touching the Community of the Sea, that
some of the most eminent were indeed of Opinion, that by the Law natural and of
Nations the Sea is perpetually and necessarily common to all men; which
nevertheless, most clearly appears to be far otherwise, if a diligent survey
be made of the Laws and Customs, either Civil or Intervenient, of most Ages
and Nations; As we have very abundantly proved in what has been already
shown you. And that not only out of the most approved Historians (whereof
there is very oftentimes most use, in searching out the most common Customs of
Nations, and other things relating to the Laws themselves Vide Gaspar. Knockium,
lib. de contributionibus, cap. 20.. 463. and seqq.
) but also out of the very Leagues or Intervenient Law of diverse Nations, yea,
and other Lawyers of no less note, together with the principal Edicts in the
Eastern Empire, besides, many other, from whence any one may easily learn
what, according to the Natural Permissive Law, ought to be determined in this
matter.

Some of the Ancients have been of Opinion, that according to the Law Natural or
of Nations, it is lawful to hunt and hauk in another man's L. 3. ff. de acquir.
rer. dom. and instit. de rer. divis. Ferae igitur bestiae and l. Injuriar. 13.
ff. de injuriis. ult.
wood or Ground, and to Fish in another man's Pond or Lake, much more in a
River, except it were prohibited by the Owner in possession. These things,
says Observat. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Cujacius, were so determined by the prudent Romans, who adhered most to the
Law of Nations. But Custom has now overruled the Law of Nations, so that it
is not lawful to Fish so much as in a public River, nor to hunt or hauk freely
in the Fields. And says the same Ad lib. 5. Feud. tit. de Regalibus.
Author in another place; The Exchequer is to be justified only by Custom, in
laying claim to the Fisheries, in a private manner, contrary to the Law of
Nations. Whereas notwithstanding, in the Feudal Laws, the Revenues of Fisheries
are counted among the Regalia or Royalties of the Prince; and reckoned by
learned men among the Ancients belonging to the Guide. Pancirol. variar. lect.
utriusque Juris, lib. 3. cap. 31.
Roman Exchequer or Treasury, who cite Ulpian himself for a witness. For, he
among the public Customs or Revenues numbreth the Revenues L. 17. ff. de U. S.
Piscariarum (as some would have it read) of Fisheries. Others instead of it put
Picariarum Pitch-pits, for those places from whence Pitch is dug. Surely,
even L. 4.. 6. ff. tit. de Censibus.
Ulpian himself reckon's Fish Ponds among those things that are liable to
assessments. But howsoever the later Customs of Nations have subverted or
overruled that more ancient Law of Fishing, Hunting, and fouling freely,
whether it were the Law natural (as they termed it)* or of nations; as
sufficiently appears by the Vide Sebastianum Medicem (...) d^ ^venati^^e
(...). Edicta and consuetudi de (...) Forestis Galliarum collect per
Sanctyonium, Andream Gaill. pract. Observat. lib. 2. 67. Matthew: Stephani de
Jurisdictione, lib. 2. ^act 1. cap. 7.. 432. and ^ejusmodi allos de Ve^ Jure^h
imperio Romano-Germanico, etc.
Law of those places which they call Forests de wildt bahne or Bannum ferinum,
and of Rivers, as it is variously established in several Countries. And so
without any prohibition of the Owner in Possession, that ancient Freedom has
been abrogated many Ages since by most received Custom: which may be said in
like manner of the Sea, whatsoever those Ancients and their Followers have
written to the contrary.

Moreover, the Emperor Leo has (as we have shown you) expressly declared by
Edict, that the ancient Right concerning a necessary community of the Sea,
was not without injustice pretended in the Eastern Empire. Wherefore Michael
Attaliates truly did ill, and so has any other Lawyer of the East (if any
there be) since the days of Leo, that has opposed its private Dominion. Nor
indeed has that eminent man dealt any better, who write's that Leo made a
change against reason of Law. And here, especial care must be taken to avoid
that which some have presumed to affirm, touching those most excellent Books of
Justinian, which make up an entire Body of the ancient Law; Albericus Gentilis
de Jure Belli, l. 1. cap. 3.
That the Law prescribed in those Books is not the Law only of a City, but
even of Nations and nature; and that the whole is so fitted unto nature, that
after the Empire was extinct, though the Law was a long time buried; yet it
rose again, and spread it self through all the world. And therefore that it
concern's even Princes, although it was framed by Justinian for private
persons. As if the law natural and of Nations were to be derived only out of
those Books. For, not to mention, how that not only very many Decrees, and
Custome's introduced in the Romane-Germane Empire it self and other places
abroad, have extremly altered many things contained in those Books; but also
that we find diverse Kings both of Gregor. Lopez in Alphonsin. 3. tit. 4. l.
6. Azevedo ad reg. constit. in rubric. tit. De las leyes.
Spain and Choppinus de Domanio, lib. 2. tit. 15.. 5. and Bodin de Repub. lib.
1. cap. 8. and vide Guil. Burlaeum in Prooem. ad Comm. in Arist. Physica.
France have sometimes heretofore prohibited the use of them in any kind within
their Courts of Justice; there are truly some things in the very Law of the
Nations of Europe (who receiv those Books, and that upon very good ground, both
into their Schools and Courts, so far as the particular Laws of their Kingdoms
will permit) I mean in their Law Common, or Intervenient, which are not
grounded at all upon the Law of Justinian, but have had their original from
Customs quite contrary thereto. Prisoners of war are not now made slaves, nor
are the Laws concerning captivity or Remitter upon return from Captivity,
touching the Boerius Decis. 178. Alvarus Velasc. Consult: tom. 1. 30 Fra.
Suarez de Legibus, l. 2. cap. 20.
persons of men, in any use at all, which notwithstanding take up a Title in
the Digests. Ships driven by wrack upon a Shore do by the C. tit. de
Naufragiis, and l. 1. and 3. ff. de Incendio and l. 21.. 1. ff. tit. de acquir.
velamit. possessione.
Law of Justinian (which is confirmed also in the Frederic. 2. in C. de Furtis,
c. Navigia, and Constit. Caroli 5. de Judiciis Capitalibus, cap. 118.
Roman* German Empire) belong either to the former Owners, or as things
relinquished and unpossessed, to the first Finders; nor does the Exchequer
interpose any Claim, whereas nevertheless, according to the Law of diverse
Nations, intervenient to themselves and their Neighbors, it be most certain,
that those Ships are very often confiscated according to the variety of
Custom: As among the English, the Bertrand. Argentraeus in Consuet. Brit. Art.
56.. 45.
Britains, Choppinus de Domanio, lib. 1. tit. 15.. 10.
Sicilians, some Luc. de Penna ad C. tit. de Naufrag. Matthew. de Afflict. in
Cons. Neapolit. lib. 1. consuet. 59. vide Garsiam Mastrillum de Magistratibus,
lib. 3. cap. 10.. 393.
Borderers upon the Shores of Italy, and others. And although it be accounted
cruelty by some to pursue profit upon so sad an occasion, as it was also by the
Andr. Gail. practic. Observat. lib. 1. cap. 18. Bodin. de Repub. l. 1. cap. 10.
Stat. Romae Vrbis. l. 3. cap. 85.
Emperor, either Constantine or Antoninus, who made a Law thereupon; yea, and
though besides the Decree of the Lateran Council, the Bull Sub. Alex. 3. c.
Excommunicationi extrait de Raptoribus.
Coenae Domini do blast those every year with Excommunication that plunder the
goods of such as suffer Shipwreck, in Bartholemeus v^^linus de Censuris
Pontifici reservatis, part. 2. cap* 4.
any Sea, upon any pretense of Law or Custom whatsoever; yet the Custom of
confiscation in this case derived not its Original from the rude and barbarous
Ages, but it flowed first from the most ancient Maritim Laws of the Rhodians
(which were in use among the Grecians in their flourishing condition) as shall
be shown by and by, and from thence was received by diverse Princes. Also, when
the Emperor's Ambassador, as Bodin says, made complaint before Henry the
second King of France, that two Ships being driven a Shore were seized by one
Jordanes Ursinus, and demanded a restitution of them; Annas of Momorancie
Master of the Horse made Answer, that all things which had been cast upon Shore,
did by the Law of all Nations belong to such Princes as have commanded the
Shores. So far has Custom taken place in this particular, that Andraeas Doria
did not so much as complain about those Ships that were cast upon the French
Shore, and made prize by the Admiral of France. So far he. In like manner,
Whales and other Fish of extraordinary bigness, do not, according to the known
Law of England, (...) de ^a^edo De^^^. Lusit in. part. 2. 48.
Portugal, and other Nations, belong to him that first seizes them, but either
to the Exchequer, or (which is all one) to such as the Prince shall grant a
Royalty of that nature.

Other instances might be brought, sufficiently to show that the Law natural
and of Nations is not wholly to be drawn out of such Decrees or Determinations
as are found in the Books of Justinian; And so that what is there inserted
touching a Community of the Sea, does not in any wise diminish the Authority
of the received Customs of so many Ages and Nations. But it is to be observed,
that the Sea is said in those Books to be common, as the A^r, and as wild
Beasts are common. As if indeed the neighboring A^r it self could not pass into
private Dominion, as well as a River that is possels'^, and wild Beasts that
are taken. Moreover, those Ancients do ordinarily conjoin a community of
Shores and Ports, not unlike to that which they teach of the Sea: As if the
very reason of the Dominion of Ports and Shores, as they belonged either to the
people of Rome, or (which is all one here) to the Prince himself, were not
manifestly drawn, as we have expressly shown already out of Cap. 14.
Celsus, from the Imposts and Customs which are frequent enough both in the
Shores and Cic. Oral. pro lege Manilia. Symmachus, l. 5. Ep. 62. 65. Tacitus
Annal. lib. 13. Alii obiter.
Ports of the ^oman Empire, and in the Books of Tit* de Publicanis, in ff. and
tit. de vectigalibu^ in C.
Justinian (as in many other places.) For, as the L. 1. C. tit. de diversis*
Praediis, and l. 5. ff. tit. de Operibus publicis,. 1.
payment of that Tribute which is called Solarium a Solo, and thence by the
Greek Lawyers Eclog. Basilic. lib. 58. p. 488. ut etiam simili notione in l.
15. ff. tit. Qui potior in Pignore.
(...), for an house that is built upon the ground of the Commonweal or the
public ground, was a sufficient Argument that the Commonweal or the Prince
was Lord of the Soil; so indeed also the Custom paid for the use of Ports,
manifested that there was the same kind of Dominion over Them. Also, Ports
themselves are rightly supposed to be a part even of the Continent, as appears
in L. 15. Caesar, ff. tit. de Publicanis.
another place. Moreover also, Justinian appropriated the Hellespont to himself
in such a manner, that he would not permit Merchants and Seamen to enjoy a
freedom of that Sea and the Ports, but at an extraordinary rate, if we may
believ In Arcana Historia, page 110.
Procopius, who was his comtemporarie and wrote his Affairs.

Nor did they imagine there was any difference betwixt the Dominion of the Sea,
and that over the Land or People, who about 400 years since put this
Inscription upon the Monument of the Emperor Georg. Gualtherus in Tabulis
antiq. Siciliae, etc. page 93.
Frederick the second, Qui Mare, qui Terras, Populos, and Regna subegit,
Who subdued the Sea, the Land, Nations, and Kingdoms;


To wit, in the Cathedral Church of Palermo, in which place notwithstanding,
the Imperial Law flourished at that time, as well as in the rest of the
Roman-German Empire. The sum of all is, that those ancient Lawyers do deliver
many things carelessly touching this matter, not only such as thwart the most
received Customs of Nations through almost all Ages, but such also as do
sufficiently contradict one another; especially, whilst they join the Shore it
self, and consequently the Ports together, as it were in an equal state of
Community. So that they are equally refuted as well by their own indiscretion,
as by the Authority of others.

Touching the Emperor Antoninus his Answer; that himself was Sovereign of the
world, but the Law (as it is commonly translated) of the Sea; in L. Deprecatio,
ff. tit. de Lege Rhodia. The true meaning of the said Answer, and a new, but
genuine Exposition of it. Also, that it comprehend's nothing which may in any
wise oppose a Dominion of the Sea. CHAP. XXV.
BUt seeing that among those particulars, which are usually drawn out of
Ancient Lawyers, against Dominion of the Sea, that Answer of the Emperor
Antoninus to Eudaemon several times beforementioned, is of so principal an
account; therefore it seemed meet to treat of it apart by it self, and search
into the genuine sens thereof; concerning which, whosoever shall look into the
whole matter with a little more care then ordinary, will I suppose be very
well satisfied, not only that most Interpreters have hitherto been wholly
ignorant thereof, but also that it in no wise contradict's a Dominion of the
Sea.

Eudaemon having been Shipwrack't at Sea, had petitioned the Emperor, for a
restitution of those wrack't goods that had been seized by the Receivers of his
Customs. The words, according to L. 9. (...) ff. de Lege. Rhodia.
Volusius Maetianus who was one of the Emperor's Privy Counselors, are these;
(...); O Emperor Antoninus, our Lord; we having made Shipwreck, have been
spoiled of all by those Receivers of the Customs that inhabit the These Isles
are part of those that lie in the Archipela^^^.
Cyclades Islands. He received an Answer from the Emperor, pointed for the
most part after this manner, in the printed Books. (...). Which is usually thus
translated; I indeed am Sovereign of the world, but the Law, of the Sea. Let it
be determined by the Rhodian Law which is prescribed for the regulation of
Sea-affairs, so far as it is not opposed by any of our Laws. For, the Emperor
Augustus also was of this Opinion. There never was any Controversy about the
reading or Translation of this Answer, unless it were in those words, (...),
whereto answers, but the Law of the Sea with a period or full point after it;
as for the most part it is taken, and as we have according to the received
translation related it Cap. ^.
already in the Objections. Of those that would have it so rendered, there have
been not a few who were of Opinion, that from the Adversative (...) autem is
implied, that the Emperor answered that himself indeed was Lord of the rest of
the world, but not of the Sea; and that the Law only, not any man was Lord of
this. Andraeas Dispunctionum, lib. 2. cap. 5.
Alciatus says; Whereas it is said, I indeed am Lord of the world, but the Law
of the Sea; some French Doctors were of Opinion because of that Adversative, that
a Soveraigntie of the Sea did not appertain unto the Emperors. But he add's;
which truly is very ridiculous: Although In ^ub. de Rer. Divis.
Baldus and L. ex hoc Jure, ff. tit de Justitia.
Jason conceived for this reason, that the Venetians were not subject to the
Roman Empire. But the sens of this Law is this (to wit, that Seaaffairs were to
be determined by the Rhodian Law, as he declare's a little before.) For,
seeing the Emperor is Lord of the world, surely, not the Land only but the Sea
also, ought to submit to his Laws, and he to appoint Laws therein: though
notwithstanding he do not determine matters by his own Law in the Sea, but by
the Rhodian Law, which was by him approved. Understand therefore, when it is
said, I am Lord of the world, because I govern the world according to my own
Law. But the Law, suppose the Rhodian Law; of the Sea; because by it, Justice is
administered upon the Sea. Add hereunto, that this Particle (...), that is,
Autem, is not so opposed, that it always exclude's what goes before. And
therefore Alciatus also renders it thus, But the Law of the Sea, by which Law
of the Rhodians concerning Navigation, let it be determined, etc. And
therefore truly, it is upon exceeding good ground that he call's their opinion
very ridiculous, who would have it hence concluded, that a Dominion of the Sea
did not belong unto the Emperors. For, suppose the Emperor did answer so, as it
is commonly rendered. Does he therefore deny himself a Dominion of the Sea,
because he affirm's the Law to have Dominion at Sea? was he not in the mean
time Sovereign Lord and Arbitrator of the world (as he implied indeed by his
Answer) and so also of the Law? whatsoever he pleased, was L. 7. ff. tit. de
Constitut. Principum.
Law. Therefore to say, that any thing which the Law had Dominion over, was not
also under the Emperor's Dominion (to whom the Law it self was subject) is so
absurd, as nothing can be more.

Others there are that render the sens of the words after this manner. Although
I my self be Lord and Emperor of the world, and so, free from all Laws, nor
bound by any Rule to give any account to my Subjects, yet notwithstanding the
Law shall be Empress and Queen at Sea, that is, it shall bear sway by Sea, in
such Cases as have fallen out at Sea, since it concern's Sea affairs, nor shall
my Exchequer be advanced by the loss of my Subjects, but Justice ought to be
equally administered between the Exchequer and private persons, and therefore
the Exchequer shall be liable to give an account. So says, Franciscus de
O^at. (...), lib. 1. cap.1. (...).
Amaya, Advocate in the King's Court of Exchequer within the Kingdom of
Granada. So you see, here is not the least Track admitted of a denial of
Sea-Dominion.

Some also there are, who would have the meaning be, that Antoninus should
expressly say that he himself was as well the Law of the Sea, as Lord of the
world. I indeed am Lord of the world, and I am also the Law of the Sea. So
Joannes Igneus: And some (...)
others there are that incline this way: with whose opinion if we shall
concur, we must needs confess also, that the Emperor did sufficiently
attribute the very Dominion of the Sea unto himself. But M^an, (...). 3 cap. 1^.
Samuel Petit, a very learned Frenchman says, Antoninus does not deny himself
to be Lord of the Sea, that he cannot give Law and do Justice to those which
deal upon the Sea; for, you see his meaning was, that Right should be don
betwixt Eudaemon and the Customers which dwelt in the Cyclades Islands,
according to the Rhodian Law; nor does he say also that he is so tied by this
Rhodian Law, that he can by no means reliev Eudaemon against this Law, if any
injury be don him, but his meaning is, that Eudaemon should have Right don
him according to this Law, but yet so that this do not thwart any of the Roman
Laws. Thus he interpret's it, though the vulgar reading be retained; which
he would rather have to be rejected, and the name of Law to be put out
there; Being of opinion that the words (...) but the Law of the Sea, are
corrupted from (...), but the wind of the Sea. As if the Emperor had said,
that he himself indeed was Lord of the Sea, but that the ^ea nevertheless is
so subject to the power and alterations of wind and weather, that it was not
in his power, though Lord thereof, to prevent Shipwracks. Moreover also, Petit
correct's the Cosmographie of the Petition. He is of opinion, that those
words, (...) in Italy, crept in through the negligence of Transcribers in
stead of (...) being understood) in the Telian or AEgean Sea, which is about
the Island Telos. What a monstrous thing were (says he) that those who were
shipwrack't in the Sea upon the Coast of Italy, should have been pillaged by
Publicans or Customers dwelling in the Cyclades Islands? what Cosmographie is
this? what relation have the Publicans or Customers of those Isles unto Italy?
which is most judiciously spoken: For, it appears a manifest error there
concerning Italy. And it is most certain, that the Island Telos, whether it
be one of the The Cyclades and Sporades make up the Isles in the Archipelago.
Cyclades or Sporades, is so placed in the AEgean or Levant Sea (as we find
in Lib. 10.
Strabo, Lib. 4. cap. 12.
Pliny, and Stephanus de urbibus) that the matter hang's well together, if we
say that the Customers of the Cyclades seized upon wrack't Goods in the Telian
Sea, which to say of the Italian Sea or Shore is too monstrous in reason.
Perhaps also, in that Catalogue of Seas summed up by AEthicus, an ancient
Cosmographer, the Ionian and AEgean Sea, the Sea called Mare Lautades (which
learned men suppose to be corruptly read for Leucadium) and Mare Tillae, the
Telian Sea it self, being taken out of this very Petition, before it was
corrupted, was signified by the name of Tilla. And thus you have in a manner
the opinion of learned men, so far as concern's the matter in hand, touching
that Answer, and the Petition of Eudemon.

For my part, I most willingly yield my assent to the emendation of the
Cosmographie: But do conceiv, that the ancient and received reading of the
Answer ought not to be altered, save only in the pointing. Oftentimes no
regard has been had, nor any use of points in ancient Books: So that
succeeding Generations have been puzzled now and then with a confusion of
Syntax. But by a very small alteration of them in this place (for they are the
very same with those in the Vide Alciat. Disp. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Books that are published) the sens appears to me not only suited to the
matter of the Petition, and clear; but also plainly freed, both from that
Fancy, as if Dominion of the Sea were denied the Emperor in that place; and
also from that fiction there expressly delivered touching the Sea-Dominion of
the Law. Nor can I be persuaded, that Interpreters hitherto have sufficiently
hit upon the Emperor's meaning. For, what is this to the purpose? I indeed am
Lord of the world, but the Law of the Sea. If it were spoken of the Law in
general, certainly the Law had Dominion as well upon the main Land, The Emperor
himself was Lord of every kind of Law, even by Land as well as by Sea: And so
truly, the Answer had hitherto, concerned the Petition nothing at all. If you
would understand it of the Rhodian Law, in such a sens (as Alciatus did) that
the Emperor's meaning was that the Law had Dominion over the Sea, what then is
the Consequence? that the matter was to be determined by the Rhodian Law, so
far as it was not opposed by any of the Roman Laws. What, was the Rhodian Law
simply supreme over the Sea, and yet notwithstanding that high Title subject to
restraint by the Roman Laws? These things do not cotton well. Let it be
pointed therefore, either after this manner; (...), I indeed am Lord of the
world. But of this kind, or this is the Law or the Custom of the Sea. Let it
be determined by the Rhodian Law concerning Navigation, so far as none of our
Laws do oppose the same. Or let it be pointed thus; (...) etc. I indeed am
Lord of the world. But let that Law or that Custom of the Sea be judged or
determined by the Rhodian Law concerning Navigation, so far as etc.

The Case was this: Eudemon Asiaticus, born in Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia,
having suffered Shipwreck in the Telian Sea (or the AEgean, which is about
Telos) complain's that his Goods were seized by the Customers of the Cyclades,
petitioning the Emperor for relief, in such a manner as if the Customers had
made an advantage by his misfortune in a most injurious manner. He salute's
him with the style of Lord and Emperor. The Emperor in his Answer readily
owneth himself to be a Lord, and so far a Lord, that he says the whole
Earth, yea, and the world it self was comprised within his Lordship or
Jurisdiction. Therein also he signifie's that it belong's to him to reliev
Petitioners when wrong is don them: But as to what concerned the matter of
complaint, or the Petition about the wrack't Goods that had been seized by the
Customers, that it did not sufficiently appear whether those Customers had don
it wrongfully. Because (if our former reading, or pointing be admitted) in
general, says he, and according to Rule, the Sea-Custom, or that Law of the
Sea which give's wrack't Goods to the Customers, hold's good. For, so these
words (...) [ but that Custom or that Law of this kind belong's to the Sea]
has relation to the thing don by the Customers, as it was in brief set sorth
in the Petition. But in regard that to this Custom or Law of the Sea, there
might, either through some privilege, or because of the quality of the goods, or
some other Custom no less in force, certain Qualifications arise, according to
circumstance, in respect whereof perhaps either the Customers ought, in this
case, to have forborne meddling with the goods, or the Complainant might have a
special exception to privilege his goods from Seizure; therefore he did well
to leav it, being a matter so succinctly and without any addition of
circumstance expressed in the Petition, to be determined by the Naval Laws of
the Rhodians; but yet so far only as the Roman Laws in the mean time were not
contrary thereto. Nor does the sens much differ, if the latter pointing and
translation be admitted: I indeed am Lord of the world, and the Sea as well as
the Land is contained within my Jurisdiction: in both, I willingly right those
that are wronged, according to Law: But truly what the Custom of the Sea may
be in this case, and whether the Complainant ought to be relieved, let it be
determined by the Rhodian Laws, which, by my permission, are in use upon the
Sea, where they are not contrary to our own. But it seems to me not a little
conducing to a confirmation of the foregoing sens, whereby the Maritim Law
touching Wrecks and the Right of the Customers (that is, of the Exchequer,
whose Right is transferr*d into their hands) is, asserted, if it shall be made
appear that such a Law or Custom was in force at that time, which Interpreters
are not wont here to grant. It is indeed certain enough according to the
Imperial Law (as we have it now compiled in the Books of Justinian) that L. 3.
and 21. ff. tit. de adquir. and amittend. possess. l. 44. ff. de adquir. rer.
dom. l. 1. 3. and seqq. ff. tit. de Incendio. l. 1. C de Naufragiis.
Wrecks are reserved to the former Owners, and so that both the Exchequer and
the Customers are thence excluded: Yea, and that the Custom whereby they are
confiscated, is condemned by the received determinations of the Roman-German
Empire, as well as the Canon Law, as we hinted in the former Chapter. But it
is collected by manifest evidences, that the Law or Custom for Confiscation of
Wrecks was in force, in the time of this Emperor Antoninus (I mean Antoninus
Pius) who, as Julius Capitolinus write's did in the establishing of this Law,
make use of Volusius Metianus the Lawyer, out of whose Books the Petition and
Answer here spoken of was transcribed into the Digests Locis superius citatis.
. It is clear, that almost all those Passages that we find in the Digests for
reserving them to the former Owners, were taken out of Paulus, Callistratus,
and Ulpian, who lived many years after this Antoninus. There is somewhat also to
this purpose out of L. 21. ff. tit. de adquir. and amit. possess.. 1.
Priscus Javolenus, who lived at the same time with this Antoninus. But this
Emperor reigned XXII years, and as appears out of Javolenus, he did by Decree
mitigate the rigor of Confiscation in this Case. From which it might easily com
to pass, that under the same Emperor such a Law and Custom as we have
mentioned might be in force, and under the same it might either be abrogated,
or the rigor of it abated. The principal Constitution, which, according to the
L. 1. C de Naufragiis.
Book of Justinian, would not have the Exchequer to interpose in this case, is
by Antonius Contius, a very eminent Lawyer, attributed to the Emperor
Antoninus, according to the Testimony of an ancient Book in Manuscript;
although the name of Constantine be put before those that are published. The
words are these; If at any time a Vessel be driven a Shore by Shipwreck, or if
at any time it run aground, it shall belong to the Owners. My Exchequer shall
not interpose it self. For, what right has the Exchequer by another man's
misfortune, that it should seek after profit upon so sad an occasion? Yea, and
Ulpian shows, that such a kind of Constitution there was also under Adrian,
who was this man's Father by Adoption. It is decreed (so says L. 12. ff. tit*
de Incendio.
Ulpian) that it may be lawful for every man, to recover his losses by
Shipwreck freely; and thus much was ordained by the Emperor Antoninus, with the
Emperor his Father. There are in these very clear Evidences, that about that
time, there was such a Law or Custom of Confiscation, as we have mentioned;
which we know very well was wont to take place often, even contrary to the
Authority of ancient Decrees. For, it may be concluded from the Shipwreck of
Valgius, or Victor, related by Epist. 37. ad Micarium.
Paulinus, that it was in some use even under Theodosius the elder. There are
the like Examples upon the Chronic. Albert. S^adensis, ann. 1112. videsis
Frederic ^inde^ro^. in Glossario* page 1443.
Shore of the Roman-German Empire: And others may be brought, whereas
notwithstanding some Laws were made to the contrary.

Moreover also, the ancient Orators, both Greek and Latin, whilst they allege
Examples about the stating of Questions in pleading, do mingle this very Law or
Custom about Shipwreck with other usual and ancient Customs in the Greek and
Roman Empire, as a thing that was very frequently received. Sopater and (...),
page 107. Venetiis, 1509.
Syrianus in Hermogenem say; The Law is, that spoils which are found, do belong
to him that is General of the Army; In like manner the Law is, that Wrecks do
belong to the Customers. In a tempestuous Sea, spoils are brought into Port.
Hereupon arises a controversy about them, between the Commanders and the
Customers of the Customs. In this case it be^ove's us not to vex our selves in
vain with reading of Laws, but to look into the very nature of things. For, in
truth the Question is, whether the Goods be now to be called Spoils or
Wrecks. In like manner says, Artis Rbetoricae Scholicae, lib. 1. page 46.
edit. Paris. 1599.
Curious Fortunatianus; what is a simple definition? when we define a
particular thing simply. Put case, that Wrecks do belong to the Publicans or
Customers. The body of a certain man that was lost by Shipwreck, clothes and
all, being driven ashore was covered by the Sands. The Customers came and drew
it out. Therefore they are guilty of the violation of Sepulcre. For here the
Question is simply, what it is to violate a Sepulcre.

Moreover, that, Volusius Metianus wrote that Petition and the Answer, appears
in Libris Publicorum ex Lege Rhodia; that is, in his summarie of those Laws
which belong either to the Exchequer or the Customers, wherein also is
contained either the Law or Custom of Confiscation of Wrecks. It suit's very
well with these Particulars, that in that Answer of the Emperor Antoninus those
words, (...), should be rendered, but that Law of the Sea or that Custom of the
Sea, which he meant should be so examined and determined, according to the
Rhodian Laws, that in the mean time, those Rhodian Laws should not be of
force, if any Rescript or any Roman Law were against it. And of what Authority
Adrian's Decree was at that time (whereof Ulpian speak's in the places before
quoted) perhaps it did not sufficiently appear, no not to the Lawyers themselves
without a more curious examination, whose assistance Antoninus made use of in
his Answer. But, that we may at length dispatch this particular; no man
whatso^ver, whether he approve the common Translation, or mine, will (I
suppose) unless he renounce his own reason, conceiv, upon a due consideration
of the whole matter, that any denial is made of the Dominion of the Sea in that
Answer, or that the least Tittle can be found in it against the Dominion
thereof.

An Answer to the Opinions of modern Lawyers, so far as they oppose a Dominion
of the Sea; especially of Fernandus Vasquius, and Hugo Grotius. CHAP. XXVI.
HAving thus refu^ed, or upon good ground removed some Opinions of ancient
Lawyers, which are usually alleged for the mainteining of a perpetual
Community of the Sea; it is no hard matter in like manner to wave the
Authority of those of later time, that oppose a Dominion. For, if we consider
the great number of those, who, whether they comment upon the body of
Justinian, or treat apart of this particular, would not have us to recede from
that natural Community; we shall find plainly that they deal in the same
manner, as they that have pinned their Faith, more then was meet, upon the
sleev of Ulpian, or some other such ancient Author: Unless we conceiv that some
of them did not so much explain the Law in this point, as recite the opinions
of Lawyers, so far as they have been by them delivered: Just in the same
manner, as if a man should so discourse upon Aristotle's Astronomy, or the
opinion of Thales touching the Earth's floating, like a Dish in the Sea, and
that of the Sto^cks of its encompassing the Earth like a Girdle, with that of
the Ancients concerning an extreme heat under the Equinoctial, and other
opinions of that kind, which are rejected and condemned, by the observation
and experience of Posterity; that he might seem not so much to search into
the thing it self, as to represent the person of the Author, thereby to trace
out his meaning, only for the discovering of his opinion. But as the root
being cut, the Tree falls, so the Authority of those ancient Lawyers being
removed out of the way, all the determinations of the modern which are
supported by it, must be extremely weakened.

Now therefore, as to what has been formerly alleged out of Fernandus
Vosquius, it is grounded upon such Arguments as are either manifestly falls, or
impertinent. For, what is this to the purpose? That the Sea, from the beginning
of the world to this present day, is, and ever has been in common, without the
least alteration, as it is generally known. Whereas the quite contrary is most
certainly known to those, who have had any insight into the received Laws and
Customs of Ages and Nations. That is to say, that by most approved Law and
Custom, some Seas have passed into the Dominion and partrimonie, both of Princes
and private persons; as is clearly made manifest out of what has been already
shown you. Moreover also he Illustrium Controvers. lib. 1. cap. 51.. 23. unde
and V. Cl. Hugo Grotius in Mari Libero, cap. 7.
would have prescription to ceas betwixt Foreigners in relation to each other,
and not to take place in the Law of Nations, but in the Civil only; so that by
his Opinion prescription should be of no force between those (as between two
supreme states or Princes) who are not indifferently subject to the Civil Law,
which admit's prescription; then which not any thing can be said or imagined
more absurd. Almost all the principal points of the Intervenient Law of
Nations, being established by long consent of persons using them, do depend
upon prescription or ancient Custom. To say nothing of those Princes, whose
Territories were subject heretofore to the Roman Empire, and who afterward
became absolute within themselves, not only by Arms, but also by prescription
(which is every where admitted among the Laws of Nations;) whence is it that
Prisoners of war are not now made slaves among Christians, unless it be because
that Custom began to grow out of date some Ages since upon a ground of Suarez de
Legibus, lib. 2^.
Christian brotherhood, and by prescription ratified betwixt Nations. Whence is
it that the ransoms of prisoners are to be paid, some to the Princes, and some
to the Persons that take them? As for instance, when the ransom is not above
ten thousand Crowns, it goe's to him that took the Prisoner; when it exceed's,
it is to be paid to the Prince. Because (says In Decistsionibus Burdegal.
decisione 178. number. 4.
Nicolaus Boerius) if it exceed, as when any one has taken a Duke, a Count, a
Baron, or any other great man, then it belong's to the Prince, and so it is
observed in the Kingdoms of France, England and Spain. It has by prescription
of time been observed among Princes; and so it became Law. And truly, to deny a
Title of prescription wholly among Princes, is plainly to abrogate the very
intervenient Laws of Nations. As for those other things mentioned by Vasquius,
concerning Charity and the inexhaustible abundance of the Sea (whereby he
make's a difference betwixt Rivers and Seas) and other things of the like
nature, they have no relation at all to the point of Dominion; as you have been
sufficiently told already.

In the next place, we com to the other, to wit, Hugo Grotius, a man of great
learning, and extraordinary knowledge in things both Divine and Humane; whose
name is very frequent in the mouths of men every where, to maintein a natural
and perpetual Community of the Sea. He has handled that point in two Books;
in his Mare Liberum, and in that excellent work De Jure Belli and pacis. As to
what concern's Mare Liberum, a Book that was written against the Portugals
about trading into the Indies through the vast Atlantic and Southern Ocean; it
contein's indeed such things as have been delivered by ancient Lawyers touching
communiti^ of the Sea; Yea, and disputing for the Profits and Interests of his
Country, he draw's them into his own party; and so endeavor's to prove that
the Sea is not capable of private Dominion. But he has so warily couched this
subject with other things, that whether in this he did hit or miss, the rest
howsoever might serve to assert the point which he was to handle. Moreover, he
discourses about the Title of Discovery, and primarie occupation (pretended
to by the Portugals) and that also which is by Donation from the Pope. And he
seems in a manner, either sometimes to quit that natural and perpetual
Community, which many Civil Lawyers are eager to maintein, and he himself, in
order to his design, endeavored to confirm; or else to confess that it can
hardly be defended. For, concerning those Seas that were enclosed by the
ancient Romans; the nature of the Sea, says Mari libero, cap. 5.
he, differ's from the Shore in this, that the Sea, unless it be in some small
part of it self, is not easily capable of Building or Enclosure. And put case
it were, yet even this could hardly be without the hindrance of common use.
Nevertheless, if any small part of it may be thus possessed, it falls to him
that enter's upon it first by occupation. Now, the difference of a lesser and a
grea^er part, cannot take place (I suppose) in the determining of private
Dominion. But in express words he except's even a Bay or Creek of the Sea. And
a little after, says he, We do not speak here of an I^-land Sea, which in
some places being straightened with Land on every side, exceed's not the breadth
even of a River, yet it is clear that this was it the Roman Lawyers spoke of,
when they set forth those notable determinations against private Avarice. But
the Question, is concerning the Ocean, which Antiquity called immense Infinite,
the Parent or Original of things, confining with the Aer. And afterward he
says, The Controversy is not about a straight or Creek in this Ocean, nor of
so much as is within view when one stand's upon the shore. A little farther
also, speaking of Prescription, he says, Cap. 7.
It is to be added, that their Authority who are of the contrary opinion,
cannot be applied to this Question. For, they speak of the Mediterranean Sea,
we of the Ocean. They of a Creek or Bay, we of the broad and wide Sea, which
differ very much in the point of Occupation. And certainly, there is no man but
must conceiv it a very difficult thing to possess the whole Ocean: Though if it
could be held by occupation, like a narrow Sea, or a Creek, or as the whole
world was said to be possessed at first by ancient Princes, it might even as
well pass into the Dominion or Ownership of him that should enter upon it first
by occupation. Howsoever, there have been Jo. Gryphiander, de Insulis, c. 25..
52.
some others, who by the same Rule distinguish in like manner the inner and
neighboring Seas from the open Sea or main Ocean.

But it is by no means to be omitted, that they, for whose sakes Hugo Grotius
wrote that Book, that is to say, the State^ of Holland, did, not unwillingly,
but rather (as it seems) according to their own hearts desire, give ear to the
condemnation of that Opinion (especially because it was owned by Grotius)
concerning a Community of the Sea and freedom of Fishing therein according to
the Law natural and of Nations, by the Ambassador of James King of great
Britain, in a speech of his delivered openly in Holland; and that others were
gravely admonished from his misfortune, not to maintein the like. Of which
thing Grotius himself bear's vvitness. In Apolegetico eorum qui Hollandiae
praefuerunt ^nte mutationem 1618. p. 387. edit. Heidelberg. cap. 19. page 257.
I have labored, says he, as much as any to maintein the Right of Navigation
to the Indies, and for the preservation of Clothdressing in our Country. But
for the freedom of Fishing at Sea so much, that Carleton the King of great
Britain's Ambassador, being incited by my enemies to speak somewhat in public
against me being at He was imprisoned for having an hand in Barnevel's
business.
that time in Prison, he had no ^ing else to say, but that I had begun to make
some Discourses in defense of that freedom, as a thing grounded upon the Law of
Nations, and Custom, time out of mind; whereas notwithstanding, nothing had
been said or written by me upon that subject, different from those things
which the State's Ambassadors had maintained in Britain in the year MDCX; and
our Ancestors before, even for some Ages past. And yet that Ambassador said,
that others ought to be terrified by the example of my misfortune, from
defending that Opinion. It is true indeed, that persons in power usually take a
liberty to aspers men as they pleas when they are in question: But these
things were not spoken so much against Hugo Grotius, as against that natural
Right of Community at Sea (injuriously pretended to) which many men have
defended more expressly and plainly then himself; but none, with so much
learning and ingenuitie. Nor, did that Speech of the Ambassador, for ought we
know, as things then stood, displeas the States of Holland.

But in his Books De Jure Belli and Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 2.. 2. and 3.
de Jure Belli and Pacis, having indeed set down the reason of the original of
private Dominion to be upon this ground, that those places which became
peculiarly assigned were not sufficient for the maintenance of all men, he
conclude's that the Sea, because of its bigness and inexhaustible abundance,
being sufficient for all, cannot be appropriated to any. He add's other
things also, touching the nature of the Seas not being distinguishable by
Bounds; of both which we have said enough already. But at length he betake's
himself to the received Customs of Nations and speak's more then once
concerning the propriety or private Dominion of the Sea, as of a thing
sometimes to be yielded without Controversy. The Land, says Ibidem.. 13.
he, and Rivers, and any part of the Sea, in case it com under the propriety
of some Nation, ought to be open for such as have need of passage upon just and
necessary occasions. Afterward also, speaking of the Ibid Cap. 3.. 8.
propriety of Rivers, After this example, says he, it seems that even the
Sea may be possessed by him that is Owner of the Land on both sides, although
it lie open either above, as a Creek; or above and below too, as a straight or
narrow Sea: So that it be not so great a part of the Sea, that being compared
with the Lands it cannot seem to be any portion of them. And that which is
lawful for one Prince or People, the same seems lawful also for two or three,
if in the like manner they pleas to enter upon the Sea flowing between. For so,
Rivers that flow between two Nations, have been entered upon by both, and then
divided. He allegeth other things also touching the Right of primarie
occupation by Sea; but so, that for the most part he contein's himself within
Creeks and streights. Ibidem.. 19.
He says, that not by any natural Right or Reason, but by Custom it came to
pass, that the Sea was not appropriated, or that it could not lawfully be
entered upon by Right of Occupation. And that the Custom being changed, if
there were any in the ancient Law that might hinder a private Dominion of the
Sea, the reason of Community must be changed also. But that it has been
sufficiently changed, appears abundantly (if I be not deceived) out of what
we have hitherto shown you. Yea, the very Laws as well The same with Municipal.
Civil as Intervenient of most Nations make abundantly to this purpose, as it
has been proved.

Moreover, that nothing may be wanting to weigh down the Balance, therefore,
besides the opinions of the Civil Lawyers before alleged out of France, Spain,
and Italy, for a private Dominion of the Sea, let this over and above be
added, which is taken out of that sort of Lawyers also, discoursing in general
terms about the Sea. I here give it you as it was composed by a Lawyer, none of
the meanest in the Roman-German Empire, by name De Regalibus, lib. cap 4.. 97.
Regenerus Sixtinus, who was indeed against private Dominion of the Sea. The
matter in question, says he, concerning the Sea and its Shore, is, whether as
Rivers that are navigable, and by which others are made navigable, they may be
reckoned inter Regalia among the Prince's Roialties? (for, whatsoever is
reputed a part of those Regalia or Roialties, is as private or peculiar to
Princes, as that is to subjects which is their own; for which cause the Revenues
of the Exchequer are private after the same manner;) so also, whether the Sea
it self and its Shore, be comprised within those Regalia? Cacheranus, Decis.
155. n. 81. Ferrarius Montanus, de Feud. lib. 5. c. 7. Versic. Tametsi Jus
piscandi.
reckon's the regulation and the very dominion also of the Sea among the
Regalia, nor does he make any difference betwixt the Sea and a public River.
Mynsingerus also, Resp. 1. nu. 162. Decad. 11. says, that the propriety of
the Sea is a part of those Regalia. But Sixtinus himself, discoursing upon this
matter, just as they do that are more addicted than they ought to the words of
Ulpian, and numbering up those Autors that are of the contrary opinion,
conclude's thus, But more true it is that a propriety of the Sea and Shore, is
not by the Common Law to be reckoned among the Regalia. But upon due
consideration of all those particulars, which hitherto have been produced out
of the Customs of so many Ages and Nations, and as well out of the Civil, as
the Common or Intervenient Law of most Nations, no man (I suppose) will
question but that there remain's not either in the nature of the Sea it self,
or in the Law either Divine, Natural, or of Nations, any thing which may so
oppose the private Dominion thereof, that it cannot be admitted by every kind
of Law, even the most approved; and so that any kind of Sea whatsoever may by
any sort of Law whatsoever be capable of private Dominion; which was the thing
I intended to prove.

The End of the first Book.
Touching the DOMINION, OR, Ownership of the Sea. BOOK II.
The order or Method of those things that are to be handled in this Book. The
British Ocean divided into four parts. CHAP. I.
HAving made it evident, in the former Book, that the Sea is capable of private
Dominion as well as the Land, and that by all kinds of Law, whether we
seriously consider the Divine, or Natural, or any Law of Nations whatsoever; it
remain's next that we discourse touching the Dominion of great Britain in the
Sea encompassing it about, and of those large Testimonies whereby it is
asserted and maintained. Wherein this Method is observed, that in the first
place we premise both the distribution and various appellation of the Sea
flowing about it, in order to the Discourse. Then it shall be shown, from all
Antiquity, down to our times without interruption, that those, who by reason
of so frequent alterations of the state of Affairs, have reigned here, whether
Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, and so the following Kings (each
one according to the various latitude of his Empire) have enjoied the Dominion
of that Sea by perpetual occupation, that is to say, by using and enjoying it
as their own after a peculiar manner, as an undoubted portion either of the
whole body of the estate of the British Empire, or of some part thereof,
according to the state and condition of such as have ruled it; or as an
inseparable appendant of this Land. Lastly, that the Kings of Great Britain
have had a peculiar Dominion or propriety over the Sea flowing about it, as a
Bound not bounding their Empire, but (to borrow the Terms used by Surveiors of
Land) as bounded by it; in the same manner as over the Island it self, and the
other neighboring Isles which they possess about it.

The Sea encompassing great Britain, which in general we term the British Sea,
is divided into four parts, according to the four Quarters of the World. On the
West lie's the Vergivian Sea, which also take's the name of the Deucaledonian,
where it washes the Coast of Scotland. And of this Vergivian, wherein Ireland
is situate, the Irish Sea is reckoned to be a part, called in ancient time the
Gildas, Epist. de Excidio Britannia.
Scythian Vale, but now the Channel of St George. So that as well that which
washes the Western Coast of Ireland, as that which flowe's between great
Britain and Ireland, is to be called the British Sea. For, not only this
(which of old was called great Britain, and sometimes simply the Aristides, in
Oratione AEgyptiaca.
Great Island) but also the Isle of Ireland, with the other adjacent Isles,
were termed Britanniae: So that many times Albion and Ireland are equally
called British Isles and Britannides; as you may see in Strabo, Ptolomie,
Marcianus Heracleotes, Pliny, Eustathius upon Dionysius Afer, and others.
Moreover, Ireland is called by Ptolomie Magnae. Constructionis, lib. 2.
(...) little Britain. And, says Ethelward, an ancient Writer, Lib. 4. c. 4.
They go to Ireland, called heretofore Britannides by the great Julius Caesar.
Perhaps he had a more perfect Copy of Julius Caesar's Book: For in none of
his Commentaries which we use, is Ireland called by that name. And it has
been observed by Lips. Epistolicar. quaest. lib. 2. cap. 3. and Elect. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
learned men, that that book has been maimed and altered by one Julius Celsus,
whose name we find now and then in the Manuscript Copies.

Toward the North this Sea is named the Northern, Caledonian, and
Deucaledonian Sea, wherein lie scattered the Orcades Islands, Thule, and
others, which being called the British or Albionian Isles; yea, and Jo.
Tze^zet, Chiliad. 8. cap. 218.
Britannides, gave name to the neighboring Sea. And indeed Thule (which some
would have to be Island; others, and that with most reason, do conceiv it to
be the biggest of the Guil-Camden. in Insul. Brit. p. 850.
Shetland or Zetland Isles, called ^hilensel by the Gaspar. Peucerus, lib. de
Terrae dimensione.
Seamen, and some there are again that think otherwise) was of old not only
termed a British Isle, but also by some expressly placed in Britain it self.
Mahumedes Acharranides an Arabian, called likewise Aracensis and Albategnius, a
famous Mathematician, who lived above nine hundred years ago, says, De
Scientiis Stellarum, lib. cap. 6.
Some observing the breadth of the Earth from the Equinoctial Line toward the
North, have found it to be determined by the Isle Thule which is in Britain,
where the longest day is XX ^ours; that is to say, Ptolomie and his ^ollowers,
who by drawing a Line on the Northside of Thule or the Shetland Isles, through
63 degrees, and a quarter of Northern Latitude, have set it down for the utmost
Bound of the habitable world. Yea, and some have used the name of Thule for
Britain it self or England. In times past, the Emperor of Constantinople was
wont to have trusty Guards called Barrangi, constantly attending his person;
who were taken out of England, as appears out of Hist. Graec. lib. 2.
Nicetas Choniates; and Codinus also who was keeper of the Palace, De Officiis
Constantinop.
write's that they were wont to salute the Emperor with a loud voice (...) in
the English Tongue. But in the Story of Alexiados, lib. 2.
Anna Comnena, the Daughter of Alexius, it is said expressly, that they came
(...) from the Island of Thule. In like manner, all the Islands either known or
heard of in this Northern Sea, were at length called by the name of British;
the utmost Bounds whereof, as also of Thule it self, some of the Ancients would
have to reach unto 67 degrees of Latitude, or thereabout. And Albategnius,
speaking of the Sea as it look's toward Spain, says; De Scientiis Stellarum,
cap. 6.
There are XII British Isles in it toward the North; and beyond these it is
not habitable; and how far it stretches, is unknown.

Upon the Eastern Coast of Britain flow's the German Sea (so called by
Ptolomie, because it lie's before the German Shore.) On the South, flow's that
which is particularly noted by Ptolomie to be the British Sea. But all that
was called also the British Sea, which extend's it self like a half Moon along
the French Shore, through the Bay or Creek of Aquitain, unto the Northern Coast
of Spain. For this we have the Testimony of Mela, who says the Pyrenean
Promontories do butt out into the British Sea. De Situ O^lis, lib. 2. cap 3.
The Pyrenie, says he, run's first from hence into the British Sea; then
turning toward the contiment, it stretches as far as Spain. Yet every man
knowe's it is called likewise either the French, or Contabrian, or the
Aquitanick Sea, from the several Shores which it washes. But so far even the
name both of the British and English Sea was enlarged either by that
extraordinary Command of the people of Britain at Sea, or of such as had
atteined the Rights of Dominion in Great Britain (which is all one to our
purpose.) And it is stretched likewise by some of the Ancients as far as the
Promontorie Nerium, now called Capo di St Maria. The Arabian Geographer says;
Climat. 4. part. 1.
Toward the North, Andaluzia (so the Arabians use to call Spain) is environed
by the Sea of the people of England, who are of the Romans, that is, who are of
the people of Europe; for, it is usual with those Eastern Nations to call the
people of Europe, generally either Romans or French. And then he says, There
are nine Stages from Toledo to St James, which is seated upon the English Sea.
Moreover, he call's the Place, where that City of St James is seated, Climat.
5. part. 1.
a Promontorie of the English Sea; and has diverse other passages of the same
kind. Thus at length great Britain, with the Isles lying about it, and the Sea
embracing it on every side, became as it were one Civil Body, so that the
whole together is comprehended in the name of British or Britannick. Also, this
Sea and Great Britain have indeed given mutual names as it were of Dignity to
each other. That is to say, this Island was called by the Ancients simply In
Catalectis Virgilii, de Sabino.
Insula Caeruli, the Isle of the Sea, as that was called Oceanus Insulae, the
Ocean of the Isle, or the British Sea.

Having made this preparation, then we treat first concerning the Sea-Dominion
of the Britains, before they were reduced under the Roman power; Next, touching
a Dominion of that kind belonging to the Romans while they ruled here,
continually and necessarily accompanying the Soveraigntie of the Island.
Afterward, it is made evident by such Testimonies as are found among the
Ancients, that the English Saxons and others who enjoied the supreme Power in
Britain, before the Norman's Invasion, had such a kind of Dominion. Lastly,
according to the fourfold division of the British Sea, we set forth the
ancient Occupation, together with the long and continued possession of every
Sea in particular, since the Norman's time; whereby the true and lawful
Dominion and Customs of the Sea, which are the subject of our Discourse, may be
drawn down, as it were by a twined thread, until our own times. Moreover, seeing
both the Northern and Western Ocean do stretch to a very great Latitude (this
to America; that not only to Island and the Shores of Groenland, but to parts
utterly unknown) and so it cannot all be called the British Seas; yet because
the Nation of great Britain have very large Rights and Privileges of their own
in both those Seas, even beyond the bounds of the British name, therefore it
was thought fit to touch a little upon these Particulars.

That the ancient Britains, did enjoy and possess the SEA of the same name;
especially the Southern and Eastern part of it, as Lords thereof, together with
the Island, before they were brought under the Roman power. CHAP. II.
IT is true indeed which an eminent man says; Hugo Grotius, de Jure Belli and
Pacis, lib. 2. c. 3.. 11.
That the Sea has been enjoyed by Occupation, not for this reason only,
because men had so enjoied the Land, nor is the Act or intent of the mind
sufficient thereto; but that there is a necessity of some external Act, from
whence this Occupation may be understood. Therefore Arguments are not to be
derived altogether from a bare Occupation or Dominion of Countries, whose
Shores are washed by the Sea: But from such a private or peculiar use or
enjoiment of the Sea, as consist's in a setting forth Ships to Sea, either to
defend or make good the Dominion; in prescribing Rules of Navigation to such as
pass through it; in receiving such Profits and Commodities as are peculiar to
every kind of Sea Dominion whatsoever; and, which is the principal, either in
admitting or excluding others at pleasure. Touching which particular, we shall
make diligent inquiry into those things which concern the Isle of Britain,
through the Ages past, down to the present time.

It is upon good ground concluded, that the most ancient History, whereto any
credit ought to be given about the affair's of Britain, is not elder then the
time of Caius Julius Caesar; the Ages before him being too obscured with
Fables. But at his coming we find clear passages of the Britain's Ownership
and Dominion of the Sea flowing about them, especially of the South and East
part of it, as a perpetual Appendant of the Soveraigntie of the Island. For,
they not only used the Sea as their own at that time for Navigation and
Fishing; but also permitted none besides Merchants to sail unto the Island
without their leav; nor any man at all to view or sound the Ports and
Seacoast. And that the Case stood certainly thus, it is no slight Argument
which we shall insert here out of Caesar himself. But allowance must be given
ever to Arguments and Conjectures, touching times so long since past and gone;
especially when there is a concurrence in the Customs and Testimonies of
following times. And as things being placed at too remote a distance, so that
they cannot be certainly discerned by the eye, are wont to be more surely
discovered by the help of a triangle at hand; So what uncertainty soever may
be in those proofs that are to be brought out of so remote Antiquity, I
question not but it will be made sufficiently manifest by the continued and
more certain usage and Custom of later times, as shall be abundantly made
evident in the following Discourse.

As to what concern's the Britains particular use of Navigation, in that
ancient time, without which an Occupation of this kind cannot be had;
notwithstanding that at Caesar's first arival, they were Caesar de Bello
Gallico, lib. 4. and 5.
terrified with the sight of that unusal kind of long Ships; and though at his
second coming with a multitude of Vessels of all kinds (being Guil.
Pictaviensis, in gestis Willi^lmi Re^is 1.
reinforced to the number of eight hundred; or, as some would have it, to a
thousand) they fled in a great fright from the Shore, not being sufficiently
provided for such a Sea Fight as was then at hand, and which they had never
been acquainted with; nevertheless, it is most certain, that they had Vessels
of their own, wherein they used to coast about the neighboring Sea, and so
entered upon it corporally by Occupation. Mention is made indeed by Writers of
some of their Vessels more notable then the rest, which they frequently used,
being framed with twigs (as the fashion has been in the more ancient Nations)
and covered with Ox-hides after their usual manner. Moreover, Festus Avienus,
speaking of the ancient Inhabitants of the OEstrymnides, or the Islands called
the Andr. Schot. Observat. Historic. lib. 3. 22.. 6.
Sillyes, with the rest lying about, thus expresses himself; -- In Oris
Maritimis.
rei ad miraculum,
Navigia junctis semper aptant pellibus,
Corioque vastum saepe percurrunt Salum.
It Is strange! There Ships they frame with Oxes-hide,
And scout in Leather through the Ocean wide.
And what he says of their continual care of Traffic and Custom of
Navigation, concern's others as well that were under the British Government.
Yet it is not to be conceived, that these twig and Leathern Vessels of the
Britains, were all of them unfit for making war by Sea (according to the manner
of that Age and of the neighboring Nations) nor that they were less fit for
long journies at that time; seeing Hist. Nature lib. 4. c. 16.
Pliny write's expressly, that sometimes they sailed through the Sea in the
space of six days. In like manner we read in the British Henric. Huntingdon.
Hist. lib. 1.
History, that about Caesar's time, Lud King of Britain seized upon many
Islands of the Sea in a way of war, which denote's that he had a very
considerable strength at Sea, and a well accomplished Navy. It is true indeed,
that there were small Vessels among these (as they are no where without them)
which doubtless were unfit to bear the brunt of a Fight or Tempest; that is to
say, such as Caesar made to transport his Soldiers over the River, when he
was straightened by Asranius his Army, as he had been taught (they are his De
Bello Civili. lib. 1. cap. 54. and videsis Solinum, ca. 25.
own words) some years before by the Custom of Britain. The Keels and Ribs were
first made of slight matter. The rest of the bulk of their Vessels, being
wrought together with Twigs, was covered with Hides; which we find mentioned
also by Lucan, Pharsal. 4.
Primum cana salix, mad^facto vimine, parvam
Texitur in puppim, ^aesoque inducta juvenco,
Vectoris patiens, tumidum cireumnatat amnem*
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus
Navigat Oceano. --
-- Translated by my learned friend Mr Thomas May.
Of twigs and willow Board,
They made small Boats covered with Bullocks Hide,
In which they reached the river's farther side.
So sail the Vene^^, if (...) flow,
The Britains sail on their calm Ocean so.
Others there are also that write of these small Vessels. But they are not (I
suppose) at least in that Age, to be called small Ships, which sailed through
the Sea in six days space, nor such as Caesar made only to transport his
Soldiers, and conveied them by Cart above XXII miles, according to his own
Relation. It cannot be doubted therefore, but that the Britains had Vessels
made even of the aforesaid matter, big enough and very fit for service at Sea.
Moreover, there will be very good ground to conceiv out of what we shall
deliver by and by, about the excluding of their Neigbors from the adjacent Sea,
that they were wont to build and set forth Ships of war, of a far more
commodious and solid substance, for the guarding of their Sea and the Isles.
But their use of frequent Fithing (though Dio Cassius, lib. 76.
some write that the more Northerly Britains did never eat fish) may be
collected upon this ground, that the better and more Civil sort of them were
wont to embellish the Hilts of their Swords with teeth of the bigger Fishes. So
says Solinus Polyhist. cap. 25.
, They which endeavor to be neat, do burnish the hilts of their Swords with
the teeth of such great Animals as swim in the Sea, because they are as white
and clear as Ivorie: For, the men take an extraordinary pride in the
brightness of their Arms. Now, I suppose, that without an extraordinary
abundance of such kind of Animals, which could not be caught without great
pains and numbers of Fishermen, there could not have been matter enough of this
kind to serve for the triming of a most warlike Nation; wherein it was a Custom
for the Mother of every manchild to put the first Food that he received into
his mouth, upon the point of its Father's Sword, in token of a warlike
disposition. And the Mothers usual Blessings were to this effect, that their
Sons might die no other death then in War and Arms. I know these words of
Solinus are commonly taken by Writers, as if they had been spoken only of the
Inhabitants of Ireland: wherein, if I understand any thing, they are plainly
mistaken. The words of Solinus in his Chapter concerning Britain, are these;
The extremity of the French Shore had been the utmost bound of the world, did
not the Isle of Britain deserv the name almost of another world. For it is
stretched above 800 miles in length, if so be we measure it as far as the
utmost point in the North of Scotland, where Ulysses once arrived, as appears
by an Altar there with an Inscription upon it in Greek Letters. It is
encompassed with many considerable Islands, whereof Ireland is next to it in
bigness. It is a barbarous Country, by reason of the rude behavior of the
Inhabitants; otherwise, of so rank a pasturage, that unless Cattle be sometimes
driven from the Pastures, they run a hazard by too much feeding. There is no
Serpent to be found, and but few birds; The people are inhospitable and
warlike: And after a victory, they first take a draught of the blood of the
slain, and then besmear their ^s. Right or wrong is all one to them. A woman,
w^^n she bring's forth a male, put's its first food upon her ^nds Sword, and
stealing it into the little ones mouth (...) the very point, she pronounces
her blessing according (...) the Custom of the Nation; with this wish, That he
may die no other death but in War and Arms. They that endevor (...) be neat,
do burnish the Hilts of their Swords, and caetera, (...) it follows above.
He treat's next of some ^nds that lie about it; as Thanet, the Hebrides, ^es,
and Thule; and as to what concern's their manners, he conclude's that Britain
is inhabited in ^t by barbarous people, who from their childhood, by artificial
stripes of diverse forms, imprint the likeness of several living Creatures, up
and down their bodies: As is sufficiently known out of Caesar and other
Writers. But now, if those words which follow that brief description, wherein
the first mention of Ireland is made, were to be understood of the Irish, not
of the people of great Britain, then it would follow there, that Solinus
forgetting what he had proposed in the very entrance of his Discourse, passed
immediately from great Britain unto Ireland and the neighboring Isles; and that
he made not any mention of the Customs of its Inhabitants, besides the
striping of their skins with diverse shapes, and this at the latter end of the
Chapter: which I can not in any case believ. Nor is it agreeable to the scope
of his discourse, that Ireland should be meant in this place, as well as great
Britain. For, of Britain he says, It is encompassed with many considerable
Islands, whereof Ireland is next to it in bigness. It is a barbarous Country,
by reason of the rude behavior of the Inhabitants, etc. Then, this more large
description of its manners and Customs which immediately follows, is no
otherwise joined to the mention of Ireland in the Edition of Delrio, and most
of the rest which we have followed in the place before-alleged. And who sees
not that the beginning of that description, and so what fallows, ought with
much more reason to be referred thus to Britain, concerning which his purpose
is to treat, then to Ireland, whose name is inserted only by the way. Nor does
that hinder at all which we read there about Serpents. I confess it to be
most true indeed, if spoken of Ireland, wherein there is no venomous Creature;
and falls, if of Britain. But yet even this also has been believed of our
Country of Britain, and that in the clearer light of learning in time past; As
appears not only by the Books of Cardan de Subtilitate, wherein he De
Subtilitate, lib. 10.
denies that Britain entertain's any such Creature,) but also out of
Sealiger's Exercitat. 200.
Exercitations upon him, who in like manner affirm's this, and spend's Discourse
to no purpose to find out the reasons why Britain has not any venomous
Creatures: which is strange indeed, since he wrote so eagerly against the
other; yea, and both of them being very famous men, and most expert
Naturalists, lived some time in Britain. But errors of this kind (as we see
also in Solinus concerning Birds and Bees) are not unusual among Writers: And
it was a common course for a Roman Writer to attribute extreme Barbarism (as
Solinus does in this place) to such foreign Nations as were not in amity with
the Romans. Now, as to this passage which is found in some Editions; [ It is
encompassed with many considerable Islands, whereof Ireland is next to it in
bigness, a Edit. Claudi^ Salmasi; Atque ita ^ane Cod. Ms. vet. in Bibliotheca
Cottoniana.
barbarous Country because of the rude behavior of the Inhabitants etc.] as if
the following words did by a continued sens and order relate unto Ireland; it
being indeed contrary to the truth of some ancient Copies and the most
approved Editions, arose (I think) upon this ground, because it was falsely
supposed by the vulgar, that Ireland alone is treated of in some following
Lines. Notwithstanding, even so also those words which follow the word [
bigness] may as well, and ought to refer unto Britain, not unto Ireland.
Moreover also, Tacitus says expressly of the Irish of that Age, In vita* Julii
Agricolae.
The men in their dispositions and habits do not differ much from Britain.

But now, that we may return unto that trimming which was made of Fishes
teeth; Auxiliaries were wont (as Caesar says) to be supplied out of Britain,
in almost all those wars that the Gauls maintained against the Romans. And
therefore it must be said, either that the Britains were for the most part an
abject savage people, yea and a dull slothful Generation (which appears to be
most falls,) or else it must be conceived that the Nation used Fishing very
much, which together with the frequent use of Navigation and Commerce, shows
that they did enter upon the Sea corporally by Occupation. But if to such a
corporal occupation, as this, we add also, that they excluded others from the
Sea, shutting it up in such a manner, that they restrained them at pleasure
from passage and entrance, what hinder's why we may not conclude, that they
acquired a manifest Dominion of their own, both by an Intentional and Corporal
possession? But that the Sea was thus shut up by them, Caesar himself seems to
inform us plainly enough. For, when he, upon his first attempt to cross the
Sea into Britain, made diligent inquiry among the Gauls, touching the Shore
and Situation of the ports, and to this end had summoned the Gallick Merchants
together from all Quarters, he was so deceived in his expectation about this
matter, that he was necessitated to send C. Volusenus before with a long Ship
to sound them, as being wholly unknown: For as much as the Gauls were utterly
ignorant of these Shores, because they were prohibited entrance, and so excluded
from a free use of the Sea. For, he write's expressly, De Bello Gallico, lib. 4.
not a man of them went thither without leav, besides Merchants; nor was any
thing known even to those Merchants, besides the Sea Coast, and those parts
which lay over against Now France.
Gaul or Gallia. Therefore, according to the usual Custom, no man, besides
Merchants, could touch upon the Shore, without leav of the Britains; nor was it
lawful for those Merchants to make a narrow search or pry into such places
ashore as were convenient or inconvenient for landing, or what Havens were fit
to entertain Shipping. For, although he says they knew the Seacoast; yet, as
Caesar affirm's, they were utterly ignorant, what ports were fit to receiv a
number of the greater sort of Ships. And it seems, Merchants were permitted to
visit the Seacoasts, only by Coasting about, and using Commerce in the very
Sea with the Inhabitants of the Island. The old Greek Interpreter of Caesar,
says also upon the place, None else, besides Merchants, were easily admitted
among the Britains: That is to say, neither by Land nor by Sea, whereof they
had (as has been shown) a very frequent use, and from which they excluded all
Foreigners, except Merchants, as from a part of that Territory, whereof they
were Lords in possession. From whence it fallows also, that they also who were
wont to cross the Sea often out of Gaul into Britain, to be trained up in the
learning and discipline of the Druides, could not do it without rendering
themselves liable to punishment for their boldness, if leav were not first had
from the petty Kings or Lords of the Island. From those petty Kings, I mean,
that ruled upon the Seacoast: For, the Britains at that time were not subject
to the Government of a single Person. They were Lords of the Sea, who governed
those Cities or Provinces that lay next to the Sea; Cingetorix, Carvilius,
Taxim^gulus, and Segonax in Kent; others also that ruled over the Regni, the
Belgae, Durotriges, Damnonii, Trinobantes, Iceni, Coritani, (being the people
that inhabited Sussex, Surrie, Hampshire, Dorsetshire, De^on, (...), Essex,
Norfolk, Lincolnshire) and the like. For, even Caesar himself says, the inner
part of the Island was inhabited by such as were said by Tradition to have been
born there; but the Seacoasts by such as had cross't the Sea thither out of
Belgium, to make war and gain booty, who were called all for the most part by
the names of those Cities from whence they came, and having seated themselves
there by force of Arms, they betook themselves to Husbandry. But he according
to that little knowledge he had of a small part of the Island, called those
only maritime Cities, or Provinces, which lie South of the River Thames;
especially Kent, the The Regni were the Inbitants of Surrie, Sussex, and the
Seacoasts of Hampshire.
Regni, and the The Belgae, Inhab^tants o^ Somerset, Wiltshire, and Hampshire.
Belgae. But although the Seacoasts were thus divided at that time into
several Jurisdictions, nevertheless it cannot be doubted, but that they used
to consult together in common against an Fnemie, or to guard the Sea (the
defense whereof belonged to all the Princes bordering upon it;) just after the
same manner as they used to do upon other occasions of war against foreign
Enemies, as you may see in De Bello Gallico, lib. 5.
Caesar, where the principal administration of the Government, with the
business of war, was put into the hands of Cassivellaunus, by a common Council
of the whole British Nation. Nor is that any prejudice against such a Dominion
of the Britains by Sea, which we find in Caesar concerning the Veneti, a
people of Gallia, that were seated at the entrance of the River of Loire; to
wit, that they had a very Caesar de Bello Gallico, lib. 3. cap. 8. and 12.
large command upon the Seacoast of Western Gallia, and that they were better
skilled then any other of their own Countrymen in the Use and Art of
Navigation, and that in the Sea Fight with Decius Brutus, they had Ships made
all of Oak, very well built, and whether you consider their leathern Sails, or
their Iron Chains in stead of Cordage, or their Masts, fitted to bear the brunt
of any assault whatsoever; and that CCXX sail or thereabout in number, went out
of the Haven very well manned and provided with all necessaries for War, to
oppose the Roman Navy. It is very probable, that the most of these were
Auxiliaries fetched by the Veneti out of Britain, or how great soever the
Venetan strength was at Sea, yet that it was not greater then the Britains, may
be collected from the same Author: For, he write's expressly, that Auxilaries
were not only sent for at that time by the Veneti out of Britain, but also
that they had very many Ships wherewith they used to sail into Britain: But
yet, as it has been shown out of him already, no man might sail hand over
head into Britain, or without leav of the Britains. It is not to be doubted
therefore, but that, besides their Twig or leathern Vessels, they had a stout
gallant Navy, which was able even at pleasure to exclude those Ships of the
Veneti that were best armed. Else, how could it be, that none but Merchants
were admitted out of Gaul upon the Seacoast of Britain? Moreover, the whole
Senate of the Veneti having been put to death by Caesar, not a man was found
among those who remained alive after Brutus his Victory, that could discover
(so much as one Port of Britain; as appears out of the same Author. Which how
it might be admitted, I do not at all understand, if the strength of those
Veneti that were wont to sail thither, had been greater then the British, or if
the British had not been much greater then theirs. But the reason why at
Caesar's arrival afterward, no Ship of that kind was found upon the British
Sea or Shore (which De C. Julii Caesaris militia, cap. de praelio Navali.
Peter Ramus wonder's at very much) and why the Roman Writers mention not any
other Ships then such as were made of Twigs, seems evident: For, the Veneti
had got all the Shipping together into one place from all parts, to maintein
the aforesaid fight, as Caesar says expressly. Therefore, if the British
Navy were called forth to their assistance, as it is probable it was, then
questionless it was all lost before Caesar's arrival: For, the whole strength
and Forces of the Veneti perished in that Sea*fight. Moreover also, Peter
Ramus, speaking of that great tempest, whereby Caesar's Ships were scattered up
and down in this Sea with great hazard, says, The Sea raised this Tempest, as
it were revenging the British bounds, and disdaining to bear a new and strange
Lord. As if he had said, that the Bounds of the British Empire were in the
very Sea, and the Sea it self angry, that it should be transferred into the
hands of any other Lord. But as to that which we find in a certain In
Panegyrico Maximiano dicto; si mihi.
Panegyrist, touching the time of Julius Caesar; that Britain was not armed at
that time with any Shipping fit for War by Sea; it was spoken either in a
Rhetorical way only, and highly to magnify that Victory of the Emperor
Constantius Chlorus (whereby having slain C. Allectus, who had invaded Britain,
he reduced the Island together with the Sea, as is shown hereafter) or else it
is to be taken only of the very time of Caesar's arrival. Otherwise, it is
expressly contrary to those reasons here alleged, and grounded upon good
Autors; and therefore not to be admitted for Truth. But after that the Island
was reduced under the Roman power, doubtless the Britains were prohibited from
having any Ships of war, that they might be the better held in obedience.
Which is the reason why Writers afterward make mention of such only as were
made of Twigs.

That the Britains were Lords of the Northern Sea, before they were subdued by
the Romans. And that the Sea and the Land made one entire Body of the British
Empire. CHAP. III.
THat the Britains were Lords also at that time of the Northern, or
Deucalidonian Sea, is a thing proved by sufficient Testimony. They called this
part of the Sea Mario sui secretum, The secret or Closet of their Sea. Tacitus,
relating the Navigation of Julius Agricola into this part, says, the Britains,
as it was understood by the Prisoners, were amazed at the sight of his Navy,
as if upon thi^ opening the Closet or secret part of their Sea, there remained
no farther refuge in case they were overcom. And in that stout Oration of
Galgacus the Caledonian, wherein he encouraged his Soldiers to fight, Tacit.
in vita Agricolae.
Now, says he, the Bound of Britain is laid open. The secret part of their
Sea or their Sea-Territorie in the North, they called their Bound. Moreover,
says the same Galgacus, beyond us there is no Land, and not the least
security at Sea, the Roman Navy being at hand; giving them to understand,
that the Dominion hereof was to be defended as was the Island, as a thing
acquired before. Add also, that among the Writers of that Age, vincula dare
Oceano, and to subdue the Britains, signified one and the same thing. So that
place of Lucan is to be understood, where he reckon's what pompous Shew^ and
Triumphs might have ushered Caesar into Rome, had he returned only with
Conquest over the Gauls and the North; -- Pharsal. 2.
ut vincula Rheno,
Oceanoque daret! celsos ut Gallia currus
Nobilis, and flavis sequeretur mista Britannis.
What Stories had he brought! how the vast Main,
And Rhine, he by his Conquests did restrain!
The noble Gauls and yellow Britains tread
Behind his lofty Chariot, being led!
But for all that, our Sea was not as yet subdued by the Romans, Julius Caesar
only showed the Island, rather then delivered it into the hands of Posterity:
neither was any part of it reduced under the Roman power, before the Emperor
Claudius his time; nor the Soveraigntie of the Sea transferred into the hands
of any other. And although in Augustus his time, Drusus Germanicus Dio Cassius*
lib* 54. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 67. Sueton in Claud. cap. 1.
sailed through that part of the Sea which lie's betwixt the entrance of the
River Rhine and Denmark, and subdued the Fri^slanders, nevertheless, not any
part of the Sea was added by that Victory to the Roman Empire; for, the
Britains held it all in possession, they being not yet fully subdued. Nor is
it unworthie observation here, that C. Caligula, being near Britain, and
coming out of Germany to the Coasts on the other side of our Sea, as if (says
Add Aurel. Vict^rem, ut emendatur ab Andraea Scho^^o, Observat. Historic. lib.
3. ^ap. 21.
Dio) he intended to make war in Britain, and having drawn up his Army, made
ready all his slings and other warlick Engines, and given the signal or word
for Battle, no man knowing or imagining what his intent was, he on a sudden
commanded them to fall a gathering of Cockles, and fill their Laps and Helmets;
Then, saying these Spoils of the Sea belonged to the Capitol and Mount Palatin,
he vaunted as if he had subdued the Ocean it self. At last, for a token or
Trophie of this mock-victorie, he reared a very lofty Tower hard by, out of
which (as if it had been another Pharos was a Tower built in the Island Pharos
by Cleopatra Q. of Egypt, where lights were hung out to guide Mariners by
night.
Pharos) Lights were hung forth by night for the direction of Sea*men in their
Courses; the ruins whereof being not yet wholly demolished, but for the most
part overwhelmed with water near Cattwiick, and very seldom discovered, it is
called by the Hollanders that dwell near it, Britenhuis and L'Huis te Briten,
that is the British House, or the British Tower. Certain it is out of Suetonius,
that a Tower was raised by Caligula in that place: yea, and it is maintained by
diverse learned men, as In Batavia, cap. 16.
Hadrianus Junius the Hollander, In insulis Britann. page 852.
William Camden our Countriman, and Histor. lib. 4. not. 56.
Richardus Vitus, that these were the ruins of the same Tower; though others
deny it, as Ortelius, Gotzius, and De Rheni Alveis, cap. 14. and videsis
Ortelium in Thesaur. Geograph. verb. Brittanni.
Cluverius: And they make a doubt both about the Original of the name, and also
its signification; concerning which we dispute not. But am extremely
mis-taken, if Caligula, by this Action of his, did not so much neglect the
conquest of Britain it self, which he hoped or at least thought of, as seem to
sport himself with the conceit of having found out so compendious a way of
Victory. He carried the matter as if he had had an intent to subdue Britain;
and supposed those Cockles, which he called Spoils of the Sea, to be Tokens
of Sea-Dominion, and as a most sure pledge of the British Empire.

Moreover, it is upon good ground to be conceived, that there was one entire
Territory of the British Empire, made up of the Land or continent of great
Britain, with the Isles lying about it, and the Seas flowing between in their
respective Channels: which may be collected, both from that one single name of
British, comprehending an entire Body of such a kind of Territory (as was
shown you before) and also from hence, that the very Sea it self is, by
Albategnius and some others, described by the name of Britain, in the same
manner as the Island, when as he places Thule, an Isle of the Sea, in
Britain. That is to say, just as Sicily, Corsica, Sardinia, and other Isles in
the Tyrrhen Sea, have L. 9. ff. tit. de Judicus and l. 99. ff. tit. de V. S.
in Law been reckoned parts of Italy, yea, and continent thereto: For, Sicily
(after that the Romans became Lords of the adjoining Sea flowing between) was
called Cicero Action 2. in Verrem, and Florus, lib. 3. cap. 19.
Regio Suburbana, as if it had been part of the Suburbs of Rome; and all these
together with Italy and the Sea it self, made one Body or Province; so all
the British Isles before mentioned, with great Britain and the Seas flowing
about it, might well be termed one Body of Britain or of the British Empire,
forasmuch as the Seas as well as the Isles, passed always into the Dominion of
them that have born Rule within this Nation: From whence perhaps it happened,
that the Romans conceived the British Empire considered apart by it self, to
be of so great a bigness, that Panegyric. Maximiano dict. Si mihi.
Britain did not seem to be comprehended by the Sea, but to comprehend the Sea
it self, as it is expressed by that Panegyrist.

That the Dominion of the British Sea, followed the Conquest of great Britain
it self, under the Emperors Claudius and Domitian. CHAP. IV.
AFter that the more Southerly part of Britain had been brought into subjection
by the Emperor Claudius, and the Isle of Wight taken in by surrender, the
British Sea, as of necessity following the fate of the Island, was together
with it annexed to the Roman Empire; at least so far as it was stretched before
that part of the Isle which was subdued. Whereupon, a Anonymu^, Epigr. vet.
lib. 2. and in Catalect. vet. Poet. lib. 1. tit. 7.
Poet of that Age write's thus to the Emperor Claudius touching the Conquest of
Britain, Ausoniis nunquam tellus violata triumphis,
Icta tuo, Caesar, fulmine procubuit.
Oceanusque tuas ultra se respicit aras;
Qui finis mundo est, non erat Imperio.
That Land where Roman Triumphs never appeared,
Struck by thy lightning, Caesar, down is hurled.
Since thou beyond the Sea have Altars reared,
Thy Empire's bound is larger then the world.
And then he goe's on, Euphrates Ortus, Rhenus recluserat Arctos,
Oceanus medium venit in Imperium.
Euphrates Eastward did thy Empire bound,
And on the North the Rhene,
The Ocean in the middle being placed,
Did lie as part between.
Here he says, that the Sea it self was with Britain subdued to the Roman
Empire; as afterward also he speak's more expressly. At nunc Oceanus geminos
interluit Orbs:
Pars est Imperii, Terminus ante fuit.
But now the Sea betwixt two worlds does flow;
The Empirs part, which was its Bound till now.
The British Sea was the Bound of the Roman Empire between France and Germany.
But immediately after the Conquest of Britain it became a part of the Empire.
He proceed's again thus; Oceanus jam terga dedit; nec pervius ulli
Caesareos fasces, imperiumque tulit.
The Sea's subdued; and though it were till now
Open to none, to Caesar's Sword does Bow.
And then, Illa procul nostro semota, exclusaque caelo
Alluitur nostra victa Britannis aqua.
Though conquered Britain far from us do lie
The water's ours that on the shore flow's by.
He call's the Sea Our water, being no less conquered, than the Island it
self. From whence also he write's, that the Roman Empire was begirt with the
Roman Sea, to wit, after Britain was subdued, Quam pater invictis Nereus
vallaverat undis.
Which the Sea had fortified with unconquered waters.
The Empire of the waters ever followed the Dominion of the Island. And In
Octavia, Act. 1.
Seneca, concerning the same Emperor and this Sea, says; -- paruit liber diu
Oceanus, and recepit invitus rates.
En qui Britannis primus imposuit jugum,
Ignota tantis classibus texit freta.
The long unconquered Sea obedience gave,
And, though unwilling, did his ships receiv.
He first the Britains to the yoke brought down,
And with huge Navies covered Seas unknown.
Moreover, the same Author in Apocolocynthosi; Jussit and ipsum
Nova Romanae
Jura Securis
Tremere Oceanum.
He gave new Laws unto the Sea, as Lord,
And made it treamble at the Roman Sword.
This is plainly to be understood of the British Sea. And Hegisippus an old
Author* (representing the person of King Agrippa speaking to the Emperor
Claudius) says, De Excidio Hierosolymit. lib. 2. cap. 9.
It was more to have passed over the Sea to the Britains, then to have
triumphed over the Britains themselves. But what could they do, when the
Elements were once subdued to the Roman Empire? The Sea taught them to bear the
yoke of servitude, after that it self had upon the arrival of the Roman
Shipping acknowledged an unusual subjection. Hence it was also, (as In Claudio,
cap. 17.
Suetonius says) that in honor of the Prince, the resemblance of a Ship was
fixed upon the top of the imperial Palace. But these particulars relate only
to the more Southerly part of the Sea. Claudius never had any Navy sail to the
North; For, his Conquest reached not so far. But the Romans sailed about the
Island first in the days of Domitian, and then it was, that they first
discovered and subdued that remotest part of the Sea. Tacitus, in the life of
Agricola who was Lieutenant in the Province of Britain, says, the Roman Navy
sailing then the first time (under Domitian) about the Island, affirmed this
Coast of the remotest (Caledonian) Sea to be the Isle of Britain, and he
discovered and subdued also those Isles called the Orcades, which had been
unknown till that time. To the same purpose also speak's Juvenal, -- Satyr. 2.
arma quidem ultra
Littora Juvernae promovimus, and modo captas
Orcadas. --
W' have born our Arms beyond the Irish Main,
And the Orcad's Islands which were lately taken.
Lately taken he says, that is, in the time of Domitian. And therefore it is
a manifest error in Eusebius Hieronymianus, who says, That Claudius added the
Orcades Isles to the Roman Empire: yet he is followed by Orosius, Cassiodorus,
Eutropius, Bid, Nennius, Ethelwerdus, and others. But the contrary is
sufficiently proved out of Tacitus alone, a very grave Author, and one that
lived at the same time. But as to those passages found in Arg^nautic. lib. 1.
Valerius Flaccus, Punic. lib. 1.
Silius Italicus, Sylvarum, lib. 5. in Protreptico ad Crispinum, Vectii Bolani
propraetoris, sub Vitellio, Britanniae filium.
Statius, and others, touching the Caledonians and Thule's being subdued
before the days of Domitian, they are so to be understood only, that we are
to conceiv either after the manner of the Poets, that the name of the more
Northerly Britains, is, by the figure Synecdoche, used for all whatsoever, and
Thule it self for any part of Britain; or else that the Caledonians generally
among the Romans, signified those Britains that were but a little removed from
the Southern Shore. For, even Lib. 3. cap. 10.
Florus write's, that Julius Caesar pursued the Southern Britains into the
Caledonian Woods: That is, plainly, into the Woods of the more Southerly part
of Britain: But when Julius Agricola had, in Domitian's time, reduced the Isle
by force of Arms both by Sea and Land, and sailing round about with a Navy,
had discovered the Caledonian Sea properly so named on every side, which the
Britains (as has been observed already) called the secret part or Closet of
their Sea, and had taken in the Orcades; we ought to conclude that then that
more Northerly Sea also was added to the Roman Empire, and so that the Romans
were Lords over all the British Sea, no otherwise then of the Island: Which
also is confirmed in plain terms by Tacitus, who speaking of Agricola's design
to war upon the Caledonians, says, he first provided a Fleet, which attended
in gallant Equipage to back his Forces; at which time he prosecuted the war at
once both by Sea and Land, and oftentimes in the same Camp, the Horse and Foot
and the Sea-Souldiers mingling mirth and company together, extolled every one
their own hazards and Adventures; one while they boasted the heights of Woods
and Mountains; another while the dangers of Storms and Tempests; some vaunted of
their exploits against the Enemy by Land, others of their Conquests by Sea,
making comparisons, souldier-like, with many bravado's. The Britains also, as
it was understood by the Prisoners, were at their wits end upon the sight of
his Navy, as if upon this opening the Closet or secret part of their Sea,
there remained no farther refuge in case they were overcom. This is a most
clear Testimony touching the Dominion of the British Sea, showing that the
Britains and Caledonians first, and the Romans afterward became Lords thereof.
A doubt has been made by learned men, whether enlargement of Dominion, or
Conquest by Sea, should be read in that place: But both the Readings plainly
point out an acquisition of Dominion. And if you read enlargement of Dominion
by Sea, it signifie's that the Caledonian Sea was then annexed* to the other
Sea, which together with the more Southerly part of the Isle, had by the
Emperor Claudius been added to the Roman Empire. And that the British Sea was
thus reduced at that time under the Roman power, as a perpetual and inseparable
appendant of the Island, was perhaps conceited by Thebaidos, lib. 1.
Papinius, when he thus bespake Domitian, in whose time this Conquest was made
of the Britains; -- maneas hominum contentus habenis,
Undarum Terraeque potens --
Long may thou joy in the Command,
Of men, and sway both Sea and Land.
Truly, a Jac. Chi^^^e^ius, in Epist. Dedicat. ad Libellum, de Portu Iecio.
late Writer also says, that Julius Caesar did assert to himself a Dominion
over British Isle and Sea. And this he says upon very good ground, whilst he
join's the Dominion of both together, as undivided; but upon none at all, when
he ascribe's only a Dominion of the Isle to the same Caesar.

Touching the Dominion of the Romans in the British Sea, as an appendant of the
Island, from the time of Domitian to the Emperor Constantius Chlorus, or
Diocletian. CHAP. V.
BUt the Romans having (as we told you before) subdued both the Island and the
Sea that roll's about it; as they managed the Government by Presidents and
Lieutenants at Land, so by a chief Governor called Archigubernus, with a
numerous Fleet at Sea. For, by that name was the Commander of the British Navy
called (or else Archigubernius, as it is in the Antoninus Augustine. de nominibus
propriis. Pandect. Florentin.
Florentine Pandects) which appears also by the Epistles of Javolenus, a
Lawyer, that lived under the Emperors Adrian and Antoninus Pius. Seius
Saturninus, F. tit. ad Senotusconsult. Trebellian. lib. 46.
says he, Archigubernus ex class Britannica, chief Governor of the British
Navy, left Valerius Maximus, Captain of a three-Oard Gally, his heir or Feofee
in trust by Will; requiring him to yield back the inheritance to his Son Seius
Oceanus, as soon as he should be seventeen years of Age. But the Romans
foreseeing there would be a great deal of trouble and but small benefit, in
subduing and holding the Caledonian Britains, they, leaving the North part of
the Isle to the barbarous people, and retiring toward the South, did so limit
their Land-dominion by rearing up Mounds or Walls before it, that we must of
necessity suppose their Dominion was but small likewise by Sea. Those Mounds
or Fences are frequently mentioned, in the Histories concerning the Emperors
Adrian, Antoninus Pius, and Severus. But by that hence which Adrian made and
Severus repaired, being either a Wall or a Trench drawn through the That is to
say, ^orkshire, (...), B^ (...) (...), (...) est^d, and ^d.
North parts, from the Eastern to the Western Shore, the Territory of the
Romans was confined almost within the same Limits which had bounded the
Conquest of Claudius. But the other, which parted the Island in the middle
between the Estuaries of * ^lotta and * Bodotria, bounded (...) and (...).
the Roman-British Empire under Antoninus Pius, and after that in the time of
Valentinian, Valens, and diverse other Emperors their Successors: So that
perhaps the Romans afterward had not much more of the Northen Sea in their
Dominion, then what washed the Borders of these Territories. But after seius
saturninus, the aforementioned Commander in chief of the British Navy under
Adrian or Antoninus Pius, there is a deep silence among Writers touching the
Sea affairs of Britain, and almost concerning Britain it self, till the days
of Diocletian. And under Diocletian, the British Sea being infested, all along
the Coast of Britanie and Belgium, by the French and Saxons, care was taken to
quiet and secure it by sending forth C. Carausius, a man indeed of mean
parentage, Eutropius, ^ist. 9.
but expert both in Counsel and Action. And Geffrie of Monmouth write's, that
he made suit for this Government of the Sea, and promised to perform so many
and so great matters for the advantage and enlargement of the Commonweal, more
then if the Dominion of Britain should be committed to his charge. Eutropius
also, speaking of the Infesters of the British Sea, over which this man was
made Commander in chief by the Emperor as Lord thereof, so far as he enjoied
the Dominion of Britain, says, that he oftentimes taking many of the
barbarous people, and not delivering the prizes to the Liutenants of the
Province, nor sending them to the Emperors, reserved them to himself; therefore
when it began to be suspected, that he permitted the barbarous people on
purpose to fall upon those that conveyed the Prizes, that by this means he
might enrich himself, a command being given by the Emperor Maximianus to kill
him, he thereupon turned Usurper; and possessed himself of Britain. At length,
having fortified himself both by Sea and Land, he held the joint-Dominion of
both for 7 years, as inseparable; being slain by his companion C. Allectus,
who enjoied the same 3 years as his Successor. And then he also (after he was
brought to so low a pass by the Emperor Constantius Chlorus, who had cros't the
Sea in person on purpose to reduce him, that he knew not what to do, and
seemed to be imprisoned rather then fortified by the Sea, as says the
Panegyric. Si mihi Caesar.
Author of the Panegyric to Maximianus) was at length, by the valor and conduct
of the Pretorian prefect Asclepiodotus, overcom and slain: And thus both the
Isle and the Sea together was recovered after ten years time, so far as it
flowed before that part which was under the Roman Jurisdiction. Nor was it upon
any other ground, then this ten years usurpation in Britain, that those Coins
were made with the Inscriptions both of C. Carausius and C. Allectus ^MP. C.
CARAUSIUS P. F. AUG. and ^MP. C. ALLECTUS. P. F. AUG. But we have placed here
a counterfeit of that brass Coin which was made by Allectus, that you may
observe the three-oar'd Gally on the revers of it, with the Inscription VIRTUS
AUGUSTA, whereby I conceiv he gave to understand, that this Empire of Britain
chiefly depended upon the Dominion of the Sea flowing about it. Touching the
recovery of Britain thus together with the Sea, there is also a notable
Testimony in that Panegyric, whereof some conceiv Mamertinus, others Eumenius
to be the Author. O how great is this Victory (says he) and worthy of
innumerable Triumphs! whereby Britain is recovered, whereby the French are
utterly destroyed, whereby moreover those many Nations that were engaged in the
same mischievous conspiracy, are forced to a necessity of yielding; And
lastly, for our perpetual peace, the Seas are scoured and rid of Pirates! Glory
then, O unconquerable Caesar (he speak's to Constantius Chlorus, the
aforementioned Emperor) that thou have purchased another world, and added to the
Empire an Element greater then all the Earth, by restoring the glory of the
Roman power by Sea. He says a greater Element, in a rhetorical flourish, in
stead of the British Sea, which he thus expressly affirm's to have been
recovered together with Britain it self. It is observable also, that the Romans
always so spoke concerning the Empires, of Britain, and of the Sea called by
its name, as inseparable. Making mention likewise of that pest, which consumed
only within the bowels of Britain, or of the imminent danger then attending
the Roman Empire, It w^^ bounded (says he) with no mountain or river, which
was not secured by Guards at the place appointed. But although we shared in
your valor and selicitie, yet like a Ship it was exposed in every place ^o
great terrors, wheresoever the Seas are spread or the winds do blow. And a
little after, says he, By this Victory not only your Britain is redeemed
from vass^lage, but security of traffic restored to all Nations, which might
have run as great hazard at Sea in time of war, as they gain benefit by peace.
He expressly call's the Government also of Allectus a Force of Rebellion by
Sed, and it appears, says he, that the ^ery Is^^ of Britain, which had
harbor'd a treason of so long continuance, is m^de sensible of your Victory by
being restored unto it self. Together with the Conquest of Britain it self,
all the strength of Shipping was lost, which, upon Allectus his usurpation in
Britain, must needs as a perpetual Concomitant of the Island, have been of very
great use against the Emperors. But the Panegyrist goe's on* In other parts
indeed some things remain which ye may acquire, as you pleas or see cause; but
beyond the Sea what was left except only Britain? which you have so recovered,
that those Nations also which border upon that Island, are wholly at your
devotion. There is no occasion to proceed farther, except you design (that
which is impossible in nature) to find out the bounds of the ^ea. What Nations
are those here that border upon Britain, except those that lie Beyond Sea,
whose Shores were conjoined with the British Empire as it was then accounted,
or with the Sea-bounds of the Province of Britain, that is, in the British Sea?
As the French, and the other adjoining Nations. For, it is not to be
understood of those little Isles which are next to us; their Inhabitants not
being worthy the repute of Nations. Not was it agreeable to the Majesty of a
Panegyric, to aggrand^se the Emperor's glory by such petty things. But by
and by in the following Chapters we show* that those Nations adjoining to the
bounds of Britain, or whose bounds are united to the body of the British
Empire, were those very Inhabitants of the continent of France, whose Shores
are contiguous to the bounds of the British Sea, which in a civil sens was
accounted a part of the Isle it self, or Territory united therewith. For, the
Panegyrist proceed's thus to the explanation of those words: By the means of
thy Victories, O Constantius, most victorious Emperor, all those parts that lay
waste and desolate about the Country of Amiens, and Beauvois, and Troies, and
Langres, now thrives again by the labor of the rude Husbandman. In like manner,
Carolus Sigonius, out of the same Author, says, De ^cciden^ali imperto, lib. 1.
By this victory not only Britain it self was recovered, but the Coasts of
France also, Spain, Italy, and Africa, were freed from the perpetual
incursions of Pirates. That is to say, by the taking in of Britain, with the
Sea, and the naval strength that was its Guard, not only the neighboring but
even the remotest Provinces bordering on the Sea, were made secure and free,
seeing they were all threatened by this war or rather rebellion by Sea, which
might have raged and wandered as wide as the Ocean, and into the streights of
the Mediterranean Sea; which are indeed the very words of the Panegyric. So
that you see, to restore or reduce Britain, to recover it, to suppress a
Sea-Rebellion here, and to scour this Sea, were esteemed under such a
consideration, that, the one being don, the other followed, by reason of the
inseparable Dominion of the British Isle and Sea together. And when Britain was
lost, the Naval Forces of the Romans, whereby the Sea was guarded, were lost in
like manner. But when it was reduced, even these also were reduced together
with the Sea.

Touching the Dominion of the Southern and Eastern Sea, as an Appendant of the
British Empire, from the time of Constantine the Great till the Romans quitted
the Island. That it was all under the Command of the Count of the Saxon Shore
throughout Britain. Also concerning the British Navy, under the Romans. CHAP.
VI.
IN the following Age, the manner of Administration of Government being
changed about the time of Constantine; as the Pretorian Prefect of Gallia had a
Deputy under him to order the Civil affairs of Britain; and as the Magister
Militum occidentis; He that commanded the Militia of the West had an Officer
under him called Comes Britanniarum, Count of Britain, and Dux Britanniarum,
Duke of Britain, who commanded Forces for defense of the Midland parts of the
Isle: So the said Magister Militum was wont at his own discretion to appoint
some person of eminent dignity to be his Substitute, by the Title of Notitia
Dignitatum Imperii Occidenti^.
Count of the Saxon Shore throughout Britain, with Command over the Garrisons
and Fortifications placed upon the South and Eastern Shore of Britain, and over
all that Sea which flow's between France, Spain, Holland, Denmark, and great
Britain, as over a part or bound, not bounding, but bounded by the British
Empire, no otherwise then as a distinct Province of the same Empire; as most
eminently appears by the very Title of the Dignity or Command. For, the Duke
of Britain, and Count of Britain, were as the Count of Tingitania, the Count of
Spain, and very many others of the like kind, denominated from those Lands and
Countries over which they were put in Command. And such of these Dignities or
Commands as were for defense of any Frontiers or Borders, took name ever from
the Borders. Upon which account it is, that among the Imperial Offices or
Commands we meet with Comes limitis AEgypti, the Count of the Egyptian Border,
No itia Pig^^^. Orient.
the Prefect of Euphrates, the Inscript. Gruter. fol. 1090. 21. Ibid fol 490.
Prefect of the Bank of Danubius, and the S^don^us Apollinaris in ^ane^yric.
Authemio
Count of Danubius, and those L. 9. C. Theodos. lib. 7. tit. 1.
to whom the Charge and Defense of the river Rhine was committed: For these
Rivers were Bounds or Limits of the Roman Empire. And it is the opinion of
Marquard. Freher. Orig. Palatin. part. 1. cap. 3.
learned men upon good ground, that the Counts or Dukes of Rhine are meant by
those words concerning the River of Rhine. But as the Northern and Eastern
Bounds of the Roman Empire were denoted by the names of the Rivers Danubius,
Rhine, and Euphrates, so clearly also the name or Limit of the Saxon Shore
pointed out the Eastern and more Southerly bound of the British Empire, or that
which was reduced by the name of British, as an entire body, under the Roman
power. So that whatsoever reached as far as that Limit, lay properly under the
command of the Count of the Saxon Shore in Britain, as Governor of the
Sea-Territorie, as an appendant of the Isle. But that Territory or Province
subject to this particular Dignity or Command, reached through the very
British Sea, from the Shore of Britain to the Shores on the other side of the
Sea, or those which lie over against ou^ Isle of Britain, in France, the Low
Countries, Holland, and Denmark; so that what Sea or Islands soever lay between
near the British Shore, appertained all to the Command of the aforesaid Co^^^t,
as to the charge of an Admiral belonging to a Province or Territory.

But that those opposite Shores were all known at that time by the name of the
Saxon Shore, is evident both out of Ptolomie, Marcianus Heracleotes, Zosimus,
and the like, and also out of the Register or Breviarie of the Dignities of
both the Empires. For, Geograph. lib. 2.
Ptolomie and In Peripl^.
Marcianus place the Saxons at the entrance of the River Elbe which lie's near
Cimbrica Chersonesus or the West-part of the Kingdom of Denmark, as also in
Cimbrica Chersonesus it self. And that Shore took the name of Saxon from their
first and most ancient habitations. But being the most eminent people of
Germany, they by driving out their Neighbors enlarged their habitations
Southward, all along the Batavian, Belgic, and French Shore. From whence
Histor. lib 3.
Zosimus write's, that about Constantine's time, they possessed themselves of
the Hollander's Country at the entrance of Rhine. And because they seated
themselves near these Shores, and by their frequent excursions thence infested
both Sea and Land all along the Seacoast of France, it was called not only
the Shore of those Saxons, or the Eastern bound of the British Empire; but also
that Belgic and the whole Gallicane Shore, which lie's over against our Isle
of Britain, was termed the Saxon Shore, and the Saxon limit or Border. Touching
the Shore of Denmark and Holland, where they had more enlarged their
habitations, the point is manifest by what we have already mentioned. And the
Register or Breviarie of the Imperial Dignities speak's expressly in like
manner touching the Belgic and Gallican Shores. For, in it we find, that
under the charge or command of the Duke of the Tract of Bre^aign in France.
Aremorica (which reaches from the Western Gallia, or from the mouth of the
River of Loire to the entrance of Seine) there was a Tribune of the first new
band of Soldiers of Armonica and Grammona upon the Saxon Shore. There, the
French Shore lying over against our South part of Britain, is called in plain
terms the Saxon Shore. For, in the same Breviarie, under the Command of the
Duke of that part of Belgica secunda, (which reaches from the entrance of the
River Seine to that of the River Maze, and comprehend's Flanders) we find
Equites Dalmatas Marcis in littore Saxonico, Dalmatian Horsemen at the Borders
on the Saxon Shore. And the Saxon Shore is evidently set forth in the signal
Ornaments of the same Duke. So all that which reaches from Cimbrica
Chersonesus or the West-part of Denmark to the Western Gallia, is expressly
called in the Breviarie the Saxon Shore, which happened not only from the
frequent depredations made then upon that Seacoast by the Saxons, but by their
Excursions and often acquiring of habitations all along that Shore. So that
nothing could have been more plainly spoken, to show that the whole Sea lying
between, was possessed at that time, as an appendant of the Island, by the
Lords of the South-part of ^he Isle; except a man should suppose, that those
places which are extended from the proper habitation of a Count, Duke, or any
other Officer in Command for defense of Borders, unto those Borders from whence
he was denominated or entitled, were not subject either to his Jurisdiction or
to the Dominion of those that bestowed the Command upon him. Which truly is
absurd, and wholly different from the usual administration of the Roman Empire.
But that Count of the Saxon Shore in Britain, had his proper places of abode
only in Britain; and, under the Romans, that Magistrate belonged only to
Britain. Nor were those Saxons any other then Enemies. And their Shore, so far
as they possessed it, was an Enemies Country. Moreover, this Count had Houses,
at his own pleasure, in either of those Garrisons, Towns, or nine Maritim
Cities, which being seated upon the Shores of Sussex, Kent, Essex, and
Norfolk, he always had them painted out near the Sea, and added to his grand
Commission, for the signal Ornaments of his Office. The names of these Cities
were Othona, Dubris, Lemmanis, Branodunum, Garianum, Regulbis, Rittupae,
Anderidos (or Anderida) and Portus Adurni. Besides, both the Deputy of
Britain, and the Duke, and Count of Britain, had their signal Ornaments given
in like manner with their Commands. This had a pourtraicture of the Isle it
self, drawn in the form of a Castle fortified in the Sea. The Duke had certain
Midland Towns. And the Deputy those five Provinces into which the Isle was
divided by the Romans; as you may see in the Breviarie of Dignities. Where the
aforementioned Arms of the Count of the Saxon Shore are represented after this
manner, to wit, the very same that was wont to be drawn in his Commission. But
as to what concern's those Maritim Cities or Towns in these Ornaments; if we
may believ (...). Camden in Sussexia, Cantio, Essexia, Norfolcia.
such as are well verst in the affairs of Britain, Othona was seated upon the
Shore of the Trinobantes which lie's before Dengy hundred in the County of
Essex. Dubris is the same with Dover. Lemannis was placed about Hith on the
Kentish Shore. Branodunum was no other but Branchester upon the Shore of
Norfolk near the washes between that and Lincolnshire. Garianum was either
Gernemutha, or some place near it. Regulbium or Regulbis was situate upon the
Northen Coast of Kent, being called now Reculver. Rittupis or Rhutupiae was
seated in Kent at the entrance of the River Wantsum; Perhaps it was the same
with Richborow. Anderidos stood upon the Bank of the River Rothermouth, and is
now called Newenden. And lastly, Portus Adurni became a little Village, now
called Aldrington, near Shoreham upon the Coast of Sussex. But the very Form
and Fashion of the Book pictured in those Ornaments, which in the Manuscript
Copies of the Breviarie (as Pancirollus says) is of a purple Ad Notitiam
Dignatum occidentis, cap. 72.
or yellowish color, did signify the Instructions of the Emperor. And if we
may believ Pancirollus, the Letters inscribed upon it signified in the Notaries
language, Felix Liber injunctus Notariis laterculi, continens Mandata ordine
Principis, seu Primicerii, who was the principal Notarie. The very same
Inscription is sometimes found in the Ornaments of other Governors. But who they
were which the Count of the Saxon Shore throughout Britain had under his own
Command, for defense of the aforementioned Dominion by Sea, and what manner of
Officers, is expressed in the Breviarie after this manner;

Sub dispositione viri spectabilis, Comitis litoris Saxonici, per Britanniam.
Praepositus numeri Fortensium, Othonae. Praepositus Militum Tangricanorum,
Dubris. Praepositus numeri Turnacensium, Lemannis. Praepositus equitum
Dalmatarum Branodunensis, Branoduno. Praepositus equitum Stablesiani
Garrianensis, Gariann^n^. Tribunus cohortis primae Vetasiorum, Regulbio.
Praepositus Legionis II Aug. Rutupis. Praepositus numeri Abuleorum, Anderidae.
Praepositus numeri Exploratorum portu Adurni.
Officium autem habet idem Vir Spectabilis Comes, hoc modo.
Principem ex officio Magistri Praesentalium a part peditum. Numerarios duos,
ut supra, ex officio supradicto. Cornicularium; Adjutorem; Subadjuvam;
Regendarium; Exceptores; Singulares, and reliquos Officiales.
The names both of the Soldiers and Officers are to be found in Pancirollus;
this being no place for a Commentary, to explain them to such Readers as are
not well vers't in the Story of the Roman Empire in its declining state. But I
shall give an account of their numbers, as it is cast up by Pancirollus, that
you may the better know what those Garrisons were which were employed at that
time, to guard this Seaappendant of the British Empire. Ad notitiam dignit*
Occid. cap. 72.
Under this Count (says he) was one Legion or Regiment perhaps of a thousand
Foot, and six Companies; perhaps one thousand two hundred, and two Troops of
Horse almost two hundred. The whole amount's to almost two thousand two hundred
Foot, and two hundred Horse. For, Lib. de Thema^ibus.
Constantinus Porphyrogenneta write's, that at this time there was a Regiment
of a thousand Foot. So he. Now, the Ships and Soldiers belonging to the Navy
are not mentioned in the Breviarie, at least not by this name. But as there
were Troops of Horse disposed against the Landings of Enemies (in case any
should happen;) so there is no reason to doubt, but that the Soldiers
belonging to the Navy were listed in the Companies and Legion. After which
manner likewise Flavius Vegetius says, that De Re militari, lib. 4. cap. 21.
at Misenus (now called Monte Miseno) and at Ravenna, several of the Roman
Legions continued with the Fleets, that they might not be at too great a
distance from guarding the City, and that they might as occasion required, be
transported in Shipping to all parts of the world. He reckon's those Soldiers
belonging to the Navy, among the Regiments of Foot, or under their Name. But
in the mean time it is to be observed, that the Lipsius de Magnitudine Romana,
lib. 11. cap. 5. sed and vide Jul. Caes. Bullinger. de Imperio Romano, lib 6.
cap. 6.
most diligent Inquirers into the Roman affairs, whilst they Treat of their
Fleets, do besides that of Ravenna and De quibus item Tacitus lib. 4. Annal.
Miseno (of which this latter lay nearest to France, Spain, Barbary, Africa,
Egypt, Sardinia, and Sicily; the other was wont to sail in a direct course to
Epirus, Macedonia, Achaia, Propontis, Pontus, the East, Crete, and Cyprus;
which are Vegetius his own words; both of them being first instituted and
appointed there by Suetoniu^ in August^, cap. 49.
Augustus Caesar, to guard the Provinces bordering upon the Sea, with the Sea
it self, and called also Pretorian, for the more reputation) they do (I say)
for the most part add only two more that were set forth to Sea, but of less
account. The one was placed at Friuli, in that part of France called Tacit.
Annal. 4. Strabo, lib. 4.
Gallia Narbonensis, The other in the very Joseph. Halos. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Euxin Sea. And it is for the most part agreed, that the Romans had only four
constant or more eminent Fleets at Sea. They do indeed rightly add also some
other constant Fleets which belonged to Rivers, as that of the Rhine, and
Danubius, of which sort also may be reckoned that belonging to Mysia called
Maesica, and another also belonging to Pannonia or Hungary called Pannonica,
and others of the like nature. But among these there were certain Barks or
nimble Vessels call Cod. Theodos. 7. tit. 17. de Lusor^^s Danub^^.
Lusoriae or Lusuriae (in English we may call them Flie-boats) wherein they
scouted out as far as the remotest Banks and the Castles built upon them, to
guard the Bounds of the Empire. And under this notion the name of these
Lusoriae, was restored by ^. 4. C^de Offic. Milit. Ju^ic. and l. 4. C^de Offic.
Magistri Officiorum.
Claudius Salmasius, according to two Laws in the In notis ad Flavium vopiscum,
page 475.
Code of Justinian which were before sufficiently corrupted. And as in Rivers
they for the most part used these Lusoriae or lesser Vessels; so in the Sea
they made use of Pinnaces, the least whereof had single Ranges of Ores; those
that were a little bigger, double Ranges; and those of a middle size or
proportion had three or four, and sometimes five, as we are told by Vegetius.
But now, notwithstanding that those diligent Inquirers into the defenses and
Fortifications of all sorts belonging to the old Roman Empire, are wont, when
they mention any Navy of Britain, to speak slightly or in terms obscure
enough; this nevertheless is most certain, that there was among the standing
Guards of the Romans, not only a particular Fleet of Pinnaces or light Vessels
belonging to Britain, wherewith they guarded this Sea whereof we speak, as an
appendant of the Isle of great Britain; but also that they had not any other
Navy in the outer Sea, or any Shipping at all upon the Seacoasts of Spain or
France, without the Mediterranean Sea. At least, it is no where mentioned by
ancient Writers. Which is no slight Testimony, that the Sea and the Isle
together made up one entire Body of the British Empire, as it was then
devolved unto the Romans, and also that such a Custom was at that time in force
upon the Sea, so far as it belonged to Britain, that the like could no where
be found at least in the more Western parts, there being no other
Sea-Province among them. There is (besides that ordinary instance Chap. V.
alleged before out of the L. 46. ff. tit. ad Senatus consul. Trebellianic.
Digests of the Civil Law, concerning Seius Saturninus Commander in chief of
the British Navy under Antoninus or Adrian the Emperor) express mention made
also by Historiar. lib. 4.
Tacitus of this British Navy, where speaking of the affairs of Cerealis and
Civilis under the Emperor Vespasian, Another fear, says he, had possessed the
mind of Civilis, lest the fourteenth Legion being assisted by the Navy of
Britain, should infest the Hollanders.
Batavians upon the Seacoast. And therefore that learned man Lipsius had no
ground to conceiv that this was part of that Fleet of small Vessels called
Lusoriae, whereby the River Rhine was guarded; to wit, that part of it which
guarded the entrance of the River near that place called the British Tower,
whereof we spoke before in the third chapter of this book. For, it was even
the whole Navy of Britain, and that which belonged wholly to the Sea, not
having any relation at all to the Rivers. And that it belonged to the Sea,
appears not only by the thing it self, but also by what has been already
spoken, and what shall be said in the next chapter touching the Count of the
Saxon Shore; so far at least as we may be able to judge of the former (as we
often use to do) by the latter course that was taken in ordering affairs, and
disposing of Guards and Garrisons. But that this was a complete Navy, and had
a peculiar Prefect or Commander in chief over it, is testified by a fragment of
an ancient Inscription in a Palace at Rome, called Palatium Capranicense, Janus
Gru^^^ us, p. 493.
wherewith truly that name of Prefect of the British Navy was utterly lost.
Yet it appears thereby that such a Prefecture or Command there was, not of the
least note among those ancient dignities of the Romans, and that it was
committed to the same man that was likewise Prefect of the two Navies called
Classis Moesica and Pannonica; as also Proconsul and President of the Alps,
Sub-Prefect of the Pretorian Navy, and Tribune of the sixteenth Legion. The
form of the Inscription stand's thus................................. XVI.

Moreover, it is no light Argument to prove, that in those times there was
frequent use of that Navy in guarding the British Sea, as a part of the
Province of Britain (as has been already said;) and that upon this ground,
because the very name of those scouting Skiphs which were joined with the bigger
sort of Pinnaces or light Vessels upon the Guard, was borrowed by the Romans in
their writings from the Britains, after the same manner as they took the name
of those Boats called Copuli from the Germans, which Videsis Lips. ad Tacit.
Hist. lib. 5. number. 36. and de Magnitud. Romana, lib. 1. cap. 5.
were likewise of that sort of Vessels called Lusoriae, ^^ploied in guarding
the Rhine. The Romans observed that the Britains called those Vessels Pyctas.
Flavius Vegetius, who in the Reign of the two Valentinians, composed his Books
concerning the affairs of the Roman Militia, out of the Commentaries of Cato,
Celsus, Trajan, and Hadrian, says, De re Militari, lib. 4. cap. 37.
scouting Skiphs are joined with the bigger sort of Pinnaces, that had about
twenty Rowers in all; which Skiphs the Britains call Pyctas. In these they use
to make assaults and in^^^es upon a sudden, and sometimes intercept the
provision and supplies of their Enemies Shipping, and by diligent watchfulness
discover their approaches or counsels. And that their Scouts may not be
discovered by their whiteness, they die the Sai^s and Tackling with a bluish
color, like the waves of the Sea. They besmear them also with wax as they use
to trim their Ships. Yea, and the Seaman or Soldiers put on clothes of the
same bluish color, so that they are the less discernable as they scout about,
not only by night, but also by day. So far he. And the printed Books do
generally render these Vessels here Pictas or Pyctas. But some Manuscripts, that
have been used by Godesca^cus Stewechius, call them Picatas; and also we read
Picatas in two Manuscripts belonging to the King's Library at St James, as I
was informed by that learned man and my very good friend Patrick Young; from
whence it is, that, in the old French translations of Vegetius, it is rendered
one while Picaces, another Pigaces. But says Stewechius upon the
aforementioned place, It seems more probable to me that they were called
Pincas, Pinks; For, even at this very day there is such a kind of Vessel known
both in Britain and Holland. And the ordinary name is Even Pincke. But
howso^ver the case has stood, here we see in Vegetius, that the scouting
Vessels were employed together with the Pinnaces, and their name so observed
according to the British language of that Age, that there appears not the
least ground to doubt, but that Vegetius was of opinion also, that those
Vessels were either constantly or very frequently in use among the Britains,
and in the Sea-Province of Britain. So, it is acknowledged by every man, that
those words Gesum a Javelin, Trimarcia Three Horses, Essedum a Chariot,
Petoritum a Wagon of four Wheels, Braccae Breeches, and others of that kind,
borrowed either from the Gauls or Britains, and received by the Romans into
their own Language, do sufficiently set forth the use of those things which
they signify either in Gaul or Britain. Moreover also, Vegetius in this place
so join's together the manner of guarding the Sea and the subtle sleights they
made use of for that purpose, that there is no reason at all why we should not
believ, that they were then used by the British Soldiers which served at Sea,
or who had command over the small Vessels called Pyctae or Picatae in those
Guards by Sea.

An Examination of the Opinion of some learned men, who would have the Saxon
Shore, from whence that Count or Commander of the Sea throughout Britain had
his Title, to be the British Shore on this side of the Sea; which is plainly
proved to be falls. CHAP. VII.
BUt truly certain learned men, either treating (as it often falls out) of some
other subject, or else being too careless in considering the matter, do
otherwise interpret that Dignity or Command of the Count of the Saxon Shore
throughout Britain; And in such a manner, that if their determination were to
be admitted, the proof or testimony before-alleged touching a Joint-Dominion
of the Sea together with the Isle, in that Command under the Romans, would
plainly fall to the Ground. These men are of two different Opinions. Some would
have the Shore of Britain it self or that which is on this side the Sea, to be
called only the Saxon, in the naming of this Dignity or Command: Others would
have it to be both the Shore of Britain, and all that Shore also which
^etche's a compass like a half Moon from the Western part of Denmark as far as
the West of France, and lie's over against Britain. But truly, they are both
extremely mistaken.

The Author of the former opinion is Guidus Ad Notitiam Dignit. Occid. cap. 72.
Pancirollus, who write's that the Shore or Limit within the Island was so
denominated from those Saxons, who were called in hither by Vortigern King of
the South part of Britain, to his assistance. The Saxons (says he) possessed
part of the Island, from whence a limit or bound that was reared over against
them by one that was made Count, was called Saxon. Then which nothing could
have been more ignorantly spoken, if you reflect either upon the thing it self,
or the course of times. For, omitting this, that in the Breviarie of Dignities
it self no mention is made at all of a Saxon Bound or Limit, but of a Shore
(notwithstanding that Pancirollus in the Inscription of his Commentary
entitle's the Commander that we speak of, Count of the Saxon Limit throughout
Britain) the Breviarie was written in the Reign of Theodosius the younger, or in
the year CCCCX, as learned men do commonly agree. That is to say, of that time,
the frame of the whole Government of the Empire, both in the East and West,
having been overgrown long before, was with very great diligence digested as
it were into one entire Book of Offices and Dignities. But the Saxons, as most
of the Ancients tell us, came first into Britain in the year of our Lord
CCCCXLIX. But suppose, what upon better consideration may perhaps be allowed,
that their arrival ought to be reckoned in the Apud Guil. Camden. in ^^it.
page 95. and vide Tho. Lidi^^ in Temp. Emendat. page 238.
year CCCCXXVIII. that is in the XXI year of the Reign of Theodosius the
younger, yet in the mean time this is most certain (which is here in the first
place to be observed) that Britain was utterly abandoned by the Roman
Governors, before they were called in. Doubtless they were as In Epist. de
Excidio Britanniae.*
Gildas write's brought in by King Vortigern to drive back the Northern
Nations, the Picts, and Scots; not the Romans, who had bidden farwell to the
Island. Neither had tho Romans or their Dukes or Counts any thing at all to do
within the Isle with the Saxons. So that it must needs be gross ignorance in
Histories, and in the Calculation of time, to set down any Saxon Limit or Saxon
Shore in the Island it self, whilst the Roman Empire flourished, or had any
kind of Authority in this Country. Nothing therefore is more evident then
that the Shore lying on the other side of the Sea over against the South and
Eastern Coast of Britain, as we described it before, was called the Saxon in
that Dignity or Command. Moreover also that Count of the Saxon Shore
throughout Britain was far more ancient, and known by an addition thereto of
the Sea Coast or of that Sea which was comprehended in the Roman jurisdiction
throughout Britain, or in the body of the British Province. For, Nectaridius
was invested with this Dignity in the time of Valentinian the first, or about
the year of our Lord CCCLXX; as is testified by Histor. lib. 27.
Ammianus Marcellinus, where he says, information was given by a Messenger,
that Britain was reduced to an extreme low condition by a barbarous
Conspiracy; and that Nectaridius Count of the Seacoast, and Buchobaudes the
Duke were surprised unawares by the craft of the Enemy. Nor is any difference
to be imagined between the Dignity of the Count of the Saxon Shore, in this
sens, throughout Britain, and that which the forenamed C. Carausius received
at Boloigne in France, to scour the Sea along the Coast of Gaul was by the
Romans divided into four parts; of which Belgica was one, containing Picardie
part of Champagne, Burgundy, with so much of Germany and the Netherlands as
lie's on this side the Rhine.
Belgica and Bretaigne, which (as Eutropius and Orosius say) was infested by
the French and Saxons. For, that even he also had places of strength and
Mansion-houses belonging to his Government in Britain, appears sufficiently
upon this ground; that when Maximianus had given order to put him to death, he
immediately usurped in Britain, and reigned after for the space of seven years.
So, the Governor here or Count of the Seacoast, and the Count of the Saxon
Shore, being ever accounted the same, held the sole Government of Britain and
the Sea belonging thereto. To whom also we may add, as differing only in
name, not really, the Prefect or Admiral of the British Navy, under the
Romans, mentioned in the former chapter. We confess indeed, that the Duke of
Belgica secunda and the Duke of the Country of Aremorica beforementioned, was
by the very nature of his place to afford supplies for the guarding the Sea
and this Shore beyond Sea: For, they also, as has been observed, had Garrisons
seated upon this Saxon Shore. But it is chiefly to be observed here, that
these beyond-Sea-Dukes were according to the nature of their Dignity or Office
to take care, not so much of the Shore or Sea, as the Continent; and that from
thence, as you see, they took their names. This from the Tract of Praeter
Notitiam and Pancirollum, vide Joseph. Scaligerum ad Ausonium, lib. 2. cap. 6.
Aremorica and Ebroicae now called E^reux.
Ebroicae; which being extended through five Provinces, Aquitania prima and
secunda, Senonia, Lugdunensis secunda and Tertia (which comprehend's the lesser
Britain and Normandy) contained almost all that which was commonly called by
the name of Gallia; But the other had its name from Belgica secunda. Nor was
there one Count or Duke of the Midland Country, and another of the Shore or
Seacoast in Gaul. But in Britain, the Counts or Dukes of the midland parts and
the Count of the Seacoast or Saxon Shore, had distinct charges, distinct
Forces, and the signal Ornaments of their Offices wholly distinct. Just as if
the Roman Emperors would have it signified by this very thing, that as the Sea
it self did by particular Right always belong unto the Empire of the Island,
so the Sea-affairs and their protection to the British Command and Jurisdiction
of the Saxon Shore or that Beyond Sea; but that both the Dukes of the Continent
or main Land of Gaul lying right before it, were bound so to send relief, as
occasion should require, against the Saxon Invasions, that in the mean time the
sole care of the sea it self, as a particular Province given in charge, lay
upon him that was made Count of the Saxon shore throughout Britain. And if any
Duke or Count either of Aremorica or Belgica secunda, was called by the name of
Duke or Count of the Saxon shore (as Jos. Scaliger. in lect. Auson. lib. 2.
cap. 6. and Guil. Camden. in Brit. page 96.
some would have) it was don doutless upon this ground, because the Saxon shore,
lying over against us on the other side of the sea, did bound their
Land-Government; as it did also the Sea-Jurisdiction of the aforesaid Count
throughout Britain.

Nor indeed is that other Opinion any more to be admitted, which says; That
our British shore was at that time called Saxon, as well as that which lie's
over against it or beyond sea: And so that the name in the Dignity or Office
of the aforesaid Count, does signify the shore on this side the sea. Of this
Opinion is In Thesaur. Geograph.
Abrahamus Ortelius; I conceiv, says he, that the Saxon shore, in the
Breviarie, does signify the Eastern part of Kent, seeing that Dubris, Rutupis,
and other Towns of Kent are described therein. He has indeed very eminent men
for his Followers, In Kent, page 230.
William Camden, Cosmograph. part. 2. lib. 3. cap. 31.
Paulus Merula, German. Antiqua, lib. 1. cap. 18.
Philippus Cluverius, and some others. And they add this for a reason; because
both shores, as well this on this side the sea, as that on the other side, took
name from the Saxons that used Piracie in very great numbers upon this sea: And
therefore that the British shore also is set forth in the Title of that Count.
But this is a manifest Error. We know indeed the Writers of that time do say,
that both the shore over against ours and the neighboring Sea, was infested by
the frequent depredations and Invasions of the Saxons, and (to say nothing of
their ancient habitations upon the Danish and Batavian shore) that they settled
their abode there: And therefore that it was thence named Saxon, is in a manner
out of doubt among learned men. But concerning the Saxons thus frequenting that
shore, there are testimonies beyond all exception. Panegyric. ad Avitum August
seu Carm. 7. Add eum lib. 8. Epist. 6.
Sidonius Apollinaris, of the Coast of Bretaign in France, says, Quin and
Aremoricus piratam Saxona tractus
Sperabat. --
-- hope then revived the Bretaigns stout,
The Saxon Pirates being driven out.
And Histor. lib. 27.
Ammianus Marcellinus says, that under the Emperors Valentinian and Valens,
the Coasts of Gallia were wasted by the Franks and Saxons bordering upon them,
every one making excursions as far as they could by Land or Sea, with grievous
plunderings, firings, and slaughters of such as they took Prisoners. Add
moreover, that Saxones Baiocassini, the Saxons of Baieux are mentioned by Lib.
5. cap. 26.
Gregory of Tours, as ancient Inhabitants upon the shore of Aremorica: So that
the reason is evident, why the name of Saxon was given to the shore over
against ours. But truly we read not any where, that the Saxons had at that
time either settled themselves upon the shores of Britain, or were wont to sail
thither, or that they infested any thing of Britain, except the Sea. Nor do we
find so much as the least sign or evidence, whereby to conjecture that the
name of Saxon was either due or given at that time to the shore of Britain. And
it was never heard (I suppose) that any shores, which have been of any account
or fame, should have taken a new name either from a mere passage, or a bare
infesting of the Sea by such as sail along the Coast, without landing.
Especially, in the setting forth of a Dignity or Command, which cannot be
don, except an addition be made in the mean time of the name of the Land,
whereto the shore it self did indeed belong. Run over all the Dignities which
are recorded in the Breviarie of both Empires, you will find none set forth by
any other denomination, then either from a Bound or Frontier it self, as those
that were appointed for the defense of Bounds and Frontiers; or else from a more
known and certain name of some Province, as the rest. We know indeed, there
was a Haven among the The Morini were a people of Belgica, bordering upon the
Sea, and seated between Artois and Picardie.
Morini, which lay over against us on the other side of the Sea, called
heretofore British, or, as Not Histor. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Pliny name's it, Portum Morinorum Britannicum the British Port of the Morini:
which name Jacob Chiffletius, in Portu Iccio, cap. 6.
learned men would have to be derived from our Britain. But (supposing it to
be Calais) they would have it so denominated because of Julius Caesar's
crossing over from that Port into Britain. Now, it does not appear by the like,
or any equivalent reason, that the shore, which belong's to Britain, was called
Saxon, in the time of that Dignity whereof we speak. And doubtless, there is
no improbabilitie in reason, that the British Port of the Morini, might in the
days of Pliny, or of the Emperor Vespasian (which is all one) be denominated
from the riding of such Ships as were employed under the Romans to guard the
neighboring Sea, so far as it was British, and subject to the Lievtenancie or
Jurisdiction of Britain. But truly if the very shore of the Island had been
meant in the Dignity of that Count, whereof we speak, whose Office was to
guard the Bounds, how compendiously might he have been called Count of the
British shore? For, what ground had there been for so singular a circumlocution
of words, as Count of the Saxon shore throughout Britain, if it had been the
very shore of Britain? It is plain, that as in the Imperial Offices there was
an Officer called Magister Militum per Orientem, Magister Militum per Thracias,
per Illyricum, peditum per Occidentem; a Master *or Commander) of the Militia
throughout the East, a Master of the Militia over all Thrace, Illyricum, and of
the Jnfantrie or Foot throughout the West; ^o also that this Officer was called
Count throughout Britain. That is to say, every where throughout Britain, so
far as it belonged to his particular charge, that is, as far as was necessary
to guard the bounds of the Empire, placed next to the Saxon shore, or that
which is on the other side of the Sea. And so the words, whereby this Dignity
is expressed, are to be distinguished that he may be plainly called Count
throughout Britain; but of the Saxon shore, or Bound Beyond Sea, upon the same
account as other Dukes or Counts in Command over Bounds or Frontiers were wont
to be entitled. And there is an eminent example to this purpose in the Bound
of the German Empire, which was held by the Romans. It was the River Rhine. The
Guard of the Rhine was wont to be committed to a Lieutenant or Governor; as
appears by Zonaras, Tom. 2. alit.
Historians, and out of L. 9. C. Theodos. lib. 7. tit. 1.
the Code of Theodosius. But yet the Bank on the other side of Rhine was the
bound of this Government, and so of the German Empire, not the Bank on this
side. From whence also Posthianius being entrusted with this charge under the
Emperor Gallienus, is by the Emperor Valerian, in an Epistle of his sent unto
the French, called Duke of the Bound beyond Rhine; as we learn out of In
trigenta Tyrannis.
Trebellius Pollio. Also, the Bound beyond Rhine, that is, the Bank beyond the
Rhine is recorded by In Tacito Augusto.
Flavius Vopis^us. Thus, usually the Proconsul of Asia had the whole straight
of Hellespont under his Command as far as the shores of Europe, as is shown in
the fourteenth chapter. And certainly, the Count of the Saxon shore throughoue
Britain, is after the same manner to be reckoned Count of the shore or bound
on the other side of the Sea, and so of the whole Sea flowing between, as an
established Officer in the Government of Britain. And this also is very much
confirmed out of another place of the very Breviarie of Dignities, where
mention is made of the several Jurisdictions of those Counts which were under
the Command of that eminent person entitled Magister Militum Praesentalis. In
the printed Copies of the Breviarie, we read it thus;

Sub dispositione viri illustris Magistri peditum Praesentalis, Comites Militum
infra-scriptorum;
Italiae, Africae, Tingitaniae, Tractus Argentoratensis, Britanniarum, Litoris
Saxonici per Britannias.
In the Edition both of Alciatus and Pancirollus, it is read, as we render it
here, Militum infrascriptorum. Yet doubless the word Limitum Limits ought to
be put in stead of Militum Soldiers: For it is not agreeable to the nature of
the Imperial Offices, that the word Militum should be admitted in that place.
And it appears most certain by those things which follow, that Italy, Africa,
the Tract of Strasburgh, Britain, and the Saxon Shore, had their respective
Counts, as Comites Limitum Counts of the Limits or Bounds, no otherwise than
those Territories which are added there next after; as Mauritania Caesariensis,
Tripolis, and other Provinces in like manner, besides Britain, which had their
respective Dukes likewise, by the name of Duces Limitum Dukes of the Limits.
But now both the Duke and Count of Britain had the very Shore of the Island for
their Limit or Bound. And therefore seeing it is so, what Limit had that Count
relation to, was who entitled of the Saxon Shore throughout Britain, if you
will not yield that he took his Title from the Shore lying over against us?
There was a Duke, and a Count of Britain (simply so called) besides a Vicarius
or Deputy of Britain, who governed the whole Island according to their several
charges; and we find in the Breviarie, that both the Duke and the Count and
the Deputy had for the signal Ornaments of their Offices, the whole Island,
but in several Forms, encompassed with the Sea; even as the Count of the Saxon
Shore had the Isle in like manner, encompassed with Sea-Towns or Ports. Also,
it is manifest by those which are set forth in the Breviarie of Dignities, that
the Deputy, Duke, and Count of Britain had the very Territories of the Isle
for the Limits of their Government, and so also that they extended themselves to
the very Shores every where throughout the Jurisdiction of the Romans. So that
also both the Duke and Count of Britain ought to have been entitled in like
manner from the Saxon Shore as from a Limit or Bound, if the Shore of Britain
had been called by this name at that time. For, we plainly see, that the
Islands of Britain themselves, so far as the Isles about it are comprehended
under that name, are expressly described under the notion of Limits, in that
Catologue of Dignities relating to Limits, which we have cited out of the
Breviarie. Therefore from hence also it appears, that Limit which was the
Saxon Shore is to be reckoned without the Island, and so in the Shore over
against us or which lie's beyond Sea, according to that which we proved before
in our Discourse. Nor truly, is it to be passed over without observation,
seeing there are very many signal Ornaments of Sea-Provinces and Jurisdictions,
as well as of those within Land, pictured in the Breviarie, and this according
to the Form or Fashion received from those that had the supreme power, by the
principal Secretaries or others who drew up the Commissions; That not only no
Ornaments at all are found in the Dignities of the West, wherein there is any
Tract of the Sea, except those which belong to the Government of Jurisdiction
of Britain, nor indeed in the Dignities of the East, except the Counts of Egypt
and Isauria (both whose Ornaments had a Sea-border about them;) but also that
the Sea was ever placed round about in the signal Ornaments belonging to the
four several Governments or Jurisdictions of Britain, that is to say, that of
the Deputy, the Duke, the Count, and lastly, the Count of the Saxon Shore
throughout Britain. Just as if the Romans would have had it signified thereby,
that no other Province at all, nor any other Jurisdiction whatsoever had either
a Dominion of the Sea so amply conjoined, mingled, and as it were incorporated
within it self, or a protection and command of a Territory by Sea.

Some Evidences concerning the Soveraigntie and inseparable Dominion of the Isle
of Britain and the Sea belonging thereto, out of Claudian, and certain Coins of
the Emperor Antoninus Pius. CHAP. VIII.
FRom the Dominion of the British Sea, as being continually united to the
Island, or an inseparable concomitant thereof (as has been already shown you)
proceeded, as it is very probable, those passages of Claudian, who seldom
speak's of the quieting, recovering, or subduing of Britain, but he add's also
the Sea it self, as that which did necessarily accompany it. Speaking in honor
of the Emperor Honorius, touching the original of his Family, which was out of
Spain, he says, -- Panegyri^, de 4. Consulatu Honorii
Cunabula fovit
Oceanus. Terrae dominos pelagique futuros
Immenso decuit rerum de Principe nasci.
Hinc processit avus. --
The Ocean rock't his Cradle. It became
Those who as Lords both Sea and Land should claim,
Of nature's mighty Prince derived to be.
From hence thy Grandsire had his pedigree.
That is to say, Theodosius, who after that Nectaridius Count of the Saxon
Shore, as is before related, and Buchobaudes Duke of the Island, were slain,
was sent into Britain by the Emperor Valentinian the first. But that which
Claudian says, concerning the affairs and actions of this Theodosius, relate's
very little to the Sea, save that he call's him Conqueror of the British
Shore, and adds that having vanquished the Saxon's, he washed the Orcades with
their Blood. Which is plainly to be understood of his scouring the British Sea
that was wont to be infested by the Saxons. A little after also, concerning
Theodosius the son of this man, or the Father of Honorius, that is, the Emperor
Theodosius the first, he says, Sed lauds genitor long transgressus avitas
Subdidit Oceanum sceptris. --
His Father did his Grandsir's worth transcend*
And brought the Ocean under his command.
Which without question relate's to the recoverie of Britain, after the
slaughter of Maximus at Aquileia, who had tyrannically usurped the Soveraigntie
of the Island. The same Author writing also in commendation of Flavius Stilico
Tutor or Guardian of Honorius the younger, bring's in Britain her self saying,
Stilico has so fortified and secured me, -- De laudibus Stili^onis. lib. 2.
ne Litore toto
Prospicerem dubiis venturum Saxona ventis,
I could not see throughout the Shore, or stand
One Saxon ready to cross over and land.
That is to say; he rendered the Sea quiet and secure for me, he has guarded
and kept it for me; he has driven away the Saxons from the use of it. In
another place also, he bring's in the Goddess Piety speaking to Honorius, --
In Eutropium, lib. 1.
Quantum, te principe, possim,
Non longinqua docent: domito quod Saxone Tethys
Mitior, aut fracto secura Britannia Picto.
What progress I may make, during thy Reign,
Some late examples tell us; since the Main,
The Saxon being tamed, is grown more sure,
And Britain from the conquered Picts secure.
The Protection of the Sea is in this place plainly conjoined with that of the
Island. The same Poet also, to Manlius Theodorus the Consul, says, -- Hispana
tibi Germanaque Tethys
Paruit, and nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
Spanish and German Seas both yield to thee,
And Britain severed from our world by Sea.
There was the same Dominion, the same Victory, and the same Guardianship or
Protection always both of the British Tethys, or Sea, and the Isle it self.
For, the German Tethys in this place is that part of the British Sea which
flow's between Belgium, Holland, Frisland, the Jutae, and Britain.

And hereunto the form of the Province (which under the more ancient. Emperors
was governed by a President) as it is found among the Roman Coins. It is
represented in the Figure of a woman, clothed with a Pall or linen frock,
sitting sometimes upon rocks, sometimes upon a Globe in the Sea, with a Military
Ensign, a Spear, and a Buckler; as you have here pictured according the
brass-Coins of Antoninus Pius.

Thus they signified, that Britain had Dominion over the Sea about it, and the
Roman Emperor over Britain. But we find not any form of this kind before the
time of Seius Saturninus, the first Prefect (whereof any mention is made by the
Ancients) or Commander in chief of the British Navy, or of those Naval Forces,
wherewith the Romans guarded the British Sea. He held this Command under
Adrian, or Antoninus Pius, as has been said already. And from hence it is
that Claudian afterward, when he make's a Representation of Britain (being
in a special manner, called the Isle of the Sea) he clothe's her with a
leathern garment so made as it were like waves of water, and died of a bluish
color, that it wholly resembled the waves of the Sea; and he put's the Sea
under her feet. Thus he indeed describe's her, when he bring's in several
Provinces, as Spain, Britain, and Africa demanding the Consulship for Stilico
at Rome. And he mention's Britain in a peculiar manner. De laudibus
Stiliconis, lib. 2.
Inde Caledonio velata Britannia Monstro,
Ferro picta genas; cujus vestigia verrit
Caerulus, Oceanique aestum mentitur amictus.
Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus, inquit,
Munivit Stilico; totam cum Scotus Hibernam
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Tethys.
In monstrous habit Caledonian-wise
Then Britain came; her cheeks had a disguis
Of diverse colors, which, to pleas the view,
In various forms an Iron Pencil drew;
Just at her heels the Sea it self did glide,
Her Mantle mock*t the working of the Tide.
Me and my Neighbors Stilico did save,
Quoth she, and bravely rescue from the grave;
When as the Scot moved Ireland to rebel,
And Pirates made great Tethys signifie's the Sea.
Tethys foam and swell.


A little before, there he set's forth the hair of Spain with leaves of the
Palm Tree, and her mantle imbroider'd with the River Tagus; And Africa with
ears of Corn and Ivorie, after the same manner as it was stamped in the Coins of
Antoninus Pius. Both these are washed, and almost encompassed by the Sea. But
the Poet then understood, that the Dominion of the adjacent Sea belonged to
neither of them, as it did to Britain: But as the Palms, and the River Tagus
were peculiar to Spain; as the ears of Corn and Ivorie to Africa; so he would
have it understood, that the Province of Britain had the Sea of the same name
peculiar thereunto. But yet it is to be conceived, that the Dominion of the
Romans was so limited in this Sea, according to their possession of the shore,
that they had little power in that part of the British Sea, which bordered upon
the shores of those British Nations, who were not under their obedience: This
is to be taken chiefly of the Irish Sea, and the rest that lie's North-west.
For when the Roman Empire began to decline, not only Ireland, but the Isle of
Man also, and the other Isles of the Western Sea, and a great portion of the
more Northerly part of Britain, was possessed by the Scots and Picts; so that
we have sufficient ground to conceiv, that they also had an ancient Dominion
of their own in the neighboring Sea. And so let this serve to have been spoken
concerning the Empire or Dominion of the British Sea, in the time of the
Romans, as that which by ancient Right no less belonged to the Isle and the
Empire thereof, then either a Wall or Suburbs unto a City. Now we pass on to
the times of their Successors.

Touching the Dominion of the British Sea, after that the Inhabitants had freed
themselves from the Roman power. CHAP. IX.
WHen the Roman Empire was declining under the Emperors Theo^os^us the younger,
and Honorius, and Valentinian the third, insomuch that they had not Forces
sufficient to guard the City it self, then the Britains freed themselves wholly
from their Power, about CCCCLXXX. years after the arrival of Julius Caesar, or
in the year of our Lord CCCCXXX. That is to say, as Histor. li. 6.
Zosimus write's, They cast off the Roman Government, and settled a Common weal
after their own liking. Then the Dominion of the Sea, as well as of that part
of the Isle which was possessed before by the Romans, returned unto the Natives.
In the mean time, the Saxons inhabiting the shore over against us, hanker'd
after it, who being a people extremely given to Piracie, the Romans were wont
to appoint an Officer to drive them away, called the Count of the Saxon shore
throughout Britain, as has been shown at large already. Nevertheless being
sent for by the Southern Britains destitute of all manner of succor from the
Romans, to assist them against the Scots and Picts, they at length got the
whole Power here into their own hands. And so in that famous Heptarchie of
theirs, the Kingdom was ever accounted of in such a manner, that even before
the time of King Egbert, it was under the Power of some one King, which all the
rest acknowledged as Supreme. These were driven out by the Danes; but
questionless, they both had a Dominion by Sea conjoined with that upon Land.
For it is not to be imagined, that they who were so accustomed to the Sea, and
to whom before that time -- Sidon. Apollinaris Panegyric. ad Avitum Aug. seu
Carm. 7.
pelle salum sulcare Britannum
Ludus, and assuto glaucum mare findere lembo;
It was a sport to cut the British Main
In Leathern Barks, and plow the azure plain.
And whose Rowers or Mariners had you beheld, you would have thought you had
seen so many Arch-Pirats, as Li. 8. Epist. 6.
Sidonius Apo^tinaris says of the Saxons; And who did not only know, but were
familiarly acquainted with the dangers of the Sea; The very same thing is to
be said of the Danes also and Normans, (for, these names being prom^scuously
used, do very often signify the same Nation) as is sufficiently attested by
Regino, Dudo, the Monk of Malmsburie, Abbo, Gemiticensis, and others; It is
not, I say, to be imagined, that these people having gotten possession either
of the Isle or shore, to which the Soveraigntie of the Sea did so nearly
appertein, should not in like manner have possessed the Sea, also lying before
it, by right of Dominion. Nor is it perhaps altogether unworthie to be
considered, that these Saxons had so great, so singular and admirable an
acquaintance with the Sea and Seaaffairs, that by an exquisite observation of
the Tides and The Ebbs they called Ledones or Lidunas; the Tides they called
Malin^s.
Ebbings of the Sea, they were wont to reckon their months and years, yea, and
to frame Computations of years thereby. A thing not to be paralleled by any
example. And as the more ancient Husbandmen used to reckon days and hours by
the time of yoking their Oxen; and as most other Nations measured years and
days by the course of the Sun and Moon, (as things most to be regarded before
others, in the improvement and various use of those Lands that they possessed):
so these alone distinguished their yearly and monthly periods, by the mere
reciprocal motion of the Sea, which they were so well acquainted with, and by
its various beating upon the shore in Ebbing and Flowing, as that whereof
special notice was to be taken in that kind of life. Moreover, as they say
the Egyptians derived their skill in Geometry from the measuring of their
Fields, after the Inundation of their River Nilus; so it is not to be doubted,
but that our Saxons derived this strange artifice, never heard of in any other
Country, from a very frequent use and perpetual observation of the Sea.
Concerning which, he that would know more, may peruse our venerable De Natura
Rerum, cap. 28.
Bid first, and after him De emendatione temp. lib. 2. page 162. and in
Appendice ad conjectan. in Varronem page 181. Edit. 1581.
Joseph Scaliger, De Doctrina temp. li. 2. cap. 70.
Dionysius Petavius, and Olaus In Fastis Dani^is, lib. 1. cap. 11.
Wormius. But that the whole Nation was very much accustomed to Sea-affairs,
and not only those that bordered upon the Sea, may be collected from thence,
that otherwise it would hardly be believed, that the Nation it self could have
kept an account of Times and Seasons, by the various course of the Sea: For it
could not possibly be, but that such an account would have been either
useless, or too difficult for those that were not used to the Sea. Yea, without
doubt it was no small cause of their calling the Saxons into the Island, that
they being most expert Seamen, might guard the Sea, which having been newly
deserted by the Roman Navy, lay open at that time to the Invasions of Enemies
on every side. Thus much indeed seems to be signified by Lib. 1.
Ethelwerd an ancient Writer, speaking of their coming hither. In those days,
(says he) the Britains heard that the Saxon was a Nation active in Piracie or
Navigation, and strong in all kinds of Necessaries for war, throughout all
the Seacoast from the River Rhine, as far as the City Donia, which is now
commonly called Danemare. To them therefore they sent Messengers with
extraordinary great Presents, desiring aid, promising them a peaceable
intercours and amity. Thus they that were wont before to infest the British
Sea, are invited to its protection and amity. And truly, that the Britains had
a very special care at that time of the Sea-affairs, and so of the Guardianship
of their Sea, appears from thence; that in the story of Britain, we read
concerning the most famous King Arthur and Prince Malgo, that by many bloody
Battles they either added or recovered six Comprovincial Isles of the Sea,
(which are the very words of Geofferie of Monmouth) that is to say, Ireland,
and Shetland, Gotland, the Orcades, Norwey, and By Dacia, here is meant Denmark.
Dacia, to their Dominion; yea, and Groenland, and all the other Countries and
Islands of the Eastern Sea as far as Russia, and many other Islands beyond Vide
Guil. Lambard de pris^is Anglorum legibus page 137.
Scantia, even to the farthest part of the North. And that which we find in
Nennius the Scholar of Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Elvodugus, is to be understood of this time, to wit, that Cuneda the
Grandfather of Magolcunus a Prince of the Southern Britains, drove the Scots
out of all the Countries and Islands of Britain. Certainly, for the effecting
of this, it was necessary there should be a very great strength in shipping,
for the guard and security of the neighboring Sea.

It is proved, both from the very beginning of the Saxons Reign, as also from
their Forces and Victories by Sea, that the English-Saxons, and Danes, who
ruled the South-part of Britain, had Dominion over the Sea. CHAP. X.
BEsides what has been already said of the Saxons, during their Reign here,
there are also in ancient Records diverse other particulars, which more plainly
show, that both they and the Danes had Dominion over the Sea, whilst they
reigned in Britain. Those particulars I divide into four parts: The first
respect's the Original of the most Potent Kingdom of the Saxons. The second,
the Naval Forces and Victories of the following time. The third, the Tributes
and Duties of fiduciarie Clients or Vassals belonging to the maintenance of the
Navy. Lastly, several plain and most evident testimonies concerning the
Soveraigntie of the English-Saxon Kings at that time over the Sea.

In the first beginning of the Reign of the English-Saxons, I reckon both the
coming of Octha and Ebissa, invited hither by Vortigern upon the persuasion of
Hengist, as also the arrival of King AElla in Sussex. He possessed himself of
the Sea, and the Southern shores; they of the Northern. Concerning the Naval
Forces of Octha and Ebissa, Ms. in bibliotheca Cottoniana, and partim apud
Camden. in Britan. p. 91.
Nennius the Scholar of El. vodugus, who usually passes up and down also by
the name of Gildas, speak's thus; They sailing about the Picts, with forty
Vessels, called These Ciulae were full of Saxons, which Sidonius call's Pandos
Myoparones, Vessels built somewhat long and narrow.
Ciulae, spoiled the Orcade's Islands, and came and possessed very many Isles
and Regions beyond Mare ^resicum, (meaning Bodotria or the Firth of Edinburgh)
which lie's between us and the Scots, even as far as the Borders of the Picts.
And Hengist by degrees drew those Ciulae to himself, so that they forsook the
Isles which they inhabited. It could hardly be more plainly expressed, that
the Nation being accustomed to the Affairs of Navigation and Wars by Sea,
having thus gotten a great part of Britain, did first secure that inseparable
Appendant of the Island or the Sea; having brought over a numerous Force, for
the accomplishment of this design. As to what concern's AElla, they write, that
he with his sons Cissa and Cimenus, and a Navy very well appointed with
Military Forces, arrived upon the shore of Sussex, near Witering, Cart.
C^dwallae R. apud Camden in Britann. page 223
Cimenshore, so called heretofore from this Cimenus; and that having driven
away the Britains, he possessed the Ethelwerd lib. 1. and 3. ca. 3. Henric.
Huntindon. lib. 2.
Seacoast; and sending daily for new Aids out of Germany, he at length
enlarged his Kingdom along the Eastern shores, as far as the River Humber, and
was the first of the English Saxons that attained here to so large a Dominion.
Also, that his posterity enjoied this Kingdom about LXX years. But truly it
could hardly be, that they who were eminently powerful in shipping, and had
made so happy a Progress upon the shore, should not in like manner be Masters
of the Sea it self; especially seeing we find not the least testimony that
any others were at that time, of any considerable strength in shipping upon
this Coast.

But as for the Naval Forces and Victories of the succeeding Kings, both Danes
and English-Saxons, they are to be seen every where in Joannes Asserius Bishop
of Shirburn, William the Monk of Malmsburie, Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon,
Roger Hoveden, Florentius of Worcester, and Florilegus; but especially in the
Acts of K. Alfred, Edward the elder, Athelstan, Edgar, Ethelred and Harold. And
questionless, long after the beginning of the Saxons Reign, this Country
flourisht not a little in shipping, for the mainteining of the Soveraigntie of
the Sea, as may be collected both from the Customs of the Nation already
mentioned, and the frequent use of Navigation, from which the Merchants that
used to traffic on both the shores were prohibited, upon the occasion of a
difference that arose betwixt Charles of France, (afterward Emperor) and O^^a
King of the Mercians among the English-Saxons, to whom the rest were in
subjection. Yet a freedom thereof was restored not long after, by an agreement
of extraordinary benefit and advantage to the English-Saxon, as we find in
In Epist. apud Guil. Malmsbur. de de gostis Regum, lib. 1. c. 5 Et in operibus
Alcuini inter Epistolas, p. 1669.
Alcuinus, and William of Malmsburie. But before K. Alfred, their power began
to decreas by Sea, and that especially in the time of K. Ethelwolph, when the
Ge^ta Normann. ann. 840. Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 2. etc.
Danes or Normans infested not only the shores, but also almost the whole
Island, after a most grievous manner, and seized upon most of the Isles by
force, which lie on the west of Britain. And so all was exposed to the mercy
of Pirates. But after that Alfred was invested in the Kingdom, the defense of
the Sea was restored, and its Dominion established; concerning whom, that
Asserius Bishop of Shirburn, his Tutor, write's thus: He gave command for the
building of Boats and Galleys, that is, long ships through, out the Kingdom,
that he might prevent his enemies, and fight them by Sea, and putting Pirates
aboard them, he charged them to guard the passages of th Sea. And a little
after, He commanded also his Seamen, to keep all relief of Victual from going
to the Enemy by Sea. He used the word Pirates in this place (as others of that
age have don) not for Robbers, as it is commonly taken; but for such as being
skilled in Sea-affairs, were appointed to set upon the Enemie's Fleets, and
defend the Dominion by Sea: Touching the derivation of the word, the old
Scholiast upon Sophocles his Ajax, says; (...), That is, Pira, in the Attick
Tongue, signifie's craft or art, and hence it is, that they are called Pirates
which infest the Sea. But when the English-Saxons and Danes, in the time of K.
Alfred, were ever and anon struggling for the Soveraigntie in England (for,
Gurmundus, or Guthrunus King of the Danes, was at that time settled in
Northumberland as a Fiduciarie Client or Vassal to Alfred, and had very large
Territories in the East-part of England) their Fights were mostly by Sea, as if
they had both been of opinion, that he which could get the Dominion of the
British Sea, would by necessary consequence become Lord also of the Land, or of
that part of the Isle which lie's before it. For this cause also it was, that
the Danes growing strong at Sea, K. Alfred mightily augmented his Naval Forces,
by building ships twice as long as the Danish ships, deeper, nimbler, and less
rocking or rolling, and so much more convenient for Sea Fights. Florentius the
Monk says, In the same year (that is to say, the year of our Lord MCCCXCVII.)
the Forces of the Pagans residing in East-England and Northumberland, using
Piracie upon the Seacoasts, did grievously infest the West-Saxon's Country,
with very long and nimble ships, which they had built diverse years before.
Against whom ships were built by the Command of K. Alfred, twice as long,
deeper, nimbler, and less waving or rolling by whose force he might subdue the
aforesaid ships of the Enemy. It is related also in the same words by Roger
Hoveden. But Henry of Huntingdon, speaking expressly of the number of Oars that
served for the rowing of these ships of Alfred, says, King Alfred caused long
ships to be made ready; to wit, of 40 Oars or more, against the Danish ships.
But there are Ms. Codices bini, in Bibliotheca Colloniana, anno 897.
Chronicles written in the Saxon Tongue, that speak of ships of 60 Oars, and
larger, built by him at that time; out of which these Writers abovementioned,
and others of the like sort, have compiled theirs. The words of the Chronicles
are these, (...) (...), That is to say, King Alfred gave command for the
building of long ships to encounter the Danish. But they were twice as long as
these; whereof some had sixty Oars, some more. They were also more nimble, less
rolling, and deeper then the other. Not built after the Frisian or Danish
manner; but such as he conceived most convenient for fighting. So that there
is no doubt but the business of shipping was mightily advanced in his Reign,
among the English-Saxons, in order to the defense and maintenance of their
Dominion by Sea. And we very often find, that those Sea fights managed by
Alfred and his son Edward, with various success, against the Danes, and
Normans, were undertaken not without great numbers of Shipping. But in the time
of King Athelstan, who was very strong at Sea, upon the Irish Nation (says
Histor. l. 5.
Huntingdon) and those that dwelt in ships, there fell a fatal destruction. The
English-Saxon words in the ancient Chronicles, from whence Huntingdon
translated those, and which agree with these, are, (...), which fully signify
the same thing. For, (...) or the Scottish Nation and Scots are by the Ancients
often taken for the Irish. He also (says the same Author) led an huge Army by
Land and Sea into Northumberland and Scotland, and in regard there was none
appeared to make any opposition, be marched up and down the Country, and
wasting it at pleasure, returned with Triumph; whereupon says a Apud Guil.
Malmsbur. de gestis Regum 2. cap. 6.
Poet of that time, Jam cubat in terris fera barbaries Aquilonis;
Jam jacet in campo, pelago, pirata, relicto,
Illicitas torvasque minas Analavus anhelans.
Now is the wild and barbarous North brought down;
Now Analave, the Pirat, is overthrown,
Who having left the Sea, on Land does lie,
And spightful threats breath's out against the Sky.


This Analavus was King of the Roger Hovedenius, Annal. part. 1. Ann. 937. and
Florent. Wigorn. ann. 938.
Irish, and of many Islands, who invading the Coasts of Athelstan with a Fleet
of DCXV ships, at the mouth of the River Humber, received a great overthrow,
and was put to a most shameful Flight. But King Edgar (as says In anno 937.
Florentius of Worcester) sailing about the North of Britain with a great
Navy, arrived at Chester, where his eight petty Kings met him, as he had
given order, who swear fealty to him, and that they would assist him both by
Sea and Land. Or, as Anno Edgari, 13. Huntingdon. l. 5.
Huntingdon says of the same thing, they all did homage to him, declaring
themselves ready at his command to serve him by Sea and Land. Among these petty
Kings there was one Maccusius, whom Hoveden and Florentius call a King of very
many Islands; and Florilegus, a King of Man, and very many Islands. William of
Malmsburie call's him an Arch Pirat, Moreover, the same King Edgar, as if he
intended to set forth the splendour, magnificence, and as it were an Epitome of
his whole Empire in Sea-affairs and Shipping, did (as say Florentius and
Hoveden, during his abode at Chester) enter into a Boat, wherein he was rowed
by those petty Kings, himself holding the Stern, and steering it about the
River Dee; and being attended by all his Dukes and Peers in such another
Vessel, be sailed from the Palace to the Monastery of S. John Baptist, where
an Oration being made to him, he returned in the same pomp unto the Palace.
In the very Entry whereof he is reported to have said to his Lords, that then
his Successors might boast themselves Kings of England, when they should be
thus attended by so many Kings, and enjoy the state and glory of such honors;
or, as Malmsburie write's of the same thing, when they should enjoy so great a
Prerogative of honors: So many Kings as Vassals, to be ready always to
assist with their Forces, whenever they should be required, both by Sea and
Land. There is also a notable testimony in the same Florentius, and the Monk
of Malmsburie, how that this King sailed round about his Sea every year, and
secured it with a constant Guard and Forces. Every Summer, says Malmsburie,
immediately after Easter, be commanded his ships upon every shore to be
brought into a Body, sailing usually with the Eastern Fleet to the West part
of the Island, and then sending it back, he sailed with the Western Fleet unto
the Northern, and thence with the Northern he returned to the Eastern, being
indeed very diligent to prevent the Incursions of Pirates; that is, behaving
himself in this manfully (as say Florentius also, and Hoveden) for the defense
of his Kingdom against Foreiners, and the training up of himself and his people
for warlike emploiments. Thus the Guardianship or maintenance of the Dominion
by Sea is evident.

But as concerning the Fleets aforementioned, they each of them consisted of
MCC ships, and these, as Writers say expressly, very stout ones; so that in the
time of his Reign, the British Navy consisted of such ships to the number of
Three thousand six hundred Sail, as In anno 975.
Florentius and Hoveden speak expressly. But others write, that these Fleets
amounted to Four thousand ships; as Ms. In Bibliotheca Coltoniana.
John Bramton Abbot of Jorvaux, others adding to these Three a Fourth Fleet,
whereby the number is increased to Four Thousand Eight hundred Sail; as you may
see in Florilegus. So, as Florentius also says, He by the help of God
governed and secured the bounds of his Kingdom with Prudence, Fortitude,
Justice, and Temperance, as long as he lived, and having the courage of a
fierce Lion, he kept all the Princes and Lords of the Isles in aw. We read
also in Ordericus Vitalis, of King Harold or Herald, that he so guarded the
Sea with a force of soldierie and shipping, that none of his Enemies could
without a sore conflict, invade the Kingdom. So that we cannot otherwise
conceiv, but that these Naval Forces were at that time disposed, and the
Sea Fights undertaken, for the defense and guard of the Sea, as an Appendant of
the English-Saxon Dominion in this Island. Especially, if we duly compare
these things already manifest, with those which are added by and by to this
particular, touching the same age.

The Sea-Dominion of the English-Saxons, and Danes, during their Reigns in
Britain, observed in like manner, from such Tributes and Duties of their
Fiduciarie Clients or Vassals, as concerned the maintenance of the Navy. Also,
concerning the Tribute or Payment called Danegeld, which was wont to be levied
for the Guard of the Sea. CHAP. XI.
HEre follow next the Tributes and Duties of Vassals, concerning the
maintenance of the Navy or Guard of the Sea; which are evidences also of that
Sea-Dominion which was in the time of the English-Saxons. I call those
Tributes, which were wont to be levied for the re-inforcing of the Navy, and
for provision of Victuals for the Seamen. Of which kind were those that were
levied, according to the value of men's estates in Land, for the setting forth
of ships in the time of King Ethelred. For, at that time whosoever possessed
CCCX. Cassatos, or Hides of Land, was charged with the building of one ship.
And they were all rated proportionably, after this manner, who were owners of
more or less Hides, or of part of an Hide; as Ms. anno 1008. in Bibliotheca
Cottoniana.
Marianus Scotus, Hoveden, and Florentius do all tell us in the very same
words. Ethelred King of England (say they) gave strict command that one Gallie
should be charged upon CCCX Cassati, but a Coat of Armor and an Helmet upon
nine, and that ships should be built throughout all England, which being made
ready, he victualled and manned them with choice soldiers, and appointed
their Rendezvous at the Port of Sandwich, to secure the Bounds of his Kingdom
from the irruptions of Foreiners. But Histor. minor. Ms. in Bibliotheca
Cottoniana.
Henry of Huntingdon, as also Matthew Paris, and Florilegus, speaking of the
same thing say; The King charged one ship upon three hundred and ten Hides of
Land through all England; also a Coat-Armor and Helmet upon eight Hides. Then
Huntingdon tell's what an Hide does signify. But an Hide in English, says
he, is so much Land as a man can till with one Plow for a year. Others there
are that determine otherwise touching the quantity of an Hide: And most
certain it is, that it was very various, according to the different Custom of
Countries; but the same with Cassata and A Carue of I and, i* e. as much as may
be tilled by one Plow in a year.
Carucata. Indeed, the English-Saxon Chronicles of the Abbie of Mr. in
Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Abingdon, do likewise mention Hides here expressly. In the year MVIII. (...)
(say they) (...) man (...) (...) call (...) hund (...) Tynumaenne (...) helm
(...), That is to say, the King gave command for the building) of Ships
carefully throughout all England; to wit, that one Gallie should be charged
upon CCCX Hides of Land; but a Coat-Armor and Helmet upon eight Hides. And it
was usual, according to the Laws of that Age, that the richer sort should be
taxed by the number of Hides; as we see also throughout that Breviarie of
England or the Book of Rates called Mss. penes Camerarios Scaccarii.
Domesday, which was first written in the time of King William* Huntingdon
add's also, that there never had been so great a number of Ships in the time of
any one in Britain; which is testified in like manner by the Saxon Chronicles
before cited. So that, that most numerous Navy of King Edgar (mentioned in the
former chapter) was not to be compared with this. But yet that most learned
man and great Light of our Island, Mr In Brit. page 114.
Camden, has so cast up the number of Hides throughout England, out of the
ancient Records of that Age, that they do not exceed 243600. If this had been
so, then they could have set forth no more then 785 Ships by this Tribute,
which is a lesser number then that of King Edgar by some thousands: So that some
other account is to be made concerning Hides, which is not to be handled in
this place.

Hereunto belong's that of Huntingdon, touching King Canutus and his Son
Harald. In the days of Harald (says he) as also in the time of his Father,
eight Marks were paid by every Port for XVI Ships. In the like manner, Hoveden
says, there was a Tax imposed which was paid for the maintenance of the Navy,
when King Canutus and King Edmond made an agreement in an Isle in the midst of
Severn, called Oleney. Moreover, Huntingdon write's, that 11048 pounds were
raised by Hardecanute King of England, before he had reigned two years, for
thirty two Ships (that is to say, for the building of two and thirty Ships.)
He gave Command also (as Anno 1040.
Matthew Westminster says) that eight marks should be paid to every Rower of
his Navy, and ten marks to each Commander, out of all England. He says again
also of the same King; that he appointed Officers through all parts of the
Kingdom, to collect the Tax imposed, without favoring any, and therewith to
provide all things necessary for his Forces at Sea. And Florentius says; Anno
eodem.
He gave command for the paying of eight marks to every Rower of his Navy,
and twelve (so we read it in that Author) to every Commander, out of all
England; a Tax indeed so grievous, that scarce any man was able to pay it. But
these things spoken of Canutus, his son Harald, and Hardecanute relate perhaps
unto that Tribute or Tax called Danegeld: which was paid yearly for the
maintenance of the Navy and guarding the Territory or Dominion by Sea.

Among the old Laws of England it appears; that the payment of Danegeld was
first imposed because of Pirates (either Robbers or others invading the Sea.)
For, they infesting the Country, wasted it as far as they were able. Therefore
for the repressing of their insolence, it was determined that an yearly payment
should be made of Danegeld; that is to say, twelve pence upon every hide
through the whole Land, for the pay of those that should be employed to hinder
the eruption of Pirates. So we read it in some Apud Roger. Hoveden, part. 2.
page 344. in Edit. Londin. page 603. in Edit. Francofurt.
Copies; Apud G. Lambard. de priscis Anglorum Legibus, fol. 128. and G. Camden.
Brit. pa. 102.
others render it Irruption. But the other reading seems to signify, that
this Tax was imposed, for the raising and mainteining of Naval Forces, so to
guard the Sea, that Pirates or Enemies might not be able to make any eruption
from the Shore on the other side of the Sea. Nor can the word Eruption
otherwise be well put in that place. So that even that ancient Dignity of the
Count of the Saxon shore (whereof we have already spoken) is therefore not
obscurely represented by him who commanded as Admiral over the Fleets of that
Age. This Tribute or Tax had its beginning under King Ethelred. For, he being
brought into miserable streights by Swane King of Denmark, being forced to buy
a Peace of him, hired XLV Danish Ships also by Agreement, for the guarding and
securing of his Dominion in the Sea, who were to receiv their pay yearly out of
this Tribute for their maintenance. For the right understanding whereof, it is
to be observed out of the English Saxon Story, that the Tribute or Tax
usually paid at that time to the Danes, was of more kinds then one. There was
one Tribute or sum of Money, wherewith the English-Saxons were forced sometimes
to buy Peace of such as grievously infested the Island. But another was levied
to pay the Danish Navy, which was hired to guard the Sea and defend the
Seacoasts. The first kind of Tribute appears by that of Florentius and
Hoveden, in the year MVII. Ethelred King of England by the advice of his Lords,
sending Ambassadors to the Danes, gave them Commission to declare, that he was
willing to defray their Charges and pay them a Tribute upon this condition,
that they would desist from rapine, and establish a firm Peace with him. To
which demand of his they yielded. And from that time their charge was defraied
by all England, and a Tribute paid, which amounted to 36000 pounds. That is,
he effected this only for the present, that he obtained a peace for a time
by money, which he could not by Arms, as Florilegus says well. Four years
after also, all the great Lords of England of both Orders, met together at
London before Easter, and there they staid so long till payment was made of the
Tribute promised to the Danes, amounting to forty eight thousand pounds;
which we read of likewise both in Florentius and Anno 1012
Hoveden. But this was paid to the intent, that all Danes which were in the
Kingdom, should in every place dwell peaceably by the English, and that both
People should have as it were one heart and one soul, as it is expressed by
Florilegus. Other passages of the same kind there are in the story of that
Age, yea and some of an elder date. Yet this first kind of Tribute was not wont
to be paid yearly, but levied now and then, as occasion required.
Notwithstanding it may be true perhaps which Author Chronici Melrosensis, Ms.
in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
some write, that Ethelred in the aforesaid agreement of the year MVII yielded
to pay every year a Tribute of Thirty six Thousand pounds to the Danes, for a
longer continuation of the peace. We read here that he yielded or granted,
but no where likewise that he paid it. But as for the second kind of Tribute,
which was to be paid (as we have told you) for hire of the Danish Navy, it
was a yearly Tribute, and levied at the same time, at least in the same year,
(to wit, of our Lord MXII.) wherein these forty eight thousand pounds were
paid to procure a peace. Nor was it limited by any set-summe of money, but so
much as would serve for victualling, and clothing the Forces at Sea. Florentius
and Hoveden in the aforesaid year say; After these things, upon payment of the
Tribute, (meaning that of forty eight thousand pounds) and a confirmation of
the peace by Oaths, the Danish Navy which was before in a Body, was disposed
and dispersed abroad afar off. But XLV ships remained with the King, and swear
fidelity to him, and promised to be ready to defend England against
Foreiners, upon condition that he would provide them Victuals and Clothing.
This is related likewise in the English-Saxon Chronicles of the Abbie of In
Bibliotheca Cottoniana. Anno 1012.
Abingdon; (...) (...) That is, the Tribute being paid, and Oaths of Amity
taken, the Army (or Navy) which was before in a Body, was dispersed abroad.
But forty five ships of that Navy remained with the King, and promised upon
Oath to be ready for the defense of this Land, upon condition the King did
find them Victuals and Clothing. Swane was at that time King of Denmark, with
whom Ethelred made this agreement. But both the kinds of payment
aforementioned, were called Danegelo, Danegeld, or Danageld, that is to say,
Danish Tribute. The first kind is expressly intimated by this name in In
Polycratico, seu de Nugis Curialium, lib. 8. cap. 21.
Joannes Sarisburiensis; where he says, Swane wasted and spoiled the Island
of Britain, the greatest part whereof he had in his possession, and afflicted
the Members of Christ with many persecutions, by an imposition of Tribute,
which in the English Tongue they call Danageld. But the second kind which was
paid for the maintenance of the Forces by Sea was called likewise by the same
name, both because it was occasioned by the agreement with the Danes, as also
because it was wont to be paid to the Danish Fleet, that was hired to guard the
Territory by Sea. For which cause also it retained the same name, not only
under these Danish Kings, Canutus, Harold the first, and Hardecanutus, but also
under the English-Saxon or English. And that this which we have spoken was the
Original hereof, is affirmed also by Ingulphus the Abbot of Crowland, a witness
beyond all exception, who lived at that time. He speaking of the affairs of
Edward the Confessor, says, Edit. Londin. page 510. Francofurt. 897.
In the year MLI. (which was the tenth of King Edward) in regard the Earth did
not bring forth its Fruits in such plenty as it was wont, but devoured very
many people by famine, insomuch that many Thousands of men died through the
scarcity of Corn, and want of Bread; therefore the most pious King Edward,
being moved with compassion toward the people, released that most grievous
Tribute called Danigeld, to all England for ever. It is reported by some, that
this most Religious King being brought by his Officers into the Exchequer, to
see the Danigeld that was collected, and to take a view of so vast an heap of
treasure, stood amazed at the first sight, protesting that he beheld the Devil
dancing upon the heap of money, and extremely rejoicing; whereupon he
immediately commanded to restore it to the former Owners, and would not keep
one jo^ of so cruel an exaction; but remitted it for ever, to wit, in the
thirty eighth year after Swane King of Denmark commanded it to be paid every
year to his Navy, in the time of his Father Ethelred. By dis-counting 38 years
from the year 1051. that year 1012. is sufficiently manifest, wherein the
beginning of this Danegeld is placed, according to that which has been
already spoken. Nor is it any prejudice at all, that there seems perhaps to
be one year over and above. For, such as are verst in the Chronicles of the
Monks, know well enough, that differences of that kind are very frequent among
them, especially by reason of their careless confounding of the years of our
Lord, and of the Kings, whose beginnings do variously differ, as every man
know's. Nor is it probable, that they were sufficiently agreed touching the
Tribute and Taxes before the next, or one thousand and thirteenth year. For,
concerning that year, Florentius, Hoveden, and others speak expressly thus; In
the mean time the Tyrant Swane gave command to make ready Provisions in
abundance for his Navy, and for payment of an almost intolerable Tribute. In
like manner Turkillus sent out his commands every where; that it should be
paid to his Fleet, which lay at Grenewich. That Fleet of XLV. ships rode now
and then in the Thames near Grenewich, and then first received their promised
pay. That is, in that very year, which being discounted is the Thirty eight
year, as Ingulphus would have it: wherefore its beginning was not ill placed in
that year. Without all question, that Ingulphus was a Courtier in the time of
King William the first, or a man of no mean account, at the time wherein that
was don which he relate's: so that especial credit is to be given him in this
particular. Whereas also he says, that King Edward remitted Danegeld for
ever, the same thing is affirmed also by Roger Hoveden, and Matthew the Monk of
Westminster; who says, In the year of Grace MLI. King Edward absolved the
people of England from that most grievous Tribute of 38 thousand pounds, which
was usually paid to the Danish Auxiliaries, during his Father's Reign. Whereof
we read also in Hist. minot. Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Matthew Paris. But Hoveden says, K. Edward absolved the people of England
from that grievous Tribute, in the thirty eight year after that his Father K.
Ethelred had commanded it to be paid to the Danish Soldiers. Others there are
also that write to the same purpose. Some of the Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Compacti cum Guil. Gisburnensis Annalibus.
English, Saxon Chronicles place the same thing in the following year, and so
affirm, that there intervened 39 years from the beginning of this Tribute
(which also they call (...) or Heregild, that is, a Military o^ Naval Tribute)
to that abolishment of it by King Edward; Nevertheless, as to what concern's
its beginning, they agree with Ingulphus and Hoveden, to wit, in the year MLII
those Chronicles render it thus; (...). That is to say, K. Edward abolished
that Military Tribute, or Heregild, which had been formerly imposed by K.
Ethelred* to wit, in the nine and thirtieth year after it began. But yet in the
Author of that Ms. Penes Camerarios Se^^cari^^* c. 27. Idem habetur Dialogus
etiam in Codice Rubro, penes Rememoratorem Regis.
Dialogue concerning the Exchequer, written in the time of K. Henry the
second, (commonly supposed to have been Gervasius Tilburiensis) we read it was
paid yearly even till the time of K. William the first or the Norman Conquest;
that is to say, for fourteen years complete, immediately after that
abolishment. For, so long K. Edward reigned, whom that William succeeded. The
Autor's words are these; The Pirates of the adjacent Islands, having made an
irruption, and spoiling the Seacoasts, carried away Gold, Silver, and all
things of any value. But as soon as the King and his Subjects set forth any
preparations of War, for the defense of their Nation, they presently ^^ed away
by Sea. But the chief among them, and ever more inclined to mischief, was that
warlike and populous Nation of the Danes, who besides their ordinary desire of
prey; pressed on the more furiously, because they laid claim to somewhat of
ancient Right in the Government of the Kingdom, as the British History
relate's more at large. Therefore for the repelling of them, it was ordained by
the Kings of England, that two shillings silver upon every Hide of Land should
by a kind of Custom for ever be paid for the maintenance of valiant men, who
by scouting about continually, and guarding the Seacoasts, might repress the
Invasion of Enemies. And in regard this Revenue was appointed chiefly because of
the Danes, therefore it was called Danegeld. And thereupon it was paid by
yearly Custom (as has been said) under the English Kings, until the time of K.
William the first, who was of the Norman Stock and Nation. So that Author, who
would have this Tribute to derive its name from the Danes, as if the Navy had
been maintained thereby chiefly to drive them from the Coasts of England. But
questionless, the first reason of the name, is to be received, as it has been
alleged out of the passages above mentioned; though afterward there was a
Subsidy raised and Tribute paid for the like Fleet, consisting of such as were
not Danes, or of English, for the repelling of the Danes themselves, which was
not improperly called by the same name. Touching the payment hereof after the
Norman Conquest, I shall add more Cap. 15.
by and by. But as concerning what he says here, that two shillings silver
upon every Hide were wont to be paid yearly for the raising of this Tribute,
the same is affirmed also by other ancient Autors, as Edit. Londin. page 276.
Edit. Francofurt. page 482.
Roger Hoveden, and Hist. minore Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana; in Stephani R.
initiis.
Matthew Paris: So that these men make the payment double to that which is
before alleged out of the Laws of the English-Saxons. The yearly payment of
this Tribute is valued also by Matthew of Westminster, and Matthew Paris, at
thirty eight thousand pounds, as appears by the particulars already cited:
which truly was written by them with very little discretion. Nor have they
dealt any better, who set down that payment at the rate of thirty thousand
pounds, as the Author of the Chronicle called Ms. ibid.
Chronicum Melrosense. For, at what rate soever that Tribute was paid to the
King, according to the alteration of times, it appears for certain, that the
Stipends usually allowed to the Danish Fleet were so uncertain, that they were
set sometimes higher, sometimes lower (as we must suppose it could not otherwise
happen) according to the number of Ships and Forces that were necessary for
the Guard of the Sea. Of which also there are examples among Historians.
Florentius in the year MXIV. says, K. Ethelred gave command, that the Tribute
amounting to thirty thousand (...) should be levied for the Fleet which lay
at Grenewich; So also Hoveden. But the Ms. in Bibliot heca Cottoniana.
English-Saxon Chronicles of the Abbie of Abingdon say of the same year; (...)
(...). The King commanded that 21000* should be paid to his Army; (For so
that Fleet is called every where in English Saxon) which rode at Grenewich.
Here (you see) is no small difference in the number of pounds. But howsoever,
if it be to be conceived of the yearly Tax or Tribute, then it was far less
this year then it is reckoned by those Monks, who speak of thirty eight
thousand pounds. Four years after, in the Reign of King Canutus, (who was a
Dane) a far greater sum of Money was raised for the maintenance of this
Fleet. That Florentius, whom we have often cited, says; In this year, (that
is, MXVIII. Seventie two thousand pounds out of all England, and one thousand
and fifty pounds out of London, were paid to the Danish Fleet; and there
remained forty ships with K. Canutus. But the rest were returned to Denmark.
Of which year Hoveden speak's thus; Out of all England seventie two, and out of
London 410 pounds were paid to the Danish Army or Fleet. And there remained,
etc. They differ about the Sum, not the Thing, wherein they agree with the
English-Saxon Chronicles before mentioned. Yet these altogether speak contrary
to that account of the certain sums, as it is set down by the aforesaid
Monks. But Histor. Minor. Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Matthew Paris and Matthew Westminster say of the same Time, that Cnute sent
home the Danish Fleet, and Stipendarie Soldiers, (except forty ships, as
appears by what has been said already) having paid them out of all England
eighty two thousand pounds in silver. Also, in the second year of King
Harde^nute, a Tax was levied for the Danish Army or Fleet, amounting to 21000
pounds, and 89 pounds, as Huntingdon tell's us. All which particulars do, I
suppose, sufficiently demonstrate, that the Danish Tribute here mentioned was
not fixed to any certain sum of yearly payment; and also that an huge sum
of money was wont to be paid yearly at that time to the Kings of England, for
the Guard of the Sea, (for, to what purpose else was that Fleet always kept,
and so great Taxes levied every year for the maintenance thereof?) But in the
Reign of King Henry the second, the name of Danegeld grew out of use, Tributes
or Taxes being usually paid still, notwithstanding by other names that are
very well known, for the Guarding of the Sea; as we shall show by and by. But
they are extremely mistaken, even they who agree either with John Ms. in
Bibliotheca Cottoniana, anno 13. Ethelredi Regis, seu Christi 991. pa. 57.
Bramton the Abbot of Jorvaux, or some other Author out of whom he wrote it, or
any others of that kind, in deriving the Original of that yearly Danegeld, so
often mentioned every where, from the former kind of Tribute, which was paid
to the Danes, for the procuring of a peace; and they also who Apud Jacob.
Thuanum. Historiar. li. 95.
would have the War to have been undertaken by the Danes and Saxons against
the Britains, because they denied them a freedom of Navigation, and that the end
thereof was, that this Tribute was upon that account imposed upon the Nation
when it was subdued.

Now, as concerning the Duties of Fiduciarie Clients or Vassals, wont to be
paid in that Age for Naval Expeditions and the Guard of the Sea, we have set
them down among those particulars which were spoken of King Edgar in the former
Chapter. The Petty Kings or Lords of the neighboring Isles were bound to him
by Oath to be ready at his command to serve him by Sea and Land. And in that
famous Breviarie or Register of England called Ms. penes Camerarios Scaccarii.
Domesday, (containing very many Customs in use among the English-Saxons,
besides the assessment of the Provinces, and written in the time of William the
first) we read thus; It is a Custom at Warwick, if the King went by Sea
against his Enemies, to send him either IV. Batsueins (Sea-souldiers or Rowers)
or else IV. pounds in money. And at Excester, when he made any Expedition by
Land or by Sea, this City served after the rate of V. Hides of Land.
Barnestaple, Lydeford, and Totenais served as far as that City. That is, these
three Towns paid as much as Excester alone. Moreover, Clocester yielded XXXVI.
Dicres of Iron and C. iron Rods fitted to make nails for the King's ships.
Leicester also, if the King went against his Enemies by Sea, sent him four
horses from that Town to London, to carry Arms or other necessaries.
Concerning Jews also, a chief Town in Sussex; there K. Edward (the Confessor)
had CXXVII. Burgers at his service. Their Custom was, if the King went not
himself in person, but sent others to guard the Sea, then they collected XX.
Shillings of every man, of what Country soever he were, and provided men who
were to look to the Arms on shipboard. Here very express mention is made of the
defense or Guardianship of the Sea it self. And in Colchester* an eminent Town
of Essex, we find it was the Custom of that Age, to pay out of every house six
pence a year, that was able to pay it, for maintenance of the King's soldiers
upon an Expedition by Land or Sea, etc. And this ought to be the rate, if the
King shall entertain soldiers* or make any Expedition. All these particulars
are in that Register: And others there are in it of the same kind. But an
Expedition by Sea signified in these testimonies, not a War to be undertaken
for subduing the Dominions of their neighbors lands, but most clearly a
preparation and enterprise of War, for the guarding, scouring, and keeping the
Sea, as a part of the Empire of Britain: As it sufficiently appears out of the
Histories of that time. For, we do not read, that our English-Saxons or Danes
had any other quarrel at that time, with any of their Neighbors whatsoever,
unless it concerned either the British Islands or the Sea belonging thereunto.
Which also is especially to be considered.

The Testimonies of Edgar and Canutus, Kings of England, with others expressly
declaring the Dominion which they and their predecessors had over the Sea;
together with an observation touching the Nations which in that age were seated
upon the opposite Shore. CHAP. XII.
THat we may at length set an end to that fourfold distribution which we made
of the Testimonies of that Age, let us in the last place add the express
determinations of King Edgar and Canutus concerning their own Dominion over the
Sea. As for Edgar, the title which he commonly used, ran thus; Apud Guil.
Malmsbur. de gest. Regum. lib. 2. cap. 8.
I Edgar Sovereign Lord of all Albion, and of the Maritim or Insular Kings
inhabiting round about. So he make's the body of the British Empire to
comprehend all the Maritim Kingdoms that lay about, that is to say, all that
are Situate in the British Sea. And this he more plainly declare's in the
Charter or Deed by which he settled revenues on the Cathedral Church of
Worcester, in the year DCCCCLXIV; if so be the copy were rightly rendered by
those who many years since printed so much of it as concern's this title. The
words are these, Inspeximus in Rot. Pat. 1. Ed. 4. part. 6. Sic habetur apud
Joannem Dee in Monarch. Britannic. page 58. and 60. And in Purchase his
Pilgrimage, part. 3. lib. 3. cap. 19. page 619.
Altitonantis Dei largiflua clementia qui est Rex Regum, Ego Edgarus Anglorum
Basileus omniumque Regum insularum, Oceanique Britanniani circumjacentis (so
John Dee, a man very well seen in most parts of Learning, did read it a good
while since, save only that in stead of ( Britannian) he has ( Britanniani)
while Edward Coke, in his Preface ad Commentariorum Juris, lib. 4. And James
Usher Bishop of Armag^, in Epistol. Hibernicarum Sylloge, page 121. ubi vide
item* p. 163.
others read, Insularum Oceani quae Britanniam circumjacent) cunctarumque
nationum quae infra eam includuntur Imperator and Dominus; gratias ago ipsi Deo
omnipotenti Regimeo qui meum imperium sic ampliavit and exaltavit super regnum
patrum m^orum; qui licet Monarchiam totius Angliae adepti sint a tempore
Athelstani (qui primus regnum Anglorum and omnes nationes quae Britanniam
incolunt, sibi armis subegit) nullus tamen ill^rum ultra ejus fines imperium
suum dilatare aggressus est. Mihi autem concessit propitia divinitas cum
Anglorum imperio omnia regna Insularum Oceani cum suis ferocissimis regibus
usque Norwegiam, maximamque partem Hiberniae cum sua nobilissima civitate
Dublinia, Anglorum regno subjugare. Quos etiam omnes meis imperiis colla
subdere (Dei favente gratia) coegi. -- By the abundant goodness of Almighty
God who is the King of Kings, I Edgar King of England, and of all the Kings of
the Islands, and of the Ocean lying round about Britain, and of all the Nations
that are included within the circuit thereof, Supreme Lord and Governor, Do
render thanks to the same Almighty God my King who has enlarged my Empire
thus, and exalted it above the Royal Estate of my Progenitors, who although
they arrived to the Monarchy of all England ever since the time of Athelstane
(who was the first that by force of Arms subdued the English, and all the
Nations that inhabit Britain) yet none of them ever attempted to promote their
Empire beyond the bounds thereof. But the divine goodness has favored me so
far as beside the English Empire* to enable me to subdue all the Kingdoms of
the Islands in the Ocean with their most stout and mighty Kings, even as far as
Norway, and the greatest part of Irland, together with their most famous City
of Dublin. All which (by God's grace and assistance) I have subdued and made
their necks to stoop under the yoke of my command. Whereas he says, that none
of his Progenitors had attempted to enlarge their Empire beyond the bounds of
Britain, it must be so understood, that it be taken for the Northern and
Western bounds of the British Empire, as sufficiently appears by the mention
of Irland and Norway. So that then more Islands than the name of Britain did
comprehend, or than the Isles of that Sea, together with the Sea it self, were
brought under his Dominion.

But King Canutus (or Cnute) has left a testimony also, whereby he most
expressly asserts the Sea to be a part of his Dominion. He placing himself on
a seat by the Sea side as it flowed upon Southampton Shore, having a mind to
demonstrate to his flatterers, that Kings themselves are but men, is reported to
have made trial of the obedience of the Sea (it being flood) after this
manner, Thou, O Sea, art under my dominion, as the Land also upon which I sit
is mine. And there never was any that disobeied my Command without punishment.
Therefore I command thee not to ascend up upon my Land, nor do thou presume to
wet the feet or garments of thy Sovereign. But the Tide (says Huntington, and
Florilegus who relate this story) swelling as at other times, did very
unmannerly wet not only the feet, but legs of his Majesty. Whereupon the King
leaping up proclaimed with his own mouth none to be worthy the name of King,
but him alone who command's both the Sea and land, and they obey. And from that
time he refused to wear his Crown of Gold; consecrating it to a Crucifix. In
the mean time, he here openly professed himself to be the Sovereign of the
Sea as well as of the land. Hereunto may be added some testimonies of other
Writers, which although they are of a later date than the Kingdom of the
English-Saxons, yet they are transmitted to posterity by the hands of such as
were perfectly acquainted with the English History, and by the Tradition of
their Ancestors well infouned of the most authentic Opinions and Resolvs
concerning the English Dominion over the Sea. Geof^rie Chaucer (who was not
only the most famous Poet of his time, but, as Learning went in those days, a
very well accomplished Scholar) in one of his Canterbury Tales, bring's in his
Man of Law telling a story which he would have relate to the time of Alla
King of Northumberland, who reigned thirty years; and his Reign began in the
year of our Lord DLIX. In this Tale there is brought in a Lady, called
Constantia, the Daughter of I know not what Roman Emperor, married to the King
of Syria; driven she was by weather to a place which lay under the command of
a Fortress upon the Shore of Northumberland, and there the Ship ran aground;
she was a Christian, banished for her Religion, and there taken Prisoner by
the Commander of that Fortress. In this Relation of the sad adventures of
Constantia, he says (what indeed is true) that Christian Religion was not
received into any part of that Territory, but that Pagans had overrun and did
hold those Northern Countries under their Dominion as well by Sea as Land. His
words to this purpose are these, In all that land dursten non Christen rout;
All Christen folk been fled from the Country
Through Paynims that conquered all about
The plagues of Northumberland by land and See.
He said discreetly, that the neighboring Sea fell to the Conquerers of this
Isle as well as the Land, knowing what was the resolution and generally
received opinion of his Ancestors concerning that matter He lived two hundred
and thirty years ago in the time of Richard the Second. Nor is it any
prejudice to this authority, that the other things there related are fabulous;
For we know that out of the Fables of Heliodorus, Achilles, Tatius, Theodorus
Prodromus, Eustathius, and such others, whether of an amorous or any other
strain, sometimes many useful observations may be gathered concerning the
customs, manners, and received opinions, as well of the men among whom they are
feigned to be acted, as of the times to which they are related. John Harding
also, who, in the time of Edward the Fourth, wrote an History of the affairs
of England in verse, when he reckons up those Princes that swear fealty to
King Canutus for the Lands which they held of him, Chap. 117.
he adds So did the Kings of Wales of high parage,
And all the North-west Ocean
For their kingdoms and for their lands than;
That is to say, the same was don at that time by the greatest Kings of Wales,
and of all the North-western Sea, for their respective Kingdoms and
Territories. Thus Canutus was King of the Kings of that Sea, which he himself
also sufficiently declares, when he expressly affirms in what was before
related, that the Sea it self was under his Dominion. And so much for
testimonies, to prove that the British Sea has been possessed not only by the
Britains, after they had cast off the Roman yoke, but also by the
English-Saxon, and Danish Kings.

Moreover, it seems they did use to take a kind of course for the strengthening
and preservation of their Dominion, both by Sea and Land, as the ancient
Germans (of whom both Danes and Saxons are a part) were wont to do for the
defense of their midland Cities. Among them (says De Bello Gallico, l. 6.
Caesar) it was the highest glory to make very large depopulations, and lay all
the Country round about them waste; measuring their honor by their distance
from any neighbor, and accounting it the only token of valor when none durst
plant themselves within their reach; and besides, they thought by this means to
render themselves more secure by removing the fear of any sudden incursion. So
it has been the manner of those that at any time have made themselves Masters
of the Kingdom of Britain, to extend their Dominion in the circumambient Sea to
the largest Circuit, scouring the Seas about, and keeping other Nations at a
distance, as it were from the Wall or Precinct of the Island. Nor were those
German Cities more Masters of that waste part of the Country that lay about
them, then the King's of Britain were over the Sea of the same name. But as we
observed before of the Scots and Picts, in the time of the Romans, so here also
it is to be noted of the Norwegians or Normans, (for many times they are to
be taken for one and the same people) and other Northern Nations, That those
British Isles which are situated in the West and Northern Sea, were sometimes so
possessed by the Scots and Picts, as also by the Norwegians, and such others as
infested the Northern Sea, and invaded the Isles lying between them and
Britain, that it is not to be doubted, but they also according to the various
alteration of their Dominions by Land, succeeded one another for that interval
of time, in the possession of a proportionable part of the Sea also, as an
Appendant to every one of the shores of Britain The Scots (says an In Gestis
Normannorum, page 2. Vide Aimoinum, de Gestis Francorum, lib. 4. ca. 90. and
100. de Normannis.
unknown Author, speaking of the year DCCCXLVI) for many years became
Tributaries to the Normans, who without any resistance entered and settled
themselves in the Isles lying round about. And as touching the Naval affairs of
the Normans in our Sea, there are many passages to be seen in Regino the
Abbat, Aimoinus and other Writers of that Age. But in the mean time it is
sufficiently manifest, that as by reason of the tumultuarie and unsettled
posture of affairs in those days, the Dominion of the Island it self was very
often tossed to and fro; so also the Dominion of the Sea was in like manner
attempted, disturbed, invaded, recovered, and defended, as that which did
inseparably follow the Dominion and Soveraigntie of the Island. We are not
ignorant that in the French Histories there are now and then some passages that
speak of their Naval power in this Age, which are collected by L'Amiral de
France, chap. 6. and 7.
Popelinerius. But there is nothing to be gathered from them that may set
forth the least sign or shadow of a Soveraigntie or Dominion over the Sea. Very
few indeed are to be found, and such as either concern only the defending the
mouths of their Rivers against the Normans and Danes then roving up and down
our Sea, or the subduing of the Friezlanders, and some of the Neighbor-Nations.
Whereunto also some other passages relate, which we shall mention by and by,
when we com to speak of the Admirals of France.

Several Testimonies concerning the Sea-Dominion of the Kings of England, since
the Norman Conquest, set forth in General Heads. CHAP. XIII.
FOllowing the Order and Method of our Inquiry, in the next place we treat of
the Sea-Dominion of the Britains, since the coming of the Normans into England.
And in the first place our Discourse shall be of the Dominion of the English
Sea, or that which flow's between England and the opposite shores or Havens of
the Neighbor-Nations. Now whereas it is confessed on all hands, that all
Dominion is chiefly founded upon just possession or occupation, and its
continuance, and that possession is not supposed to be had, by the act either
of the mind or body singly and apart (as L. 3. F. tit. de Acquir. vel amitt.
possessione.
Paulus long since has well determined) but is most firmly gotten and retained
by the joint concurrence of mind and body; whereupon it is distinguished into
Hugo Donellus, de Jure Civili, l. 5. Cujacius, observat. l. 9. ca. 37. l. 10.
C. tit. de acquir. possess. and retinenda.
Civil, that is, where there is a right or title by Law, and Natural or
Corporal, and it is requisite that this Dominion receiv a signal confirmation
by a long continued assent, a free and public confession or acknowledgment of
such neighbors whom it most concern's: First then, as concerning the Corporal
or Natural possession of this Sea, as well as that which is Civil or by Law,
and is retained by the act of the mind, we shall give you very ample
Testimonies since the time of the coming in of the Normans. And in the next
place, we will show how this Dominion of the Kings of England has been
acknowledged by those Foreign or Neighbor-Nations, whom it most concern's. But
forasmuch as what we shall thus speak of the English Sea in general, will
chiefly relate to the Southern and Eastern, or that which has the English
shore on one side, and France and Germany on the other, we will therefore
discourse severally of that which lie's to the West of England, and also of the
Scottish Sea, or that which lie's more Northerly.

As concerning the possession of the English Sea, both Corporal and Mental, or
Civil, continued for that space of time which we now speak of, with the like
Dominion arising and retained thereupon, there are diverse notable and very
clear testimonies thereof, which for Methods sake we divide into eight heads;
whereof

I. The Custody, Government, or Admiraltie of the English Sea, as a Territory
or Province belonging to the King. II. The Dominion of those Islands that lie
before the French shore. III. The Leav of passage through this Sea granted to
Foreiners upon request. IV. The Liberty of Fishing therein allowed upon
courtesy to Foreiners and Neighbors, and the Protection given to Fishermen.
V. Prescribing of Laws and Limits to Foreiners, who being in Hostility one
with another, but both in amity with the English, made Prize of each other in
this Sea. VI. The Records whereby this Dominion is expressly asserted by the
By, as a most undoubted right; and that no^ only by the King, but by the
Parlaments of England, when they debated of other matters. VII. The
Commentaries of the Law of the Land, and common customs of the Nation, which do
either assert or at least allow such a Dominion. VIII. Some ancient Testimonies
of inferior note.
All the testimonies almost that are comprehended in this Division, are indeed
domestic; but so public, and of so approved credit, that hardly any thing can
be imagined, which might give a clearer proof of possession whether Civil, as
they call it, consisting in the act and intention of the mind, or Natural,
which require's the presence of the Body. As it will appear to any man that
pleas to make inquiry. Especially if he add hereunto the judgment or
acknowledgment of such Foreign Nations whom it chiefly concerned, whereof we
shall treat also by and by* But of these things severally, and in order.

That the Kings of England, since the coming in of the Normans, have
perpetually enjoied the Dominion of the Sea flowing about them, is in the first
place proved from the Guard or Government thereof, as of a Province or
Territory; that is to say, from the very Law of the English Admiraltie. CHAP.
XIV.
AS concerning the Guard or Government of this Sea, there are three things
therein that deserv special consideration. 1. The bare mention and nature of
the Guard of the Sea, and of the Guardians or Admirals thereof, in public
Records and Histories. 2. The Tributes and Customs imposed, demanded or
accustomed to be paid for, and in consideration of the said custody. And
lastly, the tenor and variety of Commissions belonging to this Guard, and
English Admiraltie, or Government by Sea. Since the coming in of the Normans,
there is frequent mention of a Guard or Government instituted for the defense
and guarding of the Sea. Here call to mind those observations touching this
kind of Guard, which have been already gathered out of that Record or
Breviarie of England called Doomesday. And King Henry the first, says
Florentius of Worcester, gave order to his Butsecarli to guard the Sea, and
take care that no person from the parts of Normandy, approach the English
Coasts. The same says Roger Hoveden, in the very same words almost, save only
that the printed Copies err in putting Buzsecarlis for Butsecarlis. These
Butsecarli, or Butescarles, in the old English Language, are Officers belonging
to the Navy, or Sea-souldiers, as Hutesecarli, were Domestic Servants or
Officers in Court. And that to guard the Sea here signified to secure the Sea
it self, not to defend the Seacoasts (as sometimes, though seldom it did) with
Landforces, plainly appears out of Henry of Huntingdon, in whom it is clear,
that the persons who thus guarded the Sea were employed by the King, to make
War by Sea against Robert Duke of Normandy, who was then preparing an
Expedition against England. Now those public Records are lost, wherein the
Roial Commissions for the delegation of this Command or Government were wont to
be registered all that space of time betwixt the coming in of the Normans, and
the Reign of K. John. But from thence through all the succeeding ages unto this
present time, it is as clear as day, that the Kings of England have been wont
to constitute Governors or Commanders, who had the charge of guarding the
English Sea, and were the Guardians or Governors thereof, in the same manner as
if it had been some Province upon Land. First of all there were Ro^. Pat. 6.
Joannis R. Membr. 8. vide Rot. Pat. 8 Hen. 3. part. 1. M. 3. and 4. Claus. 9.
Hen. 3. Membr. 15. Pat. 9. Hen. 3. part. 2. M. 9.
entrusted with the Government of the Sea, or the Maritimae and Marinae, the
Maritime and Marine part of the Empire (understanding by those words not only
some Country lying upon the Seacoasts, but comprehending the British Sea it
self, though I confess it was not always so) such as were to guard and keep
it, under the title (sometimes) of Custodes Navium, Guardians of the ships, but
more frequently Custodes Maritimae, or Marinae, in the sens aforesaid. And in
the time of Henry the third, Thomas de Moleton is styled Rot. Pat. 48 Hen. 3.
part. 1. memb. 3. and Rot. Claus. 48 Hen. 3. Membran. 3.
Captain and Guardian of the Sea, and has authority given him to guard the Sea
and the Maritim parts of the Eastern Shore. In the same King's Reign also, the
Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports are said to guard the Rot. Pat. 27. Hen. 3.
part. 1. Membran. 3. in dorso.
Coast of England, and the Sea. So Hugh de Crequeur was Warden of the Rot. Pat.
19. Hen. 3. Memb. 14.
Cinque Ports and of the Sea in those parts. Afterward the title of Guardians
or Wardens very often changed into that of Admirals. Edward the First, says
Thomas of 22. Ed. 1. seu anno 1295.
Walsingham, for the keeping of the Sea divided his Shipping into three Fleets,
setting over them three Admirals, namely over the Ships at Yarmouth and the
road thereabout John de Botetort; over those at Portsmouth, William de Leyburn;
and over the Western and Irish Ships, a certain Irish Knight. Moreover also,
that John de Butetort is in the Rot. pat. 23. Edw. 1. m. 5.
Records of that time styled custos Maritimae; as were others also. After this,
in the Reign of Edward the Second, three Admirals of the three several Coasts
of England (says 18. Ed. 2. seu ann. 1326. and vide Rot. Pat. 19. Ed. 2. part.
1. Mem. 12. and 20. Ed. 2. Mem. 22.
Walsingham) had the guarding of the Sea, namely, Sir John Oturvin, Sir Nicolas
Kyriel, Sir John Felton.. We find moreover in our Rot. Parl^m. 14. Ed. 3.
art. 2.
public Records, that the principal end of calling a Parliament in the
fourteenth year of Edward the Third was, De Treter sur la guard de la pees de la
terre, and de la March d'Escoce, and de la Mere, i. e. That consultation might
be had concerning keeping the peace of the Land, also of the Borders of
Scotland, and of the Sea. The same regard they had to the defense of the Sea,
as of the Island or Land-Province: giving us to understand, that the Land and
Sea together made one entire body of the Kingdom of England. Other evidences
of the same nature we find in the Rot. Parlam. 13. Ed. 3. part. 1. art. 6, 9.
and 11. and Rot. Parlam. 20. Ed. 3. artic. 21.
Records of Parliament of the same King's time, or in the consultations of the
estates of the Realm had about this matter, that whilst they Treat
indifferently De la saufegard de la terre, concerning the safeguard or defense
of the Land or Island, and de la saufeguard de la Mere, the safeguard of the
Sea, they seem sufficiently to declare, being well informed by their
Ancestors, that the Dominion of this as well as of that, did belong unto the
Crown of England. For the business debated by them was not only how to provide
a Navy to make resistance against their Enemies by Sea, but for the guarding
the Sea it self as well as the securing of the Isle, and so for the maintaining
the ancient right of their King in both. In the time of Richard the Second,
Hugh Calverlee was made Admiral of the Sea (says 2. R^^b. 2. Ro^ Part
Walsingham) and Mr Thomas Percie joined in Commission with him to scour the
Roades of the Sea for one year. And in the Reign of the same King, and likewise
of the two succeeding Henry's the Fourth and the Fifth, debate was had in lam.
2. R^^h. ^. part. 2* art. 3^* and 7. (...). 2. Membran. 9. art. 13. and 14. and
7. H^^* 4. art. 18 ^ 19. and 8. Hen art. 6.
Parliament about the Guard of the Sea. In the Reign of Henry the Sixth, the
Guard Ro^ Par. 33. Hen. 6. artic. 27.
of the Sea was with a numerous Navy Committed to Richard Earl of Salisburie,
John Earl of Shrewsburie, John Earl of Worcester, and James Earl of Wilts, to
whom was added Baron Sturton; and afterward to John Duke of Rot. Franciae. 32.
Hen. 6. m. 4. and 6. etc.
Excester. And in those days it was usual to procure King's Letters commonly
called, in the language of the Law, Protections* whereby Privilege and
exemption from all suits was granted to those that were employed in this kind
of Guard or Defense of the Sea, or that spent their time super salva custodia
and defensione Maris, Stat. ^. Hen ^. cap. 1.
For the safeguarding and defense of the Sea, as the form of the words has it,
which we frequently find in the Archives. Moreover, in the Acts of Parliament
of the same King's Reign, mention is made of the safeguarding of the Sea, or de
la saufegard de la mier, as of a thing commonly known, and for which it was the
Custom of the English to make as diligent provision as for the Government of
any Province or Country. And in the Rot. Parlam. 20. Hen. 9. Artic. 29.
twentieth year of the same King, the Commons preferred a Bill, that a strong
and well accomplished Navy might be provided for the defense of the Sea,
because It is thought fit be all the Commens of this Land that it is necessary
the Sea be kept. Very many other passages there are to the same purpose.
Geoffrie Chaucer (who lived in the time of Richard the Second, and was a man
very knowing in the affairs of his Country) among other most elegant and
lively characters of several sorts of men, written in the English Tongue,
describe's the humor of an English Merchant of that time, how that his desire
above all things is, that the Sea be well guarded, never left destitute of
such protection as may keep it safe and quiet. Which he speak's to set out the
whole generation of Merchants in that age, whose custom it was to be
sollicitous for traffic above all things, and consequently about the Sea it
self, which would not afford them safe Voyages, did not the Kings of England,
as Sovereigns thereof, according to their Right and Custom, provide for the
security of this, as a Province under their Protection. The words of Chaucer
are these, His reasons spoke he full solemnly,
Showing always the encreas of his winning;
He would the Sea were kept for any thing
Betwixe Middleborough and Orewel.
Orewel is an Haven upon the Coasts in Suffolk. Middleborough is in Zealand.
The whole Sea that flows between Britain and Zealand the English Merchants
would have secured, this they were wont solemnly and unanimously to pray for,
knowing that the Sea was part of the Kingdom, and the Protection of them part
of the duty of the Kings of England. For, as concerning any Protection herein
by any foreign Princes, any farther then in their own Harbors, or at the most
within the winding Creeks between those Islands which they possessed upon the
Coasts of Germany or Gallia Belgica, there is nothing, as far as we can
find, to be gathered from any Testimonies of former Ages. In the succeeding
Ages likewise, there is frequent mention of this kind of Guard, Defense, and
Government of the same Sea, as will hereafter more fully appear when we com to
speak of Tributes, and of the tenor and variety of the Commissions given to
our Admirals. But now, it is to be observed, that both the name and nature of
this Guard is very well known, not only by the use of the word both in the L.
(...). tit. Com^odati,. 5. and 8.
Imperial and Canon Ex^r. tit. de Officio Custodis Feclesiae.
Law, wherein it denotes that the Guardian ought to take a diligent care of
that thing, whereof he is owner, who does either lend it, or commit it to his
oversight, but also by the common and obvious use which the English make of
the same word in other Offices or Governments. For in those days of old, when
the title of Guardians or Wardens of the Sea was more usual, there were
appointed Wardens of the Ports, even as at this day there are Wardens of the
Counties (who are those Commanders of Counties called Sheriffs, and in the
usual form and tenor of their Writ have custodiam comitatus the Guard or
Defense of the County committed to their charge) Wardens or Keepers of the
Marches or Borders, Keepers of Towers or Castles, Parks, Houses, and the like.
Yea, and the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland was especially in the time of King Rot.
Cart. 2. Joann. R. in Dors. and Rot. Pat. 17. Joannis.
John and Rot. Pat. 3. Hen. 3. Membran* 4. etc.
Henry the Third, styled usually Warden or Keeper of Ireland, and his Office
or dignity, commonly called the Keepership of Ireland; after the same manner
as John Duke of Bedford, and Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, whom Henry the fifth
during the time of his absence in France, deputed to govern the Kingdom of
England, by turns, were called Custodes Angliae, Keepers of England, as we
very often find both in Th. Walsingham, ann. 1420, etc.
Histories and Rot. Parl. 8 Hen. 5. etc.
Records. So Arthur Prince of Wales was made Rot. Pat. 8 Hen. 7. part. 1.
Keeper of England* while Henry the seventh was beyond the Seas. So Piers
Gaveston was keeper of England, while Edward the second remained in France. So
were others also in like manner. The Governors also of the Islands of Jarsey
and Garnesey, and the rest that are situated in this Sea, who now are styled
Governors, Keepers, or Captains, were in Rot. Pat. 3 Hen. 3. ^n Juni^; Philippo
de Albiniaco, etc.
ancient times called only by the name of Guardians, or Keepers. This then
being so, what reason have we to think that our Ancestors did not use the
same Notion of Guardian or Keeper, and of guarding or keeping, in the name of
the Guardian and the Guard of the Sea, which they were wont to use in the Guard
and keeping of the Island, and in the other dignities or offices before
mentioned? Doubtless, in all these the peculiar Dominion and Soveraigntie of
him that conferred the Dignities, is so clearly signified and included, that
his Dominion or Ownership of the thing to be kept and guarded, as well as
Authority over the person dignified, is plainly implied in this Title. Nor is
it to be omitted, that in ancient times before the authority of the high
Admirals of England was sufficiently established by our Kings, and settled so
distinct, that the Command and Government of the Sea did belong only to them,
the Governors or Keepers of the Provinces whom we call Sheriffs of the
Counties, by virtue of their Office had also some Custody or Command of part of
that Sea which adjoined to their respective Provinces, as of a part of the
Kingdom of England. Which truly (to let pass other proofs) is sufficiently
evident by this, that many times in those days, they who, by the Common Law of
the Land, were wont, as at this day, to put in execution the Commands of the
King in those places only that were committed severally to their charge and
custody, did do the same also in the Sea it self as well as in any
Land-Province belonging to him from whom they received their authority. For, by
virtue of their ordinary power derived from the King, and such as was founded
upon the very same right by which they held the Government of the County or
Province, they did oftentimes remove the King's Ships and Fleets from one Port
to another by Sea, as through the Territory of the Province that was committed
to their charge. Which indeed is a thing we hear not of in later times; but
that so it was in the Reigns of King Henry the third, and Edward the first,
the Records Rot. Claus. 7 Hen. 3. dors. 6. 14. (...). 3. Memb. 22. and 17. in
dors. Claus. 17 (...). 3. Membr. 7. in dors. Rot. Pat. 24 Ed. 1. Membr. 17. and
Claus. 25 Ed. 1. Membr. 12. in Dorso etc.
of those times do testify. But afterward, the Universal Custody of the Sea,
excepting only what was extraordinary, was committed by our Kings to the high
Admirals of England, and to them alone or their Deputies, and apperteineth unto
them now by an unquestionable right. But when any person is entrusted with that
Guardianship or Custody, the possession and dominion of the King who intrust's
or give's him the Authority, is comprehended in that Government or Command;
which also is confirmed by words most express and home to the business in hand*
that are to be seen in a Libel, or Bill of Complaint Chap. XXVII. and XXVIII.
, hereafter mentioned, which was exhibited by a great number of the
neighbor-Nations, to the Commissioners of our Edward the first, and Philip the
fair King of France.

The Dominion of the English Sea asserted from those Tributes or Customs that
were wont to be imposed, paid, and demanded, for the Guard or Protection
thereof, after the Norman Conquest. CHAP. XV.
COncerning the Tributes or Customs that were wont to be imposed, paid, and
demanded, for the Guard of the English Sea, there are very ample ancient
Testimonies, all along since the Reign of the Normans: And those things which
have been already mentioned touching the Guard of the Sea, do not a little
confirm it. It is manifest, that the Tribute imposed, in the time of the
English-Saxons, for the Guard of the Sea, which was called Danegeld (of whose
Original and use we have Chap. 11.
already spoken) was wont now and then to be paid heretofore under the Norman
Kings. After the words there cited out of the ancient Dialogue touching the
Exchequer, about the payment thereof before the Norman Conquest, it immediately
fallows thus in the same Dialogue: In his Reign (that is to say, the ^^ig^ of
William the first) the Danes, as well as other Robbert of Land and Sea,
restrained the Invasions of Enemies, knowing this to be true which is written,
When a strong man armed keep's his house, he possesses his goods in peace. For
they were not ignorant, that resolute and valia^^ men would not let injuries
pass unrevenged. Therefore whereas the La^d had paid it along time in the same
King's Reign, they were unwilling to pay that every year, which had been
exacted upon urgent necessity in time of war: But yet they would not have it
wholly cashiered, because of sudden occasions. Therefore it was seldom paid in
his Reign, or the Reign of his Successors* that is, only then, when they
either had or suspected a war with Foreiners. And among the Apud Roger.
Hovedenium in Annal. part. 2. page 344. Edit. Londin. and 603. in Edit.
Francofurt. and apud G. Lambard. in Archaeonomia page 128.
old Laws of England we find that William Rufus requiring aid of the Barons
for the regaining of Normandy out of the hands of his brother Robert, surnamed
Cortehole, who was upon a Voyage to the Holy Land, Danegeld was granted to him,
not established, nor confirmed by a Law; that is to say, four shillings upon
every Hide of Land, which were paid for defending the Dominion by Sea. For,
that was the intent and end of Danegeld, according to its nature and original.

Moreover, Annal. part. 1. page 276. Edit. Londin. page 482. Edit. Francofurt.
Roger Hoveden says expressly, that it was usually paid until the time of King
Stephen. He speaking of the promises which he made at the time of his
Coronation, says, Thirdly, he promissed that he would remit Danegeld for
ever, that is, two shillings upon an Hide, which his Predecessors were went to
take every year. The same also is affirmed by Matthew Paris, and Ms. in
bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Roger of Wendover, out of whom the Chronicles set forth by Matthew until the
nineteenth year of Henry the third, or the year of our Lord MCCXXXV. were
wholly taken. They say of King Stephen, Tertio vovit quod Danegeld, id est, and
qualibet yda terrae duos solidos, quos Antecessores ejus consueverant accipere
in aeternum annis singulis condonaret. So indeed we read it in the In
Biblioth. Cottoniana.
Manuscript Books of this Matthew, whereby the Printed ones are to be amended,
who render it only thus: Tertio vovit, quod Antecessores ejus accipere
consueverant, in aeternum annis singulis condonaret. But this also is added by
Hoveden; These especially, and diverse other things he promissed before God,
but kept none of them, as we are told likewise by Paris and Wendover* So that
this Tribute was wont to be paid in the Reigns of William the first, and the
second, Henry the first, and King Stephen also, for the guard of the Sea. And
it appears by the accomp^s of the Exchequer, that it was paid sometimes in the
time of Henry the second. And after that it grew out of date, another course
was wont to be taken very frequently, and used as the Custom of the Land, that
Pay, and Provisions might not be wholly wanting, to maintain the Dominion of
the Kingdom of England by Sea. Mention is made touching this particular in the
Court-Rolls of Edward the first M. 25. Ed. 1. Comm.. Ban^. R^t. 72. Penes
Camerarios Scaccarii.
, Terrarum ad Custodi^^ Maris agistatarum; that is, of such Lands as were
charged with a Payment or Tribute for the guard of the Sea. We know indeed
also, that it was in the same manner collected at that time, under pretense of
the Sea, for the pay and maintenance of Landforces near the Shore. But certain
it is, that the Sea it self was guarded then with Naval-Forces, as well as the
Shore by Landforces, and so that that Payment belonged either to the Sea it
self, or else to the Shore as well as the Sea. Moreover, Subsidies have been
demanded of the people in Parliament, Pour Rot. Parl. 13 Edw. 3. Art. 6.
la salvation du Royalme and de eu^ Mesines and auxint de la Mere, de la March
d^ Escoce, de Gascoign and des Isles; that is, for defense of the Kingdom, the
Sea belonging thereunto, the Scottish Border, Gasooign, and the Isles. Thus the
Sea, and its defense and Dominion is reckoned in an equal right and condition
with that of the Kingdom, the Borders, and the Isles. Several other instances
there are of that kind. But that especially is to be observed in this place,
which we find in the Parlamentarie Records of King Richard the second,
concerning a Tribute or Custom that was imposed upon every ship that passed
through the Northern Admiraltie, that is, in the Sea which stretches it self
from the Thames mouth along the Eastern shore of England toward the
North-East, for the pay and maintenance of the Guard or Protection of the Sea.
Nor was it imposed only upon the ships of such Merchants and Fishermen as
were English, but also by the same right in a manner upon those of any
Foreiners whatsoever, no otherwise than if a man that is owner of a Field,
should impose a yearly Revenue, or Rent for the liberty of Thorowfare, or
driving of Cattle, or Cart, through his Field. Payment was made at the rate of
six pence a Ton upon every Vessel that passed by; except such ships only as
brought Merchandise out of Flanders to London, or that carried Wool and Skins
from any other place within the Jurisdiction of that Admiraltie to Calais. If a
Vessel were employed to fish for Herrings, it paid the rate of six pence a week
upon every Ton. If for other kinds of Fish, so much was to be paid every
three weeks; as they who brought Coals hither from New Castle, paid it every
three months. But if a Vessel were bound for Prussia, Norwaie, Scone, or any of
the neighboring Countries, it paid a particular Custom, according to the weight
and proportion of the Freight. And if any were unwilling, it was lawful to
compel them to pay. That is to say, there were certain Officers that had
authority to exact it, having the Command of six ships, Men of War, for this
kind of Guard or Protection. But the whole matter I here faithfully set down
out of the Rot. Part. 2 Rich. 2. part. 2. art. 38. in scheduld.
Original, in the same language it was written, that is, the Norman Language of
that time.

C'est l'Ordinance and Grante, per l'aduis des Marchaunds de Londres, and des
autres Marchaunds verse la North, per ^ossent de touz les Communes de Parliament,
par devant le Comte de Northomberland and le meaire de Londres, p^r la guard
and tuicion du mier and costers del Admiralte de North ove deux Niefs, deux
Bargis, and deux Ballingers armez and arraiez pur guerre sur les coustagis que
s'ensuient.
Primerement, pur prendre de Chescun Nief and Craier, de quele portage q'il
soit que pass per la mier dedeinz le dicte Admiralte alant and returnant pur
la voyage de chescun tonnetight VId. horspris Niefs chargez ove vins, and Niefs
chargez ove marchandises en Flandres qe serront frettez and dischargez a
Londres, and Niefs chargez ove leynes and peues a Londres ou ailleurs dedeinz
la dicte Admiralte que serront dischargez a Caleis; les quieux Niefs les
Gardens de la dicte mier ne serront tenuz de les conduire sans estre allovez
Item, de prendre de chescun vesseau pessoner qe pessent sur la mier du dit
Admiralte entour harang, de quelle portage q'il soit, en un semain, de chescun
tonnetight VId. Item, de prendre des autres Niefs and vesseauz pessoners que
pessont entour autres pessons sur la mier dedeinz la dicte Admiralte, de quele
portage q'il soit, en trois semaignes de chescun tonnetight VId. Item, de
prendre de touz autres Niefs and vesseaux passanz par mier dedeinz la dicte
Admiralte, chargez ove Charbons ou Novel Chastiele seur Tyne de quele portage
q'il soit, en le quarter de un an, de chescun tonnetight VId. Item, de prendre
de touz autres Niefs, Craiers and vesseaux passanz per mier dedeinz la dicte
Admiralte, chargez ove biens des Marchanz queconques en Espreux, ou en Northway
ou en Scone, ou en ascune lieu en mesme les parties de pardela, pur le voyage
alant and retornant, de chescun last Squar, viz. lastas graves VId.
This is the Ordinance and Grant by the advice of the Merchants of London, and
other Merchants toward the North, by the Assent of all the Commons in
Parliament, before the Earl of Northumberland, and the Mayor of London, for the
Guard and tuition of the Sea, and the Coasts of the Admiraltie of the North,
with two Ships, two Barges, and two Ballingers, armed and fitted for War, at
these rates following.
First, To take of every Ship and Bark, of what burden soever it be, which
passes through the Sea within the said Admiraltie, going and returning, for
the Uoiage, upon every Tun VId, Except Ships laden with Wines, and Ships laden
with Merchandises in Flanders, which shall be unladen and discharged at
London, and ships laden with wools and skins at London, or elsewhere within the
said Admiraltie, which shall be discharged at Calais; which ships the
Guardians of the said Sea shall not be bound to convoy without allowance.
Item, To take of every Fisher-boat that fisheth upon the Sea of the said
Admiraltie for Herrmgs, of what burden soever it be, for each week, of every
Tun VId. Item, To take of other Ships and Fisher-boats, that Fish for other
kinds of Fish upon the sea, within the said Admiraltie, of what burden soever
they be, for three weeks, of every Tun VId. Item, To take of all other ships
and Uessels passing by Sea, within the said Admiraltie, laden with Coals from
New Castle upon Tyne, of what burden soever they be, for a Quarter of a year,
of every Tun VId. Item, To take of all other ships, Barks, and Uessels passing
by sea, within the said Admiraltie, laden with Goods of any Merchants
whatsoever for Prussia or for Norway, or for Scone, or for any other place in
those Parts beyond the sea for the Uoiage going and returning of every Last
VId.
So run the Records of Parliament, which in that Age were almost all written in
this kind of Language; Not such as arrived at shore were charged here (as in
most other places) with Customs, as upon the Account only of the shore; but
those that passed or sailed by, or used Fishing, as well Strangers as Natives.
And this was upon the request also of the Estates in Parliament under Henry the
fifth in the preferring of a certain Bill, which I have taken out of the
Records, and set down at large Chap. 23.
hereafter. That is to say, they desired it as being very well instructed in
the ancient Law and Custom touching that particular, and of the Kings Dominion.
Nor can any thing be said more expressly, for asserting the Dominion of the
King of England over the Sea it self. For, it is clearly the interest of him
who is Lord or Owner of the place, to impose paiments and services within a
Territory.

Moreover, in the time of Henry VI, William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk being
accused in Rot. Parlam. 28. Hen. 6. art. 38.
Parliament, the principal head of the Charge was, that he had converted the
Subsidy money to other uses, which had been imposed and levied for the Guard
of the Sea. The words in the English are, For the Defense and tuycion and saufe
keeping of the Sea, as we read it in the Records. A demand was made also in
Rot. Parlam. 32. Hen. 6. articul. 30. and 41.
Parliament, in the two and thirtieth year of the same King, of forty thousand
pounds, For the defense and saufegard of the Sea; as we read likewise in the
Records. But why do I cite them here? In those Stat. 1. Edward. 6. 1. Mari^
Reginae, 1. Elizabethae, 1. Jacobi Regis.
Acts of Parliament which are published abroad in Print, we very often find
it, as a thing asserted by the Estates of the Realm in Parliament, that the
Kings of England have time out of mind, by authority of Parliament, taken large
sums of money, by way of Subsidy or Custom, upon Merchandise either imported
or exported, For the defense of the Realm, and the keeping and the saufegard of
the Seas, for the intercourse of Merchandise safely to come into and to pass
out of the same (which is the usual form of words.) That is to say, these words
are part of the Preface or Preamble which was usually placed in the beginning
of any Law or Statute, whereby that most known Custom or Impost of Tonnage and
Powndage was wont to be imposed, For the keeping and sure defending of the
Seas against all persons entending or that shall extend the disturbance of us
your said Commons in the intercourse and the invading of this your Realm. So
that the King of England has ever been so accounted the Arbitrator and Lord of
Commerce throughout these Seas, that it could not lawfully be hindered without
his Commission. Which truly is a manifest evidence of that Dominion or
Ownership, whereof we treat. And here you see also that the defense of the
Realm, that is, of the Island (for sometimes the Isle alone, and sometimes the
Sea also, as I shall show by and by, is comprehended in that name) and of the
Sea, as of those things which are held and possessed by one and the same Right,
is joined together. The Tribute or Custom aforementioned, which was wont to
be imposed, and the usual form of the same Imposition, may be seen complete
in the printed Acts of Parliament of K. Kdward the Sixth, and others following.
But it appears most certain by the Rolls, that the Predecessors also of this
Edward, whose Records are yet extant, did enjoy the same or the like, according
to the various Custom of the Times.

Observations touching the Dominion of the English and Irish Sea, from the
tenor and variety of those Letters Patents or Commissions Roial, whereby the
Admirals of England were wont to be put in Authority. CHAP. XVI.
THe usual form of Commission, whereby the High Admiral of England is wont to
be invested with Authority for the Guard of the Sea, run's thus at this day,
as it has don also for very many years past. We give and grant to N. the
Office of our great Admiral of England, Ireland, Wales, and of the Dominions
and Islands belonging to the same, also of our Town of Calais and our Marches
thereof, Normandy, Gascoigne, and Aquitain; And we have made, appointed, and
ordained, and by these Presents We make, appoint, and Ordain him the said N.
our Admiral of England, Ireland, and Wales, and our Dominions and Isles of the
same, Our Town of Calais and our Marches thereof, Normandy, Gascoign, and
Aquitain; as also general Governor over all our Fleets and Seas of our said
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, our Dominions and Islands belonging to the
same. And know ye further, that We of ^u^ especial grace and upon certain
knowledge etc. Do give and grant to the said N. our great Admiral of England and
Governor general over our Fleets and Seas aforesaid, all manner of
Jurisdictions, Autorities, Liberties, Offices, Fees, Profits, Duties,
Emoluments, Wrecks of the Sea, Ejectments, Regards, Advantages, Commodities,
Preheminences and Privileges Whatsoever, to the said Office our great Admiral
of England and Ireland, and of the other Places and dominions aforesaid in any
manner whatsoever belonging and appertaining.



And afterward there follow very many other particulars in the King's
Commission, setting forth that most ample Command and Jurisdiction. In former
times, as has been already shown you, this kind of Commanders were called
Custodes Maris, Guardians or Keepers of the Sea, who afterward began to be
invested with the name of Admirals, in the Reign of Edward the First. But their
Commands were usually restrained to certain Limits of Coasts; So that
particular Commanders were sometimes set over each of the Three, Western,
Southern, and Northern Coasts, but for the most part over the Western and
Northern. Seldom was one set over both, before that the Title of Admiral of
England, Ireland, and Aquitain was put into the Commissions; of which more by
and by. But as the name of Guardian of the Sea was taken from the Sea it self,
whereof he was Governor as of a Province; so that of Admirals (a word, whose
Original is very uncertain; but (...) or Georgius Codinus, de Officiis
Constantinopolit. cap. 2.
Amiralius was used of old for a Commander of a Fleet or Navy, not only in
the West, but also in the Eastern Empire) derived its name of Dignity, either
from the Fleet wherewith he defended his Jurisdiction at Sea (as it was usual
heretofore) or else from the Land, either bordering upon that Jurisdiction or
joined therewith, as it has been in the later Form of Commissions. Whereupon,
from the time of Edward the first, unto Henry the Fourth, about one hundred
and Fifty years, they were in solemn manner created Admirals of the Fleet or
Navis of our Ships, toward the Northern Parts, or toward the Western Parts or
the Southern, or (as it ^^ll out sometimes) of both together. For, the Southern
and Western Coast did, as appears by the thing it self, signify one and the
same: That is to say, the Coast stretched here and there along the Shore from
the North of the Thames. But as the Dignity of those Officers called Comes and
Magister Equitum of the West, Magister Equitum throughout Gallia, Magister
Militum throughout the East, Magister Militum throughout Thrace, and others of
that kind in the Imperial Offices, did no less denote the Authority and
Jurisdiction of them that commanded in these Provinces, who before were Lords
of the Provinces, than if they had been called Comes and Magister of the West,
Magister throughout Gallia, throughout the East, and throughout Thrace; so it
is evident, that the Admirals of the Fleets and Navies (whereby the Sea is
guarded after the same manner, as the Land is possessed by Landforces) did no
less set forth the Command and Dominion, and civil possession of those that had
authority over the Sea (who before were Lords of the Sea) then if they had been
styled Guardians of the Sea, Commanders, or Admirals, in their Commissions. And
such as were so constituted* Admirals of both Coasts, or of the whole English
Navy, were sometimes by a general name Rot. Pat. 10. Rich. 2. part. 2. Memb.
19. and 11. Rich. 2. part. 2. m. 12. ub^ Richardus Comes Arundeli^ sic
nuncup^tur in Protectionis revocation^.
called Admirals of England over the Sea, before that form of words was put
into the Royal Commissions. And of this sort of Admirals you have a Catalogue
set down by that eminent man Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossarie, where there
are others also that follow.

But such a change happened in the Form of the Commissions, in the time of Henry
the Fourth, that there was one man appointed Admiral not only of the fleets or
Navies, but of England and Ireland (over whose Fleet of Ships or Navy for
Defense of the Irish Sea, sometimes a particular person was made Admiral, as was
Rot. Pat. 21. Rich. 2. part. 2. m. 15.
Thomas Percie Earl of Worcester) yea and in express words also Admiral of
Aquitain and Picardie; As was Thomas Beaufort (who also was Duke of Excester
under Henry the Fifth) in the Ms. Formularum de Rebus Maritimis, in Biblioth.
Cottoniana. 3. Maii, 13. Hen. 4.
thirteenth year of Henry the Fourth, after he had surrendered the Commission,
whereby he had before been made Commander of the Fleets: And he was the first
(for ought we know) that was created in this manner. But in the next Form of
Commission the name of Picardie was left out* So indeed in the fourth year of
Henry the Sixth, or Anno Dom. MCDXXVI. John Duke of Bedford was by Commission
Rot. Pat. 4. Hen. 6. part. 2. Mem. 11. 26. Julii.
made Admiral of England Ireland and Aquitain. That Form continued about 88.
years, or throughout the Reigns of Henry VI, Edward IV Richard III, Henry
VII, and the three first years of Henry VIII. And about that time, ten others
were in like manner made Admirals, for the most part perpetual, of England,
Ireland, and Aquitain; the last of which was John Earl of Oxon, who was
Commissionated in that Rot. Part. 1* Hen. 8. part. 1.
Form, in the first year of Henry the Eight. But there followed another
alteration, or addition of Titles, in the fourth year of that King, Anno Dom.
MDXIII. At that time, Sir Edward Howard Knight, son of Thomas Earl of Su^^ie,
afterward Duke of Norfolk, was made Rot. Pat. 4. Hen. 8. part. 2. Augusti. 15.
Admiral of England, Wales, Ireland, Normandy, Gascoign, and Aquaitain. To
which words, Rot. Pat. 28. Hen. 8. part. 2. Augusti. 16.
Calais and the Marches thereof are added in the Commission of William
Fitzwilliams (who also was Earl of Southampton) being appointed Admiral in the
twenty eight year of King Henry the Eight. This Form of Commissions held in
use afterward, through the whole Reign of that Henry, adding (according to
ancient Custom) the clauses touching Jurisdiction. But in the beginning of
Edward the Sixth, Thomas Baron Seymour of Sudeley, brother to Edward Duke of
Somerset, was made Admiral Rot. Pat. 1. Edw. 6. part. 6. 17. Febr. membran. 9.
almost in the same words, as that William Earl of Southampton; inserting after
the name of Calais, Boloign and the Marches of the same. After him followed
John Earl of Warwick, who was created by Edward the Sixth, in the third year of
his Reign, Rot. Part. 3. Ed. 6. part. 2 November. 28.
our Admiral of England, Ireland, Wales, Calais, and Boloign, and our Marches
of the same, of Normandy, Gascoign, and Aquitain; as also Governor general
over all our Fleets and Seas; And in the same Commission he is styled
afterward, Great Admiral of England and Governor of our Fleets and Seas. But
after a while, the name of Boloign being omitted, the next high Admiral of
England was created in the very same Form of words, as is mentioned before in
the beginning of the Chapter. For, in the same Rot. Pat. 1. Mariae Reginae,
part. 5. ^0. Mar^^. Membr. 3.
Form was William Baron Howard of Effingham Son of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, made
Admiral in the beginning of Queen Marie, or Anno Dom. MDLIII. And the Command
or Government of those Seas, as the principal charge of that Office or
Dignity, is more notably expressed there, as you may see, than in the
Commission of the Earl of Warwick. From that time forwards, the very same Form
was kept always; as in the Commission of the high Admiralship granted to
Edward Baron Clinton (afterward Earl of Lincoln) in the Reign of Rot. Pat. 4.
and 5. Phil. and Mariae, par. 1. Feb. 10.
Philip and Marie; also in the Commission of Charles Baron of Effingham,
afterward Earl of Nottingham, in the time of Q. Rot. Pat. 27 Eliz. R. part.
10. 8. Julii.
Elizabeth; and of Charles Duke of York, in the time of King Rot. Pat. 9. Jacobi
Regis, part. 9. Jan. 27.
James; besides George Duke of Buckingham, who enjoied the same Office or
Command in the same words, in the Reigns of Rot. Pat. 16 Jacobi Regis, part. 17.
James and Charles. So that for above eighty years or thereabout (that is, from
the beginning of Q. Marie) the whole form, as it is set down in the beginning
of this Chapter, was ever expressly retained in the Commissions of the high
Admiralship of England, so far as they denote either the Countries, or the
Seas, or the Dominion of the same. But therein the Admiral is styled Governor
General over all our Fleets and Seas, (just as John Earl of Warwick was
likewise expressly appointed in general terms under Edward the sixth) or over
our Seas aforesaid. But what were those Seas, or the Seas aforesaid? They are
in the foregoing words expressly called the Seas of our said Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, our Dominions and Islands of the same. That is, in plain
terms, Mer d' Engleterre, d' Ireland, and Gales, or the Sea of England,
Ireland, and Wales; after which manner the Seas belonging to the Dominion of
England, are sometimes also described in Stat. 20 H. 6. cap. 11.
our Laws, which are called likewise now and then by 2 Ed. 3. fol. 9. seu 36 a.
pl. 6.
our Lawyers, Les quatre Miers d'Engleterre, or the four Seas of England,
divided according to the four Quarters of the World. So that in the most
received form of this Commission, after the beginning of Queen Marie's Reign
(out of which also the sens and meaning of former Commissions is to be
collected) we have a continual possession or Dominion of the King of England
by Sea, pointed out in express words for very many years. And what we have
already spoken by way of Collection out of these that followed the beginning
of Marie, touching the sens or meaning of former Commissions, wherein a
positive Command of the Sea is not expressed, is truly (to omit the thing it
self, which sufficiently intimate's as much of its own nature) not a little
confirmed upon this ground, that he also, who before any express mention of
our Seas, took place in the form of the Commission of the high Admiralship, was
next preferred to the same dignity, was immediately after his Creation,
according to the whole Title of his Office (as being the same title which
indeed always belonged to the Admirals of England) styled; Great Admiral of
Rot. Pat. 1 Ed. 6. part. 6. membran. 5. Augusti, 30.
England, and Governor General of the Navy and our Seas. So verily Thomas
Baron Seymour (whom I mentioned before) is styled Admiral of England in the
Patent Roll granted to him by Edward the sixth.

It is proved by words plain enough in the form of the Commissions for the
Government or command of the high Admiral of England, from ancient to the
present time, that the Sea, for whose guard or defense, he was appointed by
the King of England as Lord and Sovereign, was ever bounded toward the South,
by the shore of Aquitain, Normandy, and Picardie. CHAP. XVII.
BUT in the Form already shown, which has continued in use for so many years,
you see mention is made only of the Seas of our Kingdoms of England, and
Ireland, our Dominions, and Islands belonging to the same, as the Province, for
whose guard or defense the Admiral was appointed; that is, (as we have told
you) the English, Irish, and Welsh Sea, all which is contained under the name
of the British, as it has been observed at the beginning of this Book. Yet the
names of Normandy, Gascoign, and Aquitain, besides Calais, are added, which
are Provinces seated upon the shore over against us. As to what concern's them
in this place, they are either to be considered in the same manner as if they
had been always held in subjection by the English from the time of the first
mention of them in the Commission; or as they have already for some Ages past
been out of their Jurisdiction.

But suppose in the first place, that they had always remained in the
Jurisdiction and Possession of the English. Questionless, howsoever the Admiral
of England might then, according to this Form of Commission, have had Courts of
Admiraltie in those Provinces (as there is no place almost without Courts of
Admiraltie, even where not any Dominion of the Sea at all is pretended to
belong unto the place, wherein they are held) yet by no means might he thence
be called Commander of the Sea it self (if so be you except the Ports, and
such like Creeks of the Sea, which are as it were incorporated within Land)
either as it may be said to belong to Normandy, or to Aquitain, Gascoign or
Picardie: But by virtue of this form of Commission, he had exercised Maritim
Jurisdiction in those Provinces beyond Sea, no otherwise almost than our
Admiral in England, and Ireland, or others the like do at this day, over men's
persons and goods upon the African, Mediterranean, Indian, or any other Sea at
a remote distance: For, the extent of such a Jurisdiction by Sea is without
bounds. But the extent of his Jurisdiction, or of the Sea, over which he is
placed Admiral, as Warden, Guardian, or President, to defend and keep it under
the Dominion of him who is Lord thereof, are bounded. And it sufficiently
appears by express words of the ancient form of Commission, that no Sea is
contained therein, as a Province to be defended, but that which is either
English, Welsh, or Irish, or relate's to England, Wales, and Ireland, as an
appendant. From whence it fallows, that those names of the opposite shores in
the Commissions do not at all mention the Sea flowing between as proper to
those shores, or belonging to them in any kind, but serve only as a limit
beyond the Sea (so far as concern's the limiting of the English and Irish Sea;)
as those names also of England, Wales, and Ireland, serve in stead of a limit
on this side of the Sea, so far as in the Commissi* on they denote the Sea
under the Admiral's Charge or Protection: So that, even as that Officer called
the Count of the Saxon shore throughout Britain, was eminently according to the
name of his dignity, Commander of the whole Sea flowing between Gallia and
Britain, as of a particular Province, (which has been shown Chap. 6. of this
Book.
already) and had the name of the opposite shore for the limit of his
Jurisdiction; so the high Admiral of England, or Commander of the Sea belonging
to the English Empire, has in the King's Commission the shore of Normandy,
Gascoign, Aquitain, and Picardie, to set forth only the Beyond Sea limits of
his Jurisdiction or Command (so far as he has charge of defending the
Sea-Province or Dominion belonging to England) in those shores which lie over
against us. For, if any say, that the case is otherwise, wherefore then is not
the sea over which he has command, denominated from some of these shores over
against us, as well as of the English, Irish, and Welsh, or the Seas of the
Kingdoms of England, Ireland, and Wales, and of the Dominions and Isles
belonging to the same? The Reason is, because no other Sea, as it falls under a
Civil consideration (for we speak not here of the denomination given by
Geographers) does flow between the Territories on this and the other side of
the Sea which are mentioned in his Commission. Therefore as in that Roman
dignity of the Count of the Saxon shore throughout Britain, the shore was the
transmarine bound or limit of that dignity, so also in the Command of the high
Admiral of England (so far only as he has a Province or Jurisdiction by Sea,
as a Governor of a Territory) those opposite shores or transmarine Provinces,
named in his Commission, are to be reckoned the Bounds of the Sea under his
Charge or Protection. And this truly is sufficiently apparent from the words of
the Commission already handled, if so be we suppose (as hitherto we have
don for discourse sake) that the Kings of England did, all the while that form
of Commission was in use, retain those Beyond sea Provinces under their
Dominion as the Romans had don of old. But the matter is made more evident, if
we observe how the names of those Provinces have, at least, from the time of
Queen Marie, been so kept in the form of this Commission, that since her Reign
there remain's not the least ground for any of those in the Commission, to
signify any other thing than what we have already declared: For, in her
Reign Calais was yielded up to the French, and since that time, the English
have not been possessed of any Province upon any part of the opposite shore.

Moreover also, in the one and thirtieth year of King Henry the sixth, or Anno
Dom. MCCCCLIII. the English were driven out of Gascoign, Aquitain, and the
other Provinces of France, by the French King, Charles the seventh: Nor was
there after the time of this Henry, any Officer or Governor of Note appointed,
or that could conveniently be appointed by the English either in Normandy, or
in Aquitain it self; yea, nor in Normandy, either after or long before the
loss of Aquitain. It is true indeed, that the County of Guise, Calais, and some
other Towns in Picardie, besides those neighboring ones that Henry the eight
gained by force of arms in the same Country, remained long after in subjection
to the Kings of England; yea, and that a small part of Rot. Vascon. 6. and 7
Ed. 4. etc. in Capella Rotulorum.
Aquitain yielded obedience, though not constantly, to the King of England, for
some years after Henry the sixth; but not the whole Duchy. Nor does it make to
the contrary, that sometimes under some of our later Kings, there was one
appointed Captain General or Governor over all our subjects in Normandy, with
which Title both Ambrose Earl of Warwick, and Adrian Poynings were honored in
the time of Queen Rot. Pat. 4. Eliz. R. part. 1. in dorso.
Elisabeth. For, they were merely Generals of the Forces that were transported
thither to assist the King of France, not invested at all with any Government
or Command of the Duchy of Normandy. But yet, even after the time of Henry
the sixth, the name of Aquitain was constantly retained in the Commission of the
High Admiralship of England: That is, for one hundred and fourscore years, or
thereabout, after the English were driven out of Aquitain, as appears in the
former Chapter. Hereto at length was added (as is shown there also) the name of
Normandy, in the beginning of Henry the eight: whereas notwithstanding the
King of England, was not possessed of Normandy a long time before, nor in any
wise after; nor did he in that agreement Rot. Franciae, 2 Hen. 8.
made a little before with the King of France, claim any other possession in
Picardie, besides that of Calais, and the Territory of Guise, and Hammes. And
so it has continued now for one hundred twenty two years also in the
Commission of Maritim Government or high Admiralship of England, without any
relation at all had to the Government or Command of the Duchy it self, but
only of the shore, which bounded the Sea under his Master's protection, upon
the Coast of France. For, although Aquitain indeed was first added to the names
of England and Ireland, in that Commission, while the English possessed the
Duchy of Aquitain, nevertheless it not only so remained likewise in that
form of Commission constantly, even after the expulsion of the English, until
our times, but Normandy also (which had never been named before in the
Commission of high Admiral of England) was added, and this some Ages after that
the English were wholly deprived of the Duchy it self: So that either these
names do serve in stead of a Limit to the Sea under his protection, or else we
must perforce admit contrary to reason, that they signified nothing in the
Commission for so many years. For, we see that those names of opposite Shore
were retained in the Admiral's Commission, even from the end of Queen Marie's
Reign until our times, or for the space of 77 years, though the English in the
mean time were not possessed of the least part of France; as also that Normandy
was added many years before, but yet long after the English were outed of its
possession. Nor ought any man fondly to imagine that these Names were inserted,
because of that right the King of England had to the Crown of France. For
indeed, the Kings of England have, by an ancient Right, usually entitled
themselves Kings of France: Also the Dutchies of Aquitain and Normandy and the
other Provinces of France mentioned in this Commission, are comprehended in
that name of the Kingdom, as the lesser in the greater. But if that had been
the cause, certainly the name of France should have been ascribed to our
Admiral; yea, and other Officers of that Kingdom have been made in the same
manner by the King of England after he was driven thence: Of which thing there
is not the least evidence indeed any where exstant. And it is to be observed,
as soon as ever an alteration was made in the Draught of the Commission, from
that denomination of the Command of the Admirals of England, which was derived
from the Fleets and Coasts over which they had command, unto that which is made
up of the Kingdoms and Provinces, that then an Addition was made of Aquitain;
to the end that the limit or Bound, as well on this as the other side of the
Sea, might be pointed out by the Shores: The name of Normandy being added
afterward, and retained still together with Calais and the Marches thereof and
Aquitain, upon the same account. But while that the Kings of England were in
former times possessed of Normandy, Aquitain, and other Countries in France,
there are not found in the form of Commission, wherein the Kingdoms and
Provinces (as has been already shown) are expressly nominated, any other
Admirals or Governors of the Maritim Province or Dominion by Sea made by them,
besides those to whose care the Fleets and Coasts were committed in the manner
already mentioned; that is to say, the whole Sea flowing between our British
Isles and the Provinces over against them, and the Fleets belonging to any
Territories whatsoever of the Kings of England, were at that time by a peculiar
right of the Kingdom of England in the Sea, so subject to them who were so put
in Command over the English Fleets and Coasts, that there remained neither
place nor use for any other Commanders of that kind. Which may be said
likewise of those times, wherein some of the Kings of England stood possessed
also of the Kingdom of France; as Edward the Third, and the two Henry's 5th and
6th. Nor is it a bare conjecture, that they did not put any others in command
over the Sea and Fleets, besides those to whom, by right only of the Kingdom
of England, the power was committed (to wit, according to that right which
comprehended the whole Sea flowing between) but it is sufficiently proved also
upon this ground, that we have the ancient public Rotuli Franciae, Norman*
(...), Vas^o^i^, Archivo ar^is Londinen^^^, Regum ^er^ singulorton annis
distinc^i.
Records of those times, touching the Offices constituted by our Kings in
France, and those Provinces beyond Sea, in most whereof I find not the least
sign of the contrary.

And if it be demanded here, wherefore it was that the Shore of Bretaign was
omitted (which in like manner lie's over against our Isle of Britain, and
together with the Shore of Picardie, Normandy, and Aquitain, sufficiently
take's up that whole Tract which stretches it self in the Realm of France,
before the English and Irish Sea;) certainly, if the aforementioned reason take
place, there is little cause to doubt that it happened thence, because the King of
England was not at any time so possessed of Bretaign, that being outed of it,
he needed to be very sollicitous touching the Bounds of the Sea-Territorie
adjoining. Distinct Lords of Territories confining on each other (as were the
King of England and Duke of Bretaign heretofore; for Bretaign had Kings and
Dukes of its own before Charles the Eight, under whom, Anno Dom. 1491. it was
united to the Realm of France) do for the most part keep their Bounds so
distinct, that they may be the more evidently taken notice of by all; but when
of such kind of Territories there is but one and the same Lord (as the King of
England was while he possessed either Normandy or Aquitain or any other
Maritim Province in France together with England) he being outed of either,
ought above all things to take care that the past confusion of possession be
not prejudicial to the future distinction of Bounds. For fear then, lest it
might have been pretended that even the Sea adjoining or confining with those
Maritim Provinces, which were a long time heretofore possessed by the English
and afterward taken away, was taken away together with the Provinces, whenas
perhaps, by reason of the past confusion of possession in one and the same
Lord, all men might not be sufficiently instructed touching the Bounds of the
English Sea placed, as we have said, upon the Shore over against us; therefore
for the setting forth of those Bounds, the name first of Aquitain after its
being lost was retained in the Admiral's Commission, and then that also of
Normandy was added. And afterward both of them, with the name of Calais and
the Marches, in stead of the Shore of Picardie, were for the same reason
continued down to our times. Which reason truly could not concern Bretaign at
all; nor Flanders likewise, nor any other Shores lying Eastward over against
us: All which nevertheless do, after the same manner, bound the Sea-Territorie
of England. Moreover, those things that have been hitherto observed, shall be
confirmed, by what we shall add next, touching the Office of Admiral among the
French.

Touching the Admirals of the Kingdom of France, or those constituted upon the
opposite Shore; their Original, nature, and variety. That the Sea it self
flowing between Britain and France, is not contained in that command of his, as
of one that is Governor of a Territory or Province; nor is there any thing in
it that may oppose the Dominion of the King of England by Sea. CHAP. XVIII.
THat there were Admirals also constituted by the French King upon the opposite
Shore of France, is known to every man. And as there is an Admiral appointed
in Gallia Narbonensis to over-see maritim Affairs there, so also on the
opposite Shore, there are distinct Offices of the Admiral of Aquitain,
Bretaign, and Normandy and the adjoining Coasts. But the French Lawyers of
late are wont to call their Admiral in Latin Praefectus Maris, Governor of the
Sea, as if the Sea were subject to him also as a Governor; whereas
notwithstanding, if the thing be rightly considered that Government of the Sea
by what name soever it be called, does not signify (as among the English) any
Dominion of one having command in any nearer part of the Sea (for, we speak
not of the Sea of Marseille, which has no relation hereunto but only of their
Naval Forces in any Sea whatsoever; together with the Government of the Seamen
and Jurisdiction over their persons and movables, which may fall under the
determination of a Judge pour raison ou occasion (as they Ar^est. ann. 1377. sub
Carolo 5. ^dict. Fram. Tom. 3. ^it. 2.
say) de faict de la mer, that is, by reason or upon occasion of any suit or
controversy arising about Sea-Affairs. For the more plain understanding
whereof we must make farther inquiry.

In the more ancient times, there were indeed Admirals or Governors of Sea
affairs among the French, yet so that their Writers do not a little differ
about the original of the dignity. They for the most part say, that Rotlandus
is found to have been Governor of the Sea of Aremorica or Choppin. de Doman^o
Franciae, lib. 1. tit. 1^^. 11. Pa^quier en les Recerches, live. 2. cap. 14. J.
Tilius de de Rebus Gallicis, lib. 2. Alii.
Bretaign under Charlemaign, whom they fetch out of Eginhartus who wrote the
life of Charles at that time. But in Eginhartus he is expressly called Governor,
not of the British Sea, but only of the Shore of Britaign, as we told you in
the Cap. 18.
former Book: In which name there is a description, not of one that govern's
the Sea as a Province, but who command's the Shore as the limit of his
dignity. That is to say, of the same kind as those Counts (or officers) were,
who were Capitular Caroli and Ludovi^. R R. lib. 5. cap. 4.
deputed in that Age to guard the Sea Coast, and secure it from the incursions
of enemies by Sea. There is also a In Gest. Normannorum, page 22.
nameless Author of a Chronicle belonging to a Monastery called Monasterium
Besuense, who write's that this guarding of the Shores under the Caroline Kings
was given over a little after the time of Charlemaign. But in the following
Ages, the Kingdom of France, being divided as it wereby piece-meals into
several principalites, that which a long retained this name of the Kingdom of
France, was reduced into so narrow a compass, that the Province of Narbon was
held by Sovereign Earls of its own, Aquitain or the Western Shore which lie's
more Southerly with Normandy by the English; Bretaign either by Kings or Dukes
of the same, and Flanders by Earls: So that whilst the whole Seacoast, except
Picardie, remained separate from that Kingdom, there was Sea little enough
lying before it. Yea, and the Naval Forces were small enough, of which (before
the accession of a larger Seacoast to the French Kingdom) there was most use
in the expedition of the holy War. Nor was any other Governor wont to be
appointed there by the name of Admiral, then he who as occasion required was
put in Command over the Navy and Military Affairs by Sea, yea, and was
borrowed from some Nation bordering upon the Sea, as the Genoeses or others of
that kind. But the Kings themselves had at that time no Command over the Sea,
as it is expressly written by Johannes Tilius, a Clark of the Parliament of
Paris. His words are these; De Rebus Gallicis, lib. 2. Add Laurent. Bochel. in
Thesauro Juris Gallicani. part. 1. page 90.
After that the Kingdom of France was lessened by divisions, and the Kings
confined to more narrow Dominions, because they had potent Vassals who enjoied
Feuds with absolute Soveraigntie, if you except their homage (for, the King of
England held the Dutchies of Normandy and Aquitain; Britain had a Duke of its
own; and slanders, Toulouse, and Provence had their Earls) the Kings of France
for a long time had no command over the Sea, and therefore had no need of
Admirals, until they undertook the Expedition for the holy Land, at which time
they made use of Genoeses whom they hired, with Spaniards, or other of their
neighbors that were well skilled in Sea-affairs, to under-take the care of
transportation, having no office appointed for that purpose; and by this means
they had many Admirals in one single Expedition. But after that the English had
quitted Normandy, and the Kingdom of France had gotten ground upon the
Seacoast, the use of Sea-Affairs also was somewhat augmented; That is to say,
about the times of John and Henry the third Kings of England. So that the
first Admiral that they reckon in the Catalogue of French dignities, of whom
any memory is left to posterity, was Enguerandus Coucaeus, in the time of
Philip the Bold King of France, or about the year 1280, as it is related by
Joannes Feronius. And what kind of dignity his was, appears sufficiently
thence, that his next Successors Matthew Momorancie, and John Harcourt were
only, upon a particular occasion, put in command over the Sea-Forces by Philip
the fair; as we Apud Andraeam Chesnium, in Historia Familiae Momoranciae, lib.
3. page 183.
understand by their Commission. Yea, and they are mentioned by William de
Nangis, by the title of Admirals; as others also are by In Chronic. Episcoporum
ultraject. and Com. Hollandiae.
Joannes de Beka, in the time of Philip the fair. Although De Rebus Gallicis,
lib. and vide Paschasium, en les Recerches, l. 2. c. 14.
Joannes Tilius reckon's Amaurius Viscount of Narbonne, to be the first that
bare the dignity of Admiral in France, as a constant settled Office over the
Affairs of the Sea; to wit, in the time of John and Charles the fifth Kings of
France, that is, about the year 1300; whilst Popelliner. en l'Amiral de France.
others are too busy in summing up diverse other particulars, touching the
Antiquity of this command among the French. Afterward Aquitain was added to
the Dominion of the King of France, in the year 1453. Henry the sixth of
England being driven out. But in the year 1481. the Province of Narbonne; in
the year 1491. the Duchy of Bretaign; and lastly, in the space of some years,
all that the English held in Picardie, was added also. So all the Seacoast,
except Belgium, returned into the Patrimony of the Kingdom of France. Hereupon
it came to pass, that four Sea-Governments or Admiralships were afterward in
use therein, notwithstanding that sometimes one and the same person held several
together. But of these, the Government that belong's to the shore of Normandy
and Picardie, is at this day usually called the Admiralship of France, because
before that the Province of Narbonne, Aquitain, and Bretaigne were annexed to
the patrimony of the Crown; the only Maritim Government in the Realm of
France, was that of Picardie, whereto Normandy was added afterward, as the
next Province; the other three being denominated from their respective
Provinces. The whole matter is very well set forth by Renatus Choppinus. De
Domanio Franc. lib. 1. tit. 15. 13. Add Popelliner. En l'Amiral de France,
chap. 12.
There are (says he) four Governors of the French Sea, who bear an equal
command under a different title, and upon several Coasts of the Sea. For, in
ancient time, Aquitain was possessed by the English, Bretaign by its Dukes,
Provence by Hereditarie Earls, not by the Kings of France. And therefore at
that time, the Admiral of France had command only over the Belgic Sea of
Picardie, and Normandy, as far as the Coast of Bretaign. But then all the
other bordering Princes chose Governors of the Sea, or Admirals* peculiarly for
themselves. And therefore the English being driven out of Aquitain, and the
Countries of Provence, and Bretaign, being brought into subjection to the
Crown of France, the King supposing it not fit to innovate any thing, appointed
a Lieutenant and Admiral of Aquitain; likewise a Governor of Bretaign, with the
government of the Sea; as also in the Province of Gallia Narbonensis, in a
manner distinct and apart from the rest. But the chief Courts of Judicature
belonging to the French Admiral, are settled at Paris, and Roan. So he. And a
little after he write's, that there were Princes, not a few, who held the
Seacoasts as Beneficiaries, that enjoied the power of Admiral in their
Territories. But we have Edicts and Decrees concerning the Admiral's
Jurisdiction over the Maritim Forces, Affairs, and Persons, in the times of
Edict. Regum Franciae, lib. 3. tit. 5. and Popelliner. ca. 10.
Charles the fifth and sixth, Lewis the 12th, Francis the first, Henry the 2d and
3d, and other Kings of France; as also touching the Tenths of Spoils taken from
Enemies, and other things of that kind which relate unto the Goods and Persons
of such as are subject to the Crown of France, upon the account of any manner
of Navigation whatsoever. And in these Edicts he is sometimes called by the
King, Nostre Edict. Ludovici, 12. 148^.
Lieutenant general per la mer and greves d'icelle, that is, our Lieutenant
general throughout the Sea and the shores thereof. But this Lieutenant or
Governor (as they pleas to call him) of the Sea, was never at all in command
over any part of the Sea flowing between France and Britain, as over a Province
or Territory to be defended for the King of France, (after the same manner as
the Admiral of England) but in the Sea only over the Petrus Gregor. Tholosan.
in Syntagm. Juris, lib. 1. cap. 3.
Naval Forces, Persons, and Affairs belonging to the French Jurisdiction; much
after the same manner, as a Sovereign Prince take's cognizance of Offenders of
his own Retinue in a Foreign Territory, and rule's them as at home; but without
any pretense of his to a right of Dominion in that Territory. Which truly
there is no man but will conceiv, that shall in the first place observe the
defect and deep silence of ancient Testimonies, touching such a kind of
Dominion among the French, besides the Quality of that Government among them,
and at length the entire and most ample Power always exercised throughout the
Sea and the shore lying about it, under the sole command of the English, and
will but compare it for so many Revolutions of years, with those so long broken
and divided Dominions upon the opposite shore of France, and with the late
addition of the Seacoast to the Kingdom of France, according to those things
which have been already spoken about it. It is clear, that there are no
Testimonies before our time, concerning any Dominion of this sea, belonging to
the King of France. Nor are there any in our time, except certain Lawyers, who
speak of it either by the By, or in a Rhetorical flourish only, not in a way
of asserting it by strength of Arguments. Of these things I have spoken
already in the former Book; where also other matters are alleged, of special
observation, which confirm what is handled in this particular. But now let us
add hereunto, that the very French Historians, both of the past and present
Age, do affirm, that in ancient times the Kings of France therefore either had
no Admirals at all, or else that they were constituted now and then (only as
occasion required) because they had no Empire over the Sea, as Tilius says
expressly in the place abovementioned. In vain therefore does L'Amiral de
France, chap. 9.
Popellinerius reprehend those Historians, in saying it is false, because
Normandy, Picardie, and Flanders, were heretofore under the French Dominion.
For, not to mention this, that the Kings of France reigned a long time without
the possession of Normandy and Flanders, and retained not any other shore
besides that of Picardie, (as appears by what has been already shown, and by
the frequent Testimony of Historians) and the consequence does not appear to
be good, that they had any command over the Sea, because they were in
possession of some Seacoast; no more truly than it may be concluded, that a
man is Lord of a River in France, because he has Lands lying by it: whereas by
received Custom according to the Sanctyon des Coustomes des Eaus and Forests,
live. 2. chap. 1. cod. Hen. 3. lib 16.
Law of France, the King is Owner of all Rivers that are Navigable, where they
belong not to some subject by a particular prescription of possession, or some
other title, besides the possession of the adjacent Land, as the Custom is not
unusual also in other places.

But as to what concern's the Quality of this Maritim Government among the
French; it is to be considered, that as every one of the more eminent Offices
or Governments, has a peculiar place in their high Court of Parliament, and
that according to the nature of the Government, as it chiefly respect's any
Province or Government within the limits of the French Dominion, as the
Constable, the Grand Escuyer, or Master of the Horse, the Grand Master, and
others; yet the Admiral of France, has no place at all upon that account: As
it was determined in the time of Ann. 1552. 12 Jan. ut Notatur in Edict. Regum
Franciae, tom. 3. tit. 5. in Margin. Jo. Tilius, l. 2. Simon Marion in Placit.
5.
Henry the second, when such a place was plainly denied to Gaspar Collignie
Admiral of France, as he was Admiral, or had the Maritim Government; but it
was granted him as Governor of the Isle of France (as they call it) under the
King. For, by the title of Admiral, he had no Government in Chief within the
limits of the Kingdom; but because being Admiral of the Fleets and Sea (in the
aforesaid sens) which is out of the King's Dominion, he exercised Jurisdiction
over Persons and Affairs only upon the Account of the Sea; therefore in this
respect he was to be denied any place. For which cause likewise it came to
pass (as it seems) that those four distinct Admirals beforementioned, have in
like manner also a Government of Provinces, from which they are wont to be
denominated, as we understand by these passages already cited out of
Choppinus, and others that write of this matter. So they that have any
principal command within the limits of the Kingdom, that is, within the shores
of France, do enjoie an equal privilege with the other more eminent dignities,
of the Realm. Moreover also, the Regulation of those Rivers whereof the King of
France is Lord, are not under the Admiral's Government, but under the special
charge of those Officers, that are called Presidents or De quibus volumen
grande conscripsit Sanctyonius, and vide Cod. Hen. 3. l. 16.
Masters of the Waters and Forests. That is to say, the public Waters which
are within the Bounds of the Kingdom, and over which the King has Dominion, do
belong to another dignity; not at all to the Admiral, who, according to the
general nature of his Office, is not appointed to take charge of any Province
there, much less of the Rivers (as in England.) The principal intent therefore
of this Office or Dignity is only to command the Fleets by Sea; For which
cause also some years since Henry of Momorancie Admiral of France, having set up
a Statue on horse back at Chantillie in honor of his Father Henry Duke of
Momorancie Apud Andraeam Chesnium, in Hist. de Familia Momoranciaca, l. 5. pa.
445. Anno 1612.
, call's himself in Latin only Navalis Militiae Magistrum, Master of the
Militia by Sea, instead of Admiral, So that never any Admiral constituted by
the French King either of France, or Britain, or Aquitain, had any authority in
the Sea it self, whereby he might challenge a Dominion to himself as Governor
or Commander in Chief; which may be said in like manner of all the Admirals of
the Belgic and the neighboring shore on this side, and of the Cantabrian or
Spanish shore on the other side: For, the authority of them all, so far as
concern's this particular, has been and is alike. We know indeed, that this
dignity was wont to be styled Admiral of France, and Governor of the Roial
Navy, as the same Dignity among the English was usually called in the same
manner, Admiral of England, and Governor of the Roial Navy, in Rot. Franc. 10
Hen. 8. seu 1518. 4. October. cum Francisco primo. Rot. Foeder. and Tract. Jacobi
Regis cum Ludovico 13. etc.
several Leagues that have been made betwixt the English and French* But it is
clear by what has been shown, that they bare the Office or Dignity called by
the same name upon a different account; And the Quality of a Dignity is to
be valued by the nature of the Charge, not by the bare name or title. And let
so much serve to be spoken touching the defect of ancient Testimonies, and the
Nature or Quality of the Government.

But now as to what concern's the most ample and entire Command of the English
for very many Ages, and the comparing of it with those several Governments
heretofore on the opposite shore; it is most certain, that there was almost
from the very beginning of the very first Times of the English-Saxons one
entire Empire throughout England, and so on the whole shore which lie's over
against Germany, France, and that part of Spain, called Biscay, and this also
in the time of that Heptarchie which is mentioned by Writers: For, there was
always some one person who had most power therein, and to whom the rest yielded
obedience, as we are told by Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 5. and vide Camden. in
Brit. page 97.
Beda. And touching that particular there is a notable Testimony in Alcuinus,
where by reason of the Quarrels betwixt Offa King of the Mercians, that is
indeed, of the most large, and in a manner the most midland part of the
Heptarchie, and Charles (surnamed the Great) King of France, Navigation was so
Alcuinus apud G. Malmsbur. de gestis Regum, l. 1 c. 5. and inter Epist. Alcuini
in operibus ejus, pa. 1669
prohibited on both sides, that Trade was wholly obstructed; which truly cannot
be conceived, unless these large Territories near the Sea had been under the
Dominion of Offa; yea, the Inscription whereby Offa was wont to set forth his
Roial Title, was often expressed after this manner, Hemmingus Ms. in Cod. Eccles.
Wigorn. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana fol. 44. b. and 150. etc.
Offa, by the Grace of God, King of the Mercians, and also of the Nations round
about. But after the time of Egbert or the 800 year of our Lord, there is a
continued Catalogue plain enough of those Kings whether English-Saxons, or
Danes, who (unless you fondly except Edmund the Anglo*Saxon, and Canutus the
Dane, by whom the Kingdom was for some little time divided) did Reign without
any other sharer in the Dominion upon this shore. No wonder then that the Kings
of England being entire and absolute Lords in command of so ample a shore, for
so many Ages, did also take special care to retein the Dominion of the Sea
lying before it, as an Appendant of the Island; especially seeing they not
only had so long and large a command likewise on the shore over against us,
but also there were not any of their neighbors that could in any wise hinder
it, except such as possessed some petty Countries bordering on the Sea (which
truly may be so called, being compared to the spacious shore of the English
Empire) and those also that were under distinct Jurisdictions.

The sum of all this is, seeing that about the beginning of our great
Grand-Father's days, there was only a very small shore contained within the
bounds of the French Kingdom, and the Lords of the Maritim Provinces, by the
addition whereof that Kingdom (as we have already shown) was afterward
enlarged, did not so much as pretend any Right to the Dominion of the
Neighboring Sea, upon the interest of those Provinces; and seeing no Testimony
can be had in the Monuments of ancient Writers concerning such a kind of
Dominion, but that very many are found touching the Sea-Dominion of the Kings
of England, they having continually possessed the whole English shore in its
full latitude under one entire Empire for above a thousand years, and
concerning the perpetual enjoiment of the Sea, as an Appendant of the Kingdom;
Therefore it fallows, that their Right is very manifest in this particular,
and so that the Sea it self is a Province under the tuition or protection of
the Admiral of England, as part of the Kingdom; but that the Admirals of the
shore lying over against us are not in reason to be called Governors of the
Sea, in such a sens as may signify any Dominion of a Commander in Chief in the
Sea it self, out of the Ports or other In-lets of that kind. For which cause
also it was, that some Ages since very many of the Neighbor-Nations
understanding well enough the Right of England, made their Complaint in express
terms against Reyner Grimbald Admiral of the King of France, because that l'
Office del Admiralte en la mier d' Engleterre per Commission de Roy de France
tourcenousment Emprist and usa un an and plux, etc. That is, because he had
arrogated to himself and for the space of a year exercised the Office of
Admiraltie, by the King of France his Commission in the English Sea. The old
Records from whence this is taken, are set down entire by and by; where you
have more also that make to the same purpose. And so much may serve to be
spoken touching the Guard or Government of the English Sea, as a part of the
King's Territory or Province and Patrimony of the Crown.

That in the Dominion of those Islands lying before the shore of France, which
has ever been enjoied by the Kings of England, it appears that the possession
of the Sea wherein they are situate, is derived from their Predecessors. CHAP.
XIX.
THat a Possession and Dominion of this Southern Sea, has been held also of
old by the Kings of England, is not a little manifest by the Dominion of those
Islands that lie before the shore of France. For, it is generally known, that
after King John and Henry the third were driven out of Normandy it self, that
the Isles Caesaria and Sarnia (which we call Jersey, and Garnesey) Aureney,
and some other Neighboring Isles lying near the shores of Normandy and
Bretaign, yea and situated within that Creek of Sea which is made by the shore
of Bretaign on the one side, and that of Normandy on the other, have in the
following Ages, Rot. Claus. 2 Hen. 3. membr. 1. part. 1. Pat. 3 Hen. 3. membr.
3. and 5.
both now and heretofore, remained in the Dominion of England. But by the
sentence passed against K. John, as Duke of Normandy, for the murder of his
Nephew Arthur, the French would have him deprived of all the Right he had to
Normandy. And afterward Jo. Buchetus in Annalibus Aquitaniae, part. 4. and
Cod. vet. Foederum, etc. Ms. in Archivo Fiscali, fol. 1.
Henry the third resigned his Right to Normandy. But suppose we grant what
is commonly received, that these Islands were of the Norman Jurisdiction, or
belonging to the Duchy of Normandy; yet truly even so, they neither could
be taken away by the sentence, nor did they fall to the French by Resignation,
forasmuch as the possession of the Sea, and so of the Islands placed therein,
was still retained; after the same manner almost as many Priories were in
England it self, who though they were belonging to the Norman Government in
Church Matters, yet even as they were of the Government of Normandy, they ever
remained under the Dominion of England, as long as the Privileges of
Monasteries were in force among the English; as being situate within the
undoubted bounds of the English Empire. Nor is it easily understood wherefore
the Islands could have been so retained, unless they also had been seated
within the bounds of the English Empire in the Sea.

But the thing chiefly to be considered here is, that very many Foreign
Nations, as well as the Estates of England, did in a Libel or Bill of Complaint
publicly exhibited in the time of King Edward the First, and King Philip the
Fair, before a Court of Delegates specially in that behalf by them appointed,
in express terms acknowledge that the King of England has ever been Lord not
only of this Sea, but also of the Islands placed therein, par raison du
Roialme d' Angleterre, upon the account of the Realm of England or as they were
Kings of England. Which truly is all one, as in most express terms to ascribe
this whole Sea unto them, as far as the Shores or Ports lying over against us.
But concerning that Libel, I shall add more by and by. Nor is it to be
omitted, that the addition of a Shore, larger than that of Picardie, to the
Kingdom of France, happened first at that time, wherein those Isles were so
retained by the English after they were outed of Normandy: For before, the
Shores of Aquitain, Bretaign, and Normandy, were in the possession of other
Princes; that of Aquitain and Normandy being possessed by the English, and that
of Bretaign by the Duke or Earl of that Country: So that the French King had
neither any shore almost, nor any considerable use of Sea-affairs at that time;
by which means also the English did with the more ease retain the aforesaid
ancient possession of the Sea and the Isles, after they were deprived of the
Norman Duchy. And this sufficiently appears also by that Sea Fight performed
between the French Fleet (commanded by Eustachius the Monk, in the time of
Philip Augustus King of France) and the English Fleet under the Command of
Philip de Albenie Governor of the aforesaid Islands, and John Marshal, who both
carefully guarded the passages of the Sea, in the beginning of the Reign of
Henry the Third. That is to say, a French Fleet of about 80 Sail was designed
to transport Auxiliarie Forces out of France for Lewis (afterward the Eight of
that name that was King of France) who through the Treason of some Conspirators,
made War upon the English King in England. This of the French was assailed by
an English Fleet of 40 Sail. But Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris tell us, that part of the French, who had
not been used to Sea Fight, was in a short time wholly defeated. Observe here,
they say that hitherto the French were not accustomed to Fights by Sea. But of
the English they say, the English being warlick and skilled in Sea Fight galled
them with Darts and Arrows, ran them through with their Lances, did execution
with their Swords, sank their Ships, and them with Lime (which they did by
throwing the Powder of Lime into the Aer, so it might be driven by the wind
into the French-men's eyes) They were deprived also of all hope of relief and
succor, and know not which way to sly. The English at that time time being
expert in Sea Fight, did by this means make good the possession of their Sea,
and the Isles also that are situate therein: For, even this Fight relate's to
the second year of Henry Matthew. Pa^^^, page 398. Edit. ^ondin.
the Third, or the year of our Lord MCCXVIII, that is, at the same time almost
when the English were first deprived of Normandy. But as to that which is
commonly said, that these Islands first belonged to the English Norman (...).
Coke, in Comm. Juris (...). part. 7. in ^al^^^ ^^^u, sol. 20. c. 21. Guil.
Camden^^sulis Brit. page 855. Alii; quod and admittitur in dipliomatum aliquot
recentiorum pro^miis, veluti Rot. Pat. 7. Elisabethae R. part. ^. Herelio de
Carteret, Rot. Pat* 2. Jacobi, part. 19. and 9. Jacobi part. 24. ubi de
Insularum privilegiis.
right, or by the right of the Duchy of Normandy, it is as easily denied as
affirmed by any. Nor is there any weight in this Reason, that because those
Islands have and ever had certain Customs like the Norman, therefore they do
belong to Normandy: For, the Norman Customs are often used in England, as the
Roman are sometimes by other Nations; yet every man know's this can be no
ground for such an Argument. Nor is it any more to the purpose, that those
Islands were within the Diocese of the Bishop of Constances in Normandy, until
that in our Grand-father's days they became subject to the Bishop of Videsis
Ro^. Pat. 11. Elisabethae, R. part. 8. in dorso.
Winchester. Their Ecclesiastic Government was a long time derived out of
Normandy, with more convenience indeed because of the nearness of the place;
which began, as it is to be supposed, in those days when the English
possessed the Shores on both sides: But it does not follow thence, that those
Islands belonged to the Duchy of Normandy, any more then that the many
Priories heretofore in England, who were of foreign Jurisdiction in
Ecclesiastical matters, did therefore belong to the Dominion of foreign
Princes, and not to that of the English Kings, as Kings of England. That is
every jot as weak also which they use to allege about the Norman Languages
being in use among the Inhabitants of those Islands. The people of Cornw^l in
England have always used the Welsh Tongue, at least with a little alteration
in the Dialect, as the Bretaigns do also in France; In like manner the
Inhabitants of the Isle of Man use the Irish Tongue; yet no man will conclude
thence, either that this paie's obedience to the Kings of England, as Lords or
King of Ireland, or that the other are subject to their Princes by any right of
the Welsh Principality. We know indeed, that sometimes slight mention is made
not only in the proems of some Charters of later times, but also in several
ancient Petitions of the Isl^nders, that those Islands belonged heretofore to
the Duchy of Normandy, and upon that account were held by the Kings of
England: But yet we know as well, that those Provinces which in Ancient time
were derived by Inheritance to our Kings in France (of which kind truly these
Islands are to be reckoned, if they were held as parts of Normandy) were
always permitted so to use their own Customs and ancient Forms of
Jurisdiction, that they were not at all subject to the Vide (...). Hen. 8.
^^leway, fol. 202. plac. 19.
ordinary Jurisdiction of the Courts of England. The same privilege was ever
allowed likewise to the people of Aquitain, Anjou, Normandy, and others. Yea,
and some Ages since, the Kings of England were pleased to order, that such
Controversies as happened there should not be decided in any other place out of
the Islands, but in their own Courts of Judicature: whereas notwithstanding it
is most certain, that in the Reigns of Edward the Rot. Placit. de Insulis, 2.
^d 2 and Rot. Pat. 15. E^. ^ part 1. Membran. 2^.
Second and M^^h 5. ^d. 3. rot. (...). coram R^^e, and Mich. 6. ^d. 3 rot. 1^1.
coram ^ege, pen^s C^^^rarios Scaccarii, 2. ^d. 3. fol. 5. seu 32. ^. and (...).
Tempore ^d. 3. fol. 1^8 a.
Third (times which without doubt made good search into that Right, whereby
those Islands were annexed to the Patrimony of the Kings of England) there
were Justices Itinerant, that is, Officers created of old, who were often by
ordinary right to take cognizance especially of the more heinous crimes
through all the Counties of England; also of such Rights and Privileges of the
Crown as were usurped and arrogated by any, and of other matters for the most
part that are usually brought into Courts of Justice, who being Jo.
Saresburien^is, de Nu^is Curialium, lib. 5. cap. 15. and 16.
sometimes also called Justitiae errantes, Justices errant, were wont to be
sent forth into those Islands as well as into the Counties of England; though
the Inhabitants did indeed exclaim, and sometimes preferred their Petitions
against this kind of Jurisdiction. But yet it is most certain that the opinion
of those very Officers (who were themselves learned in the Law) then was, that
those Commissions whereby they were so enabled to administer Justice in those
Islands were not only grounded upon Law (which was the opinion also of those
who ruled at that time in this Nation) but also that the very Provinces of the
Islands were so incorporated one with another, as they are all with England,
throughout the extent of that Sea which lie's between, after the manner of our
English Custom in the Provinces or Countries, that, a Cause being sometimes
enlarged, they might appoint days of Appearance to any Inhabitants of those
Islands, in the King's Bench in England, as well as to the Inhabitants of any
one of the Isles in the other, after the same manner as is used within England
it self: Which appears by the Commission of John de Scardeburgh and his
Fellow-Justices in the time of Mich. ^. Ed. 3. Rot. 183. coram rege, and Mich.
rot. 5. and 6. Ed. 3. paulo ante citatis, 181. coram Rege, penes Camerarios
Scaccarii.
Edward the Third, and Rot. Placit. de Insulis, 2. Ed. 2. rot. 30. in dorso; in
Arce Londinensi.
others of that Age. But it was never heard, I suppose, that upon such an
enlargement, a time of Appearance might by our Common Law be appointed in any
other place but that which is of the same Jurisdiction (as contained within the
Patrimony of the Crown) whereto also that place belong's out of which any one
is so adjourned. Nor do I remember, that any such thing was ever so much as
attempted in those Provinces, which were not reckoned in the Patrimony of the
English Empire; yet possessed upon another Title by the King of England; as the
Dutchies of Anjou, Normandy, Aquitain, and the like. Moreover also, in the
more ancient Charters of some of our Kings, in confirmation of the Rot. Pat. 2.
Ed. 6. part. 7. ubi Inspeximus. 1. Henrici. 8. etc.
Privileges of Islanders, they are noted more than once for such Privileges as
they or their Ancestors or Predecessors have enjoied under the obedience of any
of our Progenitors being Kings of England. Surely, if it had been then
believed, that those Islands were a part of the Duchy of Normandy, it is not
to be doubted but they had added also or Dukes of Normandy, which we find
truly in some Charters of Rot. Pat. 2. Jacobi, part. 19.
later time, yet so that in these also those Isles are said in express terms,
and that upon very good ground, to be retained in sealtie and obedience to
our Crown of England. But, in the time of Edward the Third, the Islanders
petitioning the King in Parliament for their Privileges and Custom's which had
been established time out of mind, annexed the Customs of some of the Islands,
among which are these; Item, that no man ought to be questioned about his
Freehold, after he has quietly enjoied it a year and a day, unless it be by
Writ taken out of the Chancerie of our Lord the King, making special mention
both of the Tenement it self and of the Tenant. Item, That they shall not be
put to Answer before the King's Justices of Assise, until they first give them
Copies of their Commissions of Assise under their Seals. Item, that the King's
Justices assigned by Commission for the bolding of Assise, ought not to hold
Pleas here longer than the space of three weeks. Truly, these ancient Customs
seem so to re^^sh, as if those Islands had been subject to our Kings and their
ordinary Jurisdiction, by the right of English Empire, not by the Norman;
although the Islanders insinuate also in the same Petitions, that they were a
part of the Neighboring Province of Normandy. Add hereto also, that the ^sle
of Serk was granted by Queen Rot Pa^* 7 El^s part 3
Elisabeth to Herelie de Carteret, to be held in Capite by him and his heirs;
that is to say, as a Feud belonging to the patrimony of the Crown of England;
notwithstanding that it be unawares, or else carelessly admitted in the Charter
of this Grant, to be within the Duchy of Normandy. But in the Treaty held
at Chartres, when Edward the third renounced his claim to Normandy; and some
other Countries of France that bordered upon the Sea, it was added, that no
controversy should remain touching the Islands, but that he should hold all
Islands whatsoever which he possessed at that time, whether they lay before
those Countries that ^ee held, or Tho. Walsingham, Anno 1360. s^u 3^ Ed. 3.
others: For, reason required this to maintain the Dominion by Sea. Yea, both
Jersey, and Gernsey, as also the Isles of Wight and Man are said in diverse
Treaties held betwixt the Kings of England and other Princes, to belong unto
the Kingdom of England, and to lie ^oeder. 1542. inter Caesarem and ^en. 8. and
Foeder. 1585 inter Elisah. R* and Ordines Foederatos Belgii, quorum transsumpta
in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
near the Kingdom of England. These Isles also were granted heretofore by King
Rot. Franciae, 3 ^en. 5. Membran. 6. number. 12 No^^^b. 27.
Henry the fifth to his brother John Duke of Bedford, without any recognition
to be made unto Us or Our Heirs, notwithstanding any Prerogative of the Crown
for any other Tenure held of Us out of the said Islands, which may in any wise
belong unto the said Islands, Castles, or Dominions. Which words seem not in
the least measure to admit any Right of the Duchy. Perhaps also that ancient
custom was as a token or pledge of the Sea's Dominion being conjoined with that
of the Isles, whereby all the Fish (as it is in the Records of Rot. Finium, 31
Ed. 3. Membran. 18.
Edward the third) taken by the Fishermen of our Isles of Gernesey, Jersey,
Serk, and Aureney, in the Sea, between Easter and Michaelmas, is according to
the Custom of those places acknowledged to belong unto Us at a reasonable rate
to be paid therefore, and that the said Fishermen are bound to carry all the
Fish by them taken between the Times aforesaid, unto certain places in those
Isles appointed, that the Officers under our Governor of the aforesaid Isles,
may take thence for our use, at what price they shall think fit and reasonable.
Nor is that to be slighted, which we find in the Chronicles of the Abbie or
Monastery of Teuxburie, concerning Henry Beauchamp Duke of Warwick, who was
invested by Henry the sixth with the Title and Dignity of King, not only of
the Isle of Wight but also of Gernesey, and Jersey, whereunto the other Isles
in this Tract do in a civil sens belong. The same thing is recorded of the Isle
of Wight by that Learned man In Britann. page 200. and 430.
William Camden, and that out of the same Book. The Ms. in Bibliotheca
Cottoniana.
Book it self speak's after this manner; But the noble Lord Henry Duke of
Warwick and first Earl of England, Lord Le Dispenser, and de Abergeveney, King
of the Isles of Wight, and Gardsey, and Jardsey, Lord also of the Castle of
Bristol, with the appurtenances thereunto belonging, died 3 Idus Junii, Anno
Dom. 1446. in the twenty second year of his Age, at the Castle of Hanley, and
was buried in the middle of the Quire at Teuxburie. And a little before it is
said of the same man, that he was Crowned King of Wight by the King's own
hand, no express mention being made in that place of the other islands, but
they reckoned in the same condition with this, as they were part of the
patrimony of the Kings of England. But it is not to be believed, that those
Isles which lie before the shore of Normandy, had been so turned into a
Kingdom, though subject to the Crown of England, unless even they also who made
them a Kingdom, had conceived that they possessed them before by a Title
superior to that of the Duchy; that is to say, by a Kingly Title. As King
Richard the second, when he had determined that Robert Earl of Oxford (who
also was Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of Ireland) should be created Tho.
Walsingham in Rich. 2. anno 1^86. page 352. Edit. Londin.
King of Ireland, questionless did not doubt but that he himself in the mean
time possessed that Island by no less a Title and Dignity than of King,
although the name of Lord was wholly used there at that time Statut. Hibernic.
33* H. 8. cap. 1.
in stead of King, as also until the latter end of the Reign of Henry the
eight. So it is conceived upon good ground, that those Isles, and the Sea lying
about them did, though they used different Customs, constitute one entire Body
of Empire with the Kingdom of England. Whereunto also that special privilege of
theirs does relate, whereby through the favor of the Kings of England, they
enjoie the benefit of freedom from hostility by Sea, though there be a War
on foot between the Neighbor-Nations round about; but of this more Cap. 22.
hereafter. And in their Court-Records which contain the Acts or Decrees of the
aforesaid Justices Itinerant, we very often find Pleas of the Crown, which
phrase is an Evidence of the English Government. Also, in Rot. Placit. de
Insulis, 2. Ed. 2. Rot. 21 and 30 etc. in arce Londin.
their Trials, those Forms [ In contempt of our Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignitie] and [ Our Lord the King was seized of the aforescid Advousen in time
of Peace, as of his Fee, and in Right of his Crown] and others not a few of
that kind we meet with, which savor not of any Right of the Duchy. Add
moreover, that the King of England so held the Right heretofore, not only of
the Isles over against the shore of Normandy, but of those also which are
opposite to Aquitain (as a pledge or concomitant of his possession of that Sea,
so far as it belonged to the patrimony of the Kingdom of England) that though
our Henry the third renounced his claim to no small part of Aquitain, yet that
Isle lying before it, called Oleron, (no less famous in the West for Of which
see more in the twenty fourth chapter.
Naval Laws, than Rhodes was of old) he granted to his eldest son Edward to
be held in time to com, as a perpetual Appendant of the English Crown: For,
this Claus was added to the Grant [ so Cod. vet. Foederu^, etc. Ms. anno 1259.
Penes Camerarios Scaccarii.
that the said Isle may always remain to the Crown of England, and never be
alienated from the same.] Also in his Letters granted to the Inhabitants of
Oleron, he says, Cod. Vet. Ms. in Biblioth. Cottonlana, de Rebus Aquitanicis,
fol. 3.
We will not in any wise sever you from the Crown of England. Some years before
also, he in like manner made a Grant of Rot. Vascon. 38 Hen. 3. membr. 8.
Matthew. Paris, pa. 1187. seu 1207. Edit. Land. Florilegus, ann. 1254. and Cod.
Vet. Ms. de reb. Aquitan. in Biblioth. Cotton. fol. 66.
Gascoign (or those parts which lie upon the shore of Aquitain near the Sea) to
Prince Edward, upon condition it should remain entirely and for ever to the
Crown of England. So without doubt his intent was, that both the Seacoasts,
and this Isle should in a special manner be possessed by the said Prince, but by
no means be disjoined from the English Empire, any more than the Sea its self,
which washed their shores. And although after a while, both this and some other
neighboring Isles, did many Ages since, for diverse reasons, follow the fate of
those French shores which lie next to them, yet in the mean time the Dominion
of the Sea remained entire, as it did before, to the Kings of England; as it
sufficiently appears by those other passages which we have shown.

The Dominion and possession of the Sea asserted on the behalf of the Kings of
England, from that leav of praeter-Navigation or passage which has been
usually either granted by them to Foreiners, or desired from them. CHAP. XX.
THose things which we have hitherto alleged concerning this possession and
dominion, are confirmed by several Passports that have been obtained from the
Kings of England, for leav to pass through this Sea; whereof we have clear
Testimonies in Records: that is to say, granted at the entreaty of Foreiners.
Our Henry the Rot. Franciae, 5. Hen. 4. membr. ^1. Jan. 5.
fourth granted leav to Ferrando Urtis de Sarachione, a Spaniard, to fail
freely from the Port of London, through our Kingdoms, Dominions, and
Jurisdiction, to the Town of Rochel. It is manifest, that in this place our
Dominions and Jurisdiction do relate to the Sea flowing between. And when
Charles the sixth King of France sent Ambassadors to Robert the third King of
Scots, to treat about the making of a League, they upon request made to the
same Henry obtained Passports for their safe passage par touz Ibid. mem. 14.
noz povoirs, destrois and Seigniories, par Mer, and par Terre, that is,
through all places under our Power, Territories, and Dominions, as well by Sea
as by Land. There are innumerable other Letters of Passport (called safe
Conducts) in the Records, especially of Henry the fifth and sixth, whereby safe
Port and Passage was usually granted as well by Sea as by Land and Rivers, that
is to say, throughout the whole Dominion of him that made the Grant. And it is
worthy of observation, that this kind of Letters were usually superscribed
and directed by our Kings to their Governors of the Sea, Admirals,
Vice-Admirals, Sea-Captains, to wit, the Commanders appointed by the King to
take care of his Territory by Sea; whereas notwithstanding we find no
mention at all of any such Commanders in those Passports of that kind which
were granted heretofore by the French King to the King of England, when he was
to cross over into France. Letters of that kind were given to our Edward the
second by King Philip the Long, superscribed only thus, Rot. Claus. 13 Ed. 2.
membr. 7. in dorso.
Phelip par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France, A touz noz Justiciers, and subgies
salut. Philip by the grace of God, King of France; To our Judges and Subjects
greeting. But the reason is evident, why the K. of England was wont to direct
his Letters to his Commanders of the Sea, and the French King at that time
only to his Judges and Subjects in general: To wit, because the King of England
had his Sea-Commanders throughout this whole Sea, as Lord of the same, and
therefore when he crossed over, it was not reasonable that the French K. should
secure him by Sea, it being within the bounds of the English Territory: And
yet the King of France might perhaps have an Admiral at that time, but only
upon the shore of Normandy and Picardie; For, that of Aquitain, Bretaign, and
Narbonne, were not as yet added to the patrimony of that Crown: And it was
about that time, or a little before, that they are placed, who are first ranked
in the Catalogue of the Admirals of France. But of later time it is true
indeed, that in those Passports or Letters of safe Conduct, which have been
granted even by the Stilus and Protocoll. Cancellariae Franc. cap. de Pa^^aiges
and Sauf-Conduits.
French King, and other Princes bordering upon the Sea, Admirals are usually
named in express terms among the other kinds of Roial Officers; to the end
that they to whom the Passports are granted, may be secured in every place and
part of their Dominion. But as touching the English Command over such as pass
or sail through their Sea, there are many other Arguments taken (as we shall
show by and by) from the manner of our King's prescribing limits to such as
sail in this Sea; as also from those passages which we have Chap. 14 of this
Book.
already cited out of Records, concerning the Tributes or Customs imposed by
the English upon such as passed through the Sea. And truly it is very
considerable also, that the Kings both of Denmark and Sweden, together with the
Hans-Towns, very often and earnestly begged of Queen Elisabeth, that they might
have free passage through the English Sea with Provisions toward Spain, during
the War betwixt her and the Spaniard. I know indeed that such a License was
denied them not only in respect of the Dominion of the Sea, but chiefly to
prevent the conveying of Provisions to the Enemy. For which cause also diverse
Ships belonging to the Hans-Towns laden with Corn, were 30 Junii, 1589. qua de
re Declaratio tunc Londini typis Edita.
taken by English men of War, in the very Streights of Lisbon, without the
Sea-Territorie of England, which went by the Thuanus, Histor. l. 95.
Scottish Sea, and the West toward Portugal; which was don doubtless that they
might not presume to use the English Sea, without the leav of the Queen. But
the Hans-Towns cried out thereupon, that the Laws of Nations, Commerce, and
Leagues, were violated; because their ships were so taken by the English only
upon this account, that they carried Provisions to the Enemy; that is, in a
Territory, where the English did not in the least pretend to any Dominion. And
concerning this particular, there is a notable Question controverted by very
Albericus Gentilis, de Jure Belli, li. 1. cap. 21. Hispanic. Advocat. li. 1.
cap. 20. and Hugo Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 3. cap. 1. 5.
Learned men, How far they that are not enemies, or would not be called
enemies, may by the Law of Nations afford supplies unto an enemy. But some
years before the taking of these ships, when the Hamburgers (who in the name
also of the rest of the Hans-Towns, desired leav to pass through this Sea to
Portugal and Spain) were more than once denied any kind of liberty to
transport either Corn or Warlike necessaries; they did not at all suggest, that
their Petition at that time was grounded upon the Law of Nations or Commerce,
nor that the Queen's denial was contrary to this kind of Law. That is to say,
they were by her first 1585. As you may read in the Queen's Declaration, 1589.
Answer enjoined to abstein from transporting Arms with other Warlike
Necessaries and Corn, but (says the Queen) in transporting other commodities,
we shall not hinder you at all, but shall with all favor permit the ships of
your Subjects to abide and pass after the accustomed manner, that they may
perform their Voyage. This Answer they did not seem to take amiss. But two
years after they sent into England Sebastian a Berghen their Ambassador with
Petitionarie Letters, desiring that the Exception in the License formerly
granted might be taken away, and a freedom to transport all kinds of
Merchandise permitted. Their Petition was denied again, and this moreover
added, That such as should presume to do the contrary, should for their bold
presumption suffer the loss of all their Goods and Merchandise so carried
against her Majesty's will and pleasure, if they fell into the hands of her
Men of War, or any other of her Majesty's Subjects. Thus they ever addressed
themselves by Petitions; and the Queen gave Answers according to her pleasure.
They did not so much as pretend the Laws of Nations or of Commerce, before that
they understood their ships were seized in another Sea, to wit, that of
Portugal, which they conceived free for themselves by the Law of Nations and
Commerce, without leav from the Queen of England. Then it was they began to
plead, that Liberty ought not by any Law to be denied; even these men who but
some years before, had humbly Petitioned the Queen of England, more than once
for free passage through the English Sea: So that, that principal point (as some
would have it) of the Law of Nations, that relief ought not to be conveyed to
Enemies by a Friend, was not only the ground either of the Hans-Town's
Petition, or the Queen's denial, but her right of Dominion by Sea was concerned
also, which the Hans-Towns well knew they should violate, if they should pass
the Queen's Seas without her leav.

Hereunto for the same reason those particulars relate, which we find
concerning this matter in those points that were to be insisted on in the year
MDXCVII. by Witfeldius, and Bernicovius, Ambassadors from Christiern the
fourth, King of Denmark, to the Queen of England. In the Records of the
Embassy in Sir Robert Cotton's Library.
We were (say they) strictly enjoined by our King, to mediate with her
Majesty, that our Country men may be permitted a freedom to transport Corn
or Provision toward Spain, even as we have don formerly, and do now again
with all earnestness desire, especially since it is supposed, that the same
License of transporting Corn is granted sometimes both to English and Dutch;
that our Countrie-men may not be used in a wors manner than your own Subjects,
and that at least some certain ships might in favor of the King's Majesty, have
leav granted them once a year at least, during the War, to carry Provisions;
and that we may be able to certify the King our Master, how far we in this
case prevail. But the Ambassadors had this Answer; that the Queen cannot in
reason be induced to consent it should be don as they desired. And whereas
you allege a supposal, that both English and Netherlanders have License given
them sometimes to transport Corn, We (to wit, the Chief men of her Majesty's
Privie-Council, who gave the Answer) dare confidently affirm, that never any
such matter was granted by the Queen, nor will she ever incline to grant the
like, during the war. If the Queen had not in the opinion of the Danes, (as
well as of the Hans-Towns before) been Sovereign of the Sea-Territorie, through
which they were to pass, to what end then was this so earnest a Petition, and
so imperious an Answer? Here, in this often iterated Petition, no liberty is
pretended besides that which depended upon the Queen's pleasure, as Sovereign
of the Passage.

For this cause also it was, that John King of Sweden, in that Letter of his
sent to Queen Elisabeth in the year 1587. wherein he desired leav for Olavus
Wormaeus a Swede, to carry Merchandise into Spain, acknowleged, that he must
of necessity Maritimas Reginae ditiones pertransire, pass through the
Sea-Dominions of the Queen, which are the very In Sir Robert Cotton's Library.
words of the Letter. Nor is it any new thing, that this kind of passage
should be denied to Foreiners: For, in very many of those Pass-ports that were
granted to the Merchants of Neighbor-Nations by Edward the first, during the
war between him and the French, this claus is usually added, Rot. Pat. 24 Ed.
1. memb. 5. and 25 Ed. 1. par. 1. membran. 2. 7. 16. etc.
upon condition, that they neither conveie nor cause any thing to be conveied
to the French party, nor communicate any thing (...) all to our Enemies there
in any manner whatso^ver, as we read it in the Records, where are many others
of the same kind. From hence it is, that in the same King's instructions, it
is required, that his Soveraigntie by Sea be preserved with extraordinary
care and diligence, as belonging to him by ancient right, as Arbiter and
Moderator of the Laws or Customs, and Persons, of such as pass therein. The
words themselves, which signify the same, are these, Fascic. de Superioritate
Maris Angliae, in Arce Lo^dinens^.
Especialment a retenir and maintenir la Sovereignete qe ses ancestres Royes
d'Engleterre soloyent avoir en la dite Mier d'Engleterre, quant a l'amendement,
declaration and interpretation des lois per eux faits a Governer toutes Maneres
des gentz passanz per la dite mier, especially to retein, and maintain the
soveraigntie which his Ancestors the Kings of England were wont to have in the
said sea so far as concerns the amendment, declaration, and interpretation of
the Laws by them made to govern all manner of Nations passing through the said
sea. Hereunto also belong's that Commission of King John, whereby he required
in very imperious terms, that all kinds of ships whatsoever which could be
found throughout the English Sea (it being expressed by the general name of
the Sea, as flowing round about) should be staid and be brought near his
shores: For, it has been a Custom in all Ages, that the ships of any persons
whatsoever, as well Strangers as Subjects, may sometimes be staid in the Ports.
But it was King John's intent, that his whole Sea as well as the Ports
themselves, should be plainly signified in this Commission. In witness whereof
I here set down the Commission it self. The Rot. Pat. 9 Johann. ^. Membran. 1.
Number. 3.
KING to all the Sturemanni and Marinelli and Merchants of England that sail by
Sea greeting. Be it known unto you, that we have sent Alanus Juvo de Sorham
and Walter Stattun, and Vincent de Hastings and Wimund de Winchelsey, and
others of our Barons of the Cinque Ports, and other our faithful Sturemanni,
and Marinelli of our Galleys, to arrest all ships that they shall find, and
them safely to bring, with all that shall be found in them, into England. And
therefore we command you, that ye be attending upon them in this business,
so that ye be in England with all your Ships and Merchandises at such Port
and Coast as they shall appoint you. And if any shall attempt to resist them
contrary to our command, you, our Liege-men, are required to assist them with
all your strength, as you tender your selves and your chattels, and peace and
residence in our Land for you or any of your Generation. Witness hereunto
William Briwr at Lutegar, the eight day of February. These Sturemanni here do
signify Sea-Captains, and Marinelli Sea-souldiers. But to command that all
ships should be arrested throughout the Sea, that is, staid or taken, and
brought into England, what else was it but undoubtedly to declare himself Lord
of the Sea through which they passed? Now let no man object, that this
Commission extended only to the Ships of English men, or of the Subjects of
him that gave the Commission. It is true indeed, that the Commission before
cited, was sent and directed only to the Sea-Captains, Men of War, and
Merchants of England: But yet it is manifest thereby, that the four persons
there named, and others Barons of the Cinque Ports, and the rest that are
added, were obliged by the aforesaid Commands to arrest all the ships that they
should find throughout the Sea, and bring them safely into England, with all
that should be found in them. But this part of the Commission was added (as it
plainly appears) that no English Sea-Captain, or Soldier, or Merchant
whatsoever, might be wanting in their assistance, in staying the ships of
Foreiners; If any one shall attempt to resist them contrary to our command,
you, our Liegemen, are required to assist them with all your, etc. Our
Liege-men in this place, or they that ought to give assistance in making stay
of ships, are all the Seamen and Merchants of England that sail up and down
throughout this Sea: They therefore whose ships were to be staid, did not com
under the name of Liege-men, or Subjects; and that it so appears to be by the
very Form of this Commission, that there need's not any thing more be added
touching this matter, I suppose no man will doubt, who take's it into his more
serious consideration. Nor do the words make mention of the ships of Enemies,
but of any whatsoever; as being delivered by a Sovereign Prince, who was
concerned at that time, for his own occasion, and at discretion, to use not
only his own Sea-Territorie, but also the ships sailing therein, as well as
those that were in Port.

We find a Commission of the like nature, and which speak's to the same
purpose, in the time of King Edward the third, wherein Command is given to make
stay of all ships of ten Tuns and upward, that should be found in the South
and Western Sea (except some that were newly designed to cross over into
Bretaign) that they might be armed and set forth in the King's service. The
Title of this Commission is, De Navibus arrestandis and capiendis, For
arresting and seizing of ships. The Form of it run's thus; The KING to his
beloved Thomas de Wenlok his Serje^nt at Arms, Lieutenant of our beloved and
trusty Reginald de Cobham, Admiral of our Fleet of ships from the mouth of the
River Thames toward the Western parts, greeting. Be it known unto you, that
we have appointed you with all the speed that may be used by you, and such as
shall be deputed by you, to arrest and seiz all ships, Flie-Boats, Barks, and
Barges of ten Tuns burden and upward, which may happen to be found in the
aforesaid Admiraltie, (that is, in the Sea reaching from the Thames mouth
toward the South and West) and to cause the Flie-Boats, Barks and Barges
aforesaid* to be well and sufficiently armed and provided for the war, by the
Masters and owners of the same, and to bring them speedily so provided and
armed to Sandwich, except only the ships that are ordered for the passage of
our beloved and trusty Thomas de Dagworth and his men that are bound for
Bretaign; so that you be ready there in your own person, together with the
Ships, Flie-Boats, Barks, and Barges aforesaid, so well provided and fitted for
the war, upon the Saturday next before the Feast of the Apostles Simon and
Jude, next ensuing at the farthest, to go thence upon our Command, according to
such direction as shall then on our part be given, to the Masters and Mariners
of the aforesaid Ships, Flie-Boats, Barks, and Barges, and to take sufficient
Provision for the enabling of you to do the premises, in such places as you
shall see most convenient (except only Church-Land) you making due payment for
the same; and also to seiz and arrest all those that you shall find to oppose
or resist you in the execution of the premises, and them to commit into our
Prisons, there to abide till we shall think fit to take farther order, etc.
All Officers also in the said Admiraltie are commanded to yield obedience and
assistance upon the same occasion. The usual subscription in that Age showing
the Original Authority of the Commission was, By the King himself and his
Council. But that the aforesaid Sea it self was conterned under the name of the
Admiraltie, is clearly manifest by what we have already shown you. And King
Edward the third used his ancient Right, as other Kings of England did also
therein, as well as in the Ports themselves, or Shores of England (for, there
are innumerable examples of the staying of all Ships whatsoever, by the King's
Command in Port or Shore.) But that which has been alleged about the staying
of Ships, and Listing them for the King's Service, you are always to
understand it was so don according to equity, that competent Pay was to be
allowed them answerable to the proportion of Tuns, and also to the number of
Seamen, that were so taken into emploiment. Touching which particular, there
are several Testimonies also to be found in the Rot. Par. 3 Hen. 5. par. 1.
number. 6. seu 31.
Records of Parliament.

That License has been usually granted to Foreiners, by the Kings of England,
to fish in the Sea; Also, that the Protection given to Fishermen by them, as
in their own Territory, is an ancient and manifest Evidence of their Dominion
by Sea. CHAP. XXI.
AS a freedom of passage, so also we find that a liberty of Fishing has
been obtained by Petition from the Kings of England. There is a clear
Testimony hereof in that which was alleged Cap. XV.
before out of the Records of Parliament, concerning those Tributes or Customs
that were imposed in the time of Richard the Second, upon all persons
whatsoever that used Fishing in the Sea. Moreover, it appears by Records, that
Henry the Sixth gave leav particularly to the French and very many other
Foreiners, Rot. Francie 38. Hen. 6. Membran* 9. and 14.
for one whole year only (sometimes for six Months) etc. to go and fish
throughout the Sea at all times and as often, etc. But this leav was granted
under the name even of a Passport or safe conduct; yea, and a size or
proportion was prescribed to their Fishing-boats or Busses; that they should
not be above XXX Tuns. And it is true indeed, there was a kind of
consideration or condition added, that some others, who were subjects of the
King of England, might in Fishing enjoy the same security with Foreiners:
Which was for this cause only put into the License, that if the Foreiners did
disturb or molest them, they should lose the benefit of their License. The
words of that consideration or condition, in the beginning of those Licenses,
run after this manner; To the end that the business of the Herring-fishing and
of other Fish, may be advanced, continued, and maintained for the public
good; yea and that the like security may be yielded and afforded to some
certain Fishermen under our obedience. I suppose that those certain Fisher men
under our Obedience were also the French, who at that time continued in
subjection to the English; whereas almost all in France, except the Shore of
Picardie, had newly revolted from the King of England: That is to say, at the
latter end of the reign of Henry the Sixth. But that which we find either
here touching equal security, or in other places sometimes also, about the
giving of safe conduct even to the Fishermen of England, by License granted,
either to French, or Flemings, or Bretaigns; that usually happened when the heat
of War was over and a Cessation agreed on to treat of Peace or Amity. In the
mean time, security of that kind was given on both sides now and then by
agreement: But by the King of England as well in respect of his being Lord of
the place, as his being a party that was treating about a League or Amity.
By others upon this account only, not upon that; unless you understand the
question to be about the use of Ports and Shores: For so, no man denie's but
these were Lords as well as he. Moreover also, in our time, leav was wont to
be asked of our Admiral, for Frenchmen to fish for Soles in the neighboring
Sea, for King Henry the Fourth of France his own Table; as it is affirmed by
such as have been Judges of our Admiraltie and Commanders at Sea of an ancient
standing; yea, and that the Ships of those French were seized, as trespassers
upon the Sea, who presumed to fish there without this kind of License.

But in the Eastern Sea, which washes the Coasts of Yorkshire and the
neighboring Counties, it has been an ancient Custom for the Hollanders and
Zelanders to obtein leav to fish, by Petition to the Governor of Scarb^rough
Castle, situate by the Seaside in the County of York; and this for very many
years past, as is affirm^d by that learned man Mr Camden speaking of those
Coasts; It is worth the while, says he, to note what an extraordinary
plentiful and gainful Herring-Fishing the Hollanders and Zelanders use to have
in the neighboring Sea, having first obtained leav from this Castle according
to the ancient Custom. For, the English have ever granted them leav to fish;
reserving always the honor and privilege to themselves, but through a kind of
negligence resigning the profit to Strangers. For, it is almost incredible what
a vast sum of m^nie the Hollanders make by this Fishing upon our Coast. So he.
There is another man also of very great skill and knowledge in Sea-affairs, who,
in the time of Q. Elisabeth, presented a Book to the Parliament, written in the
English Tongue, about the Commodity of Fishing, wherein he write's, that the
Hollanders and Zelanders every year, toward the later end of Summer, send forth
four or five hundred Vessels called Buffes, to fish for Herrings in this
Eastern Sea, Hitcho^^^ New years Gift. Edit. Londinens. 1580.
Where before they fish they ask leave of Scarborough, which are his very
words. Care was taken also by Proclamation, in the time of Proclmaat. 7. of
King Ja^^^, May 6.
K. James, that no Foreiner should Fish in the English or Irish Sea, or that
which belong's to the other Isles of the Realm of England, without leav first
obtained, and every year at least rene^ed, from the Commissioners appointed for
this purpose at London. And touching the liberty of fishing granted at other
times also to Foreiners by the Kings of England, there are many Testimonies in
Gerard. Malinius in Lege Mercatoria, cap. 35.
other Writers. But the cause why we do not often meet with the Forms of those
Licenses, granted either for passage or fishing in the English Sea, was plainly
this; because by the Leagues that were made with the neighbor Princes, a License
or freedom of that kind (as also of Ports, Shores, Passage, and other things)
was so often allowed by both Parties, that, as long as the League was in force,
the Sea served, as if it were a common Field, as well for the Foreiner that was
in amity, as for the King of England himself who was Lord and Owner. But yet
in this kind of Leagues, sometimes the Fishing was restrained to certain
Limits, which is a thing chiefly to be considered. The limits related both to
place and time: So that according to agreement, the Foreiner in amity might
not fish beyond these Limits; the K. of England reteining a Dominion over the
whole adjoining Sea. Touching this, there is a notable Example in the time of
our Henry the Fourth. An agreement was made betwixt the Kings of Rot.
Franciae, 5. Hen. 4. 29. September.
England and France, that the Subjects of both might freely use Fishing
throughout that part of the Sea, which is bounded on this side by the Ports of
Scarborough and Southampton, and on the other side by the Coast of Flanders and
the mouth of the River Seine. The time also was limited betwixt Autumn and the
Kalends of Januarie following. And that the French might securely enjoy the
benefit of this agreement, our King directed Letters to that end, unto all his
Sea-Captains and Commanders. Here you see plainly, those Limits wholly excluded
the French from that part of the Sea which lie's toward the West and
South-west* and also from that which lie's North east of them, as being so
limited by our Henry, at his own pleasure, as its Lord and Sovereign. Nor was
there so much as the least shadow of right or Prerogative, whereby the French
King might seem to have any interest as a Lord or Owner in the setting of these
Limits; seeing that part of the Sea which was secluded did not touch upon any
Shore of his in the North, nor had he any Country lying before the Sea in the
South (except Normandy) or in the West; the rest being held either by the
Duke of Bretaign or by the King of England, as we have already observed. From
hence truly it was a Custom, for the Kings of England to give protection to
Fishermen that were Strangers, sometimes by Proclamation, and sometimes with a
Fleet of men of War, when they went to Fish either by agreement made upon
treaty, or by leav obtained, qualifications being added according to the
English King's pleasure. There is among the Records of the time of Edward the
First, an Inscription, Pro hominibus Hollandiae etc. For the men of Holland and
Zeland, and Friesland, to have leav to fish near Jernemuth. The King's Letter
for their Rot. Patent. 23. Ed. 1. Membr. 5.
protection fallows thus. The KING to his Beloved and Trusty John de
Buteturte Warden of his Port de Jernemuth Greeting. For as much as We have
been certified, that many men out of the parts of Holland, Zeland and Friesland
also, who are in amity with us, intend now to com and fish in Our Sea near
Jernemuth; We command you, that you cause public Proclamation to be made once
or twice every week, that no persons whatsoever employed abroad in our service
presume to cause any injury, trouble, damage, hindrance or grievance to be
don unto them, but rather, when they stand in need, that ye give them advice
and assistance in such manner, that they may fish and pursue their own
advantage without any let or impediment. In Testimony whereof, We have caused
these our Letters to be made Patents, to continue in force till after the
Feast of St Martin next ensuing. Witness the King at Wengham, the XXVIII day of
September. Which was in the XXIII year of his Reign, and of our Lord MCCXCV.
The same day also, in favor of the ^arl of Holland and his Subjects, he set
forth three men of War toward the farther Coast of the Sea, for the safeguard
(as he says in another Letter) of those Uessels belonging to your and our own
Country, that are in these days employed about the Herring Fishing etc. and
to guard your Coasts near the Sea. Here he grant's a Protection to fish. And
in both the Letters, he limits it within the space of two Months. He alone
also protected the Fishermen upon the Ge^man Coasts (which, by reason of its
nearness, he call's here your Coast near the Sea, in his Letter to the Ea^l of
Holland) as well as upon the English. Nor might the Fishermen use any other
kind of Vessels, but that which was prescribed by our Kings. Upon which
account, all kinds of Fishing were sometimes prohibited, and sometimes admitted,
this restriction only being added, that they should fish in such Vessels
only as were under thirty Tuns burden. This appears by those Letters of
King Edward the Third concerning the Laws of Fishing, which were directed unto
his several Governors of Yarmouth, Scarborough, Whitby, and Donwich, Towns
seated upon the Eastern Shore. The words are these; Rot. Claus. 11. Fd. 3.
Membran. 35.
Forasmuch as we have given License to the Fishermen of the aforesaid Town,
and to others who shall be willing to com unto the said Town for the benefit
of Fishing, that they may fish and make their own advantage with Ships and
Boats under thirty Tuns burden, any prohibition, or Commands of ours
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding, we command you to permit the
Fishermen of the aforesaid Town, and others who shall be willing to com to
the said Town for the benefit of Fishing, to fish and make their own advantage
with Ships an^ Boats under thirty Tuns, without any let or impediment, any
Prohibitions or Commands of ours made to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, as we have said. ^itness the King at the Tower of London,
August. X. Which was in the 11th year of the Reign of Edward the Third, or of
our Lord MCCCXXXIX. But if any heretofore undertook the protection of the
Fishermen in this Sea, without leav of the English, they were to be seized
and imprisoned, as Invaders of the Right of Dominion, and to expect to be
dealt with accordingly, for the injury don to the King of England.

This is evident also in the Records of our K. Edward the Fourth. For, he
erected a Triumvirate or invested three Persons with Naval Power, whom the
Records call Custodes, Conductores, and Waftores, Guardians, Conductors, and
Waftors, whose Office it was to protect and guard the Fishermen upon the
Coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk. To the end therefore that the expenses of the
Guard might be defrayed by the Fishermen, and all others whatsoever be
excluded from meddling with this kind of Guard or protection, he appointed
four men, by name Sir John Hemingham Knight, William Hopton, Edmund Yve, and
John ^ansfleet Esquires, as well (say the Rot. Pat. 22. Ed. 4. Membran. 2.
Records themselves) to over-see those Guardians, Conductors, and Waftors, as to
give notice to all Fishermen of what Country soever they be, who shall desire
to fish in the Parts aforesaid under the protection of the said N. N. that
those Fishermen and every of them, do contribute to all and all manner of
Costs, Charges, and Expenses belonging to the same Guardians and Conductors in
the time of fishing, and charge all such Costs, Charges, and Expenses according
to a proportion, and to levy and collect those Costs, Charges, and Expenses,
out of this kind of Fishings belonging to the Fishermen aforesaid,
wheresoever they may be found; As also to arrest and apprehend all others,
except the before named, who presume or attempt to become Guardians, Conductors,
or Wastors, and to commit them to our next Gaol, there to be kept safely and
securely, till we shall take order for their deliverie. In the very same words
almost, to the same purpose, we find diverse Letters Patents of King Henry
the Rot. Pat. 3. Hen. 7. part. 2. in dorso 15. August. and part. 1. in dorso.
18. Septembris.
Seventh; yea, and of Richard the Rot. Pat. 2. Rich. 3. part. 1. Membran. 2.
Third, save that in the form hereof, after those words [ charge all such
Expenses according to a proportion] this considerable Claus here is inserted [
Although the same Fishermen, whether any one or more of them, may have had
Letters of safe Conduct from any other King, Prince, or Governor of any Kingdom
whatsoever.] So that by the received and usual Custom, the Charges of the Guard
were to be defraied by the Fishermen of this Sea, at the pleasure of our
Kings, though they might have had Letters of public security and protection
from any other Princes. Nor were any other persons to be admitted to a
partnership in this kind of Guard, except those that were appointed by the
King of England, lest by this means perhaps it might derogate from the English
Right. Which is a manifest sign or evidence of the Dominion and Possession of
the place.

The Dominion of England made evident from the laws and limits usually set by
our Kings in the Sea, to such Foreiners as were at enmity with each other, but
in amity with the English. And concerning the King's Closets or Chambers in
the Sea. Also touching that singular privilege of perpetual truce (or exemption
from hostility) in the Sea about those Isles which lie before the shore of
Normandy. CHAP. XXII.
AS to what concern's the Laws and Limits that have been prescribed to
Foreiners (from whence I derive a fifth sort of Testimonies) who being at
enmity with each other, and both of them in amity with the English, did
mutually make prize and prey upon each other throughout this Sea; Whereas about
the beginning of the Reign of James K. of England, the rest of the Christian
world was every where at peace, but the war waxed hot betwixt the Spaniard and
the States of the United Provinces, and thereby it happened, that both those
parties being in amity with the English, did infest one another with mutual
and very frequent depredations in the English Sea, touching the lawfulness
whereof diverse Questions arose among the King's Officers, in the Court of
Admiraltie; Our K. following the examples of his Predecessors, did as lawful
Sovereign and Moderator of the Seas, set forth a Proclam. 1. March 2. of K.
James, or 1604. in Rot. Pat. 2. Jacobi R. part. 32.
Proclamation, appointing certain limits upon the English Coasts, within which
he ordained there should be safe riding for both parties, with safe passage,
yea, and declared he would give equal protection to both in such manner, that
within these limits neither might the Spaniards use any hostility against the
United Netherlanders, nor these against them, nor the Subjects of any Nation
whatsoever against those of another, without incurring his displeasure. The
words of the Proclamation are these; Our pleasure is, that within our Ports,
Havens, Roads, Creeks, or other places of our Dominion, or so near to any of
our said Ports and Havens, as may be reasonably construed to be within that
title, limit or precinct, there shall be no force, violence, or offense
suffered to be don, either from man of war to man of war, or man of war to
Merchant, or Merchant to Merchant of either party. But that all of what Nation
soever, so long as they shall be within those our Ports and places of our
Jurisdiction, or where our Officers may prohibit violence shall be understood
to be under our protection, to be ordered by course of Justice, and be at
peace each with other. But by the same Proclamation he declared, that violence
should so only be permitted betwixt Enemies in that limited part of the Sea,
that if any man of war should either be hovering near hand with an intent to
offer violence to his enemy, in the open Sea adjoining, or the Creeks, Ports,
and Havens of the same, or should out of any place so prohibited, contrary to
the intent of the Proclamation, fall upon his Enemies ship, setting forth to
Sea from the same place, then the English men of war, as well those belonging
to Merchants as Commanders in the King's service, should remove and punish such
kind of violence. The words of the Proclamation are these; Our pleasure
therefore and commandment is to all our Officers and Subjects by sea and land,
that they shall prohibit (as much as in them lies) all such hovering of men of
war of either side so near the entry of any of our Havens, or our Coasts. And
that they shall rescue and succor all Merchants and others that shall fall
within the danger of any such as shall await our Coasts in so near places, to
the hinderance of Trade and Traffic outward and homeward, from and to our
Kingdoms. The Prescribed limits aforementioned were set forth in a Table or
Map cut in Brass, and published by the King's Command. The manner of it was
such, that both the limited part of the Sea, and those Ports and Creeks were
pointed out by direct lines draw from one point of land or adjacent Island, to
the next Point or Island upon the English shore. These points with the Isles
fetching a compass round about from the North-Coast of England, by the East and
South as far as the West, being in number twenty seven, are ranked thus in
their order. Holy Island, the Sowter, whitby, Flamborough head, the Sporn
Cromer, winterton-nesse, Easter-nesse, Layestof Estnesse, Orfortnesse, the
Northforeland, the Southforeland, Dungenesse, Beach, Dunenoze, Portland, the
Start, the Ram, the Dudman, the Lizard, Lands end, Mildford, S. David's Head,
Beardsie, Holy head, and the Isle of Man. We have very great Creeks of Sea cut
off by these lines from the Sea round about, which they call Regias Cameras The
Kings Chambers, and the Ports Roial. Even as in an house the inner private
Rooms, or Chambers, or Closets, which in barbarous Latin are wont to be termed
Camerae, are reserved for the Master; and as the City of London has of old
been called in our Law the Chamber of the King of England, wh^reby the rest of
his Dominion round about is set forth, as it were by the use of a more narrow
Title: So these Creeks, though very large, being called by the like name and
limited at the pleasure of the Kings of England, do in like manner show his
Dominion over the rest of the Sea. But we have taken a Description of the
Points and Islands, whereby those Creeks set forth in the Table here annexed,
are wont to be limited, out of that Martii, 1604. seu 2. Jacobi R.
instrument which was written in English by twelve men very well skilled in
Maritim affairs, and sworn for this purpose at the time when the Proclamation
was published, and it was by them presented to Sir Julius Caesar Knight, at
that time Judge of the High Court of Admiraltie, but now Master of the Rolls,
and one of his Majesty's Privie-Council, to whom the care of searching after
this kind of ancient limits was committed. But in that Instrument, as well the
distance of all the Points in respect of each other, as the manner of sailing
in a direct course is explained, from whence the latitude of every one of the
King's Chambers, may in part be collected. Those twelv men beginning at the
Holy Island, fetched a compass round from the North by the East and South to the
West, in the order hereafter following. The first course and distance is from
that Island to The Sowter. And from thence the rest are reckoned in the like
manner.

Promontoriorum series. Rumbi Leucae. Ad the Sowter in Phoenicem, S. S. E. 17
Ad Whitby in Notapeliotem S. E. 12 Ad Flamborough head in Notapeliotem S. E.
versus Austrum. 8 Ad the Sporne in Phoenicem S. S. E. versus Apeliotem. 13 Ad
Cromar in Meleu^um S. E. and by E. 24 Ad Minterton nes in Hypophoenicem S. E.
and by S. 4. Ad Caster-nes in Phoenicem S. S. E. 21/13 Ad Layestof in Austrum
S. 3 Ad East-nes in Austrum S. versus Occidentem. 1 Ad Orforth-nes in
Mesolybonotum S. and by W. 6 Ad North-foreland. in Austrum S. versus
O^^identem. 15 Ad South-foreland. in Austrum S. 6 Ad Dunge-nes in Notolybicum
S. W. versus Austrum. 7 Ad Beach in Africum W. S. W. versus Austrum. 13 Ad
Dune-noze in Africum W. S. W. versus Occidentem. 24 ^/^ Ad Portland in
Hypafricum W. and by S. verse. Austrum. 161/12 Ad the Start in Africum M. S. M.
in Occidentem. 18 Ad the Ram. in Occidentem M. versus Boream. 6 Ad the
Dudman. in Africum M. S. M. versus Occidentem. 8 Ad the Lizard. in Africum M.
S. M. ^/^^ versus Austrum. 9 Ad the Landsend in Caurum M. N. M. versus Boream.
7 Ad Milford in Boream N. versus Orientem. 31 Ad S. David's head. in Boream N.
versus Occidentem. 5 Ad Beardsie. in Hypaquilonem N. and by E. verse. Orie^t^m.
12 Ad Holy head. in Boream N. versus Occidentem. 9 Ad Monam in Hypaquilonem N.
and by E. versus Boream. 26

Here you see very large spaces of Sea, intercepted sometimes for above ninety
Miles (for, three English miles here go to every League) whereby those
Chambers or Sea-Closets are made. But we find the management of that business
concerning these Chambers, at the time of the aforesaid Proclamation, set forth
after this manner, in the subscription of the twelv men that were sworn, and
added to the aforesaid distances and courses of sailing. We whose names are
subscribed, being called before the Right Honorable Sir Julius Caesar Knight,
Judge of his Majesty's High Court of Admiraltie, and there being enrolled,
admitted, and sworn, for the describing of the limits and bounds of the King's
Chambers, Havens, or Ports, in their full extent, do by these presents make
answer, and to the best of our knowledge and understanding, declare, that the
said Chambers, Havens or Ports of his Majesty, are the whole Seacoasts which
are intercepted or cut off by a straight line drawn from one point to another,
about the Realm of England. For the better understanding whereof, we have made
a Table concerning that business; whereto we have annexed this our Schedule,
showing therein how one Point stand's in a direct line toward another,
according to that Table. Given the fourth day of March, Anno Dom. 1604. and in
the second year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, etc. And then in
the Schedule there follow the names of the twelv men; who were all persons of
very great knowledge in naval or Maritim Affairs. So, the spaces within the
straight lines drawn from one point to another, are the Chambers or Ports of
the King of England, who being Lord in like manner of all those parts of the
Sea, as far as the opposite Shores or Ports, whilst he commanded a keeping
of the peace within these Creeks or Closets, did, as Arbiter, permit those that
were in amity with him; but enemies among themselves, to make prize of one
another, in the rest of the Sea; yet not without some qualifications or
restrictions added concerning the use of the more open part of the Sea. And
truly, the Spaniards alleged afterward, that themselves ought to be protected
from hostility also, without these limits, in the more open part of the Sea;
and that by virtue of the agreement of peace, whereby the Kings of Spain and
England were obliged to protect one another's subjects, in all parts of their
Kingdoms: which is as much as to say, that the rest of the Sea flowing between
com's no less under the name of the Kingdom of England. And this appears also
from the dispute held by their Advocate in England, about the protection of the
Territory by Sea, against the Hollanders, who mightily exclaimed (as Albericus
Gentilis in Advocat. Hispanica, lib. 1. cap. 8.
he says) that they should be intercepted and staid by the King's Officer at
Sea, with the prize that they had taken from their enemies the Spaniards. That
it was an unjust violence; that being disturbed and spoiled, they ought to
have reparation made them, and to be beard against those Spaniards, who being
prisoners were discharged with the goods that were taken. But that the King of
England might justly give the Spaniards protection against the Hollanders, in
the British Sea, either within or without those limits, he plead's after this
manner. You see (says he) how f^r the Dominion of the King of England
stretche's toward the South, North, and West. The Tacit. in vita Agricolae*
Caes. de Bello Gallico, l. 5.
Northern Coasts of Britain, having no Countries lying against them, are washed
by the main and open Sea. And the Southern Coasts of Ireland are bounded upon
Spain; the Western upon the Indian Countries under the Dominion of Spain; And
so the Jurisdiction of our King by S^^, is of a mighty vast exte^t. Nor was it
restrained or be^^en'd by that subsequent Proclamation of the King (the same
above mentioned) whereby certain limits were appointed, beyond which the King
declared the power of his Territory should not be extended, in these Acts of
hostility betwixt the Spaniards and Hollanders. But it is said, that the
Hollanders were intercepted by the Officer without these limits. Also according
to the Articles of Peace lately agreed on betwixt our King and the King of
Spain, they ought to protect one another's Subjects in all places throughout
their Dominions: and therefore both ought to give protection throughout that
immens Jurisdiction. For, there are limits Menoch. Consil. 14.
founded upon right, and there are limits by compact or agreement: And an
argument taken from the one, does not conclude against the other. And here we
are to follow the limits of right, concerning which certainly the articles of
Peace and Agreement ought to be understood; Because the other Bounds being set
afterward, were not then in imagination. But the authority of the Proclamation
extend's not to things past. Certain it is, that Laws and Constitutions do give
a Being to ^. 7. (...) 110. ^^1.
future businesses, and are not to be recalled unto things don and past. Nor
is this a Declaration of the King's right (therefore the more easily to be
(...).
admitted) made in the Proclamation, but a disposition and law wholly new. For,
a (...). 1. (...) 8. (...) 18. (...)*
Declaration induces nothing new, and changes nothing. But this Proclamation
would change much, seeing the power of the King's Territory extend's it self
much beyond those limits now constituted. To this an (...)
Answer may be given also, which is acknowledged by all, that a Declaration is
of no force to another's prejudice, which here might be don to the ship that
was intercepted; for which right was sought according to common Custom, and
also according to the special agreement of the peace, that those Princes should
suffer no violence to be don to one another's Subjects in their Territories.
And it is much more strong in respect of that express article of the Treaty,
for that it could not be meet to take off from the full force of the Contract;
which would now be lessened notwithstanding, if it were granted that the
Territory is solessen'd, within which only our King might protect the
Spaniards. Moreover, it hinder's not which is objected, that these limits which
are now expressed in the Proclamation, were observed long before by long Custom
in Controversies of this nature. For, to omit those most difficult things which
are delivered in (...). 1. Co^^l. 74. ^um. 10.
proving the Custom, certainly the intent of our King in the Contract of peace
seems not to have had respect unto that Custom, if any there has been, or
also unto the Statute, which is alleged here to be ancient. For, neither are
those things common and understood by the other Prince in amity, nor perhaps
by our King himself; to wit, matters of fact, in his new Kingdom. All which
things I thought ^it to add here out of Albericus Gentilis, because they belong
not only unto these Limits, Creeks, or Roial Chambers in the Sea, but to the
Dominion of the whole British Sea. And truly Gentilis was ill understood by
Joannes Tract, de Insulis, cap. 14. 46.
Gryphiander, who discoursing at large concerning Sea-Affairs, allegeth the
place before-cited out of him in so brief a manner, as if by that Proclamation
of King James, his Jurisdiction had been restrained simply to those limits. The
Jurisdiction of England (s^i^h Gryphiander) by Sea, although it be extended to
the South, North, and West, yet by a Proclamation of James the present King, it
is circumscribed by certain limits in the Sea. He quote's Albericus Gentilis,
for his Author. But truly, the King had no intent in that Proclamation, that his
Jurisdiction should be circumscribed simply by those Limits, but only in
relation to the acts of hostility at that time betwixt the Spaniards and
Hollanders; he being Lord and Moderator of the British Sea for ever, as well
as his Predecessors: which is sufficiently manifest out of the Proclamation it
self, and out of Gentilis. Nor indeed is it easily to be conceived, from
whence that special and perpetual privilege of Truce or Freedom from hostility
had its original, which the inhabitants of Jersey, Garnsey, and the other ^sles
lying before the shore of Normandy, do enjoy even in this very Sea, though war
be between the Neighbor-Nations round about, unless it be derived from this
Sea-Dominion of the Kings of England. Concerning that privilege, Master Camden
being well informed by ancient Testimonies, speak's after this manner in
brief. In Insulis^* Brit. p. 855.
By an ancient privilege of the Kings of England, here is as it were a
perpetual Truce, and though a war be on foot, yet the French and others have a
liberty to com hither to and again without danger, and use Commerce securely.
But we find the same more at large, in some Rot. Pat. 2. Ed. 6. part. 7. Rot.
Pat. 2. Elizab. part. 6. (...) Rot. Pat. 2. Jacobi Regis, part. 19.
Kings Patents, expressed thus concerning Jersey; that in time of war,
Merchants of all Nations, and others as well Strangers as Natives, Enemies as
well as Friends, may freely, lawfully, and without peril, go unto, pass to and
fro, and frequent the said Isle and the places upon the Coasts thereof, with
their Shipping, Merchandise, and Goods, as well for shelter from foul weather,
as upon any other their lawful occasions, and there to use free Commerce and
Traffic, and to abide with safety and security, and to com away thence, and
return at pleasure, without any damage, trouble, or hostility whatsoever, in
their Affairs, Merchandise, Goods or Bodies; and that not only near the Island
and places aforesaid upon the Coasts, and their Precinct, but also within the
spaces distant from them as far as a man may ken, that is* so far as the sight
of the eye can attain. And this is called a privilege, which you see extend's
so far into the Sea it self, as the sight of the eye can pierce from the shore.
And if so be this privilege did not proceed from the Kings of England, as they
are Lords both of the Sea and the Isles, (and by the same right that the Isles
themselves belong to them, as has been said Cap. XIX.
before) it cannot in reason be imagined from whence it had its original.
There is not (so far as we know) so much as a pretense of a Grant made by any
other Princes. But only by the Kings of England, who unless themselves were
Lords of the whole Sea flowing about, by what Title and Authority did they
ordein such a Truce so far within the Sea on every side, between enemies of all
Nations whatsoever that came unto those Islands? But as our Kings have very
often commanded that all manner of persons should ceas from hostility, not
only within the aforesaid Creeks, but also throughout the spaces extended
thence at pleasure, into their Territory by Sea; so in like manner they
indulged the like kind of privilege for ever throughout these Coasts of the
French shore, that all manner of persons, though enemies to one another, might
securely sail to and fro, as it were under the wings of an Arbiter or Moderator
of the Sea, and also freely use the Sea according to such spaces or limits as
they were pleased at first to appoint. Which, without doubt, is a clear
evidence of Dominion.

Certain public Records, wherein of old the Dominion of the Sea is, by the
way, asscribed to the Kings of England, both by the King himself, and also by
the Estates of Parliament, debating of other matters, and that in express words,
and with very great deliberation, as a known and most undoubted Right. CHAP.
XXIII.
I Shall next of all cite several public Records, which are kept in the Tower
of London, wherein the Dominion and possession of the Sea is by the way
expressly asserted as belonging to the King of England, and that both by the
King himself, as also by the Estates of the Parliament of England, as they were
debating about other matters. For, that is the sixth head of the former
Division. King Edward the third intitle's himself and his Predecessors Lords of
the whole Sea flowing round about, in the several Commissions given to Geoffry
de Say Governor or Commander of the Southern and Western Sea, and John de
Norwich of the Northern (the limit of distinction beginning, as it was usual,
at the Mouth of the Thames) out of which Records we here set down theform,
which is especially to be considered, so far as it make's to this purpose.
Rot. Scotiae, 10. Ed. Memb. 16.
The KING to his Beloved and Trusty Geoffry de Say, Admiral of his Fleet of
Ships, from the Mouth of the River Thames toward the Western parts, greeting.
Whereas We have of late commanded you by Our Letters, that you together with
certain Ships out of the Cinque Ports, which we have ordered to be furnished
and made ready for war according to our Command, should set forth to Sea, to
oppose and resist certain Galleys, provided and enforced with men of war in
diverse foreign Parts, which, as We were informed, were set out toward the
parts of our Dominion to aggriev Us and Our people, or else to turn their course
toward the Coasts of Scotland, for the relief and succor of our Enemies there;
And in regard it has been related by some, that Galleys of that kind to the
number of XXVI are newly com to the Coasts of Bretaign and Normandy, and do
still abide there, as it is supposed, to do what mischief they can against Us
and Ours, or to succor Our said Enemies, as is aforesaid; We calling to mind
that OUR PROGENITORS THE KINGS OF ENGLAND have before these times been LORDS OF
THE ENGLISH SEA ON EVERY SIDE, yea, and defenders thereof against the
Invasions of Enemies; and seeing it would very much grieve Us, if our Kingly
honor in this kind of defens should (which God forbid) be lost in our time,
or in any sort diminished; and desiring, with God's help, to prevent dangers of
this nature and provide for the safeguard and defens of the Realm and our
Subjects, and to restrain the malice of our Eenemies; We do therefore strictly
require and charge you, by the duty and Allegiance wherein you stand bound,
according to the special trust reposed in you, that immediately upon sight of
these presents and without any farther delay, you do set forth to Sea with the
Ships of the Ports aforesaid and the other Ships which are now ready; and that
you arrest the other Ships in obedience to our command, which We lately
required you to arrest (But so that they might be ready and provided to set
forth according to Our aforesaid Command, seeing We caused the Masters and
Mariners of the same Ships to be prepared, and gathered together, whether
they were within your Liberties or without, and to cause them, being well
provided of men of war and other necessaries, to hasten out to Sea with the
aforesaid Ships) and that with all diligence you make search after the
aforesaid Galleys and other Ships of War abroad against us, and stoutly and
manfully set upon them, if they shall presume to bend their course for the end
aforesaid, toward the parts of Our Dominion, or the Coasts of Scotland. And if
they steal away from you, so that you cannot meet with them, then you are with
the aforesaid Ships of our Fleet without any delay to follow after the same
Galleys and Ships of War set out against Us, if they shall make toward our
Kingdom or the Coasts ^f Scotland aforesaid, and courageously to destroy them,
for the conservation of our Royal honor. But yet We will not that you occasion
any hurt or hindrance to Merchants or others passing by Sea, who have no
intention to offend Us and our Subjects, or to succor our Enemies. Then
fallows a power to press Seamen, and some other matters of that kind. The day
also and Authority is subscribed after this manner. Witness the King at the
Town of St John, the sixteenth day of August. By the King himself and his
Council. The like Commission was at the same time, and by the same time and by
the same Authority given to John de Norwich Admiral of the Northen part:

In the preferring of a certain Bill also in Parliament (which was the voice of
the Estates of the Realm) in the reign of the same Edward, we find that he
was usually accounted and styled King or Sovereign of the Sea by all Nations.
The words are, Rot. Parl. 46 Ed. 3. number. 20.
qe XX ans passez and toutdiz adevant, la Navy de dit roialme estoit en touz
portz and bones villes sur mier and sur riviers si noble and si plentinouse, qe
touz les pais t^no^ent and appelloyen^ nostre avantdit Seignieur, LE ROY DE LA
MIER, and tout son pays dotoyent le pluis per mier and per terre per cause de
la dite Navy etc. Which being translated out of the old Norman speak's to
this effect; That the English were ever in the Ages past renowned for Sea
affairs in all Countries near the Sea, and they had also so numerous a Navy,
that the people of all Countries esteemed and called our King, the King or
Sovereign of the Sea. There is likewise a notable Testimony touching this
business in the Parlament-Records of Henry the Fifth, where the tenor of the
Bill ran (as was usual) after this manner; Item priont les Rot. Parl. 8 (...).
5. memb. 3. art. 6.
Commens que, per lou nostre tressoverain seigneur LE ROY ET SES NOBLES
PROGENITORS DE TOUT TEMPS ONT ESTE SEIGNEURS DEL MERE, and ore par l^ grace de
Dieu est venuz que nostre dit seigneur le Roy est seigneur des costs d'
ambeparties del mere, d' ordeigner sur touts estrangers passants per my le dit
mere, tiel imposition al oeps nostre dit seigneur le Roy a prendre que a luy
semblera reasonable pur la sauvegarde del dite mere. That is to s^^* Item, the
Commons do pray, that (seeing our Sovereign Lord the King and his illustrious
Progenitors, have ever been Lords of the Sea, and now that through Gods gtace
it is so com to pass, that our said Lord the King is Lord of the Shores on both
sides of the Sea) such a tribute may be imposed upon all Strangers passing
through the said Sea, for the benefit and advantage of our said Lord the King,
as may seem agreeable to reason for the safeguard of the said Sea. The Answer
subscribed to this Bill was, Soit avise par le Roy, that is, let the King
himself be advised of it. For, the King resided in France at that time, being
Lord of that Country by Inheritance and Conquest, and Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester was President of the Parliament, being then Keeper or Lieutenant of
England, by whom, as the King's Deputy, this kind of Answer was usually given
to Bills, as often as an assent to them was delaied; but when the King was
present in person, le Roy s' advisera, the K. will advise, served in stead of
an Answer from ancient down to the present time, in such Bills as were not
passed into Acts. That is to say, in those Bills to which the Lords and Commons
had given their assent before, that is, the Estates of the Parliament of
England, which is here especially to be considered. For, most certain it is,
that, according to Custom, no Answer is given either by the King or in the
King's name, to any Parlamentarie Bills, before that the Bill, whether it be
brought in first by the Lords or by the Commons, has passed both Houses, as it
is known to all that are verst in the Affairs and Records of Parliament. And
when the name of either of them is left out in the draught of the Bill, (as the
Lords are in that before alleged) it was wont to be supplied, as it is also at
this day, by the brief form of Assent, which is added by that House, to whom the
Bill is sent and transmitted. For, that House which first prefer's it,
transmit's it to the other, who either give's an assent, or reject's it. And
when both Houses have so given their assent, then after a while, either the
King give's his assent (whereby it becom's an Act or Law) or else he laie's it
aside, and (as I have already shown) take's time to advise; Neither of which
is ever don by the King, according to the course of Parliament, till both Lords
and Commons have first given their assent. But the whole form of the
aforementioned Bill, which is full of all kind of story concerning things
transacted in Parliament, is taken out of the very Schedules annexed to the
Bill, (wherein the Forms of this kind of assent were wont expressly to be
added) and registered according to ancient Custom, among the Records of
Parliament, in the very same words wherein it was at first exhibited; no express
mention being made of the assent both of Lords and Commons which is annexed to
the Body of the Form (for, the assent of both sufficiently appears, in that
according to the course of Parliament it was so presented to the King) and the
Kings assent only or intent of deliberation being added by way of
subscription, as I have shown. But most of those Schedules annexed to that
kind of Bills which relate to the more ancient times are lost; whereas
notwithstanding the Records wherein they were wont to be registered, have been
carefully preserved in the Tower for above CCC years. All which we thought
meet to mention here, to the end that in the Bill before alleged out of the
Parlamentarie Records of Henry the fifth, these three things may be observed,
which make very much to the point in hand. First, that the Estates in
Parliament, according to the Custom of their Ancestors, that is to say, both
Houses of Lords and Commons, being well-informed of the matter perhaps by some
ancient Testimonies whereof we are bereft by the injury of time, did with one
consent affirm it as a thing unquestionable, that the King of England is Lord
of the Sea: As it appears also in that former Record which relate's to the
Reign of Edward the third; for, both the Bills are placed alike in the
aforesaid Records. Secondly, that the Sea whereof they speak is the whole that
flow's between France and England: For, they say in express terms, that King
Henry, being Lord of the Sea, was at that time Lord des costs d* amb^parties
del mere, that is, of the Coasts or Shores on both sides of the Sea, or those
that include the Sea on both sides, which cannot be understood of any other or
greater Sea, than of that which was mentioned there immediately before: And so
it is in plain terms to be taken of that whole Sea. Thirdly, that those
Estates did not question but that Tributes might be imposed by authority of
Parliament, upon all strangers whatsoever, wheresoever they pass through this
Sea; as well as Customs in Port; And that they did not at all conceiv, that a
Bill ought to be presented touching that business unto the King, as he was at
that time King of France, but only as King of England, that is, as Lord of the
whole Sea flowing between. And it is very improbable, and not in reason to be
admitted, that they would so upon deliberation (for both Lords and Commons use
to debate such matters a long time before they pass a Bill) that they would, I
say, so upon deliberation require an imposing of Customs by the Act of an
English Parliament, in a place that was not subject, as a part of the Roial
patrimony, to the King of England, as King of England. From hence it was also,
that our present King Charles did this last year declare, that himself and his
progenitors the Kings of England have in all times hitherto, by an ancient and
most just title, been Lords of this Sea; to wit, in his Brev. 10. Caroli R.
October. 20. seu 1634.
Letters Patents sent to the Maritim Counties of England, whereby ship-monie
was imposed for the defense of his Dominion by Sea. Add moreover hereunto, that
in the agreement made betwixt our Edward the first and Guie Earl of Flanders
about the wearing of Colors or Flags in every ship, and punishing offenders by
Sea, William de Leyburn is called 1286. seu 15 Ed. 1. in Fascic. de
superioritate, Maris, in Arce Londinensi.
Admiral de la mier du dict Roy d Engleterre, or Admiral of the Sea of the said
King of England. Other Testimonies of the same kind there are in Records
touching the Dominion of the Sea, as it has been received and acknowledged
according to the Common Law and Custom of our Country, which I shall discourse
of in the next place, and after that, concerning the Testimony of Foreiners.

Of diverse Testimonies in our own Law Books, and the most received Customs,
whereby the Sea-Dominion of the King of England, is either asserted or
admitted. CHAP. XXIV.
THE seventh of those Heads, according to the former Division, which manifest
the aforesaid Dominion of the Kings of England, relate's to our Law-Book's, and
the received Customs therein, which prove it from the most ancient times. There
are also in them many Particulars that may relate hereunto, which are explained
now and then touching the Guard of the Sea, the English Admiraltie, and other
things already handled. But in this Chapter we shall use either the
determinations and Commentaries of our own Lawyers, or chiefly such
Court-Records as explain their opinions. I confess indeed in some of the Authors
of our Law who wrote above CCCL. years ago or thereabout, after they had (as
the manner then was) read through the Civil Law also, they were so strict in
following those determinations word for word, which they found concerning the
Sea in that Law, that when they treated de acquirendo Rerum Dominio of the
manner of acquiring the Dominion of things, they tranferr'd them into their own
writings. From thence it is, that Henry Bracton, who was a very famous Lawyer
at the later end of the reign of Henry the Third, says, Lib. 1. seu de Rerum
divisione, cap. 12.. 5. and 6.
Naturali jure communia sunt omnia haec, aqua Profluens, aer, and Mare, and
litora Maris quasi Maris accessoria. By the Law of Nature all these things are
common, running water, the Aer, and the Sea, and the shores of the Sea as
accessories or dependants of the Sea. Also, aedificia, si in mari five in
litore posita fuerint, aedificantium sunt de Jure gentium, If Buildings be
raised in the Sea, or upon the shore, they become theirs that build them by the
Law of Nations. And a little after, Jus piscandi omnibus commune est in portu
and in fluminibus, a Right of fishing is common to all in a Haven and in
Rivers. Which we find likewise in Author Flet^ Ms. lib. 3. cap. 1. Breto^ lib.
2. cap. de Purchase.
some other of our Law Books of that Age, as a passage that fell from some
Writers (of whom I spoke at large in the former Book) that were more affected
than was meet with the words of Ulpian and Justinian, in the general division
of things. But these very men in other places, showing the Customs of our
Country, do sufficiently admit the King's Dominion by Sea. For Bracton himself
afterward speak's of them that by the King's grace and favor Bracton lib. 2.
cap. 24. 2. and 5. fol. 56. and 57.
quieti sint de Theolonio and consuetudinibus Dandis per totum regnum Angliae
in terra and mari, and per totum Regnum tam per terram quam per mare, Were
exempted from paying Tolls and Customs, throughout the whole Kingdom of England
in the Land and in the Sea; and throughout the whole Kingdom both by Land and
by Sea. And in the same King's time a freedom from some paiments was granted to
the Citizens of London Rot. Pat. (...) Hen 3. memb^. (...).
per totum Regnum tam per mare quam per terram, throughout the whole Kingdom as
well by Sea as by Land. And so Bracton, when he return's to speak of the
Customs of our Country, acknowledged that the Dominion of the Sea belonged to
his King no less then the Land. And hence it came to pass also, that inter
Capitula Coronae (as they call them) that is to say, those Articles or chief
Heads, whereof inquiry was to be made according to the usual custom, by
Judges delegated throughout England for the conservation of the public peace,
we find this also, de Purpresturis factis super Dominum Regem, sive in Terra
sive in Mari, etc. Of Pourpre^^ure is properly, when a man encroacheth, or when
any thing is don to the nuisance of the King's Tenants.
Pourprestures made upon our Lord the King, either on Land or in the Sea, or in
sweet waters, either within the Liberty or without, or in any other place
whatsoever. And it is placed among the Articles of this kind recited by Lib.
3. de Corona, cap. 1. 3. and cap. 2. ^. fol. 116b. and 118a.
Bracton himself, and in the Fle^a, Ms. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Author of the Book called Fleta. But in the language of the Law we call those
things Pourprestures, whereby detriment is don to any public place belonging
to the Patrimony of the Crown, as a public thorow-fare, a River, and the
like: So that according to the nature of this ordinary Article touching
Pourprestures, in the general form of inquiry, the Dominion or Ownership of
the Sea is ascribed to the King, no less than of the Land, or of public Road
or thorow-fare, and River. agreeable hereto is that Article about any kind of
saltwaters being enclosed by any subject, or possessed in any other manner;
which in the ancient Records of our Court of Admiraltie is said to be don, to
the disherison of the King. The words are there, Cod. Ms. de Admirallatu, fol.
18b. Artic. in Admirallat. inquirend. Edit. anno 1595. number. 33.
Item soit enquis de ceulx qui acrochent a eulx eaves salees en desheretison du
Roy. And at this day, inquiry is wont to be made, about that business, by
Authority of the high Admiral. Robert Belknap also, an eminent Judge in the time
of Richard the Second, 6. Rich. 2. Fitzherbert tit. Protection. 46.
says that the Sea is subject to the King, as a part of his English Kingdom or
of the Patrimony of the Crown. His words in the Norman tongue run thus; Le
Mere est del ligeans del Roy, come de son corone d' Angleterre. He added to
his words, in a remarkable way, as belonging to the Crown of England, or as
belonging to the Royal Patrimony of England, to the end that no man might
question, whether the Sea belonged to his King by the Right of the Kingdom of
England, or of the Duchy of Normandy, or of any other Province in France.
Another also, who wrote in the time of Henry the Eighth, says, it has been
received by ancient custom, that it is a duty lying upon the King of England,
as Lord of the British Sea, to scour the Sea of Pirates, and to render the use
thereof as of a public Road or Thorowfare whose soil is within his Patrimony)
safe for Shipping. For, he expresses himself in English thus; Seingerman.
lib. 2. cap. 51.
The King of the old Custom of the Realm, as the Lord of the narrow Sea, is
bound, as it is said, to scour the Sea of the Pirates and petit robbers of the
Sea. So much also, as to what concern's Dominion, is without controversy
admitted by our Ed. Coke part. 5. fol. 108. and in Comm. ad Littleton sect.
439. fol. 260.
Lawyers of later time. And it appears by public Records, containing diverse
main points, touching which the Judges were to be consulted for the good of
the Commonweal in the time of King Edward the Third, that the King's
Sea-Dominion, which they called the ancient superiority of the Sea, was a
matter out of question among our Lawyers of that Age. But consultation was had
for the more convenient guarding of it: For, the whole Bench of Judges were
advised with to the end (so we read it in the In Fascic. de superioritate
maris, in Arce Condinensi.
Records; and that is especially to be observed which we find here about the
first beginning of the Naval Laws of the Isle of Oleron, seated in the Creek of
Aquitain at the mouth of the River Charente) that the form of proceeding
heretofore ordained and begun by Edward the first, grandfather of our Lord the
King and his Council, at the prosecution of his Subjects, may be resumed and
continued, for the reteining and conserving of the ancient superiority of the
Sea of England, and the Authority of the Office of Admiraltie in the same, as
to the correcting, expounding, declaring, and conserving the Laws and Statutes
long since made by his Predecessors Kings of England, for the mainteining of
Peace and Justice among all people of what Nation soever passing through the
Sea of England; and to take cognizance of all attempt to the contrary in the
same; and to punish Offenders and award satisfaction to such as suffer wrong
and damage; Which Laws and Statutes were by the Lord Richard heretofore King of
England, at his return from the holy Land, interpreted, declared, and published
in the Isle of Oleron, and named in French le ley Olyroun. Here you have it
declared as a thing most received and certain, that the King of England has,
by ancient right, been Lord of the Sea, of the same name, or that which flow's
about it. But that whereof the Bench of Judges were to consult, was only about
the orderly maintenance of this right. Nor is it truly a small sign of this
Dominion, that Richard the First King of England, being in the Isle of Oleron,
which he possessed as seated in his own Sea, not so much for that he was Duke
of Aquitain as King of England (whereof we have already spoken) did, as sole
Ruler and Moderator of Sea-affairs, first publish those Naval or Sea-Laws in
that his Island, which hold in force to this day, and from that time gave them
so large and perpetual an Authority by that name, that as the Rhodian Naval
Laws (as the case stand's) do prove, that the Rhodians in ancient time were
Lords of the Grecian Sea, so the Laws of Oleron having Edict. France, tom. 3.
tit. 2. Juribus and privilegiis Admir^^li. 19.
obtained such a kind of Authority by Sea, from their first Institution, must
ever declare the King of England as the Author, to be Lord of the neighboring
Sea round about. But some printed Copies of these Laws, make them about sixty
years later than the Reign of that Richard; by what authority, I cannot tell.
For, they relate them to have been made in the year MCCLXVI, which is the
fiftieth year of our Henry the third. Also, in the Law of the Land, it is
reckoned among the Privileges of such as are absent, that they, who shall be
out of the Realm of England at the levying of a Fine of any Land, and making
Proclamations thereupon, are not so bound either by a yearly prescription, as
heretofore, or by a five years prescription, as is usual of later time, but
that their Right remain's entire to them upon their return home, if they make
their claim, within the like spaces of time. But intra regnum within the
Kingdom is by the same Law taken, and that in the usual phrase for that which
is intra (or as it is wont to be barbarously rendered infra) Quatuor Maria,
within the Stat. 18. Ed. 1. seu de modo levandi Fines. Bracton, lib. 5. de
exceptionibus, cap. 30. fol. 437. 2. Ed. 3. fol. 9a. 4. Ed. 3. fol. 46. pl. 30.
Fitzherbert 8. Rich. 2. tit. Continual Claim, 13. Plowden, C^^ment. 1. part.
fol. 359. and 360. etc.
four Seas, to wit, the Southern, Western, Eastern, and that Northen Sea which
washes both the sides of that neck of Land, whereby Scotland is united to
England. That is to say, within the outmost bounds of the English Empire in
those four Seas, or within the opposite Shores of the Eastern and Southern Sea
or Ports belonging to other Princes, and within the bounds of the Northern and
Western Sea, which indeed are to be bounded after another manner; but yet to
be bounded: that is, accordirng to the extent of possession Westward beyond
the Western Shores of Ireland, and by the first beginning of that Sea, which is
of the Scottish name and jurisdiction. But that which is opposed to this
Particle intra quatuor maria, within the four seas, is that Bracton ib. and
Coke 7. Jacobi R. part. 8. fol. 100. Cas. Rich. Lichford.
extra quatuor Maria, without the four seas, or to be in the parts so beyond
the Seas, that they be beyond the bounds of the Sea-Dominion of the King of
England; from whence we are to determine of the bounds or exterior limit of
the Seas. And although the Land of England be sometimes used for that which is
the whole Realm, or English Empire, as signifying the same, a more ordinary
and indeed more brief expression being applied (as is usual) in stead of a
more large; yet it certainly appears, that extra quatuor maria, without the
four seas, and extra Regnum, without the Realm, do in our Law Books signify
the very same thing (that is to say, so far as the extent and latitude of the
whole English Empire is comprehended in the name of Realm, not as the Realm of
England, is now and then distinguished in Coke, part. 7. in cas. Calvini, fall.
23.
our Law from Ireland, which also is a distinct Dominion of the same Empire, or
from the other Islands which are reckoned in the Roial patrimony of the Kings
of England.) For, it is usual in the Language of the Law, so to describe him,
who, in that sens, shall be out of the Realm. And whereas in the Reign of
Richard the second to an objection made against one that would avoid the yearly
prescription as not bound by it, for that he was not in England, it was
excepted that he was in Scotland, and so within the four Seas; It was
thereupon Fitzherbert, tit. Continual Claim, 13.
answered and ruled by the Court, that the Exception was of no force, for that
Scotland was not within the Bounds and Limits of England. So that within the
four Seas, and within the Realm, signified one and the same thing; from whence
these terms, out of the Realm, and without the four Seas, become one and the
same also. To be out of the Realm, is very Sect. 440. and 441.
often repeated in this ^en^ also, by Littleton, the most excellent of all our
Law-Writers, signifying no other thing than what he renders it in Sect. 677.
and videsis Plowden, Comment. part. 1. fol. 359. and 360
another place, by one who ala oustere le mere, crossed the Sea, or, went
beyond sea. from thence also it seems to have proceeded, that, whereas with
us, among the several temporal excuses of Defendants, who are summoned to
appear in Court (in our Law we call them Essoin is an alledgment of an excuse
for him that is summoned, or sought for to appear, and answer to an action. It
is as much as excusatio with the Civilians.
Essoins) there are two alleged, whereof the one is entitled de ultra Mare, the
other De Malo veniendi, and this latter is allowed to him that is hindered by
any kind of misfortune whatsoever, within the Seas, or on this side of the
more remote bounds of those Seas, which belong to England; but the former to
him who live's without, or beyond the Seas, belonging to the English Empire;
From thence it seems, I say, to have proceeded, that, in former times, when
there was a more frequent use in Court of this kind of excuses, a Defendant
being absent in Ireland, might lawfully make use of the latter form of Essoin,
but not of the former. Nevertheless, if through ignorance he did make use of
this, it took on the nature of the latter, that is, wholly quitting all its own
nature, it depended upon this, that the Defendant, according to the more vulgar
sens^ or acception, lived Beyond Sea. For, according to received Custom, the
nature of them both was such, that when any one might lawfully use the former,
he might also after a while likewise enjoy the benefit of the latter. But in
the said kind of Essoins or Excuses, the former not being lawfully made use
of, but yet turned into the latter by construction of Law, lest it should become
of no use, there was no place for the latter; to the end it might not be
iterated contrary to Custom. The matter it self was thus decided in the time
of K. Henry the third, as it is described by Henry Bracton, after this
manner. Esto, says Lib. 5. ^ract. de Esson^is, cap 8.. 2.
he, quod quis se Essoniaverit de Ibernia quasi de ultra Mare; attornatur
Essonium illud ad simplex Essonium de Malo veniendi ut coram Martino de
Patteshul in Banco, anno Regis Henrici Sexto de Gilberto Mariscallo and Cecilia
uxore ejus and Allano de Hyda, qui vocavit ad Warrantum Willielmum Mariscallum
in Comitatu Pembroke, and qui se essoniavit de Ibernia, and non fuit allocatum,
and postea fecit de hoc quod aliud essonium de malo veniendi ad alium diem non
fuit allocatum. So much we find also in the ancient Author of that Book
entitled Ms. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Fleta. Doubtless, Ireland is no less seated beyond sea, than either France or
Spain, unless you take that decision, as relating only to the Civil notion of
this kind of situation; to wit, that it is not situate beyond that Sea which
is a part and Territory of the English Empire, but placed therein, and
comprehended under one and the same Supreme Power with England; and so that an
Excuse or Essoin de ultra mare, is not in that kind to be admitted. In the
ancient Ms. fol. 12b.
Records also concerning the Customs of our Court of Admiraltie, we read it
was an usual Custom in the time of King Henry the first (who died Anno Dom.
MCXXXVI.) and of other Kings both before and after him, That, if any man
accused of a capital crime don by Sea, being publicly called five times by
the voice of the Crier, (after so many several days assigned) did not make his
appearance in the Court of Admiraltie, he was banished out of England and de
mer appurtenant au Roy d Angleterre, or out of the Sea belonging to the King of
England, for forty years, more or less, according to the pleasure of the
Admiral. Other particulars there are that relate hereunto about Actions for
matters arising in this Sea, that were wont to be entered in express terms
heretofore, in the Temp. Ed. 1. Fitzherbert tit. Avowr^e 192. and Placit. 37.
and 38 Hen. 3. Rot. 10. Devon. Itin. Suffer. 47 Hen. 3. Rot. 10. Trin. 50 Hen.
3. Rot. 22. and Trin. 24 Ed. 3. in Brevibus Regis inter Pilke and Uenore; quae
in Arcis Londinensis Archivo. Ejusmodi item sunt alia.
ordinary Courts of our Common Law, who^e Jurisdiction was ever esteemed of
such a nature, that an Action instituted about a matter arising in any other
place than within the bounds of the Realm, was by the ancient strict Law,
always to be rejected by them. After which manner as it has been a Custom
now for many years, that an action ought to be rejected, unless the matter
have its rise within the Body, (as they call it) of the County, that is,
within some Province or County of the Island, usually given in charge to
certain Governors or Officers, known to us by the name of Sheriffs. So also is
it in this Sea-Province, belonging, by the ancient received Custom, to the high
Admiral, or his Deputies, not only so far as concern's its defense and guard,
but also as to matter of Jurisdiction. So that at length it is manifest, that
the Sea-Dominion of the King of England, is without controversy admitted and
asserted also, both by the Determinations and Customs of the Law of the Land,
and by the express words of the Writs and Forms of the Actions themselves.

Nor is that of any force at all to the contrary, which either our
Countrie-man Bracton the Lawyer, (as has been said) or some others, of late as
well as ancient time, that are Followers of him, but in too careless a manner,
(while they Jo: Cowel. Instit. Juris Anglicani lib. 2. tit. 1. sect. 3. and 4.
set down the Institutions of our English Law) have unadvisedly uttered by the
way, touching that ancient community of the Sea, and of Fishing also in
Rivers, according to the Books of Justinian; as if such a kind of community
were admitted in our Law. Truly, that which they have so let slip, is not so
much to be taken as contrary to the known Law of the Land in this particular
(for, even Bracton himself, as I have shown, has diverse other passages that
signify this Dominion of the King) as it is to be reckoned for some of the
relics of Ulpian, or of the School of the Imperial Law, too slightly and
carelessly added by the way in writing. And the like may be said of Andraeas
Horn Ms. in speculo Justit^ariorum, lib. 2. and Joannes Dee in Monarch. Britan.
page 21.
one or two more of our Writers, who after the manner of reasoning, received
for the most part in the Imperial Law, touching the middle of a River, and an
Island risen therein, do by the way, but ignorantly, make the middle of the Sea
flowing between to be the bound of this Sea-Dominion of our Kings. Moreover,
the same may be said likewise of the Anno 1602 apud Camden. in Ann^libus, Tom.
page 272. Edit. Londinens.
Commissioners of Queen Elisabeth, who treating at Bremen with the
Commissioners of Christiern the fourth King of Denmark* about a freedom of
Navigation through the Northern Sea, object a perpetual community of every
kind of Sea, from the Law of Nations, deny a Dominion, and wrest other things
by way of Argument out of the Writers of the Imperial Law, which are clearly
contrary to our English Right, as also to the Intervenient Law of Nations,
which has continued in force for so many Ages about the Dominion of the Sea.
Either, I say, the same must be said of them, or else that they did not so much
make choice of Arguments which they thought were true, to serve the present
occasion, as of such that might seem to have the greater force and authority
among those Civil Lawyers with whom they were in Treaty. Nor is it a new
thing, that Civilians should speak of a natural and perpetual community of the
Sea, even where it is most certain that a Dominion thereof is admitted from all
Antiquity, in the very Territory wherein they themselves are comprehended; as
I have formerly declared. There are also very many Rights among us, belonging
either to the Exchequer, or to such as enjoy the Right of the Exchequer by
Grant from the King, which some conceiv to be grounded upon that Sea-Dominion,
whereof we discourse: As the confiscation of Goods derelict in the Sea, and of
some of the greater sort of Fish, as Wale-Fishes, Sturgeons, and others. And for
the most part that of the Satyrist hold's good, Juvenal. Satyr. 4.
Quicquid conspicuum pulchrumque ex aequore toto est,
Res Fisci est ubicunque natat. --
Goods in the sea of any worth and note,
Belong to th'Chequer wheresoere they flote.


Besides wreckt goods cast out ashore, when no living creature belonging to the
ship remain's alive. But these things do not only appertain to him that is
Lord of the Sea, but sometimes also to others in other Nations. And they for the
most part depend, either upon the Law or Custom of some Land, as in the case of
Goods cast ashore, or of such as are found and imported; or else upon a Right
over such Persons as shall first possess them, as in the case of any Goods
whatso^ver derelict or found in the Sea, and others of that kind. Therefore I
thought it not meet to draw those things here into Controversy.

Some ancient Testimonies of less account, touching the Sea-Dominion, whereof
we Treat. CHAP. XXV.
THE last head in the aforementioned Division is concerning some Testimonies of
a lesser account. There has been a piece of Gold very often coined by our
Kings, called a Rose-noble, which was stamped upon one side of it with a ship
floting in the Sea, and a King armed with a Sword and Shield, sitting in the
ship it self, as in a Throne, to set forth a Representation of the Dominion of
the English by Sea. The first Author hereof was Edward the third; when he
guarded his own Sea with a very numerous Navy, consisting of Thom. Walsingham
1359. seu 33 Ed. 3.
Eleven hundred Ships; at which, as at other times, he marched victoriously
through France. Questionless, our Kings in a manner followed the example of
Caius Allectus in this particular, who having gotten possession of the British
Empire, (as was shown Cap. 5:
before) expressed his own Dominion by such a kind of Coin. This pattern, which
I have placed here, belong's, I suppose, to Edward the Fourth. And in a Book
Figures des m^n^yes de France, fol. 131. and 132.
lately set forth in France of the Coins belonging to the French Kingdom there
are some that were stamped by those Kings of England who were also Kings of
France. But that those Insignia of a Ship, the Sea, a Sword, and a Throne, did
relate to the right of the Crown of England, not at all to that of France,
cannot be doubted by any, who shall observe, that there is not the least
impress or print of that thing to be found in those French pieces, that were
coined by the Kings only of France. And whereas there are in the Coins of
Zeland, certain representations of Sea-Dominion, as a Lion issuing out of the
Sea, and other things of that kind; yet truly that is but of late time, and in
no case a pointing out of Dominion (if you except their Ports and inner spaces
of the Sea included within their Islands) but only of the kind of life and
situation of the people. But the aforesaid English Coin had an inscription upon
the revers (which is not unusual in the gold Coins of our Country) taken out
of the Gospel, viz. Jesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat, which Apud
Guil. Camden Remains page 206. Edit. 1614.
some have conceived was a sentence in use among the Chemists, who by a
customarie profanation of the name and passage of our Savior, thought to set
forth the majesty and dignity of that Art of theirs, which refined the gold
for these Coins in the time of Edward the Third; Others, that it served for an
Amulet or Charm to make a man invulnerable or Shot-free. We find indeed in
some Paulus Grillandus, Tract. de Quaest. and Tortura, q. 4. number. 13. and 14.
Lawyers, that these words are placed among those, that are used by men brought
under Examination upon the Rack, to ease and drive away their pain: Touching
which it is not worth the while to spend any farther Discourse. But as for the
meaning of the impress on the other side of the Coin, it is thus explained by a
certain Versifier, whose name is unknown, but he wrote in English Rythme, in
the time of Henry the Sixth, touching the conservation of the Government of the
Sea Ms^ in Biblioth. Cottoniana, and vide G. Camden in loco ante citato.
; For four things our Noble shows to me,
King, Ship, and Sword and Power of the Sea.


But his intent is, earnestly to persuade the English that it is their main
interest diligently to guard the Sea (whereof the Kings of England are Lords)
and to defend it with all their might, as the perpetual prop and support of
their Empire. He says also, that the same advice was given by the Emperor
Sigismund, at his enterview with our Henry the Fifth, for the procuring of on
peace betwixt him and Charles the Sixth King of France. Give me leav to set
down his words. The true process of English policy
Of utterward to keep this region
Of our England (that no man may deny
Nor say of sooth but it is one of the best)
Is this; that who sees South, North, East, and West,
Cherish merchandise, keep the Admiraltie,
That we be Masters of the narrow See.
For Sigismund the great Emperor,
(Which yet reigns) when he was in this land
With King Henry the fifth, Prince of honor,
Here much glory, as him thought, he found;
A mighty land which had taken in hand
To war in France, and make mortality,
And ever well kept round about the Sea.
And to the King thus he said, My brother
(When he perceivaed two towns Calys and Dover)
Of all your towns to choose, of one and other,
To keep the Sea and soon to com over
To werre outward and your reign to recover,
Keep these two towns sure, and your Ma^estie,
As your tweyne eyne, so keep the Narrow See.
For if this See be kept, in time of war
Who can here pass without danger and wo^
Who can escape? who may mischief differ
What marchandie may for by be ago?
For needs hem must take trewes every foe,
Flanders and Spain, and other, trust to me,
Or else hindered all for this Narrow See.


What is contained more at large in these Rhythmes, you have the sens of it
contracted above in few words. It is not worth while to render the words
themselves. The same Versifier also proceeds thus; But King Edward made a siege
royal
And wanne the town; and in special
The Sea was kept, and thereof he was Lord;
Thus made he By Nobles here are meant the Rose Nobles that he coined.
Nobles comed of Record.


We have also diverse other very large Domestic Testimonies of this thing,
which are added in the next place, being mingled together with the ancient
Recognition or acknowledgment of foreign Nations concerning the same.

That the Sea-Dominion of the Kings of England is acknowledged by Foreiners,
whom it most concern's, by their usual striking of Sails, according to ancient
Custom. Also concerning two Edicts or Ordinances that were set forth about this
Thing, by the Kings of France. CHAP. XXVI.
We are com now to Foreiners. And it is clearly evident, by what we have
discoursed before, either touching the limits set for Navigation by the King of
England, or the License of passage through this Sea often desired by Petition,
that some of them have indeed acknowledged this Dominion. But there are two
Testimonies more notable than the rest, which show (if you consider chiefly, as
you ought, their being Neighbors, and such whom it concerned) that they
generally did the same. The one is the usual striking of the Topsails, by
every Ship of any Foreign Nation whatsoever, if they sail near the King's Navy
or any Ship belonging to the same Navy in the Sea. The other is a Libel
published of old, or a Bill of complaint instituted, wherein very many foreign
Nations heretofore, in the time our Edward the First, did all together, and by
common consent with the English, acknowledge the Dominion of the Kings of
England by Sea. Whereto I shall add also a particular declaration of that
kind, made by the Flemings, in an Ambassie to our Edward the Second.

But that the striking of Sails is don, not only in honor of the English King,
but also in acknowledgment of his Soveraigntie and Dominion in this Sea, is, I
suppose, a thing out of question. Certainly, the French cannot doubt of it,
who, by such a kind of striking, would have had themselves heretofore
acknowledged Lords of our Sea; but in vain. That is to say, they were as much
over-seen in the former Age, in setting forth two Edicts or Ordinances, to
require and ratify such a kind of striking Sail to themselves by all
Foreiners, as they were in so rashly vindicating the Sea-Dominion of the King
of England. Concerning those Edicts we spoke before in the Cap. 18.
former Book; Neither of which was received as valid in any Court of Justice,
according to a decision made in the Ludovic. Servin. Placit. 11. Tom. 2. 1592.
page 262. Edic. 1609.
supreme Court of Parliament, which we have observed also in that place. Yea,
and here I shall set down the very words used by Ludovicus Servinus Advocate
general to the King of France, to magnify the Authority of those Edicts or
Ordinances, at the time of that Decision. The one of them being set forth by
King Henry the Second of France, or in the year MDLV; the other by Henry the
Third, or in the year MDLXXXIV, they were both objected by those, who required
a striking of Sail to them in the name of the French King, even without the
bounds of France (for, the words of the Edicts did not relate only to the Sea
confining upon France;) upon which ground also they offered violence to certain
Hamburgers who refused to do this, and seized them as guilty of contempt
against the dignity and Dominion of the French by Sea. But as to this thing,
says Servinus, it may be said on the contrary, That the (Edicts or)
Ordinances of the Realm making injunction to strike and com aboard, have not
been observed and are not to this day; And it does not appear that of the year
1555. has been verified in the Court of Parliament, but the Defendants do
report only an extract out of the Register of Brouage (which indeed is evident
enough when that Edict is objected by the Servinus, placit. citat. page 254.
same man.) Moreover, it was an old obsolete Law, and that which prove's it, is
the new Ordinance of the year 1584. For, there had been no need of a new Law if
the old one had been kept; And notwithstanding that the last has not been
verified simply, but as it was promoted by persons in Power at that time, it
did not pass without resistance, but was Registered and Published with the
Qualification required by the Procurator General, at the charge of the
Executor, according to the ancient Forms, and such as the Officers of the
Admiraltie had made in former time, without doing any thing anew. The former
Edict, which was objected, was never admitted by the Estates of the Realm; for,
nothing of that matter is to be found in the Records of Parliament, which is
the proper place for a Testimony of its admission. But the later was indeed
admitted, though as to any effect of a Law, either at that time to be enacted
or introduced, or as received before into Custom, it was plainly rejected, and
that at the instance of the King's Procurator; who desired it might be so
qualified, as you see, that what was grounded upon ancient Custom, it only
might be ratified, even after this Edict was so admitted in favor of some great
Ones. Which was discreetly don; seeing both the Edicts were extremely contrary
to the Custom of their Neighbors, yea, and of all Foreiners. But as to the
business of striking sail, which they would have to be a special Sign or Pledge
of their Soveraigntie and Dominion in those Edicts, which notwithstanding, upon
second thoughts, were rejected afterward in Law (as has been shown;) truly,
it having been usually and perpetually acknowledged due for so many Ages to the
English, and performed accordingly both by stranger, and by the French
themselves (as a matter grounded upon long prescription) can be no slight
argument among the French, to confirm that Dominion of the English, whereof we
treat.

Moreover, it is affirmed by all that are used to the Sea as a thing out of
Question, that this intervenient Law or Custom of striking sail has been very
usual to the English and other Nations; And that it is very ancient and
received for above four hundred years, appears by this, that at Hastings, a
Town situate upon the Shore of Sussex, it was decreed by King John, (in the
second year of his Reign, or of our Lord MCC) with the assent of the Peers;
that if the Governor or Commander of the King's Navy in his Naval Expeditions
(which were all in that Age upon the Southern Sea) shall encontre sur la mer
(so the words run in the Ms. Commentar. de rebus Admiral, fol. fol. 28. ^.
Norman Tongue) aucunes Nefs ou vesseaulx charges ou void, qui ne vevillent
avaler and abeisser leurs triefs, au commandment du Lieutenant du Roy ou de l'
Admiral du Roy ou son Lieutenant, mais combatant encontre ceulx de la flote,
que, silz puent estre pris, quils soient reputez come enemies, and leurs Ness
vesseaulx and biens pris and forfaits come biens des enemies, tout soit que les
Maistres ou possessours d' iceulx voudroient venir apres and alleguer mesmes
les Nefs vesseaulx and biens estre des amies du Roy nostre seigneur; and que la
menye estant en iceulx soient chastiez per emprisonement de leur corpse pur leur
rebellete par discretion; That is to say, shall meet any Ships whatsoever, by
Sea, either laden or empty, that shall refuse to strike their Sails at the
command of the King's Governor or Admiral, or his Lieutenant, but make
resistance against them which belong to his Fleet; That then they are to be
reputed enemies if they may be taken, yea and their Ships and Goods be
confiscated as the Goods of Enemies. And that, though the Masters or Owners of
the Ships shall allege afterward^ that the same Ships and Goods do belong to
the friends and Allies of our Lord the King. But that the Persons, which shall
be found in this kind of Ships, are to be punished with imprisonment, at
discretion, for their Rebellion. It was accounted Treason, if any Ship
whatsoever had not acknowledged the Dominion of the King of England in his own
Sea, by striking Sail: And they were not to be protected upon the Account of
Amity, who should in any wise presume to do the contrary. Penalties also were
appointed by the King of England, in the same manner as if mention were made
concerning a crime committed in some Territory of his Island.

A Recognition or Acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominion of the King of England,
made by very many of the Neighbor-Nations round about, in an ancient Libel
publicly exhibited, or in a Bill of Complaint instituted by them, together
with the English, against Reyner Grimbald Governor of the French Navy. Also,
touching a Recognition of this kind implied in his Defense. CHAP. XXVII.
THe other Testimony concerning the Recognition of most Foreign Nations in this
particular, is that Libel or Bill of Complaint heretofore instituted by very
many Nations together, wherein they unanimously declared the King of England
and his Predecessors to be Lords of teh Sea flowing about, and brought them to
give an acompt in a Court of Judicature, who presumed to violate that Right:
For the well understanding whereof, I shall relate the whole matter more at
large.

A war being on foot between our Edward the First, and King Philip the Fair of
France, it was so concluded sometimes by agreement, that there might
notwithstanding be a Freedom of Commerce on both sides, and so a Truce with
all Merchants whatsoever on either side; but as to other things, hostility
proceeded in the mean time (as it was wont) betwixt both the Nations. This
special kind of Truce was called Rot. Claus. 25 ^d. 1. in S^bed. annex.
Membranae 26. Rot. Alem^^^^e a 22 ^d. 1. ad ^1 ^d. 1 etc.
Sufferentia guerrae, sufferance of war, and during war, there were certain
persons appointed by both Princes, to take cognizance of things don contrary
to this Truce, and pass their Judgments, according to the* ^ot (...)* (...) ^d.
1. part 2. m^m. 24* in do^so.
Law or Custom of Merchants, and the Form of Sufferance. After a revolution of
some years (wherein this kind of Truce took place, and sometimes not) a League
was made in the year of our Lord MCCCIII. which is the one and thirtieth of
Edward the first. The first Article of that League is, (...) integ^^on ^ab^tur
in (...)* A^^manni^, 31 ^d. 1. M^mbrana 2.
that those Kings should not only be at amity with each other, but also that
they should defend one another in all manner of Rights, against any others
whomsoever, except the Church of Rome, and on the part of the King of England;
his son in law John Duke of Brabant; but on the part of the King of France,
Albertus King of the Romans, and John Earl of Henault. But the third Article
thereof (for the first and third is of singular use in that Libel or Bill of
Complaint, as will appear by and by) is this, Item il est accord qe l'un ne
receptera, ne sustendra, ne confortera, ne fera confort, ne aid as Enemies de
l' autre, ne soffera qu' ils eient confort, souccors, ne aid, soit de gent d'
arms, ou de vitailes, ou d' autres chooses queles q' eles soient de ses terres
ou de son poiar, mais adiondera sur peine de forfature de corpse and d' avoir
and empeschera a tot son poair loiaument en bon foi qe les dits enemies ne
soient resceipts ne confortes es terres de sa seignurie ne de son poiar, ne
q'ils en aient confort soccours ne aid soit gents d' arms, des chevaux, d'
armeures, de vitails, ou d' autres chooses queles q' eles soient: which is in
English to this effect; that, according to this contract of amity, they were
neither of them in any wise to cherish the enemies of the other, nor suffer any
kind of aid or relief to be afforded them in their Territories. The war
being thus at an end, because there arose very many complaints concerning
injuries don up and down, as well in the more open as in our own Sea, during
the special Truce before* mentioned, but also it was probable that others of
that kind might arise perhaps after the League was made, especially by reason
of the differences at that time betwixt the French King and the Earl of
Flanders; therefore Commissioners were appointed by both Princes to hear and
decide them. And those at that time on the behalf of the King of England were
Robert Rot. Pat. 31 Ed. 1. membr. 16. ult. Junii.
de Burghershe Constable of Dover Castle, and John de Banquell Steward of
Pontoise, Baraldus de Sescas, and Arnaldus Ayquein Knights; on the French
King's behalf were appointed the Lord Saquilly, Mittonius Blanvillius,
Bertrandus Jordanus, and Gulielmus Ralastansius, Knights also: To the end that
they might take cognizance (so it is in the King of England's Commission) des
enterprises, mesprises, and forfaites en Treve ou en Sufferance, enter nos and
le dit Roy de France, d' un part and d' autre, es costeres de la mer d'
Engleterre and autres per dece^ and ausint per devers Normandy and autres
costeres de la mer per de la; that is, of encroachments, injuries and offenses
committed on either side in time either of the League or Sufferance, or, of the
Truce agreed on between Us and the said King of France, for freedom of Commerce
only, either upon the Seacoasts of England, or any other neighboring Coasts
of the Sea, either toward Normandy, or others more remote. But the aforesaid
parties were autorised by two Commissions, in such manner, that the one
Commission contained four, and the other also four, an equal number being
appointed by both the Kings. They both bear date the last day of June, MCCCIII.
To these Commissioners or others of that kind, the Libel was jointly exhibited
by Procurators, on the behalf of the Prelates and Peers of England, also of the
high Admiral of England, yea, and of the Cities and Towns throughout England;
and lastly, of the whole English Nation, and others subject to the King of
England; and how this could be don otherwise than by authority of the Estates
in Parliament, is not to be imagined. With these in like manner were joined the
Procurators of most Nations bordering upon the Sea throughout Europe, as the
Genoeses, Catalonians, Spaniards, Almains, Zelanders, Hollanders, Fri^slanders,
Danes, and Norwegians, besides others under the Dominion of the Roman German
Empire. All these together instituted an Action or Complaint against Reyner
Grimbald, who being Governor of the French Navy, had, during the war between
King Philip of France, and Guie Earl of Flanders, intercepted and spoiled
Merchants of their Goods in this Sea, that were bound for Flanders. And all
these Complainants jointly say, that the King of England and his Predecessors,
have time out of mind, without controversy, enjoied the Soveraigntie and
Dominion of the English Sea, and the Isles of the same, by right of their Realm
of England, that is to say, by prescribing Laws, Statutes, and Prohibitions of
Arms, and of Ships otherwise furnished than with such necessaries as belong to
Merchants, and by demanding surety, and affording protection in all places
where need should require, and ordering all other things necessary for the
conservation of Peace, Right and Equity, between all sorts of people passing
through that Sea, as well strangers, as others, in subjection to the Crown of
England. Also, that they have had, and have the Sovereign Guard thereof, with
all manner of Conisance and Jurisdiction in doing Right and Justice, according
to the said Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Prohibitions, and in all other
matters, which may concern the exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the said
places. To wit, such matters as concerned the office and jurisdiction of the
Admirals, that were wont to be appointed by the Kings of England. Then, adding
the first Article aforementioned of the League made but a little before,
whereby both Kings were obliged to defend one another's right, they proceed in
their Accusation against Grimbald, saying; That he is only Master of the
Navy of the King of France; but call's himself Admiral of the said Sea; and
pretend's that he was autorised under that title by the King of France, upon
occasion of his making war against the Flemings. And that after the making of
the said League, and contrary to the intent and meaning of the same, he had
for above a years time unjustly assumed and usurp^d the office of Admiral in
the said Sea, by authority of the King of France his Commission; taking the
People and Merchants of England, and other Nations passing through that Sea,
imprisoning and spoiling them of their Goods, and delivering them up to the
King's Officers, as Goods forfeited and confiscate. And whereas he has in a
very insolent manner justified these actions of his in writing, as don by
authority of the King his Master's Commission, as also according to a
Prohibition made by the King of England, and proclaimed, according to the
intent of the aforesaid third Article of the Treaty, throughout his Dominions,
(that is to say, a Prohibition which forbade a giving any relief to the French
King's enemies within the Dominion of the King of England) and so endeavored to
defend himself before the Commissioners; it was alleged to be don to the great
damage and prejudice both of the King of England, and of the Prelates, Peers,
and all the rest, who jointly preferred the Bill, as aforesaid. Therefore they
all with one consent pray, that the persons so imprisoned being set at
liberty, and restitution made of the Goods injuriously taken, they might be
refe^red to the Jurisdiction of the Admiral of England (to whom alone this
kind of Jurisdiction, both in respect of Things and Place, as well as Persons,
did appertein) and that, by order of the Commissioners, Reyner Grimbald himself
might be enjoined to repair the losses of the Complainants, in case he wore
able to make satisfaction; or otherwise, that the King of France, who gave him
Commission for that Command, might be adjudged to do the same. But after
reparation made, that then also the said Reyner might receiv such punishment
for violating the League, as might deter others from the like attempt in time
to com.

Now what was don by the Commissioners, is not very well known: It seems it
was a matter of such moment, that it was thought more convenient to make an end
by agreement, than bring the matter to a trial. But in the mean time, nothing
is more evident, than that a right of Dominion over the Sea, and that ancient
and confirmed by long Preseription, was in express terms here acknowledged by
almost all the Neighbor-Nations, to belong to the King of England; and so, that
he might, at his own pleasure, give protection, and set Laws and Limits to all
that sailed through this Sea, and used it in any manner whatsoever; nor could
this kind of Right be altered or diminished by the differences of the
Neighbor-Nations between each other, or by any Right of war belonging to
others, otherwise than in any other Territory of his Dominion. And it is to
be observed, that the Flemings themselves, betwixt whom and the French there
was a war on foot at that time, were not, nor could they rightly have been
parties in that Charge or Accusation: For, by virtue of the aforesaid League
made between the English and French, they were to assist one another by Arms to
defend each other's Rights; so that according to the League, the French King
was permitted to use the Sea, to infest the Flemings being his enemies, but
not to intercept such as passed this way from any other Nations, or that were
bound with Merchandise for Flanders. And Paulus De gesti^ Franc. li. 8.
AEmilius, speaking of this very time, says; The French King threatened ruin
to Flanders. The King of England protected the Flemings. For, Edward was so far
only a friend of the King of France, that yet he would not have the Flemings
ruined. Thus our King order's the matter, both as a Defender of his own Right,
and supreme Moderator also of Navigation in respect of others. Nor truly is it
to be omitted, that Grimbald himself here, being Governor of the French
Navy, did not only arrogate this power in this Sea from the Authority granted
him by his King's Commission, but in express terms also made use of that
Prohibition of the King of England, which was in force according to the Third
Article of the said League, thereby to defend himself; as if he had also
acknowledged, that himself could not have lawfully held that office of.
Admiraltie in this Sea, without such a Permission as he conceived himself to
enjoy, by virtue of that Prohibition. For, by that Prohibition, it was required
that no relief should be given to the French King's Enemies, nor any aid
afforded them within the Dominion of the King of England, (that is, per my son
poere, which were the very words of Grimbald, as you may see in the Libel it
self set down hereafter.) And so Grimbald expressly objected the Authority of
that Prohibition, together with the power of his Master's Commission in defense
of himself: As if he had said, I use this power, it being given me by the
King of France, who put me in Command over his Navy, and Affairs belonging to
the Sea: But besides this, the King of England having set forth his
Prohibition, commanded that no kind of relief should be given to any Enemy
of the French, within his Dominion, according to the League made between both
the Kings. And therefore, seeing I have not taken either the Persons or Goods
of any but such as are Enemies, or at least such as according to the
Intervenient Law of Nations, are to be reckoned upon an hostile Account (for,
doubtless he pretended, that they were to be taken as Enemies of what Nation
soever they were, who relieved the Flemings by Merchandise or otherwise) I
conceiv it a sufficient ground of defense in my behalf, that the King of
England, according to the League made, did by public Proclamation require,
that no succor or relief should be given to the Enemies of France in any part
of his Dominion. Upon which account, not to these, whom I took at Sea. The
sum of all in brief is this; That Grimbald did not so much as imagine, that
his office of Admiraltie or Power given him by Commission depended upon any
Dominion of the King of France by Sea, but altogether upon the Authority of his
Kings Commission, the League, and the King of England's Prohibition: As if the
English King had openly declared by that League and Prohibition, that he would
not take it for any injury to himself, during that kind of League and
Prohibition, although the French should fall upon any of their Enemies in his
Dominion, or though they, which is all one here, should be taken in his Sea,
by the French King's Officers. Certainly, unless you so understand Grimbald, I
do not see wherefore he should at all join that Prohibition together with the
King his Master's Commission, in defense of himself, as it is expressed in the
Libel, or why mention was made there of the Dominion of the King of England,
throughout which that Prohibition was proclaimed, seeing the controversy arose
touching things don only by Sea. But if he be so to be understood,
certainly then he did not only forbear to oppose the ancient right of the
King of England by Sea, but also sufficiently acknowledged it, while he seems
to affirm that a temporary restriction only was added thereto, by an
accession of the League and the Prohibition: So that we have a tacit
acknowledgment even of the French themselves at that time, in this their
Admiral. But how the principal points of the League ought to be expounded, it
is no place here to discourse; for; we observe only that the Sea. Dominion of
the Kings of England was acknowledged, in that Libel, by so many Nations.

Moreover truly, it is worthy observation; that about the very same time, to
wit, a little before the making of the League, the King of England did homage
to the French King for the Duchy of Rot. Alemann. 30 and 31 Ed. 1. Du Tillet
en le recueil des Traictes, etc. fol. 40b.
Aquitain, the Earldom of Pontois, and other Provinces that he held in France;
that he was also wholly deprived of them some time before by decree of the
Parliament of Florilegus, ann. 1293. 3. Thomas Walsingham* ann. 1294. Alii.
Paris; yea, and that about one hundred years before, King John was outed of
Normandy; and yet afterward that the King of England now and then regained a
possession of it, and that before the time of the League, and of the
publication of this Libel; which serve all to this end, that we may observe,
that when the aforesaid famous controversy arose about the use and
Soveraigntie of the Sea flowing between France and Britain, and the absolute
Dominion thereof was asscribed by so many Nations, upon a Title derived time
out of mind, to the King of England and his Predecessors, yet in the mean time
no title at all was pretended in right to their possession either of Normandy,
or Aquitain, whereupon a Dominion of any part of the Sea might in any sort be
grounded, but claimed upon the sole right of the English Empire. And it
appears evident by the thing it self, that the things complained of by those
Nations in the Libel, were don by that Governor of the French Navy, chiefly in
the Sea near the shores of France and Flanders, which were in hostility with
each other: And so certainly they all unanimously affirm, that the whole Sea,
whereof they speak, is under the Dominion of the King of England, and that upon
the sole Account and right of the English Empire. And as for Grimbald, he did
not defend himself, either by a pretense of any Dominion of the King of France,
or by disproving of that Prescription; whereupon the English Title depend's, as
a thing not declared according to Truth or ancient Right; nor did he at all
pretend, that the Right which the Kings of England had in the Sea board ring
upon France, did belong to them either upon the account of Normandy, or any
other French Province whatsoever, as Fiduciarie Clients or Vassals of the King
of France, though it had been convenient and very seasonable for him to have
alleged all these Particulars, if the Truth had been so indeed. Whereby also
that is not a little confirmed, whereof we discoursed before, about taking the
names of the shore over against us, in the later Commissions of the Office of
high Admiral of England, for limits only of the Sea-Dominion of the Kings of
England, and of the Province thereof under their protection. Moreover also,
about seven years before the exhibiting of the aforesaid Libel to the
Commissioners, when as the King of France, by reason of diverse heinous injuries
don to his Subjects by the English in this Sea, required that the King of
England (as he was the Fiduciarie Client or Vassal, because of Aquitain and
other Provinces that he held under him in France) should be questioned not
only for wrong don, but also for his right to those Lands which he held, and
be summoned to appear in the Parliament of Paris; the matter being set down at
large in the Letter of Summons, he inserted nothing therein whereby he might
seem to arrogate any Sea-Dominion at all to himself, or diminish that which
belonged to the King of England; as you may see in Anno 1293.
I lorilegus, who has set down an entire Copy of them in his Annals. The same
Author also, speaking of the same Time, says, Anno 1294.
At that time, there was neither Lord, nor Law over the Sea men; but what every
man was able to catch, or snatch, he called his own; which plainly denote's an
extraordinary License or of Depredation, and infesting the Sea; yet so to be
understood, that in the mean time the incomparable power of the English in
Shipping, which guarded their Dominion by Sea according to the Custom of their
Ancestors, was chiefly signified thereby, the King very freely permitting his
Subjects to use depredations by Sea, as long as the war continued. For,
Florilegus himself relate's, that great numbers both of French and Spaniards,
were then taken at Sea by the English. Yea, and about Anno 1297
that time, Thomas of Walsingham write's, that either a French or Norman Navy
of two hundred Sail, which roved about this Sea to rob the English, were
overcom by a Fleet of sixty English Ships, and brought into England. There is
also another ancient Author of the same time, when these affairs were acted, who
says, Ms.
That in the Month of May, MCCXCIV. there fell out a Quarrel between the
Seamen of the Cinque Ports of England, and the Seamen of France, and it was
determined by a fight at Sea, wherein the English with a Fleet of one hundred
Sail, took two hundred Ships of France, and drowned or killed almost all the
Seamen of France, for which cause, Philip King of France, endeavored to take
away Gascoign from the King of England. Others there are likewise, that have
other expressions touching these things, whereby it is easy to collect what is
meant by that of Florilegus, when he says, that there was neither Lord, nor
Law, over Seamen, at that time; that is to say, the King of England had let
the reins loos to his Subjects, as Moderator of this Sea, and this he did,
that they might not only restrain his enemies, but them also that should
reliev his enemies in any manner whatsoever, or that should use the Sea
otherwise than at his pleasure, who was Lord thereof. But as concerning the
like acknowledgment, made singly and apart by the Flemings, of the Dominion of
the Kings of England over the Sea, I shall Treat by and by; after that I have
in the next place set before you the Libel it self in its own, that is, the
Norman Tongue, as it stand's recorded in the Tower of London.

A Copy, or Transcript of the Libel or Bill of Complaint, mentioned in the
former Chapter. CHAP. XXVIII.
IN the Archives of the Tower of London, where Records of above four hundred
years are kept, there is a bundle of Parchments, which contein some affairs
relating to the times of Henry the Third, and of Edward the First and Third.
The first contein's an agreement made between Edward the First and Guy Earl of
Flanders, touching their Ships bearing of Colors about this Sea, to the end
that they might be the more easily known. Then there are annexed three either
Originals or Copies of the said Libel written at the same time. For (as it
seems) the several Procurators of those Nations, that were parties in the
Complaint, had their several Libels, though expressed in the name of all
together. So that one is endorsed thus, De Baiona, as if that Libel had been
exhibited singly by the men of Bayonne; but the title run's thus, De
Superioritate Maris Angliae, and Jure Officii Admirallatus in eodem, that is,
Of the Superiority (or Soveraigntie) of the Sea of England and the right of
the Office of Admiraltie in the same, as it is also in the said agreement
between the King and the Earl of Flanders. Also, in one of the Libels, to those
words is added retinendis and confirmandis; All being very plainly written in
the usual Character of that Age, whereunto the matter relate's. And there can
be no scruple touching the realitie and truth of them to any one that sees
them, who is but a little acquainted with the ancient writing and such kind of
Records. I gave you the whole sens, yea and partly the words before; but now
have thought fit to set down an entire Copy of the Libel, as it was written at
that time in the French or Norman Tongue; which run's after this manner. A
vous, Seigneurs, Auditors Deputez per les Rois d' Engleterre and de France, a
redresser les damages faits as gentz de lour Roiaulmes and des altres terres
subgitz a leur seignuries, per mier and per terre, en temps de Pees and Trewes,
monstrent les Procurors des Praelatz et Nobles, and del Admiral de la mier d'
Engleterre, and des Comminalties des Cities, and des Villes, and des
Marchaunz, Mariners, Messagiers, and Peleringes, and de tous autres du dit
Roiaulme d' Engleterre and des autres terres subgits a in segnurie du dit Roy
d' Engletterre and d' aillours, si comme de la Marine de Genue, Cateloigne,
Espaigne, Alemaigne, Seland, Hoyland, Frise, Denemarch, and Norway, and de
plusours autres lieux del Empire, que come LES ROYES D' ENGLETERRE PAR RAISON
DU DIT ROYALME, DU TEMPS D' ONT IL NY AD MEMOIRED DU CONTRARY, EUSSENT ESTE EN
PAISIBLE POSSESSION DE LA SOVUEREIGNE SEIGNURIE DE LA MIER D' ENGLEIERRE ET DES
ISLES ESTEAUNS EN YCELLE, par ordinance and establisement des lois, estatutes,
and defenses d* arms, and des vesseaux autrement garnies que vesseaux de
Merchandise, et de seurte prendre et savegarde doner en tous cas que mestier
serra, et par ordinance de tous autres faits necessaries a la guard des pees,
droiture, et equite enter toute manner des gentz taunt d' autre seignurie come
leur propre par illeque's passanz, et par sovereign guarde et tote manner de
conisance et Justice haute et basse sur les dites lois, estatuts, ordinances et
defenses et par toutz aultres faitz queux a le government de sovereign
seignurie appertenir purront es lieux avaunt ditz. Et A. de B. Admiral de la
dite mire deputez per le Roy de Engleterre, et touz les autres Admiralls per
meisme celui Roy d' Angleterre et ses Auncestres jadis Rois d' Engleterre,
eussent este in paisible possession de la dite soverein guard ove la conisance
et Justice et toutz les aultres apertenances avantdites (forspris en cas d'
appell et de querele fait de eux a lour sovereigns Roys d' Engleterre de
deffault de droit, ou de malvais juggement) et especialment par empechement
metere, et Justice fair, seurte prendre de la pees de toute manner des gentz
usaunts arms en la dite mier, uo menans niefs aultrement apparallez ou garniez
que n' appartenoit au nief Marchande, et en toutz aultres points en queux home
peut aver reasonable cause de suspection verse eaux de robbery ou des autres
mesfaits. Et come les Maistres des Neifs du dit Royalme d'Engleterre, en
absence des dits Admiralls, eussent este en paisible possession de conustre et
jugger des touz faicts en la dite mire enter toute manner des gentz solon^ les
lois estatuts et les defenses et Custumes. Et come en le pimier article de l'
Alliance nadgairs faite enter les dits Roys, en les traitz sur la darrain pees
de Paris, soient comprises les paroles que ^ensujent en un cedule annexe a
y^este (At non in schedula annexa, sed in eadem membrana descriptum est quod
sequitur; unde non tam ipsos libellos, qui cognitoribus edebantur, quam sive
formulas eorum archetypas sive exemplaria descripta haec esse conjiciendum
forte est; uti etiam ex eo quod Admiralli Angliae nomen aliter ac per A. de B.
non inseratur; quae prima elementa non sunt nominis alicujus tunc temporis
Angliae Admiralli in sacris Scriniis reperti) Primierement il est traict and
accord enter nous and les messagers and les procurers susdits, en nom des dits
Roys, que iceux Roys serront l'un a l'autre, desores enavant, bons, vrayes, and
loyaux amys, and eydans contre tout home (sauve l' Esglise de Rome) en tiele
manner que si ascun ou plusieurs quicunques ils fuissent voloient depointier,
empescher, ou troubler les dits royes es franchises, es liberties, privileges,
es drois, es droitures, eu es custumes de eux and de leur royalmes q'ils seront
bons and loyaux amys and aydans contre tout home que puisse viure and morir a
defendre gardir and maintenir les franchises, les liberties, les privileges,
les droitures, et les custumes desusdites; Except pur le dit Roy d'
Angletterre, Monsieur Johan Du^ de Braban en Brabant, et ses heirs dessendans
de lui et de la fille le roy d' Angleterre, et except, pur le dite nostre
seigneur ^e roy de France l' excellent Prince Monsiur Aubert Roy d' Alemaigne
et ces heirs royes d' Alemaine, et Monsieur Johan Count de Henau en Henau. Et
que l'un ne serra en consail ne en aid ou l' autre perde vie, membre, estate
ou honor; Monsieur Reyner Grimbaltz Maistre de la Navy du dit Roy de France,

(...)


In English it run's thus: To you, our Lords, Or Commissioners.
Auditors deputed by the Kings of England and France, to redress the wrongs don
to the People of their Kingdoms, and of other Territories subject to their
Dominion, by Sea and by Land, in time of Peace and Truce.
The Procurators of the Prelates, Nobles, and of the Admiral of the Sea of
England, and of the Commonalties of Cities and Towns, and of the Merchants,
Mariners, Messengers, Inhabitant strangers, and all others belonging to the
said Realm of England, and the other Territories subject to the Dominion of the
said King of England, and of others under the Jurisdiction of the same; As also
of diverse other Nations, Inhabitants of the Sea-Costs of Genoa, Catalonia,
Spain, Almaign, Zeland, Holland, Friesland, Denmark, and Norway, and of diverse
other places of the Empire, do declare; That whereas THE KINGS OF ENGLAND, By
Right OF THE SAID KINGDOM, FROM TIME TO TIME, WHEREOF THERE IS NO MEMORIAL TO
THE CONTRARY, HAVE BEEN IN PEACEABLE POSSESSION OF THE SOVEREIGN LORDSHIP OF
THE SEA OF ENGLAND, AND OF THE ISLES WITHIN THE SAME, with power of making and
establishing Laws, Statutes, and Prohibitions ^ of people, as well of other
Domin^^ns as their (...) passing through the said Seas, and the Saveraign Guard
thereof. And also (...) all manner of Cognizance in Causes, and of doing right
and Justice, to high and low, according to the said Laws, Sta^u^es, Ordinances,
and Prohibitions, and all other things which may appertein to the exercises of
Sovereign Jurisdiction in the places aforesaid. And whereas A. de B. deputed
Admiral of the said Sea by the King of England, and all other Admirals
appointed by the said king of England, and his Ancestors* heretofore kings of
England, ^ of a^^^al and complaint made of them to their Sovereigns the kings
of England, in default of Justice, or for evil Iud^^^n^* and especially of
making Prohibitions, doing* Justice, and taking surety of the peace of all
manner of people* using arms in the said Sea, or carrying S^^ps otherwise
furnished and ^et forth th^^ Merchantmen use to be; and in all other points
where a man may have reasonable cause to suspect them of Robbery or other ^uors.
And whereas the Masters of the Ships of the said kingdom of England, in the
absence of the said Admiral, have been in peaceable possession of taking
cognizance and judging of all A^^ions don in the said Sea, between all manner
of people, according to the Laws, Statutes, Prohibitions and Customs. And
whereas in the first Article of the League lately made between the said Kings,
in the Treaty upon the last peace at Paris, there are comprised the words here
following, in a Schedule annexed to these Presents. (But that which fallows is
not written in a Schedule annexed, but in the same Parchment; from whence it
may perhaps be conjectured, that these are not so much the very Libels
themselves, which were exhibited to the Commissioners or Auditors, as ancient
Copies taken from the Original; as also from this, that the name of the Admiral
is set down A. de B. which two first Letters do not agree with the name of any
one that we can find in Record, to have been Admiral of England at that
time.) First, it is concluded and accorded between Us and the Agents and
Procurators aforesaid, in the names of the said Kings, that the said Kings
shall from this time forward, become to each other good, true, and faithful
friends, and be aiding to one another against all men (saving the Church of
Rome) in such manner, that if any one or more, whosoever they be, shall intend
to disturb, hinder, or molest the said Kings, in the Franchises, Liberties,
Privileges, Rights, and Customs of them and their Kingdoms, They shall be good
and faithful friends to each other, and aiding against all men living, and
ready to die, to defend, keep and maintein the Franchises, Liberties,
Privileges Rights, and Customs aforesaid; Except on the behalf of the said King
of England John Duke of Brabant in Brabant, and his heirs descending from him
and the daughter of the King of England; and except on the behalf of our Lord
the said king of France, the excellent Prince Monsieur Albert king of Almaign,
and his heirs kings of Almaign, and Monsieur John Earl of Henault in Henault,
and that the one shall not be of Counsel, nor aiding, where the other may lose
life, member, estate, or honor.

Monsieur Reyner Grimbald, Master of the Navy of the said king of France, who
call's himself Admiral of the said Sea, being deputed by his aforesaid Lord,
in his war against the Flemings, did, after the said League made and confirmed,
against the tenor and obligation of the said League, and the intent of them
that made it, wrongfully assume and exercise the office of Admiraltie in the
said Sea of England, above the space of a year by Commission of the said king
of France, taking the people and Merchants of the kingdom of England, and of
other places, passing through the said Sea with their Goods, and committed them
so taken to the prison of his said Lord the king of France, and delivered their
Goods and Merchandises to the Receivers of the said king of France by him
deputed in the Ports of his said kingdom, as forfeited and due unto him, to
remain at his Judgment and award. And the taking and deteining of the said
people with their said goods, as also his said Judgment and award, for the
forfeiture and acquest of them, he has justified before you, Lords, Auditors,
in writing, by virtue of the authority of his said Commission of Admiraltie
aforesaid, by him usurped after this manner, and during a Prohibition or
Restraint generally made and proclaimed by the king of England, in right of his
Dominion (according to the tenor of the third Article of the League aforesaid,
which contain's the words above-written) requiring that he may thereupon be
acquitted and discharged of the same, to the great damage and prejudice of the
said king of England, and of the Prelates and Nobles, and others
abovementioned.

Wherefore, the said Procurators, in the names of their said Lords, do pray
your Lordships Auditors, that you would cause due and speedy deliverance of the
said people, with their Goods and Merchandises so taken and detained, to be
made to the Admiral of the said king of England, to whom the cognizance of the
same of right apperteineth, as is before expressed; So that, without
disturbance from you or any other, he may take cognizance thereof, and do what
belong's to his office aforesaid; And the said Monsieur Reyner be condemned
and constrained to make satisfaction for all the said damages, so far forth as
he shall be able, and in his default his said Lord the king of France, by
whom he was deputed to the said office; and that after satisfaction given for
the said damages, the said Monsieur Reyner may be so duly punished for the
violation of the said League, that his punishment may be an example to others
in time to com.




So far the Libel of so many Nations, manifestly acknowledging the Soveraigntie
and Dominion of our Kings over the Sea, and thereupon demanding protection for
themselves. And whereas no mention is made of this thing in the Histories either
of the French, English, or others, it is no wonder since the proceedings of
Courts of Judi^a^ure are very seldom set down in Histori^^* But we understand
by the French History, that this Gri^bald was Gov^^^or of the French Navy at
the very same time. Paulus AEmiliu^ writing of Philip the Fair, says, De
Gestis Francorum, lib. 8.
He hired sixteen Galleys from Genoa, ^ver which Reyner Grimbald was Governor
or Commander. He sailing about by Sea, infested the Seacoast of Flanders.
Regimerus, Regin^rus, or Reynerus Grimbaldus, is one and the same man; and
among the Genoeses, there is an eminent Family of that name: But because he was
a Foreiner and Mercenarie, therefore (it seems) Joannes Feronius left him out
of the Catalogue of the Admirals of France; yet De rebus Galli^is, li. 2.
Joannes Tilius placing him among the Governors of the French Navy, call's him
Roverius Grimaldus. He also is that Admiral of the King of France, who, as
Joannes de Chronic. Episcop. Ultraject. and Commit. Holland. page 93.
Beka says, had command of three hundred and fifty Galleys, that were sent by
Philip the Fair, in the year MCCCIV. to aid the Hollanders against the
Flemings. There are also several particulars in the Records of France, which
relate to the differences then on foot between the English and French: And
although that Libel or any Copy of it be not found therein (if we may credit
Tilius, who set forth a Catalogue of that kind of Records) yet there is that
Commission among them, whereby the aforesaid Auditors or Commissioners were
autorised to determine of things don contrary to the League. It is described by
Recueil des Traictes, etc. fol. 40.
Tilius after this manner; Pouvoir done par le Roy Edovard a deux nommez and
accordez de sa part pour avec les deux eleuz de la part du dit Roy (Phelippe)
d' enquerir and amendir les forfaictes durant lour trefue, le Dernier Juin
MCCCIII. Ou tresor; layette Procurationes, posse, and potestates Angliae; K.
Power was given by king Edward to two persons named and appointed on his part,
to meet with two persons chosen on the behalf of the said king (Philip) to make
enquiry and give remedy touching Injuries committed during the Truce betwixt
them the last of June MCCCIII. in the Treasury; in the Box entitled,
Procurationes, posse, and potestate^s Angliae; K. The Commissions bear date the
same day and year; whereby these Auditors or Commissioners were appointed for
this purpose, as we observed before out of our own Records. Nor is it of any
force here to the contrary, that Commissioners were sometimes Rot. Claus. 2^1
Ed. 3. par. 1. membran. 25. dors. Rot. ^^anciae, 10 H^n. 8. etc.
deputed in the same manner by the Princes of the shores on both sides of the
Sea, as also by the aforesaid Kings, to determine complaints about robberies
and other injuries usually don by private persons to one another by Sea and
Land. For, if any one will collect thence, that the Princes which deputed them
had both an equal right in the Sea, it may as well be concluded upon the same
ground, that they were but partowners of their own Countries, and had an equal
interest in each other's Land. Besides, in such a kind of deputation as that,
there is more regard had of the persons offending, that are to be tried, than
of the Dominion of Territories; which truly is wholly to be discovered some
other way.

A Recognition or acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominion of the Kings of England,
made by the Flemings in an Ambassy to Edward the Second. CHAP. XXIX.
TO these let us add now the assent and voluntary acknowledgment of the
Flemings in the Parliament of England, in the Reign of Edward the Second. When
as the Ambassadors of Robert Earl of Flanders complained of the taking of their
Goods away at Sea, imploring remedy of the King of England, they said more
than once that they were taken upon the English Sea toward the parts about
Crauden, within the power of the King of England, and brought into England; but
that it appertained to the King of England to take cognizance of the crime, for
that he is Lord of the said Sea, and the aforesaid depredation was committed
upon the aforesaid Sea within his Territory and Jurisdiction; which are the
words of the Record; but I shall set down the Rot. Pat. 14 Ed. 2. part. 2.
Membran. 26. in dorso.
whole, so far as it relate's to this business. Memorandum, That whereas for
the reformation of certain injuries in an amicable way, don by the Subjects of
the Earl of Flanders, to the Subjects of the Kingdom of England, and by the
Subjects of the said Kingdom to those of Flanders, since the time that our said
Lord the king undertook the Government of his kingdom, several Treaties had
been held between the Council of our said Lord the king, and the Ambassadors of
the said Earl often sent into England, upon the aforesaid occasion, which
Treaties, by reason of some impediments that happened, did not a^tem the desired
effect* at length in the Parliament of our said Lord the king, held* at
Westminster in oc^abis Sancti Micha^lis, in the fourteenth year of his Reign*
there appeared certain Ambassadors of the said Earl, to treat about reforming
the aforesaid injuries in the form aforesaid. And when as the said Ambassadors
had been admitted by our said Lord the king to treat anew of this kind of
Injuries, these Ambassadors, as other Ambassadors of the aforesaid Earl, in the
aforesaid Treaties did, among other particulars that they required, before all
things make supplication; That the said Lord the king would at his own s^^t, by
virtue of his Roial Authority, cause inquiry to be ma^^, and do Justice, about
a certain depredation la^ely made by the Subjects of England (as they said)
upon the English Sea, of Wines and diverse other Merchandises belonging to
certain men of Flanders, toward the parts about CRAUDEN, within the Territory
and Jurisdiction of our said Lord the king; alleging that the aforesaid Wines
and Merchandises taken, from the said Flemings, were brought within the R^^^m
and Jurisdiction of the said Lord the king, and that it belonged to the king
himself so to do, for that HE IS LORD OF THE SAID SEA, and the aforesaid
depredation was made upon the said Sea within his Terr^^or^^ and Jurisdiction.
In conclusion, after diligent consideration had of the Premises in the same
Parliament, with the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Peers of the said Realm
being there present, it was concluded upon their advice by the said Lord King,
that, to preserv the benefit of Peace between the Subjects of England and
^landers, the said Lord king do by his Roial Authority cause inquiry to be
made about the Goods taken at that time upon the aforesaid English Sea toward
the said place of CRAUDEN, and brought within the said Realm, in those places
where the Malefactors went with the goods so taken to the said Land of England,
and cause the same depredation to be heard and determined according to Law and
Reason, and that the Owners of the Ships who had a hand in the said
depredation, and others, who knowingly received the said Offenders with the
Goods so taken in whole or in part, may be charged and punished thereupon, as
partakers, of the aforesaid depredation.



So far that Record. And Commissioners were appointed with power of
Jurisdiction by the King's Commission, through most of the Maritim Counties, to
make reparation of damages. But because there are upon the shores over against
us (especially those of Zealand, and there are also upon other neighboring
shores) besides Inlets of Rivers, very many windings and turnings of the Sea
flowing in, whereby the land is so interwoven up and down, that it cannot well
be but that the Sea also which flow's in, and oftentimes remove's Banks and
make's Harbors there in the same manner almost as a River or Brook, must be
contained under the same Jurisdiction, as an entire Body with the Land;
therefore sometimes mention is made also of this kind of Sea flowing in, as of
a Sea reckoned within the Jurisdiction and Current of the Sea of the opposite
shores; as for example, of the Sea Flanders, or (as I find it in some ancient
Ms. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana 3 Hen. 5.
Manuscripts which seem to be the Originals of certain Letters of King Henry
the Fifth to the Earl of Carolois, and to the Governors of Ypres, Gaunt, and
Bruges) deins la Jurisdiction and l'estrem de la mere de Flandres, within the
Jurisdiction and stream of the Sea of Flanders, which is all one. For, setting
aside the Sea so flowing in or making an inlet or harbor before the opposite
shore, all that which remain's, or the Sea flowing between those opposite
Countries and England, was ever esteemed to be of the English Dominion,
according to what I have formerly shown. So that a late Writer doubtless was in
a dream, when, upon the repairing of the Dock at Mardike, he write's, Jacobus
Chiffletius, in Epistola Dedictori^ ad Comitem de Olivares, Portui Iccto
praefixa.
that he saw the Empire of the British Sea restored to the King of Spain. And
so I have don with this point, touching the Declaration and acknowledgment of
the Sea. Dominion of our Kings, made by those Foreign and Neighbor-Nations, who
were most concerned in the Business.

Of the Dominion of the King of Great Britain in the Irish and Western Sea,
considered singly and apart by it self. CHAP. XXX.
I have already spoken in general, of the English or British Sea, which is a
part of the Patrimony of the Crown of England, but chiefly as it lie's either
East or South. It rest's now, that we treat of the Western, as also the
Scottish and Northern, and in a word of the whole British Sea that remain's. It
is evident to all, that part of the Western Sea, lying before England, is
understood as well in that Libel which was exhibited by so many Nations to the
Commissioners deputed by the Kings of England and France, above three hundred
and thirty years ago, wherein we so often read le mer d' Angleterre or the
sea of England, as in the King's Commission-before mentioned, wherein our Kings
are expressly-declared Lords of the English Sea on every side; and therefore I
shall forbear to repeat what is CAP. 24.
cited out of Bracton, about the Essoyning or excusing of a man absent in
Ireland, and other things of that kind alleged before, which make to this
purpose. Moreover also, we read every where, that all the Isles in this
neighboring Sea were called British (as we observed at the beginning of this
Book) just as if the narrow Seas flowing between, like Rivers or turnings of
Rivers, did disjoin those Banks or Shores from great Britain, as (...)
Fragments of the same. Whereby it appears, that the narrow Seas themselves
with the Isles, even as Rivers with their Banks, are to be reckoned a part of
the British Territory. And hereunto especially relate's also that expression
in the Libel so often cited; to wit, that the Kings of England have ever been
Lords both of the English Sea (or of the British, so far as it stretches
before England) and also of the Isles situate therein, par raison du Royalme d'
Angleterre, by right of the Realm of England. So that the Isle of Man, which
(as Giraldus Cambrensis says) stand's in this Sea, in the very midst betwixt
the Northern Parts of England and Ireland, was (if I understand any thing)
reckoned of old among the Land-Provinces of England, even as the Isle of Wight,
Lundie, and others of that kind. Nor does it seem to be understood otherwise
by those men of ancient time, who, upon occasion of a dispute, whether this
Isle ought by right to be taken for an appendant of England or Ireland being
placed in the midst of the Sea flowing between, determined the controversy on
this manner. They brought venomous serpents; and observing that the Isle did
entertain and cherish them, as well as England and the rest of great Britain,
but on the contrary that Ireland destroyed them, it was concluded (says
Topograph. Hiberniae, did. 2. cap. 15.
Giraldus Cambrensis, who lived under Henry the Second) by the common censure
of all, that it ought to be ascribed unto England. For, if they had so thought
the Territory either of Ireland or England, as it consisted of Land and Sea,
to be dis-joined from this Isle of Man, that they had conceived the Sea lying
between, either common to all men, or by ancient right subject to other than
the Kings either of Ireland or Britain, they might seem to have raised a very
ridiculous Controversy: For, I suppose, the Question could be no other, than
touching the bounds of England or great Britain, and Ireland. But that a
Question about bounds may be admitted between Owners that are Neighbors, where
the Territories of both are not continual or contiguous, is beyond my
understanding. It is well said by L. 4. 11 l. 5. and 6. ff. tit. Finium
Regundorum.
Paulus; that if a public Thorowfare, or public River intervene, which
belong's to neither of the neighboring Owners, an Action cannot be brought
upon that Title of the Law, Finium Regundorum. And truly, after that Quintus
Fabius Labeo, being Cicero de Officiis, lib. 1.
appointed Arbiter by the Senate betwixt the Nolans and Neapolitans about the
bounds of a Field, had so craftily persuaded both of them to retire backwards
apart from each other, that a portion of the Field was left in the middle which
he adjudged to the people of Rome, there could not any Controversy arise
farther between them about the bounds of this Field; because there ceased to be
any confine betwixt them: But if any Question arose afterward, they were both
to contend with the people of Rome. Even so it is to be conceived of that
Question, to which of the two Countries the Isle of Man ought by Right to be
ascribed; it arising chiefly upon this ground, because it lay in the midst
between the Territories belonging to Ireland and Britain, and at the confine of
both. For, by an Argument drawn from the nature of the very soil only, without
a civil consideration of Dominion (though they would have here the very nature
of the soil to be the evidence thereof, as a Lot for decision) it ought no
more to be ascribed either to Britain or Ireland, than to Norway, Spain, or
France, where every man know's that venomous Creatures are bred as well as in
Britain. Therefore, to be ascribed to England or Britain in that ancient
Decision, is, so immediately to be annexed to the British Territory, that the
Isle of Man may truly, and in a civil sens, be called a Land-Province of
England or Britain, seeing the English Territory is so continually extended as
far as its Western Coasts; that which bend's Westward from the very Confine,
being ascribed to Ireland. And therefore Queen Elisabeth's Commissioners let
fall those words too unadvisedly in the 1602. apud G. Camden. in A^nalib. ^^m
2. page ^^3. (...).
Treaty, held at Bremen, with the Danish Commissioners, about free Navigation
and Fishing in the Norwegian Sea; That the Kings of England never had
prohibited Navigation and Fishing in the Irish Sea between England and Ireland;
as if they would have had it proved from thence, that the Dane ought not to be
prohibited Fishing or Navigation between Island and Norway, because neither were
Lords of the Sea, but had possessed the Shores only on both sides by an equal
Right. There were other particulars also no less rashly spoken touching a
community of the Sea, as we observed before. Concerning Navigation and
Fishing in the Norwegian Sea, I shall add more by and by. But as it was ill don
of those Commissioners in that Treaty to make use of an Argument drawn from a
necessary community of the Sea, so there is no truth in that which they let
fall concerning the Irish Sea. For, we know, that not only those petty
Potentates bordering near the Sea heretofore, that were in Rebellion and had
usurped the Kings Right in many places of Ireland, did exact grievous Tributes
of Foreiners for the very liberty of Fishing; but also it was expressly
provided by Act of Stat. Hibernic. 5. Ed. 4. cap. ^.
Parliament, that no Foreiner should Fish in the Irish Sea, without leav first
obtained to this purpose from the Lord Lieutenant, or some other lawsul Deputy
or Officer of the King of England; yea, and that all Foreiners should pay
yearly, for every Fisher-boat of XII Tons or upward, thirteen shillings and
four pence, and for every lesser Vessel two shillings; upon pain of forfeiting
their Vessels, Furniture, and all Goods whatsoever, if so they refused this
kind of payment or did not acknowledge this Soveraignite of the Lord of the
Sea. But I shall insert the whole Act touching this business, that we may
understand what was the most received Opinion of all the Estates of Ireland,
touching this Right here of the King. Item, at the request of the Commons,
that where diverse vessels of other lands fro one day to other going to fish
amongst the kings Irish enemies in diverse parts of this said land by which the
kings said enemies be greatly advanced and strengthened as well in vitualles,
harneys, armor, as dyvers others necessaries, also great tributes of money
given by every of the said vessels to the said enemies from day to day to the
great augmentation of their power and force against the King's honor and
wealth, and utter destruction of this said land, thereupon the premises
considered, it is enacted and ordained by authority of the said Parliament,
that no manner vessel of other lands shall be no time nor season of the
year from henceforth, from the feast of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ's
next coming, go in no part of the said land betwixt the said Irish enemies to
no manner fishing without one special license of the Lieutenant, his deputy or
Justice of the land for the time being, or license of another person having the
kings power to grant such license, upon pain of forfaiture of the ship and
goods to the king. And that whatsoever person or persons that find or impeche
any of the said vessels, rumpants or forfaites against this act by the
authority of the same, it be lawful to them so making any claim in behalf
of the King, and approving the said forfaytures by any of the said vessels to
be made, that the king shall have the one moitye of the said forfeyture, and the
said person or persons shall have the other without any impechment, and that
all manner vessels of other lands coming in the said land of Ireland a
fishing, being of the burden of twelve tons or less, having one Drover or
boat, everye of them to pay for the maintenance of the Kings wars there
xiii. s. iiii. d. by the year. And all other small vessels as scarfes or
boats, not having Drover nor lighter being within the said burden of twelve
runs, every of them shall pay twoe shillings goings a fishing in the like
manner. Provided always that no vessel fyshing in the North part of Wicklo,
be charged by reason of this art; and that the Lieutenant, his deputy or
Justice of the land for the time being, shall have the foresaid sums and
duties of money so paid to be employed in the Kings wars for the defente of
the said land, and that the Customers and Collectors of the same sums shall
accoumpt before the said Justice, Lieutenant, or Deputy for the time being, or
such Auditors that shall be for the same appointed by the king or them, and not
before the Barons of the exchequer in the said land; and that none of the said
vessels so coming from other parts in the said land shall not depart out of
the said land, till every of them pay their said duties upon pain of
forfeiture of the vessels and goods to the King.



There are some also who affirm, that the King of Spain Gerardus Malinius, in
Lege mercatoria cap. 35. page 189.
obtained leav by request from our Queen Marie, for XXI years, to fish in the
more Northerly part of the Irish Sea, and that thereupon a Revenue of one
thousand pounds per annum was advanced to the Exchequer in Ireland. A
Proclamation also was set forth by Proclam. 7. Jacobi 6. Martii.
James King of great Britain, prohibiting any foreiner, without leav first
obtained, to fish in this Irish Sea. But as to what concern's that Controversy
about the Isle of Man, although it be remembered by Giraldus (who wrote in the
Reign of Henry the Second) nevertheless it is to be conceived, that it arose
in the more ancient times of the English-Saxons, when all that lie's betwixt
England and Ireland, was in subjection either to the Kings of Ireland, or
Britain, that is, when both of them had in this Sea distinct Territories of
their own, whose Bounds were in question. Certain it is, as Hist. Eccles. lib.
2. cap. 9.
Beda write's, that Edwin the most potent King of the Nortbumbrians, or rather
of all the English-Saxons, subdued the Mevanian Isles to the Dominion of
England, about the year DCXXX. That is to say, both that Mevanian which we
call Anglesey, and the other also which is Man, whereof we discoursed. But in
the later time of the Anglo-Saxon Empire, the Norwegians or Danes, who
exceedingly infested both this and the North-east Sea with very frequent
Robberies, at length seized both this Isle and the Hebrides, and held them
almost two hundred years: So that in the mean time, this of Man could not in a
Civil sens be ascribed either to Ireland or Britain. But that the Kings
thereof were at that time Lords as well of the neighboring Sea as of the Isles,
may be collected out of their Annals, where we find that Godred, whose surname
was Crovan, King of Man, in the year of our Lord MLXVI brought Dublin and a
great part of Laynster ^m (...) ^40.
under his subjection. And so thoroughly subdued the Scots, that no man, who
built a Ship, durst drive in more than three Nails: So that he gave both
limitation and Law to the Shipping of his Neighbors; which is all one, as to
enjoy the very Dominion of the Sea, as I have shown in what has been already
spoken. And from hence perhaps it is, that the more ancient Arms of the Kings
of Man were a Ship with a Sail folded together, and this Inscription added, Rex
Manniae and Insularum, King of Man and of the Isles; as Mr (...), page 847.
Camden observ's from their Sails: For, the three legs of humane shape, now
every where known, are but of later time. But afterward, when Ireland was
subdued by Henry the Second, and King John, and Reginald King of Man Chronic.
Manniae, anno. (...) ^t. cart. 14. ^^^^nis R. membran. in dorso.
brought into the power of King John (the English possessing this Sea at that
time with a very numerous Navy) there is no reason at all to doubt, but that
the neighboring Sea round about was taken also into the Dominion of the
English. For, in that Age the King of Man was no absolute Prince; but being
subdued, he paid homage to the King of England, and yielded under his
subjection. But in a short time after Alexander the Third, (...), hist Scot
lib. 13.
King of Scots, annexed it to the Dominion of Scotland, and put in a Governor,
who was to assist him upon occasion with thirteen Galleys and five hundred
Seamen. He recovered the Hebrides also, by driving out the Norwegians, and
transmitted it to his posterity. Then, Man returned again to the English; who
enjoied Ireland a long time together with it and that sea-territory. But the
Kings of the Hebrides and of Scotland enjoied the Northern part of this Western
Sea, after that they had expelled the Norwegians who were Lords here of the
Sea. And from hence it is, that, as Scotland, England, this Isle of Man, the
Hebrides, and Ireland with other adjacent Isles, so even the Vergivian and
Deucaledonian Sea it self washing the West of Scotland, and surrounding these
Isles with windings and turnings, ought now also to be accounted the ancient
Patrimony of the King of great Britain.

But there is moreover, in the more Westerly part of this open and main Sea,
another Right belonging to the King of Great Britain, and that of a very large
extent upon the Shore of America. Whenas Sr Humfery Gilbert Knight, did by
Authority of Queen Elisabeth transport a Colonie into the New World, with
design to recover certain Lands in the East parts of the Northern America,
which of Right belonged to the English Dominion, the Queen was by him, as her
Procurator put into a possession, for ever to be held by her and her heirs,
both of the Port, called by the name of St John (which is in the Island of
Baccalaos) and also of the whole Sea as well as Land on every side, ^acklu^s,
in his Voyages, Tom. 2. page 151.
for the space of six hundred miles. Then he received this new Kingdom of the
Queen, as her Beneficiarie, having a Branch and a Turf delivered in his hands,
according to the usual cerimonie of England in transferring the Ownership of
Lands and Possessions. Nor truly was it necessary, that he should otherwise
get the Possession, from whence this Dominion of the Queen and her Posterity
had its Original. For (as Paulus says well) there is no necessity that he
who L. 3. ff. ^t. de acquir. Rer. Dom.
intend's to take possession of a Field, should walk about the whole, but it is
sufficient if he enter any part of that Field, so long as he does it with a
mind, thought and intent, to possess the Field to its utmost extent and Bound:
Which saying may relate to Seas, as well as Lands, that were never taken into
possession. So that as De Conditionibus Agrorum.
Siculus Flaccus Treating of Occupatorie Lands, says, Men did not possess so
much land as they were able to till, but they reserved as much as they were in
hope they might be able to till, the like also may be said of a Sea so taken
into possession. Look how much was reserved in hope of using and enjoying, so
much also was bounded. But perhaps the first original of the Dominion of this
main Sea of America, did not proceed from the Possession that was acquired by
Gilbert. He rather restored and enlarged the Right of the Crown here: For,
that Island called Baccalaos, was added to the English Empire by His Commission
you may find, Rot. Franc. 12. Hen. 7.
Sebastian Chabot, in the time of Henry the Seventh. And it is certain, that
afterward it grew to be a Custom, for the Officers belonging to the High
Admiral of England (in whose charge are all the Seas subject to the King of
England and Ireland, as King of England and Ireland) to demand Tributes of such
as fish't also in this Sea; which was (I suppose) a most evident token of the
King's Dominion. But it was Stat. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 6.
provided by an Act of Parliament, in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, that no
Tributes of that kind, to the grievance of Fishermen, should be paid any
longer. How far our English Colonies, lately transported into America, have
possessed themselves of the Sea there, I have as yet made but little inquiry.

Touching the Dominion of the King of Great Britain in the Scottish Sea,
especially toward the East and North. CHAP. XXXI.
THose particulars which were cited before out of the Proclam. 7* Jacobi and
Mar^ii, 6.
Proclamation of James King of Great Britain, about the Prohibition of Fishing,
relate as well to the Scottish Seas, on every side; from whence also you must
acknowledge their possession has been retained together with an ancient
Sea-Dominion. That is to say, all Foreiners were prohibited to Fish in these
Seas, without leav first obtained at Edinburgh. And in those Scottish Acts of
Parliament, they are not so much new Laws made, as old ones revived, whereby it
was ordained. That all manner of Parlam. 4. Jacobi R. 6. cap. 60. and
Parliament. 6. ejusdem cap. 86.
Fischeres, that occupies the Sea, and vtheres persons quhat sumever that
happenis to slay Hering or quihte Fish upon the Coast, or within the Isles or
out with the samen within the Frithes bring them to free Ports, etc. where they
may be sold to the Inhabitants of the same kingdom, quhairby his Ma^esties
Customs be not defrauded, and his Hienes Lieges not frustrat of the
Commodity appointed to them be God under the pain of confiscation and tynsel
of the veschelles of them that cumes in the contrair hereof, and escheiting of
all their movable guddes to our sovereign Lords use. So that use and benefit is
claimed hence, by a special right in that Sea: otherwise truly, that use and
been; fit would of right no more appertein either to the King of Scotland or
his Subjects, than to any other whomsoever. But the Law was made concerning all
Fishermen, as well strangers as Scotch-men; as being ordained by all the
Estates of that Kingdom, who so well understood both the King's Right, and also
their own (as subordinate to the King's) by Tradition from their Ancestors, or
by long-continued possession and Dominion, that there remained not the least
ground of scruple touching that business. And a Scottish Lawyer speaking about
Fishing in the Eastern Sea of Scotland, I cannot, says Guil. Welwodus, de
Dominio Maris, cap 3.
he, omit to tell you, that in the past Age, after a most bloody quarrel
between the Scots and Hollanders about occasions belonging to the Sea, the
matter was composed after this manner, that in time to com the Hollanders
should keep at least fourscore miles distance from the Coasts of Scotland. And
if by accident they were driven near through violence of weather, they paid a
certain Tribute at the Port of Aberdene before their return, where there was a
Castle built and fortified for this and other occasions; and this was duly and
really paid still by the Hollanders within the memory of our Fathers, until
that by frequent dissentions at home, this Tribute, with very many other Rights
and Commodities, came to nothing, partly through the negligence of Governors,
and partly through the boldness of the Hollanders. So you see, how limits were
by agreement prescribed heretofore in this Sea, to the Fishing of Foreiners.
But the more Northerly Sea, which lie's against Scotland, was for the most part
in subjection heretofore to the Norwegians, and Danes, who were Lords of the
Isles there: So that the people of the Orcades speak the Gothish Language to
this day. Robertus de In Append. ad Sigebert. Gemblac. Anno 1197.
Monte tell's us, that he, who was called King of the Isles, was possessed of
XXXII Islands in that Sea above four hundred and sixty years ago, paying such
a Tribute to the King of Norway, that at the succession of every new King, the
King of the Isles present's him ten marks in Gold, and make's no other
acknowledgment to him all his life long, unless another King succeed again in
Norway. And Topograph. Hiberniae, did. 2. cap. 11.
Giraldus Cambrensis, writing of these things says, that in the Northern Sea,
beyond Ulster and Galloway, there are several Islands, to wit, the Orcades and
Inchades (or Leucades, which some would have to be the Hebrides) and many
other, over most of which the Norwegians had Dominion and held them in
subjection. For, although they lie much nearer to other Countries, yet that
Nation being more given to the Sea, usually preferr's a Piratick kind of life
above any other. So that all their Expeditions and Wars are performed by Sea*
Fight. This he wrote in the time of Henry the second. So that sometimes those
Sea-Appendants of the Dominion of Britain, in the Northern parts, were invaded
by Foreiners. Hence also it is, that Historia Ecclesiastica, lib. 10. page 767.
Ordericus Vitalis, speaking of Magnus the son of Olaus King of Norway, says;
he had a great power in the Isles of the Sea; which relate's unto the time of
William the Second King of England. The same Ordericus also says, that the
Orcades, Finland, Island also and Groenland, beyond which there is no other
Country Northward, and many other as far as Gothland, are subject to the King
of Norway, and wealth is brought thither by shipping from all parts of the
world. So we have here a clear description of the Dominion of the Norwegians
heretofore, as well in this neighboring Sea of Scotland, as in the more open.
But in after time, when as by Ex Tabulis publicis, Ferrerius, in Appendice.
Hist. Hectoris Boetii subjuncta, page 388.
agreement made between Alexander the third King of Scots, and Magnus the
fourth of Norwaie, as also between Robert Bruce King of Scotland, and Haquin of
Norwaie, it was concluded touching these Isles, that they should be annexed to
the Scottish Dominion; this could not be don, but there must be a Cession also
of that Sea-Dominion, which bordered round upon the Coast of Norwaie. Yet the
Norwegian King possessed it for the most part; and afterward the Dane, by an
union of the two Kingdoms of Denmark and Norwaie; until that Christiern the
first, King of Norwaie and Denmark, upon the marriage of his daughter Margarite
to James the third King of Scotland, made an Munster. Cosmograph. lib. 2. and
Gui lielm. Camden. in Insul^^ Brit. page 849.
absolute Surrender of these Islands; and in the year of our Lord MCDLXX.
transferred all his right both in the Isles of Orcades and Shetland, and the
rest lying in the hither part of the Northern Sea, upon his Son in law, and his
Successors. And as concerning this business, I shall here set down the words of
Joannes Ferrerius, who was indeed Native of Piedmont, but supplied with matter
of History out of the Records of Scotland, by Henry Sainclair, Bishop of
Ross. Moreover in the Deucaledonian Sea toward the North-East, there are the
Isles of Orcades, seated next to the Coast of Scotland, whereof only twenty
eight are at this day inhabited; and above an hundred miles beyond the Orcades
toward Norway, are the Shetland Isles in number eighteen, which are at this
day inhabited, and in subjection to the King of Scotland; concerning which,
there was a great quarrel in former Ages between the Scots and Danes, yet the
Dane kept possession. All these Islands did Christiern King of Denmark
peaceably surrender, together with his daughter in marriage to James King of
Scots, until that either he himself or his posterity paid to the Scottish King
or his Successors, in lieu of her Dowry, the sum of fifty thousand Rhenish
Florens, which were never discharged to this day. For, so much I my self have
seen and read in the Deeds of marriage betwixt Lady Margarite daughter of the
King of Denmark and James the third King of Scotland, drawn up and fairly
signed with the Seals of both Kingdoms Anno Dom. 1468. etc. But afterward,
when Lady Margarite being Queen had been delivered of ber eldest son James
Prince of Scotland, the Danish King willing to congratulate his daughter's good
deliverie, did for ever surrender his right in the Islands of the Deucaledonian
Sea, to wit, the Isles of Orcades, Shecland, and others, which he delivered in
pledge with his daughter, upon her marriage to the Scottish King. I hear the
deeds of this surrender are kept among the Records belonging to the Crown of
Scotland. And so at length those Isles, and the Dominion of this Sea, returned
to the Kings of Scotland, which they enjoy at this day. The Kings of Scotland
have a pledge of Dominion also in this Sea, that is to say, Tributes or Customs
imposed upon Fishermen, for Fishing; of which by the way you may read in their
Parlam. 6. Mariae, Reginae Scot. c. 54.
Acts of Parliament.

Touching that Right which belong's to the King of Great Britain, in the main
and open Sea of the North. And the Conclusion of the Work. CHAP. XXXII.
COncerning that Neighboring Sea, which is a Territory belonging to the Scots,
I have spoken in the former Chapter. But I must not omit to treat here of that
Sea, which stretches it self to a very large extent toward the North, washing
the Coasts of Friesland, Island, and other Isles also under the Dominion of the
King of Denmark, or of Norway. For, even this Sea also is asscribed by some to
the King of Great Britain. Albericus Gentilis, applying that of In the life of
Agri^ola.
Tacitus, The Northern Coasts of Britain, having no Land lying against them,
are washed by the main and open Sea; you see, In Advocat. Hispanic. lib. 1 cap.
8.
says he, how far the Dominion of the King of Great Britain extend's it self
toward the South, North, and West. As if almost all that which lay opposite to
the Isles of Britain, in the open Sea, were within the Dominion of the King of
Great Britain. And concerning the Northern Sea also, which reaches there to
parts unknown, the very same thing in a manner was acknowledged by a subject of
the King of Denmarks, no mean man, in a Letter that he wrote some years since
to a friend of his in England, his name is Gudbrandus Thorlacius, Bishop of
Hola in Island, who in a Letter Hacklu^t in his Voiages. Tom. 1. page 590.
sent hither Anno MDXCV, to Hugh Branham Pastor of Harwich, call's the Britains
almost. Lords there of the whole Sea. There is, says he, a report now at this
day, that you of Britain ( whom I had almost called Lords of the Sea) have
Negotiations every Year in Groenland. But the Kings of Denmark deny it here;
and this more Northerly Sea which belong's to Island, they challenge to
themselves, as they are Kings of Norway; and that by ancient right, if not
unjustly pretended. To this purpose let us observe, that passage which I find
in a speech of the Ambassadors of Erricus the tenth King of Norway and Denmark,
delivered unto our Henry the fifth, which run's to this effect. 3 Hen. 5. seu
Anno Dom. 1453. in Schedis ve^ultis bibliothecae Cottoniauae.
Most victorious King of England, may it pleas your Majesty to understand,
that our most gracious Lord the King of Norway, etc. aforesaid, has certain
Islands, to wit, Island, Jeroy, Hietland, and many more belonging to his
Kingdom of Norway, whereunto of old no persons were wont to repair out of other
Countries, upon any occasions whatsoever either of Fishing or Merchandisi^g,
under pe^il of life and limbs; nor might the men of the Kingdom of Norway, more
than those of other Countries, without special license from his Majesty. Nor
might they after License obtained, set forth out of any other place than the
City of Bergen, nor return to the same place but upon inevitable necessity,
or when they ought to pay Customs and other Duties to the King's Exchequer,
according to the most ancient Custom of Norway, which has been constantly
observed time out of mind in that Kingdom. Also, in the year MCCCCXLV.
Christophor King of Denmark and Norway, Isaacus Pontanus in Hist. Danica, and
Zuer. Boxhorn. in Apologia pro Navigatione Holland.
granted the Inhabitants of Zirickzee in Zealand a freedom of Navigation into
his Kingdom, Island and other Isles being excepted and prohibited, which are
the very words of the Grant. Moreover, out of the League made at Koppenhagen in
the year of our Lord Foed. Hen. 6 Augliae, and Errici 10. Dani^ R. 1432. art.
6. Ex Tabulis Legationis Danicae seu Dissertationis Bremensis, 1602. in in
Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
MCDXXXII. between our Henry the sixth and the same Erricus King of Norwaie,
and Denmark, the Commissioners of the King of Denmark who held a Treaty at
Bremen with the Commissioners of our Queen Elisabeth, in the year MDC II about
the free use of this Sea, alleged this Article almost to the same sens; It is
provided, that all Merchants, and all other men whatsoever in subjection to the
King of England and France, do not presume hereafter, under peril of loss of
life and goods, to visit the Countries of Island, Finmarck, Halghaland, or any
other prohibited places and unlawful Ports whatsoever, in the Kingdoms of
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. Yea, and some years before, the use of this Sea was
prohibited both to Merchants and Fishermen, unless they were bound with
Merchandise to North-barn, the most eminent Town of Traffic under the King of
Norwaie. And touching that particular, there is an Act of Parliament of Henry
the sixth, whereby Stat. 8 H. 6 cap. 2. and Rot. Parlam. 8 Hen. 6. number. 35.
such a kind of Prohibition continued in force for certain years, in favor of
the King of Norwaie. So that there were many Letters Patents afterward granted
by Ro^. Franciae, 18 H. 6. membran. 16. Rotul. Franc. 12 H. 7. Rot. Franc. 1
Ed. 5. etc.
our Kings to their subjects of England, whereby they had License to go unto
Island, Finmark, and other Dominions of the King of Norway and Sweden. But that
Statute, the rigor whereof was dispensed with at the King's pleasure, by such
kind of Grants, became Stat. Hen. 8. (...). 1.
repealed at the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the eight. And Joannes
Mayor making mention of that time, says, De Gest s S^o^o^um, l. 1.
A Fleet of English went every year to Island, beyond the Arctick Circle to
catch Fish. But what manner of determination soever ought to be made touching
the Dominion of this more Northerly Sea; yet certain it is, such a perpetual
servitude at least was, by several agreements betwixt the Kings of England, and
Norwaie, imposed upon it, that to this day also the subjects of England enjoy a
perpetual right of sailing unto Island, and of using and enjoying this sea.
For, by a League made at Koppenhagen in the year MCDXC. betwixt Henry the
seventh of England and John the second King of Denmark and Norwaie, it was
concluded, Foed. Danic. 11 Hen. 7 art. 4. quod in Tabulis Legationis 1602.
etiam habemus.
that all Merchants and Liege-men, Fishermen, and any other persons whatsoever
being subjects of the King of England and France, might for ever in time to
com sail freely to the Island Tyle, that is to say, Island (for, in that age
it was generally taken for Thule, as it is now also by some) thither to have
recours and to enter with their ships and goods, and merchandise, victuals, and
any other commodities whatsoever, upon occasion of buying, selling, fishing, or
merchandising; and there to abide and convers after the manner of Merchants,
and from thence freely to return as often as they pleas, without any
Prohibition, molestation, or impediment of Us or our heirs and successors in
the Kingdoms of Denmark and Norway, or of any of our Officers; they paying the
due rights and usual Customs as well in that Island as also in the Ports
belonging to the same where they shall happen to arrive. Provided always, that
seven years immediately after the date of these presents, they do Petition to
renew their License from us and our successors Kings of Denmark and Norway, to
the end that so from seven years to seven years, Merchants, and all other
persons aforesaid, may for ever acknowledge us and our successors Kings of
Denmark and Norway, in the renewing of their License. But that this League was
not limited by any time, but concerned the heirs and successors of both the
parties, appears not only in part by what has been alleged already, but by
the very form of the Preface, which I thought meet to add in this place. We
John by the Grace of God King as aforesaid, by the unanimous advice and consent
of our beloved Counselors, and others the Lords and Nobles of our Kingdom of
Denmark, have caused a Treaty to be had, with the Orators of the most
illustrious Prince Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England, and France,
our most dear Brother, James Hutton, Doctor of the Civil Law, Thomas
Clarentieux King of Arms, Thomas Carter, and John Beliz, Merchants of Lyn,
about the restoring of peace, and establishing a perpetual concord between our
Kingdoms; which Counselors of ours, and the Orators, autorised in our City of
Koppenhagen, by special Commission of the before named King of England, our most
dear Brother, and with full power, whereof we are assured by the Letters of
the said King of England, have concluded, that between us, our heirs, and
successors, well willers, friends and allies, and the most illustrious Prince
Henry King of England and France, our most dear Brother, his heirs and
successors, well willers, friends, and allies, there be and shall be for ever
in time to com, a perpetual peace, inviolable friendship, and firm concord, in
the following form. Yea, and that League was renewed in the year MDXXIII. by
Henry the eight of England, and Christiern the second King of Denmark and
Norway, in the same form. The right therefore is perpetual, and transmitted to
the heirs of the K. of England, that the English should have a free use of this
more Northerly Sea belonging to Island. But frequent Ambassies notwithstanding
passed on both sides about that business, in the Reigns of Frederick the
second, and Christiern the fourth, Kings of Denmark, and of Elisabeth Queen of
England. The Danes alleged, that the English had no right to use this kind of
liberty, without leav first obtained of the Kings of Denmark, and that renewed
every seven years, according to that league made in the time of John the second
and Henry the seventh. Moreover, Nicolas Craig, who was sent Ambassador into
England by Christiern the fourth in the year MDXCIX. pretended the agreement at
Haderslabe, in the year MDLXXXIII. between Frederick the second and Queen
Elisabeth, as if it had therein been expressly provided, that this servitude in
the Sea of Island, established by the English, might be limited by a denial of
License at the pleasure of the King of Denmark. But it was answered both by the
Lords at home in England, as also by the Queen's Commissioners sent to Bremen
for the transacting of this business, that this right or Sea-servitude is so
confirmed to the English, as well by Prescription of time, as by perpetual
agreements of Leagues, that that particular which occurr's in the agreements of
King John the second, and Henry the seventh about asking of License, does in
no wise relate to this effect; that whether it were denied or not requested by
Petition, that right or servitude could be diminished, but to this end only,
that the English, by a customarie Petitioning every seven years, might
acknowledge the Norwegian right in this Sea. There was neither manner, nor
condition, nor time annexed to the servitude, but it took place there only to
this end, that the memory merely of the benefit of the League or of the
Original of the servitude established, might be renewed now and then by
Petition. Yea, Frederick the second in his letters to Queen Elisabeth, dated
the fourth of May, MDLXXXV, most expressly disclaim's this Claus of the
League, which concern's Petitioning for License. And truly the whole right of
the English in that Sea, was not first claimed by them upon the account of that
League at Koppenhagen, whatever they of Norway may pretend to the contrary.
For, when the Ambassadors sent heretofore by Erricus the tenth to our Henry
the fifth, made complaint about English men's fishing in this Sea, the King of
England (I suppose) intimate's plainly enough, that he had some right before in
that Sea, while at that time he granted this only in favor of the King of
Norwaie, that the English should no otherwise use Fishing there for the year
immediately ensuing, than as it had been usual in ancient time, and this he
commanded by public Proclamation made in the more eminent Ports and Cities.
The time limited, and the ancient Custom of Fishing, do plainly import some
former right. But here I give you the form of the Proclamations; Vet. Schod. de
Temp. Hen. 5. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana. and Rot. Claus. 3 Hen. 3. Membran. 5.
in dors^.
It is required, that none of the Lieges of our Lord the King, for certain
causes specially moving our Lord the King himself, do, for one year next
ensuing, presume to go unto the Islands belonging to the kingdoms of Denmark
and Norwaie, and especially toward the Iste of Islande, for the cause of
Fishing or any other occasion, to the prejudice of the King of the aforesaid
kingdoms, otherwise than they were wont in ancient time.

It appears also by Parlamentarie Rot. Parl. 3 Hen. 5. par. 1. membr. n. 33.
Records of the same King's Reign, that the English used Fishing in that Sea
very many years before. But that League made at Haderslabe (pretended before by
Craig) does not relate unto Fishing either in the Sea of Island, or in this of
Norwaie, but to the Traffic and Merchandise used then by our Merchants of the
Moscovie-Companie. For, this only was agreed, that the Merchants of that
Company, being constrained by Tempests, or otherwise, might freely have
access to the shores and Ports both of Island and Norwaie; but with this
Reserv, that they do not in any kind Traffic, and use Mercbandise, in the
Ports of Norwaie or Island before prohibited, nor molest the Subjects of the
King of the said places in any thing against the Laws of Hospitality, and that
they wholly abstein from all manner of injury; which is the sum of that
Answer which was given to Craig, by the Peers of England. But all things are
clearly explained about this business, and that right of the English defended
at large in the Letters sent by Queen Elisabeth to Christiern the fourth
bearing date Call. Septembris Anno MDXCIX. So much whereof as concern's this
particular, I think meet to insert. At the request of the most excellent Prince
your Highnesse's Father, we sent (say the Queen's Letters) an Ambassador into
Germany, Anno MDLXXVII. who Treated with his Commissioners about all matters
in controversy, and especially about the Fishing of Island and Norway, where
it was found, that the King insisted only upon a former Treaty of two years
Sub Edwardo IV. Angliae R.
Truce, wherein it was at that time agreed, that the English should not sail
beyond Hagaland. But there were several Treaties with the Kings John and
Christiern alleged on our part, wherein, all former controversies being
composed, it was otherwise agreed and concluded; and both parties were to stand
to this Treaty of general peace made afterward, not to the preceding two
years Truce. Which the most excellent Prince your Father, acknowledging,
desired by his Letters, that that controversy might be referred to another
disquisition. But since that time, no such disquisition has been made.
Nevertheless we understand that our subjects fishing have been taken,
tormented, and handled in a hostile manner. Whether this be justly don, all
men will be able to judge who shall weigh our Reasons with an impartial mind.
We do not deny, but that the Lord Chancellor Whitfeld and de Barnico, when
They were Ambassadors in England anno 1597.
they came unto Us, did in words pretend that the fishing of Island and Norway
was used by the English, contrary to the Leagues and Agreements of the
Kingdoms. But seeing they neither did nor could produce any proof, and we have
authentic evidences attested by the Kings John and Christiern to the
contrary, whereto more credit ought to be given than to bare Allegations, the
matter was put off to another time. It was answered also to Dr Craig, that the
Transaction which was concluded with King Frederick at Haderslabe in the year
of our Lord MDLXXXIII belong's nothing at all to this Business, for the reason
before mentioned. And a little after the Letters speak thus. But that which is
pretended from the Treaty with King John, (the aforesaid Treaty at
Koppenhagen) that licens for fishing ought to be renewed by petition from
seven years to seven years (as a thing which for very many was not omitted) We
answer, that the fault of its omission proceeded not from the English, but from
the Danes. For, that seven years Licens was petitioned for till the time that
King Christiern was expelled, about the year of our Lord MDXX. But afterward it
ceased to be renewed, because of the uncertaintie to whom the succession of the
Kingdom did lawfully belong. And since the time of the said expulsion of King
Christiern, neither King Frederick your great Grandfather, nor Christiern your
Grandfather, nor Frederick your Highnesse's Father, ever urged any such
petition for Licens. But concieving former Treaties sufficient, which were made
between the Kings and Kingdoms, they would not innovate any thing after a
prescription of very many years, seeing they were otherwise sufficiently
secure that the same thing would never be attempted, which was the first
occasion of ordaining such a Licens. And to this end, the Letters of King
Frederick your Highnesse's Father written to Us, and bearing date the fourth of
May, Anno MDLXXXV were shown to Doctor Craig, purporting that if the English
absteined from doing injuries, they should enjoy the wonted liberty and favor,
without any mention or requiring of a Petition for Licens; whereas nevertheless
We offered you, that our Merchants should hereafter petition you from seven
years to seven years, according to the ancient and long continued Custom, which
offer We understand your Highness would not admit. For, the most excellent
Queen would not otherwise acknowledge the Jurisdiction and Empire of the King of
Denmark and Norway in this Sea, than that the whole servitude or right of
fishing aforementioned, there established (as aforesaid) might (as a
considerable part of the ancient Patrimony) be retained to her and her
Successors. There were other Letters and Treaties also about this business, in
the year Camden. in Annal. Elisabeth ^ an. 2. anno. 1602.
MDCII. But the Controversy being deferred, nothing was concluded. But it
appears the King of Great Britain has Empire and Dominion also in the Sea
which lie's far more Northerly than Island. To wit, in that of Groenland. For,
this Sea having never been entered by occupation, nor used in the Art and
Exercise of Fisherie, was first in the memory of our Fathers rendered very
gainful, through a peculiar fishing for Whales, by those English Merchants of
the Moscovie-Companie who ^ailed that way. The use of a Sea never entered by
Occupation and such a kind of profit being first discovered, does according
to the manner of the claim, give a Dominion to the discoverer who claim's it in
the name of another (as here in the name of the Sovereign of England) as well
by a corporal as intentional possession, no otherwise than does the first both
natural and civil possession of any other things whatsoever that were never yet
possessed. Upon which ground it was, that King James, in his Letters of
cre^ence given to the worthy and most accomplished S Henry Wotton Knight his
Ambassador in Holland, and others employed by him to treat about that business,
did very justly call the Fishings in the North Sea near the Shores of
Groenland, 29 September. A Copy of which Letters is in Sr Robert Cotton's
Library.
acquired for Us only and Ours by right.

But that we may at length conclude; whatsoever has been discoursed hitherto
touching the Right and Sea-Dominion of the Kings of Great Britain, and the
ancient extent of their Royal Patrimony in the Sea, give me leav to sum up
the whole in certain Verses of the most excellent Hugo Grotius (of whose
Lawwritings, so far as they concern either a private Dominion of the Sea, or a
Community, we have spoken in the former Book) which were very elegantly
written heretofore to K. James, upon his Inauguration in the Kingdom of
England. Says he, -- Sylvarum, lib. 2.
Tria sceptra Profundi
In Magnum coiere Ducem. --
Three Scepters of the Deep their powers do bring,
To make a Trident for a mighty King.


And then addressing his Speech to the Sea, that is wont to receiv its motion
from the Moon, Sum animos a Rege tuo, meliore levatus
Sidere, nec cela populos quocunque calentes
Sole, per immensum quem circumvolveris orbem,
Quis det Jura Mari. --
Take courage from thy Ro^al Governor,
As by the influence of a better Star,
And in thy course about the World explain
To all mankind, who it is that rule's the main.


And in another place, -- licet omnia casus
Magna suos metuant, Jacobo promissa potestas
Cum Terris Pelagoque manet. --
Though all great things a fall do fear,
Yet James his power must stand,
Being enlarged and composed
Both of the Sea and Land.


A little after also, he proceed's thus; -- Rerum Natura creatrix
Divisit populos, and metas ipsa notavit.
Sic juga Pirenae, sic olim Rhenus and Aspes
Imperiis mensura suit: Te flumine nullo
Detinuit, nulla nimbosi verticis arce;
Sed Totum complexa parens hic terminus ipsa
Substitit, atque uno voluit sub limite claudi.
Te tibi seposuit, supremo in gurgite, Nereus.
Finis hic est, qui Fine caret. Quae meta Britannis,
Litera sunt aliis; Regnique accessio tanti est,
Quod ventis velisque patet. --
Nature her self the mistress of mankind
Has severed Nations, and their bounds designed.
So the Pyren'ean Tops, Aspes, and Rhine,
As bounds to Empires She did once assign.
Yet Thee She with no River-hath confined,
Nor lofty Tow'er that dare's the stormy wind;
But having thrown her wide embraces round
The Univers, here fixed her self thy Bound,
And meant one limit should you both contain,
Thee Nereus has secluded in the main.
This Bound unbounded is. Great Britain stand's
Confined by the Shores of other lands;
And all that may by Winds and Sails be known
Is an accession of so great a Crown.


And without question it is true, according to the Collection of Testimonies
before alleged, that the very Shores or Ports of the Neighbor-Princes
Beyond Sea, are Bounds of the Sea-Territorie of the British Empire to the
Southward and Eastward; but that in the open and vast Ocean of the North and
West, they are to be placed at the utmost extent of those most spacious Seas,
which are possessed by the English, Scots, and Irish.

FINIS.
Prais and Glory be to God our Savior.
ADDITIONAL EVIDENCES, Concerning the RIGHT OF SOVERAIGNTIE and Dominion of
ENGLAND in the SEA;

Collected Out of certain public Papers, relating to the Reigns of K. JAMES,
and K. CHARLES.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard. An. Dom. 1652.

ADDITIONAL EVIDENCES Concerning the RIGHT OF SOVERAIGNTIE and Dominion of
ENGLAND in the SEA; Collected Out of certain public Papers, relating to the
Reigns of K. JAMES, and K. CHARLES.
THE Learned Author having fully evinced the Right of this Island in the Sea,
and that from all Antiquity, it were superfluous to seek after any farther
Testimonies relating to elder times, wherein he himself has been so abundant,
and already set down the most material; And therefore it is conceived
requisite to add a few such Evidences only, as are found among several Papers
of public Transaction, which are still to be produced, and will serve to show
how that claim which has been made successively by all our Kings of the
English Race, was continued down to the present Times, by the two Princes of
the Scottish Extraction.

In the seventh year of the Reign of King James, this Right was stoutly
asserted by Proclamation, and all persons excluded from the use of the Seas
upon our Coasts, without particular License; the Grounds whereof you have here
set down in the Proclamation it self. A Proclamation TOUCHING FISHING.
JAMES by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defendor
of the Faith, etc. To all and singular persons to whom it may appertein,
Greeting. Although We do sufficiently know by Our Experience in the Office of
Regal Dignity (in which, by the favor of Almighty God, We have been placed
and exercised these many years) as also by the observation which We have made
of other Christian Princes exemplarie actions, how far the absoluteness of
Sovereign Power extends it self, and that in regard thereof, We need not
yield account to any person under God, for any action of Ours, which is
lawfully grounded upon that Just Prerogative: Yet such has ever been, and
shall be Our care and desire to give satisfaction to Our Neighbor-Princes, and
friends, in any action which may have the least relation to their Subjects and
Estates, as We have thought good (by way of friendly premonition) to declare
unto them all, and to whomsoever it may appertain, as follows.

Whereas We have been contented since Our coming to the Crown, to tolerate an
indifferent and promiscuous kind of liberty to all Our Friends whatsoever, to
Fish within Our Streams, and upon any of Our Coasts of Great Britain, Ireland,
and other adjacent Islands, so far forth as the permission or use thereof might
not redound to the impeachment of Our Prerogative Roial, nor to the hurt and
damage of Our loving Subjects, whose preservation and flourishing Estate We
hold Our self principally bound to advance before all worldly respects: So
finding that Our continuance therein, has not only given occasion of
overgreat encroachments upon Our Regalities or rather questioning for Our
Right, but has been a means of daily wrongs to Our own People that exercise
the Trade of Fishing, as (either by the multitude of strangers* which do
pre-occupie those places, or by the in^uries which they receiv most commonly at
their hands) Our Sub^ects are constrained to abandon their Fishing, or at least
are become so discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them, to
betake themselves to some other course of living, whereby not only diverse of Our
Coast Towns are much decayed, but the number of Mariners daily diminished,
which is a matter of great consequence to Our Estate, considering how much the
strength thereof consists in the power of Shipping and use of Navigation; We
have thought it now both just and necessary (in respect that We are now by
God's favor lineally and lawfully possessed, as well of the Island of Great
Britain, as of Ireland, and the rest of the Isles ad^acent) to bethink Our
selves of good lawful means to prevent those inconveniences, and many others
depending upon the same. In consideration whereof, as We are desirous that the
world may take notice, that We have no intention to deny Our neighbors and
allies, those fruits and benefits of Peace and Friendship, which may be justly
exspected at Our hands in honor and reason, or are afforded by other Princes
mutually in the point of Commerce, and Exchange of those things which may not
prove prejudicial to them: so because some such convenient order may be taken in
this matter as may sufficiently provide for all these important considerations
which do depend thereupon; We have resolved first to give notice to all the
world, that Our express pleasure is, That from the beginning of the Month of
August next coming, no person of what Nation or Quality soever, being not Our
natural born Subject, be permitted to Fish upon any of Our Coasts and Seas of
Great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent, where most usually
heretofore any Fishing has been, until they have orderly demanded and obtained
Licenses from Us, or such Our Commissioners, as ^ee have autorised in that
behalf, viz. at London for Our Realms of England and Ireland, and at
Edenborough for Our Realm of Scotland; which Licenses Our intention is* shall
be yearly demanded, for so many Uessels and Ships, and the Tonnage thereof, as
shall intend to Fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of Our
Coasts, and Seas as aforesaid, upon pain of such chastisement, as shall be fit
to be inflicted upon such wilful Offenders.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the 6 day of May, in the 7th year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, Anno Dom. 1609.


Notwithstanding this Proclamation, the Netherlanders proceeded still in their
way of encroachment upon our Seas and Coasts, through the whole Reign of that
King, and were at length so bold as to contest with him, and endeavor to baffle
him out of his Rights, pretending, because of the long connivence of himself and
Queen Elisabeth, that they had a Right of their own by immemorial possession;
which some Commissioners of theirs that were sent over hither, had the
confidence to plead in Terminis, to the King and his Council. And though the
King, out of his tenderness to them insisted still upon his own Right, by his
Council to those Commissioners, and by his Ambassador to their Superiors, yet
they made no other use of his Indulgence, than to tire out his whole Reign, and
abuse his Patience by their artificial delays, pretenses, shifts, dilatorie
addresses, and evasive Answers. And all that the King gained by the tedious
disputes, overtures, and dispatches to and again, was in conclusion only a
verbal acknowledgment of those Rights; which at the same times that they
acknowledged, they usually designed to invade with much more insolence than
before. But you have the main of what passed in those days in this particular,
with their insolent demeanor, lively described in these following Collections,
taken out of several Dispatches that passed betwixt Secretary Naunton, and
Dudley Carlton Lord Ambassador from the King, to the States of the United
Provinces. In a Letter of Secretary Naunton's to the said Ambassador, dated at
White Hall, the 21 of December, 1618. I find these passages.
I Must now let your Lordship know, that the State's Commissioners and Deputies
both having attended his Majesty at New Market, and there presented their
Letters of Credence, returned to London on Saturday was a sevennight, and upon
Tuesday had Audience in the Council Chamger, where being required to
communicate the points of their Commission, they delivered their meditated
Answer at length. The Lords upon perusal of it, appointed my Lord Bining and
me to attend his Majesty for directions, what Reply to return to this Answer
of theirs; which I represented to their Lordships yesterday to this effect;
That his Majesty found it strange, that they having been so often required by
your Lordship his Majesty's Ambassador, as from himself, in their public
Assembly, to send over Commissioners fully autorised to treat and conclude, not
only of all differences grown between the Subjects of both States, touching
the Trade to the East Indies, and the Whale-Fishing, and to regulate and settle
a joint and an even Traffic in those Quarters, but withal to take order for a
more indifferent course of determining other Questions growing between our
Merchauts and them about their Draperies and the Tare; And more especially to
determine his Majesty's Right for the sole Fishing upon all the Coasts of his
Three Kingdoms, into which they had of late times incroached farther than of
Right they could; And lastly, for the reglement and reducing of their Coins to
such a proportion and correspondence with those of his Majesty's and other
States, that their Subjects might make no Advantage to transport our Moneys by
inhansing their valuation there. All which they confessed your Lordship had
instanced them for in his Majesty's name, that after all this attent on his
Majesty's part, and so long deliberation on theirs, they were com at last with
a Proposition to speak only to the two first points, and instructed thereunto
with bare Letters of Creance only, which his Majesty take's for an Imperious
fashion of proceeding in them, as if they were com hither to Treat of what
themselves pleased, and to give Law to his Majesty in his own Kingdom, and to
propose and admit of nothing but what should tend merely to their own ends.

To the second; Whereas they would decline all debate of the Fishings upon his
Majesty's Coasts, first by allegations of their late great losses and an
Esmeute of their people, who are all interessed in that Question, and would be
like to break out into Jom combustion to the hazard of their State which has
lately escaped Naufrage, and is not yet altogether calmed; What is this but to
raise an advantage to themselves out of their disadvantage? But afterward they
profess their lothness to call it into doubt or question, claiming an
immemorial possession seconded by the Law of Nations; To which his Majesty
will have them told, that the Kings of Spain have sought leav to Fish there by
Treaty from this Crown; and that the King of France (a nearer Neighbor to our
Coasts than they) to this day request's leav for a few Vessels to Fish for
Provision of his own household; And that it appears so much the more strange to
his Majesty, that they being a State of so late date, should be the first
that would presume to question his Majesty's ancient Right so many hundred
years inviolably possessed by his Progenitors, and acknowledged by all other
ancient States and Princes* That themselves in their public Letters of the last
of June, sent by your Lordship, seemed then to confirm their immemorial
possession (as they term it) with diverse Treaties, as are of the year 1550;
and another between his Majesty's Predecessors and Charles the fifth, as Prince
of those Provinces, and not by the Law of Nations. To which their last Plea,
his Majesty would have them told, that he being an Islander-Prince, is not
ignorant of the Laws and Rights of his own Kingdoms, nor does exspect to be
taught the Laws of Nations by them, nor their Grotius, whose ill thriving might
rather teach others to disavow his Positions; And his honesty called in
question by themselves, might render his Learning as much suspected to them, as
his person. This his Majesty take's for an high point of his Soveraigntie, and
will not have it slighted over in any fashion whatsoever.

Thus I have particulated unto you the manner of our proceeding with them. Let
them advise to seek leav from his Majesty, and to achnowledg him his Right, as
other Princes have don, and do; or it may well com to pass, that they that will
needs bear all the world before them, by their Mare Liberum, may soon com to
have neither Terram and Solum, nor Rempublican liberam.


And in a Letter of the said Ambassador Carlton to Secretary Naunton, of the
30 of December, 1618, from the Hague, we find this Return, touching the
business of Fisherie.
WHether the final resolution here will be according to his Majesty's desire,
in that point concerning the Fishing upon the Coasts of his three Kingdoms, I
cannot say; And by somewhat which fell from the Prince of Orange, by way of
Discourse when he took leav of me on Monday last, at his departure, I suspect
it will not, in regard the Magistrates of these Towns of Holland, being newly
placed, and yet scarce fast in their seats, who do autorise the Deputies which
com hither to the Assembly of the States in all things they are to Treat and
resolv, will not adventure, for fear of the people, to determine of a Business,
on which the livelihood of fifty thousand of the Inhabitants of this one
single Province does depend. I told the Prince that hows^ever his Majesty,
both in honor of his Crown and Person, and Interest of his Kingdoms, neither
could nor would any longer desist, from having his Right acknowledged by this
State, as well as by all other Princes and Commonweals, especially finding the
same openly oppugned both by their Statesmen, and men of war, as the writings
of Grotius, and the taking of John Brown the last year may testify; yet this
acknowledgment of a Right and a Due was no exclusion of Grace and Favor; and
that the people of this Country paying that small Tribute upon every one of
their Busses, (which is not so much as disputed by any other Nation whatsoever)
such was his Majesty's well-wishing to this State, that I presumed of his
permission to suffer them to continue their course of Fishing; which they might
use thereby with more Freedom, and less apprehension of molestation, and let
than before, and likewise spare the Cost of some of their Men of War, which they
yearly send out to maintein that by force, which they may have of courtesy.

The Prince answered, that for himself at his return from Utrecht, he would do
his best endeavor to procure his Majesty contentment, but he doubted the
Hollanders would apprehend the same effect in their payment for Fishing, as
they found in the passage of the Sound, where at first an easy matter was
demanded by the King of Denmark, but now more exacted than they can possibly
bear: And touching their Men of War he said, they must still be at the same
charge with them, because of the Pirates. Withal, he cast out a question to me,
whether this freedom of Fishing might not be redeemed with a Sum of money?
To which I answered, it was a matter of Roialtie more than of Utilitie, though
Princes were not to neglect their profit.




And in another Letter of the said Ambassador from the Hague to Secretary
Naunton, of the 14 of Januarie 1618. He give's him to understand, That having
been expostulated with, but in friendly manner, by certain of the States about
his late Proposition, as unseasonable and sharp, they said, they acknowledge
their Commissioners went beyond their limits in their terms of Immemorial
Possession and immuable Droict de Gens; for which they had no order. Then,
says he, I desired them to consider what a wrong it is to challenge that upon
right, which these Provinces have hitherto enjoied, either by connivence or
courtesy, and yet never without claim on his Majesty's side, etc. In another
Letter of Secretary Naunton's to the Lord Ambassador Carlton, of the ^1 of
Januarie, 1618. we read thus:
AS I had dictated thus far, I received direction from his Majesty to signify
to the State's-Commissioners here, That albeit their earnest entreatie and his
gracious consideration of the present trouble of their Church and State, had
moved his Majesty to consent to delay the Treaty of the great Fishing, till
the time craved by the Commissioners; yet understanding by new and fresh
complaints of his Mariners and Fishers upon the Coasts of Scotland, that within
these four or five last years, the Low Countrie-Fishers have taken so great
advantages of his Majesty's Toleration, that they have grown nearer and nearer
upon his Majesty's Coasts year by year, than they did in preceding* Times,
without leaving any Bounds for the Country People and Natives to Fish upon
their Prince's Coasts, and oppressed some of his Subjects of intent to continue
their pretended possession; and driven some of their great Vessels through their
Nets to deter others by fear of the like violence from Fishing near them, etc.
His Majesty cannot for bear to tell them, that he is so well persuaded of the
Equity of the States, and of the Honorable respect they bear unto him, and to
his Subjects for his sake, that they will never allow so unjust and intolerable
Oppressions; for restraint whereof, and to prevent the inconveniences which
must ensue, upon the continuance of the same, his Majesty has by me desired
them to write to their Superiors to cause Proclamation to be made, prohibiting
any of their Subjects to Fish within fourteen miles of his Majesty's Coasts
this year, or in any time hereafter, until order be taken by Commissioners to
be autorised on both sides, for a final settling of the main business. His
Majesty has likewise directed me to command you from him, to make the like
Declaration and Instance to the States there, and to certify his Majesty of
their Answer, with what convenient speed you may.




Thus far Secretary Naunton to the Ambassador.

Now what effect the Ambassador's Negotiation with the States had, appears by
a Letter of his from the Hague, of the 6 of February, 1618, to King James
himself; where, among other passages he has this: I find likewise in the
manner of proceeding, that treating by way of Proposition here, nothing can be
exspected but their wonted dilatorie and evasive Answers; their manner being
to refer such Propositions from the States General to the States of Holland.
The States of Holland take advice of a certain Council residing at Delph, which
they call the Council of the Fisherie. From them such an Answer commonly com's,
as may be exspected from such an Oracle. The way therefore (under correction)
to effect your Majesty's intent, is to begin with the Fishers themselves, by
publishing, against the time of their going out, your resolution, at what
distance you will permit them to Fish, whereby they will he forced to have
recours to their Council of Fisherie; that Council to the States of Holland;
and those of Holland to the States General, who then in place of being sought
unto, will for contentment of their Subjects seek unto your Majesty.




By these you may perceiv how earnestly the ancient Rights of England were
asserted, and the old Claim made and renewed, and a recognition made also in
the Reign of that King by the Netherlanders themselves, though all proved to no
purpose, the King and his Council being afterward lulled again into a
connivence one way or other. And it give's sufficient cause to suspect, that the
men in Power at that time might be charmed with money; since it was a Quaere
put by the Prince of Orange to the Ambassador Carlton, in the heat of all the
Controversy, Whether the Freedom of Fishing might not be redeemed with a
sum of money? For, turning over the Papers of Transactions of the Time
immediately following, I perceiv the dispute was let fall on a sudden, and
thereupon an opportunity given the Netherlanders, to encroach more and more
every year, upon the Seas and Shores of this island. And so far they proceeded
in this presumptuous Course, through the Toleration given them in the later end
of the Reign of King James, and the beginning of the late Tyrant his son, that
at length they fell to a downright impeachment of our Rights, not in words
only, but by contemning the commands of the King*s Officers, prohibiting us
free Commerce within our own Seas, abusing and disturbing the Subjects at Sea,
and the King himself in his very Ports and Chambers; and by many other actions
of so intolerable a nature, that in the year 1635 he was awakened and
constrained to see to the preservation of our Rights at Sea, and give order for
the setting forth of a powerful Fleet, to check the audacious designs and
attempts of those ungrateful Neighbors. And the following year, in prosecution
of his purpose, he set forth this ensuing Proclamation, entitled, A
Proclamation For restraint of Fishing upon His Majesty's Seas and Coasts
without LICENSE.
WHereas Our Father of Blessed memory King James, did in the seventh year of
His reign of Great Britain, set forth a Proclamation touching Fishing; whereby
for the many important reasons therein expressed, all persons, of what Nation
or Quality soever (being not His natural born Subjects) were restrained from
Fishing upon any the Coasts and Seas of Great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of
the Isles adjacent, where most usually heretofore Fishing had been, until they
had orderly demanded, and obtained Licenses from Our said Father, or His
Commissioners in that behalf, upon pain of such chastisement as should be fit
to be inflicted upon such wilful Offenders: Since which time, albeit neither
Our said Father, nor Our Self have made any considerable execution of the said
Proclamation, but have with much patience expected a voluntary conformity of
Our Neighbors and Allies, to so just and reasonable Prohibitions and Directions
as are contained in the same.

And now finding by experience, that all the inconveniences which occasioned
that Proclamation, are rather increased then abated: We being very sensible
of the premises, and well knowing how far ^ee are obliged in Honor to maintain
the rights of Our Crown, especially of so great consequence, have thought it
necessary, by the advice of Our Privy Council, to renew the aforesaid
restraint of Fishing upon Our aforesaid Coasts and Seas, without License first
obtained from Us, and by these presents to make public Declaration, that Our
resolution is (at times convenient) to keep such a competent strength of
Shipping upon Our Seas, as may (by God's blessing) be sufficient, both to
hinder such further encroachments upon Our Regalities, and assist and protect
those Our good Friends and Allies, who shall henceforth, by virtue of Our
Licenses (to be first obtained) endeavor to take the benefit of fishing upon
Our Coasts and Seas, in the places accustomed.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the tenth day of May, in the twelfth year
of Our Reign of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.


This Proclamation being set forth in the year 1636. served to speak the
intent of those naval preparations made before in the year 1635. which were so
numerous and well-provided, that our Netherland-Neighbors being touched with
the apprehension of some great design in hand for the Interest of England by
Sea, and of the guilt that lay upon their own Consciences, for their bold
Encroachments, soon betrayed their Jealousies and Fears, and in them a sens of
their offenses, before ever the Proclamation was made public: As I might show
at large (if it were requisite) by certain Papers of a public Character yet in
being. But there is one, Instar omnium, which may serve in stead of all; and it
is an acute Letter of Secretary Coke's, that was written to Sir William
Boswel, the King's Resident then at the Hague, the Original whereof is still
reserved among the public Papers: In which Letter, he set's forth the Grounds
and Reasons of preparing that gallant Navy, with the King's resolution to
maintain the Right derived from his Ancestors, in the Dominion of the Seas; and
therefore I here render a true Copy of it, so far as concern's this business,
as most pertinent to our purpose. (SIR!)
BY your Letters and otherwise, I perceiv many jealousies and discourses are
raised upon the preparations of his Majesty's Fleet, which is now in such
forwardness, that we doubt not but within this Month it will appear at Sea. It
is therefore expedient both for your satisfaction, and direction, to inform you
particularly what was the occasion, and what is his Majesty's intention in
this work.

First, we hold it a principle not to be denied, That the King of Great
Britain is a Monarch at Land and Sea to the full extent of his Dominions, and
that it concerns him as much to maintain his Soveraigntie in all the British
Seas, as within his three Kingdoms: because without that these cannot be kept
safe; nor he preserv his honor and due respect with other Nations. But
commanding the Seas, he may cause his Neighbors and all Countries to stand upon
their guard whenever he think's fit. And this cannot be doubted that
whosoever will encroach upon him by Sea, will do it by Land also, when they see
their time. To such presumption Mare liberum gave the first warning piece,
which must be answered with a defense of Mare Clausum: not so much by
Discourses, as by the louder Language of a powerful Navy, to be better
understood, when overstrained patience sees no hope of preserving her Right by
other means.

The Degrees by which his Majesty's Dominion at Sea has of later years been
first impeached and then questioned, are as considerable as notorious.

First, to cherish, and as it were to nurs up our unthankful neighbors, We
gave them leav to gather wealth and strength upon our Coasts, in our Ports, by
our Trade and by our People. Then they were glad to invite our Merchant's
Residence with what privileges they would desire. Then they offered to us even
the Soveraigntie of their Estates, and then they sued for License to fish upon
the Coasts, and obtained it under the Great Seal of Scotland, which now they
suppress. And when thus by leav or by connivence, they had possessed themselves
of our Fishings, not only in Scotland, but in Ireland and England, and by our
staple had raised a great stock of Trade; by these means they so increased
their shipping and power at Sea, that now they endure not to be kept at any
distance: Nay, they are grown to that confidence to keep guards upon our Seas;
and then to project an Office and Company of Assurance for the advancement of
Trade; and withal, prohibit us free commerce even within our Seas, and take our
ships and goods, if we conform not to their Placarts. What insolences and
cruelties they have committed against us heretofore, in Ireland, in Gro^nland,
and in the Indies, is too well known to all the world. In all which, though our
sufferings and their wrong may seem forgotten, yet the great interest of his
Majesty's honor, is still the same, and will refresh their Memories as there
shall be cause. For, though charity must remit wrongs don to private men, yet
the reflection upon the public may make it a greater charity to do Justice on
crying crimes. All this notwithstanding, you are not to conceiv that the work
of this Fleet, is either revenge or execution of Justice for these great
offenses past, but chiefly for the future to stop the violent current of that
presumption whereby the Men of War and Free-booters of all Nations (abusing the
favor of his Majesty's peaceable and gracious Government, whereby he has
permitted all his Friends and Allies, to make use of his Seas and Ports in a
reasonable and free manner, and according to his Treaties) have taken upon them
the boldness, not only to com confidently at all times into all his Ports and
Rivers, but to conveie their Merchant's ships as high as his chief City, and
then to cast Anchor close upon his Magazins, and to contemn the commands of his
Officers, when they required a farther distance. But which is more intolerable,
have assaulted and taken one another within his Majesty's Chamber, and within
his Rivers, to the scorn and contempt of his Dominion and Power; and this
being of late years an ordinary practice which we have endeavored in vain to
reform by the ways of Justice and Treaties, the world I think will now be
satisfied, that we have reason to look about us. And no wise man will doubt
that it is high time to put our selves in this Equipage upon the Seas, and not
to suffer that Stage of action to be taken from us for want of our appearance.

So you see the general ground upon which our Counsels stand. In particular,
you may take notice, and publish as cause require's, That his Majesty by this
Fleet intends not a Rupture with any Prince or State, nor to infringe any
point of his Treaties; but resolves to continue and maintein that happy peace
wherewith God has blessed his Kingdom; and to which all his Actions and
Negotiations have hitherto tended, as by your own Instructions you may fully
understand. But withal considering, that Peace must be maintained by the arm
of power, which only keep's down War by keeping up Dominion, his Majesty thus
provoked, finde's it necessary even for his own defense and safety to
reassume and keep his ancient and undoubted Right in the Dominion of these
Seas, and to suffer no other Prince or State to encroach upon him, thereby
assuming to themselves or their Admirals, any Sovereign command: but to force
them to perform due homage to his Admirals and Ships, and to pay them
acknowledgments, as in former times they did. He will also set open and
protect the free Trade both of his Subjects and Allies: And give them such safe
Conduct and Convoie, as they shall reasonably require. He will suffer no other
Fleets or Men of War to keep any guard upon these Seas, or there to offer
violence or take prizes or booties, or to give interruption to any lawful
intercours. In a word, his Majesty is resolved, as to do no wrong, so to do
Justice both to his Subjects and Friends, within the limits of his Seas. And
this is the real and Roial design of this Fleet, whereof you may give part as
you find occasion to our good neighbors in those parts, that no Umbrage may
be taken of any hostile act or purpose to their prejudice in any kind. So
wishing you all health and happiness, I rest

Your assured friend and Servant, JOHN COOK.
Whitehall, 16 April. 1635. our style.



In this Letter you see first, how it was held for an undeniable principle,
that the King was King by Sea as well as by Land; That neither the honor nor
safety of this Island and Ireland could be maintained, but by preserving the
Dominion by Sea; and that it is an argument, that they that encroach upon us by
Sea, will do it also by Land when they see their time. He declare's also, how
our unthankful neighbors are risen to this hight and insolence, partly by
grant, partly by connivence, but principally through their many injurious
abuses of our Patience and Indulgence. And lastly, you may observe here what
resolutions were then taken to prevent the lil^e injuries, and preserv our
English Interest in time to com. But how those Resolutions were followed in the
succeeding part of his Reign, I shall not stand to examine; only it suffices
here to take notice, that the Claim of Sea-Dominion was made by him, as well as
by his Father, and for a time strenuously asserted; though afterward he
slackned his hand in the prosecution; whereof the Netherlanders taking
advantage, and of our late commotions (which were their Halcyon-daies, and time
of Harvest) are now advanced to such a monstrous pitch of pride, malice, and
ingratitude, that they dare bid defiance to those ancient Rights which we have
received from all Antiquity, and justify their actions by a most unjust and
bloody war, in the view of all the world. What remain's then, but that the
Parliament and People of England should lay these things to heart, with an
indignation answerable to so prodigious violations and invasions? They have now
an opportunity and strength given them by God (O let not hearts be wanting!)
to make good the Claim, and accomplish that work of establishing our Interests
by Sea, beyond the possibility of future impeachments. Let it not be said,
that England, in the state of Monarchy, was able to hold the Soveraigntie of
the Seas so many hundred years, and then lost it in the state of Liberty. It
is, as now established with its Appendants, the greatest and most glorious
Republic, that the Sun ever saw, except the Roman. God has made it so by
Land, and will by Sea; for, without this, the Land is nothing. It was ever so
apprehended by Kings, yea by the last and worst of our Kings: And shall the
Founders of this famous structure of Government now in being, who have
cashiered Kings, and vindicated the Rights and Liberties of this Nation upon
his head and his whole posterity and party, not assert them against
perfidious Neighbors? It were unpardonable in any to harbor a thought of that
nature, or to yield that such a blemish should be brought upon all those
glorious actions and achievements, whereby God has freed and innobled our
Land and Nation.

But that the people of England may be excited to a valuation, maintenance,
and improvement of their interest by Sea, it is necessary to let them
understand what advantages are to be made thereby, and are made by others, who
of Usufructuaries by permission, have in design now to make themselves absolute
Lords of the Fee. And therefore it is very convenient here to set down an
excellent Discourse which was written in the time of the late King, and
presented by the following Title. The inestimable Riches and Commodities of the
British Seas.
THE Coast of Great Britain do yield such a continual Sea-harvest of gain, and
benefit to all those that with diligence do labor in the same, that no time or
season in the year passes away without some apparent means of profitable
imploiment, especially to such as apply themselves to Fishing, which from the
beginning of the year unto the latter end, continues upon some part or other
upon our Coasts, and therein such infinite sholes and multitudes of Fishes are
offered to the takers as may justly move admiration, not only to strangers,
but to those that daily be employed amongst them.

The Summer-Fishing for Herring, begins about Mid^ommer, and lasts some
part of August.

The Winter-Fishing for Herring, lasts from September to the midst of
November, both which extend in place from Boughones in Scotland, to the Thame's
mouth.

The Fishing for Cod at Alamby Whirlington, and White Haven, near the Coast of
Lancashire, from Easter until VVhitsontide.

The Fishing for Hake at Aberdenie, Abveswhich, and other places between Wales
and Ireland, from VVhitsontide to Saint James tide.

The Fishing of Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Land, and of Severn
from Christmas to Mid-Lent.

The Fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland frequented by those of Biscay,
Galicia, and Portugal, from the beginning of April until the end of June.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North, and North-East of Ireland, from
Christmas until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Pilchers on the West coast of England from Saint James-tide
until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Cod, and Ling upon the North-East of England, from Easter
until Midsummer.

The Fishing of great Staple-Ling and many other sorts of Fish lying about the
Island of Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas all the year
long.

In September, not many years since upon the Coast of Devonshire near Minigal,
500 Ton of Fish were taken in one day. And about the same time three thousand
pound worth of Fish in one day were taken at St Ives in Cornwall by small Boats,
and other poor provisions.

Our five-men-Boats, and cobles adventuring in a calm to launch out amongst the
Holland Busses, not far from Robinhood's Bay returned to VVhitbie full fraught
with Herrings, and reported that they saw some of those Busses take ten,
twenty, twenty four lasts, at a draught, of Herrings, and returned into their
own Country with forty, fifty, and an hundred Lasts of Herrings in one Buss.

Our Fleet of Colliers not many years since returning from New Castle, laden
with Coals about the Well, near Flanborough head, and Scarborough, met with
such multitudes of Cod, Ling and Herring, that one amongst the rest with
certain ship-hooks, and other like iustruments, drew up as much Cod, and Ling
in a little space of time, as were sold well near for as much as her whole
Lading of Cole. And many hundred of ships might have been there laden in two
days and two nights.

Out of which wonderful affluence, and abundance of Fish swarming in our Seas,
that we may the better perceiv the infinite gain which Foreign Nations make, I
will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hollanders in our Coasts, and
thereby show how by this means principally they have increased.

1. In Shipping. 2. In Mariners. 3. In Trade. 4. In Towns and Fortifications.
5. In Power extern or abroad. 6. In public Revenue. 7. In private wealth. 8.
In all manner of Provisions, and store of things necessary.
1. Encreas of Shipping.
BEsides 700 Strand-Boats, 400 Evars, and 400 Sullits, Drivers and Tod-boats,
wherewith the Hollanders fish upon their own Coasts, every one of those
employing another Ship to fetch salt, and carry their Fish into other
Countries, being in all 3000 sail, maintaining and setting on work at least
4000 persons, Fishers, Tradesmen, Women, and Children; They have 100 Doyer
Boats, of 150 Tuns a piece, or thereabouts, 700 Pinks and Well-Boats from 60 to
100 Tuns a piece, which altogether fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland
for Cod, and Ling only. And each of these employ another Vessel for providing
of salt, and transporting of their Fish, making in all 1600 ships, which
maintain and employ persons of all sorts, 4000 at least.

For the Herring-season, they have 1600 Busses at the least, all of them
Fishing only upon our Coasts from Boughonness in Scotland to the mouth of
Thames. And every one of these makes work for three other ships that attend
her; the one to bring in salt from Foreign parts, another to carry the said
salt, and cask to the Busses, and to bring back their Herrings, and the third
to transport the said Fish into Foreign Countries. So that the total number of
ships and Busses plying the Herring-Fair, is 6400; whereby every Buss, one with
another, imployeth forty men, Mariners and Fishers within her own hold, and
the rest ten men a piece, which amounts to 112000 Fishers and Mariners. All
which maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen, Women, and Children a
land.

Moreover, they have 400 other Vessels at least, that take Herring at Yarmouth,
and there sell them for ready money: so that the Hollanders (besides 300 ships
beforementioned fishing upon their own shores) have at least 4800 ships only
maintained by the Seas of Great Britain, by which means principally Holland
being not so big as one of our shires of England, containing not above 28
miles in length, and three in breadth, have increased the number of their
shipping to at least ten thousand sail, being more then are in England,
France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, and Russia. And to
this number they add every day; although their Country it self afford's them
neither materials or victual, nor merchandise to be accounted of toward their
setting forth.

Besides these of Holland, Lubeck has 700 great ships, Hamborough six hundred,
Embden fourteen hundred, whereunto add the ships of Bremer, Biscay, Portugal,
Spain, and France, which for the most part fish in our Seas, and it will appear
that ten thousand sail of Foreign Vessels and above are employed and maintained
by fishing upon our Coasts. So that in Holland there are built a thousand sail
at the least to supply shipwracks, and augment their store, which as the
Prince, and common Nurserie, is the chiefest means only to encreas their
number.

2. Encreas of Mariners.
THE number of ships fishing on our Coasts, as being aforesaid 8400. If we
allow but twenty persons to every ship one with another, the total of Mariners
and Fishers, amounts to 168000, out of which number they daily furnish their
longer Voiages to all parts of the world; for by this means they are not only
enabled to brook the Seas, and to know the use of the tackles and compass, but
are likewise instructed in the principles of Navigation, and Pilotage, insomuch
as from hence their greatest Navigators have had their education and breeding.

3. Encreas of Trade.
BY reason of those multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their
Trade to all parts of the world, exporting for the most part in all their
Voiages our Herring, and other Fish for the maintenance of the same. In
exchange whereof they return the several commodities of other Countries.

From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal, for our Herrings they
return Oils, Wines, Pruines, Honey, Wools, etc. with store of Coin in Specie.

From the Straits, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silks, Allomes, Currants,
Oils, and all Grocerie ware, with much money.

From the East-Countries for our Herrings, and other French and Italian
commodities before returned, they bring home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar,
Sope-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-board, Wainscot, Timber, Deal-board,
Dollers, and Hungary Gilders.

From Germany for Herrings, and other salt Fish, Iron, Steel, Glass,
Mil-stones, Rhenish wines, Button-plate for Armor, with other Munition, Silks,
Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Baratees, and such like Franckford commodities, with
store of Rix-dollers.

From Brabant they return for the most part ready money with some Tapestries,
and Hull-shop. Yea, some of our Herring are carried as far as Braseil.

And that which is more strange and greatly to our shame, they have four
hundred Ships with Fish, which our men of Yarmouth, within ken almost at land
do vent our Herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pay for the Fish
taken upon our own Coast ready money, wherewith they store their own Country.

4. Encreas of Towns and Forts.
BY this their large extent of Trade, they are become as it were Citizens of the
whole world, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them
within these four hundred years are full as great again as they were before;
Amsterdam, Leyden, and Middleburgh having been lately twice enlarged and their
streets and buildings so fair, and orderly set forth, that for beauty and
strength, they may compare with any other in the world, upon which they bestow
infinite sums of moneys, all originally flowing from the bounty of the Sea,
from whence, by their labor and industry, they derive the beginning of all that
wealth and greatness, and particularly for the Havens of the aforesaid Towns
whereof some of them cost forty, fifty, or an hundred thousand pound. Their
Fortifications also both for number, and strength, upon which they have
bestowed infinite sums of money, may compare with any other whatsoever.

5. Encreas of power abroad.
SUch being then the number of the Ships and Mariners, and so great their
Trade, occasioned principally by their Fishing; they have not only
strengthened, and fortifieed themselves at home to repel all Foreign Invasions, as
lately in the war between them and Spain; but have likewise stretched their
power into the East and West Indies, in many places whereof they are Lords of
the Seacoasts, and have likewise fortified upon the main, where the Kings and
people are at their devotion. And more then this, all Neighbor-Princes, in
their differences, by reason of this their power at Sea, are glad to have them
of their party. So that, next to the English, they are now become the most
re-doubted Nation at Sea of any other whatsoever.

6. Encreas of public Revenue.
MOreover how mighty the public Revenue, and Customs of that State are
increased by their fishing, may appear in that above thirty years since, over
and above the Customs of other Merchandise, Excises, Licenses, Waftage, and
Lastage, there was paid to the State, for Custom of Herring, and other
salt-Fish, above three hundred thousand pound in one year, besides the tenth
Fish, and Cask paid for Waftage, which comes at the least to as much more
among the Hollanders only, whereunto the tenth of other Nations being added,
it amounts to a far greater sum.

We are likewise to know, that great part of their Fish is sold in other
Countries for ready moneys, for which they commonly export of the finest gold,
and silver, and coming home recoin it of a baser allay, under their own stamp,
which is not a small means to augment their public treasure.

7. Encreas of private Wealth.
AS touching their private wealth, if we consider the abundant store of
Herrings, and other fish by them taken, and the usual prices that they are sold
for, as also the multitude of Tradesmen and Artizans, that by reason of this
their Fishing are daily set on work, we must needs conclude that the gain
thereof made by private men must of necessity be exceeding great, as by
observing the particulars following will plainly appear.

During the wars between the King of Spain, and the Hollanders before the last
Truce, Dunkirk by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland, and
setting great ransom upon their Fishermen, enforced them to compound for great
sums that they might Fish quietly for one year, whereupon the next year after
the Fishermen agreed amongst themselves to pay a doller upon every last of
Herrings, toward the maintenance of certain Ships of War to waft and secure
them in their Fishing, by reason whereof there was a Record kept of the several
lasts of Herrings taken that year, and it appeared thereby that in one half
year there were taken thirty thousand lasts of Herrings which at twelv pound
per last, amounts to 3600000, and at sixteen, twenty, thirty pound the
last, they are ordinarily sold, then transported into other Countries, it
comes at least to 5000000 l. Whereunto if we add the Herrings taken by other
Nations together with the God, Ling, Hake, and the Fish taken by the
Hollanders, and other our neighbors upon the British Coasts all the year long,
the total will evidently arise to be above 10000000 l.

The great Trade of Fishing employing so many men and ships at Sea, must
likewise necessarily maintain as great a number of Tradesmen, and Artizens on
Land, as Spinners, and Hemp-winders to Cables, Cordage, Yarn-twine for Nets and
Lines, Weavers to make Sail-Cloaths, Cecive Packers, Tollers, Dressers, and
Cowchers to sort and make the Herring lawful merchandise. Tanners to tan their
Sails and Nets; Coopers to make Cask, Block, and Bowl-makers for ships,
Keel-men, and Laborers for carrying and removing their Fish, Sawyers for
Planks, Carpenters, Ship-wrights, Smiths, Car-men, Boat-men, Brewers, Bakers,
and a number of others, whereof many are maimed persons, and unfit to be
otherwise employed. Besides the maintenance of all their several wives, and
children, and families. And further every man and maidservant, or Orphant,
having any poor stock, may venture the same in their Fishing-Voiages, which
afford's them ordinarily great encreas, and is duly paid according to the
proportion of their gain.

8. Encreas of Provisions.
AND to conclude, it is manifest that Holland only affording in it self some few
Hops, Madders, Butter and Chees abounds notwithstanding (by reason of this
Art of Fishing) in plentiful manner with all kind of provisions as well for
life, as in Corn, Beef, Muttons, Hides, and Cloths; as for luxury, in Wines,
Silks and Spices; and for defense, as in Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Timber. All which
they have not only in competent proportion for their use, but are likewise
able from their several Magazines to supply their Neighbor-Countries.

The premises considered, it makes much to the ignominy and shame of our
English Nation, that God and Nature offering us so great a treasure even at our
own doors, we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof, and, by paying
money to strangers for the Fish of our own Seas, impoverish our selves to make
them rich. Insomuch that for want of industry and care in this particular two
hundred twenty five Fisher-Towns are decayed and reduced to extreme poverty;
whereas on the contrary by diligent endevoring to make use of so great a
blessing, we might in short time repair these decayed Towns of the Kingdom,
and add both honor, strength, and riches to our King and Country, which how
easily it may be don, will appear by some few observations following.

By erecting two hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength and bigness,
there will be emploiment made for a thousand Ships, and for at least ten
thousand Fishermen and Mariners at Sea, and consequently for as many Tradesmen
and Laborers at land.

The Herrings taken by the Busses will afford his Majesty two hundred thousand
pound yearly custom outward, and for commodities returned inward thirty
thousand pound and above.

We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable rates, growing in our own
Kingdom for the building of Busses, every Shire affords hardy and able men
fit for such emploiment who now live poorly and idle at home.

We have victuals in great plenty sold at easy rates without payment of
Excises, or Impost.

Our shores and harbors are near the places where the Fish do haunt.

For drink, or nets, salting and packing our Fish; and for succor in stress of
weather, we may bring our Fish to land, salt and pack it, and from some part of
his Majesty's Dominions be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy, before
the Hollanders can arrive in Holland.

We have means to transport our Fish into some Northern Countries, where the
Hollanders seldom or never com. And though we had as many Busses as the
Hollanders, yet is there vent for all, or more, for in the East and Northern
Countries, and in many other places, Herrings are every days meat, Winter and
Summer, as well to draw on drink, as to satisfy hunger, and in most places the
greatest part of the year they be scarce to be had; for presently after
Michaelmas the Sound and Rivers are frozen up so as no Herrings can be
transported into twenty several Kingdoms, and free States until July, which is
for thirty weeks space together, so that when Lent com's, there are few to be
bought for money.

Lastly, since by care and industry we gained from the Flemmings, doubtless so
by the means we may as easily grow expert in the Art of Fishing, and in time
make it a staple commodity of our own.

But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider and endeavor to
reform certain wants and abuses which hitherto have hindered us from effecting
that good and great work, whereof these that follow are none of the least.

1. General liberty of eating flesh contrary to old custom, and the
Statute-Laws provided for observing Fish-daies, from whence our scarcity and
dearth of Fish proceeds; for where Flesh is ordinarily spent, Fish will not
be bought, and want of sale decaieth all Trade, gain being the Nurs of
Industry. 2. Want of order and discretion in our Fishing, every man being
left to himself and permitted to Fish as best likes him: whereas amongst the
Hollanders two of the best experienced Fishermen are appointed to guide the
rest of the Fleet, all others being bound to follow them, and to cast their
lines according to their direction. 3. The Hollanders and other Nations set
forth with their Busses in June, to find the shole of Fish, and having found
it, dwell amongst it till November, whereas we stay till the Herring com home
to our rode-steads, and sometimes suffer them to pass by ere we look out, our
Herring-Fishing containing only seven weeks at the most, and theirs twenty.
4. The Hollander's Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather,
whereas our Cobles, Crayers, and Boats being small, and thin sided, are easily
swallowed by a rough Sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather by reason
of their weakness for fear of storms. 5. The Hollanders are industrious, and no
sooner are discharged of their lading, but presently put forth for more, and
seek for Markets abroad as well as at home; whereas our English after they have
been once at Sea, do commonly never return again until all the money taken for
their fish be spent, and they in debt seeking only to serve the next Market.
6. The Hollanders have certain Merchants, who, during the Herring-season do
only com to the places where the Busses arrive, and joining together in
several companies, do presently agree for the lading of thirty or forty
Busses at once, and so being discharged, they may speedily return to their
former shipping; whereas our Fishermen are uncertain of their Chap-men, and
forced to spend much time in putting off their Fish by parcels.
These and other defects would carefully be taken into consideration, and
certain orders made to make our Fishing prosperous, and successful, especially
considering the fearful mischiefs the neglect hereof has brought to the King
and Kingdom in general, and to many good Towns and Corporations in particular,
as by authority even of Parliament it self in the Statute of 33 Hen. the eight,
is plainly testified, which I have summarily here set down, to avoid the
prolixitie of the original.

Because the English Fishermen dwelling on the Seacoasts did leav off their
Trade of Fishing in our Seas, and went the half-Seas over, and there upon the
Seas did buie Fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders, by reason
whereof many incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. the decaie of the wealth
and prosperity as well of the Cinque Ports, and Members of the same, as of
other Coast-Towns by the Seaside, which were builded, and inhabited by great
multitudes of people by reason of using and exercising the craft and feat of
Fishing. Secondly, the decaie of a great number of Boats and Ships. And
thirdly, the decaie of many good Mariners, both able in body by their
diligence, labor, and continual exercise of Fishing, and expert by reason
thereof in the knowledge of the Seacoasts, as well within this Realm as in
other parts beyond the Seas. It was therefore enacted, that no manner of
persons English, Denizens, or strangers at that time, or any time after
dwelling in England, should buie any Fish of any strangers in the said Ports
of Flanders, Zealand, Picardie, France, or upon the Sea between shore and
shore, etc.

This act by many continuances was continued from Parliament to Parliament, until
the first of Queen Marie, and from thence to the end of the next Parliament, and
then expired.

For conclusion, seeing, by that which has formerly been declared, it
evidently appears, that the Kings of England, by immemorable prescription,
continual usage, and possession, the acknowledgment of all our Neighbor-States,
and the Municipal Laws of the Kingdom, have ever held the Sovereign Lordship of
the Seas of England, and that unto his Majesty, by reason of his Soveraigntie,
the supreme command and Jurisdiction over the passage, and Fishing in the same
rightfully apperteineth; considering also the natural site of those our Seas
that interpose themselves between the great Northern Commerce of that of the
whole world, and that of the East, West, and Southern Climates, and withal the
infinite commodities that by Fishing in the same is daily made; It cannot be
doubted, but his Majesty, by means of his own excellent wisdom and virtue, and
by the industry of his faithful subjects and people, may easily, without
injustice to any Prince or person whatsoever, be made the greatest Monarch for
Command and Wealth, and his people the most opulent and flourishing Nation of
any other in the world. And this the rather, for that his Majesty is now
absolute Commander of the British Isle, and has also enlarged his Dominions
over a great part of the Western Indies; by means of which extent of Empire,
(crossing in a manner the whole Ocean) the Trade and persons of all Nations
(removing from one part of the world to the other) must of necessity first, or
last, com within compass of his power and jurisdiction.

And therefore the Soveraigntie of our Seas, being the most precious Jewel of
his Majesty's Crown, and (next under God) the principal means of our Wealth
and Safety, all true English hearts and hands are bound by all possible means
and diligence to preserv and maintain the same, even with the uttermost hazard
of their lives, their goods and fortunes.

Thus you see what wondrous advantages may redound to the Felicity, and Glory
of this Nation, if God give hearts and resolutions to vindicate those rights
which are now most impiously and injuriously invaded. And so much for what
concern's England.

Now that I may reflect a little upon the point of Sea-Dominion in general, to
show how far it has been asserted, and maintained by others, who have enjoied
a Dominion in other Seas, when they have been concerned in the like Case with
England, having their Soveraigntie at Sea impeached and questioned by
encroaching neighbors; it was thought meet here to annex an ingenious and
learned Plea touching the Dominion of the Sea; which was very succinctly
written in Italian, but faithfully rendered in English by an honorable Member of
this Commonwealth, and published some time since, under the following Title.



Dominium Maris: OR, THE DOMINION OF THE SEA.

Expressing the Title, which the Venetians pretend unto the sole dominion, and
absolute Sovereigntie of the Adriatic Sea, commonly called The Gulf of Venice.

Manifested in a Pleading or Argument, betwixt the Republic of Venice, and the
Emperor Ferdinand.

Whereby is sufficiently proved, That the Sea as well as the Land* is liable to
the Laws of Propriety* and may be brought under the jurisdiction and
protection of particular Princes and States. Contrary to the Assertion of
those, who affirm, the Sea to be free, and under the Dominion of no man.

Translated out of Italian.



LONDON, Printed by William Du Guard. An. Dom. 1652.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READDER.
I Thought it fitting not to instruct, but rather to remember the Reader, that
this Sea, over which the Venetians challenge Sovereigntie and Dominion, being
commonly called the Gulf, is nothing else but a large Bay or inlet of the Sea,
which entering in betwixt two lands, and severing them for many miles
countinuance, in the end receiv's a stop or interruption of further passage, by
an opposite shore, which join's both the said lands together. It is called the
Gulf of Venice, from the City of Venice, situated upon certain broken Islands
near unto the bottom thereof. It is also called the Adriatic Sea, from the
ancient City of Adria, lying not far distant from the former. From the
entrance thereof unto the bottom, it contein's in length about 600 Italian
miles: where it is broadest, it is 160 miles over, in others but 80, in the
most 100. The southwest shore of it is bounded by the Provinces of Puglia, and
Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples, the Marquisate of Ancona and Romagnia in the
Pope's State, and the Marqui^ate of Trevisana in the Venetian State. The North
part of it, or bottom, has Friuli for it is bounds, the North-East is limited
by Istria, Dalmatia, Albania, and Epirus: whereof Istria does not so entirely
belong unto the Venetians, but that the Archduke of Gratz, of the Austrian
family, who at this present is Emperor, does possess diverse Maritim Towns
therein. In Dalmatia, saving Zara, Spalato, and Cattaro, they have nothing of
importance, the rest belonging to the Republic of Ragusa, and to the Turks. In
Albania and Epirus, they possess nothing at all, it being entirely the Turks.
So that he, who shall examine the circuit of this Sea, which must contein
above 1200 miles, shall find the shores of the Venetian signorie, not to take
up entire ^00 of them, omitting some scattered towns and dispersed Islands,
lying on the Turkish side of the Adriatic shore. For the securing hereof from
the depredation of Pirates, and the pretenses of diverse Potent Princes, as the
Pope, Emperor, King of Spain, and the great Turk, who have each of them large
territories lying thereupon; also to cause all such ships, as navigate the same,
to go to Venice, and there to pay custom and other duties, the Republic
maintein's continually in action a great number of ships, galleys and galliots,
whereto they also add more, as there may be occasion, whereof some lie about
the bottom of the Gulf in Istria, others about the Islands of Dalmatia, to
clear those parts of Pirates, who have much infested those seas: others, and
those of most force, have their stations in the Island of Cor^u, and in that of
Candia: in the first of which commonly reside's the Captain of the Gulf, whom
they call by the name of Proveditor, or Provisor general, whose office it is to
secure the Navigation of the Gulf not only from the Corsari or Pirates, but to
provide that neither the Galleys nor Ships of the Pope, the King of Spain, or
great Turk, do so much as enter the same, without permission of the Signorie,
or Republic, and upon such conditions as best pleases them; which they are so
careful to effect, that in the year 1638 the Turkish Fleet entering the Gulf
without license, was assailed by the Venetian General, who sunk diverse of their
vessels, and compelling the rest to fly unto Valona, he held them there
besieged, although the same City, and Port whereon it stand's, be under the
jurisdiction of the Grand Signor. And notwithstanding that a great and
dangerous war was likely to ensue thereupon, betwixt the Grand-Signor and the
Republic, because the Venetian General, being not content to have chased them
into their own Ports, did moreover then that, sink their vessels, and landing
his men, slew diverse of their Mariners who had escaped his fury at Sea: yet
after that a very honorable peace was again concluded betwixt them, wherein,
amongst other things, it was agreed, that it should be lawful for the
Venetians, as often as any Turkish vessels did without their license enter the
Gulf, to seiz upon them by force, if they would not otherwise obey. And that it
should likewise be lawful for them so to do, within any Haven, or under any
Fort of the Grand-Signor's, bordering on any part of the Venetian Gulf. Out of
all which, when I considered the real and absolute Sovereigntie, which this
Republic does actually enjoy over this sea, which they have ever defended, as
well by the sword as the pen; and withal how that some neighboring Nations of
late years, did seem to envy the title of England to the narrow seas,
affirming in some of their writings, the Sea to be free; that it neither ought,
nor could be under the jurisdiction of any; that it was a wild beast which
could not be ruled; that, possessio being Pedis positio, there could no
possession be either taken or kept of it; that the limits thereof, being a
fluent element, could not be scored out, or certainly determined, that it was
as free for all mankind to use, and as common as the aer, with many other
things to that purpose; I chancing some years past to be at Venice, upon
consideration of the premises, did labor with a great desire, to know the
grounds of that title, whereupon the Venetians founded their Dominion of the
Sea; and after much search, even to the despair of obteining of it, I happened
upon this ensuing argument, containing a Plea or Dispute, betwixt the Austrians
and Venetians, touching the Dominion of the Adriatic Sea, not fictitious or
devised only to color the cause, but faithfully transcribed from out the
public Registers of that City, which I offer herewith to the Reader in
English, and withal these two considerations,

First, that hereby it will appear, that the Commonwealth of England's
challenge to the Dominion of the Sea, is neither a Noveltie or singularity;
especially, when it is besides most apparent that the King of Denmark, does not
only pretend to the Sovereigntie of the Sound, but causes all such Ships as
pass through it, to pay what toll he pleases. The great Turk prohibit's all
Nations, saving his own Vassals, to enter the black Sea, or Pontus Euxinus; the
like he does to the red Sea, whch contein's at the least 1200 miles in length,
beginning from the streits of Babelmandel, which give's entrance thereinto, and
ending at the Town of Sues, which is seated at the bottom thereof. The King of
Portugal opposes, to the utmost of his power, any, but his own subjects to
sail into the East Indies, affirming those Seas to be entirely under his
dominion, as well by Conquest, as the Pope's donation, insomuch as the smallest
vessel, even of the natives of those parts, cannot sail from Port to Port,
without the passport of the Viceroy of Goa, or of some other by him deputed
thereto, styling himself, amongst others his Titles, to be King of the
Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce, or Traffic of AEthiopia, Arabia, Persia,
India, etc. which has been hitherto so punctually observed, as no Castilian,
or Spaniard, might at any time, or for any occasion, sail into the East Indies,
though both those Nations were for many years together united under one King.

Secondly, if the Dominion of these Seas dotruely and properly belong to the
Commonwealth of England (as has been so sufficiently cleared and proved to the
whole world, by that learned Book entitled Mare Clausum) why may not, or ought
not the People of England, by all lawful ways procure, that the Dominion of
these Seas that so justly appertein's unto them, may be secured from any
force, violence, or opposition, how great soever, of their most powerful
neighbors; whenas we see the Venetians to be so jealous in preservation of
the title they pretend to their Seas, as rather then to suffer it to be in the
least sort questioned, they do upon all occasions oppose themselves by force, or
otherwise, against the most potent Princes of Europe and Asia. Vale.

(...).

Dominium Maris: OR, THE DOMINION OF THE SEA.
AFter a long peace, betwixt the Progenitors of the Emperor Maximilian the
first, and the Republic of Venice, in the year 1508, there began certain
slight differences, which concluded in a notable, and most memorable war:
insomuch as the Republic, for 22 years following, were with the said Prince,
and with his Posterity, for diverse respects, sometimes in war, sometimes in
peace, and sometimes in truce, until in the year 1529 all differences betwixt
them were composed, and a peace concluded in Bolonia, which continued all that
Age, with the Emperor Charles the Fifth, together with his brother Ferdinando
King of Hungary, and Archduke of Austria. But because by the division, made
betwixt the said brethren, seven years before, all the Austrian lands which
confined with the Venetians, were laid by agreement unto the part which
belonged unto King Ferdinand, the confines of which as they had conjuncture
with the lands of the Republic, were very intricate; and of great difficulty
to conclude, unto whether party they did belong, as well for the public
reasons of the said Princes, as for those of their private subjects; To end all
which in quiet, it was agreed that there should be an arbitrarie Tribunal
erected in Trent, for the deciding of these doubts, which in the year 1535,
pronounced sentence, whereby all the differences (being more then an hundred)
were definitively concluded.

Here notwithstanding the difficulty ceased not, because some did travers the
execution of the sentence, so, as in progress of time, new quarrels did arise
from both sides, each one pretending new wrong^ offered by the advers party.
Whereupon to put an end to all these differences, there was by the common
consent, as well of Ferdinando (who succeeded in the Empire by the resignation
of his brother) as of the Republic, a convention appointed in Friuli 1563, of
five Commissaries, one Procurator, and three Advocates, for each part, who
should treat of the differences, as well old as new, and should have power to
conclude them, under the ratification of the several Princes. And this so great
a number of Judges, was desired by the Emperor, the better to give satisfaction
to his subjects, of several Provinces, interessed in the cause.

Of the Imperial side, the Commissaries were Andrew Preghel a Baron of Austria,
Maximilian Dorimbergh, Elenger de Goritia, Stephen Sourz, and Anthony
Statemberger: the Procurator was, Giacomo Campana, Chancellor of Goritia: the
Doctors or Advocates were Andrea Rapicio, Gervasio Alberto, and Giovan Maria
Gratia Dei. For the Venetians the Commissaries were, Sebastian Venier, Marino
de Cavalli, Pietro Sanudo, Giovan Baptista Contarini, and Augustine Barbarigo:
The Procurator was, Giovan Antonio a secretary: the Advocates Marquardo
Susanna, Francesco Gratiano, and Giacomo Chizzola.

At this Convention the complaints on both sides were opened, which being
argued, and the other public differences partly composed, and partly decided,
there was taken into consideration a Petition of the Imperial Procurator, in
this form, Ejusde^ Majestatis nomine requiritur, ut posthac illius subditis,
atque aliis in sinu Adriatico tuto navigare, ac negotiari liceat. Item ut
damna, Tergestinis Mercatoribus atque aliis illata, restituantur. It is
required in the name of his Majesty, that hereafter it may be lawful for his
subjects, and others, to traffic and navigate safely in the Adriatic Gulf.
Likewise that recompense be made for the damages sustained by the merchants of
Trieste, and others. And Rapicio the advocate did accompany this demand with
saying; that this was not a cause to be handled with any subtlety, it being a
thing most notorious, that navigation ought to be free, notwithstanding the
subjects of his Majesty had been constrained to go with their ships to Venice,
and there to pay custom, at which his Majesty was aggrieved, and made instance
that it might be remedied.

To this Chizzola, Advocate of the Republic made Answer, saying, that it was a
clear case indeed, that Navigation ought to be free; but yet those things,
whereat they were aggrieved, were no ways repugnant to this freedom; forasmuch
as in countries which are most free, those who have the dominion thereof receiv
custom, and order by which way all Merchandise shall pass; and therefore no
body should be grieved, if the Venetians, for their own respects, did use so
to do in the Adriatic Sea, which is under their dominion; and he added, that
if they intended to dispute of the business in question, he was to advertise
them, that this cause could not by any pretens be brought into judgment, at
that convention, which was only instituted, for the execution of such things
as were formerly sentenced, and for righting of such new wrongs, which
succeeded after the sentence; it being besides a thing most notorious, that
the Republic, as Lord of the Adriatiok Sea, did exercise that dominion at the
present, which from time out of mind, it had always don, without any
interruption, as well in receiving of customs, as in assigning of places for
the exaction of it, and that the pretens now alleged was new, and never before
used by any predecessor of the Emperor, either as King of Hungary, or as
Archduke of Austria, or the countries thereto adjacent, or of his Majesty
then being, for many years, until this present time. He challenged the
Imperialists to show, when ever any such thing was before pretended; certainly
not before the peace of Bolonia; for then such a difference as this (if there
had been any such) had been there determined, or referred over to the
Arbitrarie Tribunal, wherein were handled above 120 controversies; but of this
not any mention made, neither, from that time to this, was there any such
pretension once set a foot. But if this were a new wrong, succeeding after the
sentence of Trent, they should show what it was, and when it had beginning,
because he was prepared to show unto them, that any thing concerning the same,
was of most ancient use and continuance, without the least noveltie in the
world; and therefore they ought not to be heard, who came with demands, which
could take no original either from the sentence of Trent, or from any
innovation of wrongs succeeding thereupon.

To this Rapicio replied, that he intended not to lay his principal foundation
upon that, which to all is so well known, which is to say, that the Sea is
common and free, and that by reason thereof, not any might be prohibited, to
sail unto any place, which best pleased him: and if any Doctors should happen
to say, that the Republic has a prescript Dominion over the Adriatic Sea,
with a long possession, notwithstanding they prove it not: and to Doctors who
affirm a thing barely out of fact, without any manner of proof, little belief
is to be given; for which cause, he would not dwell upon that; but would com
to his principal reason, which was, that admitting the Republic to be Patron
of the Sea, yet the Emperor's Subjects might navigate freely by the
Capitulations, which were established betwixt the Princes on both sides, and
therefore the Petition proposed was pertinent to be handled by the said
Convention; to which (he being so required by the Venetians) added this for a
foundation, Quia libera navigatio Maris Adriatici cum Majestatis suae
Caesareae, tum subditorum damno and incommodo, ab Illustrissimi Domini Veneti
triremium Praefectis impedita fuerit, contra Capitula Vormatiae, Bononiae,
Andegavi, and Venetiis inita: Forasmuch as the free navigation of the Adriatic
Sea, has been hindered by the Captains of the Venetian's Galleys, to the loss
and prejudice of his Imperial Majesty, and of his subjects, against the
Capitulations of Worms, Bolonia, Angiers, and Venice. And here he produced a
passage of the Capitulation of Bolonia which spoke as follows; Quod communes
subditi libere, tute, and secure possint in utriusque statibus and dominiis tam
^erra, quam Mari, morari and negotiari cum bonis suis, ac si essent incolae,
and subditi illius Principis, ac Dominii, cujus patrias, and Dominia adibunt;
provideaturque, ne vis aut aliqua injuria, ulla de causa, eis inferatur,
celeriterque jus administretur. That the subjects of either party may freely,
safely, and securely abide, and traffic with their goods, in the States and
Dominions of one another, in like manner as if they were inhabitants, and
subjects of that Prince and State, into whose Country or Dominion they do com:
and that it be provided, that no violence or injury, be for any cause
whatsoever offered them; and moreover that justice be speedily administered.
He also recited the capitulations of the truce of Angiers and Worms, and of
the peace of Venice, which is not necessary here to repeat, being of the same
tenor. He did rest much upon the word libere, considering that libere is
joined to the word Navigare: by which it ought to be understood, according to
the common construction of Law, That every one might navigate freely; but he
cannot be said to be free, who is constrained to go to Venice. He added
moreover, that the word libere could not be imagined to be superfluous, but
must of necessity operate something; that the two words, tute and secure, could
import nothing else, (...) but without impediment, or molestation, or paying of
Customs; to this he added, that there were then 400 complaints of his
Majesty's subjects, whose vessels were compelled to go to Venice, and there
made to pay Custom, for happening only to arrive in the ports of the
Venetians, either by fortune or some other occasion. He read the sentence of a
Rector of Liesina, who freed a ship, which touched upon that Island by chance;
and he made a narration, that certain barks with salt were suffered by the
Venetian Fleet, to pass upon their Voyage, without sending them to Venice. He
concluded, that his request extended to these three points. 1. That the
Austrian subjects might Navigate whither it pleased them. 2. That arriving in
any Port of the Republic, only per transitum, they should not pay any thing.
3. Lastly, that coming to Trade in any of them, they should not pay more then
the subjects of the Republic. Chizzola answered hereto, promising clearly to
solv all the objections introduced by the other, so as there should not remain
any place of reply, and to show with true and lively reasons, that what was don
by the Ministers of the Republic in the Gulf, was don by lawful Authority. And
reserving himself, to speak of the Dominion of the Sea afterward, howsoever
presupposing it in the first place, he began with the Capitulations; and first
he said, that the word libere, was not joined, as Rapicio said, to any such
word as Navigare, but to the words Morari and negotiari tam terra, quam Mari^
and therefore by libere is to be understood as the common construction of Law
intend's, when one does either dwell, or do business in the house, or land of
another, that is to say, observing the Laws, and paying the Rights of the
Country. He added also, that those Capitulations, betwixt the house of
Austria, and the Republic, were equally reciprocal, and not made more in favor
of the Austrians, in the State of the Venetians, then of the Venetians in the
State of the Austrians; neither was there greater liberty granted to the Sea,
then to the Land; and that the words were clear enough, which import, that the
subjects on both sides might stay, trade, and merchandise, in the state of one
another, as well by Land as by Sea, and be well entreated; insomuch as the
subjects of the Venetians were to have no less liberty in the Lands of the
Austrians, then the Austrian subjects in the Sea of Venice; And that by virtue
of those words, what his Majesty would have in the State of the Republic, it
is fitting that he allow to them in his own State; and if his Imperial
Majesty within his own State, upon the Land, will not yield that the subjects
of the Republic shall go which way they list, but coustrain's them to pass by
such places only, where Custom is to be paid, he cannot with justice demand,
that his subjects may pass by or through the Sea of the Republic which way
they list, but ought to content himself, that they go that way only, which
shall best stand with the commodity of those who have the Dominion over it;
and if his Majesty cause Custom to be paid, upon his Land, why may not the
Venetians likewise do it, upon their Sea? He demanded of them, if by the
Capitulation they would have it, that the Emperor was restrained, or hindered,
from taking of Custom? and if not, why would they have the Venetians tied
thereunto by a Capitulation, which speak's of both Potentates equally with the
same words? He showed by particular Narration, that from the Peace of Venice
152^, until that present, the Emperor had increased his Customs, to the
grievance of the Venetian's subjects, in victuals and Merchandise, which passed
from the one State unto the other; insomuch as that which formerly paid but
one, was now increased in some to 16, and in others to 20. and he instanced in
iron and other commodities, which were wont to pay little or nothing, were now
raised to such an excessive Custom, as proved much to the damage of the
Venetians, besides they were forced to pass only by such places, where they
should pay Custom, out of which to pass, it was Contra banda, and their goods
confiscated. And if his Majesty think's it lawful to do what it pleases
within his own estate, without breaking of the Capitulations, he cannot think
that the Venetians doing but the same, should, contrary thereunto, any ways
offend. He added, that in every Peace established betwixt two Princes, after a
war, it is necessary that their subjects may live and trade together, not to
the excluding of Customs, although there be excluded the violences,
hostilities, and other impediments of trade, which were formerly used in time
of war, neither is the authority of the one, or other Prince, thereby taken
away or restrained by Sea or by Land.

At the force and clearness of this discourse, the Austrians remained as it were
in a trance, looking one upon another, insomuch that Chizzola judging it not to
be necessary to dwell longer upon this, passed to the proof of the
presupposed truth, viz. That the Republic had the Dominion of the Sea, and
said; that the proportion was most true, that the Sea was common and free, but
yet no otherwise that could be understood, then as it is commonly said, The
highways are common and free, by which is meant, that they cannot be usurped
by any private person, for his sole proper service, but remain to the use of
every one: not therefore that they are so free, as that they should not be
under the protection and government of some Prince, and that every one might do
therein licentiously, all that which it pleased him, either by right or wrong;
forasmuch as such licentiousness or Anarchie is abhorred both of God and
nature, as well by Sea as by Land. That the true liberty of the Sea, exclude's
it not from the protection and superiority of such as maintain it in liberty,
nor from the subjection to the laws of such, as have command over it, rather
necessarily it include's it. That no less the Sea, then the Land, is subject to
be divided amongst men, and appropriated to Cities and Potentates, which long
since was ordained by God from the beginning of mankind, as a thing most
natural, which was well understood by Aristotle, when he said, that unto Sea
or maritim Cities, the Sea is the Territory, because from thence they take
their sustenance and defens; a thing which cannot possibly be, unless part of
it might be appropriated in the like manner as the Land is, which is divided
betwixt Cities and Governments, not by equal parts, nor according to their
greatness, but as they have been, or are able to rule, govern, and defend them.
Bern is not the greatest City of Switzerland, and yet it has as large a
Territory, as all the rest of the twelv Cantons together. And the City of
Norimberg is very great, and yet the Territories thereof hardly exceed the
walls. And the City of Venice for many years was known to be without any
possession at all upon the firm Land. Upon the Sea likewise, certain Cities of
great force and valor have possessed a large quantity thereof, others of
little force, have been contented with the next waters; neither are there
wanting Examples of such, who notwithstanding they are Maritim, yet having
fertile Lands lying on the back of them, have been contented therewith, without
ever attempting to gain any Sea-dominion; Others, who being awed by their more
mighty neighbors, have been constrained to forbear any such attempt; for which
two causes, a City, notwithstanding it be Maritim, may happen to remain
without any possession of the Sea.

He added that God did instant Principalities, for the maintenance of Justice,
to the benefit of mankind, which was necessary to be executed, as well by
Sea as by Land. That S. Paul said, That for this cause there was due to Princes,
Customs and Contributions: that it should be a great absurdity to prais the
well governing, regulating, and defens of the Land, and to condemn that of the
Sea: that if the Sea in some parts for the ampleness and extreme distance
thereof from the Land, was not possible to be governed and protected, that
proceeded from a disabilitie and defect in mankind; as also there are deserts
so great upon the Land, as it is impossible to protect them; witness the many
sandy parts of Africa, and the immens vastities of the new world. And as it is
a gift of God, that a Land by the Laws and public power, be ruled, protected
and governed; so the same happen's to the Sea: that those were deceived by a
gross equivocation, who said, that the Land by reason of its stabilitie might
be governed, but not the Sea, for being an unconstant element, no more then
the aer; forasmuch as if, by the Sea and the Aer, they intend all the parts of
those fluent elements, it is a most certain thing, that they cannot be
governed; because, whilst a man serv's himself with any one part of them, the
other escape's out of his power; but this chances also to Rivers, which cannot
be retained. But when it is said to rule over a Sea or River, it is not
understood of the Element, but of the site, where they are placed. The water of
the Adriatic Sea continually run's out of it, neither can it all be kept in,
and yet it is the same Sea, as well as the Tiber, Po, or the Rhine are the same
Rivers now, which they were 1000 years past. And this is that which is subject
to the protection of Princes.

He asked the Austrians if their pretens were, that the Sea should be left
without protection, so that any one might do therein well or ill, robbing,
spoiling, and making of it un-navigable; this would be so absurd, as he durst
answer for them, no: therefore he concluded, that by a necessary consequence
his Majesty would acknowledge, that it should be kept, governed and protected
by those unto whom it did appertein by divine disposition: which if it were so,
he desired to know, if it seemed to them a just thing that such should do it,
with the expense of their own pains, charges, and blood; or rather that such
should contribute toward it, who did equally enjoy the benefit: To this also
he durst answer for them, that they would say the doctrine of St Paul is too
clear in the point (not to allege matter of Law) that all such who are under
government and protection, are thereby bound to pay Customs and Contributions.
And thereupon he concluded, that if the Republic were that Prince, to whom it
did appertein to govern and protect the Adriatic Sea, it followed necessarily,
that whosoever Navigate's it, ought to be subject to their laws, in the same
manner as such are, who travel through a Country upon the Land.

From thence he went on to show, that this Dominion over the Sea, from time
out of mind, did belong to the Republic, and thereupon caused to be read out
of an Abstract which he had taken, the Opinions of thirty Lawyers, who, from
the year 1300, until that present time, did speak of the Dominion which the
Republic had over the Sea, as of a thing most notorious, and of which, even in
their times, the mind of man knew not the contrary: some of them affirming,
that the Republic had no less Dominion over the Sea, then over the City of
Venice; others saying, that the Adriatic Sea is the Territory and demeasnes
of the said City, making mention of the lawful power which the Venetians had
to establish laws over Navigaon, and to impose Customs upon such as navigate
those Seas; and he added that he never read any Lawyer, which ever said the
contrary. And turning himself to R^picio he said, that if he would not
believ those Writers which testified that the Sea belonged to the Venetians,
whereof they had possession from time out of mind, before the age wherein the
Autors lived, although they prove it not, yet he could not deny to receiv
them for testimonies of such things which they saw and knew in their times, and
to hold them as witnesses, far above all exception, being famous men, and dead
so many years ago, as they could not be any ways interessed in the present
differences. And because more then 250 years were past, from the time that the
first Autors, which he alleged as witnesses hereof did write, to the time of
those, which he last cited in that behalf; by their attestation it was
sufficiently proved, that for long time more then so many years, the Republic
has commanded the Sea, and therefore he could not deny the immovable
possession thereof to the present.

Afterward turning himself to the Judges, he prayed them, that upon the
Autorities alleged, they would be pleased to listen unto a short consideration
of his, which he did not doubt, but would leav in them a full impression of
the Truth. And first he desired them to consider, that notwithstanding some of
the aforesaid cited Autors speak with general words, saying, the Sea of the
Venetians, neither declaring the quality nor quantity thereof; yet others do
specify it, using the name of the Gulf; and others with terms more expressive,
saying, the Adriatic Sea; which clearly demonstrate's, not only the site, but
also the quantity of the Sea possessed; and so showed, that those who speak
more expressively, ought to clear the passages of those, who write more
generally, according to the common precept, that with clear places the more
obscure are to be illustrated. He considered also, that the diverse manner of
speaking of the same Doctors, some deriving the Dominion of the Republic over
the Sea, from Custom, some from prescription, others from an induced subjection,
and others from a privilege, did arise all out of this reason, because as they
were most assuredly informed of the possession and jurisdiction of the said
Seas, which they both saw and heard to belong to the Republic from time out of
mind; so they writing upon that matter, not at the instance of any one, but of
their own proper motions, and by way of Doctrine only, each one of them judged
it most convenient to express the title of that jurisdiction, some with one
term, some with another, without coming to use the sole and true proper term, as
they would have don, if they had been put to write for the interest of any one;
in which cases the Counselors are always conformable, receiving from the
person interested equally the like instructions.

He added, that, through the variety of expressing themselves, the truth of
the cause was no ways diminished, but rather increased; as St Augustine says,
speaking of the diversity which is observed to be betwixt the holy
Evangelists; because by the diverse manner of expression, used by the said
Writers, every one may rest assured, that none of them did write ne pagato, ne
pregato, neither paid, nor prayed. In which cases they are never wont to
vary, from the single form prescribed unto them by the party interessed; but
rather he that shall well examine it, shall see amongst the Doctors a
wonderful concord in this one point most true, that after the declination of
the Constantipolitane Empire, the Adriatic Sea was found to be for many years
abandoned, (as also many Islands and Cities of that State) in such manner, as
it remained unguarded and without the protection and government of any Prince,
and under the jurisdiction of no body, until by the Venetians, who, to receiv
their livelihood thereby, were constrained to maintain it in freedom; and
thereupon taking it into their protection, got thereby the government and
dominion over it, in like manner as by the law of Nature and of Nations, the
Land, the Sea, and other things, which are not under the Dominion of any other,
com justly unto those who first get the possession of them; by which reason the
first Empires were founded, as well upon the Land as at Sea, and daily there
are new ones in the same manner formed, when any of them, either through age or
vice, becoming weak, wants force, and sink's of it self. The which costodie
and government of the Sea, so acquired, the Republic has daily advanced, by
the keeping of potent Fleets and greater Armadoes every day then other, with
the expense of a great deal of Treasure, and the profusion of a world of blood,
both of their Citizens and Subjects, continuing without interruption, in sight
of all the world, the said begun Dominion and custody, overcoming and removing
all such impediments, as either by Pirates or Potentates, as well of Italy as
of the opposite shore, at diverse times have been raised. And for the clearing
of such doubts, as might arise by the subtle construction of words, he added;
that although those who took upon them to speak in the strict terms of the Law,
were wont to say, that such things only were gained by Custom, which by the
Civil Law, being to be common, were notwithstanding converted to a private
benefit, yet without any impeachment of the public profit, as to fish in a
River without impeachment of Navigation; yet for all that, the Title of Custom
cannot be unproperly given, where there shall be gained and continually kept
in possession and Dominion, a quantity either of Sea or Land abandoned, and of
no man possessed, as Bartholus, Baldus, Castro, and others do affirm. And
although that by title of Prescription a thing cannot possible be said to be
possessed, unless, by the occupation of it, another be thereof spoiled and
dispossessed, which title come's not in this place, forasmuch as the Republic
has not spoiled any of the possession of the Sea, but has seized upon it,
finding it abandoned and without Patron or Possessor: notwithstanding in some
sort, it may be called Prescription, as if a Falcon were let fly and cast off
by its master, and thereupon growing wild, should after be taken up by
another, and by him manned, and for a long time fed; although not properly, yet
not absurdly it may be said, that this second master has it by Prescription.
Likewise, to speak in terms of Law, the propriety of speech does not admit the
use of this word Servitude, unless to the proper Territory of a State, there
be gotten some power over another State, and yet that State remain's Patron of
its own notwithstanding; in this sens the Republic has not brought the Sea in
servitude to the City of Venice, because it has not gotten any special use or
command over it, the Dominion for all that remaining to another Patron, but
has assumed the total and entire Dominion thereof, which was before abandoned,
neither by any governed or protected: nevertheless it may in a certain
proportion be called Servitude, inasmuch as the Republic has been
constrained to assume the total Dominion and Government thereof, for the
service of the City of Venice, whereof it had necessary use.

Now as touching the Privilege of keeping this Sea, and who was the Donor, this
neither can here have any place, forasmuch as at the time of the assumption of
it, there was not any who could make any grant thereof, the Emperor of the
West never having any Power or Authority over it; and as little superiority
or jurisdiction had any other western Prince; and therefore could so much the
less give it to another. The Emperor of the East, not having force sufficient
to keep it, had long since abandoned it, and being thereupon divested of all
the Power he had over it, and of the Possession thereof, never made any grant
thereof in the successive Peace and Treaties which happened afterward betwixt
the said Empire and the Republic. Notwithstanding all which the Italian
Lawyers, as Professors of the Cesarean Law, and sworn to the very words of it,
being besides most devoted to his Imperial Majesty, as if at this present day
Augustus or Antoninus did reign, do force themselves with all extortion, to
verify upon the western Emperor that saying, Imperator est Dominus Mundi, The
Emperor is Lord of the world. Which at that very time when it was first
pronounced, was not true in the hundred part of the world, and at this present
not in any considerable proportion. And whilst they would honor the Emperor,
and give him, with such words as these, that which he neither has nor can
have, they consider not the absurdity of the speech, as if they should say,
that no King possessed any estate lawfully, unless it were granted him by the
Emperor, which is as true, as when they affirm that the Venetians possess the
Adriatic Sea, by an Imperial privilege. But it appears clear enough, in what
sens this is spoken by them, because there is none of them do intend thereby,
that there was ever any such Grant made thereof by the Emperor; but by that
they do figuratively intend a privilege assumed by immemorable possession,
which possession they interpret to be with the knowledge and sufferance of the
Emperor, which is as much as if they should say, that Christian Kings possess
their Kingdom, and the Republic possesses the Adriatic Sea, as lawfully by
their title of acquiring it, as if those Kingdoms and that Sea had belonged to
the Emperor, and from and by him to those Princes, and to the Republic
afterward granted. So spaciously did Chizzola dilate in speaking of the
opinion of the Lawyers, it being the field of his profession: he concluded,
that any one might rest satisfied, as well in truth, as in reason, that by the
Authority of the said Doctors, there were sure foundations laid to the cause,
which he did defend.

After the testimony of the Lawyers, he added that of the Historians, who do
relate, that the Republic, for more then 300 years past, did receiv Custom, of
such as sailed that Sea, and kept armed vessels in a readiness, for to compel
all such Ships so sailing, to go to Venice, testifying moreover, that even unto
their present time the same Custom was observed. But upon their attestations
he dwelled not much, saying, that though they were good Testimonies of
preceding occurrences; yet when one goes about to prove the interests of
Princes, or of private persons, he ought to help himself by authentic
writings, and to use the Historians with great discretion; some of them being
moved by love, others with hatred, and others with hope of preferment; which
constrain's them oftentimes to use flattery, or Hyperboles, upon which cannot
be laid any sure foundation.

Wherefore he produced an act of the general Council of Lions, anno 1274,
where the Abbot of Nervesa, being delegated by the Pope (upon a pretension of
those of Ancona to have free Navigation upon the Adriatic Sea) sentenced, that
the demand should be rejected, and that the Venetians should not be molested
in the defens and protection thereof, from the Sarazens and Pirates, neither
should be disturbed from exacting thereupon their Rights and Customs, which
they had of victuals, merchandise and other portable Commodities.

Chizzola likewise added, that it is clean out of memory, when first of all
there was created in Venice, a Captain of the Gulf, because in the year 1230,
the Chancerie was burned, with the memorials of all such elections; but from
that time to this present, he could show out of the public Registers, the
continual succession of the said elected Captains without any interruption.
Likewise he added moreover, that there remain the Registers from that time to
this, of the Licenses granted to pass the said Sea, with armed vessels or ships
of war, and to the persons and goods belonging to their use, at the request of
diverse Princes, who had their Possessions upon the shore of the Adriatic Sea,
and that as well by sundry Popes, Legates, Vicars, Governors, and Commonaltie
of the Land of Romania and Marca, as by the Kings of Naples for Puglia, of
which many were granted, some denied and others yielded to, but in part; But it
being superfluous to allege the Acts of those, the Successors of whom do not
so much as question this Title, he descended to particularize only the
Predecessors of his Majesty, as Kings of Hungary, and Archdukes of Austria.
He recited a Brief of Pope Urbane the sixth, directed to Antonio Veniero the
Duke of Venice, bearing date Luca 14 Junii 1388. where he give's him thanks,
that with his Galleys deputed for the keeping of the Gulf, Marie Queen of
Hungary had been enlarged, who had been kept prisoner in Castel-novo; with two
other congratulatorie Letters, the one to the said Queen, the other to King
Sigismund, who after was Emperor, being her Husband, rejoicing with them
likewise of the said enlargement made by means of the Captain of the Venetian
Galleys, deputed to the custody of the Gulf. Afterward he caused to be read
a safe Conduct granted at the Petition of Rodulph Earl of Sala, in the name of
Ladislaus King of Naples, and of William Archduke of Austria anno 1399. 12
Decembris, that the sister of the said King (espoused to the aforenamed
Archduke) might be conducted by Sea from Puglia, to the Coasts of her
Husband, with Galleys and other Vessels, in all to the number of about twelv;
with condition that there should not be suffered to pass upon them any Bandito
or banished person of Venice, who had don any thing against the Republic,
which did merit death: which safe conduct should be available to the
Austrians, as well in going as in coming, so as by the same, they might also
re-imbark at Trieste and return unto Puglia. But yet this safe Conduct was not
made use of, because the King having deferred the departure of his sister for a
small time, in the interim she died.

Also he produced two letters of the Emperor Frederick, unto Duke Giovanni
Mocenigo, the first dated in Gratz 24 Sept. 1478. the other 2 Apr. 1479. from
the same place, where he tell's him that he having taken order that there
should be brought from Puglia and Abruzzo, to his castles of Castro and of
Istria, a certain quantity of corn, he request's that it may be permitted
him to do it freely, which being to him a great pleasure, he shall acknowledge
it with many thanks.

This he seconded with a letter of Beatrice Queen of Hungary, to Giovanni
Mocenigo Duke of Venice, dated the last of Jan. 1481. whereby desiring for her
proper use to have diverse things from the parts of Italy, which she could not
bring from thence by Sea, without the permission of the Republic, she desired
that, for courtesy sake and friendship, it might be granted her, which she
should take for a great favor, and correspond upon the like occasion.

And another of Matthias King of Hungary to the said Duke dated 26 Febr. 1482.
where relating how the Republic was accustomed to give License every year to
Count Frangipani Patron of Segna and other Maritim places, to bring from Puglia
and Marca a certain quantity of victuals, and that after the said places, were
passed over into his hands, he had omitted to desire it; wherefore he now
prayed, that the same grace might be showed unto him, and that concerning
this, he would write his letters and give them to a person which he had sent
expressly to receiv them; which he should acknowledge as a favor and correspond
accordingly.

And another of the same King to Augustino Barbarigo the Duke, dated 18 Oct.
1487. in the which relating, that he having need of wood for the reparation of
a fortress standing in the mouth of Narenta, he prayed, that he might have
leav to carry it unto Segna by Sea, and that there might be Letters Patents
made thereof, offering to gratify him in a greater matter.

He added to this a Letter of Anne Queen of Hungary 30. Aug. 1502. in the
which recounting the sterilitie of the Country of Segna, she desire's leav to
bring certain victuals from Puglia and Marca, and that he would give to the
bearer, who was sent on purpose, Letters of Licens for the same, promising to
acknowledge it as a great favor and courtesy.

Lastly, he produced a Letter dated 3 Sept. 1504. of Giovanni de Dura Captain
of Pismo, servant to the Emperor Maximilian, which he writ unto the Duke
Leonardo Loredano, importing, that Giacomo Croato, a subject of his Majesty's,
parting from Fianona, entered into the Sea, which is under the Dominion of the
Republic, for to go to Segna, and was there assailed by an armed Bark of
Pirates in contempt of the Signorie or Republic, and supplicate's that some
order might be taken therein.

Upon all which particulars, he weighed most that which ought best to be
considered, having respect to the times, persons, and qualities of the several
Princes, and for greater confirmation of their assent, he remembered the yearly
Cerimonie used at Venice; where the Duke, in presence of the Ambassadors of
other Princes, particularly of his Majesty's, did use to espous the Sea, by the
casting of a Ring into it, with these words: Desponsamus Te Mare in signum very
and perpetui Dominii: We do marry the Sea, in sign of our true and perpetual
Dominion over it. Which Cerimonie as the foresaid writers do affirm, had
beginning when Pope Alexander the Third was in Venice, notwithstanding they add
withal, that it was instituted in sign of the Dominion which the Republic had
formerly gotten, jure belli.

To the 400 complaints of the Emperors Subjects, and to the sentence of
Liesina, he answered, giving thanks for the remembering of them, as a thing
brought in much to his favor, because the complaints do presuppose the
prohibition, and the sentences, either condemning or absolving, do prove the
jurisdiction.

And to the salt-barks, he said, that they were not suffered to go to Venice,
as never any are suffered to go, all foreign salt being prohibited to enter
into that City; and if it were not cast into the Sea, it was a courtesy,
which ought not to be imputed to them to their prejudice.

He concluded, that he had delivered the true sens of the Capitulations, and
proved the immemorable possession of the Adriatic Sea; that he could have
said much more, but it seemed to him superfluous, and these two points were
made most clear; First, That this pretense of the Austrians was but new; And
secondly, That their Petition at this Convention could have no place.

The Imperialists after they had conferred together, took a resolution not to
persevere in the demand of Justice, and the Baron with Suorz said openly, that
the Republic was Patron of the Gulf, and might impose what Customs they
thought fitting; and that they thought so in their consciences: but therewithal
they were of an opinion, that for honesty sake, and for the friendship which
the Republic had with the house of Austria, it should be don with the least
incommoditie of the subjects to that house, as could be possible. The other
three said, that it was now no time, either to approve or to disapprove the
Dominion of the Sea, but rather to find by way of courtesy some kind of
temperature, whereby the Republic might receiv the Rights belonging thereunto
from the Austrian subjects sailing those Seas, and on the other side, that such
conditions annexed formerly thereunto, might be taken away, which were
incommodious to the Austrians, and no ways profitable to the Venetians.
Whereupon diverse ways to effect it were examined, and a conclusion taken to
refer all to their several Princes, as it was necessary to refer all things
else; the Commission being to be only perfected by their ratification, and so
this Convention ended.

FINIS.

