THE DOVBTING BELIEVER: OR, A TREATISE CONTAINING 1. The Nature 2. The Kinds 3.
The Springs 4. The Remedies


of Doubtings, incident to weak Believers.

BY OBADIAH SEDGWICK, Bachelor in Divinity, and Minister of Coggeshall in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Thomas Nicols and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley at the sign of the Bible. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT, Earl of Warwick, Baron of Leez, etc. My
Noble Lord, and free Patron.
MY LORD,
RENEWED heart is a very Heaven in our little world, and Faith is the only Sun
in that Heaven. The sinner never comes to be precious, till he comes to be
pious; and the value of that piety still advances, according to the quantity
of true faith, as the Ring is the more considerable with the Diamond. I cannot
conceive of a more compendious way for any Christians full and constant
revenues, then this, To get faith, and still to use it: The sum or product of
which would be this, Grace and Glory, Heaven and Earth are ours.

Satan well knows what a serviceable channel Faith is for all our traffic,
either for our ship to lanch out into duties, or for Gods ship to come laden in
to us with mercies: and therefore there is no Grace which he batters, and
conflicts so with, as with faith: If we weaken or shake foundations, this has
a spreading influence into the whole building: A Christians faith cannot be
wronged, but presently all the spiritual frame becomes sensible of wrong and
loss.

In my weak judgment, it were a great prudence to secure that, which being
secured, now secures all. Nothing grows weak, where faith grows strong. My
Lord, This poor Treatise which I presume to front with your name, is like
Aaron and Hur, who staid up the hands of Moses; So does this Treatise endeavor
to stay the hand of faith in a weak Believer, who has an ample estate on the
shore and at land; but those waves of doubtings (when he is thrusting in) too
often make him to fall back and stagger: Whence follows this great
unhappiness, That whereas his faith might have served in many precious
comforts, it is (almost a whole life) employed only to answer fears and
doubts. I humbly present the subsequent Work to your Lordships personal use,
and public patronage. Be pleased (at your leisure) to peruse it, and regard
it as the first cognizance of my thankfulness to your Honor, for the Living
which you did so freely and lovingly confer upon me, wherein I shall desire
faithfully to serve your Lord and mine.

Now the Almighty God, and blessed Father, abundantly enrich your noble heart
with all saving graces, and continue you long to be an instrument of much glory
to himself, comfort to his Church, and good to our Commonwealth.

Your Honors perpetually obliged, Obadiah Sedgwick.

To the Christian Reader.
THis Treatise which now is presented to a public co^struction, was (many
years past) the subject of my private Meditations and Sermons. I did not affect
any farther publication of it, then in the Pulpit; but the importunity of
others has compelled it thus to appear in print: Not that the manner of
handling the Subject (here insisted on) is excellent or exquisite, but that the
matter handled may be supposed to be of common use and benefit; as a little
star has influence, though not that glory which is proper to the Sun.

The Case which is here put, and discussed, is a Case of common experience:
There is no Believer, but some time or other will confess it is his. The Sun
being seated in an heavenly Orb, shines with a very pure and constant light,
but the candle (though set and burning in a golden candlestick, yet) burns
with a snuff, and much variableness. When Christians are translated, and
transplanted from earth to heaven, then their graces shall become perfections:
There are no defects in heaven, there are no mixtures in heaven, but whatsoever
is pure there, it is altogether pure: Yet on earth it is otherwise, neither the
habits of Grace, nor the acts of Grace are alone (...) any Christian: When I
would do good, evil is present with me, said Paul: And, I believe, Lord, help
my unbelief, said that poor man in the Gospel.

Where is the Believer who insists not more on his fears then on his faith? and
is not oftener lamenting his doubts, then rejoicing in his assurances? None have
an interest in Christ, but Believers; None have title to a solid and settled
peace, but they: And yet we see the children fearful, and bondmen confident;
the best of men still in suit, and the worst of men quiet, as if in full
possession; none doubting less then such as have most cause to doubt, and none
doubting more then such as have most cause to triumph in Christ. And in truth
thus it will be whiles gross ignorance veiles over presumptuous sinners, and
mis-belief is incident to tender spirits.

And is not the hand of Joab in this business too? Is not Satan in all the
sins of wicked men, and in most of the troubles of good men? either he tempts
us to sin, and that will cause us to doubt; or else he tempts us to doubt,
and that will cause us to sin. Surely it is not the shortest of his wiles and
arts, in matters of Religion, to keep the judgments of some still staggering;
and in matters of a souls interest in Christ, to keep the heart still
doubting. Does he not know that the Christian cannot so happily improve Christ,
who is still in suit to prove his title to Christ?

For the better expediting of these soule-suits, peruse (if thou please) this
ensuing Work, which is (I confess) not a garden for every one to walk in, but
only physic for the sick or weak. It is intended as an Hospital for the
lame, only for a troubled sinner, only for a weak believer: And the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, even
he who establishes us in Christ, prosper it for his glory, and the help of
some one or other.

Thy Faiths servant, Obadiah Sedgwick.

A Table of the Heads in this TREATISE.
CAP. I.
THe nature of doubtings. page 6
CAP. II.
Four sorts of doubtings. 11 Those of inquietation are Either 1. Real, or 2.
Personal. 13

CAP. III.
Quest. Whether doubtings may consist with a true faith. Sol. They may: This is
1. explicated. 16 2. Proved. 17
CAP. IV.
The springs of doubtings are 1. Original sin. 24 2. Imperfection in faith. 26
Which 1. Wants ability to argue. 28 2. Insists most on discouragements. 29 3.
Is unacquainted with our armory. 31

3. The life of sense. pa. 33 What it is. 34 Three demon strations that it is a
cause of doubtings. 35
4. Restraining of faith. 38 5. Special sins after conversion. 46. Four
reasons thereof for doubtings. 47. to 53 6. Spiritual indispositions. 55 Two
knots are made by them. 1. Whether our graces betrue. 56 2. Whether our
services can be accepted. 58
7. Fruitless endeavors. 59 8. Imbecility of judgment. 64 Which 1. wants
the strength of truth, because it wants the apprehension of it. 66 2. Is easily
over-mastered with error. ibid.
9. Ignorance of the doctrine of Justification. 70 10. Disputation against the
Promises. 81 Three arguments confirming that to promote Doubtings. 11.
Suspension of divine favor. 89 Four Grounds for doubting in this 12.
Crediting of Satan's testimony. 94 13. New risings of old sins. 98 Now we
question, 1. Reality of pardon. 99 2. Sincerity of repentance. 100
14. Silence in conscience. 102 Four occasions to doubt by reason thereof.
105. to 107

CAP. V.
The cures of doubtings. 109 1. Mortification, a cure of inherent corruption.
110 What kind of mortifying does it. 118 Specially of unbelief. 121 Three
deirections for that. 124
2. Faith is to be perfected. 125 Some rules for that. 3. Keep down the life of
sense. 137 Some directions concerning this. 138 4. Scope is to be given unto
faith. 146 Three considerations about this. 147 5. What to do concerning
special sins after conversion. 160 Three directions, with encouragements, if
followed. 6. The case of indisposition. 177 The differences twixt a dull heart
and a dead heart. 178 All indisposition is not fundamental. 182 The bent of
the heart may be right, notwithstanding dulnesses. 186 And a way of acceptance.
190
7. Considerations and directions about supposed succeslesnesse in duties. 194
8. Knowledge, 1. Distinct, 2. Distinguishing, necessary. 210 Derived
conjectures are to be reduced to the prime truths. 215 Four things of which a
weak Christian should be more fully informed. 1. Of preparations to grace. 222
2. Of the operations of grace. 227 3. Of the degrees of grace. 231 4. Of the
fruits of grace. 235
9. Concerning Justification Five singular comforts concerning pardon of sins
in it. 239 Other supports from the imputation of Christ's righteousness. 262
10. Two kinds of dispute against the Promises. 269 Five helps about this. 270
11. Search the causes of the suspension of Gods favor. 286 The ways of
regaining Gods favor. 290 Quest. How a Christian may support himself in the
interim. 302
12. Satan's testimony of our estates is illegal, and not to be admitted. 306
13. Several times, 312. and causes, 316. and ends of reviving of old sins. 320
Quest. How to know whether is be Satan's work or no. 333
14. How a silent conscience may be made to speak. 343 How to support our
selves under the silence of conscience. 344
In the Additionall part. 346 1. Ob. Sense of sinful workings. Sol. Five
considerations about them. 347. etc. 2. Ob. Sense of wrath. 353 Sol. Several
kinds of it. 355 The way to cure it. 358

3. Ob. A condemning conscience. 359 Sol. Difference betwixt condemnation of
the sin, and of the person. 359 4. Ob. A fear of the sin against the holy
Ghost. 363 Sol. What that sin is not. 364 What the ingredients of is are. 367
A TREATISE OF DOVBTINGS: FROM MATTHEW. 14. 31.
O thou of little faith, Wherefore did thou doubt?
THese words contain in them the sum of a Christian in this life, which is
this: That he is truly, but yet weakly good. Christ here sees in Peter (though
a Disciple) a defective faith, and then a defect of faith: Faith he saw in him,
yet it was defective. It was little faith: There was truth, but there was not
such actual strength in it as might or should be: And besides this, he espies
in him a defect of faith; not for the habit of it, but for the act of it
Wherefore did thou doubt? Which words are a conviction that he did doubt, and
likewise a correction, Wherefore, Wherefore did thou doubt? q. d. Thou did
doubt, but thou did ill so to doubt.

There are many excellent points which might be observed from the Text, I will
name some, and insist only on one of them: Thus then.

1. A true Believer may be but a weak Believer, [Thou of little faith!]

2. Christ takes notice even of a weak Believer, [O thou of little faith!]

3. Though Christ likes believing, yet he dislikes doubting, [Wherefore did
thou doubt?

4. A person may be truly ^eleeving, who nevertheless is ^ometimes doubting:
In the ^^me person here you see a com^endation of the one, and a ^ondemnation
of the other, which suppose necessarily a pre^ence of both.

This being the Subject on which I purpose to treat, for the ^enefit of weak
Christians, I shall declare five things concer^ing it: Namely,

1. The nature of Doubtings. 2. The kinds and diversities of them. 3. Their
possible consistence with true faith. 4. Their grounds, and springs, and
occasions. 5. Their cures and remedies.
CAP. I. The nature of Doubtings.
TO understand this, you Four qualities in the soul. Joh. 12. 48 Heb. 12. 25
must know, that in the worst part of the soul, there are several qualities,
viz. 1. Infidelity, which strictly and amongst those which profess the Gospel,
is a positive rejecting of heavenly truths, with their secret goodness; herein
men forsake their own mercies by plain dissents and sleightings of the good
word of grace: as is evident in the Pharisees, Luke 7. 30. who rejected the
counsel of God, etc.

2. Despair, which is a manifest dissent, not so much in respect of the thing,
or object, (for this is assented unto as true in respect of it self, viz. That
God is merciful, and Christ did die for sinners) but in respect of the person
or subject, wherein the soul gives up it self as lost, as without the compass
and As Jer. 2. 25. There is no hope: no.
hopefulnesse of the divine proclamation: It is persuaded that there is no
possibility for it to recover the shore, and therefore sinks in the depths: My
meaning is, That such a soul, Esa. 38. 18 They that go down into the pit
cannot hope for thy truth: This holds not only in the pit of the grave, but
also in the pit of despair.
though it sees that in God, and that in Christ which can save, and does save
others, yet cuts off it self as not at all capable of any interest in the
mercy of God, or blood of Christ, and so eternally falls under its own
weight, as is evident in Judas and Cain.

Now Despair, so far as it makes assent unto Truths, it is opposed unto
Infidelity; and so far as it dissents from special goodness in them, it is
opposed to Faith; and so far as it concludes impossibility of that good unto
it self, it is opposed to Hope.

3. Fearful opinions, which are positive assents unto Truths, yet raised upon
such probable inducements only, that the soul is left with a suspicion, that
the contrary may be true. They are like a man upon a Simile.
weak plank in a great river, there he sits, and there he fears, because he
knows not certainly how long he shall sit there.

4. Doubtings, which are the suspensions or inhibitions (the holdings up) of
the soul from any determinate inclinations one way or other: they are the
pawsings of the mind.

As take a man in a journey, Simile.
where he meets with two ways, he looks on this, and inclines it may be the
right, and then he looks on that, and supposes that it may be the right, and
then he looks upon both, and ^^akes a stand, and goes on in neither: So it is
with the so^le in doubtings (spiritually) There are two ways before it, two
objects, two works, to believe, ^r not to believe, and Dictated from the
spirit, and from the flesh; from that, by way of persuasion; from this, by way
of disswasion.
arguments to incline to the one, and ^o the other, drawing into some equality
of strength and weight; ^ust like a pair of scales, answerably balanced, so
that both are ^at a stand, there is no turning either to the right hand nor to
the left. Therefore the Schoolmen say well, that Dubitatio est motus supra
utramque partem contradictionis, cum formidine determinandi alteram partem ejus.

That you may yet conceive 3. Things to be further observed.
this clearly, remember 1. In our minds there are Assentings, which are the
adherents of the understanding to truths known: And there are Dissentings,
which are the bearings off from those truths. There the soul positively
inclines, here it declines; there it puts out the hand, and here it keeps it in.

2. Doubtings properly stand between them both; they are not plainly the one,
nor plainly the other: If I may speak freely, I conceive them to have a twang
of either; they are a medium, a middle thing, as your mixed colors are which
you cannot style directly white, or directly black.

The soul has a desire to join unto Truth, it has a desire to share in that
goodness which it apprehends; yet it neither Doubtings are stagge^ings. Romans
4. 20
fastens, nor yet rejects, but like the fish to the bait, it likes it, and is
striking at it, but dares not, and swims about; or like Simile.
a wave of the sea, (that is the Apostles comparison, James 1. 6.) thrusting to
the shore, and yet drawing back; or like a Meteor hovering in the air twixt up
and down: Such rolling, reeling actions of the soul are doubtings; they are a
recoyling adventuring: The soul sees reason of either side, to draw, and
withdraw, to give on, and to give back. It sees Christ and the promises, knows
the goodness and bounty in the one and the other, whereupon it is giving on
upon them, and putting out the hand, but then instantly it checks it self, and
is stayed with contrary arguments and fears; I may not be so bold, Perhaps
they belong not unto me.

So that the person is hanging betwixt hope and fear, I would, but I may not;
I may, but I dare not: It is just with the soul as with those at Chesse, they
set out a man, and think to take a King, but then presently they are checked,
and draw him back again: God he is my Lord and my King, nay and yet he is not;
He will do me good, yet I fear he will not; He has pardoned my sins, and yet
I fear he has not; He does hear my prayer, yet I doubt he does not; My estate
is good and happy, nevertheless I suspect it is not.

Thus does a man waver, and roll, and is like a man in the Simile.
ungrounded places, he no sooner plucks up one leg out of the dirt, but the
other ^inks in* the soul is not determined one way or other.

3. One thing know more, that though the mind does not pitch or rise unto a
determinate action in spiritual doubtings, yet it ever inclines toward a
determinate object: That is, Note.
though the doubting Christian cannot come yet to quit those uncertain, and
trembling, and shivering motions, and bring them to a stayednesse, and positive
fixing, yet his mind hones, it looks after Christ and the promises; it does
not reject, nor does it give up all hopes; it keeps in it two things, which
Infideli^y and Despair want.

1. One is, that it priseth 2. Things.
Christ and the promises, though it cannot claspe them.

2. Another is, that it gives not up the case as desperate and impossible; but
though it cannot fix, yet it will be hovering about them.

Cap. II. The kinds and diversities of them.
THe second thing respects the sorts of doubtings, and these I must also touch.

I conjecture that there are 4. Sorts of doubtings.
four sorts of doubtings.

1. Some are of admiration: in these the mind does not gainsay simply, no, it
does believe, and is only solicitous about the hidden manner, or way of
performance, or accomplishment. Such a doubting was that of the Virgin, Luke 1.
34. How Luke 1. 34.
shall this be, seeing I know not a man? Non doubit at esse faciendum, sed
quomodo fieri possit, inquirit, says S. Tom. 5. de Mariae interrog.
Ambrose.

2. Others are of confirmation: Where the soul believes, but desires something
more to secure and settle it, so that it might be put out of all doubt, as was
that of Gedeons, Judge. 6. Judge 6. 36, 37.
36, 37, 39. Which kinds of doubtings are the cravings of a little more
indulgent security from God in matters of extraordinary concernment; not that
we properly question the verity of him, but that (in respect of our selves) we
might work the more confidently upon clearer evidence and warrant.

3. A third sort are of negation: and this is such a form of scrupling,
wherein we plainly suspect God of his good word of truth; and is incident unto
evil men in their general course, and to good men in respect of some
particular carriages and ^usinesses, as is evident in Za^^arias, Luke 1. 18.
Whereby shall Luke 1. 18.
(...) know this? This question was ^question of doubting, and this ^oubting,
no question, was an ^^beleeving one: It did not cre^^ the Angels message; so is
it ^^pressed, ver. 20. Thou shall be ^^mbe, because thou beleevest not ^y words.

4. A fourth sort are of inqui^ation, where the mind is di^ersly carried, and
is not come ^^ a rest, as when a cause is not ^ome to a sentence, but hangs
(...) suspense. Now of this sort of ^oubtings we speak at this ^me, which
again may be ^ranched,

1. Into Real, which questi^ns the principles themselves, ^ther for truth or
goodness, and so they respect matters of ^aith; or else they question acti^ns
touching lawfulness or un^awfulnesse, and so they respect ^atters of fact: In
which respect they are more specially styled Scruples of conscience* which are
nothing else but some grating and painful doubts about points As Romans 14. 23.
practical: O^ which see the Casuists.

2. Into Personal; Where no^ the things in themselves, but i^ respect of our
selves, are questioned, and only questioned, no^ peremptorily denied or
rejected: viz. I know and beleev^ that God is a Father, that Christ is a
Redeemer, and the Saviou^ of sinners; I now doubt, Not whether there be any
truth, o^ good in these, (for these I yield but upon view of my great sin^
fullness and many defects, now only question (and this i^ enough) whether my
interes^ be in that truth and goodness What is said here of a case respecting
Spiritualls, the sam^ may be said of that other respecting the promises for
Temporalls, See Luke 12. 28.
because that doubting ^^e extend to both.

3. Again, there are two sorts personal doubtings.

1. Some are privative, which move all presence of faith: ^^ which see 1 Timothy
2. 8. and Jam. ^6.

2. Some are contrary, which ^e minuere, but not negare; they (...) impair,
and keep faith low, ^^t not wholly deny or extin^ish it, as in our present Text.

Cap. III. ^f their possible consistence with Faith.
ANd here lies the kernel, Whether personal doub^^ngs, (i. e.) doubtings of a
man's ^articular interest in God, and christ, and the promises, may ^onsist with
personal Faith?

To which I answer, They may:

1. Doubtings be sinful, for they are the smoakings of corruption.

2. They be no part of Faith.

3. They cannot consist at the same instant with the acts of faith; for it is
impossible that faith should formally doubt. As it is impossible that I should
lay Simile.
hand on the rock, and not lay hand at the same time; or that mine eye should
see and not see the color at the same time; or my hand receive, and not
receive the gift at the same time: So is it impossible that the soul when it
does believe, should doubt, forasmuch as Faith in In sensu composito.
act, and doubt in act, are opposite; and the soul cannot possibly set out
from one faculty at the same time opposite acts; I confess successively it
may, yet simultaneously it cannot: But now to believe, and to doubt, are
opposite; for in the one I embrace, in the other I do not embrace; in the one
I rest, in the other not, etc.

Yet fourthly, Actual doubtings Actual doubtings may consist with habitual
faith.
may be in a person who has habitual faith; for this you must know, that
faith and doubtings are not opposed as life and death, where the presence of
the one determinately concludes the total absence of the other; but as cold
and heat in remiss degrees in the subject, where though the nature of cold be
not the nature of heat, but naturally one is expulsive of the other, yet both
lodge in the same room; So Faith is not Doubting, and Doubting is not Faith,
one of these is expulsive of the other, yet both may and do meet in the same
person:

Who is notwithstanding called How one is styled a Believer, yet has
doubtings. Simile.
a Believer from the most eminent part: For as we truly call many persons
beautiful persons, though in some one or other limb there may be some faulty
incongruity in nature, (because that which is better still denominates or gives
the name) so we say that Christian^ are true believers, because they have faith
really in their souls, notwithstanding many culpable doubtings which they feel
and express.

It were a folly indeed that men should think their fields had no corn,
because there are many filthy weeds; or that the heap has no wheat, because
much chafe; or the pile no gold, because much dross; or the soul no faith,
because many doubtings.

I had almost said (let it go, I think it is a truth) there is none had faith,
but has found his doubtings. Did you ever see a^ fire without smoke? Smoke is
no part of the fire, yet it steams from that fuel, to which fire is put: So it
is with faith, and doubtings, etc.

Nay see this truth put out of Believers have doubted.
all doubt by several instances in Scripture: Let this of Mat. 14. 31. be the
first, O thou of little faith, (said Christ to Peter) Peter.
Wherefore did thou doubt? Where, though Christ did reprehend him for
doubting, yet as he does intimate his doubting, so his faith too: He had
faith, though little, and doubtings, though he had that faith; there was the
one, and there was the other, they were both in Peter; For he had not stepped
out, but for faith, and he had ^not sunk, but for his doubtings.

Observe Abraham himself, Abraham.
the father of the faithful; yet we find him winding and turning, shuffling
and doubting more then once, if we read Genesis 12. and Genesis 15. 2, 3. and Genesis
20.

So David had his tremblings, David.
his faintings, his suspicions; all in him was not faith; He in his haste falls
out with some for liars, who yet spoke nothing but Ps. 116. 11
the truth of God: And so again, Psa. 31. 22 God has forgotten me, etc.
in his haste, he is cut off from before the eyes of God, who yet heard the
voice of his supplications.

Job also, a man of great sorrows, and of great faith, yet had hee^ Job.
not his qualmes? his shakings? his questionings? Indeed in some places he
seems Heroicke in his faith, graciously victorious over all calamities, and
riding above all waves; yet in other places we find the Man a^ well as the
Believer; he staggers, he fears, he is giving up.

The faithful in Scripture are compared oftentimes to Trees, which though they
be well rooted, yet may be shaken; and t^ Noah's Arc, which though i^ was a
safe harbor, yet it was tossed; and to an house built o^ a rock, which though
it be fir^ and cannot be removed, yet (...) may be moved; and to Stars, which
though they be heaven^y, yet are twinkling; and amongst them, much to the
Moon, which with her light has yet some dark spots.

What should I allege examples? Experiences.
Let your own experiences, and daily complaints sufficiently answer to this;
let them give verdict: Some of you have not yet risen above your fears. Let God
hold up his favor, do you not presently doubt? Let him hold in his hand, do
you not also doubt? O how we toss, and roll, and stagger in every ^ensible
difficulty! In matters of this life, scarce a contrary oc^urrence which does
not di^tract us. Thus is it with most ^f us in our infancy, and in our
^ettings out* But for you who ^re of further perfection, who ^re ripened unto
an assurance, ^erhaps unto a full assurance, ^an you never remember any
bowings, shakings, shiverings, doubtings? Or think you never to meet with any
more? I have known the Sun one day bright, and the next covered; and David's
mountain strong: But Thou did hide thy face, and ano^ I was troubled, Psalm.
30.

Besides all this, consider the nature and condition of tru^ faith in this
life; It must the^ be granted that there may b^ doubtings with it, foras^uch as
no grace is perfect in this life it has its contrary in the sam^ subject in
some remiss degrees And it is one work of faith sti^ to be casting out of
doub^ which do rise in the mind which working could not b^ unless there they
were.

But will you say, When^ and flow? Do they vary from ^^emselves, either for
truth or ^oodnesse? Or does Christ the ^undation, the rock on which ^ur faith
is built, is not he the ^^me yesterday, to day, and for ever? ^f so, how, why,
whence is it ^^at a Believer should doubt?

I answer, That though there ^^e the samenesse in God, in

Cap. IV. Springs, Causes, and Occasions o^ doubting are or may be these.
1. Natural corruption: Thi^ The first cause of doubtings.
is a corrupt root, the seed of all sin, and of unbe^^ liefe. This is that
flesh which Original sin the fountain of unbelief
does lust against the spirit, a^^ thrusts up abundance of mot^^ ons, and
corupt reasonings, a^^ motives to interrupt our fai^^ in its great business of
belee^ ving: So that when we wou^^ It corrupts and misinforms the mind, and
withholds the will.
do good, evil is present wit^ us; and when we would be^ leeve, unbelief is
prese^ with us.

It is very true, that in our co^^ version, the soul is gracious^ enlarged,
and the powers of (...) It is a disease hanging about the best.
are crushed, Yet so, that still* (...) go with a chain about (...) leg: And
though sin has (...) deaths-wound, yet so much li^^ Note.
is still remaining as to interru^^ our graces, to resist them; yea (and if we
look not well unto it) to stay and bind them.

He who has a maime in Simile.
his leg, cannot move in that manner or measure as he desires; and a wounded
hand or arm hand or arm cannot stretch out it self, and lay hold at all
times. Corruption is in the best, and will do its part, and that is one reason
why we cannot do all our part in believing.

You know in the Wars, Simile.
how the intentions and motions of one side are stopped, and kept up, by the
malice, and subtilty, and power of the other; and that there may be many veins
of sweetest water under the earth, which yet are many times checked and
controlled by the falling down of earth. O this body of sin, which (nolentes
volentes) we must yet carry about with us, how backward is it to come to
Christ? how unbeleeving is it? how suspicious? how fearful? It will not be
persuaded, it will not hearken, it will not credit, it will not yield, it will
not embrace.

The very Disciples, who had the presence of Christ, who saw the Miracles of
Christ, who heard the voice of Christ, how often did they doubt? did they
question? Whence shall we have bread to feed so many? * Luke 24. 21
We had trusted it should have been he who should have redeemed Israel. So
that Christ reproves them more then once or twice, O slow of Luke 24. 25
heart to believe, etc. 38.
Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is
I my self: But Christ apologiseth for them, The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.

2. Imperfection of faith; A second cause of doubtings.
this is another cause of doubting. Why should a child fall so much, and a man
so seldom? is it not the weakness in the Simile.
nerves, and sinews, and low motive parts? When fire is newly kindled, it is
but little, and has much smoke; so is it with our faith, the more imperfect it
is, the more doubtings it finds.

Matthew. 14. 31. O thou of little Weak faith and many doubtings go together.
faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Little faith, and great doubtings go
together; like a little heart, and great mists. Some men are but Babes in
Christ, they are but plants in the garden, they are but lambs in the fold: Now
children are apt to fear, and plants to shake, and lambs to flag behind, and
weak believers to doubt: Lay a little burden on Simile.
a child's shoulder, he knows not what to do; show him the water, he cries
out: So is it with weak believers; Their strength is not proportioned unto
unusual exigences; Neither have they experiences, nor that quickness of art
to hye them to their helps.

And these are great matters, 1. when a man wants strength to deal with his
enemy, and 2. when he has not had experience: Therefore let us consider this
yet more; Where faith is weak or imperfect, there are three things incident
unto those Believers.

1. They want ability to Three things in weak believers.
argue: for their experience is little, and therefore their judgments are not
so settled; so that they cannot always maintain their ground. David, David.
because of former experiences, he is not amazed at the uncircumcised
Philistine, but rests upon that God for victory here, who had granted him
former deliverances from the Bear and the Lion. And so Paul. 2 Cor. 1.
Paul confirms himself, 2 Cor. 1. 10. who delivered us from so great a death,
and does deliver, in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver*: but weak David
was right in Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee,
for thou Lord bast not forsaken those that seek th^e.
faith has little experience of Gods truths, and of Gods power, and of Gods
method and times.

2. They see their wants and hindrances, more then their helps and
encouragements: like Elisha's servant, who saw the multitude of the enemies
compassing the city with horses and chario^ts, and the reupon cried out, Alas
my Master, El^sha's servant, 2 King. 6. 15, 16, 17.
how shall we do? but (at first) he saw not the mountain full of horses, and
chariots of fire round about Elisha, which might have stayed and upheld him.

It is with new and weak Believers, as with the Israelites, Israelites.
who did hear of the sons of Anak, those mighty Giants, and of the high and
mighty walls about the city of Canaan, they looked on these, and were greatly
perplexed and discouraged, but they did not look on the strong and Almighty
God, who did promise to go with them, and conquer for them: So do these, they
look upon the mere temptations and suggestions of Satan, they look upon the
powerful stirrings of remaining corruption, they look upon the strength of
present crosses they look upon their own weaknesses against all these, they
look upon Gods delayings, upon their own dulnesses, and whatsoever may keep
them down; but they look not upon that God who has promised, who has
performed the oath to Abraham the father of the faithful; they look not upon
Christ, who has by his blood ratified and sealed the Covenant, they look not
upon that mighty spirit of grace in them; they look not upon other standing
Christians, who can tell them that God is true in all his promises, and
assuredly righteous, and a present help, and who never fails them that trust
upon him and wait.

3. They cannot repair unto the establishments of faith as strong believers
can: They are not yet so acquainted with the Armory of faith; the Promises, The
Armory of faith.
they are the Armory of faith; but now these Promises are many, and are
graciously framed to the variety of our conditions; which because the beginning
Believer knows not, therefore in the times of changes, being not so ready,
having not his weapons, nor being so presently able to send them out, hence it
is that doubtings do so arise, yea and so grow upon him in such strength, that
he is like to faint.

You shall experimentally Note.
find many good people, who have in some cases maintained their ground with
credit to their faith, (for they have traversed a particular vein of the
Promises, they have found them out, they have applied them, and made use of
them, by virtue of which they have borne down the many risings of doubt and
fear in that kind, and have singularly enabled and comforted their hearts
against distrust and fear.)

But these self-same persons on a sudden have been and are strangely puzzled,
distressed, afraid, doubtful, full of fears and dejections, and all that they
can do is to bear up, yea and that is hardly done too: Why? what is the
matter? have they not faith? Yes; and does not that faith work? Perhaps it does
in a general way, but with particular efficacy they cannot yet observe it:
How so? This, there is a new kind of trouble, a new burden, which yet they were
not put unto, and they cannot find any promise to reach that same: and hence it
is that their fears and doubtings do exceedingly sprout up and distract them.

And this is found to be very true, that in particular and sensible distresses,
(be the matter Till faith does settle we shall be unsettled.
and kind what they may be) the soul remains in a hurried perplexity, in a
waveing unsetlednesse until that faith can find out a Promise to answer it
either expressly or virtually: One of these two ways it must reach us in our
conditions, or else our fears are up.

^. The studying of the life The third cause of doubtings.
of sense: This is another spring of doubting: which is evident in Thomas, John
20. 25. Except Joh. 20. 25
I shall see in his hand the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his
side, I will not believe: He must see and feel, or else he is faithless.

Now to study the life of sense is this, viz. To place the disposition of God,
and the issues The life of sense what it is.
of our condition in our feelings and sensible apprehensions: As to believe
that God is my God, because I find him so; That he is gracious, because I find
a sensible answer of my prayers; That he does accept of my services, because I
find that life of affections. So on the contrary, that he is not my God,
because I find not those ^ensible reports of his favor; I find not that
quickness, and former smartnesse of affections; I find not present answers
unto all my desires and requests; That I am not in the estate of Grace, because
I feel not the vigours, and secret increasings of grace; That I do not
believe, because I do not rejoice, nor see my sins blotted out, etc.

Which kind of life must verily be exposed unto infinite and continual
doubtings: Three demonstrations, that the life of sense causes doubtings.
For,

1. The soul here has no constant bottom to settle upon; our feeling is
sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes none at all. Indeed it is A bowl
upon a bowl, etc.
true, that faith may b^eed feeling, but then it is as true, that faith may be
without it: As Sense meets with contrarietics, and cannot resolve them: but
faith can reconcile all by resting on God and his Word. (Da^id, Job, and Paul,
etc.)
the soul does breed seeing and hearing in the eyes and ears, yet the soul
may be in the man when these do not see, and these do not hear: A man cannot
but be perplexed in his thoughts, if he holds this opinion, That meat does not
nourish him, unless he presently sees how the parts grow bigger by it; or,
That his father does not love him, because he is not always smoothing and
stroking of him; or That his seed is lost, because it is not a present harvest;
or That the channel will shortly be dry, and without water, because the Tide
is gone out, and has left it naked: In Conclusions can never be firm, which
depend upon variable and changeaable principles.
like manner, to conclude against our souls from Sensibles, and Mutables,
exposes it to the labyrinth of daily fears and scruples.

But secondly, the soul hereby does advantage Satan in his suggestions; for the
life of sense (like the rolling sea) is open to all winds, it has a secret,
restless, unquiet distemper of its own; but besides that it is open to the
singular disturbances and inquietations from the devil: For the life of Note.
sense has made two propositions for him of the despairing Syllogism, and he
can easily make the other: viz.

He who has not the sense The syllogism of sense.
of Gods favor, present answers from God, feelings of his graces in their
nature and measure, cannot be in the state of grace and salvation, (this is the
Maxim of sense) But thou (says Satan) have not the sense of Gods favor, etc.
Ergo, says he, Thou art not, Ergo also say thou, I am not in the state of
grace and salvation.

Lo here the issues of the life of sense! And now, no marvel if the soul
gives not on upon Christ or the promises, but is tossed to and fro, and hangs
in extreme suspense.

Yet thirdly, it is a life which does much dishonor God, and therefore exposed
to many fears and unsetlednesses: What? To measure the truths of God by our
feeling? and the graciousnesse of God by our sense? what is this but to
arraigne God both for truth and graciousnesse? What is God will not stoop to
our unbeleeving way of sense, but we must rise to his granting way of faith.
this but to set upon God, and give the sentence, which he has kept in his
own hands? What is this, but to limit the holy One of Israel? yea, to correct
his wisdom, as not being skilful to order the business of our salvation,
unless we always have an eye or a finger at every turn to know his particular
intentions and proceedings with us?

It is a glorious and singular Note. We know not what a promise will do, till
we lay hold.
way to believe so long, until we come down to feeling; But to begin with
feeling, and so rise to believing, is a delusion both dangerous and impossible;
for thou can never truly feel, unless thou do first believe: Can thou
truly warm thy heart with that divine favor which faith did not let in? The
fourth cause of doubtings.


A fourth cause of doubtings, is, when we deny Faith its We give not faith its
perfect work and full scope to all objects and all occasions.
matter and grounds to work: How is that? It is, when we guide the whole
business below, and not above; I will give you some instances.

1. You know that the condition of Grace is exposed to many short allowances in
externalls; Four instances.
and the condition of sinful men is capable of large Prosperity of evil men,
and adversities of good.
prosperity in worldly things; A good man may have many wants, and an evil man
may have, in this life, his good things, (as Abraham speaks of Dives.) Now when
a person looks upon the bulk, upon the outward part, upon the shell, upon the
rind of things, and sees plenty with evil men, and poverty with good men;
honor shining there, and contempt clouding here; fullness for them, and
leanness for these; pleasures and liberties attending them, and sorrows and
restraints befalling these; when I say he looks on this, and no higher then
this, it is possible that suspicions and doubtings may start up; it is possible
that the soul may sink down somewhat at it. See an evidence in Asaph, Psalm.
73. 2. Psalm. 73. 2.
My feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped. 3. When I saw the
prosperity of the wicked. 12. These are the ungodly who prosper in the world,
they increase in riches. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence. 14. For all the day long have I been plagued, and
chastened every morning. Observe here his distrusts and doubts; As if his
gracious course did no way benefit him, or as if he had served God for naught.

And thus he goes on, whiles he bends his thoughts downward, whiles he keeps in
his faith, whiles he denied it matter to work upon; but ver. 17. But 17.
there he gives scope for faith to work, and then he is free again, and well
again, [Vntill I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end.]

2. In case of the sinful condition; Whiles we look on it, and deny Faith its
matter also to work upon, we shall be full of doubtings. Let a man look only
Sinful condition.
upon his sins, upon the nature of them, the aggravations of them, what will
come of it? 1. Strong humiliations, and those are good. 2. Doubtings and
despaires, and those are bad. The single considerations of sin, are the matter
only of our fear; they are a grievous burden: David was not able Psalm. 38. 4.
to stand under it, My sins are too heavy a burden for me to bear, Psalm. 38. 4.

For what hope is there in Nothing in a sinner to uphold a sinner.
our selves? What is in a sinner to uphold a sinner? No burden is an ease to it
self. Let people behold their sins, and not use their faith, they cannot but
doubt; for now sin appears in all the motives and causes of fear, and now
God appears not in the nature of a friend, but with the countenance of an
enemy, and of a severe Judge; and where now can the troubled soul anchor, or
fasten, or ease it self?

God (you know) has given unto Man two ears and two eyes; if we make use of
one only, our lives will often hang in doubt and suspense, If we have not an
ear Psa. 81. 8 I will hear what God the Lord will speak, etc.
to hear what God says to an humbled sinner, as well as an ear to hear what
Conscience will say unto a sinner: If we have not an eye to look unto Christ,
as well as an eye to look unto our sins; an eye to behold the brazen Serpent,
as well as an eye to behold the biting, fiery Serpent, we cannot then but
doubt: As we must give conscience Note.
its scope to work upon sin, so we must give Faith its scope to work upon
Christ, else we shall neither be freed from our doubtings, nor yet from our
sins which cause those doubtings.

3. In case of bodily distractions Bodily distractions.
and occurrences, which put us into an exigence or strait; if we look below
only, if we look upon their strength, and our strength only, it will now be
with us, as with David tired out, and almost David.
spent by the huntings and pursuings of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
I shall surely one day fall by the hand of Saul; or as with Peter, who Peter.
looking upon the waves, (and not upon Christ) began to sink, and cried, Lord
save me; Mat. 14. 30
or as with Jehoshaphat, whiles he looked upon the great Armies, Iehoshaphat. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
We know not what to do. Not long since, we might have read this in our very
faces, Our selves
when the Churches abroad A little before the K. of Sweden came into Germany.
were in great distress; we looked on their dust and ashes, their ruins and
weakness; we looked on man, and gave up all for lost; We did not look upon
God, and therefore our ship was full of water, our hearts did fail us, doubts
and fears like a black cloud did overspread us: Nay at This was preached in
the times of the great calamities of the Church in Germany.
this very time we hear of an externally disproportionable strength, that the
enemies are more in number, they are confederate, they complot, they intend a
great design, and now I find the fears, the doubts wagging; and assuredly
whiles we look downward only, and not upward; whiles we lay events and issues
upon the creature; Whiles our eyes are down, our fears will up.
whiles we give faith no scope to look up and work upon that God who can save
by a few as well as by many, we shall never be freed from doubtings.

The very same is true in our personal occurrences; as long as we look on the
things only which we meet withal, and oppose our own strength unto them, it
will be with us as an Simile.
house without pillars, tottering with every blast; or as with a ship without
an anchor, tossed with every wave: For every cross is too hard for us, though
none can be too hard for God.

4. So for temptations; Temptations.
Here also our doubtings fly up, because our faith flies not out. O say we, we
are not able to bear, to withstand, to overcome; the temptations are strong,
and many, and daily. Suppose so; And what do we? Verily we are soon ready to
sit down, and to give the day to Satan, never considering that God gives his
Soldiers his Arms; never considering that the quarrel and battle is the
Lords, he is engaged in the fight, for all is for his sake: We think that God
looks on only, and believe not how much he curbs Satan, and sustains us; As if
Satan might do what he pleased, and God left us alone to grapple; whereas the
Lord makes manifest his power in our weakness, and 2 Cor. 12.
his grace is sufficient for us, and Romans 16.
he will bruise Satan shortly under our feet.

A fifth cause of doubtings, The fifth cause of doubtings.
may be particular and special sins after conversion:

Which are like water dropped Simile.
into a candle, making it to burn flat and dull, with a black snuff at the
top, and catching as it were, going up and down for hold: or as a rheum, a
salt rheum, fallen into the eyes, which intercepts the sight, and darkens it for
a time: So do our special sins after conversion, they do dim, and darken the
soul, and like those enclosed spirits of the air in the bowels of the earth,
they cause many fearful shakings and tremblings, as is evide^t in David after
his great David, Psalm. 51.
sins of Adultery and Murder, they did exceedingly weaken his spiritual
condition, and wiped off all his comfortables.

Beloved, these sins, they must needs be a strong spring of doubtings if we
do but consider,

1. That it is their nature to Four things here about special sins.
set us off from the shore and harbor: You know that a Ship which lies quiet
in the harbor, or by the shore, thrust it out, lanch it into the Simile.
sea, it is tossed again: Now in all known sins which wound the conscience,
(after conversion) we loosen the Anchor, and put off: The Promises, and
Christ, (upon which our confidences Special sins, though they loose not the
estate, yet they loosen our hold.
were anchored) do now seem to give, they will leave, they will withdraw.

But suppose, in their sensible virtue they should not, (which yet they do)
nevertheless we cannot fasten now, for the very temper of the soul is
injured, our spirit is wounded. You know though the staff Simile.
does stand where it did, and as it did, yet if my hand be wounded, I cannot
claspe it, nor use it as formerly.

Now, what think you, must not the soul needs be filled with fears, and with
doubts, which has thrust it self thus from such a gracious harbor as the
mercies, the loving kindnesses, the sweet and blessed promises of God? may it
not say now, as David once, Psalm. 77. 3. I remembered God, Psalm. 77. 3.
and was troubled? and well may thou be troubled, who would for such a sin
pull away thy hand from such a God.

2. God does really take these sins ill, very ill, from those upon whom he
has conferred such fruits of his love: For this is a truth, that Gods
goodness aggravates our sinning.
in case of offenses, Love and Bounty can give in the strongest and heaviest
aggravations: As in that of David, 2 Samuel 12. 7. I anointed thee King over
Israel, and I delivered thee out of 2 Sa. 12. 7.
the hand of Saul: 8. And I gave thee thy masters house, and gave thee the
house of Israel and Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover
have given unto thee such and such things. 9. Wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord to do evil in his sight, etc.

Observe how the Lord pleads it, and aggravates it upon David. Now when a child
Simile.
knows that he has committed a fault, (concerning which his father gave him a
special charge, See thou do it not) and withal he knows that his father is
fully acquainted with all the business, it is likely (we find it so) that
fears and doubtings gather within the breast of the child; He dares not keep
off, and yet he is afraid to come in; he knows that his father has taken it
ill at his hands.

So it is with us after our special sins, we know that God hates them, (he
hates them Note. Sin in any, hated of God.
not personally, but naturally; not because in such persons, but because in any
persons) Their nature is repugnant (...) his: (as we hate poison (...) Simile.
self, and therefore ^et it (...) a Toad, or in a Princes (...) we hate it
still) and they (...) have fallen upon such sins, (...) have incensed a gracious
(...) there, what notable fears, what strange misgivings, what appalings get up
now upon the heart?

Where is my Father? (says the offending child) He is within, (says one) away
he runs; or he is abroad, and then down he sits, and weeps, and bewailes his
loss, I shall never gain his favor again.

Thus it is with us after our special sins; If God seem to draw toward us,
we are ready to fly from him: I heard thy voice (says Adam) and was afraid,
and hid my self: And if he does not draw toward us, we sit down, wring our
souls, and fetch many a deep Ah, Ah what have I done! Ah me, (...), Where am I
now? I (...) provoked my God, and (...) afraid to come unto him, etc.

3. God does not easily open (...) favor unto those who thus abuse it: There
was free intercourse twixt God and the soul before; but now the door is shut,
which before was open, and God himself will keep the key, so that nothing, no
means or ways shall open unto us, until he does please. You remember how
David kept his distance David to Absalom.
from Absalom for his lewdness, he kept him off a long time, he might not see
the Kings face: And David himself for his sins against his Father, could not
(without And God to David.
long suings) see the face of God, as before, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51.


And now think you it strange that the soul should doubt? Assuredly great
desires Note.
delayed and prorogued do cause great fears; yea, it breeds singular
suspicions, May be I shall be still put off; will the Lord cast off for ever?
and will he be favorable no more? Ps. Psalm. 77. 7.


4. Nay, now the soul being made sensible, and having weighed all
circumstances, can and does teach it self many Tender and wounded hearts apt
to multiply exceptions against themselves.
arguments and reasons to keep off; It is apt enough to fall upon it self, and
to keep down any readiness which it observes to give on upon God or Christ.

It is some time before faith can find a way to ingratiate this offending
soul, and to epsy a sufficient medium by and through which it may close with
God for pardon and favor: And when faith has found it out, then our
mis-giving hearts beat us off; and as our weak children pluck Simile.
down the bird soaring up, with a string, so do our weak hearts pull in our
faith which is now speeding toward heaven by the blood of Jesus Christ for us.

The more tenderness we we gain of the sins, the more shynesse and fear
grows on us, and seldom does the soul recover its former hold, and ancient
correspondence and intimatenesse with God, until there has been a
proportionable humiliation, and spaces of settled reformation: Twixt which, and
the great discovery of special and renewed assurance, the heart meets with
many a wave, with many a sad day, with many a fearful rising, with many strong
and terrible doubtings.

So then you see, that special sins after conversion, do cause great
doubtings in the soul, because they make a jar, a wound, they lay a bar
twixt us and God, they keep up God, and keep down faith, and give up all the
matters of disheartning and fear, they make the soul to be at a stand, to go
away from the gates of heaven many times with singular checks and heaviness.

6. A sixth cause of doubtings, A sixth cause of doubtings.
may be indispositions unto or about spiritual duties: when our Altar seems
to have no fire, our bodies to have no souls, our affections to be estranged
from our services; when we pray, but not with that fervencie; when we hear, but
not with that attentiveness; when we set upon any sort of duty, but not with
that alacrity, with that joy, with those becoming spirits.

Nay sometimes there is a strange listle^nesse, a kind of flat dullness,
drowzinesse, that we hardly move upon our Like the Disciples.
work, much ado to draw our selves unto duty. Like the Disciples, It troubles
a Captain when he cannot make his men come on and fight.
the soul is so heavy, that it can hardly watch and pray.

Out of which kind of slumberings, the hearts of Christians do ordinarily
awake with doubtings, and that about two particulars especially.

1. One respects the verity Two places of doubtings hence.
and being of Grace: As Gedeon in another case, (Judge. 6. 13.) If the Lord be
with us, why then is all this be fallen us? So here, If truth of Grace were in
me, how should all these indispositions, dulnesses, deadnesses accompany me?
Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty, but I am as one chained up:
Where Grace is truly Note.
kindled, there is a holy fire to warm the heart in duty; I have rejoiced in
the way of thy testimonies, (Psalm. 1 19. 14.) and Ps. 119. 14
with my whole heart have I sought thee, So David. Thy word David.
was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart, for I am called by thy Name O
Lord of Hosts, says Jeremiah, Chap. 15. 16. And the Ier. 15. 16.
Prophet Esaias, Chap. 56. 7. says, Esaias 56. 7.
God will make his people joyful in his house of Prayer: And besides all this,
we are commanded to serve the Lord with gladness, Psalm. 100. 2. Psa. 100. 2


Whereupon the soul misgives, How can my condition be good, which differs so
much from the secret and lively dispositions of Grace? How can it be good which
is so unanswerable to that quickness promised, and found in the people of God?
How can I be good, who about the actions of good am so dull and heavy,
awkeward and flow? etc.

2. But then, suppose the soul can clear and assoyle it self from this fear,
(by knowing that fire may be where it does not always flame, and the root may
live where the branches do not always flourish, and by finding some answerable
dulnesses in some eminent David's, who often have prayed for quickening) yet
there arises another doubting from our dullness and indisposition, which is a
fear of acceptance, The Lord will not accept of these services, because they
are so heavy, they are therefore without any efficacy. Suppose I may be good,
yet they are bad, and can win no favor with God. Thus the soul is oft-times
much perplexed by reason of its indispositions; as if either it were totally
bad, or God intended little good unto it, because it is not quickened, and more
enlivened in the services presented unto him. And verily it will much trouble a
tender and sincere heart to observe in it self such flat and dull opinions of
God and Christ, and such an ineptitude in it self in doing that, which to do
with the best of its strength, and might, and affections, it sees reasons, and
has desires thereto.

7. A seventh spring or occasions A seventh cause of doubtings
of doubtings may be fruitless endeavors: I call them so, because we think
them so: What is that? This it is; When we find out defects in our particular
graces, and in particular duties, or some effects of particular corruptions;
and have gone to God by Prayer, and in his Ordinances, so that we have a long
time prayed for the filling up and enlarging of our weak faith, love, sorrow,
joy, assurance, and prayed against that hardness, passionatenesse, or
whatsoever sinfulness observed in the heart: And yet we seem to be still
where we were, we creep on with the same impotencies in grace, and move on
with the same burdens of sinful motions and propensions: O now the soul sits
down with much sorrow, and with doleful conclusions: Well, it is in vain to
seek any more, God will make that good to me which he threatened unto Moab,
Esaias 16. 12. He shall Esa. 16. 12
come unto his Sanctuary, and shall not prevail. I have sought him a long time
and have not prevailed; I shall never rise above these risings: If God had a
purpose to do me good, I should have been sped ere this.

The opinion of succeslesnesse must needs cause doubtings, because,

1. God seems to have a controversy Three things in this.
with the soul; Surely, says the heart, something is the matter that I cannot
have audience, all is not right and eaven twixt God and me.

2. The very stays and supports of duty seem to fail us. You know that the
P^omises are the great encouragements of all our services; and what have we to
bind God but his own Promises, by which he has bound himself? He has said
that he will hear, and answer; Upon which assurance of his, we came in, and
prayed, but cannot get any thing, though we press God upon his own promise;
Whereupon the soul is brought to a stand, If God will not answer his own
word, how shall he answer me?

3. Now we suspect not our petitions, but our persons, and uncomfortably judge
or fear, that we have been deceived in our progress toward heaven: God would
be to us as to his, (a God hearing Prayers) if we had been to God as his,
serving him with a perfect heart, for God hears not sinners, Joh. Joh. 9. 31.
9. 31. But If any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he
hears. Whereupon the soul strongly argues against it self, My heart is
sinful, or else my prayers had been succesfull; I regard iniquity in my heart,
therefore it is that the Lord hears me not, Psalm. Psalm. 66. 18
66. 18.

Beloved, you who deal with observation and experience can acknowledge

1. That there are spaces Observe 3. things.
twixt our prayers and Gods answers: God hearkens what David speaks, and David
must hearken what God will speak: Prayer is our angle, our feed, our dove, our
messenger, it does not always take at first, it does not return us always a
present harvest, it comes in sooner, and sometimes later, it waits the time of
the master.

2. God is wise in causing these spaces, he has ends, singular ends both for
his own glory, and for the good of our Graces.

But thirdly, corruption takes occasion hereby, and Satan vents his envious
malice hereupon: As the back-biters, and Simile.
slanderers, and contentious spirits, who love to set variance twixt faithful
friends, let the least occasion happen, a wry look, a misplaced word, a
misintended neglect, a forbearing of present dispatch in some desired service;
let these fall out, presently the back-biter, envious, malicious, contentious
spirit, catches; Lo, you see his love, his backwardness, his sleighting of
you, etc.

Thus do our corrupt hearts and Satan; Look you now, you see how needless,
how Hence David's Why is the Lord so far from hearing? etc. Is his mercy clean
gone? etc.
fruitless all the care and service of God is; Alas, he thinks not on you, he
regards not your prayers: If he had loved you, if he intended to do you good,
could this be? would he have held up after so many prayers, so many tears, so
many importunities, so many pressings by his mercies, by his Christ, by his
promises? No, no, Thou art not in favor with God, his mercies, his promises
belong not to thee, etc. Thus they.

8. An eighth spring may The eighth cause of doubtings.
be, imbecility of judgment about the essentials of salvation; And assuredly,
here lies the great spring of doubtings. An erroneous mind is the forge which
hammers all our suspicions; it is the womb which bears and breeds all our
fears; If it does not find, yet it makes all our knots for us.

What one speaks of a plain place of Scripture, This verse, said he, had been
easy, had not Commentators made it so knotty; That we say of a Christians
condition, It is gracious, happy, clear, sure, did not erroneous judgments
disturb, and vex, and unsettle them. This is true, that a weak judgment and
a tender conscience are seldom without fear and doubting. You see it in the
Romans, about practical matters, whereupon the Apostle presses the stronger
not to receive the weak to doubtful Romans 14. 1 22.
disputations; and if they had a particular faith, to keep it unto themselves,
knowing well, how weak judgments, like weak plants, are easily stirred and
shaken.

You may see it also in the Ephesians, about doctrinall matters; for Paul
giving an Item unto them to overthrow their childishness, Ephesians. 4. 14. he Ephesians.
4. 14.
does paraphrase it to be such an estate wherein men are tossed to and fro, and
carried Two things incident to this.
about with every wind, etc.

Two things are incident unto shallow judgments, (by virtue of which they are
objected (with ease) unto doubtings.

1. One is, They have not been conversant in the compass of Truths, there be
some Truths which yet they know not; they have not all their holds and strength.

2. New Doctrines contrary to old Truths, are not so easily over-mastered by
their understandings, A man must have good eyes to find out cunning glosses.
but do either win misbelief, or else disturb their true belief. You shall
scarce hear any new things started, but withal we hear of many
personsstartled, as if their faith had hitherto been in vain; for tender
consciences are apt to believe the most, and therefore sometimes do believe
those points which are false.

Shall I give you instances Instances.
amongst our selves? 1. One is an equality of humiliation before conversion: as
if no man were truly converted, who has not equalled the greatest penitent in
the highest degrees of contrition and terror. And hence it is that many
distressed, bowed, broken souls, do exceedingly labor to grind themselves,
and to fall into the flames of horrible fears, thereby to assure themselves of
a good estate: Whereas, 1. All Christians are not equal in their preparations.
2. No man can judge his estate at all, simply, by legal humiliation.

2. A full assurance at first, or else no faith: As if Jacobs ladder had no
degrees, and the Simile.
Sun at his first peeping were in the height of heaven; Or that a Scholar must
be placed in the upper form, as soon as he enters the School. Such
inconsiderate deliveries as these, they trouble the faith of many, (as the
Apostle speaks of those in 2 Timothy 2. 18.) If faith cannot be without full
assurance, then I am no Believer, says David, for I had my faintings; Nor I,
says Peter, for Christ himself tells you, I had my doubtings.

It is a most vain and dangerous way for any Divine or ordinary Christian to
impose Rules, and to deliver a thing as a dogmaticall and common truth, which
he or he have in a special way only observed in themselves: The Spirit of God
bestows upon all the Elect of God, the same substantial frame of grace; but
the making up, and the making out of these, is different: As, No man must say
he has Simile.
no soul, because he feels not those particular workings of reason and desire
which another does; So, No man must conclude another to be out of the estate of
Grace, if happily there be not a plenary answerablenesse in them both, for every
method and measure of working grace.

Therefore let me caveat a An Item to the stronger Christians
little here, to you who are grown Christians: Remember that there are some
who are weak, yet true members of the same body: and do not you indiscreetly
insist upon your only personal experiences, and those only in some
particulars, in all companies, because you have (perhaps) risen high, therefore
none are right, who are below you: Consult the Scriptures, and deliver us what
it directs, and wherein it supports: You know not yet the aptnesses in tender
consciences to throw down themselves, and to catch at matters and arguments of
trouble. Thou sendest (perhaps) from thy company, a poor, a laden and troubled
heart, with a bitter and amazed opinion, that it has now no faith, which yet
came unto thee with some weak and strong desires of firmer faith.

Weak judgments (as I said before) cannot bear all things, but (like some men's
stomachs) are presently oppressed with meats unusual: And when we have
mistaken an error for truth, it may prove to the soul as the mistaking of
poison for medicine, a business of troublesome and dangerous consequence.

9. Ignorance of the Doctrine A ninth cause of doubtings.
of Justification; This is another cause of doubting.

The Doctrine of Justification is a Doctrine of Life. Romans Romans 5. 18
5. 18. The free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. And it is a
Doctrine of Peace, Romans Romans 5. 1.
5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, etc. And therefore the
ignorance of it must needs be a cause of fear and doubting.

Here consider four things. Four things.


1. The Christian condition is subject to many sensible impressions: We are
seldom without assault or combat; and those pierce us most which Sensible
guilt is troublesome, as a disease when one is awakened.
the conscience throws up. A man may bear any wound with more ease, then that
which he has given himself. When the Law powerfully reveals, and the
Conscience closely applies the guilt of our nature and lives, now it is a sad
and heavy time. Job cries out in the sense of this sting, Chap. 13. 26. Thou
writest bitter Job 13. 26
things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth.
S^lomon, tells us that the wounded spirit is hardly sustained, Pro. 18. 14
Prove. 18. 14. David is even dried up by his roaring, David.
and worn away with the pain of it. And Paul cries out Paul.
as a man almost lost, Romans 7.

2. The soul makes out at Something to answer and account for it.
such a time for some stay and help: It seeks where it may lay his burden, and
find something to ease and deliver. It is with a sick soul as with a sick
Simile.
body, which turns from one side to another, from this part to the other part
of the bed and of the pillow, and craves help of this friend and of another,
would have ease from any, but perchance can get none from all.

Here is sin, says the person; here is a sinful soul, and there is a
righteous Law broken, and a righteous God offended, who yet must and will be
satisfied: He calls upon me, and has arrested my Conscience; Now good Lord,
what shall I do? I have nothing to pay, or that can give satisfaction.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will
the Lord be Micah 6. 6, 7.
pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall
I give my firstborn for my transgression? the fruit of my body for the sin of
my soul? q. d. Those are nothing, those can do nothing; my sins are many,
great, deep; my righteousness is none, or too weak to answer for my
unrighteousness: All the good I have, or can do, cannot expiate the evil
which I have done, or make up that good which I should have. Here is some
sorrow, but what is that? it is but as a drop to the Ocean of guilt which lies
upon me: Here is some duty, but what is that? it is defective in it self, and
no amends to the many thousands of breaches which I have made. Nothing in our
s^lves.


3. The soul cannot stay it self upon it self: God calls for satisfaction; I
have it not says the soul: God will have satisfaction: Lord! what shall I now
do? The Conscience works upon us, and tells us, God is just, and if these sins
be not pardoned, and a righteousness found and presented, we are lost. Now the
soul is at a stand, seriously and sadly bethinks, What have I? Nothing but
sin, yet sin cannot answer for sin: Perhaps some imperfect holiness, but that
cannot make up a perfect satisfaction.

O my brethren! our blood and spirits must needs go and come, when the arrest
is upon us, and none appears to bail us: when the ship is split, and no rock
is near to save us: when the sentence of death is read against us, and none is
at hand to pardon us: when the Avenger of blood pursues us, and no city of
refuge opens to shelter us: unrighteousness, unability, and Conscience and God
meet, and none yet, nothing is yet found to answer for us, or to pacify us.

4. Without us there is something able to stay us, of which the soul being
ignorant, is still perplexed: it cannot conclude its fears, and scruples, and
doubts.

What is that? Ob. Sol.


I answer, Justification is the stay, and therefore the soul must needs be
burdened, being unacquainted with it: As,

1. Till we know where to Three things.
lay down our sinful burden, we must needs be troubled: If a perplexed soul
could find any to charge his debts upon, who would bear and answer for him,
then it might have rest: Now Christ in Justification takes our guilt upon him:
As Paul said to Philemon concerning Philem. 18
his servant One simus, If he has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put that
upon mine account: So says Christ to the broken and laden sinner, If thou have
any guilt, and sinful debts to be answered for unto God, put them upon mine
account; If thou have wronged my Father, I will make all eaven, look for thy
discharge and acquitance by me; for I was made sin for thee, that thou might
be made the righteousness of God in me, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and God 2 Cor. 5. 21
was in me, (ver. 19.) reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them; And 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, 1 John 2. 1.
he has an Advocate with the Father, etc.

2. Till we know our justifying righteousness, we cannot but be troubled: That
righteousness which justifies us, is not in us: No righteousness justifies,
but that which is every way perfect and full; now this is in Christ, and not in
us. Romans 5. 19. By the obedience Romans 5. 19
of one, many shall be made righteous. When a sinner is to stand before God for
acceptance and life, he stands not before him in his own rags, but in the
garment of his eldest Brother: He cannot say, Lord, here is a righteousness in
me which has fulfilled thy Law; here is a righteousness in me, against which
thou can make no exception; here is a righteousness in me, for which thou
art to account and pronounce me just: But this he may say, Lord, though I have
no perfect righteousness to answer thee, yet thy Son has for me, and he is
made unto me from thy self, my righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 30
30. And being justified by faith in it, he may have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 19.

Brethren, no man can be free from strong fears and doubts, who thinks to be
acquitted or condemned by what is in himself: If a man thinks this, The Lord
will or does enter into judgment with me, and I find nothing to satisfy him,
all the powers of my heart, and of my graces are insufficient, and therefore
there is now no hope but I shall be cast and condemned; you see here is ground
of doubtings: yet if a man could look out of himself, and know that his
righteousness is to be found in Christ, and God has appointed it so, that I am
to be justified by that righteousness only; now the soul may have a stay to
rest on: Yet my Saviors righteousness was perfect, was accepted, and he is
mine, and his righteousness is mine.

3. Till we know the dispositions (if I may so speak) in God about our
justifying, we cannot but doubt: for a man reasons thus: I have committed
great sins, which now do grieve me, and I hate them, and I have left them, but
I know not how they may be pardoned; those will now cause doubtings. Until we
know that God for Christ will justify us from great sins, as well as small, 1
Cor 6. 8, 9. and that 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10.
he blots out the thick cloud, as well as the cloud, Esaias 44. 22. Esa. 44. 22
I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins: and that there were expiatory sacrifices not only for infirmities, but
also for enormities, all which typified the virtue of the blood of Christ,
which justifies from great sins, etc.

But I have nothing to move

Yet pardoning is a gracious Esaias 43. 25. I, even I am Esa 43 25
he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake: and for his
Christ's sake, Ephesians. 1. 7. In Ephesians. 1. 7.
whom only we have redemption, even the forgiveness of our sins.

But God will call me hereafter

No, the Lord in his new Covenant Jer. 31. 34. I will forgive Jer. 31. 34
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. So that you
manifestly see, how the ignorance of our Justification leaves the soul in
great doubtings, because, 1. A man knows not where to cast his burden. 2. Where
to find his righteousness. 3. What is the virtue, and fullness, and love, and
graciousnesse, the fidelity and irrevocablenesse of God in justifying a sinner
by Christ.

10. A tenth cause of doubtings, A tenth cause of doubtings.
is disputation against the Promises: You have heard (heretofore) that the
ignorance of the Promises is an occasion of doubting: and now I am to show you,
that the arguing of the soul against them, is also another cause.

But you will say, Does any

I answer, The Promises may Sol. The Promises considered two ways
be considered, 1. In respect of their absolute truth and goodness: thus they
are not disputed against, unless by Atheists and positive unbeleevers, as were
those scoffers, 2 Pet. 3. 4. who said, Where is the promise of his coming?

2. In respect of their application and extent: Thus many weak believers are
subject to argue against them: Not, whether they be verity and mercy; not,
whether righteousness and peace do meet in them; but, whether these do reach
to them, and may be applied by them. Nay, that is not all, they do ofttimes
upon unjust grounds thrust away the Promises from themselves.

And now the soul must needs be hurried with fears and doubtings, in case the
condition be sensible, because

1. The Promises are to faith Three reasons of it.
as ground unto the Anchor; cast out an Anchor, and if it has not ground to
fasten, or Simile.
hitch in, the Ship rowls still: This is a truth, If faith cannot pitch and
fix, the soul cannot be quiet and settled. David in one place uses the
comparison of a bird, that his soul did hye unto God, as a bird unto her nest.
Whiles the bird is in Noabs dove found no rest for the sole of her foot.
the air, it is hovering, and flying, and restless; so is it with the soul,
until faith can settle it under the wings of a Promise.

Nay, again, the Promises are called the breasts of consolation: When the
child is hungry, and distempered, nothing quiets it but the breasts: And
assuredly, if the Promises do not still the soul, nothing can.

Now when a man will rove from this ground of faith, when he will fly from his
rest, when he refuses the breasts of consolation, no marvel if his soul be
full of doubts and fears: For this is all one, as if a lame man should throw
away his crutches, or a weak man his staff, or a sick man his cordials, or a
sinking man the bough which holds him up.

The goodness of the Lord (promised to David) was that Psa. 27. 13
which did hold up all his faintings; and so all Gods people have still been
held and staffed up by Gods Word: And therefore that person must needs be full
of doubts, who withdraws his shoulder from such a stay and rock, upon which he
should lean and rest himself.

2. This is but selfnesse, which is ever accompanied with unquietness: for why
do thou refuse to apply those Promises which God has made? Is it not
because, 1. Thou would have more goodness first, 2. Less unbelief first?
And is not this a self-seeking, yea, in some sort a self-standing? What an odd
and unseemly Note. So thou have promised to pardon sins, etc.
method of worshipping of God is this? Lord, I have but weak grace, and thou
have promised to strengthen it, and perfect and finish it, but I will not
believe thy Promise belongs to me; until I have first a greater increase of my
grace. Or thus, Lord, I find much unevenness in duty, and thou have promised
to give thy Spirit, which shall cause me to walk in thy way, but I will not
believe this Promise, until I be first more enabled in duty. Or thus, Lord, I
find much sinfulness in me, and thou have promised to change and cleanse the
heart, and to subdue iniquity, but I will not believe this Promise, until
first I see my sins subdued: When I find my graces increased, then I will
believe that thou will increase them; when I find my When thou have done it,
then I will believe that thou will do it.
obedience continued, and my sins subdued, then will I believe that thou will
cause me to walk, and wilt subdue sins. q. d. If thou will perform thy Promise
before I do believe thy Promise, then I will believe thy Promise. This is as
Simile.
if a man would see the blood in the veins, before the veins are opened; or
wash his hands clean, before he has turned the cock to let out the water.

3. A man is still held by the powers of his corruption: And where corruptions,
or wants are still found in their former measure, there the tender soul will
doubt and fear.

Let a man bestow himself much in hearing, or much in praying, or much in
conferring, yet if he have the art of thrusting away the Promises, he will be
still as he was: v. g. Suppose a man to be sick, call Simile.
unto his help a College of Physicians, let them consult upon his estate,
prescribe the most fitting potions, and quickening cordials, and when the
patient has heard them, he efuseth their prescriptions, he will not take
them, but says, These belong not to me; will his disease at all abate?

So is it with us; when we hear, or read, or confer, and many Promises fall
in to our help, if yet we put them aside, we now keep up our sinfulness, our
weaknesses, and therefore keep up our doubtings and distrusts.

But you will say, All Promises

To which (briefly) thus v. g.

Suppose thou feel the power of sin stirring in its motions Note.
and workings, and (as Paul complains) leading thee captive; though every
Promise cannot now be applied, yet thou do ill in not fastening on the
Promises of Mortification, which are made for this end, that the sensible and
weary sinner should lay hold on them for the subduing of his sins.

Again, suppose thou find weakness of Grace, (that thou can not do the
good that thou would do) do thou now well to thrust away the Promises of
assistance and strengthening, by saying, What is that to me, if God has said, I
will uphold, and I will strengthen, and My grace is sufficient, and My power
shall be manifest in weakness?

So again, suppose thou feel the guilt of sin, piercing and afflicting thy
conscience, and God has promised to pardon iniquities, transgressions, and
sins, and to love freely, and to receive graciously, do thou now well or
wisely, to thrust away the pardoning Promises, and say, What are they to such a
one as I am? If any beggar should say, What is that to me, that there are
bountiful alms at the rich man's gate? Or a Malefactor, What is that to me,
that the Prince will pardon Traitors? Or a sensible sinner, What is that to me,
that Christ did die for sins, and God will be merciful to returning sinners?
etc.

11. An eleventh cause of Eleventh cause of doubtings.
doubtings may be the suspension of divine favor: When God holds up his
countenance, the light of it from shining into the heart, ^o that a Christian
does not enjoy his day as before, his God as before, in the sensible evidences
of his loving favor, now the soul may (possibly) fall into singular distrusts
and fears. See it in David, Psalm. 30. 7. Lord, by thy Psalm. 30. 7.
favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong; Thou did hide thy face
and I was troubled. A Christians life, is in some respect, like a Courtiers,
who is near his Prince, upon his countenance or forbearance all his comforts
or discomforts do depend. We may say of him, what Mary spoke, when she lost
Christ, Luke 2. 48. Behold, Luke 2. 48.
thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing, (i.) with an heavy heart. So,
etc. But,

How appears it that this

Thus. Sol. Four things.


1. Gods favor is the greatest good; Thy favor is life, Psalm. 30. 5. He there
expresses Psalm. 30. 5.
Gods favor by that good which of us is most desirable: Nay, Thy favor is
better then life, Psalm. 63. 3. Therefore he 63. 3.
cries out, Psalm. 36. 7. O how excellent Psalm. 36. 7.
is thy loving kindness! and prays, ver. 10. O continue thy loving kindness.
And Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me, O Lord, 106. 4.
with the favor that thou bear unto thy people, 5. That I may see the good
of thy chosen, etc.

Now the sensible absence of the greatest good, must needs imprint the motions
of greatest fear, and suspicion, and trouble as you may see in David, Psalm.
77. 3, 7, etc. For now the glory seems to be departed from Israel.

2. Again, In these times nothing can comfort the soul, or stay it without
much difficulty: Our very graces will hardly uphold us. You know Simile.
that if the King clouds his countenance, they are not the dignities conferred
which will content us; they are not our revenews and possessions which will
cheer us: So is it with us, when God draws up his loving countenance; They are
not our riches, or our gifts, or our graces, or our services, which can delight
us; These do it, whiles in them we see Gods love shining toward us; but if
that draw back, these are all put to a strait: All is nothing to David, whiles
he is under this enquiry, Will the Lord be favorable no more? Psalm. 77. 7.
Psalm. 77. 7.


3. God does seldom draw up his favor, but for some unkindnesse on our part:
Our sins (ordinarily) are the clouds which hide his face from us; they are the
wall of separation: perhaps some great sin, as David's; perhaps some careless
esteems of him, speaking in his Ordinances; perhaps some slight passing by of
his secret motions and counsels; As the Church, Cant. 5. 2. Open to me Cant.
5. 2.
(...) sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, etc. To which voice of Christ,
how does the Church demean her self? 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I
put it on? At length, ver. 6. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had
withdrawn himself and was gone; my soul failed, etc.

How can the soul but be greatly trouled, when it has turned its day into
night, and shut up that light which once it enjoyed to its great comfort and
solace? Woman, why weepest thou? (said Christ to Mary, Joh. 20. 15.) Because
(said she) they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him: So may we justly weep, when our sins have taken away our God from us in
his comfortable favor, and we cannot easily regaine him, and find him.

4. These times of suspension, ordinarily are times of trial: wherein God
leaves the Christian to some notable combats, and to the great exercises of
Graces; at which time, corruptions and tentations will stir, and therefore no
marvel if they be times mixed with some fears and doubtings.

12. Another spring of doubtings, The twelfth cause of doubtings.
is, the crediting of Satan's testimony touching our estate; when we rest upon
his judgment, and see our conditions through his informations.

You know that objects are diversely represented unto the eye; Sometimes from
themselves in their proper nature, as when a man sees a green color Simile.
as it is; sometimes mediately, by other things, as when a green color is seen
through a red glass; now it does not appear in its native color, but in the
likeness of that through which it is perceived: So is it with our spiritual
estate.

Sometimes it is represented unto us, as it is truly existing; and thus we
shall see it, when we look upon it, and judge of it by the word of God: And
sometimes it is represented unto us, not as it is, but as it appears in some
corrupt and deceiveable testimonies and reports unto us: As Joseph's Joseph.
chastity appeared to his Master under the nature of abominable uncleanness,
when he took the testimony of it from his filthy wife: So shall our most
innocent and upright frame appear unto us to be nothing else but basest
hypocrisy, if we put the issue of it upon Satan's informations: For as Satan
has an art to color over the true condition of sinful bondage, keeping close
and in covert the proper image, or (rather) deformity of it: So he has a
delusion too, in hiding from our eyes the true powers of gracious sincerity,
and fetching up to the judgment all our weaknesses and present imperfections,
with all former known evils, with which he does so totally possess the mind,
that it can hardly see any thing that good is in it self, or if it does, yet
it sees so much corruption and imperfection, as that it is ready almost to
turn the scale and balance.

And here our crafty enemy cease not, but taking the advantage of a tender
conscience, he exaggerates upon us the large distance of this condition in
which we now are, from that which God commands and expects, and has found in
some of his righteous servants; in the citation of whose piety he is not very
sparing, that by the consideration of their fullness and our own emptiness,
we might the more easily suspect our condition, and credit his relations.

Which if we once do, Bone Deus! into what labyrinths do we wind our selves?
into what fears? into what doubts? We shall never set out to believe any
Promise, but he checks us back with the hollownesse of our condition; we shall
never set upon any ordinance or duty, but he foyles us with suspicions (at
least) that all is in vain, God will not bless and prosper his Ordinances
unto such; And in those Ordinances, if any matter of bitterness or
uncomfortablenesse be delivered, he brings home that to us, and tells the soul,
This is thy portion.

Now where our estate rests upon a deceitful informer, where we take things as
Satan makes them, where we judge of sin as he pleads it, and of Gods love to us
as he conveys it, and of Gods Promises as he interprets them to us, and of our
own Graces, and holy temper, as he cleares and evidenceth them unto us, there
can be nothing but jealousies, fears, distractions, and daily doubtings in the
heart.

13. Another spring may be A thirteenth spring.
some new risings of old sins after humiliation, and some singular assurance
of their pardon.

David gives a touch at this Psalm. 25. 7.
(I think) Psalm. 25. 7. when he prays, Remember not the sins of my youth, nor
my transgressions. So does Job, 13. 26. Thou writest Job 13. 26
bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities of my youth.

It would trouble us to see a man rise up out of his grave, (who has been
buried a long Simile.
time) and now to haunt us: So these sins which we have long since committed,
and long since bewailed, and long since renounced, and after long humiliations
their discharge has been obtained; to meet these sins (like an enemy with a
sword in his hand) with guilt in their faces and countenances again, this will
amaze the soul, it will appale it, and startle it, and make us more then once
to sigh and inquire, Why is it so?

Two things will now fall into Two things.
question.

1. The reality of pardon: Where God says, he pardons sin, there he says,
that he will remember it no more: But it seems he does remember it, (else how
comes it thus upon me as a debt not yet discharged, as a guilt not yet
removed?) and if he does thus remember it against me, I much fear, that as yet
the Book is not crossed, this sin is not pardoned. Upon which, something else
may fall in; If this sin be not pardoned, perhaps the rest are not; and if
this be risen up against me, how can I tell but all the rest may (afresh) set
themselves in array, and give a second charge upon my conscience too?

2. The reality of Repentance: For where God calls for sound repentance, (as
Esaias Esaias 1. 16.
1. 16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil) there God does promise, (ver. 18.) that
Though our sins be as scarlet, yet they shall be as white as snow; and though
they be red like crimson, yet they shall be as wool: in which words are
expressed a plain change of the sinful condition; our sins shall not be what
and as once they were.

Whereupon the soul misgives for its part: God will do what he has promised,
Note.
if I had done what I was enjoined. If my sins had been truly left, they had
been fully discharged; but now I possess them again in their guilt, and
therefore I exceedingly fear that I did overtly discharge my self of them in
my repentance. If Christ had slain them by his blood, or if I had drowned them
by true sorrow and repentance, they could not thus revive in their guilt, but I
fear that I did only skin over these sores, which I feel now to break out,
or that I laid them asleep only, and not dead, because they awake upon me with
such terror and clamor: And if so, then there has been a long and fruitless
vein of rotten hypocrisy in me; and whereas I had thought my work almost
finished, I am as yet to begin again.

Beloved, this is a secret and piercing fountain of strong fears and
doubtings, especially when the sins rise up, and set on us afresh after a
course of humiliation, and some singular assurance of their pardon: and yet it
is the case of many Christians, incident unto them in their days of great
losses, or sicknesses, or death.

14. Another spring or occasion A fourteenth cause.
may be some long silences in the conscience.

God (you know) has set in our selves, our Lawgiver, our Judge, and our
Witness: Conscience does sustain, and should discharge the offices of all
these: In a doubtful day it should clear our condition, and witness for us
against the testimony of Satan, and of our own fears: And therefore God has
given unto it an excusing and comforting power, as you may see, Romans 2. 15.
Their thoughts excusing one another, or accusing. And 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, etc.

Here consider some particulars,

1. Concerning Testimony. 2. Concerning our Condition.
1. There is a threefold testimony A threefold testimony.
about our estate; 1. One is from the Spirit, which shines in the renewed heart
by an unspeakable light, 1 Cor. 2. 12
and manifests unto it the things given unto it of God, and so seals, and
witnesses the truth and goodness of our particular interests in God and
Christ, according to the word of God. 2. Another is from faith, which does
testify the interests of the soul in that happiness which it finds revealed
in the Word: For that which faith believes by a direct act in the Word, it may
testify of the same to the person by a refexive By assurance.
act. 3. A third is from Conscience, which beholding the simplicity and godly
sincerity of the heart, testifies unto it (against all opposition) that this
blessed frame is in the soul; and this testimony being concordant with that of
the word, the soul is thereby greatly sustained, forasmuch as this is known
before, viz. A sincere temper is happy; and now Conscience clearing that
temper, the soul hereupon is much cheered.

2. Our condition falls under a threefold consideration.

A threefold estate.
1. Sometimes under the accusations of Conscience: Conscience does speak and
testify, but it is either that our hearts are totally base, and sinful, and
corrupt, or that in such and such a particular it is not right, it was not
perfect, but sinful and degenerating.

2. Sometimes under the excusations of Conscience: where Conscience testifies,
and acquits, and speaks peace, either As in Paul, loc. cit. As in David about
Saul.
about the frame of the heart, or rectitude of some particular action and
course.

3. Sometimes under a neutrall act or work of the Conscience: (i.) The
Conscience (like Absalom to Ammon, 2 Samuel 13. 22.) speaks unto a person neither
good nor bad: It does not accuse him, nor does it excuse him; it does not speak
terror, nor does it speak peace; it does not charge any special guilt, nor
does it give us a particular discharge of any.

Now this is the time of fears and doubts; I will show you why: because,

1. A negative state satisfies not a tender Christian; It does not satisfy a
tender soul, that God looks not like an enemy, unless also he looks as a
friend; or that Conscience does not check, but that it should excuse. It does
trouble us many times, that in our exemptions from trouble, we yet find no
Peace-speaker.

2. It gives suspicion of a neutrall estate: because Conscience seems to behave
it self as a neutrall, neither against us, nor for us. I call that a neutrall
estate, which is not eminently evil; it has some good in it, and does some
good, but is not so good as to be gracious: therefore the civil estate is a
neutrall; it does not rise to be so bad as the worst, nor to be so good as the
best people are. Now this estate (absolutely considered) is bad, it is an evil
estate, it is an estate in which if a man lives and dies, (and goes not beyond
it) he cannot be saved.

3. It may breed an expectation of the worse testimony of Conscience; for
withdrawments are (sometimes) the forerunners of some bitter intentions: It
fell out ill with Saul, when God withdrew himself from him: So when Conscience
withdraws, perhaps my Conscience has found matter against me; and as it does
not now speak peace, so (perhaps) shortly it may speak bitter things unto me.

4 Nay, Conscience is Gods Vicegerent, it is his Deputy, and therefore in the
silences and withdrawments of it, we look through and fear the disposition of
God himself toward us; because the servants do ordinarily express the
conceits, and inclinations, and affections of their masters: And this is
certain, that we do in an angry conscience behold Conscience is the
lookingglasse.
always an angry God, and so in a cheerful conscience a gracious God, and so
shall we in a silent conscience suspect a doubtful God: We do ordinarily
judge how God is toward us by what we find and feel Conscience to be toward
us: This is the glass in which we see his favors or frowns.

These are the springs of Doubtings, which I have enlarged in their opening
unto you; it is likely there may be more then these, (I could also deliver you
more about the temporal estate; but that is out of our scope and compass now)
It now remains that I descend to the closing up of these springs, to the cures
and remedies of these Doubtings, which is the last thing proposed.

CAP. V. The Cures and Remedies of Doubtings.
HEre lies our next and greatest work: And therefore as Physicians in this part
are more cautelous to administer things which are in their qualities most
proper, and in their measures most convenient; so must we in the healings and
closings of the spiritual distempers of the soul. And therefore that this
work may be happily performed, I shall (desiring Gods grace to assist and
bless) prescribe unto you, 1. The particular cures which Two sorts of cures,
Particular, General.
shall answer all those particular springs of doubtings before mentioned. Then
2. The general Cures and Remedies which may extend to the help of all, or most
of our doubtings, if time and leisure hold out.

The particular Cures.
1. Natural corruption was The first cure, answering the first cause of
doubtings.
the first spring of Doubtings, and Mortification is the first help and remedy:
That is the Disease, and this is the Cure. I may say that of our faith, which
the Apostle speaks of our persons, Romans 8. 13. If ye Romans 8. 13
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. The more
our sins do die in us, the more our faith will live in us. We are diseased
men, (take us in our best condition) Similies.
and you know the more any disease does lose of its strength, the more does our
health rise up and thrive: and so we are as a garden which has many plants,
and several weeds, the abating of these, the rooting up, and killing of these
contributes the greater relief and strengthening to our plants.

The Apostle (Heb. 10. 22.) Heb. 10. 22
would have them to draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith: he
would have them to cast out their doubtings in their approaches unto God, he
would have them to come with assurance, with a full assurance; to come so, as
verily to be persuaded of Gods acceptance of them; not indifferently to come
with, May be I shall be accepted, may be I shall not; this is a doubtful
approaching. But what does he adjoyne to this exhortation? Observe the next
words, Having your hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. d. As long as
your hearts are evil, as long as Conscience can charge you for entertained
evil, you will be wavering and doubtful; But if your hearts were sprinkled,
if the evil of sin were washed from them, then you might come with a full
assurance of faith, (i.) Then faith might fully persuade you to come
confidently unto God; for Faith cannot well persuade, if Conscience can yet
truly charge and condemn.

Therefore says S. John, If our hearts condemn us not, then 1 John 3. 21
have we confidence toward God. (i.) If sin be mortified, if conscience finds
no sin harbored, but condemned, if it cannot condemn us for not condemning
our sins; then we have confidence toward God: (i.) Then if we come to God in
Prayer, and ask any thing of him in the Name of Christ, Faith may confidently
rest upon it, that God does hear, and will answer. Whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him, ver. 22.

There are two effects of our sins.

1. They keep down our faith. I am so troubled (says David) that I cannot
look up. See the place, Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable Psa. 40. 12.
evils have compassed me about: Mine iniquities have taken Two effects of sin.
hold on me, so that I am not able to look up: They are more then the hairs of
my head; therefore my heart fails me. You see here that his sins made his
heart to fail, to misgive it self; and like a heavy rheum they fell on his
eyes, that he could not well look up. They are a hinderance to faith, our
natural inclination is a very clog unto the spirit of faith; and when faith
would do some good for us, it ever (like a malicious person) throws in doubts
and scruples, and breeds withholding arguments and reasonings against the
Truths and Promises of God.

2. They make the encouragements By contrary reasonings and denyals.
of faith to be difficult; they keep off the things which would edge and
quicken our faith. As Peter said in another case, Depart from me Lord, for I am
a sinful man; So the heart here, God is or will depart from me, because I am
such a sinner; He will not hear my prayer, because of my sins; nor be gracious
to me, because of my sins; nor may I pitch upon his Promises, because of my
sins.

Now consider, if that which did keep down faith in respect of its proper
inclination, (for faith naturally bends upward) and in respect of its
operation, that it cannot exercise it self without interruption, were removed;
would not faith be higher? If the chain and bolts were off, if the rheum were
dried, should we not walk better, should we not look better? Again, If the
encouragements of faith were kept close to faith, if faith could see them, and
dwell upon them, would not our doubtings sink? Therefore it is more then
evident that our doubtings would sink, if our natural corruption did sink, if
our sinful lusts did sink, which do breed those indispositions, those
interruptions, those continual difficulties unto our faith. Faith would rise,
if its contrary did abate. Cast Genesis 21. 10
out this bondwoman and her son, (said Sarah to Abraham) for the son of this
bondwoman shall not be heir with my son: So say I, cast out this bondwoman
and her son, cast out natural corruption and infidelity, that Isaac may be
alone, that faith may be (as much as may be) alone, and then it will possess
the Promises (and the soul too) with more quietness.

But here the soul replies, did fall; If the fountain did decay, the streams
would lessen; But alas, 1. Who can mortify his sinful nature? 2. What kind of
mortifying of it is requisite? 3. What way may be taken to effect it?

I will briefly say something to each of these demands.

1. To the first, Who can mortify his sinful nature? I answer, Of himself,
no man can; naturally he has neither will nor power thereto: But as
Chrysostom spoke in the business Tu non potes, sed Dominus tuus potest.
of Repentance, Thou can not turn thee, but yet thy God can turn thee; That I
say here in the business of mortifying, Thou can not mortify thy sins, but
God can do it: He can do it for thee, though thou can not do it for thy
self: Though thy natural corruption be a spreading leprosy, he can heal it:
Though it be a violent plague, he can cure it: God has put enough in Christ to
save a sinner, and therefore enough to heal a sinner. Remember one thing, In
all commands, the duty is thine, and the power is Gods: He who commands thee to
mortify sin, is ready enough with sufficient power to effect it, if he be
sought unto.

Nevertheless observe by the way, that Mortification may be effected two
ways; 1. Passively, as when the Lord does infuse holy principles of Grace,
which are contrary in their nature and virtue to the nature and power of sin,
working out sinful corruption by degrees. 2. Actively, as when the renewed and
converted soul does by faith successively apply and draw down the crucifying
virtues of Jesus Christ; Though the mere natural man can do nothing to the
mortification of sin, yet the renewed person having received grace from God,
is by the help of Gods Spirit to stir up the grace that is in him, and
especially his faith, to trust on Jesus Christ for the further subduings and
crucifyings of his sinful nature.

2. But now for the second demand, What kind of Mortification is most
requisite, so as in more measure to free the heart from doubtings? In a word,
this; be sure the mortifying be

1. Radical: lay the axe to the root: As all Graces thrive most when their
springs are quickened, so all sins decay most when their roots are mortified.
Corrupt acts will fall quickly, if a corrupt heart were more sanctified. The
strength of sin is inward, there are the strong holds which need most to be
cast down: By all means set up a crucifying Christ in thy bosom.

2. Impartial. It is true, one sin may trouble more then another, but it will
be thy wisdom to trouble all sin: Sins are chained together as well as Graces;
and one sin serves to help another, and the neglected sin may perhaps
suddenly wound thee, and make thee to stagger. The whole body of sin in every
member of it, must be the object of thy mortifying work: This will testify the
truth of Grace received, and the sincerity of thy conscience, and consequently
will remove many bottomes of fears and doubtings.

3. Diurnall: (i) a daily work. Perhaps sometimes thou art fervent in the work,
(when conscience is struck, or when afflictions strike thee) but afterward
thou art negligent, and then sin gets strength again. But as thou should
live by faith daily, so thou should die to sin daily: Watch thy spirit,
resist the motion of it, insist on divine promises, implead the strength of
Christ every day: Thou should so believe still, as if thou never yet had
enough of Christ; and so live still, as if thou were to live thy last; and so
mortify sin still as thou did at the first time wherein God looked on thee.

4. Special. If thou would make thy battle strong in any part, do it then
against Infidelity, and whatsoever upholds and contributes unto it. It is
granted, that the Radical principle of thy doubts is original sin; but then
the immediate principle of it is remaining Infidelity. Out of it immediately
come all thy staggerings, and reelings, and questionings, and doubtings: That
is it (O weak believer) which disables thy apprehension of the Covenant, of
Christ, of the Promises, of thy Title: That is it which perverts thy judgment,
and mis-perswades it with cunning reasonings, so that either thou can not
discern the full truth of Gods Promises, or thou can not see prevailing
reasons to persuade thy self that they belong to thee.

Therefore let the main care and work of thee be, to strike at unbelief: Be
humbled much for it, beseech the Lord to cure thee more and more of it, to
remove the ignorance of the Covenant out of thee, and to cast down carnal and
proud reasonings, which give the lie to the way of Gods free and full Grace;
which would have thee to be first, and of thy self, that which thou can
never be without Christ: and to do and bring that which God never imposed on
thee to do or to bring, but has told thee plainly, the working of it in thee
belongs only to himself, and he is also really and graciously willing to
bestow upon thee.

3. As for the third demand, What way thou may take for the mortifying of all
this sin; I answer,

1. Generally, touching all of it, Do but insist in the ways on which already
thou art fallen; Did any virtue in the death of Christ, (laid hold on by faith)
did that heretofore help against sin? It will do so still: Did any love of
God help thee the more to hate sin? It will do so still: Did any assurance of
a reconciled God in Christ, freely and abundantly pardoning of thee, weaken sin
in thee? It will do so still: Did solemn confessions of sin, selfe-judgings,
special mournings, sufficiently help thee with conquest of sins? They will
do so still: Did the humble application of thy self to the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, (through which he is pleased to reveal his arm) confer any strength
against thy sins? It will help still: Did any holy fear, any tenderness in
conscience, any declining of occasions? Did vehement wrestlings with God in
Prayer? Did serious meditation and consideration? Did close society with the
Saints? Did studies of farther holiness? Did frequent reviewings of thy
condition, and renewings of Covenant with thy God in his strength? Did holy
watchings? Did resistings of the first births of sin? Did these, any of these,
all of these, or any other spiritual course besides these, cause thy
sinfulness to be vile unto thee, to be abhorred by thee, to be cast down in
thy judgment, to be cast out in thy affections, to be cast off in thy life?
Go on with these, and sin will then be more and more mortified, and doubts
will be more and more weakened: the more that thy conscience is thus sprinkled
from dead works, the more shall thou be able to draw near unto God in
assurance of faith.

2. Particularly, for the mortifying of remaining Infidelity, do three things:

1. Study exactly the Covenant of Grace, in the Author of it, foundation of it,
matters contained in it, and all the adjuncts and terms of graciousnesse,
sutablenesse, fullness, faithfulness, etc. appertaining to it.

2. Study JESUS CHRIST* thoroughly; know him distinctly in the person of a
Mediator, and offices, and effects, and works.

Then 3. To much meditation in these, abound in Prayer, that God in particular
would cause thee by faith to set thy seal unto them: But more of this will
follow in answering some other causes of doubtings.

2. The second spring was weakness and imperfection in faith: The cure and
remedy of which, is, to perfect and strengthen faith: put more strength, more
growth, more ripeness into faith, and your doubtings will be less. The Simile.
more purely the fire burns, the less smoke it has; and when the light and
heat of the Sun are greatest, then the clouds and misty vapors are fewest.

Faith and Doubtings are like a pair of scales, where the weight of the one
bears away the other. The Disciples I remember prayed, Lord, increase our
faith; and so did he of whom you heard in Mark 9. Mar. 9. 24.
Lord, help my unbelief.

You will say, No man can

I answer,

1. God who gave faith, can strengthen it; for every grace depends upon him,
not only for birth, but also for complement: his strength must lead us on from
strength to strength, from faith to faith; he who is the Author, is also the
finisher of it: And therefore if thou would have a strong faith, thou
should go to a strong God, and beg of him, Lord, increase my faith; My
knowledge is dim, lighten that candle, open mine eyes yet more, that I may see
thy truths; My assents many times shaking, but do thou establish and comfirm my
heart in thy truths; My embracings, applications, very trembling, and broken,
and interrupted, but do thou guide mine eye to look upon my Savior, do thou
guide my hand to lay hold on him, do thou Do thou persuade me, and I shall be
persuaded.
enable my will and affections to embrace all the goodness of thy self, of
thy Christ, of thy Word.

It is Gods method to lay in (at the first) weak faith, that we might beg for
more faith, and give him the honor of all. Had we it strong at first, he
should not hear of us; but he dispenses it by degrees, that in all our
gettings, and in all our victories over doubtings, etc. his strength mayhave
the glory. Therefore go to God, and say, Lord, I would have more faith, thou
would have me to perfect it, but all perfection is in thee, and I cannot by
my mere strength ripen what thou give, but thou can water what thou
plantest; though it be sown a weak body, yet thou can make it rise a strong
body; though faith at first be but as a grain of mustard seed, yet thoucanst
cause it to blossom, and to spread it self into a high measure: Therefore
thou who alone can do it, do it for thy weak servant: Thou must take charge
of thine own graces; and if thou give my faith more strength, my believing
will bring thee in the more glory, etc.

2. The studying of Christ and the Promises more, will bring more strength and
perfection to faith. It is with the Christian as it is with the Scholar, let
the Scholar study Simile.
more the objects of knowledge, and then his knowledge will grow to be more
large; So let the Christian study more the matters of faith, and his faith will
rise to be more full.

Hence the Apostle prays that the Ephesians, Chap. 3. 19. Ephesians. 3. 19.
might know the love of Christ, that they might be filled with all the fullness
of God: And ver. 17. That Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith, that so
they might be able, ver. 18. to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height.

What the Prophet spoke of Hos. 4. 6.
perishing, we may say of fainting and doubting, My people doubt for want of
knowledge. Did we know the nature of our Redeemer more, how holy, and
compassionate, and helpful it is; did we know the ofoffices of our Savior,
how absolute they are in removing our guilt, in conquering our corruptions, in
making way for us to the Father, in speeding our suits and requests; did we
know how fully he stands for us, he died for us, he intercedes for us, how
willing he is yet to be more applied by us, and possessed of us, we would
believe more, and doubt less. What the Psalmist speaks of God, that same is
true of Christ, They that know Psalm. 9. 10.
thy Name will put their trust in thee.

Yet take a Caution in thy studying of Christ, study him as God reveals him,
otherwise thy doubts will stick upon thee. If a man studyeth his Note.
sins in his own way, in a natural way, he shall neither rightly see them, nor
yet be freed from them: So if men study Christ their own way, if they will
have him to be such a one as their fearful hearts would make him to be, and
not such A mighty Savior and gracious.
a Savior as God has manifested him to be, then not conceiving of Christ as
he is, they shall be and remain still as they were.

3. Be in the ways of strength. There are ways in which God does reveal his
arm; his arm is that which does strengthen us, and his arm is revealed in
his Ordinances: for God does not call us, nor change us, nor strengthen us, nor
save us without means.

He who is too good for the Ordinances, will ever be too weak in his faith. A
child Note.
which cannot stand when it is borne, may yet go by the use of the breasts;
but that person who is weak, and wants strength, if he feeds not, will abate
more, and ere long want life it self. This is a truth, A new Christian is
sometimes full, and a full Christian is always weak: for our spiritual
Spiritual life like the natural.
life is like unto our natural life, both of which are within us, yet neither
of them do rise, but from something without us.

What the impotent person spoke, Joh. 5. 11. He that made Joh. 5. 11.
me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed and walk, that we affirm of
Gods Ordinances, Those his means which made us good, can make us better; They
made us live, and they can make us walk; They gave faith, they brought the hand
which did set the plant, and they can enlarge faith, they bring the showers
which do water that plant:

For (...) they evidence Christ more, and open and unfold the Promises (which
are the stays of our faith) more.

2. They enervate or weaken, God can answer that in one Sermon, which has
troubled us more then one year.
and scatter the grounds of our fears and doubtings, and exceedingly suppress
the reasonings and powers of unbelief.

3. They clear the understanding, and so keep open the way for faith to God
and Christ.

4. They do instill a secret and drawing virtue, they do excite, and quicken,
and persuade. Ergo.

Fourthly, let faith know its privileges, and then it will grow more strong:
Faith would do more, if it did know all that it might do: Assuredly we should
have more confidence, did we know our royalties.

Believers are more to God then the most immediate servants are to a Prince;
All the Subjects of a Prince have some privileges, yet theirs are greatest,
who are in nearest service; now none nearer to God then Believers: See 1 Pet.
2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation,
apeculiar people; Nay, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Ye shall be my sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty: and these have those privileges which the servants have
not. They who descended from the blood of Abraham, had more privileges then
others, and have not they greater who come from the blood of Christ? The
Priests of the Law had singular exemptions, and Kings of all men are most
highly privileged; do you think Believers come short, who are not profane,
nor civil, nor typical Priests, but royal Priests? who are not Priests
only, nor Kings only, but both Kings and Priests, a royal Priesthood? who
are a holy nation, a peculiar people, (i.) a people of treasure, such by whom
only God gets something?

O, say many weak Believers,

No? Does not God love

But the world, all men discountenance

Ye are Kings in Gods account, and peace, and joy, Romans 14. 17. Cannot this
stir up faith?

We are often times afraid to

Are ye not Believers? And The Priests might enter in, when none else might.
And is not Jesus Christ the Altar upon which we tender all our sacrifices and
services to God? and is it not the Altar that sanctifies the gift? Mat. 23. 19.
The Apostle Mat. 23. 19 Gal 5. 1. Ephesians. 2. 13.
says, Gal. 5. 1. that Christ has gotten us a liberty: and Ephesians. 2. 13. that
we are made nigh by the blood of Christ: and Heb. Heb. 10. 19
10. 19. that we may have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus.

If therefore we did once thoroughly know what privileges the firstborn have,
the sons of God have, the generation of Christ have, the Priests That 1. Gods
1. Love is ready. 2. Ear open. 2. Access made. 3. Special Inte^cessions. 4.
Imperfections nothing. 5. Grants certain.
of God have, the purchased by Christ have; if we knew the grants of favor,
and free accesses, and singular acceptances with God, in and through Christ, O
how might we keep down our fears and our doubtings, and singularly encourage
our faith to run, and with fullest eagerness to embrace our God, our Christ,
our Promises?

There be other means for the perfecting of faith, as, Experiences,
Observation, etc. which I have touched long since, and our Divines are
plentiful this way, and therefore I spare.

3. The third spring of doubtings, was, the study of the life of sense: The
remedy of which, is, the keeping of it down: If you will keep off doubtings,
you must keep down sense and feeling. Blessed (says Christ to Thomas, Joh.
20. 29.) are they that have Joh 20. 29
not seen, and yet have believed.

If a man thinks this, That Christ is not mine, unless I handle him; and God
is not mine, unless I see him; and grace is not mine, unless I feel it; he
will be for ever full of doubts and fears.

For the helping of which, consider these things.

1. Sense is not a fit Judge of our condition; it cannot report our estate but
by what it feels: but the spiritual estate is not always under feeling; we
should be good and bad, found and lost, cheerful and sorrowful, many times in
one day, nay in one hour, if that sense gave sentence on our condition.

Beloved, think well on this, How can sense reach unto the times of desertion?
unto the There is not a latitude in sense. As a rich man's hand cannot hold all
his lands, so a Christians sense cannot comprehend all his condition.
times of want? unto the times of indisposition? unto the times where faith
does express no acts, but such as are pure and clear, and only grounded upon
the Promises? In these abstracted times, Sense finds nothing to speak to us, to
evidence for us, for God holds off, and wants hold up, and dulnesses hold in,
and we have nothing but a word of promise (all other things seem to fail and
forsake) to sustain and retain us.

2. The spiritual course many times goes against our sense, and therefore
sense must be kept down. You know that Abraham against hope believed in hope,
Romans 4. 18. Romans 4. 18
Faith and sense are many times at a contradiction; faith will believe what
sense perceives not; and what our sense does perceive, that same our faith
will not believe, but the contrary. Though ^e kill me, yet will I trust in him,
says Job: And Abraham believed his sons safety, in the sacrificing of him; and
we our immortality, notwithstanding our death and corruption. This is very
certain, that when we For your ways are not my ways, etc. As the heavens,
etc. Esaias 55. My times are in thy hands. Psalm. 31. 15 Heb. 11. 1. The evidence
of things not scene. 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are
upon th^e.
feel corruptions living, faith will believe them to be dying; and when we
feel our selves in trouble, faith will then believe our comforts and
deliverances: Faith usually (I do not say always) believes the contraries
unto sense.

For sense goes our way, and faith goes Gods way: Sense allows and sets it
self a time, and Faith is content to receive and take Gods times: Sense moves
upon what appears, and Faith upon what is not yet: Sense looks downward, and
Faith looks upward: Sense does sustain it self by something within us, and
Faith sustaines it self by something without us: Psalm. 27. 3. So Hab. 3. 17,
18. So Esaias 8. 17. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him. Esaias 50. 10. Who is he that walks
in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God.

3. Sense or feeling is not medium credendi, but fructus fidei: (i.) It is not
the ground of believing, but a fruit of faith. v. g. Take feeling in the most
excellent parts of it, as in assurance, and joy, and peace, these are not
Antecedents to faith, but Consequents of it. What is that? That is, a man has
not these first, and then faith for or from these, but he has faith first, and
these afterward.

Why do thou not believe?

If I had assurance that God were my God, and Christ were my Christ, and the
Promises were mine, I would: But say, Is the Word or thy Assurance the ground
of faith? And would thou have the fruit before the tree? or thy safety before
thou layest hand on the rock? If thou would have assurance, thou must then
believe; for the sweetness of Ephesians. 1. 13. After ye believed, ye were sealed
assurance flows from that faith which by believing feeds on Christ. So if
thou would have joy, believe; for true 1 Pet. 1. 8. In whom though now ye see
him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, etc.
joy does not prevent, but attend believing.

We are often times troubled by our own pride and folly; God sets us a way to
believe, and we will follow our own way; He gives unto us his Word of Promise
to ground our believing, and we will have our sense to be the ground: Of which
course, I dare say, what Abraham spoke to the curiosity of Dives, who would
have some to be sent from the dead, that his brethren might believe; to whom
Abraham thus replies, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead. Luke 16. 31. Luke 16. 31.


So say I, If men will not believe because God has promised, neither will they
believe if sense should stand up and speak; for we have more reason to suspect
our own testimony, then to distrust Gods invitation and promise.

You will reply, This testimony

I answer,

1. Gods testimonies are indeed evidencing of our present interests in him, or
special answerings of our present desires.

2. But then know, thou must first put to thy seal and hand of faith, before
he delivers over to thee the assuring Evidences. And as yet I never knew any
Christian who could be answered without faith, or took comfort in that which
yet he did not believe. For though it be the favor of God which does properly
comfort, nevertheless it does not actually comfort, unless faith has taken
in that favor.

But are not former experiences David remember the days of old?

I answer, True, Experience^^ the future acts of faith, but the Word of God is
still the ground of faith: They are not intrinsecall grounds, but extrinsecall
motives.

You may consider the experiences, either in things granted and performed, or
in Note.
the manner of their performance. Thou have had Gods favor, thou have had an
answer, but how did thou obtain them? was it not by believing? was it not by
waiting upon some good word of Promise? Thy enjoying of them did not prevent
thy believing of the word of Promise, but the believing of that word of Promise
did let in and bring unto thy soul that sweet and gracious experience: And
therefore thy experience was not the ground heretofore, nor is it now; only
thus far it serves as a singular furtherance to faith, that that God on whom
heretofore thou did believe, and from whom (in believing) thou receivedst
such gracious helps and answers, will again (he being the same for ever, and
his Promises being Yea and Amen) by further believing on his Word, renew his
gracious goodness and merciful favor unto thy soul.

4. A fourth spring was, the restraining of faith, the curbing of it in its
work, and in occasions. Now the remedy of this is, to give way unto faith; give
it scope, let it do its whole service: As the Apostle said of patience, Jam.
1. 4. Let Jam. 1. 4.
patience have her perfect work, so let faith; do not restrain it, and then
you shall be stayed, you shall be freed: The workings of one contrary restrain
the other.

Therefore Christ checks his Disciples for their anxieties, for their carkings
and solicitudes, and would have them to let their faith loose to see a Father
who would provide, Mat. Mat. 6. 32.
6. 32. They had poverty, or feared it; their wants came in, and losses, and so
their fears came in, and thoughts. But how should they cast them out? Thus: If
faith did believe helps, as well as impatience find wants; if they would give
way to faith to believe Gods providing, as well as sense to see the world
abridging and ebbing, they would not have been so full of thoughts: Shall he
not much more clothe you of little faith? ver. 30.

But for the farther help in this point, consider,

1. In any occurrence, Faith Three things. here.
may be our Agent, it can deal for us, because, 1. Our temporal life is by
faith, 2. The temporal Promises which reach over all the external condition,
are the bottom of faith: Hence it is said, Hab. 2. 5. The Hab. 2. 5.
just shall live by his faith. When we have no other help, yet faith can be our
staff; when we have no other feeding, yet faith can be our bread: It can
negotiate for the soul, it can make repair to God, and singularly solace and
sustain the soul in his word of Promise.

Suppose a man's means begin to shrink, his condition is drawing thin, he is
near to want, at such a time this man may keep down his doubts, and tearing
thoughts, if he will give faith a scope to work: I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. Heb. 13. 5. Here is a Promise Heb. 13. 5.
now, and here is plenty enough to faith; and faith (if it may have its perfect
work) will sustain thee against all doubtings.

I shall be left, say thou.

Thou shall not, says Faith.

Not now, perhaps, for yet I

Nay, never, says faith, for Psalm. 9. 10. They, etc. for thou Lord have not
forsake them that se^k th^e.
and God will not fail faith; and why should thou fail, when faith holds up
thy heart, and God holds up thy faith?

So for any cross and trouble; Not any burden this way, but faith may be a
shoulder to ease us: As long as there is a Promise to bear up faith, faith
will have strength to bear off the disquietments of our troubles.

I know not what to do, says

No? says Faith, Is not the a strong hold in the day of trouble, and does not
he know them that trust in him? Nahum 1. 7. Nah. 1. 7.


But troubles are renewed, Ob. Gods arm is not shortened.
and come again; and though I was delivered heretofore, yet now I fear.

Fear? says faith, No reason Job 5. 17. Happy is the Job 5. 17.
man whom God corrects. If a man has wounds, it is well for him to have a
searching plaster: and if a man has a full stomach, it is well for him if he
has a potion; and if his spirits putrify, it is well for him to be let blood:
So, etc.

18 For he makes sore, and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole.

19 He shall deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven there shall no evil
touch thee.

There is nothing new to God, nor difficult. Though our troubles be grievous to
us, yet their deliverance is easy to God, and faith can find a harbor for
every storm: yea, give faith but its scope, it will conclude present helps
from former deliverances; and the escape out of old troubles, shall ensure
faith in the new: He who has delivered, does, and will still deliver, 2 Cor. 1.

God does not alter, neither 2 Cor. 1.
in his truth, nor in his goodness, nor in his power, although our conditions
do vary: The temptation may be new, and affliction new, but God is still the
same, and the Promises the same, and faith can make use of one God to conquer
twenty temptations, and one Promise to bear up against many afflictions.

2. In every occurrence there is a providence, and the issues depend upon it.
If Satan tempts if afflictions, and crosses, and losses, and contempts befall
us, there is a Providence to permit them, to order them, to direct them, to
restrain them; and if we gave faith a scope to work upon that Providence, we
would not be so full of doubts.

1. For Satan, he does indeed tempt and suggest, but he cannot do this when he
pleases, he must ask leave of God But his actions and the issues of them are
subordinate and under restraint.
to touch Job any way: And when he does tempt, the issue does not depend upon
his malice; The Lord looks on, and subministers mavelous strength, and makes
his servants to pray earnestly, and hear earnestly, and apply his Promises,
and will deliver.

We look upon Satan, and not upon God; we look upon Note.
strong temptations, but we look not upon mighty assistances; we consider our
own weakness, but do not consider Gods omnipotency; we think how unable we
are, but not how able God is; we find yet no deliverance, and do not give
faith its perfect work, to believe that God will find a way to conquer for us.
If faith did but dwell upon Gods providence in this, how he suffers Satan to
buffet us, and how his grace is sufficient for us, and how his power will be
made manifest in weakness; how he has delivered, and does in our very
resistance deliver us, and has In God is my trust, I will not fear what man
can do unto me, said David. So here, etc.
promised to bruise Satan under our feet, we would not doubt, we would not
gratify Satan with fears of fainting, but resist him steadfastly by
encouraging our selves in our God.

2. For our crosses and losses; There is a Providence in them, He is in Egypt,
and in the fiery furnace, and in the prisons, etc
God is in all our troubles and wants: His wisdom is there, and his goodness:
O how shall I be delivered? How? Let faith work, and that will tell thee how.
Why should I thus be troubled? Why? Let faith work, and that will tell thee: It
is in very faithfulness, says David: And It is good for me that I am
afflicted. No child of God thus! Nay, let faith work, and it will clear all;
That a good condition is not exempted from afflictions, and that though God had
one Son without sin, yet he had no Son without sorrow.

3. Our encouragements are more then our discouragements, and our helps exceed
our oppositions; therefore faith is not to be restrained.

The Prophet healed up his servants doubtings, 2 King. 6. 2 Kin. 6. 16 El^shaes
servant.
16. Fear not, for they that be with us are more then they that be with them.

And so Christ to his perplexed Christ to his Disciples.
and doubting Disciples about those exigencies and casualties to which they
were exposed, Fear not little flock, A Kingdom opposed to temporal safety.
it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. q. d. Be not so
disquieted, so anxious for your lives, for your safeties. Though you be a
flock, and a little flock, and the wolves are many, yet let the worst come to
the worst, you shall have a Kingdom. Oppose that to this, and you need not
doubt and fear.

So S. John, 1 John 4. 4. Ye are 1 John 4. 4. Gods Spirit opposed to Satan's and
Antichrists.
of God, (little children) and have overcome them, because greater is he that
is in you, then he that is in the world.

Once more, S. Paul, Romans 5. Romans 5. 20 Grace opposed to sin.
20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; And 21. As sin reigned
unto death, so grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

So again for outward troubles, Esaias 41. 14. Fear not thou Esa. 41. 14 Help
to trouble and weakness. And 2 Cor. 1. 5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 17 Our light afflictions, etc. work
for us a far more exceeding weight of glory.
worm Jacob, (q. d. Thou art a weak creature, contemptible creature, a worm
yet thou art Jacob, and therefore fear not) for I will help thee, says the
Lord. Though Jacob be weak, yet the God of Jacob is strong.

So for outward losses, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. said Amaziah to the man of God, But
what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the Army of
Israel? The man of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more then
this.

From all which we see, that Faith has the better grounds to rest on; there
are more with faith then against it: for none can be against it, except the
evil creatures; and he who is for it, is the mighty Creator; All his power,
and his goodness, and his Christ, and his My Father is greater then all, says
Christ
Spirit, and his Word of Truth is for it: He is greater then all, so that faith
may have singular matter to work upon in all occurrences.

It is on the better side, and on the greater side, on that side which will
carry it, and bear down the contrary.

Satan is against me.

But greater is he (is that Ob. Sol.
Spirit of Christ) in me, then he that is in the world.

Sin is against me.

But greater is Christ who is Ob. Sol.
for me, then sin which is in me. Grace has much more abounded.

Men in their power are against

But greater is that Almighty God, before whom the Nations

Troubles are upon me. Ob. Sol.


But my comforts are greater then my sorrows, and the glory which I expect,
infinitely exceeds the trouble which I suffer.

Wants are upon me. Ob. Sol.


But my supplies are exceeding; I have a provident Father: And though I have
not a large portion of earth, yet I have a sure Kingdom in heaven.

Beloved, if we would but often consider of this, that faith is still on the
better, on the surer side, we would quit all our doubtings; we would Note.
not fear what man can do unto us, what Satan can do unto us; our own
infirmities would not disable us, nor afflictions; for still faith falls to the
surest party, and therefore give it scope. Faith pitcheth upon no weak causes,
upon no weak helps, upon no weak stays; it stays upon the Name of the God of
Jacob.

O how might faith outface the greatest oppositions, and trample-under all our
affronts, and losses, and doubts, if we did let it get out unto its
encouragements, could we once come with faith to be persuaded indeed, that they
who are for us are more then they who are against us!

Brethren, in our spiritual combats we have the better cause, and the better
strength; what help heaven can afford, we have. Therefore in all our distresses
let us hearten our selves, and encourage our faith: Let us (as Iehu in another
case) look up, and say, Who is on my side, who? and then we may even say what
the Psalmist spoke, Psalm. 124. 1. If it had not been the Lord who was on our
Psa. 124. 1
side, now may (the Believer) Israel say, 2. If it had not been the Lord, etc.
7. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare, etc. 8. Our help is in the
Name of the Lord, etc.

5. A fifth spring of doubtings, was special and particular sins after
conversion: These, like a strong disease, do shake the very heart and spirit of
the Christian, and stagger him on every side; and like a cloud, fold up all our
comfortable communion with God; like a dead fly they fall in all our services.
If thou do ill, sin lies at the door, said God to Cain: And so you shall
find it, that special sins after conversion do much interrupt us in our
approaches, and in our confidences.

Now the way to cure this spring, is,

1. To renew our sorrows, to set upon the fountain: David David.
did so after his great sins, and so did Peter; the one did Peter.
water his couch, and his tears were his meat day and night, and the other
went out and wept bitterly.

Bitterness of sorrow, (you read of it in Zach. 12. 10.) imports, Bitterness,
what it imports. 1. Anguish
1. an anguish of spirit: As David said for his Jonathan, My soul is
distressed for thee; so here the fallen Christian is distressed for sinning thus
against his God, for losing his God; There is often times a very tearing and
renting in the soul.

2. A sensible fullness of 2 Fullness of grief.
grief: As Joseph was full of compassion, and his bowels could hold no longer
upon the oration of Judah; so the fallen Christian is full of holy meltings, his
heart is ready to break, and like a full vessel it must have vent.

Many a time he must, and does consider this vile sin, and hies him alone to
pour out his grieved heart before the Lord, and shames himself before him,
and confesses with confusion of face his treacherous and unworthy dealing
against his God.

There is, you know, a natural Three sorts of sorrows.
sorrow, as for the loss of children; and a political sorrow, as was that for
the good King Josiah, and there is a spiritual sorrow, which is for our sins:
This must now be exceedingly renewed, and you may raise it by consideration of
mercy. O Lord, what have I How to raise our sorrow.
done? Why have I done this? Thou shewedst me mercy in opening my eyes, in
changing my heart, in calling me to holiness, in pardoning of former sins; yet
after all this, I have sinned against thee, I have wounded my heart,
dishonored thy Name, turned thy grace into wantonness, lost thy favor, broke
my peace, injured my Christ, grieved thy Spirit, turned away thine ear, given
advantage to Satan, and deserved for ever to sit in darkness, etc. Beloved, if
you find your hearts unhumbled, you shall find your hearts still to be
unbeleeving.

For besides that great sins are great provocations to our Note.
gracious God; they are also (til we are humbled for them) great impediments to
faith; faith cannot do service for us, it cannot uphold us, it cannot bring a
comforting Promise unto our hearts, until our hearts are humbled for our sins.
God comforts none but mourners; and faith cannot fall in with him, until our
hearts fall out with our selves.

And here take heed you be not slight and too quick: if you be, you shall have
your doubtings again. God does seldom or never speak easy peace after a
great sin. If you skin up a sore, it will break out again: If your sorrows be
not deep and sound, your fears will be fresh and multiplied: but let them be
pious, and serious, and then the soul will after a while recover it self, and
plead, and find mercy with God, and be able to answer and silence all the
doubtful reasonings which will rise against faith in its wonted communions and
applications.

But you will say, If we

I answer,

1. Thou have now to answer A great current will bear down the dam, and true
sorrow will carry away our doubtings.
thy doubtings. True, I did sin thus, but I have truly grieved for this sin:
and though I might not apply mercy because I sinned, yet now I may, because I
am grieved.

2. See Gods disposition to Ephraim, Ier. 31. 18. I have surely Jer. 31. 18.
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. ver. 19. I was ashamed, yea even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. But then ver. 20. Is
Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Though God be offended with our sins, yet he is delighted in our sorrows; and
nothing melts him more, then to see us come melting before him. The mournful
behavior of Joseph's brethren moved him, and the returning Prodigals The father
likes the sons submissions, though not his rebellions.
falling down to his Father, and cryings out, went to the heart of him: And it
is not without cause that David prays, Regard my tears that fall; And, Are
not my tears registered? And, Put thou my tears into thy bottle. Melting tears
do melt a tender God and Father.

2. To renew our repentance; in which I would comprehend both detestations and
forsakings. These sins must be made very hateful to the soul, you must
imbitter them, you must purge out all the sweetness of them, all the liking of
them; Nay you must set upon them as on things most abominable. Hence that
phrase of loathing your abominanations, Ezekiel. 36. Ezekiel. 36.


S. John, Rev. 2. 5. advises decayed Rev. 2. 5.
Ephesus to remember from whence she was fallen, and to repent. Beloved, this is
not a condition to stay in; This water is deep, and drowning is possible, if we
lie in it: But if we rise out of our sins, then our doubtings will fall. It
is with our consciences, as it is with water in a pot; if you put no Simile.
fire under it, it is quiet; but if you kindle a fire, the water will boil and
bubble, it has no quiet: So though conscience be quiet and kind, and molests
us not, if yet fire come under, if any notable sin come in, and kindle in the
heart; now the boylings, now the fears and doubts of the soul.

And in these tumblings, the way to cease them, is to remove the fire, and then
you shall see how the water grows to a stillness again, and by degrees The sea
will be calm, if the winds cease.
leaves fuming: So will our souls come to a pacified temper, to a setlednesse,
if once our sins be removed; leave the Esaias 1. 16, 17. Cease to do evil,
learn to do well. 18. Come now and let us reason together, etc.
sins, and ordinarily the doubts will leave the sinner.

For as sin is our unquiet sea, so Repentance is our secure harbor: Any
known sin unrepented, still puts in, and inlivens doubts in us; but
Repentance plucks out the venom, and the rage. An amended child comes again
before his Father, and a reformed Christian and penitent, may Loc. cit.
yet be confident.

3. Sue out a special assurance: You may see by David's disposition, after his
special sins, that a general acquitance would not serve the turn; for
special sins you must sue out special assurance of pardon.

Your consciences will never be quiet else; Nay this will not satisfy thee,
that yet they are pardonable, that they are such as do not exclude thee out of
the Proclamation; thou will never be quiet until God speaks peace, until he
does put his seal to acquit thee of particular sins.

Sin will rise, it will lie uppermost, thou shall feel it so, it will fly in
thy face, it will come up in serious times, until thou repent of it, and sue
out thy discharge; therefore be earnest with the Lord for pardon of it, for a
special acquitance: If the Lord Jesus did seal his blood upon thy heart, thy
doubtings would cease.

But you will say, There is

Let me answer this doubt

1. The promise of pardon Three things. The pardoning promise is exclusive, in
respect of sinners; but inclusive in respect of penitents: not all sinners, but
all repenting sinners shall be pardoned.
is indefinite to repentance: and I beseech you mark this point: God does not
say, I will pardon sins simply, but if men repent and forsake sins, they shall
have mercy. So again, in promising pardon to Repentance, he does not promise
it respectively, and conditionally, but absolutely and fully.

What is that? That is, God does not say, If you repent of such or such sins,
then you shall have pardon; but he says simply and absolutely, If you repent:
So that let the sins be never so great, never so many, yet if they be sins of
which thou now truly repentest, they are assuredly pardoned. Esa. 55. 7. Let
the wicked forsake Esa. 55. 7.
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. Here you see a promise of abundant pardon to be made unto the penitent;
though he has had thoughts, though he has had ways, yet if he forsakes them,
the Lord will pardon and show mercy.

Again, because that pardon is promised to actual repentance indefinitely,
therefore let the sinner be what he will, let him be a person who was not
converted before, or let him be a person already converted, yet if he begins
true repentance, or the other renews his true repentance, they shall be
pardoned: And the reason is, because it is not sin simply in such an estate
which God pardons, but it is sin repented of, which God does promise to
pardon: And therefore if an evil man, whose life has been a course of sins,
repents and leaves his sins, he shall have mercy: Or if a good man fall
accidentally into sin, upon his repentance he may confidently plead out Gods
promises of pardon, for he shall have mercy upon his repentance, as you may see
Prove. 28. 14. He that forsakes his sins, shall find mercy. Ezekiel. Pro. 28. 14
18. 32. Turn your selves, and Eze. 18. 32
live. See ver. 21, 22. If the wicked will turn from all his sins, ver. 21,
22.
they shall not be mentioned unto him.

Whence we may infer, that if God will forgive his enemies, he will then (upon
the same repentance) forgive his children. If a King will pardon a returning
Traitor, will he not Simile.
receive then a returning son? It was a pious speech of S. Chrysostom, Si Deus
promittat gratiam nobis offendentibus, quid faciet nobis poenitentibus? If he
promises grace unto us when we are sinning, what then will he confer on us, if
we be repenting?

2. Christ is of great virtue still, and as able to put away the sins after
conversion, as well as before: therefore is he called the same, yesterday, to
day, and Heb. 13. 8.
for ever: And the Apostle reasons it in the Romans, If when Romans 5. 10
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, how much
more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life?

We must think of the pacification by Christ, of the atonement, of the
propitiation, of the satisfaction, not as confined to any one sin, or to any
one estate, but in respect of its sufficiency, reaching over both estates, and
all the sins in both. What is that? That is, the death of the Lord JESUS was
not only to reach the sins thou did commit in thy unconverted estate; and
the rest afterward in thy converted estate, thou art to satisfy for by thine
own power some other way. What is this but that Popish leaven? that
selfjustification? those humane satisfactions? What is this but to divide our
salvation twixt Christ and our selves? What is this but to restrain either the
sufficiency or the efficacy of his death?

No, Christ is unto us in respect of sins before, and sins after conversion, as
the Lord was to the Israelites, a pillar of a cloud, and a pillar of fire.
Jesus Christ is a cloud in the Christ a pillar of cloud, and a pillar of fire.
day, (in the time of conversion) to cover our sins upon our repentance; and a
pillar of fire by night, (for the times of former darkness) upon our
repentance to consume away our sins, etc.

The difference of our estates does no way add or diminish to the strength and
efficacy of his death: His blood can cry as loud now as heretofore, and is not
less effectual to get pardon for our falls in the way, then for our sinnings
when we were not in the way, as is evident in the sins of Paul before his
conversion, and in sins of David and Peter after their conversion: for Christ
is our continual Mediator, and everliving Intercessor.

But you will reply, These

I answer, though the comfortable Sol. No sin that thou can grieve for,
cuts off our communion and interest.
interest be cut off, (until the time of sound repentance) yet the radical
interest is not: As the leprous person was debarred the use of his house,
(until he was cleansed) yet he was not debarred the title and right of his
house: and therefore thou may (upon thy repentance) sue unto the Lord by the
blood of thy Savior, the pardon of these sins.

3. The Lord is merciful still unto repentants: You shall read in Psalm. 136.
that his Psalm. 136.
mercy is set down 26 times with the adjunct of everlastingnesse, His mercy
endures for ever. And Psalm. 86. 5. Thou Psalm. 86. 5.
Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy, unto all them
that call upon thee. So ver. 13. Great is thy mercy toward me. And ver. 15.
Thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious, long-suffering, and
plenteous in mercy and truth. So Micah 7. 18. Who is a God Mica. 7. 18
like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of
the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy. 19. He will turn again, he will have compassion on us,
he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the
depths of the sea.

Mercy is not strange unto God, it is his nature, it is his delight, and
repentance will not be hid from his eyes, if it be not hid from our hearts: He
calls us to repent, and causes us to repent, that he might show us his mercy,
and everlastingnesse of his mercy.

6. A sixth spring of doubtings was indisposition unto or about spiritual
duties: Whence we fear the truth of grace, which is active and lively, and
doubt our acceptance with God, by reason of our dullness and deadness.

For the curing of this, consider,

1. That dullness in holy duties is possibly incident to men truly sanctified.
Beloved, there is a great difference betwixt a dead heart, and a dull heart:
That heart is properly A dead heart.
termed dead, which wants a living spring, and therefore spiritual duty is
contrary unto it, it has a secret a versnesse to holy services, it cares not
for holy prayer; there is not only an indifferency whether the work be done,
but a determinate dislike, and positive The difference twixt a dead heart and a
dull heart.
unwillingnesse, or rather (a Nolition) a nillingnesse to the same. Whence
arises that shuffling carriage in wicked men, to find diverting occasions, and
arguing reasonings against the strictness and spiritualnesse of duty.

But again, that heart is A dull heart.
properly termed dull, which has in it a living spring, but has not a lively
operation: The Spirit is willing, (said Christ) there the spring was open; but
the flesh is weak, there the operation was narrow. The Christian may say with
David, My heart (O Lord) Rom 7. 21, 22.
is ready, my heart is prepared; and as Paul, I would do good, and I delight
in the Law of God after the inward man; but yet, says he, I find a law; that
when I would do good, evil is present with me; And I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind. So in the Galatians, The flesh
lusts against Gal. 5. 17.
the spirit, etc. and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot
do the things that ye would. Ye would do, but ye cannot do; Ye cannot
always do the work ye would do, and ye cannot do it in such a manner as ye
would do it.

You know that a full vessel which has a narrow neck, it cannot send out the
waters so speedily, nor so fully; and a sick man, who would fetch more then a
turn about his chamber, he cannot do that, sometimes; if he does it, it is
Simile.
with extreme wearisomnesse, not of his mind, but of his body: Or as a lusty
and able man escaped out of prison with a great chain about his leg, he would
run away, but the chain hinders him, and vexes him, so that it does indispose
him in the motion.

In like manner is it many times with good people; The heart, the will is bent,
it is resolved for Prayer, for hearing, etc. but then there is a chain clogs
them, there is a spiritual weakness, there is flesh in them as well as
spirit, and this does dull them, this does indispose them about the doing,
about the exercise of their intentions and desires.

Therefore let us take heed of denying or concluding the absence of grace, from
the infirmity of working. David Psalm. 119. 25. My soul cleaves to the dust,
(that ^as low enough) quicken thou me, etc. 28. My soul melts for
heaviness, strengthen thou me according to thy word.
prayed often to be quickened, and so may we, and yet be alive. It is one thing
to have Life and livelihood are different.
life, another thing to have livelihood: That may be present, when this is
absent: for a Christian, 1. may have a dull temper of body, not able to render
unto him the spiritual sense of spiritual duties, melancholy does intercept
the vitality not only of nature but of grace.

2. He may not so seriously meditate and dwell upon the ways and motives of
livelihood, he may have but remiss, and unpiercing, or unapplying thoughts of
Gods great love and mercy, of Christ's blood and intercession, of the Promises's
goodness and fullness; and therefore his spirit may be dull.

3. He may not have such The oil may not be on the wheel, nor that gale to the
ship.
an actual aid and special influence from the Spirit of Christ to excite his
spiritual frame and temper; and then if that wind be more slack, our ship will
move on with less forwardness.

Or lastly, perhaps he may have over-lasht, he has been (improvidently or
accidentally) in the dulling ways; he has been surfeiting upon some sin, or
too greedily embracing the heavy world, or been idle in his particular calling.
But,

Whatsoever the cause may be, this is certain, that Indisposition
Indisposition is not fundamental.
is not fundamental; it is not such a case, which nullifies the estate of
Grace: For as in our most lively times there is more duty then we Note.
can thoroughly do; so in our dullest times there is not more duty then we
would do.

And this know, that the Christian condition keeps up for truth of being,
notwithstanding the many pauses, the many eclipses, the many indispositions
which may, and do accompany it.

But yet again, secondly, be informed of this, that God observes the bent of
the heart in the duty, and accordingly accepts of it. You know that place in
the Chronicles, how that the good Lord did pardon 2 Chro. 30. 18, 19.
every one who prepared his heart to seek him, though he Gods eye is more on
the intent of the workman, the^ on the extent of the work.
were not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.

The greatest actions managed from a corrupt heart are not accepted with God:
(All the superfluous and abundant Note.
gifts of the Pharisees were worthless, yet the Widows mite found acceptance)
The meanest duties set forth with a perfect heart are acknowledged by God; he
will take notice of them; for God looks to the heart: He eyes not so much thy
behavior, he listens not so much to thy words, but (through these) he
considers thy heart; if that come with life, though thy body come with
dullness, though thy tongue be not so fluent, yet if there be life and truth in
the heart, he will find duty and accept of it.

You remember that Simile Simile.
of the Goldsmith, who has a skillful eye to find out the smaller and
neglected ways of gold, though covered with much dross; and many times there
is much fire and much gold, when both are hidden with dust and cole: So is it
with the Lord, he can sent out the secrets of our desires, and what we would
do is observed and taken with him for Our groans are not hid from him.
well done, notwithstanding the many indispositions which cover our Altar.

Therefore it is David's counsel 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
to Solomon his son, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a
perfect heart and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee, etc.

Beloved, we are mistaken God can find duty in speechless tears, and sighs,
and groans. Romans 8.
about duty; we judge it not to be duty, unless the tongue can speak much, and
our behaviors be fresh, etc. as if a man were not a man, and did no work in
course clothes: But know we, that the sealing of spiritual service with
integrity of heart, is duty.

And that is it which God considers, and unto which he has made many promises
of acceptance, and audience, and grant.

This is something to stay and dulnesses?

That may easily be discerned:

1. By not contenting your How to know that the bent of the heart is right.
selves with this heavy kind of performing of duties: You will have life enough
to dislike your selves, though you have not power enough to mend your services.

There are some men (and they have evil hearts) which will be picking some
help and pleas for their lazy and dull serving of God, from what has been
spoken.

O say they, though we cannot

He does so, and he knows the true Christian is not satisfied with this, that
God accepts of a weak heart; but it would also hereupon bring him a better
heart.

It does many times fall out with it self, and rebuke its own dullness, Why
art thou so heavy, O my soul? and why art thou so indisposed within me? Thou
art serving of a living God, why do thou not serve him with a more lively
heart? And then it breaks out on the sudden, Well, Lord, If I had a better
heart, thou should have it; If I could find more affections, I would bestow
them on thee.

Hereupon,

2. It falls upon the ways of livelihood, and exercises the art of quickening:
It will not rest in this indisposition, but will use all the means to better
it self; and this does abundantly manifest its bent.

As you know, the weak person Simile.
he will have one turn more, and the ingenuous Scholar will write one line
more, and the desirous Archer will make one shot more; So the sincere heart, he
will assay yet more in duty; Perhaps frequencie in duty (says he) may breed
fervencie in duty. (A man may get him an heat by walking, and by rubbing his
benumbed parts.) Or perhaps says he, one duty more in another kind, may
quicken me to duty in every kind; as some physic and cordial to the heart,
may cause more nimblenesse in the hands and feet. I am somewhat dull in
praying, I will therefore read more, or hear more, that I may find matter to
set on my Note.
Prayer: I may perhaps meet with that in reading, which may set me on in
praying. Or I am somewhat dull in hearing, I will therefore pray more, perhaps
God may hear my prayer, and then I may hear his word with more attention,
delight, profit, etc. And assuredly so it falls out many times, that our
indispositions are more about some particular duties which are singularly
removed by the small dispositions, yet left in us about some other duties.

Or if all this betters not, yet, says he, I will even go to Gods Ordinances,
and will come before him, and bring him my soul thus indisposed, perhaps yet
he may be disposed to quicken me by his Word, to cheer me by his Sacrament;
Who knows but that he may let fall a blessing? that he may so powerfully direct
himself to me, as to shake my heart, as to throw off all my dull distempers,
and revive my Graces, and excite my affections? etc.

So that if you perceive your dulnesses, if they griev^ and displease you, if
you will not rest in them, if you yet set out to the means of removal,
assuredly your hearts are sincere; God sees that the bent is honest, that thou
art indeed willing; and take this for thy comfort, that if it be thus with
thee, God (for present) accepts of thy services, and ere long thou shall be
freed of these indispositions which do accompany thee in thy services: God
will drive this sleep from thine eyes, and these fowls from thy sacrifice.
Once again though, note, that

3. The cause of all acceptance is in Christ: therefore do not doubt that God
will reject thy services because of thy indispositions, but believe he will
accept of thy sincere endeavors, because (...) Christ. Beloved, it (...) for
us to consider all things about duty. A sincere heart must set it out, a
gracious God must take it, and a mighty Redeemer and Intercessor must present
it. Note.
Christ presents that to his Father, which we present to Christ: The duty
belongs to us, but the reason of acceptance is not in the Petitioner, but in
the Intercessour: God accepts not for our fullness, not for our liveliness,
but for his Sons worthiness, Rev. 8. 3. The Angel had a golden Censer, and
much iucense: that he shonld offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the
golden Altar.
for his merits, who ever lives to make intercession for (...) who offers up
the prayers of the Saints with the perfume and odours of his righteousness.

Are thy Prayers fervent? They are not accepted for their own strength: Are
they weak? They are not rejected for their impotencie. Is thy heart sincere?
Then know that He appears for us. Heb. 9.
Christ has sufficiency of merits to cover thy (self-blamed) indispositions,
and to gain the acceptance of the weakest (if sincere) services.

Therefore this were a good way, in case of disliked indispositions, not to
place the acceptance in our selves, but in Christ, And though there be Note.
inequality of expressions in duty, quoad nos, in us, yet there is a constancy
of intercession by Christ, propter nos, for us. Sometimes we come more fully,
sometimes more emptily; sometimes we run, and other times all that we can do^^
is to move; sometimes affections are smart, judgments quick, expressions
ready, requests fervent, hearings reverent and delightful, (...) at (...) there
times the wh^^ ^^ences bemost down (...) have prayed a slowly, our affections
turn not so lively, our judgments are barren, language sticks, Requests
breath only, but flame not, we hear, and give credit, and stock it up and
that is all: Here you see the various carriages of our holy services in respect
of the person, yet there is no such variety in Christ.

Whence it would follow, that if our duties found grace with God, bccause of
their accidental vivacity in our performance, all our weaker services were
utterly lost, and in case of the more lively services, Christ also were lost;
because the reason of their acceptance would be in themselves.

But Christ is required to make up our duties, as well as to make up our
persons; he must be a Mediator for these, servants Intercessor for those: the
talents (...) there is a constant merit, and a perpetual offering of that same
up, with As our persons, so our prayers must stand before God by Christ.
all the prayers of all Saints; hence it is that they are accepted, not for
their own worth, but for his Name.

7. A seventh spring of doubtings, was, a conceit of succeslesnesse in duty: We
have prayed much for the perfecting of such Graces, or the subduing of such
corruptions, or establishing in such duties and courses, yet nothing comes of
it, we are as we were, and where we were; therefore we doubt that we are not
good, or that God does not intend any good to us.

This is the spring, the cure and remedy of which may be made up by these
considerations: viz.

1. Service and progress (...) duty belongs to us, and (...) rewards and
recompenses belong to God. I have prayed a long time to God: True, and thou art
bound to pray still. I have heard a long time: True, and thou art bound to
hear still. Thou do but what thou art bound to do. It is the Simile.
Husbandmans part to plow the land, and to sow the corn, and it is Gods part
to give the harvest. Hereupon, says the Apostle, Let us not be weary in Gal.
6. 9.
well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not: For God is a God
hearing Prayer, and he Psalm. 65. 2.
will be found of them that seek him, and will not forsake them. 9. 10.


2. God is a good Master: Job did not serve him for naught. I called upon the
Lord, Psalm. 118. 5
and he answered me, said David. And in another place, He has 116. 1, 2.
heard my voice and my supplications, and inclined his ear unto me, therefore
will I call upon him as (...) I live. Not one of the servants who trasfiqued
with the talents that could complain he was an austere Master. Therefore God
takes it to heart, when they in Malachie Mal. 3. 13.
charged him with neglect and irrecompence for serving of him; Your words have
been stout against me, says the Lord. How so? Ye have said it is in vain to
serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance, and that we
have walked mournfully before the Lord? Whereupon the Lord instantly
manifests his bountiful and tender disposition to them who did serve him,
and think They shall be mine, (says he) and when I make up my jewels, I will
spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him. Then shall ye
return and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not. (i.) Then you shall know that it is
not lost labor to serve him.

3. Petitioners must wait an answer, as well as present a request: Therefore
know that faith in point of seeking unto God has a double office:

1. One is, to deliver up in Faith has a t^ofold office.
the Name of Christ our wants, which God has promised to supply in his Word.

2. Another is, to expect and wait those supplies which God has promised.
Therefore says David, As the eyes of servants Psalm. 123. 2
look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand
of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until (even so long,
let it be never so long) until that he have mercy upon us.

And (beloved) this waiting does notably distinguish betwixt desires which come
Waiting does distinguish desires of unsettled humor.
from an unsettled humor, and those which come from poverty of spirit. In them,
we give on, but presently give up, as we do in slight visits with Simile.
men, knock at door, and if none answer, away we go, our business was
little, and so our stay is answerable: but in those desires which spring from
poverty of spirit, Poverty of spirit.
these have faith to believe that God is at home, and have patience to wait his
answer.

As a poor beggar, (suppose Simile.
such a one as Lazarus) he will lie at the gate, and knock more then once, and
wait more then an hour for some alms, for some crumbs of our tables; and so
will humble Christians, who are truly poor in spirit, they will be at heaven
gates, and put up request after request, and expect day after day the speeding
of them from the throne of grace and mercy.

But we cannot wait. Ob. Sol.


You cannot! And that is the reason you miss of your answers. If beggars will
not stay, they lose their alms; and if Christians will not wait, they lose
their grants.

Yet let me not go off easily from this scruple, for in it lies the choicest
part of the cure: If we could but wait on God, then assuredly we should see
that we have no reason to cry out of fruitlesnesse in seeking.

How may we do to wait? Ob. Sol. Four motives to wait.


Thus.

1. You are sure to speed. Certainty of answer will beget constancy in seeking.
Sure to speed? How shall we be sure of that? Thus.

1. Take it in Promises, and so you are sure.

2. Take it in performances, and so likewise you are sure.

For Promises, you know, Promises.
there is a certainty in them; we have no way to pierce into Gods intentions of
doing us good, but by his Promises; and in them we have: For as Simile.
the words of man do deliver unto us the thoughts of man; so the Promises of
God do discover unto us the intentions and purposes of God. Now then observe
what God has promised to waiting;

Hab. 2. 3. The vision is yet for Hab. 2. 3.
an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Here is the
duty, Wait; Here is the Promise, delivered, doubled, trebled, It shall speak,
It will come, It will surely come: Nay doubled again, It shall not lie, it
will not tarry. It is as if God had said, Do but wait, and you shall be
delivered, you shall be delivered, you shall be delivered, you shall be
delivered, you shall be delivered. O the rhetorike of God! O the certainty of
his Promises!

Psalm. 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, Psalm. 27. 14.
be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart.

Esaias 40. 31. They that wait upon Esa. 40. 31.
the Lord, shall renew their strength: They shall mount up with wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint.

Micah 7. 7. I will look unto Mica. 7. 7.
the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me.

Will you now see a certainty Performances.
in performances? Then read Psalm. 40. 1. I waited patiently Psalm. 40. 1.
upon the Lord, and he inclined to me, and heard my cry. Here was waiting, and
here was sure speeding.

He was but one man. Ob. Sol. Heb. 6. 12.


Then Heb. 6. 12. Be ye followers of them, who through faith and patience
inherit the Promises. They did inherit the Promises, (i.) got all the good out
of them by patient waiting. If we be sons, let us wait, and then we also shall
be heirs of the Promises: The good of them shall be settled upon us.

See also Esaias 25. 9. and Esaias 49. 23. None shall be ashamed Esa. 49. 23
who wait on me. From all which we infer, If God has made sure Promises, If
he has hitherto performed those Promises unto such as wait upon him, Then if
we wait, we shall surely speed, etc.

2. The things you desire are great; and worth the waiting. You would think
him Simile.
a strange man, who would not wait the sealing of the pardon which the King
has promised him. It is a wonderful thing, that when God promises us pardon
of sins, we cannot have patience to seek and wait the sealing of it: Yet
pardon of sins is such a thing, as our very life lies in it.

So again, Is not grace a singular thing? Is not mortifying of sin an
excellent thing? And is it much that the Lord puts us to more frequent
seekings, to iterated prayers and duties, for those gifts and grants which are
so high in their nature? so admirable in their use? so saving in their end? can
you be better employed?

3. The answers will sweeten and easily recompense all the times and labors of
seeking. When the man-child is borne, all the labor in travail is forgotten;
the joy of it drownes the sense of that. Let As the Wisemen when they saw the
star, rejoiced.
God but lift up the light of his countenance on thee, it will answer and quit
to all the prayers that ever thou made in thy life. I found him whom Cant. 3.
4. And David does forget the aching of his bones, etc. when God did answer him.
my soul loves, I held him, etc.

4. Doubled services have usually doubled mercies: for when God prepares the
heart, he will incline the ear; and when he intends a great mercy, he first
enlarges the heart to a greatness of desire and seeking. Every true seeking
of God opens the heart wider, and secretly adds to the stock: The more prayers
we have put Prayers are our money at use.
up to use in the hands of God, the larger will the return of them prove: When
we have been long suitors, God does (ordinarily) at length dismiss us with
more then what we ask; So that he will answer us not only for our prayers,
but also for our time.

4. We shall have the best things in the fittest times: therefore we should not
accufe our services as lost, for God will answer them; but then it shall be in
the best things, at the best times.

O, will you say, Is it not

I answer, Perhaps not: God shall have victory. Again, though thou prayest
against thy sins, yet thou do venture upon the provocations and occasions of
sin, and therefore the Lord may justly hold up, because thou holdst not in.
Now the Lord (by his silence) will teach thee in these times, forbearance on
thy part, as well as forbearance on his part; and then upon thy next prayers
accompanied with this watchfulness and avoidance of occasions, he will let
fall more strength and power to mortify thy sinful dispositions.

Wherefore let us not faint in case of suspensions, for God does suspend his
grants to the times, when thou art fitted to receive them, and when it is fit
for him to open them.

Is it sin that thou would have subdued? Do thou seek his subduing power,
and withal, decline inviting occasions either from thy self or others, and
then God will hear thee. Now thou art fitted, and now is it fit for God to
help thee; but if thou will pray against the disposition, and run still upon
the occasion, God will not answer thee.

Is it grace and eavennesse in duty which thou would have? Then thou must
use former grace, and stick close with humbleness, and diligence, and
reverence to the means, and now God will supply all thy wants. Until thou
have a more humble and doing heart, thou art not fitted for more grace. God
gives more grace to the humble, says James. James 4.


I say, he will give thee more grace; Thou shall have enough for thy condition,
and enough for thy salvation, although thou have not such an equal measure
with others, whom God intends for more public use and service, then he does
thee.

5. Gods forbearings should not occasion cessation, but earnestness: He is not
silent, that we thereby should become speechless, but that our desires should
grow more fervent.

You know that the skillful Simile.
Angler does not draw back his bait that the fish should not bite, but that by
this means he should the more greedily leap after the bait.

And the tender mother steps aside, not that she would not have the child seek
her, but that it may even dote after her.

So does God many times draw back and step aside, and as the Prophet Jeremie
speaks, Jer. 11. 8.
He becomes as a stranger, and as a wayfaring man who turns aside, etc. And
as David speaks, He is as one that sleeps. Why? What? Is it that he He
knows our thoughts long before.
does not know us? No. Is it that he does not hear us? No. Is it that he will
not speed us? No. His ear is open, and before they call I will answer. Esa.


Why then? Surely because 1. He delights in this music, he smells a sweet odor
and savor in all our humble sacrifices, he delights in the broken Whiles they
are speaking, I will answer. Loc. cit. To. 15. 30. Hos. 12. 3, 4
heart.

2. He loves that we should strive with him for his grants, (that is the
phrase, Romans 15. 30) and wrestle with him, (as Jacob) and so prevail upon him;
And that we should give him no rest, (Esaias 62. 7.) until he has satisfied
Esa. 62. 7.
our souls with mercy, and established them with his grace.

3. He would inhance the goodness of the things desired, and make us to wear
the answers with more thankfulness to himself, with more comfort to our
selves, and with more benefit to others.

8. An eighth cause of doubtings was, weakness of judgment about the
essentials of salvation, which necessarily does cause doubtings, both in
respect of those suspicions, and errors, and mistakings to which it is subject:
as also in respect of that scrupulosity which ever adheres to the conscience,
where weakness adheres to the judgment.

Now the remedy of this spring, consists in these particulars.

1. Get a distinct knowledge of Fundamentals: It is the emptiness of our minds
that we be preposterous in our searches. Many a Christian loses himself in a
sea of opinions, before he has squared himself with the first grounds of
Religion.

Remember this, that the first truths do support and maintain the rest, (as
the cornerstone the rest of the building) and are as the original Will, which
decides many scruples in Law. Hence is it, Simile.
that some men doubt about special conclusions, because they are ignorant of
the general principles; which were they distinctly known, the falsity of any
conclusion would easily become evident unto them. Men usually dispute first,
and know last: As if a Simile.
Soldier would range an Army, before he has learned to handle his weapons.
How ordinary is it to hear disputes Ergo, says Paul, Romans 14. 1. Him that is
weak in the faith, receive you, but not to doubtful disputations.
of Original sin, of Predestination, of Redemption, of Faith and
Justification, of Assurance and Obedience, of the degrees of grace and duty, of
the direct and absolute way of life? etc. I say it is ordinary to hear some
arguing of these, who yet are ignorant of the nature of these. But,

Paul's method was to lay Heb. 6. 1.
down his foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God:
which if Paul thought fit to teach, I think fit for us to learn. That Ship
rowls least, which is well bottomed; and that house shakes least, which is well
founded; and that Christian True knowledge is as the day wherein we walk more
sted fastly; and ignorance like the night, in which we are full of fears, and
often stumble.
doubts least, who is well grounded in the maine points of Religion: For
besides this, that Primitive truths give an aim to all truths, so likewise
they uncase all errors, and heresies, and opinions, and arguments which come to
pervert the mind another way. And surely when the mind obtaines an evidence by
one truth for another, and by truth also of error contrary unto it, it is in
the least hazard of doubting; for as much as doubtings ordinarily arise from
some error or mis-apprehension in the mind.

2. Get a distinguishing knowledge of Fundamentals from Accessories. Every part
of the house is not the cornerstone, or the pillars: A man Simile.
may take away much, and yet the house may stand: If you take away the painting
and music, or some seelings and annexed posts, yet the house may stand.

So may a Christians salvation, though he know not many accessory truths; nay,
although he mistake about them; nay, although he deny them, if this denial be
not accompanied with a proud perverseness, but arise only from inevidence and
inability.

There are three things, about which it were good for Christians to have a
distinguishing knowledge, viz.

1. Fundamentalls. 2. Consequents. 3. Indifferents.
Fundamentals, I call those Three things.
Truths which take up the work and way of salvation; as the doctrine of sin,
and of Christ, and faith, and repentance, etc. for these are such things,
without the knowledge of which, no man can be saved.

Consequents, I call those illations or inferences which do flow from the
primitive truths, either virtute rei, in the nature of the thing, just as a
stream ^lowes from the fountain; or virtute intellectus, in the judgment of
the person, as the conclusion is made by such or such a man's conjecturall
opinion, to flow from such a principle or such a Text.

Indifferents, I call those actions which in themselves are neither holy nor
evil; neither is a man by any express Yet actions in themselves indifferent,
in respect of circumstances, may be offensive and sinful. See Romans 14. 14, 15,
etc.
command from God, (specificative) enjoined them, or (specificative) prohibited
them: Which things considered absolutely, if a man does use them, he shall not
be saved; if he does not, he shall not be damned. They do no more constitute a
Christian, then a garment does a man; which whether he does wear it yea or no,
yet still he is a man.

Now this distinguishing knowledge does exceedingly assoyle the doubting heart,
which does often times shake and roll about the lawfulnes of indifferents, etc.

3. Reduce all conjectures and consequent truths unto the first truth: It is
the counsel of the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things: And the Prophet
Esaiah, To the Law, and to the testimony. Esa. 8. 20.

It was a good speech of S. Austine to Manicheus, contesting with him for
audience, Hear me, Hear me, said Manicheus, Nay, says S. Augustine, Necego
te, nec tu me, sed ambo audiamus Apostolum, dicentem, Peccatum non cognovi, etc.

Beloved, we may see what weak creatures we are: when truths fall down amongst
us, and when we sit in the Tribunal; alas, what distractions, what several
stamps do our several opinions set on them! what distinctions, limitations,
qualifications! We will be sure every one of us to handle the question so, that
it shall be so far true, as may stand with our own delights, profits, aims
and ends; We do many times for personal respects, discourse and determine of
truths.

But now reduce them to the first truths, how do our empty and contrary
opinions and fancies clatter and shiver to dust? they fall down before the
word of God, as Dagon did before the Ark of God; for the Scriptures are the
touchstone which will easily decide counterfeit glosses and errors from
genuine and proper truths: Genuine truths are like the young Eagles, that can
with open eyes behold the light of the Sun, and erroneous glosses and opinions
are like sore eyes which cannot behold the Sun without twinkling, and
watering, and closing.

And note by the way, that if the truth be the truth of God, it does tend to
these three things: viz.

1. The glory of his rich grace, Ephesians. 1. 12. 2. Settling of peace in the
conscience, Romans 5. 1. 3. Mortifying of sin, Titus 2. 12.
4. Establish the mind in declared truths. Beware, says the Apostle Peter,
(seeing ye know these things) lest ye being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall away from your own steadfastness.

It is not unknown, that some (like Pedlars) wander up and down, and make a
living by their errors; subtle people, and crafty to their own confusion, who
have only a strength of parts to gloss over sins and errors, and to weaken the
strength of truths and ways to heaven: Most rendering children of Satan, for
they cease not to pervert the right ways of the Lord. And yet so artificially
do they vent their wares, so neatly do they Act. 13. 10.
set them out with the applause of reason and carnal licentiousness, that
many weak headed Christians swallow up their baits, drink up their cups, lick
in their tumultuous and (...) after, are clear, express; he who runs may
read them.

Busy thy self most in these; study to be a good man, and a good master; a
good man, and a good servant, etc. Exercise thy self to know what concerns
thee, and then to pray thy self into the practice of that. This is a wise way,
and settled, and which is exempted from vain turmoiles and many judicial
doubtings.

6. Inform the conscience with the nature of a Christian and saving condition:
Some things are required toward salvation, some things unto salvation; some
things give a being, other things a comfortable being; Of all which if a person
had a special and distinct knowledge, he might walk more quietly without
fears and doubtings. Shall I give you an hint of some particulars? Remember
then these Propositions.

1. Preparations to Grace are Four particulars worthy of weak christians
distinct consideration.
different and unequal: All men are not prepared by the same degrees, or in
the same manner for Christ: Conviction of the natural estate, and attrition,
and anguish, and those legal operations, these are preparations: for men must
know their sinful condition, To. 7 7, 9. Romans 8. 15 Mat. 11. 28
they must have the spirit of bondage, they must be heavy, and weary, before
they can lay hold on Christ.

Now those legal impressions are different: Every Believer (of ripe years)
has felt them, more or less, yet all cannot say alike. Every child feels
something in his birth, Simile.
but some children are brought forth with more pains, and others with less
difficulty. Lydia was quickly delivered, but Paul lies by it some days. Some
people can say, as David in another case, Sorrow endured for a night, but joy
came in the morning: Others may say as the same David, Night and day thy hand
was heavy upon me.

The Lord is pleased (for he is an arbitrary Agent both for the matter and
manner in our spiritual alteration) to single out some persons, and to charge
their sins deep upon their consciences, and to pursue them with singular
terrors, to stick his arrows and their own sins so close that they know not
which way to turn themselves. He does almost grind Some persons greatly
prepared.
them to powder, and casts them to the dust, and to the lowest amazements and
distractions; and then as the skillful Artificer, who has bruised, and
battered, and broken the mass into pieces, and thrown it into the fire, and
melted it, he yet at length takes it out, and fashions from all this, a most
comely, and precious, and useful vessel: So does the Lord many times with
some people, he returns them their old sins, and powerfully mingles the Law
and their sins, and their consciences together, and so with that hammer
bruiseth and breaks their sinful hearts, and with that fire melts them and
dissolves them as it were; yet after a long and sad time of sensible conviction
and horrible bondage, he graciously forms the Lord Jesus in their hearts, and
renewes his blessed image of grace, and they become the most acceptable vessels
of glory.

But with other persons he deals not in this high measure; He does indeed
arrest them Others gently prepared.
with the Law, but does not so fetter and iron them; he does not so imprison
them, but upon on their falling down he is pleased to release them from their
guilt and fears, and to deliver them from the powers of darkness, into the
mavelous liberty of the sons of God.

Therefore know this, that Note.
when God has attained his end, he cease in this way of legal operation.





1. To evidence unto a man the foulness of his heart and life 2. To convince
him of a total Legal troubles and workings cease, when God attaines his end:
unworthiness. 3. To produce most inward dislikes of such an abominable thing
as sin is. 4. To make a man willing, upon Gods own conditions, to take and
receive Christ. Which is in some sooner, and in some later.

These are the ends, which being in some sooner, in others later, accomplished,
the Lord does cease the workings of preparation.

You know that if a piece of stone or wood will break with one or two blows, we
spare the rest; and if the mass will yield Simile.
in one days firing, we then let it out: So, etc. But if yet the knottinesse
be great, and resistance long, then knotty wood must have iterated blows, and
un-yeelding metal must have the greater fire.

From all this, the doubtful heart may perhaps be settled about his estate in
grace: Ask him, Do thou love God? I do: Serve him with all thy might in all
thy ways? I do: Rest upon Jesus Christ? I do: Combat and war against sin? I
do; and yet I fear all is not right: Why? Because I never had such terrors as
others. Now then inform thy weak judgment, If God has shown unto thee thy
sinfulness, If he has abated thee, and emptied thee of thy self, If sin and
thou are now at defiance, If thou have yielded unto the receiving of Christ
upon his own terms and conditions, though thy legal preparations were not
answerable to others, either for intension of strength and measure, or for
extension of length and time, yet thy condition is good and safe: For that
humiliation which is accompanied with these issues, is assuredly blessed and
comfortable. If the physic carries away the humor, though Simile.
it do not make the person so sick, yet it is good: And though a man want a
storm to drive him to shore, yet is he safe enough, if he be landed with a
softer gale and tide.

2. The operations of Grace are also different and unequal, notwithstanding
that Christians may have one common principle, and the same external means of
grace. I beseech you observe this.

1. There is one and the same (specificall) seed of regenerating grace in all
Christians; the same spirit of holiness, of faith, of repentance, of love,
etc. All Christians are bottomed alike, and rooted alike for the substantial
part of Grace.

2. That many Christians may live under the same means of Grace, as many people
do live under the same light and heat of the Sun, and children under the same
parents.

3. That the exercises of their graces may yet be different: as children having
the same school, may yet sit in Simile.
several forms; and having the same food, may yet have several agilities and
abilities.

So Christians, who have the same principles of believing, and repenting, and
praying, and doing, and who have the same ministry, and common assistances,
may yet vary and differ in the active part of graces and duties. One may know
more then another, one may rest upon Gods Promises more then another, one may
pray with more fervencie then another, one may do the other parts of duty more
then another, etc. yet all of these may have truth of grace, and may be saved.

Therefore know, that inequality of holy operation does not spring from nullity
or falsnesse of Grace, but sometimes from the variety of particular Inequality
of holy operation, whence.
occasions, sometimes from the variety of particular ends, sometimes from the
variety of particular assistance. Every Christian has not alike,

1. Forcible occasion to exercise his faith and patience:

Nor 2. does God intend every Christian for some singular ends and services, to
which he fits others by the greater improvement and use of their graces.

3. Neither has every man at all times an equal gale or breath of spiritual
assistance to enlighten him, to excite, and affect, and draw him. I might also
add,

4. Neither does every Christian stir up the gifts and graces in him; he does
not wi^ely on all occasions and motions improve his stock.

Neither 5. has every man alike temper and constitution, which conduces much
to the actions of the soul.

6. Neither does every calling admit unto every Christian those spaces, and
leasures, and remissions, or vacations, which some have to set on their
heavenly frame and course.

It is with true Christians, as with true men; Every man Simile.
has a soul, and faculty from that soul, and actions issuing out of those
faculties; yet every man is not equal in the expressive ways of nature: So is
it with Christians, all have truth of grace alike, but the exercise of it is
different and personal.

3. As the actions, so the degrees of Grace are different: Compare Christian
with Christian, it is as if you should compare Branches.
one branch and limb of a tree with another; where though all be set in one
common root, yet their particular measures are more and less. Or as if one did
compare the Stars together, where though all be interested in the heavenly
Stars.
orbs, yet they differ among themselves in respect Sheep.
of magnitude and light.

Ye are the body of Christ, Members.
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 12 27
27.) and members in particular; this was a glorious and gracious condition:
But then, ver. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all teachers? are all
workers of miracles? do all speak with tongues? Nay, Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some
Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.

Now as this holds firm enough in various degrees of singular gifts for
edification, so likewise it is as evident in those special graces for
sanctification: As gifts for edification, so graces for sanctification are
different.
For, Are all in the fold of Christ, sheep? There are some lambs: (Peter is
commanded to feed both, Ergo there are both.) Are all in the garden of Christ,
Cedars? There are some tender Vines. Are all in the household of Christ, strong
men? There are some young, there are some babes in Christ too. So Heb. 5. 13.
and 1 John 2. 12, 13. 1 John 2. 12, 13.
I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you, and
because you have known the Father. You see little children there, as well as
young men and fathers; and these children, though children, though little
children, though very tender Christians, yet they know the Father, and they had
pardon of sin.

Brethren, how exceedingly do we disturb our selves with doubtings here? Many
people, through a weakness (I say no more) of judgment, do fall out with
their estate and condition, molest and afflict their hearts, close up all
against themselves, suspect, and foolishly reason and argue the nullity of a
gracious condition, from the imperfections which they observe in their graces,
from their behindments in faith, and zeal, and sorrow, etc. Ah ignorant
people! who are truly industrious after the great measures of Grace, and will
not yet quiet their fears, and still their Note.
doubtings with this,

1. That such earnest pantings, and inquietations, and unsatisfiablenesses
cannot but spring from truth of grace.

2. Then, that where grace is in truth, though in the lowest measure, there the
soul has interest in Christ, in all the Promises, in God, in heaven, in all.

Remember this, He who has least in grace, has not that which he would have;
and he who has most in grace, has not that which he should have; and he who
has any truth of grace, has enough to change his heart, and save his soul. I
would believe in that fullness of assurance and reliance as thou do, and if I
cannot, I will yet yet believe as well as I can. He who said, O woman, great is
thy faith, said also to another, not so strong, Thy faith has saved thee. No
man misseth of heaven for want of measure, but of truth. Our consolation lies
much in the comparative degree, but our salvation is in the positive: Much
grace will yield unto us here our heaven, and any grace, if true, will yield us
heaven hereafter.

4. The separable fruits of true grace are different, not only if you compare
one Christian with another, but if you compare the same Christian with himself
in diverse times and occurrences.

1. If you compare Christian with Christian in respect of comfortables, it is
night with one, when it is day with another: One goes on heavily oppressed,
walking in darkness, (that is the Prophets phrase, Esaias 50. 10.) He has not
that Esa. 50. 10 Light.
sensible light of divine favor, (Thou hidst thy face, said David, and I was
troubled, Psalm. 30. Psalm. 30. 7.
7.) He has not that sensible joy or testimony of his gracious Joy.
condition, (Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 51. 12.
51. 12.) How many mourners are there in Zion? Many who lament the absence of
favor, of joy, of peace.

Yet some others there are who do believe, and do rejoice in believing: They
see As Sim^on. As Paul.
Christ in their arms, they know whom they have believed, and rejoice with joy
unspeakable and 2 Timothy 1. 12 1 Pet. 1. 8.
glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

2. If you compare the same Christian with himself: For it is with our day of
grace, as in (...) many doubts. For the cure and remedy of which, be pleased to
consider of some particular Propositions, which I will lay down, to unfold the
business and comforts of Justification unto believing penitents; for to these
only I address my speech.

1. In Justification, our debts are charged upon Christ: they go upon his
accounts. You know that in sin, there is the vicious and staining quality of
it, and then there is the resulting guilt of it, which is the obligation of a
sinner over to the judgment seat of God, to answer for sin.

Now this guilt, (in which lies our debt) this is charged upon Christ:
Therefore (says the Apostle) God was in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them:
And, has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sinne^ You know in Law, the
wifes debts are charged upon the husband; and if the debtor be Simile.
disabled, then the creditor sues the surety. Fidejussor, or surety, and
Debtor in Law, are reputed as one person: Now Christ is our Fidejussor, He is
made sin Heb. 7. 22. Jesus was made a surety of a better testament.
for us, says the Apostle: For us, (i.) vice nostra, or loco nostro, (i.) in
our stead. A surety for u^, one who put our scores on his accounts, our burden
on Fidejussor
his shoulder: So the Prophet, Esaias 53. He has born our griefs, Esa. 53. 4, 5
and carried our sorrows. How so? He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities: (i.) He stood in our stead, he took upon him the
answering of our sins, the satisfying of our debts, the clearing of our
guilt, and therefore was it that he was so bruised, etc.

You remember the scapeit ^ev. 16. 21
^^^at, Upon his head, all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all
their transgressions, in all their sins, were confessed and put.

And the Goat did bear upon him all their iniquities, etc. What is the meaning
of this? Surely Jesus Christ, upon Christ.
whom ou^ sins were laid, and who alone died for the ungodly, and bare our
burdens away. Therefore the Believer in the sense of guilt should run unto
Christ, and offer up his blood unto the Father, and say, Lord, it is true, I
owe thee so much, yet Father forgive me, remember that thine own Son was my
ransom, his blood was the price, he was my surety, and undertook to answer for
my sins; I beseech thee accept of his atonement, for he is my Surety, my
Redemption; Thou must be satisfied, but Christ has satisfied thee, not for
himself, what sins had he of his own? but for me, (gracious Father) they
were my debts which he satisfied for; and look over thy book, and thou shall
find it so, for thou have said, He was made sin f^r us, and that he was wounded
for our transgressions.

Now this is a great stay, a great comfort, that we our selves are not to make
up our accounts and reckonings, but that Christ has cleared twixt us and God.
Therefore it is said, Ephesians. 1. 7. that in his Ephesians. 1. 7.
blood we have redemption, even the forgiveness of sins.

2. In Justification, the believing penitent has an universal discharge. What
is that? That is, when a man is in Christ, when he is a true believer, he does
not then receive a particular acquitance from such or such sins, but an
universal discharge from all the sins he has committed. You know the promise.
Jer. Jer. 33. 8.
33. 8. I will pardon all their uniquities whereby they have sinned, and
whereby they have transgressed against me. 9. And it shall be to me a name of
joy, a praise and honor, etc.

Therefore David speaking of Gods fullness and extent of pardoning and
remitting mercy, he says, Psalm. 85. 2. Thou Psalm. 85. 2.
have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered all their sin.
Selah. Which covering of all sin, is in sense the same with the Apostles not
imputing of sin, Romans 4. and 2 Cor. 5.

This is a true axiom, Peccata non minuunt justificationem; Though sins be
different, yet justification is not. When the Lord God justifies a person, the
different qualities and circumstances of former sins do not hinder their
pardon and discharge. You know that one may with a pen cross a great sum as
well as a little sum; and a King can give a pardon not only for petty Simile.
offenses, but also for rebellions and treasons, and so he does many times. It
is therefore an observable passage in holy Writ, that there is scarce a sin in
any kind, but we may read the blotting of it unto a believing Note.
and repenting person: viz.

Original sin, which was the Justification reaches all sorts of debts.
great deluge of our natures, and the first fire which inflamed the whole world
of mankind, yet this sin was pardoned to Adam.

Drunkenness, another sin which the Apostle (in 1 Cor. 6. 8.) raises to the
height of eternal separation, yet was it pardoned to Noah a believing penitent.

Lying, another sin, which is of it self apt to lock the gates of heaven,
(Rev. 22. 15.) yet was it pardoned to Abraham, the father of the faithful.

Incest, that unnatural commixture, yet pardoned to Lot.

Murder, a crying sin, and Adultery, a fearful sin, yet both pardoned unto
a repenting and believing David.

Idolatry, that ang^ing and provoking sin, a sin which unthrones God, and
makes a god, yet pardoned unto Solomon.

What should I mention more? Impatience, a sin, yet pardoned to Job.

Passion, a sin, yet pardoned to Jonah.

Denial of Christ, against knowledge and resolution, a high sin, (and such as
a Donatist upon no terms would admit, as capable of a re-acceptation) yet
graciously pardoned to Peter.

Persecuting of the Gospel of Christ, blasphemy, and compelling of others to
blaspheme, (i.) injuriously and despitefully to oppose Jesus Christ, his word,
his members, O how piercing and bleeding a sin! yet pardoned to Paul, he
obtained mercy.

Oppression and covetousness, by which a man does suck the blood and life of
others, yet pardoned to Zacheus.

Nay yet once more, as you And all sorts of debtors.
may see pardon in Justification releasing all sorts of debts, so you shall
find it releasing all sorts of debtours. Take one place for all, in Levit. 4.
where the Lord goes over all sorts and divisions of sinners, and appointed
offerings for them all, and proclaims pardon to them all: viz First, the
Priests, ver. 3. Then secondly, the whole congregation, ver. 13. and 20. Then
thirdly, a Ruler, ver. 22, 26. Then fourthly, any one of the common people,
ver. 27, 28, 31, etc.

Under which four ranks, he draws in all sorts and conditions of men; and not
only appoints a sin-offering for them all, but also accepts of the same: By
which, what is else meant but the power and efficacy of the blood of Christ,
by which all sorts of sins are pardoned to all sorts of believing and repenting
sinners?

Ah Lord! will many a person

I reply, Is there not a Justification? and not for enormities also? And does
Christ indeed leave the greatest debts for us to clear? Or cannot faith
receive the accuitance of great sins, as well as indeliberated sins? Was not
the sin-offering for all sorts of persons? And have not all sorts of sins
come within the Proclamation? No no, my brethren, Justification (without all
doubt) crosses the book. Thou art a debtor, says God: I am, Lord, says the
penitent, I acknowledge my sins, and am ^orry for my transgressions, but I
intend to run on the score no longer. Thou art a debtor, says God; I am, Lord,
says the Believer, and thou have said, If any man 1 John 2. 1.
sin, he has an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation for sins, and I believe on him Lord; I take him to be my
sinoffering, and in his blood only I seek for pardon and redemption from all
my sins; This were the way to support our selves against our many and strong
doubtings about pardon of sins; Yet the Lord knows I have repented of them,
and I do believe in Jesus Christ for the pardon of them, I hear and know that
he is the Mediator of the New Testament, and that his blood satisfies for all
sorts of debtors, and debts too; Though one sin may differ from another, yet
his me^ it and satisfaction differs not from it self, but is all-sufficient;
and therefore I acknowledge the debt, and rest on his blood for a full
discharge.

3. Discharges in Justification are not repealed, they are not called in
again. Peccata non redeunt, (i.) Subsequent sins and falls do not nullify
and evacuate former grants and pardons: for as much as 1. Pardon of sin springs
from special love and mercy, which alter not their consigned acts. 2. It is
founded in an unalterable, and absolute, and constant satisfaction; for sin
is not pardoned for any dignity in the person. In the person pardoned, there is
no reason or cause of pardon, but that is in the blood of Christ, which blood
alters, and lessens, and abates not, though our carriages do.

Hence it is that pardon of sin in Justification, is styled the blotting out of
the handwriting, Col. 2. 14. If a writing be blurred a little, and somewhat
blotted, yet it may be read; but if it be blotted out, it is no more legible;
and who can be called to account upon record when the writings are obliterated?
The same phrase is used, Esaias 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins. Where me thinks something else falls
in to our comfort, viz. That God himself does blot out. Though an underofficer
should blot out an indictment, that perhaps may help nothing; but when the King
does it, who is chief Judge, then the indictment cannot return.

Now it is the Lord himself who does blot out transgressions; he does it, who
only has power of life and death, of condemning or absolving.

In like manner there is another phrase, Mica. 7. 19. Thou will cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea. If a thing were cast into a river which
might be fathomed, then it might be brought up again; or if it were cast upon
the sea only, yet it might be discerned, and taken up again; but when it is
in the depths, cast into the depths, the bottom of the sea, now it cannot be
fathomed up again.

By which Metaphor the Lord intends to express unto us the powerful energy of
pardoning mercy, that our sins shall rise no more against us; He will clear
them so, that they (being once forgiven) shall come on the account no more: He
will drown their guilt, that it shall not come up against us before him the
second time.

Therefore Paul discoursing of Justification, Romans 4. he uses another phrase
to express this point, ver. 7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered. Covered: Covering is such an action which is
opposed to disclosure, and judicial evidences; and to be covered, is to be hid
so, and closed, as not to appear with a judicial guilt upon it.

Now the Lord here is said to cover sin in Justification: What is that? That
is, the Lord will look on those sins no more with a judicial eye, he will
not call them to account any more, that is the meaning of the phrase.

As when a Prince reads over many Treasons, and meets with such and such which
he has pardoned, he reads on, he passes by, he now takes no notice of them,
he is not stirred, he sends not our against those whom he has pardoned: So,
etc. This is for God to cover sin, viz. not to look on the sin pardoned with a
judicial eye. It is not, as some most empty and dull heads fancy it, God does
not see sin at all, and he cannot. Of all the opinions in the world, this is
the most ridiculous and childish to men who believe an All-seeing God: But to
cover sin, is not simply not to see it, but to look it over as it were, and not
to sit or stand upon it with a judicial eye, (i) to account for pardoned
sins no more.

Hence in the New Covenant, God promising to justify or to pardon sin, he
says not only, I will forgive their iniquity, but adds, I will remember
their sin no more, Jer. 31. 34. What is that? That is, if I once As the Gospel
needs to be give^ but once, so a man's sin needs but once to be forgiven: once
is enough: because if once, then for ever.
forgive their sin, I will not forgive it again, it shall not need again to be
forgiven, once shall serve the turn, I will remember it no more. The meaning
is it shall quite be forgotten, I will no more plead with them for what I have
once pardoned.

I confess, that the sense, and fruit, and assurance of a sin pardoned, this
may (redire) Note.
return; this may be lost and got; and the acts of faith concerning the
particular pardon The apprehensio^ of pardon is variable, and yet the pardon it
self is immutable.
of a particular sin, may do so, but Gods justifying act, his pardoning act is
a free and constant act: Otherwise if he pardoned (...) respectively upon an
absolute Incessation about sin, there were no flesh living that could be
justified.

4. Discharges in Justification reach not only to the guilt, but also to the
consequents of guilt: For it is a true And, remissa culpa, remittitur poena
rule, Justificatio tollit poenalia. Therefore says the Apostle, Romans 8. 1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. You know that if the
body falls, then the shadow which attends the body, that falls too; and if the
debt be discharged, the prison is discharged. We have by the blood of Christ
the forgiveness of our sins, and therefore the remission of all satisfying
punishments: Why else does the Apostle say, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us? As Christ is said to be
made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. so is he here said to be made a curse for us. He is
made sin for us, by taking upon him the guilt of our sins; and he is made a
curse for us, by bearing that wrath and punishment which was due to us because
of our sins.

Nay, let me speak a bold truth; To have sin remitted, and yet to be exposed
to punishment, (I speak only of satisfying punishment) cannot stand with that
unspotted justice of God; for no man is justly punished but by reason of
unsatisfied guilt. (In peccato fundatur reatus poena, says Aquinas well.) Now
if Christ has fully and perfectly satisfied for the guilt, then punishment
has no ground, unless we will say that God will punish for that which is
already satisfied; or that Christ's satisfaction is not total, but partial,
(i.) he satisfied for a part, and left some parts of satisfying punishment to
us, which is the opinion of the Papists for their humane satisfactions.

But to draw up again; What a comfortable stay and support is this unto a
distressed soul, to see and find all in Christ? When a person brought to the
true sight and sense of sin, and loathing and forsaking of it, and to the
giving of himself up unto Christ, shall behold his many fore-past guilts, and
see these charged upon Christ, nay and discharged by Christ, nay and so
discharged that they shall never be charged upon him again, nay and all the
consequents of guilt removed, so that Christ has set him at liberty, he has
made him a freeman, and that against all Satan's accusations: He may hold out
the blood of Christ, which will answer all; I am a sinner, but Christ was made
sin for me; I deserve damnation, but Christ was made a curse for me. If
Believers did skill the nature, and extent, and virtues of remission by the
blood of Christ; if they did know, and were possessed more with this part of
Justification, they would strengthen their faith and their comfort more, and
their doubtings and fears would sink more. Be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee.

5. One thing more, which I had almost forgotten, falls in, which is this, That
the substantial part of Justification is alike to all Believers. What is that?
It is this, God for the blood of Christ does not only charge the sins of
strong believers on Christ, but of weak believers too; and these only are not
discharged, but those also. True faith in any degree may take out all the
benefits of Justification. For as Justification does not admit of degrees, no
more is it made over to the degrees, but to the truth of faith: So that not
only Abraham, the father of the faithful, who was strong in faith, but the
father of the child, who cried out with tears, I believe, help mine unbelief,
he also has all the real interests, the very same real interests in the
blood of Christ.

You know the arm has not an interest in the head and influences thereof,
because it is big, or because it is strong, but because it is a member, by
reason whereof the least ^inger, and weakest member does also claim and has a
share. So because every Believer by true faith is made a member of Christ, he
has therefore a concurrent share in the blood of Christ, in the Justification
purchased by Christ.

And therefore it is a weaker argument of weak believers to deny, or doubt
their discharge by Christ.

True, say they, Christ is a

Do not deceive, nor unnecessarily

And thus have I briefly informed you with some notions about that part of
Justification, which respects our sins; there is yet another part, which
respects our graces and duties: from the weakness and mixture of which, do
arise many doubtings, and such as are not to be disputed down by any thing in
our selves, but only to be answered with the doctrine of Justification.

O, says the humbled sinner, hate my sins: How can I stand before God, who is
of purer eyes then to behold sin? Will the Lord accept of such a person, of
such discharging of duties? etc.

Let me stop the complaint,

1. Our persons stand not before God in their own righteousness, nor our own
services in their own strength. Indeed the Lord requires holiness in our
natures, and holy duties from us; we are his children, we are his people,
therefore we should be holy as our Father is holy, therefore the people of his
pasture should serve him. An unholy Believer were a monster upon earth, and an
undutifull son is a plain unbeleever; for though Christ did die for those who
were once rebellious, yet he dies for none to make them licentious: So that
holiness, inherent grace is absolutely required to salvation.

To salvation I say,

But to Justification in no wise. What is that? That is, though a man cannot be
saved without inherent holiness, yet is he not justified by it; When he comes
to account it with God, he may not say this, Lord, lo, here I am, see if there
be any sin in my person, or defect in my holiness; I have not offended thee, I
need not any help, any mercy; my heart is totally clean, and my duties
performed at all times in every respect for matter and manner to the full as
thou requirest: Enter into judgment with me if thou pleafest, I will be tried
by my own holiness.

2. But in the righteousness of Christ, I desire, says Paul, to be found in
him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Phil.
3. 9. See more in Romans 5. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

There is such a thing as the So called, not as if the act of faith were our
justifying righteousness, for that act is but 1. An perfect thing. 2. A
transient thing. 3. A part of inherent holiness^: but because faith only lays
hold on, and makes us to fly unto and rely on the righteousness of Jesus
Christ.
righteousness of faith; it is none other then the righteousness of Christ:
(We think little of it, we make little use of it; there is a kind of Popery in
us all; we look downward too much on our righteousness for a Justification)
and when we are to be pronounced just and righteous, when either we or our
services expect acceptance, it is in and by that righteousness of Jesus
Christ.

Whence two things arise to keep doubtings and fears off, viz.

1. That though our holiness be weak, yet Christ's is strong; that
righteousness which justifies, is full. When And so it must be, or else we
could not truly be reputed just.
we look upon our selves, Ah Lord! think we, How shall we appear before God!
How will he accept of us! Such poor, such weak, such sinful, hollow people! I
answer, Christ's righteousness is full, his coat was seamlesse; ours is made
up, and strangely cut, but his righteousness is complete, and He is made unto
us righteousness, yea, and that of God, 1 Cor. 1. 30. God has set him out to
be our righteousness, and he justifies us by it.

2. Though our services be weak, yet we are justified by Christ's
righteousness: Aaron was to bear the iniquity of the holy offerings, Exo. 28.
38. Their holy offerings had some unholy mixtures; but Aaron was to bear them,
(i.) he was to take the iniquities away from them, and to make the offerings
accepted.

Christ is this Aaron, who by his righteousness covers all the blemishes,
makes up all the weaknesses in holy duties.

Therefore my brethren, in all our approaches to God, we should not doubt. It
is the Apostles own argument, Heb. 10. 21. Having such an Highpriest over the
house of God, 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith. And ver. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering, etc. It is as if the Apostle had said, If men did know what a Christ
they have, what a full righteousness there is in him, what he does with it,
how he justifies their persons, and justifies their services, pleads for them,
beautifies them, ingratiates them with the Father, they would not doubt so much
as they do, they would be better persuaded of God, when they come and pray
unto him.

I remember the Apostle has an excellent phrase in Heb. 9. 24. that Christ
does appear for us. It is a Metaphor from a Lawyer; If a man has a case, he
goes to his Lawyer, and reports all to him, desires him to undertake the whole
business, and upon the committing of the Case to him, he appears for his
Plaintiff, opens the Case, pleads for him before the Judge, and the Cause is
carried: So is it with Christ, he appears for us, (i.) When a poor sinner, a
weak believer comes to him, and opens his condition, his wants, his
infirmities, Christ undertakes for him, he pleads for him, (he ever lives to
make intercession) he moves his Father in his behalf, brings out his
righteousness, his blood, and merits, and what he did and suffered for him,
etc. And thus does Christ for every particular service, duty, and prayer for
him who believes on him.

The tenth cause of doubtings, was, disputation against the Promises.

O, says the troubled and fearful soul, all these promises which you produce
and apply to my condition, they are nothing to me; they belong not to me: There
is indeed goodness, and truth, a wonderful worth in them, and they suit with
my condition exactly, but I may not lay hold on them; I should but presume to
take the bread which belongs to children, but not to dogs, not to such a sinner
as I am.

Good Christian, do but track thine own spirit, or the spirit of any
distressed in conscience, thou shall find this to be the last hold usually of
unbelief, namely, a reasoning against Gods Promises; the which reasoning is
sometimes through mere tenderness of spirit: as when the soul has arguments
to it self of that force, to represent a present incapacity of any good which
God has promised, and till they be removed, it dares not lay hold on the
Promises; but if they could be satisfied, then it is drawn in to believe: But
sometimes there is a reasoning against the Promises, through wilfulness of
spirit, as when all the arguments of a doubting sinner are so clearly resolved
and answered by the express words of God, that the person cannot gainsay it;
yet the person rather bends still against the Promises, then labors to honor
God in them by believing. This later reasoning is an irrational way, and
unworthy of our abetting: I should think such a Christians doubtings to arise
rather from a fixed and heavy melancholy, then any other special cause.
Nevertheless, somewhat to help the other Christian, who argues and reasons
against the Promises, merely out of tenderness and fear of his right and
title, I would commend a few things to his consideration.

1. No spiritual good is furthered, nor evil weakened by keeping the soul and
Gods Promises asunder. Tell me seriously, Is not all our help for sold and
body (in the full and whole latitude of it) couched in Gods Promises? Are they
not our wells of salvation, and breasts of consolation, our sun and shield? and
what vessel has a poor sinner to draw with out of those wells? what mouth
has he to milk out those breasts but faith? It is faith which knits the
Promises and our conditions together; it is faith which makes them to meet each
other; And till the Promises meet (in their virtue and influence) with this
condition of thy soul, thou shall never be helped or bettered by them: Till
the plaster and the wound do meet, it will never be an helping nor healing
plaster. Thou shall be (utieras) as thou wast, and the Promise shall be (ubi
erat) where it was, it shall never do thee good till thou do apply it.

2. It is believing which must clear our title. O, says the Christian, if I
knew that the Promises belonged unto me, I would then believe. I answer.

First, this is a preposterous course, and utterly impossible; as if there
could be any wellgrounded persuasion of our interest, before we have any such
interest. No, but personal persuasion is a consequent work, it cannot be the
antecedent or leading work. You must buy the lands, before you can be persuaded
that they are yours.

But secondly, if ever you would clear your title to the Promises, you must
then believe; for it is faith which does entitle you, and gives you interest
and propriety. As the Apostle spoke of a great good, After ye believed, ye were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. that I say in this case;
I fever you would be persuaded that God seals his Promises unto you, then do
you first put your seal unto the Promises: Believe, and then thou shall see the
good of them to be thy good.

3. The ground of a Christians believing Gods Promises, must not be in him who
is to apply them, but only in him who makes them. O! this is it which gravels,
and labyrinths, and still distresseth us, that we set up the grounds of faith
in our selves, and not in God. We are loath to acknowledge that the sole ground
of believing is to be found only in that God who promises.

It is said of Abraham, when God promised him a child in his old age, that by
faith he gave Rom 4. 20
glory to God: But how came he so to do? The Text says, that He considered
not his own body, now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, nor the
ver. 19.
deadness of Sarahs womb; but he considered him who had promised, and was
persuaded that what he had promised, he ver. 21.
was able also to perform. Why? This is the right course to elicite or draw
out our believing: We must not consider our selves, but we must consider him
who promises: Our reasons of believing must be found in him alone on whom we
are to believe.

Therefore I beseech you to remember, that the Promises of God are not only
objects of faith, but they are also grounds of believing: They do not only
contain excellent good for us, but likewise the motives to believe that good.
Besides the goodness in them which respectively answers our conditions, and
the presenting of that goodness unto us by way of gift, there is all reason
conjoined with these to affect our hearts to lay hold on them, namely,

1. A graciousnesse, that the Lord will freely and for his own sake do us all
that good.

2. A fidelity, that the Lord who has graciously promised, will also
faithfully perform.

And 3. sufficiency of power in God to make good unto us whatsoever word of
goodness, is gone out of his lips.

So that from all these, a Christian against all his doubtings may yet see
ground to believe the Promises of God, because,

1. The Promises are the Declarations of God for good unto us.

2. They are willing Declarations, arising only from the good will of our God.

3. He dispenses the good in them to sinners freely, without any worthiness
or desert on their parts.

4. There is not any good promised, which God is not willing or able to make
good.

Lastly, let any person believe on them, and he shall confess that faithful
is that God who promised, and that that God who has promised cannot lie.

But now on the contrary, If you look for grounds of believing in and from your
selves, it cannot be that ever your hearts should be free from doubtings; If
either you make your own worthiness the cause of believing, you shall never
come to believe: This were not to receive good from God, but to buy and
purchase it; and is absolutely against the nature of free promises, as also
against the disposition of true faith, which empties us of our selves, and
sees the cause of all our good to be only in him who is All-goodnesse.

Or if you think that you must first find the good in your selves which ye are
to fetch from the Promises, you cannot then believe, you must unavoidably doubt
still: because it is impossible for a sinner or a needy Christian ever to draw
his helps out of himself, or to prevent the promises of God. As he cannot
deserve any good from God promising, so he cannot bring any good to Gods
promises. Ho, Esa. 55. 1.
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, says the Prophet, and he
that has no money: Come ye, buy and eat. yea come, buy wine and milk without
money and without price. If thou be a thirsty person, here is all provision
freely for thee.

4. Another thing which I would commend also to doubting Christians in this
case, shall be this: Take some solid pains to clear your entrance into
Covenant with God: thereby you shall clear your interest in all particular
promises upon your occasions.

There is a gracious Covenant Jer. 31. 33 32. 38 Eze. 36. 28 Hos. 2. 23. Heb.
8. 10.
(spoken of in the Scripture) twixt God and his people: He makes us to be his
people, and we take him to be our God. And when that Covenant is passed twixt
God and a person, that there is a mutual acceptance; then the Lord estates
this person into all the particular promises: As when the woman and man enter
into the covenant of marriage, now all is settled on her, and she has title
sufficient.

So when the Lord God and a sinner are married to each other, when they are
entered into a Covenant, Thou art my God, and none else, my heart is thine, my
life shall be thine, etc. The Lord says unto such a one, And I am thine, and
all my mercy is thine, my Christ is thine, my Promises thine: If thou need
any good for soul or body, all good is thine.

I assure thee, O Christian, if If this door were unlocked, all the rooms
would easily be seen.
this were once out of doubt, that thou and God were entered into Covenant, thou
would not so much doubt thy title, or question thy right to apply any
particular promise to any condition of exigence wherein thou lie. All are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.

5. Lastly, consider well, whether there be nothing in a Christ which may not
be able to over-argue thy disputes against thy applying of the Promises I
remember that Luther in his Commentary on Genesis prescribes unto tempted
persons one very compendious way to withstand all temptations whatsoever: Let
Satan Luthers speech.
come any way, or the world any way, or sin move any way, do thou answer all
with this only, Christianus sum, I am a Christian; I may not yield to any sin,
for I am a Christian. And surely me thinks this also might be a compendious way
to resolve the doubtings of a Christian, Christum habeo I have a Christ. O
Christian, if thou did look more on thy Christ, thou might look more on the
Promises: When will thou remember, No looking on the Promises without a Christ.
that as there is no comfortable looking on God without a Christ, so there will
be no confident looking on the Promises of God without a Christ?

Christ Jesus is thy Jacobs ladder, thy prayers get up by him, and Gods
Promises come down by him: All the promises of God are Yea and Amen in him, 2
Cor. (...). 20.

There was a Book in the Revelation which none of the Elders and Worthies could
open, but yet the Lamb could open it: The Promises are a precious Book, every
leaf drops myrrh and mercy, yet the weak Christian cannot open it, nay he is
afraid to open it, and to read his portion there: Nevertheless thy Christ can
open the Promises for thee, and by thy Christ as thou may find a way for
heaven hereafter, so may thou epsy a way for thy comfort now.

And why, may Christ reply to the doubting Christian, art thou afraid to
believe? to believe my Fathers word, and thy Fathers word? Did he ever fail
any who trusted on him? Is he not willing to give, who was willing to promise?
Should he lose of his glory, if thou receivedst of his grace? Or should thou
lose of thy comfort, if thou should believe in his promise? Do thou not
care for his good? Why then art thou troubled? Or in good earnest, Would thou
enjoy that good? Why then do thou not believe? Thou see the worth of the
commodity, but stickest at the price. Did my Father ever sell grace or mercy to
any upon the price of their own worthiness? How can thou imagine him to
answer thee in justice, who yet deals with thee upon promises? And if
worthiness must be found, tell me, Who am I? Is a Christ of no worthiness to
thee? or of no worth with his Father and thine? I have dyed for thy soul, I
have reconciled thy person, I have made God himself to be thine, and therefore
his Promises to be thine.

If thou think that God will start from his word, O thou errest: His Promise
is made with Goodness, is sealed with Truth, and is ratified with my blood.

If thou think it is an inexorable and deaf ear to thy prayers, yet
consider, it is always an open and pliable ear to my merits. Come, then, I
once gave my self for thee, and since that I have given my self to thee, Be
not afraid, O thou of little faith: Look on me, and through me unto a God, so
shall thou see him fully gracious and merciful, and holding forth the golden
Scepter to thee. Look on me and through me unto the Promises, then shall thou
see them to be my purchase, and thy portion. Lay hold on them by faith, and
enrich thy self with them, in so doing thou shall please my Father, pleasure
thy self, and honor thy Savior.

11. The eleventh spring of doubtings, was, the suspension of divine favor.
Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, said David. O, the hiding of Gods
favor is more then the hiding of the Sun, or then the withdrawments of David
from Absalom: It is even the time of our fainting, the sequestration of our
souls and life. Thy favor is life, says David again.

Here now consider,

1. In these times of sequestration, a man has just cause of trouble; he
should be moved at it, that he cannot behold his God in that graciousnesse as
before, in that lovingnesse, in that light of his countenance. And verily there
is not a Christian really sensible of the divine favor, who should not be as
much perplexed in the clouding of it, as he was affected and gladded in the
rising and discovering of it.

Beloved, it is ill with that man who can equally bear up in the absence, as
in the conceived presence of Gods favor; who is of that hard and unperceiving
temper, as not to solace his soul in finding God to be gracious; and not to be
abundantly disturbed in not apprehending the wonted manifestations of his
loving favor. How excessively distressed is the Church in the Canticles, that
her Beloved had withdrawn himself! And David does in the violence of his
distemper and jealousy, (whether culpably, I know not yet) strongly charge God
(sure with much heaviness of heart) that he had forgotten to be gracious.

2. Nevertheless in the times of such suspension, it is an error, and a
dangerous error, a fruitless error, absolutely to conclude against our God, or
against our selves, of any present or hopeful interest in his blessed favor:
Therefore remember these particulars.

1. Observe the ways and times of the interception of divine favor. This is
certain, that God has ever some special end in the holding up of his
countenance; and we may and do many times give him just cause and reason. In
Scripture we may observe on our part ordinarily two occasions:

1. Some gross sins, which indeed are as a thick cloud to hold up the blessed
light of Gods countenance, for he is of purer eyes then to behold sin. These
are the wall of separation, these shut the door, and draw the curtains, and
do like some closing rheum fall upon the eye, and indispose it to the
comfortable enjoyment of the light: As we may see in David's two great sins of
Adultery and Murder, they did suspend the presence, (i.) the comfortable
presence of God, and held up the joy of his salvation, which he did so
earnestly desire to be restored, Psalm. 51. 11, 12.

2. Remissness and carelessness in our esteems and affections toward him in
his Ordinances. When Christians come to a moderation, to a cooling of their
spiritual fervor, to a more negligent acquaintance with God, and a more in
different performance of holy services and duties; then the Lord holds back,
and calls in the sensible light of his countenance: As a father does alter the
set of his looks toward his child, who is wanton upon his love, and lets down
the diligence of his just observance and duty.

See this in Cant. 5. 2. Open to me (says Christ) my sister, my love, my dove,
my undefiled. Here was a gracious entreaty, and full of wooing compellations:
What does the Church now? Surely she stirs, she rises, she runs, she easily
embraces these calls of Christ; No, ver. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? What is this? She
was careless, negligent, full of excuses, so those phrases import, of putting
off the coat: For as the keeping on of clothes was a sign of care and
watchfulness, [Nehem. 4. 23.] so the putting them off was a sign of
drowzinesse, of a disposition prepared for sleep or rest: Nay (she had washed
her feet) which was another sign of her sleepy and negligent disposition; It
being the manner in those hot countries (where ordinarily they went
barefooted) to wash their feet after their travel, and so prepare
the^selves-to rest. The meaning of all which, is this: She made many pretenses
and delays; all which did spring from an acquired sluggishnesse and remissness
of spirit.

Now mark the issue, Though the Church did not rise to open, yet Christ, ver.
4. puts in his hand at the hole of the door: (i.) Though she had neglected him
in his Ministry, yet he sent into her heart a notable item of it by his
Spirit, and then her bowels were moved for him. Why? What is the matter? Now
she rose, ver. 5. and opened the door, ver. 6. but my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone; I sought him, but could not find him; I called him, but
he gave me no answer.

Here you see, that carelessness of duty causes absence of favor: And when
men are negligent in the entertainments of the means of grace, God does in a
just wisdom go off with the sensible presence of his gracious favor.

2. Observe the ways of regaining Gods favor suspended from us: What are
those? will you say.

I answer,

1. Be affected for the loss: every absence of Gods countenance should trouble
us, but the loss of his favor, that should grieve us. So was it with the
Church there, Cant. 5. 4. My bowels were troubled for him, Or, My bowels
sounded, rumbled, made a troublous noise. What do these words intimate but an
eminent disquietnesse, an hearty sorrow for so great a loss, springing from so
great a remissness? I say an eminent disquietnesse; For where bowels are
mentioned, there an eminent degree is suggested, either of commiseration, as in
that of God to Ephraim, Jer. 31. 20. or of singular love and affection, as of
the mother to the child, or of most sorrowful affliction, as here.

Nay, so great was this sorrow and bewaylment, that ver. 6. her sold failed
when he spoke: My soul failed (i.) my soul went forth, it was gone, it
departed, because of the departure of Christ's loving favor: For as the heart
is said to go forth when men are astonished with fear, so the soul is said
to go away, when men are surcharged with grief and sorrow. Whence it is
evident, that the Church was almost dead for her folly and negligence, whereby
she had caused her Christ to withdraw himself.

And surely if negligent and regardlesse entertainments of God, or Christ, or
his Word, (which cause the cessation of favor) are thus abundantly bewailed
with bowels and faintings, how much more should the bowels be doubled, and the
measures of grief and repentance be swelled, when the suspension of Gods love
and favor is caused by our injurious handling of his blessed Spirit, by
fighting against his motions, and presuming against the directing and
convincing light, to dishonor and grieve him with the most foul iniquities.

Yet if we can humbly and thoroughly bemoane our loss, and repent of our sins,
we shall behold the Lord in mercy and love again. David could not but yield
out the countenance of his favor to Absalom, though an untoward son: If the
clouds did break, the sun would shine again; for God will not only give,
but restore comforts to his mourners.

2. Revive thy uprightness, and then God will renew his favor. A good man
(says Solomon, Prove. 12. 2.) obtains favor of the Lord: (i.) An upright
man, a man whose heart is single, (for he is opposed to the man of many
devices) whose heart is single and plain with God in his walkings, such a man
shall obtain favor from the Lord.

David assures us of it, Ps. 5. 12 Thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, and
with favor will thou compass him as with a shield. It was a good speech of
David's, Psalm. 36. 9. With thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall
we see light. q. d. Lord, thou have comfort and favor enough, thy favor
indeed is life, the very fountain of it, and in the light of thy paths shall
the sons of men see the light of thy favor.

For, brethren, we cannot see light by darkness, light must be seen by light;
and whatsoever Psalm. 17. 15 I will behold thy face in uprightness.
is contrary to light, is an impediment of seeing. Gods favor cannot be seen
by any thing which is contrary to Gods nature. Crooked Note.
hearts and crooked ways, an heart and an heart, a tongue and a tongue, a life
and a lise, (i.) a doubling heart, and a doubling tongue, and a doubled
conversation, which has a vein of sinfulness and approbation, this the Lord
hates and abhors; for God is ever single in all his dealings with men: They
shall have mercy, or they shall not have it: and so he exceedingly delights in
the simplicity of Christians: Let them deal ingenuously with him, give him all
the might they have, and him only, though they have not a present sight, yet
they have a sure promise of his favor.

The Lord will meet them, Esa. 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and
works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways. Walk thou
toward God in uprightness, and God will walk toward thee in
comfortablenesse. Be thou a son, and he will be a Father. Give him thy heart,
and he will show to thee his face.

Therefore let us cast about not only for our general, but also for the
services of our particular callings and relations, in which if the Lord sees us
upright in walking, we shall assuredly find him to be gracious in distributing
the beams of his favor unto our souls.

3. Earnestly seek Gods favor.

1. Seek it by enquiries in the ordinances of his favor. Saw ye him whom my
soul loves? said the Church in her loss, Cant. 3. 3. unto the watchmen. And
as Mary, Joh. 20. 13. weeping, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not
where they have laid him: And ver. 15. Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell
me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away. What came of this? See
ver. 16. Jesus says unto her, Mary; It was one only word, but enough to make
her turn her self, and say, Rabboni. So may it, and so does it often times fall
out with us in our seekings of Gods favor, The Lord does meet us and show
himself with his loving countenance, in his Ordinances: For these Ordinances of
God, they are the Exchange, the heavenly Exchange twixt God and his people,
wherein they present unto him their duty, and he confers on them his grace and
favor; So that they who have come hither with sighs. O that God would be my
God! have returned with Psalms of joy, The Lord is my God and my Father, I will
praise thee, O Lord my God.

2. Seek it by prayers. How abundant is David in this kind? Psalm. 106. 4.
Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people, O visit
me with thy salvation, 5. That I may see the good of thy chosen. So Psalm. 31.
16. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. So Psalm. 4. 6. Lord, lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us: For God has promised his favor, and
therefore his people may seek his favor. Nay he has commanded his people to
seek his favor, and therefore they should seek it. See Psalm. 27. 8. Thou
said, Seek ye my face, My heart said unto me, Thy face (Lord) will I seek.
It is an unadvised folly in the suspension of Gods favor, to unsonne our
selves, and unpeople our selves, (i.) to deny that grace and spiritual
relation twixt us and God. This is not the way to gain favor; for when we
have undone our relations of children, we exclude our selves from the
expectations of favor; No, the wisest and surest way is to seek the renewing
of Gods loving countenance, and say as David, Lord, thou have hid thy face, and
I am troubled, yet thou biddest me to seek thy face, and Thy face (Lord) will I
seek: Nay I do seek it, for Thy favor is life, nay, Thy favor is better
then life, so I esteem it, so I acknowledge it, and as my life, as that which
is a life unto my life do I earnestly desire it: Therefore, Lord, Make thy
face to shine, and behold me again, as thou beholdest thy people with thy
ancient favor: O visit me with thy salvation, and let me see the good of thy
countenance.

Now here take in two helpful advices more: viz.

1. When you seek the light Two things to be remembered in our seeking of Gods
favor.
of Gods countenance, do not blind your eyes: Remember still, that a man who
will shut his eye, shall hardly find: Now nothing can see Gods favor but the
eye of faith, for in Christ Jesus only we see and discern him our gracious
God and Father; Therefore keep open that eye. The direct workings of faith can
always see God, and the reflexive will at length see God to be my God. When
thou come unto him thus, Lord, I do need, I do prize, I do desire thy
favor and countenance, and thou have promised it, but thou will not keep thy
promise, thou will never show the light of thy countenance to my soul more; now
though we seek much, no marvel we find not the heavens to open; You must
Simile.
use the key, as well as the hands, if you will come in and see the rooms: Our
hands of Prayer must use the key of Faith, if we would open the countenance of
God toward us; for faith is that which gives us our sights of God and Christ.

2. Judge not of the issue by what thou feel, but by what God promises: And
in case therefore that God does not show thee his ancient love presently or
easily, yet knock again, and provoke thy heart to out-beleeve all reasonings
offeare and corruption.

As David, Psalm 42. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
help of my countenance, and my God.

O my God, says he in ver. 6. of that Psalm, my soul is cast down within
me, (no question but for the absence of Gods favor, ver. 7. My rock, Why have
thou forgotten me^^) therefore (says he) will I remember thee. Remember him, O
David? What encouragements so to do? Thy Rock seems to forget thee, and all
his waves and billows are gone over thee, thou art in a tossed, and forgotten
condition, and yet thou say, I will remember thee. Now see ver. 8. Yet the
Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his
song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

q. d. It is true, these afflictions and sorrows are upon me and God seems to
forget me for present, yet I will remember him, I know he thinks on me, he has
loving kindness, and he will command it, he can show it when he pleases, I
shall assuredly have it, perhaps in the day time, perhaps in the night time,
and therefore day and night will I seek him for his loving kindness, I will
remember him.

But how may one support How to support our selves in the interim.
Can one be good, who is thus? Or will God do good or does he think any good
of such a one?

I answer, you may support

1. By remembering the days of old. Psa. 77. 7. Will the Lord cast off for
ever, and will he be favorable no more? 9. Has God forgotten to be gracious?
This is mine infirmity. q. d. For me thus to conclnde that God will not be
favorable and gracious unto me, because I feel him not so, this is my
weakness, and sinful error: But how then will you support your self? See
ver. 10. I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High, 11. I
will I had his favor once, and am in it still, and shall have it again.
remember thy wonders of old. And assuredly the remembrance of what God has
done, is able to support us with a confident expectation of what God will yet
do for us.

If we remember the days of old, the method of Gods former proceedings and
behaviors toward us, we shall acknowledge, and so comfort our selves, that
when he withdrew, it was an withdrawment either of necessity, or expediency,
and his loving countenance has risen again without a cloud, after a night of
sorrow, after a day of seeking.

For the suspensions of his favor are temporary, though his truths be
eternal. I will come again, says Christ: And, It was but a little (said the
Church, Cant. 3. 4.) that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul
loves.

2. Thou art in favor, though thou feel none; And though thy comfort be in
the feeling of it, yet thy happiness is in the being of it: Thou art saved
because God loves, not because thou perceivest that love.

2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are
his. He knows them in respect of the freeness of his election, and in
respect of the immobility of his affection; He knows them still, but they know
not him still. Is Ephraim my dear son? Jer. 31. 20. q. d. He is so, but he
thinks I think not so.

Sometimes the walking child holds the parent, and sometimes the parent holds
the child; there is safety in both respects; for whiles either I hold, or am
held, I am safe: So is it with us and God, sometimes we lay hold on him by
faith, sometimes (nay all times) he lays hold on us by his love; our salvation
is in this, that we are Gods, and God is ours; that he has our hearts, and we
his love, though always we see it not.

3. Thou shall have favor, though now it be drawn up: He will behold thy
upright heart, and thou shall see his face with joy. Esaias 54. 8. In a little
wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

Therefore the Church elegantly, Micah 7. 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine
enemy; when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me. 9. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness. Remember this one thing, Upright and believing persons have
always a favorable God, though they have not always the sense of Gods
favor: yea though Satan do testify the contrary, which is the next spring of
doubtings, and comes in now fitly to be handled.

12. A twelfth spring of doubtings, was, the crediting of Satan's testimony
about our spiritual condition, and interests in God and Christ; to which if
any distressed Christian does hearken and attend, he shall never be freed from
inquietations and rowlings of mind, because Satan's testimony is ever directly
or obliquely against the truth and comfort of our spiritual estate.

For the remedy and cure of which spring, be pleased seriously to consider of
these subsequent conclusions.

1. The final trial of our eternal estate does immediately and solely
appertain to the Court of heaven. Indeed the disquisitive part belongs to A
twofold trial of a man's estate.
us, but the decisive part belongs to God: We ought to search and prove our
selves, but no man has immediate power to decide his estate, by acquitting or
condemning himself. This must be done by the voice of God in his revealed
Word, which commands and forbids, and therefore absolves or binds.

No subject you know has this power, to release or bind of himself, but that
is the royal prerogative of the King. It is true, if the Word condemns us,
then our consciences may do so too; and if the Word absolves us, so may our
consciences too: But this is virtute prima, not virtute propria; It is because
the Word does it, not because Conscience of it self without the Word can do
either rightly.

Whence two things arise to inform and direct us: viz.

1. Satan's judgment of our Satan's judging is but usurped.
estate is but usurped: It does not belong to him to sit upon our souls: It is
against the Law of Nations, that the same party should be witness and Judge:
And we may say to him truly, what the Pharisees proudly objected to Christ, By
what authority does he these things? Or as they to Moses, who made thee a Judge
over us? Assuredly the enemy of our salvation is not to be the Judge of it, he
being so maliciously vowed against our happiness, it is most unfit for him to
decide it: and therefore though he usurps a judgment upon Christians, yet as
David spoke in another case, Thou Lord wilt not leave the righteous when he is
judged; No assuredly, Satan shall one day be judged for taking upon him the
judging of Gods people: And do you think that Satan will give a true
judgment unto us of our spiritual condition, who dares give in false evidence
before God himself of Job, and who is said to accuse the brethren before God
day and night?

2. No testimony is to be admitted, which is contrary to the judgment of the
Word: Believe not every spirit, 1 John 4. All judgment of our estates, being
contrary to the Word, is false.
1. but try the spirits, whether they are of God. The Word must judge us
another day, and therefore it is to judge of us now.

Satan's judgment is usurped, and our own is often times erroneous, as in wicked
and presumptuous sinners, who sentence well for their safety, although God does
proclaim and pronounce bitter woes unto them.

And as our judgments are often times erroneous, so are they in the times of
distress, suspicious and hasty: We do not testify of our selves with
judgments cleared, and totally informed by the Word, of all our estate, but
with judgments affected and distempered; as David in his fit, I am cast out of
thy presence; God did not cast him off, but his distempered judgment did cast
him out.

2. Maintain the judgment of the Word, against all judgment: When a man has
thoroughly viewed and pierced into the secrets of his heart and ways by the
informing light of Gods blessed Spirit, and takes his flesh and spirit asunder,
I mean his sins, weaknesses, graces and dispositions, and lays these, with
all he knows of himself, before the Lord in a most sincere ingenuity, so that
if he were now to die, he durst venture the eternal salvation of his soul,
with his God, that he keeps nothing back, either of what is his own by
nature, or of what is Gods by grace: If now the Word decides for him, that his
condition is heavenly, his heart is upright, he is indeed one who is truly
interessed in Christ; this man or woman should now uphold this decisive
testimony of the Word, lay it up as the great copy of his eternal salvation;
and in case of opposite verdict and testimony, not to molest himself with
reasoning and doubting, but to preserve the authority of Gods testimony, by
believing, and most upright walking with God in all the powers of duty.

There yet remain two springs of doubtings to be cured, and then I have done
with that subject.

13. The thirteenth spring of doubtings, was, the new rising of old sins:
This I told you could not but amaze the soul, to see the dead rise out of the
grave again, and to read the debt as if it were not yet crossed: It does
exceedingly disquiet us about our spiritual condition. Now consider,

1. There are five times Five times in which former sins may revive
when we and our sins do meet.

1. One is the day of our legal humiliation, when the Law, like searching
physic, enters deep, stirs up the evil humor, casts our sins into our very
faces, and sets them in order before us, and reproves us for them with
undeniable conviction and horror.

2. Another is, the day of our piercing afflictions, when the Lord does send
his messengers unto us of wrath, cuts off from us our delights, tears away our
joys, crosses us in our aims, and we see God hewing our friends from us, our
children from us, our earthly delights and contents: for miserable evils are
often times a cause to make us see our sinful evils: We do many times come to
perceive our faults, by our punishments: As Pharaoh did, when the plagues were
on him, I have done evil in not letting the people go: And Balaam, when he
saw the Angel, and heard him threatening, I will now return: And so the
children of Israel, then saw, and confessed their murmuring and stubbornness,
when God sent evil Angels amongst them, (i.) some messengers of his wrath and
displeasure.

3. A third is, the time of some horrible and common judgment, whether it be
upon particular persons, or a Nation, interessed in the same guilt of sin
with our selves; For this is a time of common fire, which raging and flying up
and down, makes men run into their closets, and bring out their concealed
jewels; so do common and extraordinary judgments return us into our selves,
and gives up unto us those our hidden sins which we fear will draw the same
fire of judicial wrath upon our own persons. I do not doubt but at the last
great Plague, many of the sinful botches broke out, upon a fear lest that
judicial botch should have broken in upon your bodies and houses.

4. A fourth time is, the time of death: For though sin and a sinner really
meet in all their course of life, yet sense of sin and a sinner do not always
meet until the day of death; for death is a strict and unavoidable summons to
give up our accounts, and then the unjust steward must look about him, how he
shall answer his most just Lord and Master.

This time of meeting, evidently manifests it self to our own experience; who
though we have kindled our sins in the time of our health and strength, yet
have we not met with the flashes of them but in the times of sickness and
weakness.

5. A last time of meeting is, the day of Judgment; and this is a most
certain and infallible time; It is possible for a man to escape the legal
meeting, by conviction; and the miserable meeting, by afflictions, judgments,
and death it self; (for some die like Nabal, they live wretchedly, and die
senslesly) but at the day of Judgment, they and their sins must meet, and
shall; because then the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, and Gods
righteous judgment shall be evident to the hearts of all the world. Whence it
is, that in this day of meeting, they shall cry unto the mountains to fall on
them, and the rocks to hide them (but in vain) from the wrath of him who sits
upon the throne.

2. There are several causes of the rising of sin: Some are Diverse causes of
sins rising afresh.
on Gods part, some on our part, some on Satan's.

1. For Gods part: God does many times cause our former sins to rise, by the
power of his mighty spirit in the ministry of his Word: For whereas the sinner
would hush his fears, and griefs, and conscience asleep, yet the Lord will not
have it so: He does rub the sore, and gall the conscience, makes it sensible of
the guilt and wounds; He does pierce by the two-edged sword of his Word, even
to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and
discernes the very thoughts and intents of the heart. He meets the person often
times many years after the commission of the sins, and most expressly revives
and remembers them in all the acting circumstances, which the sinning person
either had, or would have buried in silence and forgetfulness.

2. For our part: Thus there is double cause of new rising of old sins: One
whereof is good, and the other is bad.

1. A new commission of the old sins, which brings back upon us the sting of
the old guilt; for relapses into the disease, occasion a relapse of the burden
and ache: Cut thy finger again, and it will smart again; fall into thy ague
again, it will make thee shake again: Relapses have ever this judgment with
them, that they make a fresh wound, and the old also to bleed again. You know
in some Wells, there are two buckets, put down the one, and you bring up the
other; so the falling into the same sin again, brings up the old burden
again. Though we may not revive sin to practice it, yet we may to mourn for
it.


2. Renewed humiliations; for then we do voluntarily look back upon our former
accounts, that thereby we may more humbly sue out a total discharge. Though
we may sin the sin over no more, yet we may weep it over and over; and though
the acting of it may be no more, yet the bewailing of it should last us ever.

3. On Satan's part, who like an envious and malicious wretch never gives over
to throw unto us our errors and failings, though corrected with truest
reformation. So Satan, who is the great cause and incentive to sin, will not
cease after our truest repentance, to vex, and sad, and (if he could, to)
despair our hearts with the fresh memory of former and forsaken sins; so that
we seldom or never lay hand on a blessed promise, or gain our selves into the
comfortable favor of God, or delight our selves in the sweet peace of
conscience, but he falls in, and checks, and troubles us with the
representations of former sins, and perchance makes us let go our gracious
hold, with the fears, and suspicions, and chargements of former guilts.

3. Now according to the variety of the causes, fetching up upon us our former
guilts, must we deliver unto you several helps and remedies.

Consider therefore, on Gods The ends of reviving of sin.
part, there are several ends in respect of several persons, why he brings on
the sins again.

1. To make the groundwork more deep and sure: We make our tents too short for
our wounds; We sin much, and defile our selves much, and we think that a
little washing will serve the turn. O! this business of selftryall, of laying
the axe to the root of the tree, of diving into the secrets of sin, of applying
the corrasives unto the core and heart of our natures, this goes against us,
we are quickly weary of it.

Indeed, some trouble, and some bitterness we grant to be convenient; but to
be still accusing our selves before God, still to be lashing and wounding our
hearts for wounding of God, Ah, this, this goes against us.

You shall see people sometimes very sensible of their diseased bodies: O now
some physic were good, they find such aches, such distempers, surely some
physic were good; and some they take, which makes them excessively sick; but
then away with it, no more physic: yet at length the disease comes upon them
again, and the Physician prescribes more physic, even that which must go to
the root of the disease, which though it makes them more sick, yet it procures
their safety, and better health.

Beloved, God would have men (perhaps) a longer space to sit upon their sins;
they stint themselves after great sins, and make themselves friends with God
prefently. Now the Lord knows that this skinning of the sore will spoil all,
and therefore after a short time he returns them their sins again, makes
Conscience to startle at the guilt again, and deals with us as the skillful
Surgeon with a man whose leg is broken, and ill set, he breaks it again,
that it may be well set.

So does the Lord, he breaks our souls again with the guilt of sins; He will
make us know, that we must bring him more broken hearts; we shall know what it
is to sin against him, and shall not make a real and lasting peace without a
sound and solid humiliation.

And truly this is the great mercy of his wisdom to work thus; for hereby he
makes our foundation low, and sure, and hereby he prevents subsequent stirs,
and makes way for our surer and more comfortable apprehensions and applications
of his love in Christ. You know that a wise Schoolmaster, when a boy skips from
a hard lesson to that which is more easy, he puts him back again, and makes
him say it over and over, ere he takes it forth. Men think to be catching at
Christ, however they love to lay load on him, and throw their vile burdens upon
him, though perhaps they never yet weighed their vile sinings and dishonourings
of God: But the Lord will turn them back again, he will take off these
pragmaticall presumers, and set them to learn their first lesson better: He
will make them more sensible of their vile hearts, and ways, and actions; they
shall not so easily come off from their accursed transgressions; the Lord will
hold up the comfortable answers of his favors, and the sweet tastes of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make them again to sit down in bitter sorrow for piercing
the Lord Christ, and shedding his blood, and grieving of his Spirit, and all
that men might be more humbled, and more really fitted for Christ.

2. To make us more humble. I assure you often times our very victories make us
proud, and that very grace which should be a cause to abase us, occasionally
and accidentally is a means to puff us: we rise too often above our selves,
beyond measure: And therefore as to Paul there was given a sting to abase him,
lest And that we might bestow our tears and not our tongues on others sinning.
he should be over-exalted; so to many Christians the Lord does return unto
them the sensible sting of some notable guilt, to abase their hearts, to put
them in mind of themselves.

For this reduction of former gilt, it gives up unto us our base and
treacherous natures, and the births of our own hearts: Ah! faith such a
person, this heart, this nature of mine, what was it? what is it, if the Lord
leaves it? See here the grapes, the sour grapes of this wild-vine, little
reason have I to be so highly conceited of my self, as long as I perceive such
loath some accounts and issues from my self.

And veri^y, it makes us ofttimes to despise our selves, to abhor our selves
in dust and ashes: And this is one great Our present graces make us good, and
the sense of former sins keeps us humble
end and use which the Lord makes of former sins, To keep the heart in a very
humble frame: We must have something or other still put unto us of our own,
which will let us see how foolish we are by nature, that is David's phrase, and
how brutish we were, that is Solomon's phrase.

3. To make us more careful: For the sharp remembrance of sin does in a
godly heart work stronger detestation, and stronger watchfulness: God does
make their Remembering the gall and the wormwood, Lam. 3.
new considerations to be our present preventi^^s: Future commissions of sin^^e
are many times prevented by new impressions of former sins.

What? should I sin thus again? says the humble heart: have I not reason to
crush these births? to crucify that bitter root, to pray against it, to watch
against it, to resist it, to deny it, which has been and is now a sword in my
conscience?

But now consider that there is a double carfulness wrought by the new rising
of sin.

1. One respects the guilt of it; and here our care is to get our acquitance
renewed and enlarged. O how does the Lord by these risings of sin, soon cause
the soul to rise up in suing out his grace and favor* It causes many a
tear, many a prayer, many a wrestling with God, many pressings upon the
promises, many an earnest beseeching to have our pardon and discharge more
fully sealed unto our consciences, by the blood of Jesus Christ, and testimony
of the Spirit.

2. Another respects the sins themselves, in their corrupt qualities, and
inclinations, and motions; and this is a greater study against them: firmer
resolutions, strengthening of covenants, confirmations of grace, of
circumspection, of detestation, of resistance, of any thing or way by which the
powers of sin may be more subdued and cast down.

4. To make us more thankful: Perhaps the Lord has pardoned those sins which
rise anew in thy heart; they do not always rise, because God has not
discharged their guilt, but because thou have not discharged thy new debt; they
arise as a debt, for the discharge of a debt: as we use to put men in mind of
their former miseries, not that thereby they are made miserable, but because
thereby they should be made thankful. Beloved, to have former sins discharged,
it is mercy, I say mercy, yea and a rich mercy, greater then to give a
condemned person life, or to give an imprisoned person liberty, far greater: No
such mercy as that which blots out our sins, which saves a soul from hell, and
gives it pardon and life. Now great mercies should be answered with great
thankfulness: Thou did, in the sense and sting of thy guilt, go with an
heavy heart, with bitter sighs, with deep oppressions, O that I had mercy! O
this burden! O this wound! O this sin! Yea and with deep protestations, If
the Lord will but pardon it, If he will show me mercy, If he would receive me
graciously, he should have the calves of my lips, I would love him indeed, I
would serve him, I would praise and thank him, I would speak good of his name,
I would say, Who is a God like him, that forgiveth iniquities, transgressions
and sins, and passes by the sins of his people?

Well, the Lord has showed himself like himself, a God very gracious and
merciful; but we perhaps have showed our selves like our selves, in
distresses, earnest, and full of promises; but in our exemptions, flat, and
full of forgetfulness. Now the Lord does exceedingly dislike this vanity and
doubting of heart; he loves that mercy should be still acknowledged to be
mercy? he would have us to look back, as well as to look up; and to give him
thanks for that mercy, for which not long since we would have given all the
world and our souls too: And therefore does he cast unto us our accounts, he
lets us thereby see what they were, and what he has done, that we may
confess our error for not answering great mercy with great thankfulness.

But perhaps you will inquire,

I answer, If it be by way of

But if it be by way of commission, either by relapsing into the same sins, or
multiplying of sin in another kind, (both which will dig up again our buried
and fore-past guilts) then I know no way of peace and safety, no way to allay
these renewed accusations and stings, but by renewed sorrow and repentance. And
verily what I delivered unto you heretofore about recovery from relapsing, that
is the course presently to be taken here: O let us haste in before the Lord
with hearts trickling down with tears of blood, for old and present wounds: the
very abundance of sorrow, the bitterness of grief, the art of
self-affliction, I cannot say that sorrow of sorrow, that hatred of hatred,
that indignation of indignation, that revenge of revenge, that repentance of
repentance, which are here necessarily required, and that too with longest
continuance. Do what thou will, shuffle off, cut to thy self a peace, thou
shall never have it, thy sins shall ever and anon gall, and vex, and wound
thee, until thou have renewed thy bitterness of most humbled sorrow for
renewing thy filthiness and baseness of thy audacious sinning.

But then suppose, that Satan

I will show you here briefly

1. One is, how you may know that the reviving of former guilt be from Satan or
no.

2. Another is, what is then to be done by us.

1. You may know that How to know whether Satan revives former sins.
your sins are revived by Satan, from two effects.

1. One is from the desperate issues of their reviving: you may know whether a
man be a friend, or a malicious enemy, who does revive the errors and failings
amongst men; a friend, he revives them that you may be bettered either to
reform, if the thing be evil, or to be circumspect whether the thing be true
or false; but the malicious enemy he revives them, only to make you odious and
loathsome. Now Satan's reviving of former sins is ever odious, it is of evil,
for evil, his end is desperate: What is that? That is, that we might give up
all possible interests in mercy, all hope of pardon and acceptance. Whence it
is, where he revives sins, former sins, he bends the heart to some present
mischief, to renounce all hope of mercy, and to selfemurder, and such
desperate issues; both which are against the ends of God, and the desires of an
holy heart; which upon their reviving of sin, do ever propose mercy and
betterment unto the soul.

2. Another is from the filthy issues, which is this: He revives the sting of
sin, that he may make us more bold and mad in sinning: He revives sin unto
sin, there is no hope of mercy, of recovery, therefore as good to go on as
not: Whence he inclines the heart to a leaping into the water, to a wallowing
in the mire, to a greediness in the course of sinning; which he does the more
easily win from the evil hearts of evil men, by those temporary allayments
and cessations of stinging guilt, which they observe in themselves, by their
furiousness, constant, and hardening revolutions or exercise of the same sins.

So that, if you whose hearts are tender, have been humbled for former sins,
and are so upright as still to hate them, if former g^^ilts be revived with an
inclination either to give up all mercy, or to give over your selves now with
licentiousness to the same or other sins; here is Satan in this, Satan now
revives thy guilt, and now another course is to be taken.

2. The course then is this, and I beseech you mark it;

1. Strengthen thy heart with more detestations of the sins: The more he
revives the guilty accusation, the more do thou revive thy upright
detestations: And as he poures out malice to disturb thy conscience, so do
thou pour out revenge to sub due the grounds of it: And if he vexes thee, do
thou go and vex thy sins.

2. Believe not a malicious Thy case is not wicked, because a wicked devil
says so.
accuser: Satan does often times serve a Writ in the Kings name, without the
Kings seal; he forgives where God does not, and he binds where God has
released: And this know, It is God that justifies, who then shall condemn? If
the King himself has pardoned thee, how unjust is it for the under-officer to
arrest and challenge?

3. But in case of frequent inquietations, when Satan will not be answered, but
still charge, now make thine appeal The Christian must appeal.
from him to God; and if he charge thee in the Court of Conscience, remove it
wisely to the higher court of heaven; let God once more have the hearing, and
the deciding. And now Satan, what have thou to say unto me? Thou have sinned
heretofore, (says Satan) and thy Judge does know the truth of this indictment.
I have (Satan) I confess it, and my God does know the truth of my sorrow and
repentance. Lord, do thou not know my tears, my returnings, my judgings of
my self, my feeling of mercy and grace? Lord thou have known it, and have
known my soul with thy pardoning and accepting mercy.

4. Rest the soul and fasten it unto the blood of Christ, which will always
cry down the testimonies and clamours of guilt; Nothing but that will satisfy
God, and vanquish Satan; and then by faith, not only lay hand on mercy, but
hold out the stability of mercy. The Kings pardon will serve twenty years hence
in case of suit. Satan may often trouble and question, but Gods accepting of
thee into mercy, will (I am sure, it may) quiet and uphold thee.

14. The last spring of doubtings, was, silence in the conscience, long silence
there.

For the closing of this spring, and with it, this subject of doubtings,
observe these particulars in a word.

1. The speech of conscience, what that is. 2. The speechlesnesse of
conscience, what and how. 3. To make conscience speak again, what required. 4.
To support our selves in the times of its silence, what can and may.
1. The speech of conscience: The speech of conscience, what
This is no more then its testimony for us, or against us; for conscience is
intimate with our secret frames, and intentions, and motives, and actions: By
its natural light it can tell much, by implanted light more, by renewed and
sanctified light, most of all Now the speech of conscience for us, is nothing
else but an approbation of our estate, answerable to the Word, acquiting us
against all fears and objections that we are the sons of God, that we are
truly changed, that we sincerely love him, believe in Christ, and walk before
him: for really the voice of Conscience is but the echo of the voice of the
Word, and says that unto us touching our particular, what the Word delivers in
the general. Its voice is but the Assumption, and the voice of the Word is but
the Proposition: The Word says, that should be; and Conscience says, here it
is: The Word requires such and such things in a man to be saved, and who is in
favor with God, and Conscience brings them out, and answers for the person.

2. The speechlesnesse, or silence The speechlesnesse of conscience what it is.
of conscience, is the suspension of its determining and acquiting acts
touching our estate in general, or touching some particular doubts: Sometimes
conscience calls upon us, and sometimes we call upon conscience. In matters of
direction to practice or forbearance, we usually hear a real and inward word,
Do it not, or, Thou may do it: In after doubts we call upon conscience for
its testimony, In the uprightness of my heart did I it, and my conscience does
bear me witness.

Now of all the silences of conscience, that is heaviest which befalls us in
our spiritual combats and trials; wherein our gracious condition is
questioned, but cannot be issued, because conscience holds up, and does not
testify for us by any sensible approbation and acquitance, which is caused
diversely.

1. Sometimes through particular Silence in conscience diversely caused.
mis-behaviours against the directing voice of conscience, these hold in the
acquiting voice of conscience, for conscience will not speak for us, if we
presume to sin against it.

2. Sometimes through disregard to the voice of God in the Ministry; for
Conscience takes not that well, which the Word takes ill: and therefore God
does usually make us know our neglects of his Word, by the silences of our
consciences: And assuredly something is ordinarily amiss, when Conscience
speaks unto us neither good nor bad.

3. Sometimes Conscience is silent, to make us look higher then Conscience, and
that we might know there is a higher Court to which we must make our
addresses.

4. Sometimes Conscience is silent, to make us see upon what bottomes our faith
is grounded, whether we can believe, because God says, as well as rejoice,
because Conscience speaks.

3. But to make Conscience speak, what must we do? We have had its gracious
testimonies, by which we have been much comforted and supported: How shall we
recover it to speech again?

I answer,

1. Speak to God, and then The ways to recover conscience to spee^h again.
God may speak to Conscience, and Conscience will speak to thee. God has a
greater command over Conscience, then it has over us: It is with God and
Conscience, as with a King and his Courtiers, let the King speak kindly to a
Petitioner, the Courtiers will then embrace him lovingly: and indeed Conscience
will carry Gods face, and express his dispositions of love: Therefore this
do, speak to the Lord, 1. To show thee the cause of Consciences silence. 2. To
give thee the testimony of his own Spirit, which will draw with it again the
testimony of thine own conscience, Romans 8. 16.

2. Speak to duty: Be sure thou do not displease Conscience: If thou have,
repent, and add no more to make Conscience displeased, or silent.

4. But how may we support our selves in the times of silence?

I answer, thou may comfort thy self, if

1. The Word can approve thee: the testimony of the Word is ever open, though
that of Conscience be not: What is the reason? Because men may have a constant
audience and trial of their estates. And take one thing by the way, If the
Word (which is always open and speaking) if it acquits thee, Conscience
(though now silent, whenever it speaks) will clear thee.

2. Thou have and do approve the Word: How is that? That is, If the Word be
thy rule, thy light, by which thou have and do walk: for when Conscience
comes to speak, it gives its sentence from the Word, (by which thou walk)
and of thy frame and course which thou preservest in an upright answerablenesse
to the directions of the Word.

An Addition of four other causes of Doubtings, with a brief resolution of
them.
1. SEnse of sinful workings. O! says a distressed soul, Certainly my
condition is stark naught, and I have no right to Christ, nor to any mercy, I
may not believe: Why? Because I never found such vile workings of heart as of
late: I feel a wonderful rebellion in my heart; I cannot think on any good,
nor set upon any good, but an army of evil is in me, opposing and hindering me.

To a soul in such a condition,

1. When grace comes in truth, it is ever of that power to make such
discoveries, and to raise such stirs, as the soul never felt before; for Grace
is a new nature, and a new light, and a new active principle. It is put into
the soul for that very end, to find and lay out sin, yea and to expel and
thrust it out. The judgment was never so convinced before, nor Conscience so
qualified before, nor the will and affections so spiritualized before:
therefore never marvel at the strange workings. When a child is conceived in
the womb, it is not now with the woman as in former times; and whenever
Christ is formed in the soul, it is not with that soul as in old times. There
is that now fallen in, which must purge thee and rule thee.

2. If good be wrought, evil will work and (...). When Christ was born, all
Jerusalem was troubled; so when grace is wrought, sin will stir. Indeed if
grace came into the soul either by a final and total cessation of sin, that
there were no sin residing in the soul, into the which grace comes, then thou
should feel no stir at all: Thus it shall be in heaven; Grace there shall be
alone; Holiness, and nothing but holiness there, and therefore no combat, no
stir: But thus it never will be on earth: Sin may be alone in some men's
hearts, but grace is never alone in any man's heart in this life. Or if grace
came into the soul by a peaceable resignation, if sinful flesh would without
any more ado make a full and free surrender, and give it possession without
any dispute and cavil, then also thou might expect a calmnesse, and a
cessation of arms, no vile stirrings. But O Christian, Grace and sin, The
Spirit Gal. 5. 17.
and the flesh are contrary one to the other, and therefore they lust one
against the other. Fire and water will not lie quiet. Sad indeed were thy
condition, if thou had such a frame of (vain) good, against which no sinful
part in thee would oppose.

Every regenerate man has a double man in him, the new man, and the old man;
that would do good, this would not do good; that would pray, this would not;
that would mourn, this would not; that would believe, this would not.

3. But then thirdly, thou who feel such a rebelling and opposing flesh in
thee, what is that which thou do oppose? It is true, thou feel an
untoward, rebellious nature yet within thee, but what side take thou? It is
not I, said Romans 7.
Paul, but sin that dwells in me. Sin in him opposed good, but Paul himself
approved good, and delighted in good, and willed good.

The same Apostle speaking of the co-habitation, and the cooperation of flesh
and spirit in regenerate persons, that the one did lust against the other, and
the one was contrary to the other, and that by reason of the rebellion and
unrulinesse of the one, we could not Gal 5. 17.
do the good which we would; he yet comfort them in such a condition in the
next words, If ye be led by the Spirit, ver. 18.
ye are not under the Law. As if he had said, Notwithstanding all this
rebellious opposition of your flesh, if yet ye yield not to be servants to it,
but approve of, and incline unto, and follow in your hearts and courses the
rules of the Spirit, the condition is very good and safe.

So that though the evil remaining in us does oppose the good in us, yet if we
our selves oppose not the good, our condition may be good.

4. Fourthly, as there is evil in thee opposing of thee in any good, so there
is something in thee also opposing of that evil. Do thou not condemn that
hardness which hinders thee from mourning, and sheddest many a tear because
thou can not mourn? Do thou not strive with the Lord by many prayers, and
in the use of all his ordinances against that unbeleeving and rebelliously
working nature of thine? Do thou not with Paul, conflict with it, groan
under it, cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me?

And surely neither the sense of this, nor the resistance of this, nor second
desires of deliverance from this, can be any evil signs of thy condition.

5. Lastly, in the sense of inward rebellions and workings, thy way is not to
nourish doubting, but thy duty it is to stir up believing.

When Paul felt that agony twixt the law of his members and the law of his
mind, indeed he was much troubled at it, but yet he did not conclude against
his condition in grace; No, but he acquits that, (Romans 7. 25. So then with the
mind I my self serve the Law of God, though with the flesh the law of sin)
and sets his faith to work, ver. 24. Who shall deliver me? ver. 25. I thank
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Mark his practice: This is my condition, I
feel rebellious lusts, yea I feel them sometimes captivating of me, what
course shall I now take to be delivered of them? to vanquish them? I conflict
with them, but I cannot conquer them: I cannot conquer them, yea but Jesus
Christ can conquer them, and deliver me from them, and to him will I go by
faith.

Thus must thou do in the sense of that native rebellion and vile operation of
thy flesh: Thou must by faith go unto Christ, thou must acknowledge thy
vileness, and thy insufficiency, and also his sufficiency: Thou must exalt
Jesus Christ by faith in his Mediatorship, and trust on him, that he will by
his Almighty Spirit crucify thy sinful flesh more, and (which was one end of
his coming into the world) destroy those works of sin and Satan.

2. Another cause of doubting in a Christian, may be the sense of wrath. O!
says such a one, would you have me to believe, or imagine you that I can do
so, I who feel the very wrath of God in my soul, and the terrors of the
Almighty wounding me for my transgressions? What, can or (...) I believe mercy
for me, who now feel wrath upon me? can I believe that God will be merciful,
whom I sensibly apprehend to be wrathful?

This is a notable case, and

1. There are two sorts of persons who in this life may feel the wrath of God.

First, such as are unquestionably wicked: of whom some of them feel the wrath
of God, as the beginning of their everlasting perdition: That wrath inflicted
on them is but the beginning of a just hell due unto them. Thus Judas felt the
wrath of God: And some of them feel the wrath of God as a means for their
humiliation and conversion. (...) they in Acts 2. 37. who were pricked in their
hearts, and thereupon cried out, What shall we do? felt the wrath of God.

Secondly, such as are unquestionably good; of whom some have felt Gods wrath
in case of desertion, as Heman, Ezra, Job, and others; and some in case of
notorious corruption or sinning, as David, whose bones were broken for it, and
Gods face hid from him for it, and his moisture turned into the drought of
summer.

2. Again, you must distinguish of those effects which appear in persons
under the sense of divine wrath, for they are twofold.

1. Some feel the wrath of God, and are either only enraged against God with
blasphemies, or inraging their hearts the more to go on in sinning against
God, thinking at least by the pleasure of sin to drown the sense of wrath,
or running into absolute despair of Gods mercy; and therefore never attempting
any course of repentance, because they give up all hope of mercy. Where there
is such a sense of wrath as this, in all respects, and for ever, the condition
is very fearful.

2. Some feel the wrath of God, and are hereupon (occasionally) induced either
to the study and care of an holy reformation of their sinful hearts and ways,
or to a particular restoration of themselves from gross sins, into which they
are fallen, and for which now they feel the sore displeasures of an angry
Father.

If thy condition be either of these, that thou feel wrath, and that has
driven thee to a search of thy natural estate, and to the discovery of it, and
to an humbling for it, and to all the means by which thou may be delivered
as well (and rather) from thy sinfulness, as from Gods wrath; or if this wrath
felt awakens thy conscience, and has been a means to scourge thee out of some
particular sinning, to thy former and better walkings with God, thou may now
safely believe on mercy; yea though thou as yet feel wrath, yet may thou
believe mercy: And my reason is this, because now mercy is thy portion, thy
condition now is right under many promises of mercy to pardon thee, for it is a
truly penitential condition. See Esaias 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22 Hos. 14. 1, 2, 4.

3. Though mercy be thy portion, yet know thou, that the sense of wrath will
not off, until thou do believe actually on that mercy. It is not mercy in
the Promise which alone can remove the sense of wrath, but it must be mercy
applied by faith: for till faith works in the soul of a man, till the poor
soul looks on God through the Perspective of faith, God appears not as a
merciful, but as a wrath full God to it.

And therefore thou being in such a condition as I have delivered, thou may
safely venture on mercy, though thou feel wrath, (the forenamed Saints did
so) and upon believing thou shall in due time feel the sense of mercy to take
off the sense of wrath: Thy faith will see a reconciled God, and then thou
shall enjoy a pacified conscience.

3. A third cause of doubting, may be a condemning conscience. But says the
trembling Christian, My conscience tells me of my sinnings, and of wonderful
sinfulness within me; and God is greater then my conscience, who will
assuredly condemn me; O I may not believe.

This seems to be a knotty

1. First, you must distinguish of a condemning conscience: Conscience may
either condemn,

1. A man's action, Or 2. His person.
1. A man's actions are condemned by Conscience, when Conscience being rightly
enlightened and informed by the Word of God, pronounces of them that they are
evil, and damnable; that they are contrary to Gods holiness and glory, and
therefore are to be abhorred, and crucified, and forsaken.

2. A man's person is condemned by conscience, not only when conscience finds
sins in the person, but likewise the person in sins; (i.) not only such
corruptions in the heart, but also the heart approving, and loving of them, and
resolved to keep them, and go on in them.

Now observe me in two Conclusions answerable to these two Propositions:

1. If Conscience condemns thy person, I confess thou have no reason to
believe mercy for thy self; If thy conscience tells thee to the face of God,
thou art in a foul, sinful course, and have been called upon by the voice of
the Word, and its voice to come out of it, and thou do not leave it, nay, art
resolved to pursue it, and to insist on it, now God is greater then thy
conscience, and will assuredly condemn thee.

2. If conscience condemns thy actions only, then thou may, notwithstanding
that condemnation, believe on mercy. My meaning is this, Though the conscience
by its discerming light, represents unto thee much sinfulness in thy nature
and former course, and though it does condemn these to be vile, and most fit
to be crucified, abhorred, and forsaken, this condemnation hinders not the
right of believing: Nay, no man indeed should believe, unless his conscience
does condemn sin in him; not only show him his sins, but assure him that
they are evil, and unworthy his love; nay most worthy of his detestation and
mortification.

2. Secondly, you must distinguish of times, when conscience does condemn a
man; there are two times of a Christian.

1. Some are open and free; He is himself, and besides that, he hears both
parties, as well what is for himself, as what is against himself; yea and
weighs matters in controversy in the right balance of Gods Sanctuary, not in
Satan's balance of cunning suggestions. Will conscience condemn thy person at
such a time, and under such circumstances? Nay, will not the Word of God acquit
thee at such a time against all fears, for the substance and reality of a
pious condition?

2. Some are clouded and darkened, either with melancholy, or afflictions, or
temptations, wherein the Christian sees his face through a false glass, (just
as a Title is made by a deceitful and cunning Lawyer) not according to truth,
not all of it, but some of it: What is past heretofore for action and
affection; or what has fallen out, not in the course of life since a man's
conversion, but only in case of surprisall and captivity. Now perhaps
conscience may condemn thee, but this is an illegal sentence, it is a
corrupted judgment, and is reversible: God will not judge of thee, as
Conscience in such a case does; Nay he will repeal it, and disanull it.

4. A fourth cause of doubtings, is, a fear lest a man has sinned that great
sin against the holy Ghost: And the main inducement to credit this, is, a
sinning against clear knowledge, which is one ingredient in that sin. Now
this is my condition, says a troubled soul, I have not only sinned, but
sinned against light shining in the Ministry, and working on my conscience;
therefore I may rather conclude then question it, Mercy belongs not to me.

To help a conscience thus

1. The Information which I would commend in this case, is fourefold.

First, that the sin against the holy Ghost, is not any sin which a man
commits through ignorance: Whatsoever the sin or sins have been, (whereof
the party stands guilty) whether against the Law, or against the Gospel,
suppose it be one, or many heinous sins, yet if the person be in a state of
blindness and ignorance, if there is a nescience of the fact, if he knows
not what he does, this ignorance priviledgeth the sinnings thus far, that
therefore they are not the sin against the holy Ghost.

Secondly, the sin against the holy Ghost is not any sin against the Gospel,
which is elicited and acted through a mis-beliefe or mis-perswasion: If the
sin be a sleighting of Evangelical doctrines, nay a persecuting of them, and
of the professors of them, yet if these acts of opposition depend totally on
error in the judgment, on a judgment mis-perswaded, (i.) rather believing them
not to be truths, rather thinking those ways to be false ways; I say this
mis-beliefe preserves such sinnings yet from being sins against the holy 1 Timothy
1. 13.
Ghost, because the sin against the holy Ghost supposes light even to
conviction and approbation. See Heb. 6. 4. 5.

Thirdly, the sin against the holy Ghost is not every sinning against
knowledge. These are not reciprocal propositions, every sin against the holy
Ghost is against knowledge, and every sin against knowledge is the sin against
the holy Ghost. The former is true, but the latter is not; for many a converted
man sins against knowledge, who yet never sins the sin against the holy
Ghost.

In two cases a man sinning against knowledge, does not yet sin that sin
against the holy Ghost: One is, the case of a strong and violent temptation;
Another is, the case of a sudden and turbulent passion: It is the same with
Peter's case against his knowledge denying and forswearing his Master. If Paul
before his conversion had had Peter's knowledge, he had sinned this sin against
the holy Ghost; And if Peter in his denial had had Paul's malice joined with
his knowledge, he had also sinned that sin: but the mis-beliefe of the one
before his conversion, and the infirmity of the other after it, preserved from
this sin. Error misled the one, and sudden fear surprised the other.

Fourthly, there are three horrible sinnings which do attend that sin
against the holy Ghost; and the Scripture (which we were best exceeding warily
to follow in resolving this case) expressly delivers them.

1. One is, total Apostasy from the truths of Jesus Christ known and tasted.
The truths of Christ must 1. be known and apprehended, 2. known and tasted,
they must be approved. 3. And then the person falls from these. 4. Nay his fall
is not particular, (which is incident to the best) it is a total fall, not a
falling in the way, but a falling from the way of truth. Heb. 6. 4. If they
were once enlightened and tasted, etc. If, ver. 6. they shall fall away.

2. A second is, a malicious oppugnation of that truth which was once known
and tasted, and from which now the person is fallen, called Heb. 6. 6. A
crueifying of the Son of God afresh, And Heb. 10. 26. A And despiting the
spirit of Grace.
wilful sinning after that we have received the knowledge of the truth. And it
was evident in the Pharisees, who saw and knew the light, but hated, and
persecuted it unto the death.

3. A third is, final impenitencie. Whosoever sins the sin against the holy
Ghost, he neither does repent, nor can repent: He is so justly and for ever
forsaken of God, and given up to a reprobate sense, and a seared conscience,
that he cannot repent; though (perhaps) he may see his course to be evil, yet
it is impossible (says the Apostle in Heb. 6. 6.) to renew him to repentance.

FINIS.

